A 74-year-old man (height, 160 cm and body weight, 51.5 kg) had swelling and pain in the right leg. The patient had been diagnosed with KTWS with arteriovenous fistula in the right leg 10 years prior to presentation to our clinic. He had undergone an open total gastrectomy for gastric cancer three years previously. In the past year, the patient’s abdominal aorta became enlarged to a size indicated for surgery. Furthermore, the patient complained of continuous pain in the abdominal region suggestive of an aortic aneurysm with a maximum diameter. Since the patient had a history of abdominal surgery, endovascular aortic repair was considered. However, this repair option was considered inappropriate due to poor vascular characteristics in this patient. We decided to re-open the abdomen for vascular replacement of the abdominal aorta. On physical examination, in addition to swelling of the right leg, significant development and tortuosity of superficial vessels in the right neck and right forehead were observed . Vessels in the upper limbs, left lower limb, left neck, and left forehead were somewhat tortuous but otherwise generally normal. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed prominent tortuosity below the abdominal aorta with a maximum short diameter of a 60-mm infrarenal abdominal aortic aneurysm, 55-mm right common iliac artery aneurysm, and 42-mm right external iliac artery aneurysm. In addition, a remarkably observed arteriovenous fistula had developed between the aneurysm and peripheral artery, which had dilated towards the popliteal artery. Additionally, the distal popliteal artery was occluded . Preoperative laboratory test results showed low levels of haemoglobin (9.7 g/dL) and cholinesterase (109 units/L). No coagulation abnormalities were detected. Erythrocyte transfusion was not performed preoperatively. A preoperative electrocardiogram showed atrial fibrillation. Transthoracic echocardiography showed enlargement of the right atrium and ventricle with moderate tricuspid regurgitation and mild mitral regurgitation due to an arteriovenous fistula in the right leg. The left ventricular ejection fraction was 57%. The patient’s ejection fraction decreased. However, since the patient had no problems with daily activities or signs of heart failure, we considered his preoperative haemodynamics to be stable. No obvious cerebrovascular malformations were noted on preoperative examination. Based on these findings, we have considered various solutions to resolve the anticipated problems during anaesthesia management .
General anaesthesia was induced with fentanyl (250 µg), propofol (80 mg), and rocuronium bromide (50 mg) and was maintained with sevoflurane, fentanyl, and rocuronium bromide. An arterial catheter was placed in the left radial artery, whereas a central venous catheter and an 8.5 French sheath were placed in the left internal jugular vein. We used Flotrac™ sensor (Edwards Lifesciences Corp, Irvine, CA, USA). A regional cerebral oxygen saturation (rSO2) monitor was placed on the left forehead. Surgery was planned for graft replacement or aneurysmorrhaphy, which would be selected according to the amount of bleeding after cross-clamping of aorta. It was considered that graft replacement could potentially influence the collateral circulation via arteriovenous fistula, resulting in venous thrombosis or limb ischemia. After aortic cross-clamping, incision of the aorta triggered excessive bleeding from the collateral vessel in the aneurysm. As a result, the surgeon changed tactics and decided to perform aneurysmorrhaphy. The aneurysm was decompressed with longitudinal aortotomy to reduce its diameter. The mattress suture was made underneath the side clamp, and then reinforced by a running suture using a Teflon felt on each side. Following the operation, since the right side had markedly developed superficial vessels and there were concerns about the risk of vascular injury, we performed a posterior transversus abdominis plane block (TAPB) on the left side only. The operative time was 274 min, anaesthesia time was 387 min, and blood loss was 1500 ml. Intraoperatively, 20 units of red blood cell concentrate, 8 units of fresh frozen plasma, and 20 units of platelets were used. Cardiac index generally remained at 2–2.5 L/min/m2, while the rSO2 value generally remained stable at around 60 throughout the operation. The patient was extubated in the operating room, discharged from the intensive care unit on the second sick day, and discharged from the hospital on the thirteenth sick day. The patient’s pain was under control in the intensive care unit after the operation.