A 43 year old, single and nulliparous female from southern province of Sri Lanka, presented to the surgical casualty ward with generalized colicky abdominal pain and constipation for 7 days duration. However she has passed flatus. She has had nausea and vomiting for 4 days duration which had been exacerbated on the day of presentation. Her usual menstrual periods had a cycle duration of 35–42 days and moderate bleeding lasting for 6–7 days with tolerable lower abdominal and back pain lasting for 3 days from the onset of bleeding. Her last menstrual bleeding had occurred 3 weeks prior. Her past medical and surgical histories were unremarkable. There was no family history of bowel carcinoma or inflammatory bowel pathologies.
On examination patient was afebrile and not pale. She was moderately dehydrated and was in pain. Pulse rate was 130 beats per minute and blood pressure was 100/70 mmHg. Abdomen was distended and there was generalized tenderness. There was no guarding or rigidity. No masses were palpable. Bowel sounds were increased.
Her urine HCG (Human Chorionic Gonadotrophin hormone) was negative. Full blood count revealed increased white blood cell count of 14 × 109/L (per litre) with 80 % neutrophils. Plain abdominal X-ray film showed dilated small bowel loops with empty rectum and distal colon.
A nasogastric tube was inserted and intravenous fluid resuscitation was begun. Exploratory laparotomy was planned. Midline abdominal incision was made and peritoneal cavity was opened into. An annular growth at terminal ileum was noted. Proximal bowel loops were distended. There was no free fluid in the abdomen. Ileo caecal tuberculosis was suspected and right hemicolectomy was performed. Uterus and bilateral ovaries appeared normal.
Post surgical recovery was uneventful. Patient was started on prophylactic antibiotics. Bowel sounds appeared on post operative day 1 and she passed flatus and faeces on post op day 2 and 3 respectively. Patient was discharged from hospital 4 days following surgery and she had no complains on discharge.
The pathologists report explained that on macroscopic examination the terminal ileum had been oedematous and enlarged with a diameter of 4 cm. A stricture had been identified in terminal ileum 2 cm away from caecum. An intussusception had been visualized at the site of stricture. Microscopic examination revealed endometriosis of terminal ileum contributing to the stricture formation and intussusception at the site.
The patient was referred to a Gynaecologist for management of endometriosis.