A 4-year-old boy child presented with complaints of slow growth, inability to stand, and bowing of the legs. He had gotten vitamin D3 400 IU once daily for six months before to this presentation from an orthopedic clinic in another hospital, but his symptoms had not improved.
His birth record stated that he was born healthy and weighed 3,000 grams (average body weight of full-term ranging from 2500 g to 3500 g) .
While his family history revealed that he was the fifth child of consanguineous parents, fourth degree relative (first cousins), the rest of their children are fine. His parents were in good condition and had no concerns with metabolic bone disease. In terms of his feeding history, he spent his first year on Similac formula. In terms of his developmental history, he grew his first teeth at the age of one year (typically, a baby sprout first teeth between the ages of six and ten months) and began walking at the age of eighteen months (normally a baby starts walking between 8-18 months). His development and weight remained stable at 8 months, and he lost the capacity to crawl and stand correctly, despite the fact that he had no history of seizures or tetany.
His anthropometric measurements revealed a disproportionately short stature , with a height of 77 cm, which was below the 1st percentile (93.6 cm), a body weight of 11 kg, which was below the 1st percentile (12.2 kg), and a borderline head circumference of 48 cm, which was over the 5th percentile (47.8 cm). Frontal bossing, rachitic rosary, wrist widening , scoliosis with a bent spine, and bilateral genu valgum , in addition to muscle hypotonia, were all visible signs of rickets. Dental caries were also discovered in the upper incisors and molar teeth . The following are the findings of the laboratory investigations: Serum Ca: 2.02 mmol/l, serum phosphorus: 0.84 mmol/l, Serum alkaline phosphatase: 1881IU/L, albumin 42 g/l, serum 25-OH vitamin D: 175 nmol/l, Serum Parathyroid hormone (PTH) level: 65.1 pmol/L, serum 1,25 OH D 122.4 pmol/L, Ratio of tubular maximum reabsorption rate of phosphate to glomerular filtration rate: TmP/GFR:1.5 mmol/L, urine calcium (mg/dL):urine creatinine (mmol/mmol) ratio: 0.14. Complete blood count, liver function tests and renal panel were normal. Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH): 5 mU/L and Free thyroxin 4 (FT4): 2.5 umol/L . The radiological skeletal survey showed generalized osteopenia. Scoliosis with a curve on the left side (Cobb angle 44°) was present. The classic radiological features of rickets , broadening, cupping, and fraying of metaphyseal ends of upper and lower limb bones, were present . There was also a ‘rugger jersey’ appearance to the spine . This describes the prominent endplate densities at multiple contiguous vertebral levels to produce an alternating sclerotic-lucent–sclerotic appearance, that mimics the horizontal stripes of a rugby jersey. Vertebral insufficiency fractures of the lower dorsal vertebra were also present. Renal ultrasonography revealed no nephrocalcinosis and the kidney echogenicity was normal.