A 68-year-old woman presented with dizziness and headache. She had no neurological deficits, such as paralysis or sensory disturbances. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 9 mm, unruptured, thrombosed aneurysm anterior to the brainstem . Since the patient was asymptomatic, she was followed up on an outpatient basis. However, MRI at age 70 revealed increased aneurysm size (14 mm) and brainstem mass effect [ and ]. Three-dimensional digital subtraction angiography revealed a right proximal AICA aneurysm . The AICA supplied the cerebellar hemisphere and did not anastomose with the posterior inferior cerebellar artery. Due to increased risk of rupture and mass effect, we decided to perform surgical intervention. Endovascular treatment was excluded because the aneurysm was of fusiform type. Parent artery occlusion posed a risk of cerebral infarction. Posterior transpetrosal approach was needed to perform complete trapping of the aneurysm. However, the approach could be too invasive to perform for asymptomatic patients. We decided to perform distal clipping of the aneurysm to combine its blind end with the occipital artery (OA)-AICA bypass to avoid cerebral infarction. Transcondylar fossa approach was selected because it is minimally invasive and makes reaching the distal end of the aneurysm and AICA easier. We did not approach the anterior brainstem. The distal AICA arose from the aneurysm body ; therefore, we clipped the AICA just distal to the aneurysm after the OA-AICA bypass [-]. We aimed to make the aneurysm thrombosed. Postoperative MRI demonstrated sporadic, asymptomatic cerebellar infarctions . Indocyanine green video angiography showing the adequate flow of the bypass . However, the bypass patency was not clear on MRI after the treatment. We considered the possibility that the bypass was not depicted due to an artifact or that the bypass was thrombosed due to lack of demand. The patient was discharged with a modified Rankin scale score of 1. Six months postoperatively, the aneurysm growth slowed down; however, its size was 15 mm, and the brainstem mass effect persisted [F igures 4a and b]. Therefore, we considered secondary treatments, such as parent artery occlusion with endovascular technique. However, the aneurysm size decreased without additive treatments. Twelve months postoperatively, the aneurysm size was 12 mm, and the brainstem mass effect disappeared [ and ]. Thirty-three months after surgery, the aneurysm had shrunk, and the patsient had no neurological deficits [ and ].