A full-term, 14 days old and 2.8 kg female baby was referred to our cardiac center as a case of D-TGA-IVS. Immediately after birth, the patient had cyanosis, and oxygen saturation was 75; prostaglandin E1 was started. A detailed echocardiogram revealed D-TGA with IVS, a large patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) of 4 mm, with a 5-mm atrial septal defect (ASD) and normal coronary anatomy (from posterior facing aortic sinuses).
Uneventful arterial switch operation was done successfully. At surgery, no evidence of unusual findings was encountered. The bypass time was 71 min, and the cross-clamp time was 54 min. The patient came from the operating room with a closed chest and on Epinephrine 0.05 mcg/kg/minute and Milrinone 0.5 mcg/kg/minute. Following arrival from the operating room, the patient had developed significant pulmonary hemorrhages and required a high ventilator setting. The patient received blood products and shifted to HFV. Chest X-ray showed significant lung plethora , and echocardiography revealed a fair cardiac function (ejection fraction 55%) with no regional wall abnormalities and no stenosis of the main pulmonary artery, pulmonary branches, or aorta. The second day after surgery, the patient started to develop chest wall edema, hypotension, oliguria, and CO2 retention, so the chest was opened, Epinephrine was increased to 0.07mcg/kg/minute, Milrinone to 1 mcg/kg/minute, and Norepinephrine to 0.05mcg/kg/minute and Furosemide infusion was added. After opening the chest, hemodynamics showed some improvement. The patient was then shifted to the catheterization laboratory on the 7th day after surgery for hemodynamic evaluation, coronary angiography, and looking for any MAPCAs. Aortic angiography revealed extensive 4 MAPCAs supplying both lungs . A 4 French Judkins right catheter (JR4) was advanced through the femoral artery and thoracic aorta; the catheter was then advanced to the collaterals, and an Amplatzer type IV vascular plug was backloaded into the catheter, advanced deeply into the collateral, and then released. Three MAPCAs were successfully closed with three Amplatzer vascular plugs type IV (6 mm, 4 mm, 4 mm), but the fourth one (supplying the left lower lung lobe) could not be closed due to its highly tortuous anatomy . Pulmonary angiography and aortic angiography revealed no abnormalities .
After the closure of MAPCAs, the chest wall edema persisted, causing a significant decrease in lung compliance with prolonged ventilation. After getting an excellent negative balance through diuresis, chest wall edema and lung compliance improved gradually. Then, the patient was progressively weaned from mechanical ventilation till extubation ; the chest was closed 15 days after the surgery, and the patient was extubated 12 days after chest closure. Two weeks after extubation patient was discharged home in good condition. The patient came for a follow-up in the outpatient clinic two weeks after discharge. The patient was doing fine, with no history of feeding intolerance, dyspnea with feeding, or interrupted feeding, oxygen saturation was 98%, and echocardiography revealed good cardiac function, no regional wall abnormalities, no significant supravalvular aortic stenosis or branch pulmonary stenosis, trivial neo-aortic insufficiency.