A male patient in his fifties presented with a sudden onset of confusion and syncope. There were no co-morbid medical conditions or family histories of concern.
The GCS score was 15, bilateral pupils were equal in size, 2.0 mm in diameter, slow in response to light, neck resistance, and normal muscle strength and muscle tension of the limbs. According to the general assessment, there is no evidence of muscle injury or visceral injury.
Head CT showed Fisher II SAH, and cerebral angiography showed that the left middle cerebral artery M1 had a large aneurysm with a neck width of 7.3 mm, a height of 7.9 mm, and a maximum transverse diameter of 8.5 mm; the left middle cerebral artery M2 had a small aneurysm at the beginning of its lower trunk with a neck width of 2.1 mm, a height of 2.2 mm, and a maximum transverse diameter of 1.5 mm; and the left posterior communicating artery had a neck width of 1.3 mm, a height of 3.1 mm, and a maximum transverse diameter of 2.1 mm. The rest of the cerebral vessels and their branches were well developed. Serum potassium was slightly lower (3.31 mmol/L), and other biochemical and hematological indices were normal.
The patient's symptoms are suspected to be connected to a middle cerebral aneurysm hemorrhage. The aneurysm can be treated using one of two methods: Endovascular treatment or craniotomy clipping. Considering the number, location, and operation cost of aneurysms, patients often choose craniotomies to clamp aneurysms.
Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) was performed to better describe the characteristics of the culprit aneurysm and evaluate the remaining vascular tree. Additionally, DSA is not complicated; it was conducted in a dedicated angiography room, and the patient was transported to the surgical operating room one hour later.
After general anesthesia, the patient took the supine position with his head tilted to the right and chose the left pterional approach. After conventional craniotomy, an aneurysm was clipped at the beginning of the posterior communicating artery, and then the neck of the aneurysm was clipped at the M1 bifurcation and M2 inferior branch of the middle cerebral artery, respectively. Intraoperative indocyanine green fluorography confirmed that the clipping effect of three aneurysms was satisfactory. The operation took 7.5 h, and it was complicated by 500 ml of bleeding caused by an aneurysm rupture during the operation. The intraoperative observation was always stable, with no anesthetic reaction, no adverse reaction of blood transfusion, and prophylactic antibiotics (cefotiam) during the operation. Thoroughly stop the bleeding on the wound, place a gelatin sponge near the artery clamp, and give nimodipine to prevent cerebral vasospasm after the operation, Valproate sodium is used for 72-hour antiepileptic prevention. At the same time, in order to reduce brain tissue metabolism and avoid irritability and other emotions, a small dose of sedative and analgesic drugs was given.
On the first postoperative day, the patient was unconscious with a GCS score of 5 T (E1VTM4), which was considered a symptom of cerebral vasospasm. On the third day following the procedure, the patient's peak body temperature was 40.2 °C. There was no sign of an intracranial infection discovered despite lumbar puncture and cerebrospinal fluid analysis. The liver, kidney, and electrolyte functions were monitored while vancomycin (1,000 mg every eight hours) and meropenem (2 g every eight hours) were administered as an anti-infection therapy. On the fifth day after surgery, his body temperature was 39.2°C, and he developed symptoms of impaired liver and kidney function. The level of alanine aminotransferase(ALT) was 169 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase(AST) was 850 u/L, creatinine was 106 U/L, and urea was 10.23 U/L. respectively. To protect liver and kidney function, we will discontinue the use of vancomycin in favor of imipenem to fight infection and magnesium isoglycyrrhizinate to protect the liver. When the patient's urine turned soy-colored on the sixth postoperative day(January 1st), reexamination revealed CK levels of more than 40,000 U/L and CK-MB 1,017.9 U/L, ALT was 354 U/L, AST was 1,180 U/L, creatinine was 131.4 U/L, and urea was 13.03 U/L , which are considered diagnostic for rhabdomyolysis syndrome.
The patient was diagnosed with rhabdomyolysis on January 1st. The creatine kinase level of the patient was still high after three days of alkalization urine, active rehydration, and diuresis. Then, from January 4th on, he received hemofiltration treatment once a day. On the 12th day after the operation (January 7th), The consciousness of the patient was better than before, and the GC score was 8 T (E3VTM5), urine color began to fade, creatine kinase level decreased obviously, and successfully disconnected from the ventilator. and symptomatic treatment such as alkalization liquid, infection treatment, renal function protection and nutritional support were continued. On the 13th day after the operation (January 8th), the biochemical values of CK, CK-MB, ALT, AST, creatinine, and urea in the patient's blood were 3,063 U/L, 27 U/L, 148 U/L, 133 U/L, and 13.48 U/L, respectively, so it was decided not to undergo hemodialysis. On the 19th postoperative day (January 14), the patient was conscious with a GCS score of 9 T (E4VTM5), a morning temperature of 38.5 C, CK value of 757 U/L, CK-MB value of 17.1 U/L, ALT of 55 U/L, AST of 50 U/L, creatinine of 97 U/L, and urea of 11.39 U/L, and decided to transfer out of the intensive care unit for follow-up treatment.
You can see the timeline in .
On January 15th, the patient was transferred to the general ward for further treatment. On January 19th, the patient was conscious with a GCS score of 10 T (E4VTM6) and no fever symptoms. Because of multiple venous thromboses in the right lower limb, the inferior vena cava filter was implanted. The patient can speak after suturing his tracheotomy on January 30th. On February 5th, the patient was conscious (GCS-15 points). After taking out the inferior vena cava filter, he was discharged from the hospital. When the patient was discharged from the hospital, there were no other sequelae, such as headache, nausea, blurred vision, seizures, etc.