A 71-year-old man presented in the liver disease department of our hospital with abdominal distension without obvious inducement and no other discomfort.
The patient had recurrent bloating symptoms started a month previously, which worsened the week before admission.
The patient underwent physical examinations and liver function test at a local hospital two years ago. The patient received liver protection treatment in the local hospital, but his liver function did not improve and he had yellow urine occasionally, but had no obvious physical discomfort.
The patient’s personal and family history was unremarkable.
At admission, his body temperature was 36.8 °C, heart rate was 68 bmp, breathing rate was 18 breaths per minute, blood pressure was 134/74 mmHg, and blood oxygen saturation was 99%. The patient presented with chronic liver disease, moderately yellowish skin and sclera, but no liver palms and spider angioma. The patient's abdomen was soft, without obvious tenderness and rebound pain. Moreover, the patient's liver area was negative for percussion pain, the liver and spleen were not touched under the ribs, and Murphy's sign was negative. No abnormalities were found on nervous system examination.
Liver function showed albumin 23.9 g/L (normal 40-55 g/L) alanine aminotransferase 135 U/L (normal < 50 U/L), aspartate aminotransferase 127 U/L (normal < 40 U/L), γ-glutamine acyltranspeptidase 131 U/L (normal < 60 U/L), total bilirubin 49.3 μmol/L (normal < 24 μmol/L), and direct bilirubin 17.3 μmol/L (normal < 6.8 μmol/L). The blood test showed hemoglobin 116 g/L (normal 160-175 g/L), and platelet count 75 × 109/L (normal 125-350 × 109/L). The coagulation function test showed that the prothrombin time was 16.4 s (normal 9.8-13.2 s), and the international normalized ratio was 1.46 s (normal 0.85-1.20 s) . The erythrocyte sedimentation rate, neutrophil count, and hypersensitivity C-reactive protein were normal. Stool and urine routine tests were also normal.
Hepatobiliary enhanced magnetic resonance imaging showed that the liver contour was unsmooth, the liver proportion was imbalanced, the left lobe of the liver was enlarged, and the right lobe of the liver was reduced. The liver parenchymal signal was not uniform, and multiple diffuse nodules could be seen. T1-weighted imaging showed isointensity, T2-weighted imaging showed low signal, OutPhase signal was not lower than InPhase, and there were no obvious abnormalities in the liver parenchyma after enhancement. The internal diameter of the main portal vein was within the normal range, and the intrahepatic bile duct was not significantly dilated. The volume of the spleen increased, and there was no obvious abnormality in the signal. The examination revealed liver cirrhosis, splenomegaly, and ascites .
Abnormal liver functions are associated with viral infection, alcohol consumption, drug use, autoimmunity, and genetic diseases. In the present case, coxsackie virus antibody, Epstein-Barr virus antibody, hepatitis B surface antigen, and cytomegalovirus-DNA were examined and results were all negative, thus viral factors could be ruled out. In addition, as the patient had no history of drinking and inappropriate drug use, alcoholic and drug-related factors were also ruled out. The patient's antinuclear antibody and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies test were negative, which excluded autoimmune factors. Therefore, we speculated that the patient may have a genetic disease that caused abnormal liver function, so genetic test was carried out for genetic mutations.
The detection range included 20000 gene combinations such as AARS, ANO5 and CAPN3, for genetic diseases. Exons and their adjacent ± 10 bp introns were tested and analyzed by high-throughput sequencing. Regarding genes related to the digestive system, a heterozygous missense mutation (c.710A>G) in the 33998775 position of exon 5 of the AMACR gene was found , which occurred in the protein CoA-transferase family Ⅲ domain. According to the National Center for Biotechnology Information and Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man, the frequency of this site in the normal East Asian population is 0.0001. SIFT and Polyphen-2 software was used to predict its protein function, and the results were all positive.