A 33-year-old Asian pregnant woman para 2, gravida 3, gestational age of 25 weeks, was hospitalized with fever, chills, shortness of breath, and myalgia. She had her first baby delivered by vaginal delivery 5 years ago and her second by cesarean section 2 years ago. The patient had no underlying diseases and did not have direct contact with COVID-19 cases. Vital signs of the patient were recorded as follows: respiratory rate (RR) 26 breaths per minute, blood pressure (BP) 110/70 mmHg, temperature (T) 39.5 °C, heart rate (HR) 110 beats per minute, and oxygen saturation (SpO2) 94%. The laboratory results showed that lymphocyte count was lower than normal (lymphocyte count 1 × 109/L). While platelet count, hepatic enzymes, and creatinine levels were within the normal range, C-reactive protein level (CRP) was significantly increased. Coagulation function and blood biochemistry were normal . A GeneXpert SARS-CoV-2 RNA polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test was performed, and the result was positive. The patient had no complaints about uterine contractions, hemorrhage, and symptoms of amniorrhexis. Bilateral involvement was detected on chest computed tomography (CT), and on lung auscultation, diminished breath sound was detected. A day after the hospitalization, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) because of the shortness of breath (RR 32 breaths per minute) and low oxygen saturation (SpO2 88%). CT chest on the second day of hospitalization revealed an exacerbation of pulmonary involvement. The patient was intubated 1 week after hospitalization owing to a reduction in the oxygen saturation to 80% and exacerbation of respiratory distress. Chest CT on the eighth day of hospitalization showed extensive bilateral diffuse infiltrates and deterioration of lung involvement . From the beginning of hospitalization, despite the use of broad-spectrum antibiotic coverage, the patient’s fever was intermittent.
One week after transferring to the ICU and due to the patient’s deteriorating condition, plasmapheresis was performed twice with 10 units of fresh frozen plasma (FFP) for the patient, which did not improve her condition. Also, due to a decrease in hemoglobin (HB 8.1 g/dl), two units of packed cells were transfused twice. Three weeks after hospitalization, ultrasounds were performed several times to assess fetal growth, and a sharp decrease in the amniotic fluid (amniotic fluid index 2.5 cm) and fetal growth retardation were observed. To rule out the possibility of a preterm ruptured membrane, an AmniSure test was performed twice, which was negative both times. Due to the condition of the fetus and the exacerbation of the patient’s respiratory condition, it was decided in the committee constituting of specialists in the special care and departments of lung and perinatology that the pregnancy should be terminated to improve the patient’s respiratory condition. Therefore, to induce cervical ripening, an intracervical Foley catheter was placed and extra-amniotic saline infusion was performed. After receiving three doses of vaginal misoprostol at doses of 50, 100, and 200 μg every 6 hours, a 600 g baby was born with a 1-minute Apgar score of 2 and a 5-minute Apgar score of 4, and the fetal heart rate was 145 beats per minute. The newborn was intubated and transferred to the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) and died after 12 hours.
One week after the termination of pregnancy, due to the observation of bilateral pleural effusion on the chest CT, a chest tube was installed on both sides. Since no improvement in lung condition was observed and complete destruction of lung tissue was detected, the patient died 1 month after hospitalization.