A 70-year-old male patient presented in our emergency outpatient clinic after a syncope, causing a bicycle accident. On admission, the patient had no neurological deficits or heart-related complaints. Identified cardiovascular risk factors were hypertension, obesity, smoking and diabetes mellitus. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the cervical spine revealed a displaced odontoid type II-C fracture (, ) and an unstable Gehweiler type III injury (Jefferson's fracture) with a fracture of the anterior arch on the right, dual fractures of the posterior arch, and a fracture of the left lateral mass of C1 . A coincident finding was an intradiploic arachnoid cyst in the posterior wall of the posterior fossa . Other lesions included minor head trauma, a fracture of the T2 vertebral body, and rib fractures. CT angiography of cervical spine revealed no vascular injury and regular V3 segment of vertebral arteries . Furthermore, cardiac diagnostics revealed atrial fibrillation and non-ST-segment elevation MI. Coronary angiography confirmed a three-vessel CAD with high-grade stenosis not suitable for coronary stent insertion of left anterior descending artery, ramus circumflex, ramus diagonalis proximalis (RD1) and right coronary artery. Indication for upper cervical spine surgery and bypass surgery was given. The patient's case was evaluated by an interdisciplinary team of neurosurgeons, cardiothoracic surgeons and anesthesiologists to develop the most suitable therapeutic concept.
The following three different strategies were discussed:
Conservative therapy of the upper cervical spine fractures and secondary bypass surgery after bone fusion. Conservative therapy of the upper cervical spine fractures and simultaneous bypass surgery. Fusion surgery of the upper cervical spine followed by bypass surgery. The first concept has the advantage that no fusion surgery of the upper cervical spine needs to be performed if conservative treatment is successful. The disadvantage is that bone fusion might not occur, delaying bypass surgery.
The second option also has the advantage that no fusion surgery is required. During the intervention, bypass surgery could be performed using a Mayfield Headrest System to prevent SCI. Immobilization of the upper cervical spine in a neck brace or halo-fixation would not have been possible during surgery because of the necessary sternotomy. A neck brace or halo-fixation must be worn immediately after surgery. These orthoses might exert pressure on the sternotomy wound leading to delayed wound healing. The physical rehabilitation after coronary artery bypass surgery is also limited while wearing an orthosis. Furthermore, there is a residual risk of neurological impairment during surgery requiring intraoperative neuromonitoring (IOM).
The third option has the advantage that bypass surgery can be performed without any risk of SCI because of the dislocation of the fractures. However, there is a higher intraoperative risk of cardiac events during fusion surgery of the upper cervical spine and a myocardial infarction risk in the time between surgeries. Decision making depends mostly on the severity of MI and how near-term bypass surgery must be performed. Advanced anaesthesiological management is also required. In the present case, considering the patient's age and comorbidities, and due to the fact, that bypass surgery was not emergently indicated, a conservative therapy based on immobilization of the cervical spine in a neck brace was tried. In absence of fracture healing after 4 weeks, surgical approaches were again discussed. Aware of the risk of further dislocation and life-threatening SCI, neurosurgical intervention was performed first in interdisciplinary consent. The setup included general anesthesia, single-shot antibiotics and cardiopulmonary monitoring with resuscitation equipment. Cardiothoracic surgeons were on standby. Occipitocervical fusion was discussed, but not possible, due to the suboccipital intradiploic arachnoid cyst causing a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak after exposure to the skull during surgery . This CSF-leak was closed by bone wax. Finally, the C1-C2 fusion was performed by Harms technique with x-ray guidance, spinal neuronavigation (BrainLab AG, Feldkirchen, Germany) and Doppler ultrasound. Bilateral pedicle screws (Symphony, DePuy Synthes, Raynham, MA, USA) fixed the C2 vertebra, while bilateral mass screws (Symphony, DePuy Synthes, Raynham, MA, USA) were positioned in C1. The posterior atlas fragments were removed by laminectomy, and bone granulate was deposited.
The patient was monitored postoperatively in the intensive care unit (ICU) and later transferred to the neurosurgical ward in stable condition. Postoperative CT scan confirmed correct intraosseous screw positioning. Thromboprophylaxis (enoxaparin) was administered, while aspirin was paused pre- and postoperatively to prevent hemorrhage. Intravenous antibiotics (vancomycin, meropenem, clindamycin) were administered and a lumbar drain was placed. In the course, infection parameters decreased and wound healing was regular. The patient was discharged on day 12. Soft cervical collar was recommended for additional 4 weeks. One month later coronary artery bypass surgery (anastomosis of the left mammary artery to RD1 and the left radial artery to posterior interventricular ramus) was performed. Life-long medication with aspirin was resumed. Rivaroxaban was started due to intermittent atrial fibrillation. The patient was discharged to rehabilitation on day 7.
Three months' follow-up CT scan confirmed beginning fusion of the fractures (fusion of anterior arch of C1 and beginning fusion of odontoid process . The patient did not develop any neurological deficits and recovered completely from both surgeries.