A 32 years old male initially presented to another center with complaints of pain in the lumbar region for the duration of 6 months. The pain was insidious in onset, gradually progressive radiating to the bilateral lower limbs. There was no associated fever, weight loss, chest pain, cough, shortness of breath, or loss of consciousness. He had no significant past history. There was no history of similar illnesses in the family. He was a nonsmoker and non-alcoholic.
On further investigation, MRI was done which revealed a T1 intermediate signal intensity lesion in the epidural region of the L3 vertebral body along with diffuse low signal intensities within the vertebral body . A biopsy was done which showed inflammatory cells. The initial differential diagnosis as tuberculosis was made. Hence, empiric anti-tubercular therapy was started for him. However, after 2 months, his symptoms progressed rapidly with difficulty in the bladder and bowel function, night cries, saddle anaesthesia, and referred pain in bilateral lower extremities because of which he sought our medical advice. On examination, there was a sluggish ankle (2/5) and knee reflex (2/5) bilaterally. He was found to have difficulty walking.
Contrast MRI was done which showed T2 low signal intensity lesions within the L3 vertebral body including the posterior elements along with circumferential soft tissue density showing T2 intermediate to high signal intensity soft tissue density in the epidural region causing severe narrowing of the central spinal canal and bilateral lateral recesses at L3 level (, , ). L2-L3 disc showed low signal intensity. There was STIR high signal intensity in the prevertebral as well as bilateral paravertebral regions. These findings were not typical for tuberculosis which is usually common in our setup. Other investigations like Chest X-ray, complete blood count (CBC), liver and renal function tests, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), c-reactive protein (CRP), peripheral blood smear, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), uric acid, and urinalysis were normal.
Since he had symptoms of spinal cord compression, the next step of management was decompression. During the procedure, the soft tissues adhering around the dura mater were visible . Following decompression, posterior instrumentation was performed . The excised specimen was taken for gram stain, gene Xpert and histopathological evaluation.
The gram stain and gene Xpert report did not show any significant findings. Finally, histopathological features revealed chronic osteomyelitis with focal lymphoid cell proliferation. The differential diagnosis at this time was osteomyelitis. However, the Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma panel was suggested to rule out lymphoma. The immunohistochemistry report finally revealed diffuse large B cell Lymphoma. The immunomarkers like CD20, Ki 67, BLC 2, MUM-1, CD-10, and BCL 6 were reactive. CT chest, neck, and abdomen were performed which showed no signs of lymphadenopathy. There was no other primary site hence the finding of primary lymphoma of the spine was made. He was started with the chemotherapy regimen R–CHOP (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, hydroxydaunorubicin hydrochloride (doxorubicin hydrochloride), vincristine (Oncovin), and prednisone). A total of 6 cycles of the treatment were provided every 21 days for the duration of five months. Subsequently, he completed the cycles of chemotherapy. Post procedural CT scan of chest, neck and abdomen after 6 months showed no signs of recurrence or metastasis.
Currently, the patient is asymptomatic and free of disease. He is performing his regular activities.