The patient was a 48-year-old man with a 4-year history of ureteral calculi and a 2-year history of ureteral stenosis for which he had undergone multiple surgeries. Ureteral calculi recurred many times, resulting in repeated ureteral stricture that was treated three times by ureteroscopic holmium laser lithotripsy, and twice by ureteroscopic balloon dilation. He had been admitted to our hospital for left ureteral stenosis in June 2015. Examination at that time revealed a 20-cm stenosis in the middle and lower segments of the ureter. Noncontrast computed tomography showed inflammation and adhesion around the kidney as a result of multiple ureteral surgeries, making the patient unsuitable for autologous kidney transplantation. Yang-Monti ileal ureter reconstruction was performed, and the 6-month postoperative examination revealed left ureteral patency , stable renal function, normal electrolyte levels, and no obvious mucus-like flocculation in the urine.
Ten months after the Yang-Monti ileal ureter reconstruction, the patient developed left lumbar pain and discomfort. Noncontrast computed tomography showed that the left kidney had a slightly smaller volume than the right, and that the left renal pelvis and renal calices were slightly expanded and hydronephrotic. Two nodule-shaped high-density shadows were present in the lower renal calyx; the diameter of the larger shadow was 4 to 5 mm. A liquid-density shadow was seen in the ileal lumen of the left ureter, with a small nodule-shaped high-density shadow (3-mm diameter) at its end. Corticomedullary development was good. During excretion, accumulation of contrast agent could be seen in the left renal pelvis, renal calices, and ureter . The serum creatinine concentration was normal.
The patient was placed in the lithotomy position under general anesthesia. The ileal ureterovesical reimplantation opening was smoothly entered under direct vision using a 9.5-Fr semirigid ureteroscope (Richard Wolf Medical Instruments, Knittlingen, Germany). Ureteroscopic examination revealed that the calculi were attached to surgical sutures located from 1 cm from the inner end of the ileal ureter to the ureteral opening, and that the sutures were embedded under the ileal ureteral mucosa in a ring shape . A basket extractor [NGage Nitinol Stone Extractor (NGE-017115), 1.7 Fr × 115 cm; Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN, USA] was used to hold the calculi and sutures, which were then broken up with a holmium laser (0.6 J, 30 Hz, 200-μm fiber; 60-W LISA Sphinx Holmium:Yttrium-Aluminium-Garnet Laser System, LISA Laser Products, Katlenburg-Lindau, Germany) and completely removed . Ureteroscopy revealed that the Yang-Monti ileal ureter had a thick and straight lumen, smooth mucosa, and no obvious folds or anastomoses between sections . Using a Zebra guidewire (Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, USA) for guidance, a flexible ureteroscope working sheath (12/14 Fr × 115 cm, M006250226; Boston Scientific) was imbedded and inserted into the left renal pelvis under direct vision using a digital flexible ureteroscope (8.5 Fr, 11278VS; Karl Storz, Tuttlingen, Germany). Using a filling pump (26331020–1; Storz Medical, Tägerwilen, Switzerland) with an infusion pressure of 80 mmHg, the two lower calyceal calculi were identified, broken up, and removed. As a preoperative urine culture had revealed a urinary tract infection, antibiotics were administered postoperatively. Additionally, a 5-Fr ureteral catheter (Kangge Medical Instruments, Shanghai, China) and a urinary catheter were left indwelling, and were removed on postoperative day 3.