A 55-year-old male patient was admitted to our emergency department after mechanical out-of-hospital cardiovascular resuscitation (20–30 s) with almost immediate return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC). On admission, the patient reported persisting chest pain and shortness of breath. In addition, he reported fever with flu-like symptoms during the past 2 weeks. No cardiovascular risk factors were present, and the patient had no history of coronary artery disease, heart failure or prior myocardial infarction.
Clinical examination revealed tachycardia with a heart rate of 120 b.p.m., low blood pressure of 100/60 mmHg without mechanical circulatory support or infusion of catecholamines, and blood oxygen saturation level of 90% despite oxygen delivery (6 L/min). The ECG exhibited ST-segment depression in V1–V3 and negative T-waves in V4–6. ST-elevations were not present, including the precordial leads V1R to V6R. In addition, the rapid COVID-19 test was positive and PCR confirmed COVID-19 infection, with a cycle threshold value of 33. Laboratory testing showed increased C-reactive protein (16.4 mg/L, reference value lower than 5 mg/L), white blood count (11.4/nL), and high-sensitive troponin T (hs-TnT) of 126 ng/L (reference value lower than 14 ng/L). Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction was suspected, and the patient was initially scheduled for coronary angiography.
However, bedside echocardiography revealed dilatation of the right ventricle (RV) causing RV dysfunction and D-shape of the left ventricle. Left ventricle contractility was normal without global or regional wall motion abnormalities (ejection fraction of 65%). In the absence of inferior wall motion abnormalities and precordial ST-elevation in V1R to V6R, acute PE turned out to be the most probable diagnosis. D-Dimer was also increased (4550 µg/L, reference value lower than 500 µg/L). In addition, no signs of DVT were present at admission of the patient who exhibited a Wells score of 4.5 points, PESI score of 155 points, and simplified PESI score of 3 points.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography pulmonary angiography (CTPA) confirmed the presence of massive, bilateral pulmonary emboli ( and ), also confirming the dilatation of the RV with a diameter of 62 mm at baseline . Thus, the diagnosis of intermediate-to-high-risk acute PE was established, the patient was transferred to our intensive care unit, and percutaneous catheter-directed thrombolysis was scheduled for the same day. After puncture of the right femoral vein, two 7 F sheaths were inserted to facilitate bilateral ultrasound-assisted catheter-directed thrombolysis, using the EkoSonic Endovascular System (EKOS, Boston Scientific, MN, USA). Pulmonary angiography confirmed massive bilateral PE ( and ) and two EKOS catheters were inserted into the right and left pulmonary arteries, respectively (, ). Mean pulmonary artery pressure was measured at 35 mmHg (70 and 25 mmHg systolic and diastolic pressure, respectively). Local thrombolysis was performed with tissue plasminogen (t-PA) at an infusion rate of 1 mL/h over 6 h bilaterally. In addition, unfractionated heparin was infused, targeting an activated partial thromboplastin time of 50–70 s. A total dose of 12 mg t-PA was administrated. The course during local lysis was uneventful and the patient’s blood pressure and oxygen saturation levels gradually increased, while his heart rate decreased. On the next day, the oxygen saturation reached a level of 98% without oxygen supply, his blood pressure was 130/80 mmHg, and his heart rate was 80 b.p.m. Cardiac troponin levels decreased to 98 ng/L and bedside echocardiography demonstrated almost complete resolution of RV enlargement with a RV diameter of 42 mm and function (, ). Systolic pulmonary artery pressure was estimated at 35 mmHg by echocardiography. The patient was transferred to the normal ward, and oral anticoagulation treatment was started with rivaroxaban 15 mg twice a day. The further clinical course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the following day. Repeat CTPA after 2 weeks, which was performed due to moderate calcification of the coronary arteries and to determine the effectiveness of lytic therapy and subsequent anticoagulation and the amounts of residual thrombi, demonstrated normalization of the RV diameter (42 mm) and only small residual thrombi in the pulmonary arteries (panels H–I). The patient continued treatment with 20 mg rivaroxaban once daily after 3 weeks of 15 mg rivaroxaban twice per day, and his further course during the next 5 months is still uneventful. Rivaroxaban 20 mg once per day was decided to be continued up to 6 months after the index hospitalization of the patient, followed by 10 mg rivaroxaban lifelong. In addition, malignancy was excluded by additional abdominal ultrasound, gastroscopy, and colonoscopy.