A 33 year-old Hispanic female patient with no significant past medical history was seen in the outpatient clinic. She presented with a three month history of increasing abdominal discomfort, resulting in a sense of fullness, decrease oral intake, lethargy and extensive weight loss of 15 Kilograms, a two month history of a dry nonproductive cough, which was worse in the supine position, low grade fevers without rigors, and mild night sweats that did not reach the criteria for classic night sweats. At presentation she was afebrile, mildly tachycardic (98–109 bpm), normotensive and not distressed. Abdominal examination revealed midline fullness slightly more prominent on the left than the right side with some tenderness to palpation in all four quadrants. Peripheral lymphadenopathy was not appreciated by palpation and the remainder of the physical examination was unremarkable. Laboratory data revealed a normochromic microcytic anemia (hemoglobin at 10.5 g/dl) and hypoalbuminemia (1.4 mg/dl) with a normal liver enzyme panel. Electrolytes, white blood cell count with differential & smear and coagulation laboratories were all within institutional limits.
Imaging studies revealed the development of extensive, primarily abdominal lymphadenopathy. An abdominal ultrasound revealed extensive adenopathy in the periaortic region, with a prominent hypoechoic mass at the left renal pelvis and mild splenomegaly. A report of an abdominal ultrasound performed five months earlier at a separate facility was reported as being negative for pathologic findings. A CT scan of the chest, abdomen and pelvis was performed revealed massive central lymphadenopathy with no peripherally located lymphadenopathy. A large lymphoid mass, 2.8 × 2.3 cm, was identified in the azygoesophageal recess, Figure Panel A, along with limited aortopulmonary and pretracheal lymph nodes all measuring less than 1 cm in maximal dimension. In the abdomen, there were multiple enlarged centrally necrotic retroperitoneal lymph nodes, the largest conglomerate was in the left periaortic area measuring 5.5 cm in maximal dimension, Figure Panel B, and there was evidence of significant bilateral common iliac lymphadenopathy, Figure Panel C. There was no evidence of pelvic sidewall or inguinal lymphadenopathy. Also the patient was noted to have mild hepatomegaly, splenomegaly of 13.4 cm, mild right hydronephrosis and bilateral hydroureter.
The patient tested negative, by serology and culture, for other causes of massive lymphadenopathy, which included Coccidiomycosis, Aspergillus, Histoplasmosis, Blastomyces, Cryptococcus, Legionella and Tuberculosis. Serologic markers for EBV (both IgG & IgM) and CMV were positive, but did not support an acute infection by either agent. Serologic screens for HIV and HSV type I, were negative. Although the patient had elevated levels of C-reactive protein (>20+ mg/L) and serologic reactivity for anti-smooth muscle antibodies, there were no anti-mitochondrial, anti-nuclear, or anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic (both C & P) antibodies detected. Serum AFP, CA-125 and CA 19-9 levels were within normal limits.
The patient underwent an excisional biopsy of inferior retroperitoneal lymph nodes by a laparoscopic procedure. Three lymph nodes measuring 1.2 × 0.9 × 0.5 cm, 1 × 0.8 × 0.8 cm, and 0.9 × 0.9 × 0.7, respectively, were obtained from this procedure. Flow cytometry was performed on dispersed cells from the tissue sample and did not demonstrate a monoclonal population of lymphocytes. Histologic sections of the lymphatic tissue indicated increased prominence of the sinuses with marked histiocytic proliferation resulting in effacement of architecture containing large histiocytes with vacuolated cytoplasm, Figure Panel A. Some histiocytes contained lymphocytes in their cytoplasm (emperipolesis), examples of which are highlighted by arrows, Figure Panel B. The Immunohistochemical staining revealed positive S-100 staining of histiocytes, Figure Panel C, and absent CD1a, CD15, CD30 staining; features consistent with RDD. No evidence of atypical or monoclonal lymphocytic proliferation was found.
The patient's hospital course followed an inexorable decline with markedly decreased PO intake secondary to abdominal discomfort, persistent night sweating, fevers and tachycardia. The patient required multiple erythrocyte transfusions with no evidence of hemolysis, overt hemorrhage, or thrombocytopenia. A bone marrow biopsy revealed a slightly hypercellular marrow with no diagnostic abnormalities and cultures that remained negative. Post, excisional biopsy, the patient was cared for in the intensive care unit (ICU) where parenteral nutrition was started and respiratory support was provided, ultimately requiring intubation and ventilator support. Treatment with decadron at 40 mg IV daily was initiated after pathologic evaluation of the excisional biopsy. This treatment provided transient symptomatic improvement, but the patient experienced increasing abdominal discomfort, development of icteris (total bilirubin = 20.6, direct bilirubin = 12, with an albumin of 1), and increasing pulmonary infiltrates within a week. An extensive infectious disease work-up including multiple cultures along with bronchial alveolar levage (BAL) fluid cultures revealed pathogenic organisms after more than a week in the ICU. The identified organisms included, oral candidiasis, actinomycosis in blood, and on repeat BAL both 1+ HSV and 1+ EBV. Despite broad-spectrum antibiotics, the patient progressed to acute renal insufficiency, anasarca, and refractory hypotension leading to death over several days.
At autopsy, the retroperitoneal & mediastinal lymphadenopathy had increased in size drammatically, encased vascular structures and was contiguous with the pancreas displacing the duodenum ventrally. Histologic examination showed extensive necrosis and regions of CD20 & CD79a positive staining cells consistent with diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL), Figure Panel D. Markers for T lymphocytes & histiocytes were negative within this mass. The DLBCL also involved sections of thyroid. Pulmonary actinomycosis or disseminated infectious processes were not demonstrated. Thus, the patient was considered to have both DCBCL and RDD, although the former predominated at autopsy.