A 54-year-old Iranian man, with a history of chondrosarcoma of the left lower limb, presented to our clinic with a chief complaint of cough in March 2020 during the outbreak of COVID-19. The patient had presented with a 6 cm mass in the left anterior thigh 3 years earlier, and at that time, after an incisional biopsy, he underwent wide local excision of the primary tumor. Pathology examination revealed extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma with moderate differentiation, so he received postoperative radiotherapy, and as there was no evidence of recurrence, was followed up every 3 months until the outbreak. Familial history and other medical history were unremarkable.
He complained of progressive dry cough and sweating. No history of fever, weight loss, or any other symptoms was reported. Examination of vital signs revealed a respiratory rate of 20 breaths/minute, blood pressure of 100/60 mmHg, oral temperature of 36.9 °C, and pulse rate of 120 beats/minute. On lung auscultation, he had bilateral fine rales. Blood tests revealed leukopenia (3.2 × 109/ L, normal: 4–9 × 109/L) and lymphopenia (1.2 × 109/L).
Based on two main differential diagnoses of pulmonary metastasis or SARS-CoV-2 infection, he underwent a chest computed tomography (CT) scan with intravenous contrast and SARS-CoV-2 reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
The SARS-CoV-2 RT-PCR test result, based on a pharyngeal swap sample, was positive. Chest CT revealed numerous bilateral small peripheral and perilymphatic pulmonary nodules, unilateral ground-glass patch, and nodular interlobular septal thickening. There was no evidence of mediastinal lymphadenopathy or pleural effusion .
Due to the challenging CT findings, it was difficult to rule out pulmonary metastasis in this case, so several lung biopsies were taken, and the pathology report revealed a recurrence of myxoid sarcoma in the lung. The patient was cared for as a COVID-19-infected case, and subsequently palliative chemotherapy was administered.