A 58-year-old woman presented with a one-day history of malena and light-headedness. She did not have any known co morbidities. Apart from being anaemic she was haemodynamically stable and her general physical and abdominal examination unremarkable. Hematological examination revealed low hemoglobin levels of 7.3 g/dl with normal clotting profile. After initial resuscitation, an esophagogastroduodenoscopy (OGD) was performed which excluded any cause of upper gastrointestinal bleed. This was followed by colonoscopy, which although did confirm the presence of blood within the gastrointestinal tract but did not localize the site of bleeding. However, the patient's hemoglobin level continued to fall over the next two days, which was treated with a transfusion of six units of packed red cell.
Subsequently, she underwent selective superior mesenteric angiography, which demonstrated a large hyper vascular mass with an extensive contrast blush, near the terminal ileum in the right iliac fossa . It was supplied by a large feeding artery and drained via a solitary large vein into the portal venous system . No extravasation of contrast was seen suggesting that the lesion was not actively bleeding at the time of the study. Inferior mesenteric and coeliac axis angiography revealed no synchronous lesion or evidence of any vascular deposit in the liver.
She thereafter underwent laparotomy through midline incision, which identified vascular solid tumor along the anti-mesenteric border of the ileum about 30 cm from the ileo-caecal junction, measuring 7 × 7 cm . A segmental small bowel resection was performed, and intestinal continuity established with an end-to-end small bowel anastomosis. The patient had an unremarkable postoperative recovery; her hematocrit remained stable and she was discharged from the hospital on the 7th postoperative day.
The histopathology of the resected tumor showed a submucosal tumor compressing the mucosal lining causing ulceration. Sectional analysis of the tumour showed thick bands of muscle with vascular spongy stroma. Microscopic examination showed thick bands of smooth muscle staining positive for smooth muscle antigens using immunochemistry. Immunochemistry was negative for gastrointestinal stromal tumors (C-Kit antigens) and sarcomas. Interspersed between these muscle fibers were a variety of vascular channels ranging in size from dilated capillaries to a small and medium sized arteries and veins . The smooth muscle appeared to arise from the muscularis propria of the small bowel. There was no significant mitotic activity in the tumor and no evidence of tumor necrosis. The tumor was well circumscribed with clear excision margins. All these findings were consistent with the diagnosis of angioleiomyoma.