An 81-year-old man was referred to our clinic for further examination and treatment of the right renal mass with a diameter of 42 mm on CT . The diagnosis was right kidney cancer (cT1bN0M0) with RENAL nephrometry score of 10 × . RAPN via the retroperitoneal approach was selected because of deteriorated renal function (serum creatinine level, 1.32 mg/dL; eGFR, 40.6 mL/min/1.73 m2). Tumor resection was performed following renal artery clumping. Since the urinary tract opened during tumor resection, the urinary tract was sutured closed using 3-0 V-LocTM after tumor resection. The tumor was adjacent to the hilum of the kidney, and renal parenchymal suturing could not be performed. After declumping the artery, the perirenal fat was sutured to cover the excised part. The renal artery ischemia time was 19 min, and the intraoperative bleeding volume was 60 g. A drain was placed in the retroperitoneal space; then, a ureteral stent (6 Fr–26 cm) was placed. The pathological diagnosis was clear cell RCC, pT1b, Fuhrman classification grade 2, INFa, v0, ly0, eg, fc1, rc-inf1, rp-inf0, s-inf0, and margin (-). On POD 4, drainage amount increased to 500 mL/ day, and the fluid was proved to be urine. Fluid retention was observed in the right retroperitoneum by CT on POD 5, while ureteral stent was observed in the right position. We decided to wait for spontaneous closure. However, the sustained subsequent drainage volume was approximately 300 mL/day. Retrograde pyelography (RP) on POD 20 demonstrated no urine leakage from the collecting system, while the upper renal calyx was not visualized . CT and RP findings suggested that the isolated calyx resulting from infundibular stenosis between the upper calyx and renal pelvis by intraoperative suturing may cause urinary fistula. We attempted a flexible ureteroscope on POD 27. Two sites of suture thread of V-LocTM were confirmed on the cranial side of the renal pelvis . After cutting the suture using holmium:YAG laser, the dilated calyx was observed . To prevent urine leakage, additional ureteral stent was placed in the upper renal calyx, and the other was placed in the renal pelvis. Immediately after the procedure, urinary leakage disappeared, the drain was removed on POD 32 (fourth day after the procedure). Patient was discharged on POD 42 after the RAPN. The serum creatinine level at discharge was 1.22 mg/dL (eGFR, 44.2 mL/min/1.73 m2), and renal function was maintained.