A mainland Chinese 8-month-old boy had a history of intermittent jaundice for more than seven months. He was born at full term from non-consanguineous parents with birth weight of 3700 g. At fifth day of life, jaundice occurred with no known cause and biochemical tests revealed severe unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia with the levels of STBC were 400 μmol/L. For this reason, the child was treated with phototherapy for seven days and jaundice disappeared. However, intermittent onset of jaundice appeared in seven months with the levels of STBC ranging from 45.7 μmol/L to 107.3 μmol/L. Serological tests for hepatocellular integrity, such as ALT (alanine aminotransferase), AST (aspartate aminotransferase), ALP (alkaline phosphatase) activities, serum albumin and total protein concentrations resulted within normal range. An abdominal ultrasound examination was performed without any positive findings. Furthermore, neonatal viral infections, red blood cell (RBC) enzyme abnormality, hematoma, rash, or diseases of his central nervous system were excluded. His mother was in good health while his father presented slight jaundice. His sister, a 3-year-old girl, had a history of neonatal jaundice. After comprehensive consideration of clinical and laboratory findings as well as his family history, we made a diagnosis of CNS-II and deeper laboratory investigations of the UGT1A1 gene was suggested.
Genomic DNA was isolated from the leucocytes of patients after obtaining informed consent from proband and his families. Primers for polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and direct sequencing of UGT1A1 gene are shown in Table . The sequences of the amplified DNA fragments were determined directly by the use of sequencing primers.
By sequence analysis of entire UGT1A1 gene, the proband was found to be a genetic compound heterozygote for three mutations. One was a polymorphism with a substitution of G by A at nucleotide position 211 in exon 1 (c.211G > A), resulting in the change of glycine (G) to alanine (R) at codon 71 of the UGT1A1 enzyme (p.G71R). The second one was a 3 bp deletion (TTC) between nucleotides 508 and 510 in exon 1 (c.508_510delTTC), leading to the phenylalanine (F) deletion at position 170 of the UGT1A1 enzyme (p.F170-). The last one was a T to G transition at nucleotide position 1456 in exon 5 (c.1456 T > G), resulting in the substitution of tyrosine (Y) with aspartic acid (D) at codon 486 (p.Y486D). These mutations have been associated with CNS-II except that p.G71R occurred mostly in Gilbert syndrome (a mild form of hereditary UGT1A1-associated syndromes). His father was a carrier of heterozygous p.G71R and p.F170-. Heterozygous p.G71R and p.Y486D were detected in his mother. His sister carried homozygous p.G71R and heterozygous p.Y486D. All this hereditary information of families confirmed the inheritance and the allelic distribution of the three mutations (Figure ). No mutations were detected in any of other exons and screening for the TA duplication in the UGT1A1 gene promoter of the proband and his family members showed a wild type genotype (6TA/6TA).