A 72-year-old woman with a history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and arterial hypertension was admitted to the Emergency Department due to abdominal pain and nausea of 24 h evolution. She denied any other symptoms. Upon admission, the patient had a pulse of 112 bpm, blood pressure of 105/85 mmHg, and a temperature of 36.3 °C. On physical examination, her abdomen was distended and tender. An irreducible mass with intense pain on palpation was detected in the left inguinal region. Laboratory tests showed leukocytosis of 11.4 × 109 /L and lactate of 0.7 mmol/L. The metabolic profile and liver function tests were within normal limits. Inguinal ultrasound reported the protrusion of a hollow viscus through a 42 mm fascial continuum. Taking into account the patient's history and the findings of an incarcerated inguinal hernia, emergency surgical treatment was chosen. An anterior approach was performed through an inguinal incision. On examination, a large direct hernial sac protruding from a 6 × 5 cm posterior wall defect and a synchronous ipsilateral femoral hernia were observed. The inguinal hernial sac was opened, showing the presence of the cecum and the appendix , both without signs of inflammation or ischemia (Losanoff–Basson type 1), so the sac was resected and its contents reintroduced into the abdominal cavity. The femoral space was then evaluated transinguinally, identifying the greater omentum that had slipped into the femoral canal . Subsequently, a transinguinal dissection of the femoral hernia was performed and its content was reduced. For the reconstructive phase, we consider the existence of a large defect remaining in the posterior wall of the inguinal canal after resection of the hernia sac, associated with the need to repair the found femoral hernia. Given these intraoperative findings, primary closure of the large posterior wall defect and the femoral ring was performed by primary McVay repair. Finally, the hernia repair was completed with the placement of a 15 × 7 cm polypropylene mesh. The procedure was carried out without complications and was discharged on the first postoperative day. No recurrence was detected 12 months after surgery.