A 32-year-old woman with a history of LASIK presented with a gradual painless reduction of vision in her right eye after a blunt trauma to the same eye in a road traffic accident five months before. LASIK had been done in both eyes 2.5 years earlier for a myopic refractive error of −6.00 diopters (D) with the reported post LASIK unaided visual acuity (VA) of 6/6 in both eyes. At the presentation, VA was 1/60 and 6/6 in the right and left eyes, respectively. Slit lamp examination revealed flap dehiscence, stromal scarring, and descemet folds with scarring in the right eye which had been caused by the flap dehiscence at the time of accident . There was a small macular scar in the parafoveal area due to the resolved Berlin's edema. Because of late presentation, flap repositioning was not a treatment option; therefore the affected eye underwent SALK Postoperatively, the patient received moxifloxacin hydrochloride 0.5% and prednisolone acetate 1% eye drops three times daily, and carboxymethylcellulose 0.5% eye drops four times daily for 6 weeks. Bandage contact lens was removed four days after surgery. Small amount of glue was cleared from the interface at the postoperative week 3. Uncorrected VA was 6/36 on postoperative day 1 and the best corrected VA (BCVA) was 6/24 four weeks postoperatively . The reason for suboptimal vision was the presence of macular scar. This patient maintained the same vision with a 1.5-year follow up with no signs of epithelial ingrowth or graft dehiscence.
Anterior segment optical coherence tomography (Brand name, company, city, country) was used to determine the depth of scarring (154 μm). Accordingly, dissection was performed at the depth of 160 μm with the help of microkeratome, which was determined by intraoperative pachymetry (Corneo-Gage Plus; Sonogage, Inc., Cleveland, Ohio, USA). To perform SALK, demarcation, separation and dissection of previous plane beneath the flap were performed using LASIK spatula and Sinskey hook: The flap was removed after freeing nasal, temporal and central parts sequentially and dissection was done cautiously in the scarred area.
At the completion of dissection, interface bed which was clear was thoroughly washed to avoid any epithelial ingrowth in future. Donor tissue was then cut using an automated lamellar microkeratome and artificial anterior chamber (ALTK; automated lamellar therapeutic keratoplasty system, Moria, Paris, France). The microkeratome head size was 200 μm which was the smallest available. Donor tissue was punched with an 8-mm disposal trephine. Donor anterior lamella was then put on the host dissected area with the help of fibrin glue applied on the periphery as well as in the center. A bandage contact lens was placed and one drop of moxifloxacin hydrochloride 0.5% eye drops was instilled.