A 10-year-old boy was confirmed to have Philadelphia chromosome (Ph)-positive ALL. According to the Chinese Children’s Cancer Group study ALL-2015 (CCCG-ALL-2015), he was provisionally assigned as intermediate-risk based on his presenting clinical features, aged 10 years, and immunophenotype B- cell and Philadelphia chromosome–positive ALL. According to CCCG-ALL-2015, the patient will receive MRD directed, risk-stratified treatment, modified from the St Jude Children’s Research Hospital Total XV and XVI studies and the Shanghai Children’s Medical Center ALL-2005 trial. For MRD ≥ 1% at the end of remission induction, provisional intermediate-risk patient has to be escalated to high risk. Allogeneic transplant was recommended. He received upfront window therapy with dexamethasone for 4 days followed by remission induction with prednisone acetate, vincristine, daunorubicin hydrochloride (DNR), and pegaspargase from days 5 to 28.
He began to receive dasatinib (80 mg/m2 per day) as soon as the diagnosis was made on day 5 of remission induction. On day 18 of remission induction, he was hospitalized for cough, fever, and pain, tenderness and swelling over the right elbow. Laboratory tests were notable for neutropenia and elevated inflammatory markers . A computed tomography (CT) chest scan showed the patchy shadows in the anterior lobe of left upper lung and the middle lobe of right lung. The right upper limb ultrasound revealed swelling of soft tissue without previous trauma. Empiric treatment with broad-spectrum antibiotics was initiated to cover both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. The lesion progressed to an abscess in the upper right arm. Twenty-two hours later, blood culture showed fungus positivity and pus. Empirical amphotericin B therapy was initiated. There are two reasons we chose amphotericin B. First, Candida infection is the most common fungal infection. Second, vincristine is one of the drugs used in remission induction chemotherapy. Voriconazole may increase the toxic side effects of vincristine, so voriconazole was not our first option . The blood culture results suggested C. tropicalis 2 days later. Minimal inhibitory concentrations indicated susceptibility to amphotericin B (minimal inhibitory concentration < =0.5 μg/mL), fluconazole (1) and voriconazole (0.125) and flucytosine (<=0.4). He subsequently developed pain and swelling over the right upper arm and forearm. Five days after admission, he was afebrile, but pain, oedema, and limited function of the right elbow were progressive. Repeated ultrasound revealed discrete periosteal oedema adjacent to the humerus 1 week after admission. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the right humerus showed an intraosseous abscess and probable osteomyelitis . Surgical irrigation and debridement of the bone were performed immediately . Culture of bone aspirates obtained during surgery showed that C. tropicalis was sensitive to amphotericin B, which is the same result as the blood culture. A small study of the bone fragments collected during surgery revealed fungal spores. All chemotherapy, except prednisone was continued, was withdrawn for 1 week. Debridement was repeated on the third postoperative day, resulting in considerable improvement of clinical and laboratory findings. His condition improved. One week later, when he was nontoxic, haemodynamically stable, with no signs of haematopoietic toxicity and inflammatory markers within the normal range, induction chemotherapy was continued with some modification with prednisolone and dasatinib, and treatment was carried out for osteomyelitis with amphotericin B, meropenem and vancomycin in parallel. Successful control of osteomyelitis was achieved by serial surgical debridement of the lesion, antibiotics, amphotericin B and HBO therapy. Treatment with amphotericin B was administered for a total of 3 weeks; during this time, he regained the ability to move his arm and transitioned to oral posaconazole for consolidation, which he is currently receiving on an ongoing basis. Vincristine (D19 and D26) and L-asparaginase (D26) were administered until the fever was controlled and the neutrophil count (ANC) exceeded 500/mm3. After completion of remission induction therapy, he achieved complete remission (CR). Then, we removed the remission induction treatment consisting of cyclophosphamide (CTX), cytarabine (Ara-c), and mercaptopurine (6-MP) from days 29 to 35. The next chemotherapy regimen was continued with dasatinib, weekly vincristine and daily mercaptopurine for 3 weeks. Subsequent cycles of chemotherapy were reinitiated as per the protocol. At follow-up 5 months later, the patient continued to feel good.