A 62-year-old male patient presented with renal carcinoma. The tumor was removed by partial nephrectomy in cold ischemia without undesirable events. Histology confirmed a well-differentiated renal cell carcinoma with histologically negative margins. The patient also suffered from stable chronic lymphocytic leukemia treated with rituximab and hypothyroidism under substitution with l-thyroxine.
Five days after nephrectomy, a progressive painful ulceration developed rapidly at the site of incision. The lesion was deep and had an overhanging violaceous border. The left lumbar area was indurated and erythematous .
The patient became febrile and his white blood cells (WBC) rose from 6,100 to 56,000/mm3. C-reactive protein (CRP) levels increased from 1.4 to 259 mg/L. At this point, a wound infection was suspected. He was empirically treated with antibiotics (ciprofloxacin, then imipenem and doxycycline) but its condition progressed relentlessly. Ultrasound and computer tomography scans failed to identify an abscess. Surgical wound revision did not identify any sign of bacterial infection. Preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative wound culture remained negative. However, blood culture was positive for Staphylococcus haemolyticus, and imipenem was changed for vancomycin. Despite broad-spectrum antibiotics, there was a sustained expansion of the skin lesion. PG was suspected and the patient was referred to a dermatologist.
A biopsy specimen of the edge of the ulceration showed a phlegmonous nonspecific inflammation without being able to differentiate between a necrotizing wound infection and PG. Microbiology of the skin specimen was negative. Periodic acid schiff (PAS) staining was negative for fungal infection. There were no signs of vasculitis or malignancy. A second skin biopsy was performed. Histology showed a chronic granulomatous inflammation with subepithelial edema. A minimal focal inflammatory reaction affecting small and medium-sized vessels was identified in hypoderm . Myeloperoxidase (MPOX) staining was positive . CD79a and Epstein–Barr virus latent membrane protein-1 oncogene (EBV-LMP) were negative.
Taking into account the medical history, clinical features, histology, and lack of pathogens, the diagnosis of postoperative PG within chronic lymphocytic leukemia and renal cell carcinoma was made. The diagnosis of bacteremia with S. haemolyticus was also made.
Therapy with high-dose prednisolone (250 mg/day) was initiated. The prednisolone therapy was gradually reduced and stopped after 3 weeks. Standard wound care consisted of polyhexanide applications and enzymatic debridement of necrotic tissue. After 2 weeks of treatment, WBC decreased to 6,000/mm3 and CRP to 47 mg/L. The corticosteroids induced prompt healing of the wound .
Informed consent was obtained from the patient for being included in the study.