A 47-year-old male with no cardiovascular history presented to the emergency department with acute onset lower limb weakness. He had a 3-day history of being unwell with pyrexia, rigours, lethargy, supra-pubic discomfort, and bilateral flank pain. Upon arrival, he had a blood pressure of 147/68 mmHg and tachycardic at 125 beats per minute (b.p.m.). His was tachypnoeic at 24 breaths a minute and pyrexial with a temperature of 39.4°C. On examination, he had tenderness over the lumbar spine with reduction of power (2/5) in the proximal lower limbs. There was absence of anal tone on digital rectal examination and he failed a tug test when a catheter was inserted due to urinary retention. His heart sounds were normal with no murmurs appreciated. There was no evidence of splinter haemorrhages, Janeway lesions, or Osler nodes.
Bloods on admission showed raised inflammatory markers, hence a set of blood cultures were obtained. The electrocardiogram (ECG) obtained on admission shows sinus tachycardia with a ventricular rate of 125 b.p.m. with a normal cardiac axis, PR interval, QT and QTc intervals, and QRS duration. Given the neurological findings, a magnetic resonance imaging spine was performed for suspected cord compression. This revealed a collection in both the anterior and posterior epidural space causing compression of the thecal sac. Post-contrast imaging performed confirmed an enhancing epidural abscess extending from the skull base to the 7th thoracic vertebrae. The brain parenchyma was unremarkable with no identifiable abnormality.
An ECG performed prior to surgery revealed complete atrioventricular (AV) dissociation (3rd degree AV block). However, the resulting ventricular rate was 75 b.p.m. and the QRS was narrow (<100 ms) in duration. As the ventricular rate was normal, no specific intra-operative precautions were taken at this point. The patient underwent urgent cervicothoracic decompression and washout of cervical vertebrae 6 to thoracic vertebrae 5. Pus obtained during surgery was sent for microscopy, culture, and sensitivity.
Post-spinal surgery, he was still in complete AV dissociation but now bradycardic in the intensive care unit (ICU) and was started on noradrenaline. Due to this change, the cardiology team was contacted to review the patient. Our choice for chronotropic support would have been isoprenaline. However, our colleagues in the intensive care setting were not as familiar with this and felt more comfortable with noradrenaline titration. As the heart rate improved with low-dose noradrenaline and the blood pressure was not compromised, the cardiology and ICU team felt that a temporary pacing wire was not required at that point. The patient remained on a cardiac monitor in ICU with close monitoring from the cardiology team. Given the lack of cardiac history, the initial working diagnosis was autonomic dysreflexia (AD).
An infective haematogenous spread was suspected as Staphylococcus
aureus was grown from peripheral blood cultures and pus obtained during spinal surgery. There was no obvious bacterial entry point identified on inspection of the patient, however a formal dental check was not performed. Given the evidence of heart block pre- and post-surgery, the source of infection was suspected to be from the heart. A transoesophageal echocardiogram performed revealed evidence of GD associated with small vegetation measuring 4.0 × 7.0 mm (, Videos 1 and 2) Both atria were mildly dilated but bi-ventricular size and function were normal. There were no additional valve lesions observed and no evidence of an aortic root abscess.
The patient was discussed at the infective endocarditis multidisciplinary meeting, the decision was made to treat with IV antibiotics and not close the GD in the acute setting. At the time of discussion, the patient was recovering from surgery in ICU with significant paralysis of the lower limbs. Furthermore, the shunt size was small with no ventricular chamber enlargement or reduction in systolic function. A positron emission tomography–computed tomography was not performed as the patient had clear vegetations associated with the GD and no pacing wires inserted. However, it would have been beneficial if the source of infection was unclear. He received IV Vancomycin for 46 days while recovering from spinal surgery.
The vegetation was not seen on transthoracic echocardiogram (, Video 3) performed 35 days post-antibiotic initiation. There were no further positive blood cultures and no murmur was heard. Intermittent periods of sinus rhythm with normal AV conduction were noted whilst being monitored in ICU and this was confirmed and sustained during recovery. Electrocardiogram 2 months’ post-surgery demonstrated a sinus tachycardia with no further episodes of complete heart block noted.
The patient was discharged from hospital after 83 days and is currently receiving rehabilitation in the local spinal rehab unit due to persistent lower limb weakness.
Our patient remains severely debilitated and disabled. He has been referred to the regional adult congenital heart disease (ACHD) team for long-term follow-up to monitor the defect and if he develops any symptoms of heart failure. We have deferred the decision to close is defect pending his neurological recovery. If surgery were to be performed, he would almost certainly require permanent pacing as the conduction defect would likely be exacerbated by surgery.