A 58-year-old man presented with lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) that had been present for 6 months. He had a family history of a sister who died due to breast cancer at age 36. A digital rectal examination revealed a markedly enlarged prostate with a smooth, bulging surface. The serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) density was 0.5 ng/ml. Transabdominal ultrasonography revealed a huge prostatic mass measuring 13×10×9 cm. A magnetic resonance image of the prostate showed an enlarged prostatic mass with hemorrhagic necrosis. The prostatic mass had a large size of 165×99 mm heterogeneous enhancement and displaced the bladder anteriorly and the rectum posteriorly. This implies that the tumor was mainly localized within the prostate, and there was no definite evidence of the direct invasion of adjacent organs . Abdominal, pelvic, and thoracic computed tomography scans showed a heterogeneous, infiltrative tumor within the prostate gland extending to the bladder and the rectum, no lymph node involvement or any metastatic focus including bones was recorded.
A transrectal ultrasound-guided prostate biopsy was performed. Sextant needle core biopsies containing specimens of the prostate have been submitted for histopathological examination. All specimens were fixed in 10% neutral formalin and embedded in paraffin. Three-micron-thick hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stained sections were obtained. Microscopically, four core biopsies revealed the presence of neoplastic proliferation of spindle-shaped mesenchymal cells forming interlacing fascicles. There were few mitotic figures with a low mitotic count (<1 per 10 high-power fields). There was no evidence of necrosis or nuclear atypia . The other biopsy cylinders were taken from normal prostate tissue.
In an immunohistochemistry study, the tumor cells were diffusely immunoreactive for CD117, CD34, and DOG1 .
Thus, the diagnosis of a high-risk primary EGIST of the prostate was made (tumor size >10 cm). The patient refused radical prostatectomy and received only imatinib treatment. Follow-up control was planned after 3 months. The patient was contacted by telephone, and he is in good health with no worsening of symptoms 2 months after his prostate biopsy.