Our patient was a previously healthy 52-year-old slender yellow man who had no obvious medical history. About 26 years ago, he was involved in a traffic accident while riding a motorcycle and wearing a helmet, when he was hit by a car in the head. The patient recovered 3 days later, but sequela of severe, stabbing pain was reported between the right medial scapula and spine with radiation to the thorax occasionally thereafter. In the last 3 years, upper respiratory tract infection and productive cough were noted frequently, and the patient’s symptoms were aggravated by shortness of breath when his head was positioned below 90 degrees during squatting and hunching of the body. A chest x-ray revealed a 5.6 × 3.9-cm2 mass at LMD (Local Medical Department) since then. In the meantime, the patient consulted various medical centers. During the spans of examination and watch, symptoms developed progressively with sharp pain at locations similar to the previous trauma. The patient had dyspnea, which was relieved temporarily by use of a bronchodilator. The patient manifested prone sleep with ashen complexion, and he had lost 3–4 kg of body weight over the 3 weeks before admission to our hospital. Chest x-ray and Virtual bronchoscopy with computer tomography (CT) revealed an 8.3 × 7.5 × 4-cm lobulated right upper mediastinal mass with amorphous calcification and severe, intricate airway compression . A creative mockup analogy module of the distorted trachea and tumor was generated by 3-D printing and reprogrammed by CT scan to streamline the sophisticated correlation (Additional file : Video S1). Considering the cryptogenic nature of the tumor without the possibility of a percutaneous biopsy, we performed an airway stabilization procedure before performing the operation with the patient under general anesthesia. Initially, we applied local anesthetics to the neck wound with the head left-tilted at a 45-degree lateral decubitus position, and an anterior tracheal ring of 0.6 cm in diameter was removed by cautery. Intraoperative bronchoscopy unraveled a long, twisted segment of life-threatening compression with intact mucosa . We then used an innovative approach with the patient under general anesthesia to insert a T-tube (13 French, 0.5–7.5 cm, upper and lower arm) assisted by laryngoscopy . That allowed smooth procedures for a series of examinations, such as magnetic resonance angiography of the thorax, position emission tomography (PET), and thyroid scan with preparation for secondary operation of tumor removal. Three weeks later, thoracoscopy-assisted with intralesional surgery of lobulated, firm, gray-tan tumor was performed. The tumor weighed 205 g . Pathological findings confirmed a low-grade chondrosarcoma with < 1/10 mitotic high-power fields . The patient recovered uneventfully, and his trachea returned to normal size instantly with marked improvement in pulmonary function testing. Postoperative adjuvant radiotherapy was administered, and the patient stayed in healthy condition during a solid 2 years of follow-up.