A 24 year old male police recruit from a training camp in Kafue district, in the Southern part of Lusaka Province was admitted to the University Teaching Hospital in Lusaka, Zambia. He presented with sudden-onset seizures and fever for 1 day with no prior history of ill health. Two days before presenting to our hospital, he was reported to have gone swimming in the Kafue River. On physical examination, the patient was febrile, anicteric and comatose with a Glasgow Coma Scale of 6 out of 15. He also presented with a stiff neck and decorticate posturing. His blood pressure was 104/60 with a pulse rate of 126 bpm and body temperature of 39 °C. Chest and abdominal examination were unremarkable. A rapid diagnostic test for falciparum malaria was negative. There were no features of chronic illness and no palpable lymph nodes were observed. A working diagnosis of severe septicemia with acute meningoencephalitis was made and the patient was started on IV Cephtriaxone (2 g) twice daily. The patient was immediately transferred to the intensive care ward. No bacterial or fungal pathogens were detected in CSF collected on admission (Day 1). Due to poor response to antibiotics, a repeat CSF sample was collected on the third day of treatment but no organisms were detected on direct microscopy or stained preparations. A computerized tomography (CT) scan of the brain did not show any abnormalities. The patient continued to have high fevers with generalized seizures and depression of consciousness, requiring endotracheal intubation and ventilatory support. A direct wet mount microscopic examination of the CSF sample collected on day 8 showed numerous highly motile amoebic trophozoites and cysts which was later confirmed to be the pathogenic N. fowleri on polymerase chain reaction . The patient was started on 50 mg of Amphotericin B IV but no improvement was noted. Despite several resuscitations, he died on the same day treatment was commenced (Day 8). Laboratory findings for this case are shown in Table and Table . A summary of the patient management is shown in the timeline (Additional file ).
On Autopsy, the leptomeninges were thin and transparent with vascular congestion, fibrinopurulent exudates . There was no displacement of the cingulate gyrus, medial temporal lobe, or cerebellar tonsils. Histology showed edema, lymphocytes and neutrophils features consistent with meningitis. Multiple amoeba were present in the brain parenchyma .
To confirm that PAM was due to N. fowleri, DNA was amplified with primers NF-ITS-F1 [5′-GAC TTC ATT CGT TCT TGT AGA-3′] and NF-ITSR1 [5′-CTC TTG CGA GGT CCA GAC-3′] that targeted a 577 bp region of the internal transcribed spacer of the rRNA gene .