A 38-year-old male was consulted to rule out VP shunt infection. VP shunt was placed approximately 3 months prior to admission by an outside hospital (OSH). The patient presented with fever, emesis, and pancytopenia. Patient's history included a bilateral cerebellar mass resected by an OSH 3 months prior to admission. On postoperative day four, a right external ventricular drain (EVD) was placed due to hydrocephalus. Subsequently, the patient underwent right occipital VP shunt placement 10 days later. A follow-up computed tomography (CT) demonstrated interval development of right frontal subdural collection [Figure –]. Pathology of the resected tissue demonstrated medulloblastoma. A follow-up MRI brain 1-month later demonstrates the persistent right frontal subdural fluid consistent with hygroma [Figure –]. MRI of cervical, thoracic, and lumbar spines failed to demonstrate leptomeningeal metastases of medulloblastoma. The patient underwent radiation therapy with concurrent chemotherapy of vincristine, 2 months following surgery. Subsequent lumbar puncture did not show malignant cells.
Given the recent surgery, fever, and symptoms, there was serious concern for shunt infection. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from shunt valve was obtained, which showed Gram-negative rods and Gram-positive cocci. MRI of brain with and without contrast revealed right frontal subdural fluid collection with ring enhancement and restricted diffusion, highly suspicious of subdural empyema [Figure –]. On examination, patient was awake and able to follow command in upper and lower extremities. Incision appeared clean and intact without signs of infection. The patient was taken to operating room, where the entire shunt system was removed and replaced with an EVD. In addition, a right frontal burr hole was placed over the area of subdural fluid accumulation and brisk drainage of purulent material was noted. Culture of this material grew out of Escherichia coli. The patient was immediately treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics. Patient's urine culture also grew out of E. coli. The patient was doing well and was back to his neurological baseline after surgery. Unfortunately, on postoperative day, three patients contracted severe pneumonia requiring intubation.