An 81-year-old woman was found to have an abnormal shadow in the right lower lung field on chest radiography for a routine health check-up . Her past medical history was unremarkable. Her smoking history was 1 pack/day × 50 years, and she had quit smoking at age 70. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed a tumor with an irregular border centered in the hilar region extending from segment 6 (S6) to the middle lobe of the right lung . Based on stenotic and occlusive findings of the pulmonary artery on CT scan, the tumor was considered to have directly invaded the pulmonary trunk . Although positron emission tomography showed fluorodeoxyglucose uptake with a maximum standard uptake value of 4.7 in the tumor region , there was no fluorodeoxyglucose uptake in mediastinal lymph nodes or other organs. To closely examine the extent of proximal intravascular tumor invasion, angiography was performed, which revealed complete occlusion of the pulmonary trunk at the periphery proximal to the bifurcation of the posterior ascending branch, and a filling defect at the root of this branch . Although bronchoscopy showed no mass lesion in the visible range, adenocarcinoma was diagnosed by bronchoscopic biopsy of the tumor. The level of carcinoembryonic antigen was elevated, at 5.7 ng/mL (institutional cutoff value, 5.0 ng/ml); however, no abnormalities were detected in other blood chemistry or tumor marker levels. The patient was otherwise healthy and asymptomatic. Her vital capacity was 1.92 liters, and her forced expiratory volume in 1 second was 1.40 liters. Because right pneumonectomy would be difficult given her pulmonary function and age, preservation of the right upper lobe was chosen as the surgical strategy.
Intraoperatively, the tumor was found to be located on the interlobar surface of S6-middle lobe, tending to invade proximally and distally along the pulmonary trunk. Massive induration was felt inside the pulmonary artery at the cancer invasion site . Cancer invasion was also observed at the root of the posterior ascending branch, and induration was felt in the lumen of this branch. Thus, it was ligated and divided on the peripheral side . The pulmonary artery was clamped with vascular forceps at a site proximally peripheral to the bifurcation of the anterior trunk and without internal palpable induration; then, the artery was divided and sutured. As a result of these procedures on blood vessels, we were able to preserve the right upper lobe and perform middle and lower lobectomy .
Gross examination of the specimen disclosed that the tumor was mainly centered in the hilar region at S6, measured 40 mm, and was partially grayish inside . The tumor showed continuous invasion into the pulmonary artery, and the pulmonary trunk was occluded with a massive thrombus. Histopathologically, cuboidal tumor cells showed acinar, bronchioloalveolar and solid pattern with central fibrotic scar, leading to the diagnosis of adenocarcinoma with mixed subtypes . Invasion of adenocarcinoma mainly composed of acinar pattern was observed in the pulmonary artery wall , and the endothelium had also been replaced by adenocarcinoma cells in the same region . Although a large thrombus was detected at the site of vessel invasion by adenocarcinoma in the pulmonary artery, there were no malignant findings in the thrombus itself . No cancer invasion was observed at the surgical margins of either the posterior ascending branch or the pulmonary trunk . There was no lymph node metastasis. The cancer was pathologically diagnosed as pT4N0M0, stage IIIA.
The patient's postoperative course was uneventful, and she has remained in good health since discharge. In consideration of her advanced age, no adjuvant chemotherapy was performed. For the 14 months to date, since surgery, the patient has remained free of lung cancer recurrence, and will continue to be followed-up on an outpatient basis.