We present the anaesthetic management of a 34-year-old gravida III, para 1 woman who was 34 weeks pregnant and who presented to a University Hospital setting for caesarean delivery. She was recently diagnosed with pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) and atrial septal defect (ASD). Her foetus was also diagnosed on a prenatal ultrasound as having an ASD. She was also suffering from gestational diabetes. Her clinical history included dyspnoea at rest and orthopnoea requiring two pillows whilst sleeping. She had a severely restricted functional capacity. She had a previous uneventful caesarean section 4 years prior as well as a miscarriage in the first trimester 3 years prior. She admitted that her symptoms were much worse in this pregnancy. Her physical examination revealed a pansystolic murmur in the left apex. An echocardiogram revealed a moderate sized ASD with severe PAH, moderate pulmonary and tricuspid regurgitation and enlarged right heart. A cardiology consultation recommended placing her on oral furosemide, aspirin and potassium supplements.
After counselling the patient and her family pre-operatively in consultation with the obstetrician, the patient was advised regional anaesthesia for the delivery. On the day of the caesarean delivery, after routine monitors were placed in the operating room, a radial arterial line was placed for beat-to-beat blood pressure monitoring. Her baseline saturation as revealed by the use of a pulse oximeter was 89% to 95% on facemask oxygen. She was then placed in a sitting position where a combined spinal epidural technique was used to deliver a slow graded spinal with 1 cc 0.5% bupivacaine and 20 mcg of fentanyl with a 27-gauge spinal needle. She was then placed in a semi-sitting position at 45° propped up on pillows as much as her orthopnoea would allow. Another 2 cc of 0.25% bupivacaine was administered via the epidural catheter to establish a block up to T4 level. A strong motor block was accomplished. Systemic blood pressures were supported by boluses of phenylephrine. Caesarean section was then performed without delay in the semi-recumbent position without event and the patient remained comfortable. A pulmonary artery (PA) catheter was floated during surgery to reveal PA pressures of 60 to 70 systolic. After delivery of the baby, the patient was nebulised with 1 cc of prostacycline (PGE1) and 4 cc of normal saline via a facemask for 30 minutes. Her arterial saturations improved to 99% and PA pressures reduced to 30 to 40 systolic. Systemic blood pressures were stable. The entire procedure lasted 1.2 hours with no untoward event and both mother and baby remained well post-operatively. She was monitored in the cardiac care unit for 24 hours and later sent to the ward. She was discharged home on day seven with no problems. She had refused a tubal ligation.