A 36-year-old obese, African American male presented to the ED with a 24-hour history of diffuse abdominal pain after a syncopal episode. Symptoms included weakness, mental status changes, and worsening constipation. Medical history was significant for moderate intellectual disability, bipolar disorder, hypertension, constipation, and obstructive sleep apnea. Surgical history included a tonsillectomy. Home medications included: diltiazem, hydrochlorothiazide, lisinopril, citalopram, divalproex sodium, bupropion SR, benztropine, clonazepam, and Haldol Decanoate. He had no significant family history.
Initial vital signs (VS) showed: blood pressure (BP) 95/64 mmHg, heart rate (HR) 112 bpm. Upon physical exam, the patient was awake, alert, in no distress, with a distended and diffusely tender abdomen. Initial lab results can be seen on , showing leukocytosis, lactic acidosis, and elevated creatinine.
Abdomen and pelvic CT scans (, ) were performed without IV contrast given his acute kidney injury. It reported:Segmental thickening of the hepatic flexure and proximal transverse colon, would be related to focal colitis with associated stricture; however neoplastic etiology cannot be excluded. Stercoral colitis involving the splenic flexure and descending colon due to impacted feces. Pericolic fat stranding. Trace ascites in the left paracolic gutter and in the pelvis. No free air.
While in the ED he deteriorated rapidly, becoming obtunded along with worsening abdominal pain. VS were BP 77/29 mmHg, HR 112 bpm, RR 30 rpm. Given his neurological deterioration, the patient was intubated for airway protection. Central venous access was obtained. Meropenem was administered along with fluid resuscitation and vasopressors. Arterial blood gases obtained after intubation showed; pH 7.22, PaO2 56.1 mmHg, PaCO2 36.4 mmHg, HCO3 14.6 mmol/L. The family was informed of the patient's critical condition. Consent was obtained for a diagnostic laparoscopy, possible exploratory laparotomy, possible ostomy.
In the OR an arterial line was placed. After time out the abdomen was accessed via Hassan technique through an infraumbilical incision. Obvious necrosis of the colon was visualized upon entry, leading to immediate conversion to an exploratory laparotomy. The entire left, and most of the transverse colon were dilated up to 12 cm, most of which was necrotic, especially at the sigmoid level. Proximal and distal transections were performed at the proximal transverse colon and sacral promontory respectively. Approximately 150 mL of free, murky fluid in the abdomen was noted. Dilation made the colon mobilization extremely difficult especially at the level of the splenic flexure. Intraoperative hypotension required an increase in vasopressor support and resolved after removal of the colonic segment. The right and proximal transverse colon looked viable. After ensuring hemodynamic stability an end colostomy was created, completing the operation. The segment of bowel removed can be seen in . Examination of the Hematoxylin and eosin stain on resected colonic samples can be seen in , , confirming focal colitis and necrosis.
The patient was transferred to the ICU post-operatively. On post-operative day (POD) 3 vasopressor support was no longer required, with extubation occurring on POD 4. On POD 5 a clear liquid diet was started and he was transferred to the surgical floor. By POD 6, diet was advanced and colostomy began working. Discharge from the hospital occurred on POD 8.
He was seen in clinic on follow up 2 weeks after discharge. The patient reported doing well, tolerating regular diet, with colostomy functioning properly. Unfortunately, he was lost to follow up before planning colostomy reversal.