In November 2020, a 31-year-old woman presented at the emergency room after recurrent syncope of unknown origin. She reported having lost consciousness after experiencing dizziness under the shower and had regained consciousness shortly after.
On admission, the patient was asymptomatic. Her electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus bradycarda with no ST-segment or T-wave abnormalities . She revealed no relevant trauma after syncope and physical exam and initial blood tests were normal. She reported two similar episodes of syncope in late August 2020, the first while sitting and the second while showering. A subsequent ambulatory neurological evaluation including cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and electroencephalography (EEG) did not reveal any abnormalities. She regularly smoked cannabis (up to 5 g a week) and cigarettes (10 packyears), other drugs or regular alcohol intake were not reported.
During her first night in the hospital, she experienced another syncope while sitting on her bed. Telemetric Holter ECG monitoring revealed a 12 s asystole during that episode and she was therefore referred for additional investigation and pacemaker implantation evaluation. The patient’s medical history revealed only substituted hypothyroidism (normal thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), 2.19 U/mL). The patient’s father had dilative cardiomyopathy of unspecified aetiology. Other than that, there was no history of cardiovascular diseases or sudden cardiac death in the family. Cardiac imaging with echocardiography and cardiac MRI revealed no abnormalities . Orthostatic hypotension was not seen in a Schellong-test.
Twelve-lead ECG revealed 2nd degree SA exit block showing typical Wenckebach periodicity with gradually shortening PP intervals until a pause occurred . It was concluded that the recurrent syncope was most likely due to asystole resulting from higher degree SA block. The SA block in the absence of any signs of structural, coronary, or infiltrative heart disease raised suspicion towards other rare and potentially reversible inflammatory heart conditions including LC. Indeed, the patient reported several tick bites during a countryside visit in June 2020, after which she noticed a rash on her forehead and left calf with typical morphology of an EM. Her general practitioner diagnosed LD with positive borrelia antibodies (IgG and IgM) and prescribed antibiotic therapy with oral doxycycline. The Suspicious Index in Lyme Carditis (SILC) score proposed by Besant et al. was 9 (outdoor activity, tick bite, age < 50 years, EM), suggesting a high suspicion of LC. Serological testing was repeated at the hospital and confirmed Lyme Borreliosis by a Western blot assay with positive IgM and IgG antibodies against B. burgdorferi specific antigens VLsE, p41 and OspC.
Due to the possibility that the first antibiotic course with oral doxycycline had been insufficient and the intermittent sinus arrest and syncope may have been caused by LC associated with SA block, a second antibiotic course was initiated with 2 g ceftriaxone i.v. once daily over 14 days. Signs of SA block rapidly resolved within a few days and there were no more episodes of bradycardia or asystole documented. Ergometry stress test documented chronotropic competence and revealed no exercise-induced PQ interval prolongation or widening of QRS complexes. It was therefore opted against the implantation of a pacemaker with consequent possible complications. Instead, a cardiac loop recorder (ILR) was implanted for continuous rhythm monitoring, and to be able to diagnose any further episodes of sinus pauses or high degree SA block, if they should recur. The patient was discharged on sequential oral antibiotic therapy with doxycycline for another 21 days. She has been completely asymptomatic with no sinus pauses documented in the ILR after 12 months of follow-up.