A 74-year-old man visited the emergency department with left leg radiating pain and
left hip pain that occurred 3 days earlier. He had no underlying diseases other than
hypertension. The neurologic examination revealed radiating pain on the L4 dermatome
of the left leg. The muscle power was grade 3 for the hip flexor and knee extensor,
and grade 4 for the ankle dorsiflexor and big toe dorsiflexor of the left leg. There
were no sensory changes or skin lesions on his left leg. Plain radiography of the
lumbar spine showed intervertebral disc space narrowing at the L4-5 and L5-S1
levels. Plain radiography of the hip revealed no specific findings. The patient was
admitted for pain control.
Herniation of the nucleus pulposus (HNP) of the lumbar spine was suspected and lumbar
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed. However, there were no pathologic
lesions on the lumbar MRI . A computed tomography (CT) scan of the lower extremity artery was
performed to differentiate the symptoms from those of vascular problems, but there
were no pathologic lesions. The initial laboratory examinations showed no specific
findings. After admission, 25 mg of pethidine mixed with 500 mL of normal saline was
administered intravenously to control pain, but the pain did not improve. On the
third day of hospitalization, erythematous patches and vesicles were observed on the
head, face, ear, neck, trunk, back, and both lower extremities . A skin biopsy was performed for
the vesiculopustular rash under the suspicion of disseminated herpes zoster. Herpes
zoster infection was confirmed by polymerase chain reaction analysis. Treatment was
performed with 250 mg of intravenous acyclovir every 8 hours for 6 days and 62.5 mg
of intravenous methylprednisolone for 4 days. On the sixth day of admission, all of
the lesions were covered with crust but the neuropathic pain persisted and
gabapentin was prescribed for 6 days. On the 13th day of hospitalization, the skin
lesions and left leg pain and weakness improved and he was discharged from the
hospital. This study was approved by our Institutional Review Board in accordance
with the Declaration of Helsinki.