A 31-year-old Aboriginal female was referred from a remote community in the NT with 1 week of headaches, fevers, confusion, and seizures. She was diagnosed with a bicuspid AV at age 15 with progression to severe stenosis and regurgitation, and development of a 4.7 cm aneurysm of the ascending aorta requiring surgery at age 27. She underwent bioprosthetic aortic valve replacement [AVR, (21 mm St Jude Medical Epic)] and replacement of the ascending aorta with a 20 mm Dacron graft (Maquet Intergard); a dual-chamber pacemaker (PPM) was inserted post-operatively for complete heart block. Concurrent comorbidities included type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and smoking with suboptimal adherence to metformin, bisoprolol, and aspirin. There was no history of intravenous drug use.
On presentation, she was hypotensive (82 mmHg systolic) with a pulse rate of 80/min, oxygen saturation of 100%, respiratory rate of 22/min, and febrile at 40.1°C with a Glasgow Coma Scale of 14. There were no peripheral stigmata of IE.
She received fluid resuscitation, vasopressor support and broad-spectrum antibiotics prior to aeromedical transfer to a tertiary hospital (with no onsite cardiac surgery) 1000 km away.
Initial pathology demonstrated a normocytic anaemia [haemoglobin (Hb) 113 g/L, mean corpuscular volume (MCV) 83 fL], elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) 320 mg/L and normal white cell count (WCC) 6.7 × 109/L. Lumbar puncture results suggested bacterial meningitis with a neutrophilic pleocytosis; gram stain and cultures were unremarkable. Computed tomography (CT) demonstrated multi-organ septic emboli with cerebral, kidney, and radial artery involvement.
The patient required intensive care unit admission for management of septic shock; antibiotics were subsequently rationalised to IV flucloxacillin 2 g Q4H once Staphylococcus
aureus was isolated from blood cultures. Combination therapy with gentamicin and rifampicin was avoided given the paucity of evidence supporting better outcomes and concerns for additional toxicity, antimicrobial resistance, and drug interactions. In addition, she received treatment for hyperglycaemia, anaemia (Hb 62 g/L) requiring red blood cell transfusion and diuresis for biventricular heart failure. There was no evidence of bleeding and the normocytic anaemia was attributed to chronic inflammation and subsequent haemodilution.
Electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with ventricular pacing and left bundle branch block. Cardiac imaging revealed a small (<0.5 cm) mobile echodensity on the bioprosthetic AVR consistent with a vegetation without aortic root abscess formation or para-valvular regurgitation. No obvious vegetations were seen on the PPM leads.
On day 6, magnetic resonance imaging brain confirmed multiple cerebral infarcts and associated meningeal enhancement.
The case was discussed at the multi-disciplinary Cardiac Case Conference (CCC) with the supporting interstate cardiac surgical centre with a consensus recommendation for non-surgical management.
On day 13, CT brain showed an evolving left frontal lobe cerebral abscess, requiring neurosurgical intervention with drainage of a 30 × 40 × 20 mm abscess culturing S.
aureus.
Repeat transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) was unchanged and the patient remained clinically stable. Rifampicin 450 mg Q12H was added for adjuvant biofilm activity however she discharged against medical advice (DAMA) from the ward on several occasions resulting in interruptions to the IV flucloxacillin and oral rifampicin.
On day 41, a fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) was performed to establish baseline activity prior to completion of antibiotic therapy .
On day 45, a follow-up TTE revealed new mild paravalvular aortic incompetence and abnormal Doppler flow external to the aortic root . Transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) demonstrated formation of two pseudo-aneurysms in the aortic root, one involving the left coronary sinus adjacent to the left main coronary artery (LMCA), and one adjacent to the right coronary cusp above the right coronary artery . CT coronary angiogram (CTCA) confirmed para-valvular and peri-aortic abscess formation and bilateral pseudo-aneurysms . Repeat blood cultures remained negative. She was urgently transferred to the interstate cardiac surgical centre 3000 km away.
On day 56, she underwent cardiac surgery involving explantation of the previous AV bioprosthesis, aortic graft and PPM, debridement and patch reconstruction of the aortic root with decellularized bovine pericardium, AVR (19 mm Edwards LifeSciences Inspiris Resilia bioprosthesis) and replacement of ascending aorta and hemi-arch. Post-bypass TOE revealed a residual pseudo-aneurysm under the left coronary sinus; as the surgical procedure was already prolonged and complex, this was left alone for consideration of percutaneous interventional closure in the near future. A new dual-chamber PPM was inserted 6 days later.
While initially planned for 6 weeks of post-operative IV flucloxacillin 2 g Q4H and oral rifampicin 450 mg Q12H, antibiotic duration was shortened by 11 days due to DAMA.
She presented to a remote clinic 27 days later and remained clinically well. She was commenced on high-dose oral dicloxacillin and rifampicin until repeat cardiac imaging could be performed. On day 123, an FDG-PET showed no AVR or extra-cardiac uptake . CTCA showed two pseudo-aneurysms . The findings were discussed at the CCC; consensus was that the pseudo-aneurysms did not have suitable anatomy for percutaneous closure and that further surgery was prohibitively high risk, and serial monitoring was planned. Inflammatory markers were normal and antibiotics were ceased.
The two pseudo-aneurysms have remained stable in size on CTCA at two and four months after surgery and TTE 1-year post-AVR showed normal bioprosthetic valve function. The patient was recommended to have 3- to 6-monthly clinical review with TTE, PPM interrogation and CTCA; unfortunately, she has failed to attend these and follow-up has been inconsistent. Her last specialist review and TTE were in July 2020, and her most recent PPM interrogation was in early 2021. CTCA is overdue and attempts have been made to facilitate this through care coordinators.