A 59-year-old Caucasian woman with a three-year history of several dermatological consultations and investigations (results all negative) presented to our Psychiatry Unit for consultation on the advice of her general practitioner and her dermatologist. She had been treated, without success, with various oral and topic antibiotics, even in association with corticosteroids.
The anamnestic data collection revealed that our patient was born with congenital cataracts in both eyes that made her severely sight impaired. Notwithstanding, she is a very active and relatively independent person.
In addition, she experienced traumas in her early life: her three-year-old brother died prematurely, and her 10-year-old sister was burnt to death, in her presence, in a tragic domestic accident.
She began to pick at her skin three years ago, causing herself lesions around the margin of the lips, on her cheeks, chin and nose. Her skin picking was frequent and lasted for hours; it was associated with emotional stress followed by a feeling of relief after picking.
In that period, she was forced to change the arrangement of the furniture and objects in the house due to urgent refurbishment. Being visually impaired, these problems caused her further distress. She reported that her picking behavior was due to different stimuli, such as itching, pain, and burning sensations. She was aware that these feelings, which resulted in compulsive skin picking, were irrational; she did not feel she had any face defects or deformity, but she could not stop picking.
Our patient reported a strong ‘urge’ to pick her skin: a sensation which occurred many times during the day followed by a feeling of relief the moment she picked her skin; all her attempts to resist such an urge required a huge effort and caused serious distress.
This woman has experienced early trauma, stressful events, solitude (being single and living alone), a severe handicap, and she has to take care of herself. She manifested her distress, together with anger and frustration, through her body in a self-destructive way. She picked at her skin causing herself severe lesions; her picking behavior was frequent and sometimes lasted hours.
At her first visit, the general physical examination was within normal limits, apart from the visual impairment and the skin lesions. A dermatological examination revealed the presence of multiple symmetrical facial ulcers and hyper-pigmented areas on normal skin or on pimples, particularly in the area of her cheeks, chin, nose and around her lips. The lesions ranged from a size of around 1cm to 3cm, and appeared in different developmental stages, ranging from ulcers to bruises, scabs, and scar areas, some of which were infected. Our patient, owing to her visual impairment, could not clearly see the injuries that she caused herself. Hence, when shown her magnified photographs, she was shocked by the extent of her facial lesions, which made her wonder what reactions her aesthetic condition would provoke in the people she met.
The results of a mental status examination did not reveal any mood or psychotic disorders, or other Axis I disorders.
The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis II Personality Disorders (SCID-II) revealed traits of obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, as is often observed in skin pickers .
Our patient was treated with fluvoxamine 300mg/day and oxcarbazepine 600mg/day, with a reduction of urges to pick her skin and a certain improvement in the extent of the lesions, but she was never completely free from the picking behavior; in addition, she noted considerable drowsiness.
Therefore, we changed the therapeutic program: we suspended oxcarbazepine and we added haloperidol 2mg/ml, seven drops per day (0.7mg/day), to the maintenance therapy of fluvoxamine. After 10 weeks, she came for follow-up, very grateful of what she defined as a ‘full recovery’, having never felt, until now, such a relief from her symptoms. With the new therapy, unlike the previous one, she was able to completely master her tendency to pick her skin, with the subsequent significant improvement of her clinical conditions.