Our patient was a 64-year-old Japanese woman, gravida 2, para 2 (spontaneous deliveries), who presented with genital bleeding. She had asthma but had not received any medication for it. She had no previous history of obstetrics and gynecological issues. She had obtained a diploma in cooking and was a chef. She was from a family of three, and her economic situation was like that of most Japanese people. She was a tobacco smoker. Her family medical history was unremarkable. She was diagnosed as having cervical cancer, International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics clinical stage IB1. A histopathological examination was performed on a cervical biopsy sample, resulting in a diagnosis of squamous cell carcinoma. We explained that both surgery and radiation therapy are radical treatments; hence, she received radiation therapy with external irradiation (48 Gy × 24 times) and remote afterloading system (24 Gy × 4 times). Approximately 2 years after curative radiation therapy, she complained of itching, skin rash, and small papules and nodules on her left femoral and vulval skin ; these were edema and dermatitis flare-ups. A biopsy of an erythematous macule on her left femoral and vulval skin was performed. There were a few lymphocytes around the vessels, and a subsequent histopathological examination revealed cytokeratin-positive atypical cells invading the dermis; these were within the thin-walled vessels and expressed D2-40, a marker of lymphatic endothelium . The atypical cells were similar to the cells in squamous cell carcinoma. Positron emission tomography with computed tomography (PET-CT) revealed slight uptake of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) in her left femoral skin with maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of 1.41 . Apart from that, she had no other lesion with abnormal 18F-FDG uptake on PET-CT. She was subsequently diagnosed as having cutaneous lymphangitis carcinomatosa arising from cervical cancer. At the time of diagnosis, her muscle, circulatory, and respiratory functions were normal. She had normal blood pressure (129/69 mmHg), heart rate (71 beats per minute), and body temperature (36.9 °C) and did not have anemia (hemoglobin, 13.8 g/dL). Her liver and renal function were normal (total bilirubin, 0.5 mg/dL; aspartate aminotransferase, 19 U/L; alanine aminotransferase, 15 U/L; blood urea nitrogen, 13 mg/dL; and creatinine, 0.52 mg/dL), and her electrolyte levels were normal (sodium, 143 mEq/ml; potassium, 3.9 mEq/ml; and chloride, 109 mEq/ml). Moreover, her urine analysis results were normal (proteinuria, urinary glucose, and ketone were not detected). Paclitaxel (135 mg/m2, for 24 hours)-cisplatin (50 mg/m2, for 2 hours) and BV (15 mg/kg, for 1.5 hours) combination therapy was administered every 21 days. An improvement of both itching and rash was noted after three cycles. After a total of six cycles were administered, the femoral and vulval skin erythema completely disappeared . Our patient experienced a symptom-free interval of 25 months after the last TP + BV infusion.