A 17-year-old female developed a sudden onset shortness of breath for one-day duration associated with pleuritic left sided chest pain and fever. She denied prior respiratory infections and systematic review was unremarkable. She wasn’t taking any medications neither prescribed nor over the counter, denied recent travel and had no history of close contact with sick patient. She recently started vaping 20 days prior to the presentation. There was no significant past medical or surgical history. Family history was significant only for atopy. Initial vital signs showed temperature: 39.5 °C, heart rate (HR): 111 beats per minute (BPM), respiratory rate (RR): 23 breaths per minute, blood pressure (BP): 110/72 millimeters of mercury (mmHg), oxygen saturation (SpO2): 96% on room air. There was neither accessory muscle use nor chest wall tenderness, and her chest examination revealed good equal air entry bilaterally, normal vesicular breathing and bilateral basal crepitations. Laboratory diagnosis was notable for a WBC count of 11.5 × 103/µL, with a normal differential count except for 14% eosinophils; inflammatory markers revealed a CRP: 3.5 mg/dL, and ESR: 6 mm/hr. Chest x-ray (CXR) showed bilateral lower lung zones airspace opacities with subtle left-sided pleural effusion (shown in Fig. ). As the patient was tachypneic with progressive hypoxia, Computed Tomography Angiography (CTA) was done to rule out pulmonary embolism (PE), which showed multiple scattered peripheral ground-glass consolidation suggestive of an inflammatory process (shown in Fig. ). Three COVID-19 PCR tests came to be negative, thus COVID-19 infection was excluded. A course of antibiotics including Intravenous (IV) Azithromycin 500 mg and IV ceftriaxone 1 g was started, but the symptoms failed to improve and progressed to hypoxemic respiratory failure (pH 7.36, PaCO2: 47.2 mmHg, PaO2: 29.1: mmHg) that required high flow oxygen. Flexible bronchoscopy with bilateral BAL was performed revealing high eosinophils count 84% with no other infectious etiologies detected. Given her acute onset of symptoms, negative alternative workup, and significant BAL eosinophilia the diagnosis of AEP was made. Therefore, oral steroid was prescribed in form of prednisone 40 mg/day for two weeks then taper by 5 mg every week. Three weeks after discharge, the patient came back for follow up. Her symptoms improved and chest high resolution computed tomography scan (HRCT) showed interval resolution of the bilateral opacity which is consistent with the treatment response.