A 31-year-old Bosnian male with an unremarkable health history was originally seen in early October 2015 at a walk-in medical clinic after he noticed a change in his voice for 3 weeks. The patient had no smoking history, no prior occupational exposures, was an infrequent social drinker and worked as an assistant manager at a convenience store. Initially he thought the hoarseness was secondary to an upper respiratory tract infection and surprisingly did not notice the neck mass until it was pointed out to him . The physician who examined him at the time felt a large mass in the left anterior portion of the neck and followed up with a neck ultrasound. The neck ultrasound was unremarkable revealing a homogeneous thyroid gland with no solid or cystic soft tissue masses along with normal appearing lymph nodes on both sides of the neck.
Two days later he presented to the emergency department because of increasing hoarseness and mild dysphagia. The department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery was consulted. At the time of consultation, the patient appeared to be in no airway distress and had normal vital signs. On physical examination, a palpable mass was felt on the left side of the neck. The rest of the head and neck examination was unremarkable. Laboratory investigations were ordered and included CBC, serum ionized calcium, thyroid stimulating hormone, free T4 and T3 and calcitonin. These laboratory findings were all within normal limits with the exception of a slightly elevated T3 level. Direct fiberoptic nasopharyngolaryngoscopy was performed and revealed a supraglottic mass involving the left vocal cord causing immobility . The mass appeared to be submucosal in nature and did not affect the right vocal cord. He was then admitted for observation and further workup for diagnostic purposes.
A CT scan with contrast was performed and showed a 5 × 5.7 cm laryngeal mass centered on the left thyroid cartilage, which was completely destroyed . It displayed some central decreased attenuation and was associated with early punctate calcification. The tumor extended medially and compressed the laryngeal ventricle and airway at the level of the vocal cords. Superiorly it extended to the level of the left intact hyoid bone and compressed the left pyriform sinus. There was compression and displacement of the left carotid sheath and left sternocleidomastoid with no sign of any direct invasion. A 1.1 cm diameter lymph node was seen just lateral to the jugular vein and inferior to the tumor on the left-hand side. No other bone or soft tissue abnormality was observed. At this point the appearance of the mass was very suggestive of a chondrosarcoma. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed the same findings as the CT scan and maintained the suspicion for a chondrosarcoma.
To clarify the diagnosis, an open biopsy was performed. Histopathological findings from the biopsy specimen revealed uniform sheet appearance of multinucleated osteoclast-like giant cells . The intervening cells between the giant cells showed band nuclear features supporting a diagnosis of giant cell tumor.
The patient’s case was discussed at the Saskatoon Cancer Centre Head and Neck rounds and the consensus was to proceed with a surgical approach. After consulting with various head and neck cancer specialists across Canada, reviewing the literature, and respecting the patient’s wishes it was decided to proceed with a TL. The decision to proceed with a TL versus a PL was extremely difficult. With the extreme size of the tumor and significant pharyngeal invasion, it was postulated that a partial laryngectomy in this particular case, would result in a high degree of remaining laryngeal dysfunction.
On December 2015, the patient underwent surgery. The following procedures were performed: total laryngectomy, left hemithyroidectomy, pharyngeal plexus neurectomy, partial pharyngectomy, anterior pharyngotomy, and creation of tracheoesophageal fistula for future voice prosthesis .
At 13 months follow-up the patient has no evidence of disease or recurrence. He is able to tolerate all textures of foods and is happy with the quality of his voice. In terms of communication he states he “doesn’t have any problems” and has been doing “very well from a psychological standpoint”. He was connected with an existing laryngectomy patient for peer support prior to surgery, which he found very helpful and gave him “a piece of mind.”
He currently works two jobs, the first being an assistant manager at a convenience store and second as an office clerk. He has an interdisciplinary degree in political science and business administration and is hoping to return to school in the future. One day he hopes to swim again as this was his main form of exercise and stress relief prior to surgery. The patient will have continued follow up in clinic to ensure no tumor recurrence.