A 34-year-old female patient referred to the Recep Tayyip Erdogan University Neurosurgery clinic with the complaint of a swelling that cosmetically distorted her facial appearance by growing on the right corner of her forehead in two years. A hard, motionless and tumorous lesion with a diameter of 3 × 3.5 cm and almost 1 cm depth was determined during her physical examination. There was no neurological findings over the mass. Radiologically, the lesion was found to be adjacent to the right frontal sinus and had a hypodense appearance in its direct X-ray .
In the computerized tomography (CT) scan images, it was determined that it did not harm the dura but eroded the inner tabula slightly . Only due to the cosmetic discomfort and upon the patient` request, it was decided to perform a surgical operation. The defect that occurred after the complete resection of the mass along with the calvarium was repaired by the rib (costa) of the patient herself. ( and ). The pathology of the resected tissue was evaluated as a typical osteoma .
The lesion was 4 cm to the right side of the midline on the edge of the forehead and 3 cm below the scalp. A narrow pterional skin incision on the scalp was performed. When the skin flap was turned over, the tumor was approached. The lesion macroscopically appeared in the form of a porous bone and was well- demarcated. A burr hole was opened just by the side of the lesion via a high-speed touring device of Midas-Rex. Craniotomy was performed by incising its extremity from a 2 - 3 mm distance from the strong boundary of the bone. The dura was strong and the tumor did not proceed beyond the inner tabula. The tumor along with craniotomy was totally resected. At the end of the intervention, a defect of approximately 3.2 × 3.7 cm = 11.84 cm2 occurred in the cranium. About 4 - 5 cm of the 8th costa from the thorax right side wall was resected with the help of the physician from the Department of Thoracic Surgery. The rib was transversally split into two equal pieces by preserving its length on the horizontal axis. The two pieces were attached via titanium miniplaques in a way that the trabecular bone surface would overlook the dura and the cortical surfaces would overlook outside. The final shape was given to the graft considering the defect in question. The sides of the graft were fixed by four pieces of mini plaques in a way that they would thoroughly contact the sides of the defect. Following the operation, it was observed that the shape of the case’s forehead formed its natural form. At the end of the one-year-follow-up, in the bone window images of the brain CT, it was observed that a complete fusion had occurred on the sides of the defect . At the end of the patient’s three-year-follow-up she had no more complaints about the disorder; the integrity of the cranium was maintained through the physical and radiological examinations performed and no cosmetic problem was encountered. No infection, disruption or resorption occurred over the costa graft used.