A 24-year-old male patient with a 2-month history of a mass in buccal gingival of posterior mandible. The mass was about the size of a soybean and extended to the lingual side of the mandible, tough and hard in texture, with no significant clinical complaints, such as bleeding or numbness. After the biopsy, the tumor continued to enlarge rapidly and was accompanied with numbness and tenderness. The pathological results of the biopsy were low grade chondrosarcoma of osteogenic origin.
Enhanced spiral Computed Tomography(CT) combined with Cone Beam Computed Tomography (CBCT) confirmed that the soft tissues of the labial buccal and lingual side of the right mandible were irregularly thickened, spanning the midline and reaching as far as the labial side of the right mandibular cuspid . There appeared to be irregular periosteal reaction in the lateral part of the left mandible , periodontal gap widening as well as small amount of irregular osteoid hyperplasia at the alveolar crest were observed to the right mandibular molar region . Submental lymph nodes that are normal in size .
The patient underwent extensive resection of the sarcoma of the right mandible and segmental resection of the right mandible. Four months after surgery, recurrence occurred.
The haematoxylin and eosin revealed that tumors cellswere round or slightly elongated of uniform shape and size with avariable amounts of mucoid matrix in a multinodular arrangement, and the tumor lesion presented a multinodular and lobular pattern with fibrous septa , The cells were arranged in ribbons, trabeculae and small nests present in a myxoid background . At high magnification, the tumor cells were uniform in size, with round and oval nuclei, deep chromatin and large nuclear atypia . The tumor cells were located in the cartilage lacunae, showing atypia and mitosis . Mitotic figures are about 3/10 high-power fields (HPFs) .
The immunohistochemical markers showed positive staining for vimentin, focally positive for P63, KRT14, S-100, Ki-67(80%) and showed negative staining for KRT5/6, KRT7, GFAP, cal-ponin, SMA, KRT-PAN, SOX10, mammaglobin .
FastProbe NR4A3 (9q22) gene break two-color probe was used for FISH detection, and in this case FISH analysis showed rearrangement of NR4A3 .
A final diagnosis was made as EMC combining clinical examination, pathological characteristics, IHC and FISH results.