A 39-year-old woman, gravida 3 para 1, came to this institution at 22 weeks gestation for routine second-trimester fetal anatomical ultrasound scan, with no vaginal bleeding or any abdominal symptoms. The patient’s obstetric history included one uneventful term delivery 7 years ago and a laparoscopic surgery 10 months before current pregnancy . The laparoscopic salpingectomy was for a right interstitial pregnancy. The surgeon used bipolar electrocoagulation along the edge of the pregnancy capsule, cut the intestinal pregnancy lesion with scissors and stitched the incision of uterine cornual with double-layer continuous suture with 0 # Vicryl. The patient lost 20 ml blood during the surgery and was discharged on postoperative day 2 in satisfactory condition.
The 22 weeks gestation ultrasonograms demonstrated normal fetal growth pattern and normal fetal anatomy. The cervix was long and closed. The amniotic sac was about 30 × 30 mm containing amniotic fluid without any fetal structures or umbilical cord was noted herniating from the defect of right uterine cornual into the peritoneal cavity . The placenta was located far away from the cornual. Free effusion was not seen in abdominal or pelvic cavity. Uterine rupture was suspected and clinicians were notified. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan was performed, which provided similar findings . The above findings supported a diagnosis of ruptured uterus and the patient was admitted to the inpatient ward.
The strong association between uterine rupture and maternal fatality is supported by multiple studies, including 6.6% by Astatikie G , 12% by Delafield R . Based on these literatures, doctors from maternal-fetal medicine department carefully evaluated this case, and suggested termination to the patient and her husband with full disclosure of risks to the mother if the pregnancy continued. The couple decided to continue with the pregnancy and the patient returned home with medical advice of bed rest. She then took outpatient ultrasonic scan twice a week and MRI 8 weeks later.
At 30 + 5 weeks’ gestation, the patient was admitted to the hospital for preventive dexamethasone to promote fetal lung maturation. During her hospitalization, she was given continuous monitoring of the fetal heart rate and uterine contractions. By 32 weeks both ultrasound and MRI showed increased herniation of the amniotic sac about 70 × 50 mm. Fetal growth was appropriate with normal amniotic fluid. Considering the increased herniation, doctors suggested cesarean section despite that the patient had no symptoms and the fetal status was reassuring. The couple insisted to prolong pregnancy to 34 weeks. In the next 2 weeks, the patient had good fetal movements, no uterine contraction or amniotic fluid loss.
Caesarean section was performed at 34 + 1 weeks. There was no hemoperitoneum at the point of entry into the abdominal cavity. An intact amniotic sac measured 70 × 70 mm was noted herniating through a defect in the right upper fundus of the uterus, with omentum wrapped and adhered around it . A male baby weighted 2600 g was delivered by lower transverse uterine incision, with Apgar scores of 10 and 10 at 1 and 5 min, respectively. After delivery and removing the herniated amniotic sac, a 20 mm rupture was revealed in the upper portion of the right fundus . The defect was repaired using one layer of running sutures and one layer of buried vertical mattress suture with 0 # Vicryl.
Following 7 days’ postoperative monitoring the puerpera and the infant were discharged home. The patient was counseled extensively about the risks of future pregnancy.