History: The patient was a 32 years old female from Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. She presented to one of the private clinics at Addis Ababa on January 18, 2017, with weakness on the right lower limb and numbness and tingling on the left lower limb of three days' duration. She had also associated urinary urge incontinence with a band like feeling on the right trunk below the breast fold. She had lost her right eye vision progressively seven months before the first visit. On the first visit, she was treated with five days of methylprednisolone intravenously and followed by oral prednisolone for 2 months and showed significant improvement. However, after six months of the first visit, the patient presented with another attack with weakness on the right lower limb of five days' duration with urinary urge incontinence. She was married and a mother of three children. Regarding past medical history, she was hypertensive on treatment with good control in the last 2 years. Otherwise, there was no personal or family history of diabetes or cardiac illness. No history of cough, night sweat, weight loss, or skin rash was recorded. She had no history of exposure to toxins and travel history out of Ethiopia..
Physical examination: On physical examination, she was noted to have a visual loss of the right eye with pale optic disc but no background change noted on fundoscopic examination. The right eye visual acuity was only light perception; left eye visual acuity was 6/6. Power on lower limbs was 3/5(right) and 4/5(left), reflex ¾ both on ankle and knee, plantar responses were up going bilaterally. Vibration and position sense decreased on the right body below the thoracic sixth vertebral spine and decreased pain, touch, and temperature sense on the left body below the thoracic sixth vertebral spine. The rest of the systemic and neurologic examination was unremarkable.
Auxiliary examinations: Her complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, liver function test, renal function test, serum electrolytes, and plasma glucose levels were normal. Serum VDRL was non-reactive and serology for retroviral infections was also negative. Serum Antinuclear antibody (ANA) was also negative. Serum AQP4-IgG titer (using AQP4-IgG serologic assay techniques) was also determined on the second attack and reviled 1:200+++ (normal value <1:10). Chest X-ray and abdominopelvic ultrasound results were also normal. Her brain MRI finding was normal except for the presence of the right side atrophied optic nerve . Thoracic MRI revealed hyperintense ill-defined lesions from the thoracic four (T4) to the thoracic seven (T7) spinal cords. However, the limitation of this case report was, contrast (gadolinium) was not administered during MRI study. Visual Evoked Potential (VEP) of the patient also revealed left side moderate demyelinating optic nerve neurophysiologic impairment (Optic neuritis, P100 latency of 128 milliseconds) and absent response on the right eye suggesting severe optic nerve neurophysiologic impairment . However, a cerebrospinal fluid analysis was not done considering that the case was a patient with classic NMOSD.