A 61-year-old male patient with advanced heart failure under LVAD support presented to the emergency department with worsening dyspnoea, NYHA Class IV, and massive lower extremity and scrotal oedema. A continuous-flow LVAD had been implanted 7 years ago due to dilated cardiomyopathy with heart failure refractory to medical therapy. During LVAD support, the patient developed morbid obesity (body mass index 41 kg/m2) and chronic driveline infection. At presentation, arterial pulse was absent with normal capillary refill time. The core temperature was normal. The neurologic exam was unremarkable. Electrocardiogram demonstrated VF . Interrogation of the implanted cardioverter defibrillator revealed VF while anti-tachycardic therapy had been previously deactivated due to RV lead malfunction. Left ventricular assist device interrogation showed no acute deviations of pump flow and power readings from the patient’s baseline (pump flow 6.0 L/min, power 5.0 W). Laboratory testing showed elevated serum creatinine (2.3 mg/dL, reference, 0.9–1.3 mg/dL) and N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide (39 330 pg/mL, reference, <125 pg/mL). Serum lactate level in venous blood was 3.5 mmol/L (reference, 0.5–1.6 mmol/L). Trans-oesophageal echocardiography was then performed that depicted global akinesia of all cardiac chambers with profound dilation of the right ventricle and faint movements of the tricuspid valve leaflets, a situation resembling Fontan circulation ( and Videos 1 and 2). We initiated intravenous furosemide to relieve congestion and performed external defibrillation after excluding intracardiac thrombosis with trans-oesophageal echocardiography. After multiple unsuccessful attempts to restore normal rhythm with external defibrillation, oral amiodarone was initiated followed again by multiple unsuccessful defibrillations. Due to morbid obesity despite multiple dietary consultations and the patient’s wish not to proceed to bariatric surgery due to the high procedural risk, listing for heart transplantation was not possible. It was a shared decision to refrain from performing catheter ablation in the setting of severe comorbidities including morbid obesity, severe renal failure, chronic driveline infection, and incessant VF. The patient eventually developed end-stage renal failure and died due to complications of sepsis.