A 57-year-old Caucasian lady was admitted to hospital feeling generally unwell with nausea, lethargy and reduced appetite. She had been unwell since discharge from hospital two weeks ago after her first in-patient cycle of Cisplatin and 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU). She was diagnosed with FIGO (International Federation of Gynaecologists and Obstetricians) Stage IVb mucinous adenocarcinoma of the endocervix seven months previously, an incidental finding after a laparotomy and hysterectomy were performed for abdominal distension. No other metastases were found at the time, but a relapse in the vaginal vault and small bowel were identified on repeat laparotomy. She proceeded to external beam radiotherapy (45 Gy/25 Fractions over five weeks) to the pelvis with concurrent Cisplatin, 40 mg/sqm. During this period of treatment, she developed a thrombus in the inferior mesenteric vein and was treated with low molecular weight heparin. Blood counts and biochemical profile were normal throughout chemoradiation. In-patient chemotherapy was started one month after completing radiotherapy, consisting of Cisplatin (75 mg/sqm) and 5-FU (1 g/sqm), as a four day cycle.
A past medical history of Peutz-Jegher’s syndrome, diagnosed at the age of 17, resulted in three bowel operations over two decades, leaving her with an ileostomy. She also had a history of breast cancer 25 years ago, for which a left mastectomy, axillary node sampling and a bilateral oophorectomy were performed. No further radiotherapy, chemotherapy or Tamoxifen was given. Drug history was insignificant.
She presented to hospital two weeks after the first cycle of Cisplatin and 5-FU, feeling unwell. She was dehydrated with renal impairment; urea was 12.8 mmol/l and creatinine 154 mmol/l. Other biochemical markers, including calcium, potassium and magnesium were normal, and C-reactive protein (CRP) was 3 mg/l, haemoglobin 10.5 g/dL, Sodium 141 mmol/l.
Rehydration continued over the next few days. She remained apyrexial with oxygen saturations of 98-100% on room air.
Three days after admission, the patient described an episode of brief confusion in the morning. Renal function was improving and biochemistry remained normal with a CRP of 4 mg/l. Later the same day and into the early hours of the morning, her confusion returned and she became incontinent of urine. She no longer communicated with staff verbally, and repetitive actions, such as licking her lips and moving her hand round in circles, were observed. She showed no aggressive or disruptive behaviour, but refused to have bloods taken or a cannula inserted by pushing staff away. No prior mental health issues were noted in hospital records or from family.
She was no longer orientated in time, place or person. Her abbreviated mental test score (AMTS) was 0 out of 10 and repetitive movements of her right arm continued. Her temperature was 37°C, chest remained clear on examination, abdomen soft with bowel sounds present. Glasgow Coma Score (GCS) was 14/15. Random blood glucose was within normal limits and urine dipstick was negative. Blood tests were repeated and sent for full blood count, biochemical profile, CRP and blood culture. A CT head was booked urgently and she was commenced on Dexamethasone 4 mg twice a day.
Night review by the on-call doctor found the patient groaning and making incomprehensible sounds and thrashing around. Repetitive movements continued but no seizure activity was noted. Midazolam and Lorazepam were given with minimal benefit.
Biochemistry remained normal, blood cultures were negative, with a normal thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), normal calcium, potassium and magnesium and CRP of 8 mg/l, haemoglobin 10.6 g/dL, white cell count 6.1 × 109/l, sodium 143 mmol/l. Autoantibody screen was negative and electrophoresis showed no qualitative abnormality.
CT scan of the head with contrast was conducted, which reported no sign of intra- or extra-cranial abnormality.
The following day, day six of admission, the patient was found to be smiling and lucid. She was orientated in time, place and person. The Neurology team were asked to advise and their differential diagnosis consisted of non convulsive status, acute mal encephalitis, paraneoplastic limbic encephalitis, drug related encephalopathy, sinus vein thrombosis or infectious encephalitis. They suggested the following further investigations; MRI brain, to exclude temporal lobe inflammation, lumbar puncture, to assess for infection or neoplastic infiltration, and an EEG.
The patient was much improved. She was eating and drinking, communicating normally with staff and her husband, with no obvious immediate adverse effect of the acute confusional state. Her renal function remained impaired, but all other bloods were normal.
Unfortunately, patient consent could not be obtained for a lumbar puncture or an EEG, despite emphasis given to their importance. At the time of asking, the patient had improved and was deemed to have capacity.
The MRI concluded that there were small amounts of non-enhancing white matter change in the parietal lobes ( and ).