A 19-year-old male patient was admitted to the China-Japan Friendship Hospital for headache in January 2020. The patient had developed the headache two months prior to admission, which progressively worsened and was accompanied by tinnitus and dysphagia, but neurological examination revealed no abnormalities. The patient has no family history of cancers. Cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a mass of abnormal signal shadows in the prepontine cistern. Enhanced MRI showed obvious uniform enhancement, with thickened and strengthened adjacent meninges . The clinician considered the diagnosis of meningioma and performed partial mass resection. During the operation, a gray-red, hard, and tough mass was found on the ventral side of the brain stem. It had a complete capsule and a clear boundary with the brain tissue. Pathological examination revealed histiocyte proliferation and a large background infiltration of lymphocytes and plasma cells that was also observed in the cytoplasm of some histiocytes. Immunohistochemical staining showed that histiocytes were positive for S− 100, KP-1, and cyclin D1, and negative for CD1a and Langerin, and lymphocytes were positive for CD20 and CD3. Random plasma cells, stained with CD138, were positive for IgG4, and Ki67 staining was 10% positive . The patient was consequently diagnosed with intracranial Rosai-Dorfman disease. Antibiotics were applied prophylactically to avoid postoperative infection. The patient developed temporary neurological symptoms after surgery, including left facial palsy, hearing loss on the left side, hoarseness and dysphagia, and was given symptomatic supportive treatment. He was followed up regularly in the local hospital and gradually recovered after 2 months.
Seven months later, the patient was readmitted to the hospital because of a headache. Neurological examination revealed left facial palsy, left tongue deviation, right facial hypoesthesia and hypoalgesia, bilateral hearing loss, and ataxia. Cranial MRI showed a mass in the right cerebellopontine foot, extruding the pons and medulla oblongata . The mass was surgically removed, and pathological examination confirmed that the RDD had recurred . We used hybridization capture-based next-generation sequencing (NGS) on paraffin-embedded tissues to examine exons, shear regions, and fusion-related introns of 116 genes and found KRAS mutation in exon 4 (C.351A > C. P. K117n).
The patient has received regular follow-up examinations since discharge, and there has been no new recurrence.