A 76-year-old man was admitted for acute non-ST-segment elevated myocardial infarction, complicated with acute kidney injury. The medical history included hypertension. During hospitalization, continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) was performed for oliguria. After 2 weeks of hospitalization, the patient suffered from acute shiver and fever, and was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) due to acute dyspnea and low blood pressure.
Upon ICU admission, the physical examination showed a temperature of 38.5°C, heart rate 108 beats/minute, respiration 30 breathes/minutes, blood pressure 101/57 mm Hg with intravenous norepinephrine, and 88% percutaneous saturation of oxygen. The patient appeared to be confused. Auscultation of the lungs revealed obvious dry and wet rales, and the border of the heart expanded toward the left inferior. The heart rate was regular, the abdomen was flat without tenderness, and both legs were without edema. The blood showed white blood cells at 10.4 × 109 (neutrophil cells, 87.5%), hemoglobin 97 g/L, and platelet count 41 × 109. Blood gas analyses showed pH 7.27, partial pressure of carbon dioxide 21.8 mm Hg, partial pressure of oxygen 57.8 mm Hg, base deficit −15.8 mmol/L, bicarbonate 12.2 mmol/L, and lactate 4.4 mmol/L. Blood urea nitrogen was 18.83 mmol/L, serum creatinine was 735 μmol/L, and procalcitonin was 142.56 ng/mL. The chest X-ray showed pulmonary infection with an enlarged heart . The echocardiographic examination showed an enlarged left atrium and left ventricle, and mild pericardial effusion .
In the ICU, the patient received tracheal intubation with mechanical ventilation. Intravenous norepinephrine was continuously administered to maintain the blood pressure. Meropenem (0.5, i.v. q8 h) was initially administered as an experience-guided anti-infection treatment. After 3 days, the temperature of the patient went down significantly, fluctuating between 37.2°C and 37.8°C, and the dose of intravenous norepinephrine was reduced. However, the platelet blood count continued to decrease. On the fourth day in the ICU, results of culture of the CRRT catheter and blood culture both showed CRAB.
Based upon the above signs, the diagnosis was made of catheter-related bloodstream infection, septic shock, and multiorgan failure. Based on drug sensitivity analyses, the antibiotics were adjusted to tigecycline combined with sulbactam according to the results of antibiotic sensitive test (moderate sensitivity, Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute standard). At 1 week after ICU admission, the patient suffered an acute decrease in blood pressure, and auscultation revealed the sound of a weak heart. Bedside chest X-ray showed an enlarged heart , and the bedside echocardiographic examination indicated pericardial effusion . Pericardiocentesis was performed immediately, and purulent fluid from the pericardial effusion was obtained . Culture of the pericardial fluid confirmed CRAB infection. The patient died of sepsis-related multiple organ failure eventually.