A 64-year-old male patient presented with limb pain, widespread myokymia, insomnia, constipation, and hyperhidrosis for 1 month. Two days before the disease onset, he had a fever with a maximum temperature of over 39 °C and was treated with antipyretic and antibacterial drugs at a local hospital. Though recovering from the fever, he began to feel limbs pain, accompanied by myokymia, insomnia, constipation, and hyperhidrosis. Constipation and hyperhidrosis were relieved 1 week later. However, limb pain, widespread myokymia, and insomnia still afflicted him. The neurological examinations showed a normal mental status. Examinations of the cranial nerves were unremarkable. Myokymia could be seen in the trunk and bilateral limbs . Muscle strength, tendon reflexes, and sensory examinations were normal. He had no remarkable past medical history, personal history, or family history.
The routine blood tests, including full blood count, hematocrit, liver, kidney and thyroid functions, disclosed unremarkable findings. The patient’s muscle enzymes were normal. Tumor markers (CEA, AFP, CA125, CA153, CA199, CA724, NSE, and PSA) were all negative. Electromyography (EMG) showed muscle fiber twitch potential in bilateral limbs , with no abnormalities in sensory and motor nerve conduction. The brain MRI examination showed no abnormalities . The serum test using cell-based assay (EUROIMMUN, Germany) performed in a local testing agency showed LGI1-Ab was positive (+), while CASPR2-Ab, AMPA1 and AMPA2 antibodies were all negative (−) . Twenty-four-hour video-polysomnography revealed rapid eye movement (REM) sleep latency was 221 min and REM accounted for 8.6% of total sleep time. Twenty seven awakenings happened during the whole sleep process, and the awakening time was 115.8 min in total. Chest and abdomen CT scanning showed no malignancy, but the patient refused positron emission tomography (PET) examination. Before we got the serum antibody results, to rule out certain types of myopathy, the gastrocnemius muscle biopsy was conducted and showed no abnormality.
The patient was diagnosed with MoS based on the combination of myokymia, insomnia, and dysautonomia associated with positive LGI1-Ab and typical EMG performance. He was treated with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) at a dose of 0.4 g/kg/day for 5 days and intravenous methylprednisolone 120 mg/day for 3 days, followed by oral prednisone 60 mg/day with gradual tapering over a period of a month. Insomnia was treated with clonazepam 2 mg 30 min prior to bedtime, and limb pain with gabapentin 0.3 g three times a day combined with duloxetine 60 mg/day. Ten days later, symptoms of myokymia and insomnia improved , but limb pain was not relieved. Gabapentin was then replaced by pregabalin 150 mg twice a day. During 30 days’ follow-up, limb pain got significantly relieved. At 60 days’ follow-up, when all the drugs had been stopped for 2 weeks, the patient achieved complete remission. According to 6-month follow-up results, the patient showed no obvious symptoms of discomfort.