A 61-year-old African woman (68 kg weight) was referred to the intensive care unit for a rapidly progressive dyspnea and dry cough. Her medical past history was marked by a kidney transplantation in 2001 for nephroangiosclerosis, along with malignant hypertension. Current medications included amlodipine, bisoprolol, lisinopril, tacrolimus, prednisolone (3 mg/day), linagliptine, and rosuvastatin. Since 28 months, she was also receiving flecainide (100 mg once daily) for recurrent supraventricular tachyarrhythmia. In the emergency department, her body temperature was 36.7°C, respiratory rate 34/min, heart rate 66/min, arterial pressure 131/48 mmHg, and pulsed oxygen saturation (SpO2) 67%. Lung auscultation revealed bilateral crackles in the lower lobes. Relevant laboratory investigations showed C-reactive protein (CRP) of 375.1 mg/L (< 5.0 mg/L), creatinine of 4.49 mg/dL (0.60–1.30 mg/dL), white blood cell count of 24,720.103/µL, and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) of 508 IU/L (< 250 IU/L ). Arterial blood gas analysis revealed a pH of 7.41, pO2 of 57 mmHg, pCO2 of 28 mmHg, total bicarbonate of 18 mmol/L, and lactate of 0.6 mmol/L. On chest X-ray examination, bilateral infiltrates predominated in the basal part of both lungs . Lung computed tomography (CT) disclosed bilateral ground-glass opacities and septal thickening . Empirical antimicrobial therapy was started with piperacillin/tazobactam and sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim. Antihypertensive medications and flecainide were withdrawn. Because of the rapidly progressive hypoxemia, oral intubation was required for mechanical ventilation with inspired fraction of oxygen (FiO2) 0.80. Before antimicrobial therapy, a sputum analysis from the endotracheal aspirate failed to reveal any microorganism on direct examination, and culture remained sterile. Continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) was also temporarily needed. Examination and cultures of bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL; 73% neutrophils, 16% macrophages) were negative for mycobacteria (including atypical), bacteria, fungi, parasites and virus (multiplex PCR respiratory panel). In the serum, PCR was negative for cytomegalovirus (CMV), and the Aspergillus galactomannan test was negative. Immunofluorescent staining and PCR were negative on BAL for Pneumocystis jirovecii. Screening for myositis-specific antibodies (and also other autoimmune disorders) was negative. Echocardiography confirmed hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and aortic valve disease, with preserved left ventricle ejection fraction, but with a moderate to severe pulmonary hypertension. An open lung biopsy was performed on intensive care unit (ICU) day 4. Intravenous methylprednisolone was started (80 mg, corresponding to 1.25 mg/kg) for 11 days, and was then shifted to 64 mg prednisolone orally. Antimicrobial therapy was definitely stopped on ICU day 6. Microscopic examination revealed a diffuse filling of alveolar spaces by fibrin balls associated with organizing pneumonia . Culture of lung tissue remained sterile. Genotyping for cytochrome P450 2D6 was also performed and the patient was *2/*4 with a duplication for *4. This implies that the patient may be considered as an intermediate metabolizer for flecainide. Extubation was possible on ICU day 15. There was also a significant radiological improvement . Unfortunately, the recent episode of marked hypoxemia worsened the preexisting pulmonary hypertension and the patient died on day 21 from a mixed cardiogenic and septic shock following Candida albicans bacteremia.
Plasma and lung tissue samples were obtained 4 days after flecainide withdrawal. The plasma flecainide concentration was 32.3 µg/L. This measurement was obtained from liquid chromatography coupled to high resolution mass spectrometry (LC-HRMS ) using an LCMS-9030 system (Shimadzu Corporation, Japan). The method presented a limit of detection of 1 µg/L. In the lung tissue, flecainide concentration was 1.6 µg/g of tissue. This measurement was performed using a liquid chromatography coupled to diode array detection (LC-DAD).