The patient was a 36-year-old female, gravida 4, para 3, pregnant at 16 weeks and 1 day (confirmed by previous ultrasonography) who presented to an ambulatory health center with complaints of 1 day of lower abdominal and flank pain with some vaginal spotting. She also endorsed a history of mild dysuria with urinary frequency and urgency at that time. She reported no fever, chills, or sick contacts. She was referred to the emergency department (ED) for further evaluation. She had no past medical history but had arrived in the United States from Pakistan 8 months earlier. Her ED vital signs showed a blood pressure of 103/70 mmHg, a heart rate of 133 beats per minute (bpm), a temperature of 99.9°F, and a respiratory rate of 16 per minute with an oxygen saturation of 99% on room air. The patient was well appearing, and her physical examination was notable for tachycardia, suprapubic tenderness without rebound or guarding, and a pelvic examination with slight bleeding but no uterine tenderness. Her laboratory results showed a leukocytosis of 16.1 K/μL with 88% polymorphonuclear leukocytes, which was considered within the normal range for the second trimester of pregnancy. The remainder of the complete blood count, chemistry panels, and urinalysis were unremarkable. An ultrasonogram of her abdomen showed a live intrauterine pregnancy with an estimated gestational age of 16 weeks and 0 days, with a fetal heart rate of 182 beats per minute. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the abdomen was interpreted as normal, without evidence of appendicitis. She received 4 liters of normal saline, 2 mg of morphine sulfate, and 975 mg of acetaminophen. Hear heart rate improved to 100 bpm and she felt better. She was seen by an obstetrician consultant in the ED and discharged home with obstetrician follow-up and instructions to return with any concerns.
She returned to the ED 1 day later with sudden onset of vaginal bleeding and abdominal pain. Her vital signs were concerning for a heart rate of 139 bpm, a blood pressure of 149/88 mmHg, a respiratory rate of 30 per minute, and oxygen saturation of 100% on room air. Further examination revealed that the patient was actively delivering the products of conception. An obstetrician was emergently consulted and arrived minutes later. They delivered an intact fetus and gestational sac shortly after their arrival. The patient received 800 mg of rectal misoprostol. A tympanic temperature at this time was measured at 105°F. The patient was persistently tachycardic into the 140s. The patient became hemodynamically unstable with a blood pressure of 84/35 mmHg and central intravenous access was obtained. The patient was given acetaminophen, intravenous normal saline, and given vancomycin and piperacillin/tazobactam, with a working diagnosis of sepsis of unknown etiology. Her laboratory results revealed a venous pH of 7.22, an anion gap of 21 with a lactate concentration of 10.8 mmol/L. Her complete blood count at this time showed a white blood cell count of 14.9 K/μL and 85% polymorphonuclear leukocytes. The patient had normal MRI and urinalysis findings and no symptoms to suggest colitis, skin infection, or other soft tissue infections. The patient was given norepinephrine for persistent hypotension and admitted to the medical intensive care unit where she received ampicillin, gentamycin, and clindamycin for suspected chorioamnionitis. An ultrasonogram was suggestive of retained products of conception and that night the patient underwent dilatation and curettage with removal of tissue debris. The patient did well and was discharged from the hospital 4 days later.
The patient's blood cultures came back positive after 1 day for , non–β-lactamase producing, although further identification of the molecular characteristics of the bacteria, which requires slide agglutination for serotyping or polymerase chain reaction for capsular typing, was not performed. The pathology report showed retroplacental hemorrhage occupying 20% of the placental disc and adjacent infarct, consistent with placental abruption. There was no histologic evidence of acute chorioamnionitis.