A 50-year-old postmenopausal G9P8105 Congolese refugee presented to our health system within 30 days of arrival to the United States (U.S.) with symptoms of abdominal pain and discomfort, chronic dyspepsia, and gurgling sensation after eating for many years. During her initial office visit, review of records from the mandatory health clearance evaluation completed 6 months prior to arrival in the U.S. listed her medical problems as “Calcified Abdominal Pregnancy and Essential Hypertension.” Fetal biometry estimated 28 weeks gestational age at time of fetal demise. She provided a history of 8 spontaneous vaginal deliveries with 3 children who died shortly after birth. She separated from her husband and had her 9th pregnancy from another relationship. Occurring 9 years prior to resettlement, this final pregnancy had a preterm fetal demise without passage of products of conception, resulting in a large calficied abdominal mass. The patient’s only report of medical history involved high blood pressure for which an antihypertensive was prescribed, although she did not take the medication as she felt “fine.” She had no surgical history. She had no self-reported personal or family history of chronic kidney disease (CKD). She denied taking any over-the-counter medications, herbals, or supplements. On review of symptoms, she had no genitourinary (GU) or constitutional complaints. Her last menstrual cycle was 2 years prior. Her life story involved a traumatic past as she was born into a Congolese family amidst the years of fleeing war for Burunndi. Subsequent violence in Burundi forced her family to flee to a refugee camp in Tanzania, where she started a family of her own and stayed until her resettlement in the U.S. Her literacy level was low as she completed primary school in Burundi and had partial literacy in Swahili.
Her initial office visit physical examination revealed a blood pressure of 162/83 and a firm mobile lower abdominal mass, measuring approximately 15 cm by 20 cm, without tenderness to palpation. When she was asked further about her understanding of this condition, she recounted a difficult story. When she was pregnant with her 9th child, she noticed decreased fetal movement. She presented to the health facility in the refugee camp and was informed about the lack of a fetal heartbeat indicating demise of the fetus. She was instructed to go home and try to “deliver” the fetus and to return in two weeks if nothing happened spontaneously. She returned to the health facility as instructed, but was accused of “evil works,” “taking drugs,” and “killing the baby.” The medical provider at the refugee health facility recommended interventions to remove the fetus, but she did not feel comfortable with this care plan after the verbal abuse she met upon arrival. She went home to pray and declined to return to the clinic until the mandatory health clearance 6 months prior to departure for resettlement in the U.S.
One week after her initial office visit in the U.S., she presented to the emergency department for evaluation of nausea and intractable vomiting. She was found to be hypokalemic with a potassium of 3 mmol/L. An abdominal x-ray showed a fetal skeleton and non-specific bowel gas pattern with mild distention of small bowel loops suggestive of an ileus. She was admitted overnight for clinical observation. Despite being accompanied by a Swahili-speaking health navigator, the patient was fearful of the hospital and declined all oral intake. She subsequently disclosed episodic symptoms of bowel obstruction in the refugee camp, and an episode of bilious emesis requiring several days of bowel rest. She avoided healthcare facilities during those times of sickness.
Laboratory workup revealed a negative beta-human chorionic gonadotropin and CKD stage 2 . Abdominopelvic computed tomography (CT) scan with intravenous and oral contrast showed findings consistent with a lithopedion within the anterior lower abdomen and anterior upper pelvis , possibly external to the uterus representing an ectopic pregnancy. CT also revealed significant compression of the pelvic structures and small bowel obstruction in addition to significant compression of the inferior vena cava with venous collaterals within the body wall of the pelvic and hip regions.
The patient was referred to nephrology given her hypertension and CKD stage 2. Urinalysis with microscopy was unremarkable and urine random total protein/creatinine ratio was 0.15 (ratio < 0.2 mg per milligram is considered within normal limits ). Workup for secondary causes of hypertension was largely unremarkable . She was on a renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system (RAAS) blocking medication, lisinopril, during initial testing for secondary causes of hypertension. Repeat testing for primary hyperaldosteronism and a doppler ultrasound of the renal arteries were recommended but not completed. Previous laboratory data were unavailable to determine any temporal relationship between CKD and hypertension.
Her symptom of dyspepsia improved after Helicobacter pylori was diagnosed by stool antigen testing and treated with a 14-day course of oral Omeprazole 40 mg twice daily, Clarithromycin 500 mg twice daily, Amoxicillin 1 g twice daily, and Metronidazole 500 mg twice daily. Her blood pressure was controlled with oral Lisinopril 40 mg daily. After extensive counseling by specialists and primary care provider regarding surgical intervention, she declined, repeatedly stating “I just do not have it in my heart to do.” The patient’s perception of her health condition was directly related to a “spell” that someone in Tanzania had cast on her. She reassured the team that “I will let you know when I am ready; I am not scared of death.” She had recurrent symptoms of bowel obstruction requiring hospitalization and continued to decline medical and surgical care with the specialists and primary care physician after her discharge. Unfortunately, she passed away at home 14 months after resettlement from severe malnutrition in the context of recurrent bowel obstruction and continued fear of seeking medical care.