A six-year-old female was brought by a family member to the ED complaining of low back pain and swelling. The patient’s symptoms had been ongoing for several days. She denied any history of trauma. She was refusing to ambulate secondary to pain in the joints of the lower extremities. She also noted mild nausea, ankle swelling, and a rash on her lower extremities bilaterally. The patient’s family also described her as having a previous upper respiratory infection approximately two weeks prior. The patient was fully immunized and had an unremarkable past medical, surgical, and family history. She had been taking ibuprofen for her symptoms, but otherwise took no medications.
She was afebrile with a temperature of 99.0° Fahrenheit, and had a heart rate of 112 beats a minute, a blood pressure of 123/81 milligrams of mercury, a respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute, and 99% pulse oximetry on room air. She was refusing to ambulate secondary to pain but was otherwise nontoxic appearing. There was an oval area of cutaneous edema, similar in shape to an American football, approximately 10 centimeters (cm) vertically and 8 cm transversely, stretching from her lower thoracic spine down to her lower lumbar spine over which she had moderate tenderness . She had mild, non-pitting pedal edema and was noted to have a palpable purpuric rash over her ankles and lower legs. Abdominal and neurologic examinations were benign, and the remainder of the physical exam was unremarkable.
Laboratory studies included an unremarkable complete blood count, prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time, and complete metabolic panel. Urinalysis was significant for hematuria with 10–15 red blood cells seen per high-powered field on microscopy and without proteinuria. The patient was also noted to have an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate at 44 millimeters per hour (normal is <30) and an elevated C-reactive protein at 1.8 milligrams per liter (normal is <1.0). Radiographs of the lumbar spine demonstrated subcutaneous edema but were otherwise unremarkable .
The patient was treated with a weight-based dose of ibuprofen and was observed ambulating without difficulty around the ED. She was discharged with a 48-hour follow-up in the ED. At her follow-up it was noted that she no longer had any pain or swelling of her lower back and the remainder of her symptoms were resolving as well.