Our patient was a 45-year-old man who presented with bilateral finger pallor, cyanosis, splinter hemorrhages , and a digital ulcer that caused severe pain. He also complained of paresthesia of the toes and intermittent claudication of lower limbs. His symptoms had begun 2 months earlier.
The patient’s medical history included ulcerative colitis, diagnosed 9 years earlier and in remission. His regular medications included 5-aminosalicylic acid alone. He had no history of smoking. On physical examination his distal fingers were cold, mildly cyanotic, and he had a digital ulcer on the third right finger, causing severe pain. Mild lower leg edema was present and peripheral pulse examination revealed intact ulnar and radial pulses; however, pulses were absent in the dorsalis pedis. Initial bedside Doppler of only the upper limbs showed intact radial pulses with no Doppler signal over the palmar arches.
A complete blood count revealed an eosinophil count of 4,200 cells/μL, white blood cell count 11,000 cells/μL, and hemoglobin 15 g/dL. C-reactive protein (CRP) was mildly elevated (15 mg/L). Creatinine, creatinine-phosphokinase (CPK), liver functions, troponin, and urinalysis were all within normal ranges. An infection workup was negative and included blood cultures and the following tests: human immunodeficiency virus, venereal disease reference lab, Treponema pallidum hemagglutination, hepatitis B and C viruses, cytomegalovirus, Epstein–Barr virus, Strongyloides, Toxocara, and stool tests for ova and parasites.
Bone marrow biopsy showed hypereosinophilia with no other pathology.
Further workup for hematologic genetic abnormalities and clonal causes of eosinophilia was performed in the hematologic department of our hospital according to the World Health Organization (WHO) guidance for the diagnosis of primary (clonal) eosinophilic disorders and was negative. Most immune serology was negative, including antinuclear antibody, rheumatoid factor, anti-phospholipid panel, and cryoglobulins. Complement (C3, C4) and immunoglobulins were within normal range. However, conflicting results were received for the perinuclear anti-neutrophilic cytoplasmic antibodies (P-ANCA) serology: the test results from the local health maintenance organization were significantly positive, whereas our hospital laboratory’s results were negative.
To determine the “true” test results we performed a thorough investigation into the testing methodology used. Our findings revealed that the local health maintenance organization had not followed the accepted antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) assay guidelines. When we repeated the ANCA (immunofluorescence assay) tests in the hospital laboratory they were negative, as well as the anti-myeloperoxidase (MPO) and proteinase-3 (PR3) tests; atypical ANCA was positive. These test results all led to the conclusion that the P-ANCA result was a false positive in that patient.
Echocardiography and computed tomography angiography (CTA) of the chest and abdomen showed no pathology. Electromyography showed bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome and mild sensory polyneuropathy of the lower limbs.
To summarize, we had a young patient with peripheral ischemic manifestations. Other findings included peripheral sensory polyneuropathy, marked hypereosinophilia, and mildly elevated CRP. Echo-cardiography and CTA of the chest and abdomen showed no pathology.
In the days following presentation at our hospital, the patient experienced an exacerbation of finger cyanosis in both hands and the digital ulcer had worsened, with a small gangrenous area at the fingertip. The patient was treated with aspirin and i.v. prostacyclin for his ischemic manifestations; he was also empirically treated for a possible parasitic infection with a course of albendazole. Previous treatment with aminosalicylates (5-aminosalicylic acid) was stopped for the possibility of drug-induced hypereosinophilia. None of these treatments affected the patient’s condition.
We then started treatment with prednisone 1 mg/ kg. Significant clinical and laboratory improvement was seen within a few days. The patient reported a significant improvement in the degree of digital pallor and in the intermittent claudication symptoms.
On physical examination the patient’s distal pulses of the lower limbs were now palpable. His eosinophil level dropped from >3,000 cells/μL to 500 cells/μL. He was discharged from hospital and continued follow-up and further workup as an outpatient in our clinic. At this time an arterial Doppler of the lower limbs revealed ischemia of the posterior right tibialis artery. A CTA of the lower limbs revealed bilateral arterial occlusion of the anterior and posterior tibialis arteries without distal reperfusion. These arteries were completely occluded without distal reperfusion—implying a thrombosis. The proxymal part of the popliteal artery was intact as well as the aorta and its branches. There were no signs of atherosclerosis.
presents different views of the patient’s CTA, with findings that resemble thromboangiitis obliterans (TAO). However, our patient was a non-smoker and his clinical and laboratory findings were not typical of TAO.
All of the patient’s symptoms, as well as the eosinophil and CRP levels, improved with steroid treatment. However, symptoms recurred when his prednisone dose was tapered below 40 mg/day. We recommended steroid-sparing therapy with cyclophosphamide. However, the patient refused this medication since the coronavirus 2019 pandemic had just begun and immunosuppression was more threatening than ever. The patient was treated with azathioprine but had to stop after 2 months due to drug-induced liver enzyme elevation and the lack of a clinical response to this medication. Mepolizumab was started with an impressive effect , allowing for complete steroid discontinuation 4 months later.
Eight months following treatment with mepolizumab, CTA of the lower limbs still showed no reperfusion of the occluded arteries, probably reflecting irreversible vascular occlusion in this patient. At the time of writing, after 2 years of treatment with mepolizumab, we report that the patient is asymptomatic and without eosinophilia.