A 68-year-old Japanese male with systemic AL amyloidosis was admitted with fatigue, exertional dyspnea, and bilateral lower-extremity edema. He had been diagnosed with systemic AL amyloidosis in 1999, on the basis of the results of histopathological examination of the biopsied tissues of his kidney and bone marrow. After diagnosis, he was successfully managed with 21 courses of intermittent MP chemotherapy for seven years. Two months before admission, he developed exertional dyspnea. One month before admission, his dyspnea had become worse, and his chest radiograph showed bilateral pleural effusion, with the effusion on the right side being more severe. Thoracocentesis was performed with removal of one litre of yellow serous fluid from the right hemithorax. Pleural fluid analysis revealed that his nucleated cell count was 2600/mm3 (24% neutrophils, 71% lymphocytes); total protein concentration, 0.4 g/dl (a pleural fluid to serum ratio, 0:11); lactate dehydrogenase level, 26 IU/l (two-thirds normal upper limit for serum, 154 IU/l and a pleural fluid to serum ratio, 0:12); total cholesterol content, 11 mg/dl; and glucose level, 118 mg/dl. These findings were consistent with transudative pleural effusion. The pleural fluid cytology was negative for malignancy. The pleural fluid was cultured for bacteria (aerobic and anaerobic), fungi, and mycobacteria, and the results were negative.
Since the pleural effusion was refractory to aggressive administration of diuretics, thoracentesis with removal of one litre of serous fluid was repeated once every week. Although his symptoms were alleviated, the patient's pleural effusion gradually increased and the pleural fluid returned to the pre-drainage level after one week. The composition of the pleural fluid remained the same at all instances of drainage.
He was admitted to our hospital for treatment of refractory pleural effusion. On admission, he appeared to be comfortable while resting. He was 158.7 cm tall and weighed 65.2 kg. His body temperature was 36.5°C; blood pressure was 124 over 69 mm Hg; and his pulse rate, regular at 84 beats per minute. Diminished breath sounds in the right lower lung, slight inspiratory coarse crackles in the left basal lung, and lower extremity edema were observed. The results of the other clinical examinations were normal. Laboratory tests revealed that his blood urea nitrogen (31 mg/dl) and serum-creatinine (1.3 mg/dl) levels were elevated; creatinine clearance rate was low (39 ml/min/1.73 m2); 24-hour urine protein was 3.5 g per day; and total protein content (4.6 g/dl) and serum-albumin levels (1.6 g/dl) were low. These findings were indicative of renal insufficiency and nephritic syndrome. However, his renal function and his serum-albumin levels remained the same as those observed one year before. The serum protein electrophoresis was negative for a monoclonal spike. Bence-Jones proteins were not detected in the urine. All his immunoglobulin levels were normal. His hemoglobin level was 12.4 g/dl, platelet count 12 × 104/mm3, and white blood cell count, 5900/mm3, with a normal differential count. His levels of troponin T (below 0.01 mg/dl) and the C-reactive protein (0.2 mg/dl) were also normal. No other abnormalities were detected in any other laboratory tests. Our patient's echocardiogram showed symmetrical thickening of the left ventricular (LV) wall with slightly high echoic lesions (interventricular septum wall thickness, 14 mm; posterior LV wall thickness, 15 mm at systolic phase) and almost normal cardiac function (fractional shortening, 40%; LV ejection fraction, 0.71). These results were suggestive of infiltrative cardiomyopathy, and not acute heart failure caused by cardiac compensation.
At admission, his chest radiograph image showed a moderate effusion on the right side and slight effusion in the left. The computed tomography imaging of his chest revealed moderate pleural effusion in the right lung and atelectasis of the right lower robe .
Thoracentesis was performed with removal of one litre of serous fluid from the right hemithorax on the second hospital day. The level and composition of the effusion were the same as those seen before. VAD chemotherapy was administered on the third day. He did not develop serious bone marrow suppression or complications. A week after the administration of VAD chemotherapy, his chest radiograph revealed significant improvement. Moreover, he did not have dyspnea or general fatigue. However, the edema in his lower extremities showed no improvement, and no obvious change was seen in cardiac indices; pleural effusion did not recur until he was discharged from the hospital . The results of the clinical test did not change (creatinine clearance rate, 35 ml/minute/1.73 m2; daily proteinuria, 3.4 g; serum-albumin, 1.6 g/dl). He was discharged from our hospital on his 31st hospital day.
Since then, he has continued receiving intermittent MP chemotherapy. Pleural effusion did not recur for six months after he became ambulatory. However, he had a recurrence of right pleural effusion and was managed with VAD chemotherapy. Although his right pleural effusion did not increase while treating with VAD chemotherapy, the recurrence occurred immediately after VAD chemotherapy had finished. Hence, in 2006, he underwent chemical pleurodesis for recurrent right pleural effusion. After pleurodesis, his pleural effusion has not increased after he received intermittent MP chemotherapy in 2010.