In December 2019, a 59-year-old woman presented with a left breast mass measuring 13 mm. Twenty-seven years before presentation, when she was 32 years old, she was diagnosed with stage II triple-negative left breast cancer and was treated with surgery, adjuvant chemotherapy, and radiotherapy; after 12 years (15 years before presentation), she was diagnosed with contralateral stage II TNBC and was treated similarly with surgery, adjuvant anthracycline-based chemotherapy, and radiotherapy. Her family history was notable for breast cancer in her maternal aunt.
An ultrasound-guided core biopsy showed grade 3, invasive TNBC, and a Ki-67 expression of 90%. Preoperative staging with CT scan did not show other metastatic lesions. She underwent a left-sided skin-sparing mastectomy and subsequently completed adjuvant chemotherapy with epirubicin and cyclophosphamide followed by weekly paclitaxel. A germline genetic testing was performed, which revealed the presence of a pathogenic variant in BRCA2 (8765delAG); however, no adjuvant PARP inhibitor therapy was available at that time. Due to the BRCA2 germline pathogenic variant, she underwent risk-reducing bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy 10.5 months after completing adjuvant treatment. A routinary chest CT scan after surgery revealed the appearance of two right pulmonary nodules (5 and 9 mm) and a subsequent 18F-FDG PET confirmed their high metabolic activity and demonstrated pathological uptake in the right hilar lymph nodes. A bronchoscopy with fine-needle aspiration cytology of the lymph nodes assessed the presence of neoplastic cells, whose morphology was attributed to breast carcinoma. Immunohistochemical studies confirmed TNBC and the PD-L1 expression (Ventana SP142) was < 1%. Brain CT scan was negative. The disease-free survival (DFS) in the adjuvant setting was 18.5 months.
With her score being ‘0’ on the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status (ECOG PS) scale, in August 2021, the patient began first-line chemotherapy with carboplatin AUC 2 and paclitaxel at 90 mg/m2 on days 1, 8, 15 every 28 days. After 3 months from starting chemotherapy, the patient reported a progressive onset of headache: Brain CT scan showed the appearance of numerous lesions, both in the cerebellum (10-mm diameter in the right hemisphere) and in the supratentorial region (5 mm in the parietal and frontal lobes, bilaterally). The radiological evaluation also documented pulmonary, hilar nodal, bone, and bilateral adrenal disease progression, resulting in a PFS of 3.5 months after the first-line treatment.
Her ECOG PS score then became ‘1’ as she did not complain further symptoms, apart from the headache. Considering the unavailability of clinical trials in our hospital at that time and the patient’s preference to continue systemic therapy, sacituzumab govitecan was requested as part of the Expanded Access Program (EAP). Treatment was approved by the local ethics committee and the patient provided written informed consent prior to the initiation of treatment.
Sacituzumab govitecan, at 10 mg/kg (on days 1 and 8 every 21 days), was started as second-line treatment in January 2022. After the completion of the first cycle, the patient described a rapid clinical benefit and reported a reduction both of the headache intensity and of the need for corticosteroids. Nonetheless, due to the extensive central nervous system (CNS) involvement and the uncertainty with respect to the depth and the duration of intracranial clinical response, the patient also received WBRT (30 Gy in 10 fractions), starting 2 days after day 8 of the first cycle. Treatment with sacituzumab govitecan was restarted 8 days after the end of WBRT upon patient’s request. The CT scan restaging after three cycles of sacituzumab govitecan showed a significant partial response on all disease sites and a near-to-complete intracranial response. Considering the absence of new lesions and/or edema after WBRT, treatment with corticosteroids was gradually tapered and stopped 21 days after the end of radiotherapy. Her PS remained good and treatment tolerance was globally acceptable, with the prevalent side effects of grade 1 (G1) or 2 (G2): G2 asthenia, G1 diarrhea, G2 neutropenia, and G1 dry skin. However, after the completion of four cycles of treatment, G2 asthenia persisted despite supportive treatment (reintroduction of low-dose corticosteroids and ginseng supplements) and made a significant impact on the patient’s quality of life; therefore, in agreement with the patient, sacituzumab govitecan was reduced to 7.5 mg/kg and was continued at this dose. No further relevant adverse events emerged during treatment; after 10 months from starting sacituzumab govitecan, a CT scan documented systemic disease progression, while intracranial response was maintained.
Our patient’s timeline is reported in and the radiological evaluations of extracranial (lung) and intracranial response during sacituzumab govitecan treatment are reported in , .