A 57-year old female patient was admitted at our Department for investigation of enlarged and nodular thyroid gland in February 2009, noticed firstly by her general practitioner. Written informed consent of patient was obtained for the treatments and for the scientific use of the clinical data according to Declaration of Helsinki.
The patient was euthyroid, had no local or systemic complains, with thyroid functional tests within normal range (FT4 = 17.7 mmol/L, TSH = 1.36 IU/l). Nodules in both thyroid lobes were detected by palpation - smaller one in the right lobe and bigger one in the left lobe. Ultrasound (US) revealed isoechoic, non-homogenic nodule with hypoechoic halo (10 × 12 × 16 mm) in the middle part of the right thyroid lobe and smaller hyperechoic zone above it (7 × 4 × 8 mm). The nodule located in the lower 2/3 of the left lobe was hypoechoic, non-homogenic with cystic degeneration (20 × 27 × 39 mm). A scintiscan was performed, 20 min after intravenous application of 74 MBq of 99mTcO4, that showed reduced uptake of 99mTcO4 in the nodule in the middle of the right lobe and a “cold” nodule in the lower 2/3 of the left lobe .
The FNAB of the right thyroid nodule (located in the middle, measured 16mm) detected benign Hürthle cells with abundant basophilic cytoplasm, normochromatic nucleuses and big nucleolus in central position. Some of these cells showed cytological atypias. Hürthle cells with some cytological atypias were also noted by FNAB, in the left thyroid nodule. Both FNAB findings were consistent of Hürthle cell adenomas with cellular atypias.
Because of these findings, total thyroidectomy was suggested. Near total thyroidectomy was performed (November 2009). The extent of the intervention included: Lobectomia subtotalis l. sin; Lobectomia l. dext and Isthmectomia subtotalis. Histopathology revealed HCA with high cellular content and discrete cellular atypias in the nodule, located in the surgically removed tissue fragment (6 × 4.5 × 3.2 cm) of the left lobe and follicular thyroid adenoma without cellular atypias in the nodule located in the surgically removed tissue fragment (4 × 3 × 2.8 cm) of the right lobe. No evidence of malignant cell transformation or capsular invasion was detected. One month after surgery (December 2009), scintiscan with 99mTcO4 showed remnant thyroid tissue (24 mm, isoechoic, non-chomogenic oval formation) on the left side, towards isthmic location and no remnant tissue on the right side of the thyroid bed .
Because of the hypothyroid state (FT4 = 5.11 mmol/L, TSH = 36.9 IU/l), substitution therapy with L-thyroxin was administered. Since there was no indication of malignant transformation or capsular invasion on histopathology, removal of the remnant thyroid tissue was not suggested. The size and structure of the remnant tissue on the following regular check-ups was evaluated by US (17 × 11 × 24, isoechoic non-chomogenic structure), without enlargement or nodular presentation on US on the first two regular check-ups. Thereafter, the patient was euthyroid with laboratory findings within normal range.
Almost one year after surgery (patient hasn’t come for regular check-ups), at September 2010, a palpable tumour on the side of the remnant thyroid tissue (left side) was found, that showed significant progressive enlargement on US with time (from 22 mm, to 28 mm, to 39 mm). FNAB (April 2011) detected Hürthle cells with big nucleus, big acidophilic nucleolus and poor cytoplasm, cytologically conclusive of HCA with marked cellularity. To evaluate mitochondrial activity and tumour avidity, as a marker of potential malignancy, the double phase 99mTc- sestamibi (MIBI) scintigraphy was performed. Intensive accumulation was noted in this nodule on the early scintigram (10 min), without washout of the radiotraser on the late (2h) phase .
Considering the FNAB findings, 99mTc-MIBI scan and tumour size (increasing with time) the patient was suggested and underwent a second operation (August 2012) - tumourectomy and remnant tissue extirpation. Hystopatological examination of the extirpated tissue fragment - (comprising the newly detected nodule and the remnant thyroid tissue, sized 5.5 × 4.5 × 4 cm) revealed presence of well-differentiated HCC (stage III, pTNM = pT3 pNx pMx, G1 C1) with large malignant cells rich with eosinophilic cytoplasm, with hyperchromatic nucleuses, and well-differentiated grade 1 nucleus. Necrotic regions and capsular invasion were found as well. US postoperatively revealed only small remnant thyroid tissue on the left side, confirmed on the consecutive 99mTc-MIBI scintigraphy (January 2013) .
One month after, an ablative dose of 100 mCi 131I was given and there was no pathological accumulation of the tracer on the whole-body scan (WBS), except the small accumulation in the region of the remnant thyroid tissue after the second surgical procedure . The patient at present is symptom free, receiving hormonal replacement therapy. No signs of metastatic disease are present up to date and the levels of thyroglobulin (Tg) are within normal range - respectively < 0.2 ng/ml.