The case illustrates the potential of Ayurveda theory and practice to effectively manage pulmonary mycosis.
A > 60-year-old South Indian male asthenic built patient, non-smoker presented to the outpatient department (OPD) of our healthcare center, with an ill-looking appearance. Observations showed cachexia, labored breathing, pale complexion, forward stooped body posture, whitish discoloration of the tongue, swelling in feet, flaking skin with blackish discolorations on palm and soles, and a foul intolerable odor from the oral cavity of the patient.
Three months before initiating Ayurveda treatment, the patient was diagnosed with dengue and was treated at a conventional allopathic hospital. The patient provided no history of diabetes, and neither did his previous investigations revealed diabetes. However, during hospitalization, the patient was detected to have uncontrolled diabetes. The patient had no history of prior respiratory illness but developed a cough and expectoration with breathlessness, which got progressively worse. Systematic physical examinations and diagnostic tests like chest X-ray, electrocardiogram (ECG), high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT), endobronchial ultrasound (EBUS) aspirate, and histopathological examination (HPE) of the endobronchial biopsy revealed pulmonary mycosis.
The patient was prescribed conventional treatment with amphotericin B (twice a day), asthalin 100 inhaler SOS, and insulin human –mixtard 10 units (twice a day). Additionally, the patient was under intravenous hydration, oxygen, and nebulization periodically. However, the cough and associated symptoms worsened and the patient lost nearly 20 kgs of weight from the time of treatment initiation. About three months after non-responsiveness to conventional therapy, the patient approached our healthcare center for further management. The timeline of the patient's clinical investigations is shown in Fig. .
Physical examination indicated increased respiratory rate, greater effort at breathing with accessory muscle usage, and bilateral crepitations. Primary observations of breathlessness, cough, and difficulty in lying down flat were associated with the ACD diagnosis of Shvaasa roga. Previously done culture and laboratory reports of the patient depicting lung infection, primary investigations, such as total blood count, glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1C), hemoglobin (Hb), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), SpO2, and pulse were evaluated. A confirmatory evaluation of lung X-ray was performed to revalidate the presence of fungal infection. X-ray report revealed poor inspiratory signatures with an opaque film on the right upper and mid-zone of the lungs, which indicated microbial growth. Fibro-cavitary changes on the right upper lobe were observed in the HRCT thorax scan. Bronchoscopy evaluation revealed that the right upper lobe, the anterior segment was occluded by a lesion. Endobronchial biopsy revealed acute inflammatory exudate containing fungal filaments. The diagnosis revealed pulmonary mycosis infection.
As per ACD, the patient expressed traits of physical weakness along with breathlessness and was diagnosed as Vata dominant Shvaasa Roga. The biochemical tests were repeated at regular intervals during the treatment .
As per the ACD, there is no direct correlation to fungal infections. The diagnosis is then based on etio-pathological interpretation based on treatment principles in classical Ayurveda literature. The other challenges faced were that biopsies were not performed at baseline to avoid invasive procedures. Previously obtained biopsy reports were considered for the baseline assessment of the infection. The patient was also financially weak and hesitant to repeat diagnostic tests. Due to this, the patient was treated based on symptoms, lab values, and physical examinations.
After a detailed examination of the conditions, the patient's family was informed about the poor prognosis, and was admitted after obtaining high-risk consent. The patient was administered Ayurveda treatment based on the ACD classification of his condition. Considering that the patient was physically weak and Vata dominant, a dosha-pacifying line of management was adopted which included a combination of internal medications and external therapies.
Ayurveda is a clinical science that gives signs and symptoms of various vyaddhis (Diseases), and the selection of medications was made as per the expressed signs. The internal formulations used were prepared fresh daily and given to the patient [Viz Dasamoolakaduthryadi kashaya, Indukantham Kashaya, Punarnavadi kashaya, Fresh juice of Tulsi (Ocimum sanctum), Vidaryadi kashaya, Pippali (Piper longum)]. Other formulations were procured from Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP)-certified pharmaceutical manufacturers [including Vaishwanara Churna, Swasanada Gulika, Agastya Rasayana, Sitopaladi Churna, Vilvadi Lehya, Vidaryadi Ghrita]. All of these formulations are listed in the Ayurveda Pharmacopoeia of India (API). These formulations were administered at different timelines during the patient's journey toward recovery (See Additional file : Table S1).
External therapies such as warm oil application (abhyanga) to the chest and back region, followed by warm fomentation (nadi sweda) procedures were administered daily from day 1. Non-pharmacological interventions such as yoga and Acupuncture therapies were introduced after week 3 of the treatment protocol.
Diet as per the patient’s need was carefully designed during the 6 weeks of hospital stay. A light, easily digestible diet was recommended to the patient. It was observed that the patient consumed food in small quantities every 2–3 h. The patient’s symptoms were evaluated regularly, and the treatment was modified accordingly. Further, during treatment, to improve and regain strength, physiological function, and rehabilitation of the respiratory system, yoga, pranayama and acupuncture were advised from day 24 onwards till the end of the treatment (Additional file : Table S2). The sessions of yoga and acupuncture were customized to the patient's condition. In particular, treatment was provided to improve the lung channels (acupoints L1,7,9,11), enhance immunity (points LI4,11), promote blood and capillary circulation (SL6, SP9,10,36) and overall health (points CV4,6,9,17,GV20) [, ].
The laboratory investigations were evaluated at frequent intervals during the treatment.
The clinical symptoms gradually resolved at the end of week-6 of the intervention. The added breath sounds markedly decreased, pedal edema decreased with a reduction in added respiratory sounds. The inspiratory breath sounds improved, which indicated improved lung function. The patient reported an improvement in appetite by week 3. By week 4, the patient had a strong desire to eat normal food. Subsequently, improved strength, better complexion, reduction in foul odor, and better digestion and metabolism were observed. From week 5 onwards, till his discharge, the focus was mainly on tissue nourishing interventions.
Further, from the laboratory findings, fasting blood sugar (FBS), and post prandial blood sugar (PPBS) levels were normalized, and the patient gained weight as shown in Fig. a, b and g. The hemoglobin levels (Hb) increased gradually, and total blood count (TC), neutrophils, and ESR levels were back to normal range, see Fig. c–f. Pulse rate and SpO2 were also stabilized at the end of the treatment as shown in Fig. h. Finally, a confirmatory chest X-ray during the first follow-up revealed no pulmonary opacity as shown in Fig.a, b.
The patient was followed up periodically after 2 weeks, 4 weeks and 1 year of treatment to assess recurrence (Additional file : Table S3). The patient continued to have normal breathing patterns with no infection recurrence. The patient is currently doing well.
During the in-patient treatment, one adverse event was reported between in week 3 (from day 21 to day 24). The patient had frequent liquid stools along with abdominal pain and an episode of severe cough, and blackish-green vomiting at night, the blood oxygen saturation level dropped to 85% during which the patient was provided with oxygen and nebulization. The cause of the event was identified to be a deviation from the recommended diet. All the treatment interventions were stopped and the patient was given Ayurvedic antidiarrheal medicines (Mebarid and Dadimashtaka churna ). Finally, as the patient's symptoms reduced, the standard Ayurveda treatments were resumed.