A 76-year-old woman with a body mass index of 20.9 kg/m2 with bilateral knee pain visited our hospital. Pre-operative characteristics of the patient are shown in .
Preoperatively, the right knee had valgus deformity Krakow classification Type 2 and the left knee had varus deformity (Kellgren-Lawrence classification Grade 4) .
For pre-operative planning, component alignment and osteotomy volume were planned using three-dimensional computed tomography (3DCT) data of the entire limb. The goal was to achieve post-operative mechanical alignment using ZedView (ZedKnee; LEXI Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan).
RA TKA was performed on the left knee, which was painful upon walking and on the right. RA TKA was performed on the right knee 1 month later. Both procedures were performed with the medial subvastus approach. The Blue Belt Navio surgical system (Navio; Smith and Nephew, Plymouth, MN, USA) was used for image-free handheld RA surgery. We followed the methods of Kaneko et al. 2021 .
Planning of prosthesis position and bone resection was done intraoperatively with consideration of soft tissue balance. The osteophytes on the femur, tibia, and intercondylar were resected. Tracker fixation of the femur was proximal and anterior to the medial epicondyle and mid-shaft femur. Tracker fixation of the tibia was from the anteromedial tibia to 6 cm from the incision using bury pin threads (4.0 mm). Landmark registration, ROM testing, varus-valgus stress test, and mapping of the anatomy of the femoral condyle and tibial plateau were performed by “painting” the surfaces with an optical probe. A virtual model of the knee was thus created. Planning for prosthesis size, alignment, and position, as well as the volume of bone removal, were determined intraoperatively by the surgeon. Arthritic cartilage and bone were then methodically removed using a handheld sculptor. The RA surgical technique continuously tracked the position of the patient’s lower limb and the progress of bone resection with a navigation system camera. Decisions about prosthesis and bone resection volume was made intraoperatively in consideration of the soft tissue in the left and right knee ( and ).
The displaced talar neck and body with subtalar dislocation (a) computed tomogrphy (CT) showing Sagittal 3 D view (b) CT showing the sagittal view.
Subtalar intraoperative reduction.
Bicruciate stabilized TKA was performed on the left knee (Journey II BCS; Smith and Nephew. Inc., Memphis, TN, USA) to induce medial pivot movement. For the right knee, LESION posterior stabilized (PS) TKA (Smith and Nephew. Inc., Memphis, TN, USA) was performed .
TKA treatment of valgus deformity is associated with more frequent use of ligament releases and semi-constrained implants and with lower outcome scores than TKA treatment for varus deformity [, , ]. However, in this case, the patient had Krachow classification Type 2 disease, that is, failure of the medial support mechanism and lateral bone loss as well as failure of support mechanism. Osteotomy and component placement with RA TKA achieved tightness of the medial soft-tissue envelope and laxity of the lateral soft-tissue envelope, which allowed us to avoid using a semi-constrained prosthesis. In other words, planning and bone resection occurred intraoperatively with consideration of soft-tissue balance.
On the 1st day after surgery, the drainage tube was removed and physical therapy was initiated. A physical therapist started isometric strength exercises for the quadriceps and ROM exercises for the knee joint. Full weight-bearing was not restricted and patients were allowed to walk with or without assistive devices. The patient followed the same post-operative rehabilitation protocol.
Post-operative CT scans were obtained at 4 weeks for both knees. Using reference points, pre-operative CT images were fused to post-operative images automatically by matching bone surfaces. After matching, the femoral-tibial component template from a computer- aided design model was superimposed on the implant image manually to match their contours. Based on the positioning of the templates, the coronal, sagittal, and axial alignments of both components were measured using ZedView with reference to the coordinate system. The post-operative femorotibial angle (FTA) was also measured as the leg axis between the anatomical axis of the femur and tibia in the coronal plane defined by the coordinate systems. The post-operative 3DCT images of the femur and tibia were superimposed onto those of the pre-operative 3DCT plan using ZedView software [, , , ].
The patient was evaluated at 1 year after TKA using 2011 Knee Society Score (symptom, patient satisfaction, patient expectation, and activity) and the range of motion of the knee. Westren ontario and macmaster universities osteoarthritis index (WOMAC) Score was used to assess pain, stiffness, and daily activity) . Forgotten Joint Score-12 was used .
The coordinate system can be set according to the mechanical axes. Using the coordinate system, alignment measurements in accurate coronal, sagittal, and axial planes for the femoral and tibial mechanical axes can be accomplished. 3DCT measurements of the position of components can be used to evaluate the alignment of components and the leg-axis angle.
Gait analysis was performed before and after surgery using a triaxial accelerometer (AYUMI EYE; Waseda Elderly Health, Inc., Association). The AYUMI EYE device can score the gait function instantly, based on acceleration data during walking, using a triaxial accelerometer and a gait cycle extraction program embedded in an iOS application . The program predicts the durations of the subsequent stride cycles based on foot contacts detected through a segmentation algorithm. In gait analysis using an accelerometer, the gait motion is considered a periodic movement of the body’s center of gravity (COG), and the rhythmic change in COG is measured using an accelerometer, which allows for objective measurements of gait abnormalities [, , ].
Flexion contracture decreased in both knees after surgery. The flexion angle of the left knee improved after surgery, but the flexion angle of the right knee worsened after surgery . The quadriceps muscles were stronger on the left than the right, both before and after surgery . Pre-operative varus or valgus deformity became milder after surgery as well . The 2011 KSS patient satisfaction score and the WOMAC stiffness score were equivalent for the left and right knees, but the left knee was superior to the right knee in all other categories at 1 year after surgery .
Walking speed and stride length were higher at 8 months after surgery compared to before surgery . Root mean square, a measure of body sway to the left or right, decreased after surgery. The Time Up and Go test score improved after surgery .
Preoperatively, the patient had left-right swaying while walking. She was walking on frosted feet. The gait was unchanged at 2 months after surgery. It remained unbalanced at 4 and 6 months after surgery. The gait became symmetrical and stable at 8 months after surgery . Variation over a single gait cycle, that is, gait rhythm, was lower at 8 months after surgery than before surgery .