A 24-year-old female presented to the outpatient department with complaints of progressively increasing pain and swelling in her left foot since past 3 years. There was no history of antecedent trauma or fever. She visited multiple orthopedic surgeons who managed her conservatively with foot-wear modification, analgesics initially. However, she did not improve and she was finally started on trial anti-tubercular treatment (ATT) after a presumptive diagnosis of TB was made based on magnetic resonance imaging of the foot, reported hyper-intensity on short-tau inversion-recovery sequences in cuboid bone and in the soft tissue on dorsal and plantar aspect of foot . However, the patient reported no relief of symptoms and noted an increase in swelling of the foot. On examination, the foot was diffusely swollen with the forefoot in eversion and loss of medial arch . There was tenderness in the mid-foot region and along the medial border of the foot but no local rise of temperature was noted. There was significant wasting of the calf muscle but demonstrated normal ankle range of motion (ROM) and her mid-foot AOFAS score was documented to be 24. An X-ray of foot showed diffuse osteopenia with early arthritic changes in the mid-foot . A computed tomography scan of foot was performed which reported an expansile osteolytic lesion, eccentrically located in infero-medial aspect of cuboid . She demonstrated normal blood cell counts, alkaline phosphatase, and acute phase reactants (erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein). Her liver and kidney function tests were normal. Based on the prior history of non-responsiveness to ATT, a core biopsy from the Cuboid bone was taken and the sample sent for histopathology and gene expert test for TB. The histopathology sample showed features suggestive of osteoblastoma and gene expert test reported negative for TB. After a second review in the institute tumor board meeting, a surgical plan of en bloc excision of the Cuboid bone followed by lateral column fusion was planned. Under regional anesthesia and tourniquet control, longitudinal incision was made on the lateral aspect of the dorsum of foot in line with the fourth metatarsal extending from the sinus tarsi to the middle third of the fourth metatarsal. Cuboid bone was removed en-bloc after dissecting from the surrounding soft tissue . The lateral column was stabilized by filling the void created by removal of Cuboid bone with tricortical iliac crest bone graft and fixed with a 3.5 mm locking reconstruction plate extending from the calcaneum to the fourth metatarsal. Intraoperatively medial column instability was observed and confirmed under fluoroscopy and hence a decision to stabilize the column was made . A longitudinal incision was made over the dorsum of the foot in the interval between the first and second ray and neurovascular bundle isolated. The medial column was stabilized using a spanning reconstruction locking plate extending from Talus to the first metatarsal which was reinforced by 3.5 mm fully threaded cortical screws passing from Navicular bone to the medial cuneiform bone and 2.7 mm plate . The histopathology of the excised bone showed features of a bone-forming tumor consisting of anastomosing woven trabeculae lined by a layer of plump osteoblasts in a vascularized stroma and no evidence of pleomorphism or mitoses . The soft tissue did not demonstrate any tumor deposits or infiltration.
After surgery, the patient was given a below knee slab for 6 weeks. After 6 weeks, an Air Cast Boot (Donjoy, USA) was applied and ankle ROM exercises were started. Weight bearing mobilization with air boot support started at around 3 months and weaning from the boot done gradually. Patient was on regular follow-up and was evaluated clinically and radiographically with X-rays . A positron emission tomography scan was performed after 2 years and showed no evidence of recurrence. After a follow-up period of 2 years, the patient is ambulatory and demonstrates complete ankle ROM and her mid-foot AOFAS score improved to 81.