A 75-year-old Japanese woman with a right sided abdominal swelling was referred to our hospital. She had no history of medication or smoking and was a social drinker. Computed tomography (CT) showed a hypervascular bulky tumor in her right kidney with suspected liver invasion without distant metastasis , suggesting right RCC in clinical T4N0M0. For the purpose of downstaging of the tumor, sunitinib therapy (50 mg per day, four weeks on and two weeks off) was started in the neoadjuvant setting. During the fourth week of the first cycle, she experienced right upper quadrant pain with a positive Murphy's sign and abdominal fullness without fever. Laboratory tests revealed elevated levels of C-reactive protein, lactate dehydrogenase, and liver transaminases although total bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, and amylase were at normal levels. She also had laboratory features of disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) including thrombocytopenia and disordered coagulation. Despite a normal gallbladder at the first visit , abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed a tense and dilated gallbladder and thickening of the gallbladder wall without gallbladder stones or emphysematous change . Based on the diagnosis of acute acalculous cholecystitis associated with sunitinib, sunitinib therapy was discontinued immediately. She recovered in an intensive care unit after subsequent treatment with antibiotics and gabexate mesilate (FOY®) followed by percutaneous cholecystostomy.
After three months, a follow-up contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a marked shrinkage of the gallbladder and a 21% reduction in the size of the renal tumor with decreased enhancement of its center. Cholecystectomy and right radical open nephrectomy were performed. Adhesions thought to be due to cholecystitis made the operation difficult although common bile duct stenosis or retraction by the tumor that could lead to cholecystitis was not observed. Pathological examination showed that her renal tumor was chromophobe RCC (pT2) with necrosis occupying more than half of the tumor . Inflammation and ischemia were observed in the gallbladder wall which was compatible with acute acalculous cholecystitis . Computed tomography (CT) has revealed no evidence of disease recurrence for more than six months since the radical nephrectomy.