An 18-year-old woman without any significant history of previous illnesses visited an outpatient clinic with a chief complaint of recurrent vulvar abscess for 5 months. On inspection, the vulva was diffusely swelling, tender, red and warm . The patient had no other complaints apart from perineal pain and difficulty in sitting for a long time. She had previously visited another hospital with the same complaint, and on 3 occasions received incision and drainage (I&D) of the abscess. She visited a secondary hospital, where abdominal and pelvic computed tomography (APCT) showed a labia major abscess and laboratory results showed no abnormalities. She received antibiotic treatment, comprising of cephalosporin and metronidazole for 2 weeks, but her symptoms did not improve. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pelvis was performed which revealed a 9 × 7 mm sized abscess in the right labia major . Under the impression of persistent vulvar abscess with positive culture results implicating Citrobacter freundii, Corynebacterium striatum, and Eschericia coli, I&D with local excision of inflamed tissues was performed under general anesthesia. The pathology results showed acute and chronic inflammation with granulation tissue formation, without indication of caseation status. Intravenous antibiotics were administered for 2 weeks and the vulvar inflammation subsided. However, inflammation and painful swelling of the contralateral labia major arose 2 weeks postoperatively.
She was referred to our institution, a tertiary care hospital. At the pediatric and adolescent gynecology clinic, a follow-up MRI was performed because the features of the abscess were not typical of a gynecological abscess. A deep pelvic abscess, at a higher level than Bartholin abscess, was suspected. The MRI results showed diffuse inflammation of the perineum around the posterior vaginal wall with abscess formation along both vestibular glands as well as both labia major and minor. There were also features suggestive of a rectovestibular fistula at the 12–1 ‘o’clock position . The patient was then clinically evaluated for Crohn’s disease because of the above MRI findings. Her laboratory tests, including inflammatory markers, were normal.
The patient was then referred to the pediatric gastroenterology department where she underwent further blood tests, gastroduodenoscopy, and colonoscopy to rule out other differential diagnoses, such as sarcoidosis, pyoderma gangrenosum, hiradenitis suppurativa, cellulitis, tuberculosis, and contact dermatitis. Stool calprotectin levels was elevated to > 300 µg/g, which suggested a diagnosis of inflammatory bowel disease. A more detailed history revealed that the patient had no history of diarrhea or hematochezia. On gastroduodenoscopy, gastric mucosa was noted to be erythematous which was suggestive of reflux esophagitis and chronic superficial gastritis. Colonoscopy revealed multiple ulcers on the mucosa of the terminal ileum and the rectum . Pathological evaluation of tissue specimen retrieved showed mild chronic superficial gastritis and ulceration with ill-defined noncaseating granulomatous lesions in the mucosa of the terminal ileum, which were consistent with a diagnosis of Crohn’s disease or tuberculosis. Further AFB staining and Tb-PCR performed on biopsy samples taken from the terminal ileum were negative, which ruled out tuberculosis. The rectal biopsy specimen was within normal limits. The simple endoscopic score for Crohn’s disease was 11 . The result of the stool culture was positive for Clostridium difficile and the patient received oral metronidazole therapy.
MRI enterography after oral contrast ingestion showed segmental and uneven wall thickening with ulcerative lesions from the distal to the terminal ileum and distal rectum with increased mucosal enhancement and diffusion restriction . Diffuse bilateral perineal soft tissue infiltration and increased enhancement with features suggestive of a rectovaginal (11 ‘o’clock) and a vaginoperineal (bilateral anterior) fistula were also observed. The abscess in both vestibular glands and both labia were smaller in size compared to those in the pelvic MRI performed the previous month at the gynecology department. The Pediatric Crohn’s Disease Activity Index (PCDAI) was 12.5, which indicated clinical response (≤ 12.5), but not inactive disease (< 10) . The modified PCDAI score was 2.5, indicating remission (< 7.5) .
She was placed on elemental diet (2000 kcal/day) four times daily for 12 weeks, azathioprine 50 mg daily, and mesalazine 1 g three times daily. Azathioprine was increased to 75 mg daily after three weeks. The elemental diet was stopped after the prescribed 12 weeks, and she was maintained on 75 mg daily of azathioprine. The vulvar lesion completely resolved and her white blood cell (WBC) count was 3470/µL during her follow-up visit after 6 weeks of treatment. Inflammatory markers were normal, and the PCDAI was 10. Oral Azathioprine was increased to 100 mg daily, with continuous WBC monitoring on follow-up.
The patient revisited the emergency room with vulvar pain after taking medication for Crohn’s disease for 10 weeks. On examination, there was right labia major swelling, tenderness, and pus discharge . She underwent a Seton procedure for rectovaginal fistula . While her symptoms initially improved, a recurrence required second operation. About 4 months after re-operation, her symptoms finally resolved.