A 69-year-old Japanese man presented to our department with tarry semiliquid stools and symptoms of anemia. He had a medical history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and type 2 diabetes treated with oral and insulin therapy. Furthermore, he was receiving antiplatelet therapy (clopidogrel 75 mg/day) for a cerebral infarction that had occurred 2 months previously. On physical examination, he was pale, with a temperature of 36.0 °C, a pulse rate of 85 beats per minute, a blood pressure of 107/63 mmHg, and a respiration rate of 14 breaths per minute. A rectal examination revealed tarry fecal content. Laboratory tests were indicative of normocytic-normochromic anemia (hemoglobin 12.4 g/dL, normal 13.4 to 17.1 g/dL). The results of all other laboratory tests were unremarkable.
After he was stabilized, an extensive diagnostic workup was initiated. No evidence of bleeding was detected by esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) and colonoscopy (CS). Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scans and CT angiography did not reveal the cause of bleeding. Therefore, he underwent CE for assessment of his small intestine. CE showed a pedunculated submucosal tumor with an ulcer in his upper jejunum . Subsequently, DBE via an oral route revealed an ulcerated submucosal tumor, 35 mm in size, which was in the same location (150 cm distal from the ligament of Treitz) as that found on CE . The tumor was cushion-sign positive. We speculated that it was an inflammatory fibroid polyp because it had a pedunculated cylindrical lesion with an ulcer on the top of the lesion. A biopsy and endoscopic treatment were not performed due to the large size and wide stalk of the lesion, which were considered to increase the possibility of operational defects, and the risk of active bleeding and perforation. Black ink injection and clips were used to mark the anal side of the lesion. Our patient underwent laparoscopic surgery of his small intestine (segmental resection; Fig. ). A pathological examination of the resected tumor showed a pedunculated lipoma (36×9 mm) of the jejunum, consisting of mature fat cells with an ulcer . His postoperative course was uneventful and he was discharged 9 days later. He remained well at 13 months after surgery, without evidence of recurrent bleeding.