A 9-year-old Greek boy was transferred in the Emergency Department of the hospital after sustaining injuries by stray lead shots fired from a shotgun. On his admission the patient had a patent airway, Beats: 122 per minute, Blood Pressure: 135/60 mmHg, SpO2: 96% and Breaths: 30/min while from the full blood count Hb: 6.6 gm/dl, Hct: 17.2%. He had suffered multiple entry points by the lead shots that were distributed across the right side of his thorax, abdomen and left arm. On auscultation the patient had decreased lung sounds on the right side and subcutaneous emphysema. A chest tube was placed that confirmed the suspicion of pneumothorax and hemothorax. His abdomen was soft and tender with no sign of peritonitis engorgement or pain. A urine catheter was placed that revealed macroscopic hematuria. The patient was intubated and a computed tomography scan was followed. The computed tomography scan of the thorax revealed lacerations of the lung parenchyma in the right middle and lower lobe, pneumothorax, free pleural fluid, large subcutaneous emphysema, small collection of fluid (blood) in the pericardium and multiple lead shots scattered inside the thoracic cavity and the thoracic wall. No major injury to the heart (one lead shot was lodged between the epicardium and pericardium) or the large blood vessels was observed .
In the abdominal cavity the computed tomography scan showed: extended lacerations of the liver (segments V, VI, VII, VIII,) and a fracture of segment V fracture of the lower pole of the right kidney. The child was transferred in the pediatric intensive care unit of our hospital were he was transfused with blood products and remained hemodynamically stable during the critical initial period after the injury. The continuous monitoring by clinical examination and ultrasound of his abdominal cavity showed no change and his clinical condition was stabilized in the pediatric intensive care unit with no further blood loss. He continued to have a large quantity of fluid in his abdomen that showed no sign of decreasing, on the contrary on the 8th day of his hospitalization the child was transferred in the operating room for an exploratory surgery of the abdomen due to the progression of intra-abdominal inflammation caused by choloperitoneum and the very large amount of fluid collected. During the operation the peritoneal cavity was found to be filled with bile and on exploration of the billiary tree a small hole was found on the wall of the gallbladder. His post-op hospitalization was normal with no complications. The manufacturers of the lead pellets for shotguns use lead and antimony as propellants. Because of the large amount of lead pellets inside the patient’s body the blood lead levels were measured periodically . He also developed a temporary ulnar nerve paresis which was developed by a pellet which injured the nerve.