A 64-year-old Caucasian man was admitted to our hospital with a ten-year-history of a mild diffuse abdominal pain associated with anorexia. He reported no noticeable weight loss or other symptoms. His family history was unremarkable and he had no history of previous abdominal surgery.
On physical examination, we noted a mass in the left upper quadrant of the abdomen, which was mobile. A CT scan of the abdomen revealed a homogeneous, non-enhancing mass, 70 × 100 mm in size, in the mesenteric region near the small bowel, with a consistency suggesting thick mucinous or proteinaceous material, which possibly represented an intestinal wall tumor. There were no other relevant findings.
At laparotomy, a solid mass measuring 80 × 100 × 120 mm was identified at the root of the jejunal mesentery, infiltrating the adipose tissue and bowel wall, and in close association with the superior mesenteric and the middle colic vessels . The mesentery contained several large lymph nodes. A small amount of free peritoneal fluid was present. The mass was totally excised with a loop of jejunum and without apparent interference with the blood supply to the bowel. However, bowel ischemia did occur, and the patient required a second laparotomy three days later. The ischemic injury seemed to be secondary to venous obstruction. It was necessary to resect an additional segment of small bowel measuring 600 mm in length. A primary anastomosis was performed.
Our patient recovered well, and was discharged from the hospital one week after the second laparotomy. The final tissue diagnosis showed spindle-shaped fibroblasts with elongated nuclei and a benign appearance. The cut surface was tan, whorled, and firm, without necrosis, cystic change, or hemorrhage. Microscopy showed loosely arranged spindle cells with bland, oval nuclei and minimal cytoplasm . There were also plump spindle cells with tapering ends, with oval, vesicular nuclei and moderate amounts of eosinophilic cytoplasm. There were many thin-walled vessels of varying caliber. There were no cells with epithelioid features, and any inflammatory cells, calcification, osseous metaplasia, necrosis, or mitoses. The tumor had infiltrated the muscularis propria and had non-infiltrating margins. The tumor cells were negative for antibodies to CD117, S100, CD34, and smooth muscle actin, and positive for desmin. The small sample of peritoneal fluid was free of malignant cells.
A diagnosis of fibromatosis of the jejunum and mesentery was made. Six months after resection, a CT scan of the abdomen showed no evidence of residual or recurrent tumor. Our patient had no evidence of disease at follow-up 16 months after surgery. However, the clinical data and radiologic findings gave rise to a diagnostic dilemma: was the lesion an intermediate or high-risk malignant GIST originating from the bowel wall and spreading to the mesentery, or was this a benign lesion such as IAF originating from the mesentery and infiltrating the bowel wall?