A 60-year-old woman visited our hospital for evaluation of a tumor arising in a remnant cystic duct 30 years after cholecystectomy for gallbladder adenoma. Laboratory data, including tumor markers such as carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19-9, were within normal ranges. The patient had no chief complaint. Previous medical history included breast cancer that was completely resected three years prior to her visit. Since that time she had taken an aromatase inhibitor. Annual follow-up for breast cancer by contrasted computed tomography (CT) showed an intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN) in the pancreas head and an enhanced tumor image around the hepatoduodenal ligament . Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) demonstrated branched IPMN of the pancreas and a residual cystic duct tumor. The tumor was located at the junction of the cystic duct and was enhanced with Sonazoid . Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography indicated that the tumor had not invaded the common bile duct. Enhanced CT in the artery phase revealed a 6 mm round tumor. Surrounding lymph nodes were not swollen. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) showed that the tumor presented with a slightly high signal on T2 weighted imaging, and the periphery remnant cystic duct of the tumor presented as a high-intensity lesion on T2 weighted imaging . During surgery the tumor was located at the cutoff position of the remnant cystic duct and presented as a white nodule that adhered tightly to surrounding tissue. There was severe adhesion around remnant cystic duct and the hepatoduodenal ligament due to previous surgery. The remnant cystic duct and the tumor could not be separated; however, no invasion toward common bile duct was observed. Rapid intraoperative pathological examination demonstrated that the tumor was a neuroma. The operation time was 251 min, and blood loss was 80 ml. Macroscopic findings had two components; the dilated remnant cyst with white bile, and the whitish main tumor with substantial neurofibrotic changes . Immunohistological examination revealed that the AN was compressing the cystic duct from the outside . The patient was discharged nine days after surgery without any postoperative complications.