A 69-year-old gentleman with 120-pack-year smoking history was admitted with RT PCR-confirmed COVID-19 infection. He has background history of diabetes, hypertension, ischemic heart disease, and COPD GOLD D. He was on tiotropium and olodaterol inhalers, tablet aspirin, clopidogrel, atorvastatin, and basal bolus insulin injection.
During the 1st admission for COVID-19 infection, he presented with 3-day history of cough and shortness of breath. Clinically, he was tachypnoeic with RR 28 bpm. Arterial blood gas showed type 1 respiratory failure and he required high-flow nasal cannula FiO2 0.6 60 L/min. A COVID-19 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test was positive with raised CRP 20 mg/L. Otherwise, white blood cells (WBC) were normal (7 × 109/L) and other blood tests were unremarkable. Chest radiograph showed bilateral lower zone ground glass opacity. A computed tomography pulmonary angiography (CTPA) thorax on day 10 of illness revealed moderate organizing pneumonia with a background of emphysematous changes and no pulmonary embolism .
He was treated with oral baricitinib and intravenous methylprednisolone for 3 days which was then changed to tapering dose of prednisolone with starting dose of 1 mg/kg/day (60 mg/day) and reduction of 10 mg prednisolone every three days. He underwent inpatient pulmonary rehabilitation and was discharged after 22 days of admission with short-term oxygen therapy.
He presented again after two weeks with three-day history of cough and shortness of breath. Clinically, he was febrile with temperature of 38°C. He appeared tachypnoeic with SpO2 92% under room air. Lung examination revealed minimal bi-basal fine crepitations without audible wheeze. There was no pedal oedema and jugular venous pressure was not raised. Blood investigation showed leucocytosis with WBC 16 × 109/L and raised CRP 45 mg/L. Other blood investigations including renal profile and liver function test were normal. Sputum and blood culture were negative. A repeated CTPA thorax showed worsening ground glass opacity with reticulations and crazy paving pattern. There was also reduction in lung volume with displaced fissures. Otherwise, there was no organizing pneumonia or pulmonary embolism .
Multidisciplinary team discussion concluded it as post COVID-19 infection with progressive fibrosis and concomitant secondary bacterial infection. He was treated for hospital-acquired pneumonia with intravenous piperacillin/tazobactam 4.5 g QID. The prednisolone was stopped due to an active infection. Bronchoscopy was not performed as he responded well with the antibiotic therapy. He was discharged after 1 week with long-acting beta2-agonist (LABA) plus long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) combination inhaler and underwent outpatient pulmonary rehabilitation.
A follow-up at 3 months post COVID-19 infection showed improvement of clinical symptoms and radiological resolution of crazy paving pattern . His full lung function at 3 months post COVID-19 infection revealed restrictive ventilatory defect with forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) of 1.67 L (72% predicted), forced vital capacity (FVC) of 1.74 L (64% predicted), ratio FEV1/FVC1 0.96, total lung capacity (TLC) of 69% predicted, and diffusing capacity of carbon monoxide (DLCO) of 59% predicted. In addition, impulse oscillometry (IOS) showed an elevated difference between resistance at 5 Hz and 20 Hz (R5-R20) of 0.13 kPa/L/S. The presence of restrictive ventilatory defect with IOS results supports the diagnosis of post COVID-19 interstitial lung disease with concomitant COPD with emphysema. At this juncture, we have diagnosed him with resolving interstitial lung disease (ILD) and therefore no definitive treatment for ILD was warranted.