A 26-year-old male with alcohol use disorder was brought to Emerson Hospital, Concord, MA, USA, in the early morning for evaluation. The patient suffered from nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain after drinking multiple bottles of hand sanitiser on the previous day. On arrival, he was confused and appeared unwell but was able to confirm he had ingested hand sanitiser and no other substances.
In the Emergency Department, he rapidly worsened, becoming unresponsive and suffered multiple seizures. He then suffered five brief cardiac arrests, with the return of spontaneous circulation following administration of epinephrine and bicarbonate, all within the first few hours of presentation.
He was intubated after this final cardiac arrest, approximately 30 minutes after becoming unresponsive; he had a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 3, accompanied by seizures and several cardiac arrests. A head and abdominal computerised tomography scan were undertaken immediately but showed no particular abnormalities.
Laboratory studies demonstrated a severe anion gap metabolic acidosis and hyperosmolality. He was initiated on norepinephrine (0.5mg/mL administered at 0.5mcg/kg/min IV [Hospira, Inc., Lake Forest, IL, USA]), phenylephrine (20mcg/mL administered at 3mcg/kg/min IV [Eton Pharmaceuticals, Deer Park, IL, USA]), vasopressin (20 units/mL administered at 2.4 units/hr IV [Par Pharmaceutical, Chestnut Ridge, NY, USA]), and epinephrine (4mcg/L administered at 0.1mcg/kg/min IV [Par Pharmaceutical, Chestnut Ridge, NY, USA]).
Over the following few hours, five litres of intravenous fluids were administered for persistently low blood pressures and mean arterial pressures, monitored with an arterial catheter placed at the time of intubation.
He was initiated on fomepizole (1gm/mL administered at 15 mg/kg, followed by 10 mg/kg every 12 hours for 4 doses, then 15 mg/kg every 12 hours IV (Jazz Pharmaceuticals, Inc. Palo Alto, CA, USA).
Due to the concern about the possibility of non-ethanol alcohol toxicity, despite the patient’s lack of access to any other poisons at home and denial of any other ingestions, the night of his presentation, he was transferred to an academic hospital, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, USA.
On arrival, the patient’s GCS was 3. He had a heart rate of 80bpm, blood pressure 94/52mmHg on the four vasopressors described above; an oxygen saturation of 97% on volume assist-control ventilation with a tidal volume of 440cc, respiratory rate of 34 breaths per minute, positive end-expiratory pressure of 8cm H2O, and a fraction of inspired oxygen of 50%. His pupils were 3mm in diameter with no response to light. He was comatose, with no response to noxious stimuli. On the recommendation of the nephrology service, given the presence of severe acidosis, a bicarbonate infusion was started.
Fomepizole (Jazz Pharmaceuticals, Inc. Palo Alto, CA, USA) was continued, and thiamine (100mg/mL, 500mg IV [FFF Enterprises, Temecula, CA, USA], folate (1mg tablet, 1mg PO [LGM Pharma, Boca Raton, FL, USA]), and pyridoxine (100mg/mL, 100mg, IV [Biocare SD, Tempe, AZ, USA]) were provided, given concern for toxic alcohol ingestion.
The nephrology service was consulted early in the morning of Day 1 post-admission and he was admitted to the medical intensive care unit; emergency dialysis was commenced.
Targeted temperature management (TTM) was initially deferred given the severity of his condition.
His alcohol panel was positive for methanol but otherwise negative. In addition, his osmolar gap was serially monitored, given the relatively long processing time of methanol testing.
The morning after admission, his pH was 7.3 with continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) and a continuous bicarbonate infusion. Targeted temperature management was initiated at that time and maintained for 24 hours. Continuous renal replacement therapy was discontinued once his osmolar gap closed from an initial 118.0 mOsm/kg to -10 mOsm/kg (normal range -14.0 to 10.0).
Moreover, his methanol levels were undetectable. His metabolic derangements resolved after 24 hours on dialysis, he no longer required vasopressors, and his temperature was recorded at 370 Celsius.
On Day 3, post-admission, a neurologic exam was performed. Brain stem reflexes were absent; repeat head CT demonstrated diffuse oedema consistent with global hypoxia and ischemia. An electroencephalogram did not demonstrate cerebral activity, and apnea testing was consistent with brain death. Despite all examination manoeuvres indicating brain death, we could not rule out that optic nerve damage from methanol toxicity was potentially obfuscating the cranial nerve exam, so a brain perfusion scan was performed. This confirmed brain death.