A 77-year-old male presented abdominal pain and anorexia and visited a previous hospital. Computed tomography (CT) revealed rectal cancer that invades the small intestine with LN metastasis, believed to drain from the tumor-invading small intestine, and multiple liver metastases. He was diagnosed with small bowel obstruction due to rectal cancer invading the small intestine, and a decompression of the small intestine was performed before surgery using a nasal ileus tube. The patient underwent a high anterior resection with D3 LN resection and partial resection of the small intestine, which was invaded by the tumor . However, the enlarged ileal LN was not removed, considered a distant metastasis, and hepatic metastases remained. The pathological diagnosis of the primary tumor was a moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma, pT4b (ileal invasion), N0 (0/20). The tumor measured 6 cm. The patient was discharged from the previous hospital on postoperative day 9 and referred to our hospital for further treatment of liver and LN metastases. He had a medical history of atrial fibrillation and was administered rivaroxaban. The serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level was 17.3 μg/ml (normal range: < 5.0 μg/ml), and the serum carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (CA19-9) was < 2.0 U/ml (normal range: < 37 U/ml). No mutation was found in the RAS and BRAF genes and microsatellite instability status was stable. He underwent 17 cycles of 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), leucovorin, oxaliplatin (mFOLFOX6 regimen), and bevacizumab chemotherapy, which resulted in a partial reduction in the size of the lesions and normalization of CA 19–9 value. Hematological tests before hepatic and lymph node resection was shown in Table . Therefore, 9 months after the first visit, an open ileocecal resection with ileal mesentery resection was performed for regional LN removal, which secondarily metastasized from the primary rectal cancer, and multiple partial liver resections were performed simultaneously . Because the enlarged lymph node was located along the ileocecal artery, the lymph nodes were systematically removed up to the root of the ileocecal artery, equivalent to D2 dissection for colon cancer. There were seven lesions in the liver segments S1 (two lesions), S3, S4/8 (two lesions), and S7 (two lesions). Histopathological analysis did not show a neoplastic lesion in the resected remnant ileum, but there was a moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma in two out of eight regional LNs of the ileum . In all four resected liver specimens, seven viable metastatic adenocarcinomas remained. These findings were consistent with metastasis from primary rectal cancer. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 18. The patient underwent a follow-up study, and two bilateral lung metastases were found on a follow-up CT scan 5 months after ileocecal resection with LN removal and liver surgery. The two lung metastases were removed in two lung resections, each on the left and right sides, at an interval of 2 months. The pathological findings were consistent with those of rectal cancer metastases. Multiple liver recurrences were observed at the time of the second lung resection. He underwent four cycles of 5-FU, leucovorin, irinotecan (FOLFIRI), and panitumumab, leading to a partial reduction in the size of the hepatic lesions. Subsequently, a posterior sectionectomy of the liver and partial resection were performed for liver metastasis. All lesions were completely resected; however, multiple metastases to the liver, hepatic hilar LNs, and peritoneal seeding were found 3 months after the second hepatectomy. Chemotherapy with 5-FU, leucovorin, irinotecan, and panitumumab was initiated. He is still alive 39 months after his first visit to our hospital and 40 months after his first surgery for the primary lesion at the previous hospital.