A 58-year-old male was brought to the emergency room with confusion and an inability to speak for 1 day. He had a past history of hypertension and hypomania. He was single and he lived alone. On physical examination, his blood pressure was 80/63 mm of Hg, heart rate 126/minute, and temperature 102°F. He was awake but unable to speak due to a mixed receptive and expressive aphasia. He had right homonymous hemianopsia and hemiplegia. Cardiac examination was positive for a pansystolic murmur in the apical area. The abdominal examination was unremarkable. On rectal examination there was perianal erythema and diminished sphincter tone. Complete blood count showed WBC 15,400/mm3 with a left shift, hematocrit 49%, and normal platelets. Serum chemistries showed glucose 84 mg/dl, albumin 2.9 mg/dl, and calcium 8.5 mg/dl. Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the brain, including diffusion weighted imaging, revealed acute hemorrhagic infarction of the left occipital lobe and acute embolic infarctions of the left frontal and right occipital lobes . Transesophageal Echocardiogram demonstrated mitral regurgitation and large vegetations on the posterior leaf of the mitral valve. Splenic and renal infarcts were visible on Computerized Tomography of the abdomen. All of the blood culture bottles and the urine culture grew methicillin sensitive Staphylococcus aureus. Treatment of the bacterial endocarditis was started with intravenous nafcillin and gentamicin. The patient had a significant recovery of speech and motor function within a few days. When asked about recent dental work, he gave a history of a tooth extraction 2–3 days before the hospitalization but was unable to provide information about his dentist. A dentist from the hospital examined the patient and found no clinical evidence of the extraction. The patient underwent a complete neuropsychiatric evaluation. He displayed confabulation and perseverance (marriage, retirement, hospitalization were reported using the same date which was his birthday). He also had significant executive dysfunction including concrete thinking and poor insight regarding his health and cognitive problems. On hospital day 12 the patient had mitral valve replacement surgery using a bioprosthetic valve. He completed a six-week course of intravenous antibiotic treatment. He also underwent extensive rehabilitation therapy and was sent home after 8 weeks of hospitalization. On subsequent follow-up visits the patient showed complete recovery from the stroke and was back to his baseline. In response to questions about his sexual history the patient indicated having heterosexual relations with multiple partners. However, his answers were inconsistent and seemed unreliable.
A closer examination of his medical records revealed that two years prior to this hospitalization, the patient was admitted with a plastic soda bottle retained in the rectosigmoid for 3 days. The bottle had been filled with warm water and inserted into his anal canal for sexual stimulation. It slipped all the way into the rectum and could not be retrieved. His attempts to extract it at home were unsuccessful. In the emergency room his physical examination was normal except for a palpable mass in the suprapubic area, decreased anal sphincter tone and a dilated rectal vault. On X-ray of the abdomen, the outline of a plastic bottle was visible in the rectosigmoid . The patient was taken to the operating room and under spinal anesthesia the bottle was extracted. He had multiple lacerations of the rectal mucosa but there was no perforation. He went home the next day. On follow-up visits to primary care he was noted to be overall healthy except having mild hypertension. His behavior was indicative of hypomania, but he did not get a formal psychiatric evaluation.
Foreign bodies in the rectum and methods of their extraction have been amply chronicled in the surgical literature . Sexual stimulation is the reason in a majority of these cases . Local trauma, perforation, and resultant peritonitis are well known complications . An unlimited PUBMED search for articles on bacteremia or endocarditis related to rectal foreign body insertion was unfruitful (We tried MeSH terms anal/rectal/colorectal/foreign bodies/anorectal /sexual deviation for the purpose). Bacteremia and septicemia from barium enema , and therapeutic anal dilatation have been published. Procedures like fiberoptic sigmoidoscopy are known to cause endocarditis , but septic stroke resulting from endocarditis related to lower gastrointestinal instrumentation has also not been reported.
The patient's history of anorectal insertion of a plastic soda bottle for sexual gratification is consistent with published reports of use of large objects for this purpose . The resultant rectal trauma can easily lead to bacteremia. Rectal carriage of Staphylococcus aureus is well documented and is a potential source of infection . This organism tends to be more abundant on the rectal mucosa than within the feces . In a study of gastrointestinal colonization, Staphylococcus aureus grew from the culture of rectal swabs in 60% cases versus 53% positive culture of nasal swabs taken from the same subjects . This organism is known to cause endocarditis of normal heart valves [,]. Neurologic complications of infective endocarditis, particularly embolic events, tend to be higher in cases of endocarditis caused by Staphylococcus aureus .
It is known that few patients with rectal foreign bodies will freely admit to transanal introduction . This explains to some extent the paucity of literature linking this practice with bacteremia or endocarditis. We believe our patient was habituated to rectal insertion of foreign bodies and that is evident from his previous history along with the clinical findings of perianal erythema and diminished sphincter tone . In the absence of a reliable history from the patient, the link between endocarditis and rectal trauma in this case is based on circumstantial evidence. A further study of patients with well-documented evidence of rectal foreign body insertion could be the next step to explore this important observation.