The patient is an 83-year-old man who presented with bothersome LUTS despite receiving tamsulosin OCAS 0.4 mg daily for 6 months. Preoperative uroflowmetry demonstrated a voided volume of 104 mL with a maximum urinary flow rate (Q
max) of 3.9 mL/s and a residual urine of 82 mL. He had an IPSS of 27 points and a QOL score of 4. Transrectal ultrasound of his prostate revealed a 14.4 cm3 prostate. In view of his mixed storage and voiding symptoms, urodynamic study was performed and confirmed bladder outflow obstruction (Bladder Outflow Obstruction Index 51). After discussing the different surgical options with the patient, he decided to proceed with the PUL procedure.
Intraoperatively, the patient suffered from lateral prostate lobes enlargement without any obstructing median lobe. Two implants were placed in each lateral lobe at the 10 and 2 o'clock positions, with a total of 4 implants inserted. The procedure was completed uneventfully within 15 min under monitored anesthetic care. No urethral catheter was placed. While in the recovery room, the patient developed tachycardia with a pulse rate of 122 bpm and hypotension with a blood pressure of 78/30 mmHg, which transiently responded with fluid resuscitation. Urgent blood tests subsequently revealed a hemoglobin level of 4.8 g/dL (from a baseline of 10 g/dL). Also, the platelet count was 70 × 109/L and there was a deranged clotting profile which indicated consumptive coagulopathy.
Urgent contrast CT scan showed contrast extravasation along the PUL needle path of one of the 10 o'clock implants with a large heterogenous hematoma at the right pelvis extending to the right retroperitoneum . The patient proceeded with angiogram, which showed extravasation from the right prostatic artery . Angioembolization with coils and 33% N-butyl cyanoacrylate glue was successfully performed . The patient subsequently recovered although he required 3 weeks of in-hospital physiotherapy due to muscle deconditioning. On discharge, he was able to void without catheter and walk unaided.
On follow-up 2 months after the procedure, the patient was satisfied with his voiding. Uroflowmetry revealed a voided volume of 137 mL, a Q
max of 16 mL/s and a residual volume of 50 mL. The massive hematoma took 1 year to completely resolve on imaging.