A 59-year-old female presented to a peripheral hospital with progressive dyspnoea. Her past medical history included coronary artery disease, peripheral artery disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and type 2 insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Three weeks before presentation, she had received percutaneous coronary intervention with implantation of two drug-eluting stents in a bifurcation stenosis of the left circumflex and obtuse marginal arteries due to non-ST elevation myocardial infarction. Back then, she was discharged on dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) with aspirin and ticagrelor as well as ramipril, metoprolol, torasemide, spironolactone, atorvastatin, metformin in addition to insulin. She reported not being compliant with her medication within the last 2 weeks.
On admission, her blood pressure was 100/70 mmHg with a heart rate of 100 beats/min and oxygen saturation of 83% under application of oxygen 8 L/min. Clinical examination showed bilateral fine pulmonary crackles, compatible with an acute pulmonary oedema and a holosystolic apical murmur. Electrocardiogram revealed sinus rhythm with Q wave formation in lateral leads (I, avL). Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed mild left ventricle dilation (left ventricular end-diastolic diameter 56 mm, left ventricular end-systolic diameter 48 mm), akinesia of the lateral wall with moderately reduced left ventricular ejection function (35%), atrial dilation (LA volume index 36 mL/m2), severe MR (Effective Regurgitant Orifice Area 55 mm2, Regurgitant Volume 72 mL/beat), and mild tricuspid regurgitation. No further abnormalities were noted on TTE.
The patient was stabilized with intravenous diuretics and application of non-invasive ventilation and was referred to our centre for further management. Upon admission in our intensive care unit (ICU), the patient was haemodynamically and respiratory stable. Transoesophageal echocardiogram confirmed the presence of severe MR, due to restrictive motion of the posterior mitral leaflet because of the lateral akinesia without any evidence of papillary muscle rupture. Furthermore, it demonstrated the presence of a 1.5 cm × 1.5 cm thrombus in LAA, potentially due to previously undetected atrial fibrillation . Anticoagulation with unfractionated heparin was initiated.
Coronary angiogram showed a total occlusion of the left circumflex artery (LCX), potentially due to stent thrombosis because of the interrupted DAPT . Left anterior descending artery and right coronary artery were without significant stenosis. Cardiac magnetic resonance tomography (C-MRI) revealed akinesia of all lateral segments, with a transmural scar and no evidence of vital myocardium in the territory supplied by the LCX . The case was discussed in our Heart Team. Considering the relatively young age of the patient and the presence of LAA thrombus as a contraindication for TMVR, it was decided to proceed with operative repair of the mitral valve. Due to the lack of viable myocardium detected with C-MRI, it was decided against a concomitant revascularization of LCX.
On Day 3 of admission, the patient developed pulmonary oedema and hypotension with reduced urinary output and clinical signs of hypoperfusion. Due to progressive respiratory failure, she was intubated and mechanically ventilated. The patient was managed with vasopressor (Norepinephrine 0.035–0.01 µg/kg/min.) and dobutamine (5–10 µg/kg/min). Under this therapy, an adequate mean arterial pressure was achieved with improved organ perfusion and normalized lactate value, so that the application of mechanical circulatory system did not have to be considered. Meanwhile, she developed many episodes of atrial fibrillation with tachycardic ventricular response in addition to several episodes of haemodynamically significant sustained ventricular tachycardia which required electric cardioversion. Until the time of intubation, the patient did not exhibit any neurological deficits.
A new multidisciplinary Heart Team evaluation was performed. The patient was deemed to have a prohibitive risk for a surgical mitral valve intervention (EuroSCORE II 26%). However, because of the ongoing haemodynamic compromise and inability to withdraw the vasopressors therapy, a therapeutic intervention was urgently required. Despite the presence of LAA thrombus, and due to the lack of other options, Heart Team decided to proceed with urgent TMVR under employment of CPD as a rescue therapy. Pre-intervention cerebral computer tomography revealed many cerebral and cerebellar old infarcts with chronic occlusion of the basilar artery.
The procedure was conducted on Day 6. Initially, a CPD (Sentinel™; Boston scientific) was inserted through the right radial artery. The proximal filter was placed in the brachiocephalic trunk and the distal one was placed in the left common carotid artery. Then, TMVR procedure was performed with the placement of two clips (MitraClip™ NTR/XTR) . The previously severe MR was reduced to a mild residual regurgitation . Postintervention, the CPD was removed. Thrombotic debris was visually identified in both filters of the device.
The patient could be extubated the next day (Day 7) and weaned off vasopressor support. After the procedure, no further episodes of VTs were documented. Two days after the procedure (Day 9), patient was discharged from the ICU without neurological sequelae. After receiving appropriate respiratory care and physiotherapy on the normal ward, the patient was completely mobile and she was discharged from the hospital 4 days later in a good clinical situation. An admission in a cardiac rehabilitation facility within 10 days after discharge was arranged. Six months later, we contacted the patient by telephone. She reported feeling well without any heart failure symptoms. Further routine follow-up will be performed by her cardiologist.