A 17-year-old healthy male presented to the emergency department (ED) for worsening chronic left-sided back pain with intermittent numbness, inspiratory pain, and a 30-pound weight loss. He had a left lung calcification on a chest film taken 8 months prior to admission, which was thought to be benign calcium deposition. Tuberculosis quantiferon gold and human immunodeficiency virus antibody titers were undetectable. A computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated a single 4 × 5 × 5 cm posterior mediastinal mass with destruction of the posterior aspect of the left seventh rib .
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the cervical and thoracic spine confirmed CT findings, without neurological deficits on examination. A percutaneous biopsy revealed an atypical chondroid lesion consistent with a sessile osteochondroma. Given the continued significant pain, he was taken to the operating room for resection of the presumed benign lesion. Intraoperatively, it was noted to be an aggressive lesion, with bony destruction. Pathology review demonstrated MCS with both primitive small-cell and bland cartilaginous components, with positive margins . A sarcoma fusion NGS panel analysis detected a HEY1-NCOA2 fusion.
Repeat CT scan showed postoperative changes to the left posterior mediastinum with residual amorphous density and no lymphadenopathy. There was mild flouro-deoxyglucose uptake on positron emission tomography scan of the chest.
An adjuvant chemotherapeutic plan of doxorubicin, ifosfamide, and dexrazoxane for four 21-day cycles, followed by resection with attempted negative margins, was proposed to the patient, per an Ewing sarcoma–backbone chemotherapy regimen. Additionally, radiation was offered and declined. The patient chose repeat tumor resection to attempt to achieve negative margins, in lieu of chemotherapy. Two months after initial excisional biopsy, a repeat wide re-excision via left thoracotomy with multiple rib disarticulations was performed . Pathology review showed extension of the tumor periosteally, superiorly, and focally to medial resection margins without lymph node involvement. The second specimen had a greater portion of small-cell tumor relative to bland cartilaginous components with positive margins. Despite our team's recommendations, the patient declined all further treatment-directed interventions.
The patient presented 5 months later to the ED with lower extremity weakness and paresthesia. Physical exam was significant for decreased lower extremity strength with clonus and hyperreflexia. MRI of total spine revealed local tumor recurrence at T6-7 with cord compression and interval increase in sub-pleural lesions. He was taken for an emergent laminectomy of T6-7 followed by a post-surgical steroid taper. Histology showed biphasic morphology consistent with prior masses. Follow-up CT scan was notable for multiple left anterior paravertebral/pleural masses with peri-hilar and costophrenic lymphadenopathy . His lower extremity weakness improved, and the patient ultimately elected to pursue hospice care which he has been on for 6 months.