An 86-year-old woman with HH who complained of epigastric pain and vomiting was taken to our hospital. Her body weight, height, and body mass index were 51.2 kg, 150.0 cm, and 22.8, respectively. A physical examination of the patient revealed thoracic kyphosis. Her medical comorbidities include hypertension, diabetes mellitus, osteoporosis, and unruptured cerebral aneurysms. Computed tomography (CT) performed 10 years prior to her admission showed a large type IV HH involving prolapse of the entire stomach and transverse colon .
Blood examination results at her admission showed elevated levels of white blood cell (13,700 U/L) with 91% of neutrophils, elevation of serum amylase (2805 IU/L), transaminitis (alanine aminotransferase level of 76 U/L, aspartate transaminase level of 213 U/L), total (2.0 mg/dL) and direct (0.8 mg/dL) bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase (258 IU/L), and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (70 IU/L). Arterial blood gas showed hypoxemia (PaO2 62.6 mmHg). Enhanced CT (eCT) revealed a large type IV HH involving the entire stomach, and the body and tail of the pancreas sliding through the hiatal orifice into the mediastinum, with peripancreatic fluid in the posterior mediastinal space as a sequel to pancreatitis . In addition, intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts were seen to be dilated, and the latter was bended . There was no gallstone or choledocholithiasis. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) revealed dilated and bended distal main pancreatic and extrahepatic ducts .
She was diagnosed with pancreatitis and abnormal liver function test as a complication of pancreatic herniation . For the treatment of the acute pancreatitis, the patient received intravenous hydration, antibiotics (meropenem 1.0 g every 12 h), gabexate mesilate (FOY) 600 mg/day, and analgesics along with intensive care monitoring.
We tried endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) to remove the obstruction of the bile duct, but we failed to perform papillary cannulation. Enteral nutrition via nasoduodenal tube was started on day 4 of hospitalization, and oral intake was started on day 10. During the treatment, hypoxemia progressed due to herniation of the stomach, which required oxygenation.
On day 36 of hospitalization, elective surgical repair of the HH was performed. During the laparotomy , the stomach, omentum, and the contents of the hernia were mobilized into the abdominal cavity manually. There was a strong adhesion between the tail of the pancreas and the right diaphragmatic crus. The right pleura was damaged unexpectedly, which required closure and placement of a tracheal tube. After the stomach and pancreas were pulled into the abdominal cavity, the hiatal orifice was closed by silk thread sutures (primary repair), and the mesh was fixed in front of the hernial orifice. After Toupet fundoplication, intraoperative endoscopy was performed to confirm cardiac stenosis. The operative time was 217 min, and intraoperative amount of bleeding was 830 mL. The patient had an uneventful postoperative course.
CT on day 30 after the repair of the HH showed that the stomach, pancreas, and bile ducts were located in their normal anatomical position . Due to pseudogout pain, her hospital stay was extended and she was discharged from the hospital 39 days after surgery without any symptoms of dysphagia. No dysphagia or recurrence of the hernia was observed at 6 months postoperatively.