An ambulatory 66-year-old female Caucasian (149 cm/76 kg) with achondroplasia and HME presented with left hip pain and progressive walk disability. On physical examination, she had a painful and limited range of left hip motion. She achieved 45° of hip flexion, 0° of internal and 5°of external rotation, and 0°–5° of abduction and adduction. The flexion contracture of the hip was 5°. The Harris hip score (HHS) was 42. The left lower limb was 2 cm lower than the right. The patient also suffered from osteoporosis and depression.
Her radiograph revealed severe hip osteoarthritis with the marked destruction of the femoral head, dysplastic acetabular roof, limited acetabular inclination, a large irregular osteophyte on the roof of the acetabulum, widening of the femoral metaphysis, and coxa valga (, , ). A pre-operative computerized tomography showed the hypoplastic anterior wall, narrow acetabulum, limited bone substrate, the large irregular osteophyte from the femoral head, and the small transverse diameter of the intramedullary canal. The socket, femoral neck, and proximal femur were anteverted ( and ). Pre-operative planning demonstrated that cemented implants had sufficient structural stability compared to non-modular uncemented under these geometric conditions.
She subsequently underwent a left THA through a posterior approach. The approach was hampered by the capsule that was densely adherent to the underlying bone and the large exostosis that was hard to remove. On the acetabular side, the anterior wall insufficiency and the limited bone substrate made the use of a cementless cup implant impossible. The dysplastic acetabular roof was reconstructed with an impaction grafting technique. The anterior and posterior columns of the acetabulum were adequately exposed, and the teardrop and the margins of the defect were identified. Careful acetabular reaming promoted the bleeding of the host bone surface to assist the incorporation of the bone graft. We reconstructed the uncontained to contained defect with the use of a ceiling mesh. We trimmed a rim mesh appropriately to fit using an impactor as a guide to its final location and secured the mesh with several screws placed around the margin. The autologous femoral head was sectioned into chips and vigorously impacted to provide a “cobblestone looking” bed following impaction. We washed gingerly the grafted bed as preparing for proper cementing technique. Third generation cementing technique was then performed including drying of the bed, creation of peg holes, retrograde cement insertion, pressurization for 3–5 min against the bed, insertion of the standard polyethylene cup (Stryker, Exeter, X3, RimFit, 46mm), and continuous pressurization into the adjusted position until cement setting.
On the femoral side, an extensive metaphyseal flare followed immediately by a narrow medullary canal existed. This was managed with a cemented stem (Stryker, Exeter V40, No 2, Offset 44) with a metallic head (Stryker, Exeter V40, 28mm) that engaged the diaphysis. The stem was fixed with Palacos cement (Palacos, Heraeus) and a third-generation cementation technique. Lack of abductors, ossification of the gluteus medius, and part of the minimus caused instability. An additional posterior lip augmentation device (PLAD) (DePuy International Limited, Leeds, United Kingdom) was then implanted into the posterior rim of the polyethylene to improve stability.
Post-operative radiographs showed that the THA components were well aligned ( and ). Both legs were identical in length. Postoperatively, the patient was mobilized with partial weight-bearing for 8 weeks and then as tolerated. Her pain and post-operative range of motion had significantly improved. Her recovery was uneventful following the surgery. Follow-up is now at 5 years ( and ). Her HHS is 82. She has painless and unlimited walking ability. She achieves 70° of hip flexion, 5° of internal and external rotation, and 10° of abduction and adduction. There are no signs or symptoms of loosening with an adequate osseous integration of the autogenous grafts at the acetabulum; heterotopic ossification of gluteus medius was developed.