A 46-year-old Caucasian man was transferred from the gastroenterology service to the abdominal surgery division for intractable severe abdominal pain accompanied by nausea and vomiting. He had a four-month history of abdominal discomfort, namely intermittent abdominal cramping pain of mild to moderate severity in his middle and lower quadrants. His medical history was unremarkable. A review of his systems revealed weight loss of nine pounds during the previous three months. Eight days earlier, he had been admitted to the gastroenterology service for a diagnostic work-up and medical treatment. During the initial physical examination, he appeared in good general condition, was normothermic, and had a slightly distended abdomen, which, however, was soft and non-tender. No rebound effect was elicited. A rectal examination revealed no masses or blood. Laboratory results were all within normal range. An abdominal ultrasound showed a hyperechoic mass in his ileocecal region. A barium enema showed an oval-shape filling defect in his ascending colon . An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed an irregular 'target' and a 'sausage'-shape soft-tissue mass with thickened walls of his cecum and terminal ileum . Although all diagnostic procedures clearly suggested colonic obstruction, our patient refused transfer to the surgery department until the pain, nausea, and vomiting became persistent and more severe. During his admission to surgery, plain abdominal films clearly demonstrated signs of intestinal obstruction, air-fluid levels in his small intestine, and the absence of air in his colon. Our patient underwent an emergent median laparotomy. During the operation, a large intussuscepted mass was found. It was located in the region of his ascending colon and hepatic flexure, into which a large segment of his ileum, appendix, cecum, and part of his ascending colon were invaginated. Because of compromised perfusion and swelling of his colonic wall and because of an unsuccessful attempt at manual desinvagination, a round incision in his ascending colon was made, and his invaginated cecum and terminal ileum were pushed backward with the intention of preserving as much viable small bowel as possible. An in situ macroscopic view showed that a 15 cm segment of his ileum was intussuscepted into the distal 20 cm of his terminal ileum, which, together with his appendix and cecum, subsequently intussuscepted into his ascending colon, resulting in a double ileoileal and ileocecocolic intussuception. His cecum and about 30 cm of his terminal ileum were entrapped in the intussuscipiens and had necrotic changes in their walls . A right hemicolectomy that included an approximately 40 cm segment of his ileum was performed. The continuity of the digestive tube was reestablished by primary single-layer end-to-end ileotransverse anastomosis with 3.0 polydioxanone sutures.
The macroscopic examination of the specimen identified a 4 cm pendulant polypoid mass in his terminal ileum . An anatomical pathology examination of the resected specimen revealed a submucosal tumor of his ileum about 3.5 cm in diameter with features of a benign lipoma .
The postoperative course was eventful. As a result of toxic syndrome (probably due to protracted preoperative intestinal obstruction and delayed surgical treatment), the postoperative period was complicated by high fever (39.5°C), hypotension, acute renal failure within the first six postoperative hours, and significant abnormalities of liver function tests on the first postoperative day. Multiorgan failure ensued, and our patient was transferred to the intensive care unit. Renal failure resolved after hemodialysis sessions carried out each day for one week. On the twentieth postoperative day, the patient developed all clinical manifestations of pulmonary embolism which was treated with heparin initially, and subsequently with warfarin. On the 30th postoperative day, our patient was discharged from the hospital in good condition.