A 71-year-old female was admitted with epigastric pain and vomiting lasting for more than 12 hours. She had a history of arterial hypertension and cholecystectomy two years previously. On examination she had tenderness of the upper abdomen. Blood tests showed leucocytosis (14,500 / mm3), increased serum levels of amylase (1,100 IU/L), LDH (550 IU/L) and calcium (14.8 mg/dl). On ultrasonography of the upper abdomen a non homogeneous appearance of the head of the pancreas was noted with a common bile duct diameter of 8.5 mm. CT scan of the abdomen confirmed the diagnosis of acute exudative pancreatitis. Acute pancreatitis subsided within 72 hours after conservative treatment. Further laboratory investigation of the hypercalcaemia revealed increased 24-hours urine calcium (465 mg), decreased serum phosphorus levels at 1.3 mg/dl, increased serum parathyroid hormone levels (771 pg/ml), normal levels of serum free T3 (FT3), free T4 (FT4), thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), calcitonine, carcino embryonic antigen (CEA), carcinoma antigen (CA) 15-9, CA 125, alpha feto protein (AFP). Ultrasonography of the thyroid gland and the neck showed a suspicious prevertebral mass. CT scan of the thorax and neck detected a paraesophageal mediastinal mass close to the thoracic inlet. 99mTc sestamibi scintigraphy confirmed the diagnosis of parathyroid adenoma. .
After the complete subsidence of acute pancreatitis and the return of calcium serum levels at values less than 12 g/dl by hydration, the patient underwent endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreaticography (ERCP) which failed to show bile duct lithiasis. With a diagnosis of parathyroid adenoma, resection of the parathyroid adenoma via a collar cervical incision was carried out. The tumor was easily separated from the surrounded structures (vertebra, trachea, and esophagus) by blunt dissection and the feeding vessels were found and ligated anteriorly. The patient had a 6 days uneventful hospital stay. Calcium and parathyroid hormone serum levels returned to normal within 48 hours from the end of operation. A slight serum hypocalcaemia was observed over the following days and the patient received oral therapy with calcium and vitamin D to restore serum calcium levels within normal range values.