Our anonymized patient is an 18-year-old intelligent young man; a secondary school student; resident of an urban area; from a middle-class family. Four years ago, a very distressing and painful event befell the family; namely, the boy’s father – who was at this time at the end of his thirties and a successful lawyer – developed total and complete quadriplegia due to haemorrhagic stroke. The young successful father became totally bed ridden, aphasic, and reported urine and stool incontinence, and he is still severely ill until the present time. Following this calamity, the boy (our patient) was deeply shocked and saddened. He participated for a considerable time in nursing his quadriplegic father.
Shortly after, our patient developed symptoms of severe OCD in the form of acute onset of intrusive ego-dystonic thoughts, mainly of a sexual nature. The thoughts were about him being sexually oriented towards the same sex and having a sexual desire towards his male peers especially muscular ones. The thoughts were accompanied by intrusive images also of a homosexual content as well as intrusive impulses.
Our patient also suffered from abnormal sensation (orgasm like) about his anus. These sensations were very distressing for him as they made the obsessions more real and fearful (pseudo-hallucinations of a tactile [haptic] modality vs. sensory component of OCD). The boy was panic stricken and horrored because of those thoughts upon which he looked as absolutely disgusting, horrifying, and shameful. He tried to fight and neutralize OCD with all his might.
He developed compulsions of two types : behavioural acts: in the form of seeking reassurance from his close family members and asking them repetitive questions revolving around the same theme . Mental compulsions and ruminations: as expected, his desperate mental fight and ruminations led to nothing but the deterioration of the clinical picture and the deepening of his suffering.
The course of the disease was progressive and of an aggressive nature. Depression and easy irritability appeared shortly after OCD. The patient attempted suicide more than one time. Marked deterioration in academic career and scholastic achievement was reported and also social withdrawal. He stopped going to the gym or playing football because the sight of muscular men never failed to precipitate his sexual obsessive thoughts and images. He tried to avoid seeing men.
The youth’s family brought him to medical attention approximately 1 year following onset of the disease. For more than 3 years, the patient received multiple adequate therapeutic trials of SSRIs (namely, fluvoxamine and sertraline among others); he also received clomipramine which he could not tolerate because of the heavy sedation it caused him. Even if the patient responded to those trials, the response was never maintained, and the patient turned to be treatment refractory within a few months at best. Treatment was augmented with the following:Optimum doses of antipsychotics At least 10 sessions of cognitive behavioural therapy; exposure and response prevention technique At least20 sessions of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation: target area of interest is the supplementary motor area
None of these non-invasive methods of treatment resulted in maintained improvement. The patient continued to suffer considerably, and his academic achievement never returned to what it had been prior to his illness. The decision was taken to give the patient the chance of stereotactic cingulotomy.
The procedure was performed with local anaesthesia and mild sedation. The stereotactic frame was applied, and computer tomography was obtained with thin slices (Toshiba Aquilion One 320 Slice CT Scanner). The preplanned magnetic resonance images were obtained using Toshiba Vantage Titan 1.5T MRI (Toshiba Medical Systems, Ohtawara, Japan) using T1-weighted image (TE = 10 ms, TR = 600 ms, slice thickness = 0.5 mm, spacing interval = 0.05 mm), then co-registered with the stereotactic computer tomography images using inomed planning software iPS. The trajectories were designed to ablate the anterior cingulum on both sides.
The Riechert Mundinger system was used as the only stereotactic system on the market with three fixation points and artefact free offering very high level of stability, precision, and accuracy with target-point stimulator. Our institute is the only one used it in our country to date. The radiofrequency generator was inomed Neuro N50 delivered by bipolar TC013 standard thermistor-equipped thermocoagulation electrode (inomed Medizintechnik GmbH, Emmendingen, Germany). Informed consent was obtained from the patient with Ethical Committee approval (36264-PR-347).
Immediate postoperative CT brain was obtained to rule out any surgical complication; then 2 days after operation, MR brain was obtained to document the lesioning target . After surgery, our patient was early responder; anxiety, then depression markedly improved within the first weeks. Some stress related to body disfigurement thoughts due to surgery, which resolved with stitches removal and reassurance. OCD manifestations reduced dramatically (approximately 30%) within first week, then reduced by more than 50% on Y-BOCS within a month, then more than 90% in the third month postoperatively . The patient reported significant satisfaction of the procedure with dramatic relief of anxiety, depression, and OCD thoughts. Postoperative minor symptoms such as nausea, headache, confusion, urine incontinence, and intention tremor were resolved within a few days. The hand tremor was newly reported an unexpected and managed with β-blockers. The tremors were not drug induced because medications were not changed immediately postoperatively and during tremor time. CARE guidelines were followed during the report.
Regarding hand tremors, they were fine, action, intentional, 3–6 cycles per second, involving both hands of the patient without affecting other parts of his body, appeared few hours postoperatively, and resolved within 1 week postoperatively on propranolol (Inderal 10 mg tablet twice per day). CARE checklist was followed during case description and discussion (see online suppl. material; for all online suppl. material, see ).