A 77-year-old man with a history of hypertension and atrial fibrillation was referred to our hospital for evaluation of anorexia, pruritus, and lower-extremity edema. Six years before the visit, his serum creatinine level was 1.37 mg/dL (estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), 40.4 mL/min/1.73m2), and urinalysis results were negative for proteinuria and hematuria. The cause of renal impairment was not investigated at the time. One year before the visit, he received two doses of an mRNA vaccine (BNT162b2) for COVID-19 without apparent side effects. Three months before the visit, the patient received a third dose of an mRNA vaccine (mRNA-1273) for COVID-19 without immediate side effects. One month before the presentation, he had a scheduled outpatient visit to the Cardiology Department of our hospital, where his serum creatinine level was 1.67 mg/dL (eGFR, 31.8 mL/min/1.73m2). Three weeks before the presentation, he developed edema in the lower extremities and pruritus in his trunk and limbs. His appetite declined two weeks before the visit, and he could not eat for 1 week before the visit. On admission, the patient appeared drowsy. His current medications included bisoprolol (2.5 mg), amlodipine (10 mg), furosemide (20 mg), edoxaban tosylate hydrate (30 mg), and herbal medicine called Shakuyaku-kanzo-to for muscle cramps. The patient did not smoke cigarettes or drink alcohol. He did not report any recent infections. He had never contracted COVID-19 infection previously. On physical examination, he had jugular vein distension, bilateral lower extremity edema, and pruritic rashes on his trunk and limbs. He was afebrile and had a blood pressure of 156/74 mmHg, a pulse rate of 70 beats per minute, and an oxygen saturation of 97% while breathing ambient air. His blood test results showed marked renal impairment (urea nitrogen, 155.3 mg/dL; creatinine, 16.29 mg/dL; eGFR, 2.6 mL/min/1.73m2), hyperkalemia, hyperphosphatemia, hypocalcemia, and metabolic acidosis, which are findings equivalent to end-stage kidney disease (ESKD) . Chest X-ray radiography and a chest CT scan demonstrated cardiomegaly and bilateral pleural effusions (shown in Supplementary Fig. ). Echocardiography did not find evidence of the left ventricular wall asynergy or significant valvular lesions. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen did not show hydronephrosis or enlargement of the bladder, ruling out a post-renal cause (shown in Supplementary Fig. ). Apparent tumors were absent on the CT scan. The kidneys were slightly enlarged (right, 113 × 46 mm; left, 119 × 57 mm). Fractional excretions of sodium and urea nitrogen were 2.8% and 27.1%, respectively. The inferior vena cava appeared enlarged on the CT scan. Urinalysis revealed the presence of nephrotic-range proteinuria (8.57 g/g creatinine) and hematuria .
Based on these findings, rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis was suspected. We started sodium zirconium cyclosilicate and sodium bicarbonate administration on the day of admission; additionally, we initiated hemodialysis the following day. His anorexia and edema gradually resolved thereafter. Subsequent serum and urinary screening tests for glomerulopathy revealed an elevated rheumatoid factor level, and the protein fraction test showed a peak in the gamma region . Although multiple myeloma, amyloidosis, and monoclonal gammopathy of renal significance were included in our differential diagnoses, serum and urinary immunofixation electrophoresis did not reveal any M-bows. A bone marrow biopsy did not show any monoclonal proliferation of plasma cells, making it unlikely that hematological disease was the cause of his renal dysfunction. The selectivity index was 0.60, suggesting low selectivity. To identify the cause of his renal dysfunction, a percutaneous renal biopsy was performed.
A total of 13 glomeruli were observed on light microscopy. Seven glomeruli showed global sclerosis, and one glomerulus had segmental sclerosis. Most glomeruli exhibited mild mesangial proliferation and expansion with a lobular appearance, with one glomerulus showing a crescent formation (shown in Fig. ). Double contours of the glomerular basement membrane were present in some of the glomeruli. The renal tubules showed severe atrophy with mild interstitial fibrosis. Congo-red and direct fast scarlet 4BS staining yielded negative results. Immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrated strong mesangial staining of IgA, IgM, and C3c, and weak mesangial staining of IgG (shown in Fig. ). Positive staining for IgA and C3c was also observed in the basement membrane. Weak staining of kappa and lambda light chains was also present. Electron microscopy revealed the presence of extensive electron-dense deposits in the mesangial regions, with some deposits in the subendothelial regions (shown in Fig. ). Podocyte effacement was also observed.
Considering the presence of proliferative glomerulonephritis with IgA deposits, our differential diagnoses included IgA nephropathy, IgA-dominant postinfectious glomerulonephritis, IgA-dominant membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (MPGN), and IgA-proliferative glomerulonephritis with monoclonal immunoglobulin deposits (PGNMID). Given the absence of monoclonality of immunoglobulins on immunofluorescence, the possibility of PGNMID was unlikely. Postinfectious glomerulonephritis was deemed less likely because of the absence of a recent infection history, normal complement levels, and lack of subepithelial deposits or humps on electron microscopy . Based on the strong staining of IgA, IgM, and C3c in the mesangial regions, the most probable diagnosis was IgA nephropathy. Paraneoplastic IgA nephropathy was less likely as imaging studies and a bone marrow biopsy found no apparent tumor lesions, and his symptoms resolved after starting hemodialysis.
IgA nephropathy with MPGN-like changes, grade III(A/C) M1E1S1T1C1.
Suspecting IgA nephropathy and MPGN based on light microscopy and immunofluorescence findings, we started a 3-day intravenous methylprednisolone pulse followed by 0.8 mg/kg/day (50 mg) of oral prednisolone. Once we found the electron microscopy findings consistent with IgA nephropathy, we administered two additional courses of methylprednisolone pulse therapy and oral steroid therapy. His renal function remained largely unchanged after 1 month of steroid therapy. For hemodialysis vascular access, we created an arteriovenous fistula in the right forearm; however, its maturation was poor. Another attempt to create a fistula was unsuccessful. Eventually, a long-term vascular catheter was inserted in the right jugular vein. The dose of prednisolone was reduced to 15 mg/day, and the patient was discharged without any symptoms on Day 51.