A 23-year-old Chinese man presented to the hospital with complaints of gradually increasing breathlessness for 6 mo.
One day prior to admission, the patient presented to a local hospital with a complaint of gradually increasing breathlessness for 6 mo, especially after activity. The patient had no history of cough, blood in the sputum, chest tightness, pain, fever, night sweats, weight loss, loss of appetite, or other systemic symptoms. A chest computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a large mass in the anterior mediastinum that occupied all of the right thoracic cavity and part of the left thoracic cavity. Liposarcoma or fibrosarcoma was initially suspected. For further diagnosis and treatment, the patient was then admitted to the Thoracic Medicine Department of our hospital through an outpatient route.
The patient denied any previous surgery, trauma, or other previous significant medical history.
The patient denied any remarkable family history of related diseases.
On physical examination, the results were as follows: Height, 175 cm; weight, 70 kg; body temperature, 36.2 °C; heart rate, 76 beats per min; respiratory rate, 25 breaths per min; and blood pressure, 145/85 mmHg. The superficial lymph nodes, including the supraclavicular and neck lymph nodes, were not palpable. The chest wall was symmetrical without any deformities, and the patient’s breathing was regular. No breath sounds were heard over the right lung field, and the percussion sounds over the right chest were dull. The other physical examination results were unremarkable.
The laboratory testing results were as follows: Hemoglobin, 166 g/L; and hematocrit, 51.7%. Twelve tumor markers, including alpha-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, neuron specific enolase, cancer antigen (CA)125, CA15-3, CA242, CA19-9, prostate specific antigen, free-prostate specific antigen, ferritin, beta-human chorionic gonadotropin, and human growth hormone, as measured by protein biochip detection in the serum, were normal. The arterial blood gas analysis without oxygen inhalation results were as follows: pH 7.37, oxygen saturation 85%, partial pressure of carbon dioxide 60 mmHg, partial pressure of oxygen 51 mmHg, bicarbonate 34.7 mmol/L, and base excess 6 mmol/L. The pulmonary function test results were as follows: Forced vital capacity 1.2 L (23.6% predicted), forced expiratory volume in 1 s 0.91 L (21.1% predicted), and vital capacity 1.2 L (22.6% predicted). The other findings from the routine laboratory examinations were within the normal range.
A high-resolution chest contrast-enhanced CT taken in our hospital revealed a large fat-containing mass in the anterior mediastinum, which was approximately 26 cm × 20 cm × 30 cm in size. It occupied almost the entirety of the right thoracic cavity and part of the left thoracic cavity with a clear boundary, and the tumor caused lung collapse and mediastinal shift . Bronchoscopy showed no tracheal neoplasms, the distal end of the trachea and the carina were compressed and twisted, and the bronchial lumen of the right lung was narrowed to varying degrees by the pressure from an external mass. Magnetic resonance imaging of the head and CT scans of the neck, abdomen, and pelvis showed no obvious abnormalities. The bone scan was also negative.