Forty-three year old previously well Sri Lankan female presented with acute onset bilateral lower limb complete weakness and acute urinary retention of 2 days duration. She did not complain of numbness of lower limbs or weakness of upper limbs. There was no backache. Sixteen days back she had met with a road traffic accident and was struck by a bus which accounted for high-energy head injury. She has fallen on the ground and lost consciousness for 15 min and experienced retrograde amnesia. There was no injury to the spine. Subsequently in the hospital she had persistent headache with several episodes of vomiting. On discharge she did not have any neurological deficit or signs of basal skull fracture (haemotympanum, ‘panda’ eyes, cerebrospinal fluid leakage from the ear or nose, bruising behind the ear). She did not have any significant past medical or surgical history or a bleeding diathesis. She was not taking any narcotic analgesics.
On examination she was not pale. Cardiovascular, respiratory and abdominal examination was normal with a heart rate of 80 beats/min and a blood pressure of 130/80 mmHg. She was conscious with a Glasgow coma scale of 15/15 and cranial nerve examination was normal without ophthalmoplegia or nystagmus. Fundoscopy did not show papilledema. Tone, power, reflexes and sensation of the upper limbs were normal. There were no cerebellar signs. Lower limbs were flaccid with power grade 0. Knee and ankle reflexes were diminished and plantar response was flexor. All sensory modalities of the lower limb were preserved. She was catheterized for acute urinary retention before transferring from the local hospital so did not have palpable bladder. Anal tone was normal and superficial abdominal reflexes were present. There were no tender areas over the spine.
Initial whole blood count, liver function tests, renal function tests, clotting profile and basic investigations were normal. X-ray of the thoracolumbar spine did not reveal any abnormality. Non-contrast CT brain showed bilateral acute on chronic SDH. Left sided SDH was over the frontal, parietal, occipital lobes and right-sided SDH was located over the parietal and occipital lobes . The SDH extended into the interhemispheric space at the vertex but was not seen in the deeper part of the brain. There were no intracranial hemorrhages. Because the left sided SDH was larger there was a mild midline shift and subfalcine herniation to the right side.
Urgent neurosurgical referral was made and she underwent bilateral burr hole aspiration of 60 ml and 40 ml of blood from left to right, respectively. Within 12 h she was able to move the left lower limb and within 24 h her right lower limb as well. She completely regained her lower limb power within 48 h. Postoperative non-contrast CT brain was repeated . Headache resolved after 1 week and urinary catheter removed successfully after 1 week.