A 7-year-old boy with a history of mild hemophilia A was admitted to our medical center because of a 2-year history of progressive swelling and pain around right forearm and hand. His parents denied family history, any history of trauma or surgery. The patient had been diagnosed with fibrous dysplasia of bone and bone cyst, but did not receive any medical treatment before admitted to our medical center. Physical examination demonstrated that the right distal radius was swollen (50 mm × 30 mm × 20 mm) with well-defined margins and smooth surface on the dorsum lateral aspect , with tenderness to palpation, and no significant abnormality was observed on the epidermal surface. The range of motion (ROM) of the elbow was normal, while pronation and supination of the right forearm and ROM of the right wrist were restricted.
Laboratory tests showed that coagulation factor VIII level was 11.1% of normal with no factor VIII inhibitor, and APTT time was 48.4 s (reference 23.3 s–32.5 s). Other indicators were mostly within normal reference ranges. Radiographs revealed expansile swelling, bone destruction, and deformity of the distal right radius and the second metacarpal bone. The x-ray presented with soap like change in the thin cortical bone and low density of medullary cavity . He was diagnosed with distal HPs.
Considering the increasing pain and progressive bone cortex damage in the region of enlarging epiphyseal, surgical procedure of curettage and bone grafting was performed. The activity of factor VIII was maintained at 100% on the day of surgery by transfusion of recombinant factor VIII. Briefly, the lesions of distal radius and second metacarpal bone were curetted, and the bony defects were packed with allograft cancellous bone chips without internal fixation after a cortical window was made.
Recombinant factor VIII was intravenously transfused to reach the postoperative requirement: 50%–100% in POD (postoperative days) 1–3, 40%–80% in POD 4–6, and 30%–60% in POD 7–14. The pathology confirmed the diagnosis of intraosseous HPs with a predominance of blood clot, scattered fibrous tissue, and mild chronic inflammation . The patient's forearm was immobilized by a splint for 4 weeks postoperatively, during which gentle wrist motion exercises were prescribed. Routine x-ray follow-up was scheduled at 2 weeks , 5 months , and 101 months postoperatively. X-ray at 2 weeks revealed successful implantation of allograft bone and satisfactory recovery at 5 months and complete recovery at 101 months postoperatively. Routine clinical follow-up indicated improved ROM and pain relief of the right wrist at 5 months, and the ROM and appearance of the right wrist were almost normal without discomfort at the 101-month follow-up .
Unfortunately, the same patient was hospitalized for the second time because of 1 year-long progressive swelling and pain around the left hand when he was 14 years old. He denied any history of trauma. Physical examination showed that fusiform eminence could be seen at the proximal phalangeal bone of left thumb, middle finger (30 mm × 20 mm × 20 mm), and little finger . Factor VIII level was 60.8%, and no factor VIII inhibitor was detected preoperatively. X-ray showed multiple bone destruction and thin cortical bones of the left proximal phalanges with local pathological fractures .
The successive HPs, severely impairing the ROM of joints, were surgically resected on the account of the disappointing outcome and economic burden of coagulation factor replacement therapy alone. Surgical curettage of HPs in proximal phalangeal of left thumb, middle finger and little finger and bone allograft was performed under general anesthesia. The perioperative factor VIII replacement therapy was the same as the surgery performed 7 years ago.
X-ray on POD 2 showed a satisfactory bone graft . Radiographical follow-ups was scheduled at 7 months and 18 months postoperatively, the results of which demonstrated a complete recovery of the shape and structure of proximal phalanges. Additionally, the last clinical follow-up at 18 months after the operation displayed a satisfactory shape and functional outcomes . Following discharge, the patient complained of intermittent bleeding in the hips and iliopsoas after minor trauma, and 20 U/kg of factor VIII was given subsequently. The average daily concentration of coagulation factor VIII was about 4.0%. We will continue to pay attention to the treatment outcome of intraosseous HPs and the progress of hemophilia A by regular follow-ups.