A 63-year-old female with primary biliary cirrhosis was admitted to our hospital due to recurrent disturbance of consciousness for 4 mo, accompanied by fatigue, upper abdominal discomfort, and edema of both lower extremities.
The patient began to experience fatigue, upper abdominal discomfort, and edema of both lower extremities 1 year ago and was diagnosed with primary biliary cirrhosis combined with gastroesophageal varices and splenomegaly in a local hospital.
Four months ago, the patient had one episode of coma 1 wk following splenectomy and portoazygos disconnection surgery in a local hospital. The symptoms recurred following a high-protein diet or constipation, manifested by coma, hyperreflexia, and hypermyotonia. No obvious abnormalities were found on head computed tomography (CT) and cardiac ultrasound, but a large portosystemic shunt was found on contrast-enhanced abdominal CT. The patient was awake but began to be disoriented with slurred speech after treatment with lactulose, rifaximin, and ornithine aspartate in a local hospital. Similar symptoms recurred in the next few months despite persistent use of the above-mentioned drugs. To resolve the above symptoms completely, she was transferred to our hospital.
History of previous HE, epilepsy, stroke, or brain trauma was denied.
The patient had no relevant family history.
The patient appeared to be delirious and presented with count disturbance and gross disorientation. Asterixis, hyperreflexia, and hypermyotonia were detected. She also had marked edema of both lower limbs. No signs of jaundice, anemia, bloating and abdominalgia were found.
Clinical laboratory examination revealed increased levels of aspartate aminotransferase (100 IU/L, 2.9 × upper limit of normal), alanine aminotransferase (58 IU/L, 1.5 × upper limit of normal), alkaline phosphatase (304 IU/L, 2.3 × upper limit of normal), serum ammonia (213.5 μmol/L, 6.5 × upper limit of normal), and a decreased level of serum albumin (31.9 g/L, 0.8 × lower limit of normal). Hemoglobin, total bilirubin, prothrombin time and international normalized ratio results were normal. The patient scored 8 points on the Child-Pugh score and the Model for End-stage Liver Disease score was 11 points.
Contrast-enhanced abdominal CT revealed early visualization of the left branch of the portal vein in the arterial phase which was grossly dilated. Malformed collateral vessels were noted between the superior mesenteric vein (SMV) and inferior vena cava (IVC) . Gastroscopy showed the presence of moderate gastroesophageal varices.