A 13-year-old boy presented to our hospital with progressive vision loss and difficulty with opening his eyes. Best-corrected visual acuity was LogMAR 0.3 in the right eye (RE) and LogMAR 0.3 in the left eye (LE), cycloplegic refraction revealed + 0.50 + − 1.50 × 180 (RE) and + 1.00 × 95 (LE). Intraocular pressure was approximately 18 mmHg (RE) and 17 mmHg (LE). Approximately 5° exotropia was found based on the Hirschberg test, and movements of both eyes were restricted in all gaze directions. Because of weakness in the levator palpebrae muscle, bilateral ptosis was slight and the upper eyelid always covered the upper third of the pupil when looking ahead . Color fundus photography showed hyperpigmentation of both eyes, and binocular perimetric examination (Octopus900, Switzerland) revealed a superior temporal visual field defect and centripetal reduction in both eyes . Macular spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (Optovue, Fremont, CA, USA) revealed an interruption in the ellipsoid band, and several hyperreflective deposits above the retinal pigment epithelium were remarkable. The average subfoveal choroidal thickness (Cht) in both eyes was 223 μm (LE) and 224 μm (RE), respectively, as measured with built-in software . OCTA showed that the deep retinal capillary density decreased and the choroid microvessels atrophied greatly, but foveal area zone and superficial retinal capillary changed insignificantly . The parents denied a history of preterm birth. Family history was negative for individuals with similar symptoms or early-onset vision loss. Genetic testing of the boy and his mother were recommended.
The child also complained of dizziness and fatigue, and he had missed school for a long time. From the time of birth, his height and weight had been lower than that of his peers. Currently, his body max index is 14.17 (138 cm tall and 27 kg weight), which is significantly inferior to that of healthy children. He had been diagnosed with growth retardation, and growth hormone therapy was administered. Findings from echocardiography were unremarkable, however, 24-h ambulatory electrocardiogram revealed intermittent first-degree atrioventricular block and partial second-degree type I atrioventricular block. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) indicated diffuse demyelinating lesions in the white matter of both cerebral hemispheres and the inner capsule, middle cerebral crura, pons and medulla oblongata .
Long-range polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed on blood samples obtained from both the child and his mother. Specific PCR primers, mtDNA-F: CCGCACAAGAGTGCTACTCTCCTC and mtDNA-R: GATATTGATTTCACGGAGGATGGTG were used to amplify mitochondria in the blood, and a DNA library was constructed using full-length PCR products as a template. Illumina NovaSeq high-throughput sequencing was then performed on the obtained DNA library, and data reading and bioinformatics analysis were performed after evaluating using Sequence Control Software . The long-range PCR of the blood samples revealed that the deletion started at nucleotide position 6341 and ended at 13993, indicating a deletion of 7652 bp ; no abnormality was noted in the mother’s genes.
Complete evidence obtained from ocular examination and evaluation of other organs as well as from gene detection supported the final diagnosis of KSS. After we confirmed the patient’s diagnosis, we provided a pair of applicable glasses after optometry and recommended a follow-up every 3 months. To the best of our knowledge, the physicians provided the appropriate medication, and the patient had an implantable pacemaker installed.