The patient was a 53-year-old woman who had migrated to São Paulo city, Brazil from Arapiraca, Alagoas in the Northeast of Brazil. She visited the dermatology outpatient department of the University of São Paulo Medical School Hospital (HCFMUSP) with complaints of fever and skin lesions that had persisted for over a year and had worsened during the last 3 months. She mentioned that she had been treated for leprosy (MDT-MB) for 14 months, which had ended 3 months earlier. She had used prednisone intermittently for over a year during outbreaks of reactions.
Dermatological examination showed a Cushingoid face, widespread erythematous and edematous, some painful plaques and nodules some of which with central necrosis. This led us to establish the diagnosis of sub-polar lepromatous leprosy (LLsp) with a necrotizing erythema nodosum leprosum (ENL) reaction (type-2 leprosy reaction) .
She was many times hospitalized during the 3 years after MDT-MB and once in a critical condition with fever, tachycardia and hypotension. Prednisone 40 mg/day and thalidomide 300 mg/day were prescribed at the intensive care unit for treating the reaction. During hospitalization, the patient developed a septic shock. The skin was considered the most likely focus and she was treated with oxacillin.
After 6 days, despite general clinical improvement, the skin lesions worsened, but no other focus of infection was found. Histopathological examinations of the skin, one from a biopsy of the right cavum plantaris and one from a biopsy of the left arm were conducted. Both of them showed multi-bacillary leprosy with a regressive response and fragmented acid-fast bacilli (2+/6+).
After a few days, the patient had new fever attacks, swelling of the abdomen, generalized edema and worsening of the necrotizing ENL. She had elevated levels of liver enzymes, pancytopenia with progressive hypotension, hepatic and hematologic failure. Empirical antibiotic therapy with vancomycin and imipenem indicated by the infectious disease department was started. Liposomal amphotericin B was also introduced to cover the possibility of fungemia or candidemia (the patient had an esophageal candidiasis diagnosed by endoscopy, supposedly due to the long-term corticosteroid therapy).
Three days later, a new investigation at the emergency department showed hepatosplenomegaly and ascites. VL was diagnosed based on the parasitology of the bone marrow , the gold standard for diagnosis of VL and on blood examinations, which showed numerous intracellular and extracellular Leishmania parasites; using rk39 (39 amino acid repeats of a kinesin-like gene found in L. chagasi), a rapid immunochromatographic test specific for the Leishmania donovani complex and by molecular tests (kDNA-PCR = kinetoplast target DNA for PCR and ITS1-DNA-PCR = Internal Transcribed Spacer 1 target DNA for PCR). In addition, after ITS1-RFLP (PCR amplification of the Internal Transcribed Spacer 1 genes (ITS1) and Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism) , fitted-in with the diagnosis of VL, it was demonstrated definitively that L. (L.) infantum chagasi was the etiologic agent, because it presented 184 bp (base pair), 72 and 55 bp fragments .
Liposomal amphotericin B (4 mg/kg/day for 5 days) was now continued for the treatment of VL (kala-azar). This also led to a significant clinical improvement of her ENL skin lesions. Secondary prophylaxis with amphotericin B (3 mg/kg/day for 21 days each month during 6 months) was introduced by the infectious diseases physicians. During the last dose only the kDNA-PCR with her blood was positive.
Around 6 months after the treatment for VL and free of necrotizing ENL for 1 year and an occasional nodule of ENL, she developed a few hypochromic papules on her forehead . Histopathological examination of a biopsy of such a papular lesion showed a granulomatous inflammatory infiltrate throughout the dermis and superficially in the sub-cutis consisting of epithelioid histiocytes, lymphocytes and many plasma cells . Leishman bodies were seen within macrophages . The presence of Leishmania was further confirmed by immunohistochemistry using a peroxidase-anti-peroxidase technique and a polyclonal antibody to Leishmania produced in rabbits . At this time, there was no hepatosplenomegaly and the bone marrow did not show Leishmania parasites. A revision of all previous skin biopsies with immunohistochemistry for Leishmania was performed, but the results were all negative. At that moment, the diagnosis of post-kala-azar dermal leishmaniasis (PKDL) was established and liposomal amphotericin B (3 mg/kg/day for 7 days) was re-introduced resulting in a clinical regression of the skin lesions that was confirmed by histopathological examinations. About 2 years after the treatment of PKDL the patient is still free of PKDL lesions.