44-year-old Asian female with history of symptomatic myasthenia gravis was referred for a thymectomy. She was originally believed to have Bell’s palsy due to drooping of her right eyelid and facial weakness. Her symptoms worsened as she developed difficulty holding her head up, weakness in her arms, difficultly chewing and dysarthria. Symptoms worsened with activity. Her myasthenia gravis panel was positive for acetylcholine receptor binding antibody 7.81 nmol/L (normal range < 0.02). Her preoperative CT scan demonstrated a 3.5 cm × 2 cm anterior mediastinal mass along the right heart border and phrenic nerve, suspicious for Masaoka Stage III thymoma . No preoperative biopsy was performed. Her only medication was mycophenolate mofetil 500 mg BID. She had never been hospitalized for her myasthenia nor had a history of a crisis. At the discretion of her neurologist, she did not require IVIG treatment in advance of her operation. The patient was offered a thymectomy via right-sided robotic-assisted approach based on the location of the tumor on imaging .
Following induction of general anesthesia, the patient was intubated with a left-sided double lumen endotracheal tube. She was positioned supine with a bump placed under the right chest and the right arm allowed to hang below the chest with appropriate padding. Right lung isolation was achieved. Three 8 mm robotic ports were placed in the right 2nd, 4th, and 6th intercostal spaces along the mid-axillary line. The daVinci Xi robot was docked and CO2 insufflation with a pressure of 12 mmHg was initiated permitting an adequate view of the right hemithorax as well as the anterior mediastinum. Upon initial inspection, a 3 cm × 3 cm mass was identified centered over the right atrial-SVC junction with invasion of the right phrenic nerve and pericardium. A complete thymectomy was performed en bloc with a portion of the right phrenic nerve and a 4 cm × 4 cm portion of pericardium overlying the right atrium and superior right ventricle . The specimen was sent for frozen pathologic analysis and returned suspicious for thymoma. A 28Fr chest drain was placed across the mediastinum via her inferior-most port site. Hemostasis was achieved and the instruments and ports were removed. Upon undocking of the robot and closure of the port sites, the patient became acutely hypotensive (lowest recorded blood pressure 43/31 mmHg). The camera was reinserted and demonstrated partial cardiac herniation through the anterior pericardial defect toward the right chest. An emergent midline sternotomy was performed and a sternal retractor was placed . The heart was manually reduced and the patient’s hemodynamics stabilized. A vented Gore-Tex 6 cm × 6 cm patch was sewn along the pericardial edges with interrupted 4–0 prolene to close the pericardial defect. The patient was transferred to the ICU postoperatively. The patient was extubated on postoperative day one and discharged home on postoperative day seven. The final pathology was a Masaoka Type 3 invasive type B3 thymoma.