A 10 years old girl, suffering from pain in her right shoulder since the age of 9 years, presented to our Department. She did not recall a precipitating event or a trauma, reported no fever or weakness. There was no relevant personal or family history. Because to persistence of symptoms before coming to our observation an X-ray of her right shoulder revealing an osteolytic lesion was performed . In order to exclude an infectious osteomyelitis or a malignant tumor, the patient also underwent to a PET-CT showing the presence of a pathological high-uptake of the lesion. Patient’s right shoulder biopsy showed bone infiltration by lymphocytes and neutrophils. No neoplastic cells were identified. All cultures were negative. LCH was excluded since immunohistochemical evaluation of bone marrow for CD1a and S100 expression was negative. This histopathological pattern suggested an inflammatory process, so she assumed steroidal treatment for a week with improvement of symptomatology, but when patient suspended her therapy pain came back again. When she was admitted to our Department she had pain in her right arm and shoulder. Laboratory results showed a discrete increase of erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR 34 mm/h, normal value < 20 mm/h) and C-reactive protein (CRP 0,88 mg/dL, normal value < 0,5 mg/dL) with normal complete blood count, liver and renal function as such as abdominal ultrasound and chest X-ray. At MRI, the lesion of the shoulder was hypointense in T1 and hyperintense in T2 and STIR, suggesting an inflammatory process. Suspecting a CRMO we prescribed anti-inflammatory treatment with naproxen. The symptomatology disappeared and the inflammation parameters returned to a normal range 2 months later. Anti-inflammatory treatment was suspended after 3 months of therapy. Five months later, the patient came back to our Department because of pain and swelling in her right clavicle . The physical examination showed a painful swelling of the sternal end of the right clavicle. Laboratory results indicated a modest increase of inflammation parameters: ESR 29 mm/h (normal value < 20 mm/h), CRP 0.98 mg/dL (normal value < 0.5 mg/dL). Clavicle X-ray showed an osteolytic lesion, ultrasound of sternoclavicular joint revealed articular effusion. On MRI this lesion was hyperintense in T2 and STIR , so anti-inflammatory treatment with naproxen was started again and the symptoms disappeared after 2 months. Clinical history, physical examination, histopathological pattern were highly suggestive of CRMO. Six months later a STIR MRI to evaluate patient’s bone lesions was performed. The MRI did not show new lesions and previous bone lesions disappeared, so anti-inflammatory treatment has been suspended.