A 3 d history of fever and swelling of the hands and feet.
A 1-year-old healthy boy was referred to our hospital with a 3 d history of fever and swelling of the hands and feet. Excluding changes in the lips and oral cavity, the patient had five of the six symptoms of KD such as fever, bilateral bulbar conjunctival injection, rash, changes in the peripheral extremities, and nonsuppurative cervical lymphadenopathy .
The patient’s medical history was unremarkable. Physical and neurological findings were also normal.
The patient’s family and genetic history of was unremarkable.
The patient’s height and weight were 77 cm and 8.6 kg, respectively. His vital signs at admission were as follows: body temperature, 38.2 °C; blood pressure, 98/56 mmHg; heart rate, 142 beats/min; respiratory rate, 34 breaths/min; and oxygen saturation, 98% in room air. At the time of admission, he had bilateral bulbar conjunctival injection and rash over the torso and extremities. He had changes in the peripheral extremities, with edema of the hands and feet. Redness at the site of Bacille Calmette-Guérin inoculation was observed. Bilateral cervical lymph nodes were nonsuppurative and enlarged to 15-16 mm.
The hematological values are shown in Table . On hospitalization, serum laboratory results showed normal levels of inflammatory biomarkers, such as C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and serum amyloid A protein, which were as follows: white blood cell count, 7.1 × 103/mm3; platelet count, 23.3 × 104/mm3; ESR, 3 mm/h; CRP, < 0.05 mg/dL; serum amyloid A protein, 3.7 μg/mL; procalcitonin, 0.1 (ng/mL): aspartate aminotransferase, 33 U/L; and alanine aminotransferase, 17 U/L. The Kobayashi risk score for predicting intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) resistance was 1 point, indicating a low risk. Rapid Streptococcus pyogenes and adenovirus antigen test results were negative. The antibody titers of Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, human parvovirus B19, measles, and mumps were not elevated. Polymerase chain reaction was negative for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2. Bacteriological cultures of blood, urine, and stool samples were negative. A urinalysis revealed no pyuria.
On admission, echocardiogram and electrocardiogram findings were normal. Chest radiography showed no abnormalities, such as cardiac enlargement or infiltrates.