A 46-year-old man visited the emergency department of our institution due to left lower quadrant pain and a palpable mass in the left upper abdomen. He had no specific relevant past medical history or family history. Physical examination disclosed a large, tender mass in the left abdomen. All laboratory findings were within normal ranges except a slightly increased CRP level (5.82 mg/L). Abdominal plain radiographs showed a large mass-like opacity in the left abdomen . Ultrasonography revealed a large, thick-walled cystic mass without evidence of an intracystic solid portion or septum . The patient underwent computed tomography (CT) scans to evaluate the intra-abdominal mass using a 64-slice multidetector CT scanner. Contrast-enhanced CT images revealed an 18.3 × 12.3 × 21.5 cm sized oval cystic mass with a relatively thick wall in the left upper abdomen . This lesion caused an extrinsic mass effect on the adjacent stomach and pancreas. The boundary between the mass and adjacent pancreas parenchyma was indistinct. Based on these imaging findings, a neurogenic tumor with cystic changes, a mucinous cystadenoma, and a pseudocyst were considered in the differential diagnoses. The patient underwent laparoscopic spleen-preserving distal pancreatectomy without preoperative biopsy due to a risk of rupture.
Intra-operatively, the mass was confirmed to have arisen from the retroperitoneum, closely related to the pancreas tail. Surgeons found hemorrhagic fluid within the cystic mass. The surgical specimen was a large round lump of soft tissue measuring 13 × 10.5 × 4.3 cm in size. On gross section, the cut surface revealed a rubbery texture with a whitish to light yellowish color. Almost half of the mass was composed of a cystic space that was filled with clear, light brownish fluid. The mass was diffusely infiltrating the pancreatic parenchyma. Microscopically, the tumor was composed of uniform sheets of elongated, spindle-shaped cells in a collagenous stroma . The tumor was intermingled with the pancreatic parenchyma . Immunohistochemical study showed the tumor cells were positive for smooth muscle actin (SMA) and beta-catenin , but negative for S-100 protein and CD34. The final pathologic diagnosis was DF. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 20. The patient remained asymptomatic during an 8-month follow up period.