A 25 year old man presented with a one week history of rapidly progressive simple and complex motor (e.g. nodding, pointing, head shaking and turning, looking, blinking, hitting) and vocal (e.g. shouting, humming) tics including motor and vocal echo and possible blocking phenomena, all of which he attributed to the cessation of his recreational use of cannabis a few weeks ago. For at least one year he had consumed daily to relief the “urge to move the legs in the evening” that started two years ago. Back then he first noticed short twitching, disturbing movements in his legs at night, later during the daytime as well. For several years before that, he had experienced episodes of diffuse urgency to move his legs but had never had any tics or other visible unconsciuos movements. Suppressing the movement had become more difficult in the last weeks, making leaving his home or usage of public transport increasingly stigmatizing, resulting in self isolation. At the time of presentation he had continuous tics, consisting mainly of head and upper extremity movements, which he could suppress for up to 10 seconds. Exacerbating factors included emotional distress and being exposed to repetitive sounds or movements. Pre-treatment severity was determined at 75/100 measured on the Global score of the Yale Global Tic Severity Scale (YGTSS-GS). Apart from a single depressive episode several years ago treated with escitalopram and labelling himself as a demanding child he had nil else of note in his medical history and he was not on any medication. Family history was negative except for the father’s habit “to clear his throat quite often”. He appeared fit and well and general examination was normal. Neurological examination revealed no further pathological signs and psychiatric assessment was not suggestive of relevant cognitive or psychiatric comorbidities besides the current social isolation. Baseline laboratory tests including differential, serum copper indices and antibodies (NMDA, AMPA-A/B, GABA1, VGCC, LGI1, CASPR2, GAD, CV2, Hu, Ri) were within normal ranges. CSF examination, chest radiography and abdominal ultrasound were normal. MRI of the brain showed no lesions and was age-appropriate. In summary, we supected an late-onset TS, exacerbated after stopping self-treatment with cannabis. An adult-onset secondary, or transient tic disorder could not be fully ruled out. Tiaprid 300 mg per day was administered but showed no sufficient symptom relief. Owing to the therapeutic benefit of cannabis for his symptoms together with their relatively acute onset following cessation we considered a trial of Nabiximols (Sativex®) spray. Buccal application of three doses in 15 min. intervals resulted in a dramatic decrease of symptom expression. Premonitory feeling vanished and intensity of motor and phonic tics were reduced clearly (YGTSS-GS 5/100), described as “>90%” by the patient (see ). The effect lasted about 4 hours before tics started to return. Our patient reported no relevant side effects, besides cheerfullness and a feeling of relaxation.