A 63-year-old male, whose medical history was notable only for mild left hip dysplasia, initially presented to our clinic with a 2- year history of progressively worsening left groin pain. Before his pain was intensifying, he routinely engaged in high-level fitness and recreational activities, including jogging and mountain hiking. In spite of non-operative treatments including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications, activity restriction, and several intra-articular corticosteroid injections, his pain progressed and began interfering with routine activities of daily living. On exam, he was healthy appearing, with a body mass index of 23.5 kg/m2, and an antalgic gait. He demonstrated full strength with hip flexion and abduction, with a range of motion from 0 to 120° of flexion, 20° of internal rotation (which was painful), 30° of external rotation, and 30° of abduction. Radiographs and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated partial uncovering of the femoral head with end-stage degenerative changes of the left hip. Spine pathology was excluded. He, therefore, elected to undergo THA.
At THA, acetabular components included a non-cemented hydroxyapatite-coated Ti acetabular shell with modular cross- linked polyethylene (Stryker Trident PSL cup, 54 mm diameter; X3 0° liner), a ceramic modular head (Stryker Biolox Delta, 40 mm diameter, +0 mm Ti trunnion adapter sleeve), a non-cemented hydroxyapatite-coated Ti femoral stem (Stryker Rejuvenate SPT stem, size #10), and a CoCr modular neck (Stryker Rejuvenate, V40 trunnion taper, 34 mm length, 0° version, 127° angle neck). A calcar cable was placed due to a limited vertical calcar fracture, and full weight-bearing was permitted. After routine post-operative care, including perioperative antibiotics, deep vein thrombosis prophylaxis, and physical therapy, the patient was discharged home 2 days postoperatively after an uneventful hospitalization. An anteroposterior pelvis X-ray obtained in the post-anesthesia care unit is shown in .
including jogging and hiking. He was again advised of the optimal activity level for THA patients, emphasizing nonimpact activities (e.g., bicycling and swimming). At his 12- month follow-up, HSS-P and UCLA-AS remained 1 and 9, respectively, and radiographs remained stable. Discussion regarding activity was the same as at the 3-month follow-up. Routine 5-year follow-up was planned. Voluntary recall of his femoral stem occurred 2 years postoperatively. He was informed of the risks of ALTR associated with this stem and invited for follow-up, HHS-P and UCLA-AS were again 1 and 9, respectively. Radiographs demonstrated a well-fixed THA in appropriate alignment without evidence of periprosthetic osteolysis, calcar femorale rounding, or polyethylene wear . Baseline serum Co (4.8 mcg/L, reference normal <3.9), serum Cr (<1.0 mcg/L, normal <5.0), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (2 mm/hr, normal <20), and C reactive protein (<3.0 mg/L, normal <10.0) were obtained. Per protocol at our institution for evaluating asymptomatic patients with this recalled implant and with elevated serum Co, a cross-sectional anatomy study by ultrasound scan was obtained, demonstrating a 2.7 x 1.2 cm fluid collection anterior to the hip without other sequelae of ALTR. He was again advised against impact loading activities. Annual follow-up was planned to monitor for any clinical deterioration or progression of ALTR. At 34-month follow-up, serum Co had increased to 6.2 mcg/L. HHS-P and UCLA-AS remained 1 and 9. Due to increase in Co level, MRI with metal artifact reduction sequence (MARS) was obtained and demonstrated a 3.6 x 0.7 cm fluid collection posterior to the hip , but without other sequelae of ALTR. At 41-month follow-up, serum Co reached 7.6 mcg/L. HHS-P was now 2 (slight or occasional pain, with no compromise inactivity). The patient stated that he had participated in mountain hiking shortly before this Co level was obtained. Repeat MARS MRI demonstrated a 4.0 x 0.8 cm fluid collection posterior to the hip, without other sequelae of ALTR. After further counseling, the patient elected revision arthroplasty, but deferred surgery until his work calendar allowed. In the interim, he planned stationary bicycling and swimming for fitness activity. 45 months after index THA, the patient presented for preoperative evaluation. He had eliminated high-impact activities. He wished pre-operative re-check of serum Co, which showed a decrease to 5.3 mcg/L. With continued satisfactory THA clinical outcome, the patient deferred revision surgery, opting to maintain non-impact-loading activity level and monitor serum Co. At his 4.5-years follow-up visit, he remained satisfied with his THA, with HHS 96, HHS-P 2, UCLA-AS 8 (very active, but no impact sports), and Co 2.2 mcg/L, and was bicycling and swimming for fitness. The patient wished to continue non-impact-loading activity level and monitor symptoms and serum Co. He recently had his Co level re- checked at 5.0 years postoperatively, and it was 1.2 mcg/L.
Routine post-operative monitoring was uneventful. At his 6- week follow-up, he was progressing well with stable radiographs. Per our usual THA recommendations, the patient was advised to progress with non-impact loading activities. At his 3-month follow-up, Harris hip score pain (HSS-P) question was 1 out of 6 (no pain), and UCLA activity score (UCLA-AS) was 9 out of 10 (sometimes participating in impact sports). The patient noted that he participated in impact-loading activities, including jogging and hiking. He was again advised of the optimal activity level for THA patients, emphasizing nonimpact activities (e.g., bicycling and swimming). At his 12- month follow-up, HSS-P and UCLA-AS remained 1 and 9, respectively, and radiographs remained stable. Discussion regarding activity was the same as at the 3-month follow-up. Routine 5-year follow-up was planned.
Voluntary recall of his femoral stem occurred 2 years postoperatively. He was informed of the risks of ALTR associated with this stem and invited for follow-up, HHS-P and UCLA-AS were again 1 and 9, respectively. Radiographs demonstrated a well-fixed THA in appropriate alignment without evidence of periprosthetic osteolysis, calcar femorale rounding, or polyethylene wear . Baseline serum Co (4.8 mcg/L, reference normal <3.9), serum Cr (<1.0 mcg/L, normal <5.0), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (2 mm/hr, normal <20), and C reactive protein (<3.0 mg/L, normal <10.0) were obtained. Per protocol at our institution for evaluating asymptomatic patients with this recalled implant and with elevated serum Co, a cross-sectional anatomy study by ultrasound scan was obtained, demonstrating a 2.7 x 1.2 cm fluid collection anterior to the hip without other sequelae of ALTR. He was again advised against impact loading activities. Annual follow-up was planned to monitor for any clinical deterioration or progression of ALTR. At 34-month follow-up, serum Co had increased to 6.2 mcg/L. HHS-P and UCLA-AS remained 1 and 9. Due to increase in Co level, MRI with metal artifact reduction sequence (MARS) was obtained and demonstrated a 3.6 x 0.7 cm fluid collection posterior to the hip , but without other sequelae of ALTR. At 41-month follow-up, serum Co reached 7.6 mcg/L. HHS-P was now 2 (slight or occasional pain, with no compromise inactivity). The patient stated that he had participated in mountain hiking shortly before this Co level was obtained. Repeat MARS MRI demonstrated a 4.0 x 0.8 cm fluid collection posterior to the hip, without other sequelae of ALTR. After further counseling, the patient elected revision arthroplasty, but deferred surgery until his work calendar allowed. In the interim, he planned stationary bicycling and swimming for fitness activity.
45 months after index THA, the patient presented for preoperative evaluation. He had eliminated high-impact activities. He wished pre-operative re-check of serum Co, which showed a decrease to 5.3 mcg/L. With continued satisfactory THA clinical outcome, the patient deferred revision surgery, opting to maintain non-impact-loading activity level and monitor serum Co. At his 4.5-years follow-up visit, he remained satisfied with his THA, with HHS 96, HHS-P 2, UCLA-AS 8 (very active, but no impact sports), and Co 2.2 mcg/L, and was bicycling and swimming for fitness. The patient wished to continue non-impact-loading activity level and monitor symptoms and serum Co. He recently had his Co level re- checked at 5.0 years postoperatively, and it was 1.2 mcg/L.