A 22-year-old Japanese man who worked as carpenter complained of chronic left low back pain for at least 6 months. He had no remarkable medical history and traumatic event for a long time. His physical examination showed no neurological deficits, such as muscle weakness and sensory changes. In the assessment of physical status, Oswestry Disability Index (ODI) was 46%. Radiographs and computed tomography (CT) images showed the LSTV at the L5 level, identified as Castellvi classification type 2A . MRI revealed no degenerative disc changes at L5–S1 level and no compression at the left L5 exiting nerve root. Conservative treatment with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and rehabilitation was immediately initiated in accordance with the therapeutic strategy reported by Li et al for first three months . Anesthetic injection at the LSTV pseudoarticulation was performed twice during next two months and provided temporary pain relief every time. However, long-term improvement was not achieved. Conservative treatment was performed for total five months .
After the recurrence of left low back pain, a minimally invasive tubular surgery was recommended.
Preoperatively, a 3D plaster model (Biotec Bones, Zimmer Biomet KK, Tokyo) of LSTV was produced using a 3D printer to sterically grasp and decide the area to be resected and was also used for training and rehearsal of the surgical procedure .
The patient was placed in prone position on the operating table under general anesthesia. The navigation referential array was inserted into the right posterior iliac crest, and intraoperative images were obtained using a C-arm (Siemens, Germany) and navigation system (Brainlab, Germany). A 4.0-cm transverse incision was made over the LSTV at the left side, and the left posterior iliac crest was resected to facilitate a direct approach to the psuedoarticulation. A 1.8-mm microendoscopic tubular portal was placed strictly at the operating table, and the LSTV was resected using high-speed drill, bone chisel, and Kerrison punch. The tubular portal was moved side to side during each resection. We sometimes checked the progress status of excavation using a navigation probe . After the complete resection, the left iliac crest bone was returned to its original position and fixated using a fiber wire. No intraoperative and postoperative complications occurred. Postoperative radiographs and CT images showed adequate LSTV resection . The patient was free from the left low back pain, and the asymptomatic status was maintained at 2 months follow up. Postoperative ODI was 6%.