A 64-year-old Arabic man presented with a left painless swelling of the face of a 10-year duration. The patient reported a recent increase in the size of the swelling. His medical history was significant for hypertension and cigarette smoking. Head and neck examination revealed a firm, non-tender parotid mass, measuring 10 cm in the greatest dimension. There was limited mobility of the mass, and the overlying skin exhibited no changes. There were no lymph nodes or facial nerve abnormalities. The computed tomography scan showed a 7.1 × 6.2 × 5.5 cm well-defined mass in the left parotid with heterogeneous enhancement and multiple cystic spaces. The mass displaced the sternocleidomastoid muscle posteriorly and medically but showed no infiltration . FNA was performed at an outside facility and was reported as WT; the slides were not available for an in-house evaluation. The patient underwent a left superficial parotidectomy at our facility. Interestingly, the surgeon commented on the tumor consistency being firmer than a typical WT.
Gross examination of the resected parotid tissue showed an 8 cm firm tumor with a yellow to tan cut surface, exhibiting solid and cystic areas . Histological examination revealed that the nodule had two different components . One area consisted of multiple cystic spaces with papillary architecture lined by a double layer of oncocytic cells and surrounded by lymphocytes forming lymphoid follicles with germinal centers. Cellular debris and thick secretion within the cystic lumina were observed . Consistent with the previous FNA site, there were foci of fibrosis, squamous metaplasia, necrosis, and lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate. In other areas of the tumor, there was a prominent eosinophilic infiltrate admixed with lymphocytes and histiocytes in a densely fibrotic stroma. There were lymphoid follicles scattered in the fibrotic stroma exhibiting folliculolysis, follicular hyperplasia, eosinophilic deposits, and perivascular sclerosis .
The follicular dendritic cell meshwork in the background of the lymphoid follicles was highlighted with CD21 and CD23. To exclude histiocytic neoplasms, CD1a and S100 were done and showed no positivity within the tumor cells (data not shown). A complete blood count with differential and serum IgE level were performed and showed a normal absolute eosinophil count of 0.41 × 109/L and elevated serum IgE level at 2691 KU/L. Based on the histological features and laboratory test results, a diagnosis of KD coexisting with WT was rendered. There was no evidence of recurrence at a thirty-month follow-up.