A 36-year old woman was admitted acutely to our institution with a four week history of increasingly intrusive palpitations associated with pre-syncope. She was 31 weeks into her second pregnancy having experienced no problems during the first or second trimester or at all during her previous pregnancy 6 years earlier. Ambulatory monitoring organised prior to her admission had demonstrated frequent unifocal premature ventricular contractions (PVC) including couplets and triplets, and short salvos of non-sustained ventricular tachycardia (VT) corresponding with symptoms. The initial physical examination, electrolytes and laboratory investigations were unremarkable. Obstetric assessment revealed a healthy fetus consistent with 31 weeks of gestation.
Her electrocardiogram during a typical episode revealed a monomorphic wide-complex tachycardia of left bundle branch block morphology consistent with an origin from the right ventricular outflow tract . Echocardiography demonstrated a mildly dilated left ventricle with normal function and an ejection fraction of 63%. Initial attempts to control her arrhythmia medically with oral and intravenous metoprolol were unsuccessful. The patient was subsequently treated with oral verapamil therapy but, despite initial benefit, suffered with recurrent and increasingly sustained episodes of VT associated with hypotension and pre-syncope. Following obstetric consultation, the option of catheter ablation was offered as a therapeutic option. After discussion of the potential risks to the mother and foetus, both of the procedure and of potential radiation exposure, informed consent was obtained.
The patient was brought to the electrophysiology laboratory in the postabsorptive state and placed in the left lateral position using a wedge to decompress the inferior vena cava. A midwife was present to monitor the foetal heart rate. Lead shielding of the abdomen and pelvis was used to shield the fetus as much as possible if any fluoroscopic radiation was needed. Venous access was obtained from the right femoral vein. Although we intended to perform the procedure with zero fluoroscopy, owing to the distortion of the pelvic anatomy by the gravid uterus and the tilt from the wedge, minimal fluoroscopy (60 seconds, 9.9mGy) was utilised to position the catheters in the heart. Catheters were placed in the right ventricular apex and coronary sinus.
The remainder of the procedure was performed with zero-fluoroscopy using a 3-dimensional mapping system to create a geometrical shell of the right ventricular outflow tract (NavX, St. Jude Medical, St Paul, Minneapolis, USA). During frequent periods of non-sustained VT earliest endocardial activation was localised to the high outflow tract . At this location the local electrogram on the ablation catheter preceded the onset of the QRS complex by 33ms . Catheter tip pressure at this site induced sustained VT with subsequent radiofrequency ablation terminating VT. There was no recurrence during a 30-minute period of observation. The procedure was uncomplicated and no further PVCs or VT were observed on telemetry over the following 48-hours.
The patient remained asymptomatic and interim ambulatory monitoring after 8 weeks demonstrated no evidence of recurrent arrhythmia. She delivered a healthy child at term by elective caesarean section without complication.