The patient was a 38-year-old healthy Chinese man, a migrant worker who worked in Zhejiang Province. As shown in Figure , he developed influenza-like illness (ILI) symptoms, including headache and 40°C fever at the beginning of January 2014, and sought medical attention in a village clinic and received infusion therapy. He went back to his hometown in Guizhou Province for the coming Spring Festival by taking a long-distance bus from Zhejiang Province one day after he developed fever. He then sought medical care in a village clinic and a township hospital when he arrived at his hometown. His chest radiograph showed pneumonia in the lower lobe of his left lung (the CT value ranged from −12 to approximately −19) and he was hospitalized in a township hospital on day 5 after his illness onset. He experienced high fever and rapid progression, and was transferred to a provincial general hospital in Zunyi city. He was diagnosed as severe pneumonia, deteriorated rapidly and died on day 8 after his illness onset. He had received symptomatic treatment during the clinical treatment and all drugs that had been used in the township hospital and the general hospital in Zunyi city are listed in Table . No antiviral drugs were administrated during the clinical treatment. The case was reported through the Chinese surveillance system for pneumonia with unknown etiology and confirmed as human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus by means of RT-PCR, virus isolation and full genome sequencing at the Chinese National Influenza Center (CNIC). Since the patient had died, written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s next-of-kin for publication of this case report.
Sixty-one close contacts were identified by epidemiological survey, including 36 health-care personnel, eight medical escorts and 17 households and family contacts. As a public health response, written informed consents from contacts can be waived according to Chinese law. The close contacts were medically monitored for seven consecutive days; no ILI symptoms were observed in all contacts except for the patient’s family members. One family member appeared with a sore throat and developed a 38°C fever five to seven days after the patient’s illness onset, and another developed a sore throat without fever seven days after the patient’s illness onset. Continuous throat swabs were collected from them; all the samples were negative for H7N9 influenza virus. Antibody response to H7N9 virus was not detected from the paired sera of all contacts.
The influenza virus A/Guizhou/01502/2014 was isolated from the patient. The PB2 gene had a high degree of similarity (99%) to viruses isolated from human in Zhejiang Province. Another seven segments showed the highest identity with viruses isolated from birds in the Yangtze River Delta region, where Zhejiang Province is located . The phylogenetic analysis further demonstrated all eight gene segments were clustered with viruses that circulated in this region . A/Shanghai/1/2013 (SH1, the first H7N9 virus isolate), A/Anhui/1/2013 (AH1, the vaccine strain recommended by the World Health Organization) and those six virus isolates with highest identity with A/Guizhou/01502/2014 mentioned in Table were selected for characteristic comparison of the critical amino acids residues . Similar to those viruses, the mammalian-adaptive mutations such as G186V and Q226L in the HA gene that were previously reported were found in this virus. It remained R in the position 292 of the NA gene and suggested the effectiveness of oseltamivir antiviral treatment. The virus possessed a 627K mutation in the PB2 gene, which was proposed to be associated with high polymerase activity and increased the virulence in mice . The PB1 L368V mutation was found in this virus, which increased transmission in ferret . The signature amino acids of the human influenza virus in the PA gene were detected, including V100A, K356R and S409N [,]; however, a unique mutation L336M in the PA gene that had only been reported in a Hong Kong isolate was not detected.