The patient was a 49-year-old woman with a history of dextrocardia, situs inversus, and surgical repair of TOF. At the age of 2, she underwent palliative shunt surgery for TOF. At the age of 7, TOF was repaired by the transannular patch approach. It was presumed that ventricular septal defect (VSD) had been repaired by Teflon felt patch. When she was in her twenties, she often felt palpitations and dyspnoea and was diagnosed with panic disorder. She had chronic hepatitis C and achieved sustained virological response with glecaprevir and pibrentasvir treatment at the age of 48 (1 month after the first admission). She was prescribed oestradiol, dydrogesterone for menopausal disorders, and escitalopram, alprazolam for panic disorder. At the age of 48, she fainted for the first time in the kitchen. When she recovered consciousness, she was lying on the floor and realized that she had suffered a head injury, but she did not go to hospital. Two months later, she presented to the emergency department of our hospital because of a recurrence of syncope in the bathroom. Before the syncope, she had experienced palpitation and dyspnoea. At the time of examination, she was conscious and had no complaints. A 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) showed no significant changes; results of other tests were normal, including electrolytes and cardiac enzymes and findings of a two-dimensional echocardiogram. An implantable loop recorder (ILR) was implanted to evaluate the cause of syncope. Nine months later, she briefly became unconscious while having dinner with friends but then regained consciousness. Three days later, she visited our hospital. The ILR showed that the syncope had been caused by a 60-second complete atrioventricular block . The patient’s blood pressure was 113/75 mm Hg, her heart rate was 84 bpm, and her heart rhythm was regular. She had no signs of heart failure, such as congested neck veins, pulmonary adventitious sound, heart murmur, or leg oedema. A 12-lead ECG showed prolonged (PR) the time from the onset of the P wave to the start of the QRS complex and right bundle branch block . Chest X-ray confirmed dextrocardia but showed no cardiac enlargement . Laboratory tests found no abnormalities of electrolytes, thyroid hormones, or brain natriuretic peptide levels. The echocardiography showed left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was 64%, no asynergy motion and no enlargement of left ventricle (LV). And it also found normal size and motion of right ventricle (RV) had moderate pulmonary regurgitation. The detailed ILR data showed regular P waves during a significant cardiac arrest . On the basis of the findings, we diagnosed paroxysmal AVB. Cardiac computed tomographic (CT) angiography revealed no stenosis in the coronary artery. In the head-up tilt test, the vasovagal reflex was induced without bradycardia (blood pressure, 67/33 mm Hg; heart rate, 104 bpm).
An electrophysiological study found that the His-ventricular interval was prolonged (66 milliseconds). Ventricular tachycardia was not induced by programmed ventricular stimulation (burst pacing and up to three extra stimuli) at two right ventricular sites (apex and outflow; ). A dual chamber pacemaker was implanted on the 9th day of admission . The patient was discharged on the 22nd day of admission and has not experienced any symptoms, including syncope, in the 23 months since then.