A 60-month-old female presented to our clinic in central Guatemala after developmental delay since late infancy and developmental regression for 1 year. At this time, her weight was 9.0 kg and height was 86.3 cm. According to the World Health Organization growth standards, her height-for-age Z-score was -4.9 and her weight-for-height Z-score was -3.0, consistent with severe wasting and severe stunting .
The patient was born at term at home following an uneventful pregnancy. She had never seen a physician, but was evaluated by several community health workers and received presumptive community-based therapy for undernutrition. She is of Kaqchikel Maya descent and was born in an isolated village in Guatemala. Her parents were first cousins; there was no family history of severe childhood illness or death. She exhibited progressive delay in attaining motor milestones; although she sat independently (5 months) and crawled (10 months) in a timely fashion, she did not walk until 2 years. Language and social development were delayed, and she exhibited only vocalizations and gestures without meaningful word acquisition. She never attained bladder or bowel sphincter control. She had no acute severe childhood illnesses, and received all routine vaccinations according to the national schedule. She was exclusively breastfed until 1 year of age. Upon initiation of complementary feeding, she showed a clear aversion to animal protein and vomited on the rare occasions that she consumed it. At 4 years of age, 1 year before presentation to our clinic, the patient ceased walking, adopted a flexed posture of both lower extremities with scissoring and rigidity, and restrictive eating lead to significant weight loss. The patient’s physical exam was notable for severe under-nutrition, and lower extremity hypertonicity and spasticity. When supported in a standing position, she exhibited scissoring and a “tip-toe” posture. Babinski reflexes were upgoing bilaterally. She demonstrated an attentive gaze and social smile, but was nonverbal. Her hair was lighter and coarser than that of family members. Dietary recall revealed extremely low energy consumption (52 kcal/kg/day) with low-normal protein intake (0.93 g/kg/day) exclusively from plant sources. The family followed the advice of community health workers to provide dietary supplements, including iron, vitamin B12 and fortified corn-soy blends, but felt ambivalent about the treatments’ effectiveness.
Blood chemistry showed borderline elevations of lactic acid (3.3 mmol/L, reference range 0.7-2.1 mmol/L) and ammonia (87.9 ug/dL, reference range 18-90 ug/dL). AST (aspartate aminotransferase) and ALT (alanine aminotransferase) were 38 IU/L and 50 IU/L, respectively. TSH (thyroid-stimulating hormone), uric acid, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, bilirubin, serum electrolytes, and complete hematologic profile were uninformative. A filter paper blood spot was obtained and transported to the United States by courier. Analysis was conducted by Perkin Elmer Genetics laboratory (Bridgeville, PA). The analysis revealed an elevated arginine level of 3.05 mg/dL (reference range <2.00 mg/dL). On a repeat blood spot, arginine was again elevated at 2.04 mg/dl. Subsequently serum and urine samples submitted to the Biochemical Genetics Laboratory at the Mayo Clinic (Rochester, MN) for confirmatory testing. Results were remarkable for serum arginine of 510 nmol/mL (reference range 31 – 132 nmol/mL) and urine orotic acid of 46 mmol/mol of creatinine (reference range undetectable), findings consistent with a biochemical diagnosis of argininemia.
The mainstay of treatment for argininemia is a protein-restricted diet . This presents a substantial challenge in rural Guatemala, where poverty and food availability prevent many families from providing adequate nutrition for healthy children, much less for special needs diets. Additionally, there is no access to protein-free or essential amino acid medical foods or ammonia-scavenging medications. Corn tortillas, the staple of the Maya Guatemalan diet, provide 200 kcal and 5.4 g protein per 100 g . At even fairly nominal levels of consumption, tortillas would easily exceed recommended daily protein restrictions for a UCD . The family expressed concern about the cost of other low-protein, high-calorie foods. In collaboration with the patient’s family, we developed a customized diet based on locally available food stuffs, principally oat or corn porridge and affordable fruits and vegetables. Refined sugar and vegetable oil were used to augment calories, since these were affordable to the family. This diet provided 110 kcal/kg/day and 1.5 g/kg/day of locally available protein. For the first 4 weeks following the patient’s diagnosis, a Kaqchikel Maya-speaking social worker specializing in child nutrition made weekly visits to review dietary intake.
On this nutritional regimen, she gained 3.3 kg in the first 6 months, and her weight-for-height Z-score improved to -0.9. Importantly, the patient regained developmental milestones. Six months following her diagnosis, the patient was able to turn completely while lying, support her torso from a prone position and stand briefly while supporting herself. Before treatment, she was completely immobile. The patient’s family reported her to be increasingly interactive, and at 6 months basic verbal language returned. Dietary adherence was very good and the family quickly learned to differentiate high- and low-protein foods. Several 24-h diet recalls demonstrated an average of 94 kcal/kg/day and 1.4 g/kg/day of intact protein.