A 52-year-old male patient had been suffering from hypertension and diabetes for more than 10 years. His blood pressure and glucose were not well controlled under normal circumstances, and the second toe of the right foot was removed because of diabetes. He went to a subordinate hospital because of "chest tightness for 3 days and aggravation for 1 h". His troponin level was 1.78 ng/ml, echocardiography indicated an ejection fraction (EF) of 35%, and ECG showed extensive elevation of the ST segment on the anterior wall lead. The diagnosis was considered ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI), cardiogenic shock (CGS), and Killip IV. The local hospital immediately performed coronary angiography, which indicated tripartite coronary artery lesions. Due to the high vasoactive inotrope score (VIS), the doctor thought that there was a high risk of malignant arrhythmia during vascular opening, so the patient was transferred to our hospital.
The diagnosis of STEMI was clear. After consensus was reached between the cardiology department and the emergency ECMO team, V-A ECMO interventional support was planned. Before ECMO catheterization, ultrasound was used for vascular evaluation, and the femoral vein (FV) showed no obvious variation. However, no DFA bifurcation was found under the inguinal ligament, so the team decided to use a skin incision for catheterization. Due to vascular variation, isolating the FA without opening the inguinal ligament was impossible. Given the presence of CGS at that time, the patient needed emergency percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), so the perfusion cannula was first placed into the superficial femoral artery (SFA) after weighing the advantages and disadvantages. The Seldinger method was used to place the guide wire directly into the SFA to obtain angiographic evidence, as shown in Fig. . Then, in a stepwise manner, the cannula (Maquet®, 23 cm, 15F) was placed into the SFA at a depth of 15 cm to expand the channel. The drainage cannula (Maquet®, 39 cm, 21 F) was routinely placed in the FV by traditional percutaneous catheter placement. After the pipeline was established and positioned via ultrasonic guidance, V-A ECMO was administered at a pump speed of 3000 RPM, flow rate of 2.8 L/min and target mean arterial pressure (MAP) > 79 mmHg.
Coronary angiography was performed with ECMO support. Angiography showed long segment stenosis in the middle segment of the left main trunk and 95% stenosis at the heaviest point. The circumflex branch was completely occluded below the proximal end. Distal phantom development was provided by the lateral and right crown branches. The above vessels were dilated and shaped by a balloon, and then a stent was implanted. Transient ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation occurred several times during the operation. When the team briefly adjusted the ECMO speed, the heart rate recovered, and MAP remained stable. After coronary stenting, the team decided to continue in vitro circulation support to avoid cardiogenic shock after myocardial reperfusion due to frequent arrhythmias during surgery and a high VIS. As the CFA variation was clear, the patient was returned to the ICU with V-A ECMO after the distal perfusion catheter (DPC) was inserted in the digital subtraction angiography (DSA) room.
On the first day after DSA, ECMO ran at a speed of 2500 RPM and a flow rate of 2.0 L/min. When the anticoagulant target was reached, the pressure of the DPC increased, and the fluctuation in the left dorsal foot artery was significantly weakened. The patient was at high risk of thrombosis in the distal left lower extremity. Given the patient's stable haemodynamic status, after the withdrawal test was passed, it was decided through multidisciplinary consultation that left CFA repair and SFA thrombectomy would be performed simultaneously with the removal of V-A ECMO. Postoperatively, the left CFA, popliteal artery and dorsalis pedis artery were all pulsing. After the patient returned to the ward, heparin was continued for 12 h, followed by low molecular weight heparin sodium 4250 IU q12 h IH, aspirin 100 mg qd bs, and clopidogrel 75 mg qd bs antiplatelet therapy.
On the third day after the removal of ECMO, the patient was released from mechanical ventilation, and cardiac function recovered significantly. Tension blisters gradually appeared on the patient's left lower limb, which later progressed to gangrene with skin stripping and tissue blackening, as shown in Fig. . Computed tomography angiography (CTA) examination of the blood vessels in both lower extremities was performed. The report suggested significant atherosclerotic changes in the arteries in both lower limbs with varying degrees of stenosis. High bifurcation of the DFA was observed in both lower limbs, and CTA reconstruction is shown in Fig. . After consultation with orthopaedic and vascular surgery, it was decided to amputate the entire toe on the left foot considering the patient's past medical history. After comprehensive nursing care, the left foot healed well, and the patient was discharged from the hospital after his general condition was stable. At the time of discharge, the patient's cardiac function had recovered to New York Heart Association (NYHA) grade I, and the Karnofsky performance score (KPS) was 80. The presentation of all case data was authorized by the patient and his family.