A 67-year-old man presented with an elevated PSA level (7.08 ng/mL) and signs of prostate enlargement on ultrasound during follow-up of chronic hepatitis. Transrectal prostate needle biopsy revealed a pathologic diagnosis of adenocarcinoma with Gleason score of 4 + 5 = 9 in 9 of 12 specimens. Based on post-biopsy images, the patient was staged as cT3bN1M1a with seminal vesicle involvement and lymphadenopathy within the left obturator fossa, paraaortic, supraclavicular, and mediastinal regions. Subsequently, he received combined androgen blockade therapy. After 27 months, a new metastasis to the rib was detected on bone scintigraphy, although his PSA level was controlled at 0.86 ng/mL . As his PSA level reached 7.28 ng/ mL, based on a diagnosis of CRPC, the treatment was altered to abiraterone.
During abiraterone treatment, the patient’s PSA level increased accompanying elevation of neuron-specific enolase and urination disorder secondary to obstruction. He underwent TUR, and the specimen displayed adenocarcinoma (Gleason score 5 + 5 = 10) with synaptophysin-positive cells. Thus, he was diagnosed as adenocarcinoma with neuroendocrine differentiation . Subsequent immunohistochemistry of his initial biopsy specimen revealed minor portions of synaptophysin- and chromogranin A-positive cells.
Considering these results, platinum-based treatment in combination with etoposide was selected . After 11 courses, his serum PSA level decreased and his lymph nodes regressed. Owing to this drastic response, treatment was continued for 17 months, at which point his PSA level had increased to 22.53 ng/mL and lymphadenopathy recurred. The treatment was changed to DOC and then to CBZ because of PSA elevation, but the patient died before the approval and availability of olaparib.
After the approval of FoundationOne CDx, we performed next-generation sequencing using his TUR specimen while the patient was still undergoing platinum-based chemotherapy (Appendix ; Table ). All gene alterations are provided in Table . There were large deletions in BRCA2 (exons 1–11) and PTEN (exons 2–3) accompanying biallelic loss (eCN was calculated as 0). TP53 somatic frameshift mutation (p.A86fs*55) and FANCA somatic frameshift mutation (p.S849fs*40) were detected as a pathogenic variant in the tumor. Furthermore, AR gene amplification revealed an eCN of 10. Several other gene mutations were detected as a variant of unknown significance. The tumor mutation burden in the sample was 8.8 single nucleotide variants/Mbp.
Sequencing and immunohistochemistry were performed for both the tumor and intact regions, revealing large deletions in BRCA2 and PTEN only in the tumor. The normal copy numbers of BRCA2 and PTEN in normal prostatic tissue implied that these mutations were somatic events. The tumor cells showed reduced staining for PTEN, suggesting loss of expression at the protein level .