A 64-year-old African American gentleman presented to otolaryngology head and neck surgery clinic with a 3-month history of recurrent epistaxis. On physical examination and nasal endoscopy, the patient had a right nasal cavity mass. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a right nasal cavity lesion extending into the ethmoid and sphenoid sinuses. The mass was locally destructive, with bony remodeling surrounding it. It measured 2.9 cm in the transverse dimension by 3.9 cm in the cranial–caudal dimension by 6.6 cm in the anterior–posterior dimension. On MRI, the mass obstructed the right sphenoid sinus with inspissated secretions surrounding the mass . The mass extended up to the cribriform plate but without evidence of intracranial extension or orbital involvement. Nasal endoscopy with debulking and biopsy revealed a high-grade malignant neoplasm adjacent to a sinonasal papilloma with focal inverted growth pattern . The tissue was negative for Epstein–Barr virus nuclear antigen-1 (EBNA-1) by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and Epstein–Barr virus encoded RNA (EBRER) by immunohistochemistry. Further immunohistochemical analysis showed the neoplastic cells to be focally positive for pan-keratin, neuron-specific enolase (NSE), synaptophysin , epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), and vimentin. Additionally, rare immunoreactivity was noted in the subepithelial tumor cells for chromogranin, neurofilament , and GFAP. The specimen tested negative for leukocyte common antigen (LCA), latent membrane protein (LMP), S-100, CD20, CD3, desmin, and smooth muscle actin. The Ki-67 proliferation index was reported at approximately 70%. The immunohistochemical profile is consistent with a diagnosis of a collision tumor of high-grade ENB with extensive involvement of overlying schneiderian papilloma.
Surgical resection was performed via anterior and subfrontal craniotomy. Sphenoid sinus disease was described to attach anteriorly through the sphenoid ostium but without direct evidence of sphenoid mucosal disease. Complete surgical resection was reported. Pathological examination, however, showed positive margins on the superior border of the resection. Given this margin positivity and high-grade pathological features, the decision was made to pursue adjuvant concomitant chemoradiation, which was initiated following his surgical recover at 9 weeks post-operatively. Positron emission tomography (PET)/CT scan conducted for radiation treatment planning revealed increased metabolic uptake in the bilateral levels I and II neck nodes consistent with nodal metastasis. His final stage was T2N1M0.
The determination of target volumes was based on pre-operative and post-operative CT scans, 1 mm MRI images with VIBE sequence, and thin sliced PET/CT complemented by clinical and endoscopic information. The target volume included the regions of high-risk and regions of lower-risk for microscopic tumor spread. This consisted of the surgical bed with margins, bilateral comprehensive lymph node volume levels 1–5 including all PET positive disease, and the bilateral retropharyngeal lymph node volumes. Using 6 mV photon energies, the plan was designed with intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) to improve conformality and reduce dosage to critical structures. A prescription was written for 28 fractions in 180 cGy each for a total dose of 5040 cGy. Due to temporary machine malfunction during the treatment, dose adjustment was made for 29, 180 cGy fractions for a total dose of 5220 cGy. This was completed over a period of 6 weeks. Using stereotactic radiosurgery with Cyberknife (Accuray Inc.), a reduced field was designed to the surgical bed and bilateral retropharyngeal lymph node volumes in five fractions of 250 cGy each. The bilateral PET positive levels I and II neck nodes were then boosted with 6 mV photons with IMRT in five fractions of 250 cGy. The total cumulative dose was 6470 cGy. Figure shows a composite of his radiation treatment plan.
Concomitant chemotherapy included cisplatin (33 mg/m2) and etoposide (100 mg/m2) for three cycles during weeks 1, 4, and 7 of the radiation treatment. He suffered the expected toxicity from the chemoradiation with intractable nausea, vomiting, grade III mucositis, and dysphagia. He was treated symptomatically but required two hospitalizations for failure to thrive and symptom management. His pain was managed with patient-controlled analgesia pump and for nutritional supplementation, total parenteral nutrition was initiated toward the end of his treatment. On his 3-month visit following the end of his radiation treatment, he had fully recovered from the rigors of the treatment. At his 42 months follow-up visit, his clinical examination and all of his radiographic imaging studies including MRI and PET/CT were without evidence of disease.