A 73 year old male with no significant past medical history presented on September 1st 2020 at the emergency department. He had no history of bladder or prostate disease, or urinary procedure before. During the 3 weeks prior to arriving at the hospital, he complained of mild lower abdominal pain, difficulty with urinary voiding and stools every 2 or 3 days almost liquid. On examination, he was hypotensive (87/59) and his temperature was 38.4 °C. The patient looked asthenic. The abdomen was slightly distended and sensitive on the lower part. There was no defense and no rebound tenderness.
Blood levels of creatinine was 295 μmol/L (Normal: 60–105 μmol/L) and lactate was 3.8 mmol/L (Normal: 0.5–1.6 mmol/L). White blood cell count was 17,300/mm3 with 94% of neutrophil cells. Urinalysis was positive for the presence of bacteria, white cells and nitrites. The patient was rehydrated and started on piperacillin-tazobactam.
Computed tomography showed a rectal fecaloma, edema of the sigmoid part of the colon, slightly distended small bowel with no evidence of occlusion, and a thickened and distended urinary bladder. No diverticulum was demonstrated. Culture of urine and blood revealed the presence of Escherichia coli. The patient was thus treated for urosepsis and ileus.
A bladder catheter was inserted without difficulty, and antibiotics were changed for intravenous cefazolin. A cystoscopy revealed a severe cystitis and absence of diverticulum. There was no evidence any of prostatomegaly or bladder outflow obstruction. Biospies confirmed the diagnosis of severe cystitis without any underlying pathology. The fecaloma was evacuated during the bowel preparation for colonoscopy, which was subsequently normal. A repeated computed tomography ten days later revealed the disappearance of the fecaloma, decreased distension of the small bowel, and the thickened and distended bladder that is unchanged despite the presence of a Foley catheter. There was the presence of air within the bladder.
The patient was put on parenteral nutrition owing to asthenia and inappetence. The bladder catheter was changed every week after failed attempts to void normally. As the sepsis resolved, antibiotic treatment was completed after 12 days.
On October 3rd, the patient became febrile with a temperature of 39.0 °C. A chest X-ray was done to rule out a pneumonia. Pneumoperitoneum was demonstrated . The patient was immediately seen by the general surgeon. The patient soon became hypotensive with systolic blood pressure less than 60. The patient remained responsive. The abdomen was not distended but showed diffuse defense, and the patient clearly had peritonitis.
Because of the urgency of the situation, the patient was promptly brought to the operating room with a presumed diagnosis of perforation of the small bowel. Upon opening the abdomen, a moderate quantity of free fluid with a smell of urine was noticed. There was no pus or pseudomembranes. In the Reitzius’ space, there was a 3 cm perforation of the bladder . The bladder almost reached the umbilicus, despite the Foley catheter well in place. There was a marked edema of the surrounding tissues with a swollen and adherent loop of small bowel. There was no evidence of bowel obstruction or perforation. A 24-French urethral catheter was inserted, and a partial cystectomy was carried out. Culture of the abdominal fluid was done. The peritoneal cavity was cleaned thoroughly, and a peritoneal drain was left in place.
Post-operative course was uneventful. The patient was kept on piperacillin-tazobactam for 10 days. The patient rapidly tolerated food, and intestinal transit resumed within few days. He was discharged three weeks later, and the bladder catheter was changed without any problems. Three months later, the patient reported no complaints. The bladder catheter was removed, and the patients was able to void normally.
Final pathology reports revealed a severe cystitis with complete necrosis of the wall and acute perforation. Culture of the abdominal fluid grew Escherichia coli, the same germ that was found in urine upon admission.