An 11-year-old boy was referred to the maxillofacial unit of Sulaimany Teaching Hospital, Iraq with midline facial destruction. The patient stated that about 6 months prior he had fallen and suffered a nasal fracture and a septal hematoma, and then underwent surgery for reduction of the fractured nasal bone with hematoma drainage under general anesthesia. He had a complete recovery after one month. However, 3 months after the traumatic event, an ulcer like a site of an insect bite appeared and did not heal for 2 weeks, gradually increasing in size . As the lesion enlarged, his nose became blocked with a purulent discharge, leading to a diagnosis of chronic sinusitis.
On admission to our hospital unit, destruction of the entire midface was apparent . He had fever, headache, and appetite loss; disfiguring erosion of the nose; conjunctivitis; and also swelling of the bilateral periorbital, eyelids, and lower part of the nose. There were no intraoral lesions. The regional lymph nodes were not enlarged. The chest was also normal clinically and radiologically. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the face and paranasal sinuses revealed an irregular enhancing lesion in the affected region of the nose extending both nasal cavities and the ethmoid sinus with erosion and perforation of the nasal septum. The brain parenchyma was normal.
Intravenous fluids and antibiotics were given and during cleaning & debridement of the wound a biopsy was taken. Daily irrigation of the wound was started. The patient was not anemic, was HIV-seronegative and did not have syphilis. There was leukocytosis and lymphocytosis, and a culture of the purulent discharge from the lesion grew fungal hypha, so he was given Amphotericin-B 1 mg/kg/day. The biopsy of the lesion showed mucoid material mixed with a fibrinopurulent exudate, with no evidence of malignancy. A second biopsy showed nonspecific inflammation and then a third biopsy was performed and an atypical lymphocytic infiltrate was found, suggesting malignancy . Immunohistochemistry analysis of the biopsy specimen was strongly positive for cytoplasmic CD3, P53, and CD56. All of these features confirmed the diagnosis of ENK/TCL-nasal type with a T immunophenotype . Staging was performed by a medical oncologist through a complete blood count and film, ESR, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and a CT scan of the brain, neck, chest, and abdomen, also bone marrow aspiration and biopsy with CSF cytology were performed. PET scanning was not available. The patient was staged with a localized destructive lesion with no metastasis associated with a high LDH.
Chemotherapy was started using an adriamycin and L-asparginase containing regimen (UKALL 2003 protocol) because this type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) usually responds well to such chemotherapy with cranial prophylaxis. At the end of the induction phase of treatment, he entered a very good partial remission .
During the consolidation phase, he developed sagittal vein thrombosis and febrile neutropenia as a complication of chemotherapy. Chemotherapy was stopped for a short period and supportive treatment started with a very good response. However, after a week he developed a progressive lesion. Chemotherapy was restarted with concomitant radiotherapy, again with a partial response . The patient began preparation for a stem cell transplantation but unfortunately died because of a pulmonary embolism, most probably due to a side effect of L-asparginase, which causes coagulopathy, although it had been stopped and he was on low molecular weight heparin at the time.