A 68-year-old Chinese man complained of sudden, sharp chest pain that had commenced 2 days prior to presentation. He was finally diagnosed as unstable angina, accompanied by hypertension, diabetes mellitus and hyperlipidemia. Coronary computer tomography angiography and two-dimensional echocardiography showed aortic atherosclerosis and no evidence of cardio-embolic phenomenon. Coronary angiography showed severe stenosis of the distal right coronary artery and the proximal left anterior descending coronary artery . After receiving a detailed written informed consent, the patient was treated with PCI. Anti-platelet therapy was loaded with aspirin (300 mg) and clopidogrel (300 mg) before PCI. During PCI, anticoagulation was performed using intravascular heparin with 100 U/kg, and activated coagulation time was monitored and controlled between 250 and 350 s (heparinization). Low-molecular-weight heparin was used for 3 days after PCI. After PCI, the stenosis of the affected arteries were released by two stents implantation, respectively . Chest pain was significantly alleviated. One hour after the procedure, the patient presented with a painless sudden reduction in vision in the right eye; however, he sought ophthalmic consultation until the next morning.
The best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was calculated by counting the fingers at 50 cm oculus dexter and 20/20 oculus sinister. The corneas were clear. Pupils were equal, round, and reactive to light with no afferent pupillary defect. Funduscopic examination revealed a tongue-shaped retinal infarct in the cilioretinal artery, retinal edema, and cotton-wool spots in the right eye . The fundus of his left eye was unremarkable . Optical coherence tomography angiography (OCTA) of the right eye in the fovea showed a decreased flow sign in the superficial and deep retinal layers, extending from the optic disc to the whole macula. OCT B-scan demonstrated hyperreflective thickening of the inner retina, involving the fovea . The peripheral visual field appeared normal. Two-dimensional echocardiography performed after the operation revealed no cardio-embolic evidence. Postoperative carotid ultrasound found atherosclerotic plaques in the right carotid artery, and intracranial magnetic resonance angiography showed no new onset infarct focus . The peri-operative electrocardiogram monitoring captured no evidence of cardiac arrhythmia, and perioperative echocardiography had eliminated valvular heart disease. His blood pressure was 134/86 mmHg. Laboratory results including erythrocyte sedimentation rate, blood glucose, and serum lipids were unremarkable. He refused to undergo fundus fluorescein angiography. Based on the above findings, he was definitively diagnosed with acute, isolated CLRAO.
The patient requested for conservative treatments and was treated with 10 mL S. miltiorrhiza injection once daily for 2 weeks. Oral aspirin (100 mg/day) and clopidogrel (75 mg) were suggested for maintaining; and blood pressure, blood glucose, and serum lipid levels were monitored.
During the two-week follow-up, his BCVA improved to 20/400; however, the fundus appeared similar to that at the time of onset.