A 74-year-old Caucasian man with past history of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) currently in remission presented to our primary care clinic with drooping eyelids, double vision, generalized weakness, proximal muscle weakness and imbalance of two weeks’ duration.
A physical examination revealed ptosis, horizontal nystagmus on right gaze and ataxia. To evaluate for possible brain stem stroke, a computed tomography scan of his head without contrast and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his brain were done and found to be normal. He was then referred to a neurologist. A lumbar puncture was performed and cerebrospinal fluid analysis revealed a white count of 7, glucose level of 91mg/dL, protein level of 74mg/dL, no malignant cells and a negative Lyme titer. The Miller-Fisher variant of Guillain-Barré syndrome was suspected. However, anti-ganglioside antibody GQ1b was found to be negative. With a strong suspicion for an inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy, our patient was empirically started on systemic steroids. He received a full two-week course of oral prednisone 60mg daily and was then tapered off the steroids slowly. He showed significant clinical improvement except for mild persistent generalized weakness.
Three months later, our patient again presented to his neurologist with worsening of the ptosis and generalized weakness. He denied any dysphagia. Myasthenia gravis was suspected. However, acetylcholinesterase antibodies were found to be negative. A nerve conduction study was scheduled.
Meanwhile, within the next two days, he developed worsening weakness of all extremities, associated with severe worsening ptosis, diplopia and paresthesias. He was admitted to our inpatient medicine service. He denied any dysphagia, dyspnea or slurred speech. He did not recall any recent infectious illness.
Our patient’s past history was significant for a diagnosis of CLL 10 years previously during an evaluation of a asymptomatic elevation of his white blood cell count. He was treated with four cycles of fludarabine and cyclophosphamide four years previously for symptomatic thrombocytopenia and had been in remission since then.
On admission to our inpatient medicine service, a physical examination revealed ptosis, vertical and horizontal nystagmus, diminished strength in all extremities, hyporeflexia, and impaired sensation to touch and vibration. Bilateral Babinski signs were absent. His coordination was normal and his gait was stable with a walker.
Laboratory tests including a complete blood count, complete metabolic panel, thyroid function, vitamin B12, folate, glycosylated hemoglobin, aldolase, creatine phosphokinase and a urinalysis were unremarkable. A repeat MRI scan of his brain was normal.
An electromyogram and nerve conduction studies revealed slow nerve conduction and moderately severe demyelinating motor and sensory polyneuropathy involving bilateral peroneal, sural, median and ulnar nerves. MRI of the spine revealed degenerative changes of the lumbar spine but no evidence of any abnormal enhancement of nerve roots. A computed tomography scan of chest and thorax to evaluate for any mediastinal pathology revealed mediastinal lymphadenopathy measuring 1.7×1.3cm . A mediastinoscopy and lymph node biopsy revealed nodular sclerosing Hodgkin’s lymphoma . A paraneoplastic panel for neuropathies including anti-Hu, Yo, Tr, Ma1, Ma2, Ri, cancer-associated retinopathy, Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS), CV2, Zic4, voltage-gated potassium channels, amphiphysin and G-acetylcholine receptor antibodies were all negative .
Initially upon hospitalization, our patient was treated with intravenous immunoglobulin for suspected myasthenia gravis with no clinical improvement. However, after the diagnosis of Hodgkin’s lymphoma was made, he was started on chemotherapy with adriamycin, bleomycin, vinblastine and dacarbazine. At the time of writing, our patient has completed six cycles of this chemotherapy regimen and his neurological symptoms are improving gradually.