A 16-year-old female was admitted to Kyungpook National University Children's Hospital with complaints of diarrhea, hematochezia, and weight loss for a year. She had been diagnosed with latent TB 1 month before her visit, and a latent TB treatment regimen with isoniazid (INH) for 9 months had been started. She had completed Bacillus Calmette–Guérin (BCG) vaccination. Family history revealed that her father had a history of pulmonary TB, which was treated 3 years ago.
On admission, vital signs were within normal range. On physical examination, a perianal fistula with the discharge was observed in the perianal area. Initial laboratory tests showed a white blood cell count of 5,130/μL, a hemoglobin level of 11.6 g/dl, a platelet count of 462,000/μL, an albumin level of 3.5 g/dl, an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 99 mm/h, and a C-reactive protein (CRP) of 3.51 mg/dl. The fecal immunochemical test was positive and fecal calprotectin was 589.9 mg/kg. No pathogens were detected in stool culture and stool polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Chest x-ray showed no abnormal findings in the lungs. However, the interferon-gamma release assay was positive. Ileocolonoscopy showed multifocal ulcers throughout the terminal ileum and colon . Histology revealed cryptitis, crypt abscesses, and noncaseating granulomas; however, the acid-fast bacillus smear, culture, and PCR for TB were negative. Magnetic resonance enterography showed multifocal wall thickening in the colon, ileum, and jejunum and two intersphincteric perianal fistulas . Upper GI endoscopy was unremarkable. The patient was diagnosed with CD with a phenotype of A1b, L3+L4b, B1p, G0 according to the Paris classification. Her pediatric CD activity index (PCDAI) score was 50 and the Simple Endoscopic Score for CD (SES-CD) was 26.
Treatment was begun with exclusive enteral nutrition (EEN), mesalazine, and azathioprine, which were effective. Two weeks after the diagnosis, she underwent seton placement. However, 1 month after finishing her 8-week treatment with EEN, her disease relapsed. Azathioprine was changed to methotrexate (MTX). However, symptoms did not improve, and infliximab (IFX) was started 1 month later, considering that she had taken sufficient latent TB treatment with INH for 5 months. The patient chose to take IFX as her biologic agent between IFX and adalimumab, which are the only biologic agents currently approved for the treatment of moderate-to-severe CD. Chest x-ray before starting IFX showed no abnormal findings in the lungs. After starting IFX, INH therapy for latent TB treatment was extended for a total of 12 months.
Ileocolonoscopy at 1-year follow-up after IFX treatment revealed endoscopic healing. PCR for TB was negative again from specimens of the ileum and cecum. However, ESR and CRP gradually increased 1 month after the ileocolonoscopy, and she developed diarrhea. IFX trough level was 2.4 μg/mL, and IFX antibody was negative. Considering the suboptimal trough level and negative anti-drug antibody status of the patient, secondary loss of response due to nonimmunogenic pharmacokinetic failure was suspected. Therefore, the IFX interval was shortened from every 8 weeks to every 4 weeks.
However, 1 month later, she newly developed symptoms of fever, cough, and sputum. Chest x-ray and chest computed tomography (CT) showed multiple small nodules in both lungs indicating miliary TB . Bronchoscopy was conducted, and TB was confirmed by a positive TB PCR test of the tracheal biopsy specimen and bronchial washing fluid. IFX treatment was discontinued and the standard TB treatment regimen with INH, ethambutol, rifampin, and pyrazinamide for 2 months followed by INH, ethambutol, and rifampin for 4 months was started. MTX and mesalazine were maintained to treat CD. Miliary TB was completely cured after 6 months of TB treatment .
Three months later, an abdominal CT was performed to evaluate her CD after failed ileocolonoscopy due to poor bowel preparation. No active CD involvement was observed in the bowel, whereas a newly developed left psoas muscle abscess and spinal bony destruction were incidentally identified . Surprisingly, the patient did not have any back pain. Spinal MRI was conducted to confirm the diagnosis of TB spondylitis . Ultrasound-guided aspiration for the paraspinal abscess was conducted, and TB PCR was positive. Abscess culture grew M. tuberculosis later. Bacterial and fungus culture grew no isolates. Follow-up chest CT revealed no aggravation of miliary TB. Thus, she was diagnosed with TB spondylitis.
She discontinued all medications for CD treatment and maintained TB treatment for a total of 12 months because extrapulmonary TB had developed within 3 months after the end of her miliary TB treatment. TB treatment regimen included INH, ethambutol, rifampin, and pyrazinamide for a total of 12 months. Spinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at 1-year follow-up after TB treatment revealed that her spinal lesions were cured .
MTX and mesalazine were restarted thereafter. However, symptoms of diarrhea and abdominal pain developed 2 months later. Her PCDAI score was 35 and the exacerbation of CD was confirmed by ileocolonoscopy. Again, acid-fast bacillus smear, culture, and PCR for TB were all negative. Due to the fear of another severe active TB with IFX treatment, vedolizumab (VDZ) was initiated instead. The patient is currently on VDZ for over a year and is maintaining clinical and biochemical remission. No serious adverse events, including TB reactivation, have occurred. Spinal MRI conducted 1 year after VDZ initiation showed no reactivation of her TB spondylitis .
This case report was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Kyungpook National University Chilgok Hospital (No. 2020-09-018). All procedures performed in studies involving human participants were in accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional and national research committees and the Helsinki Declaration (as revised in 2013). Written informed consent was obtained from the patient.