The 40-year-old male patient was enrolled in a study of anti-PD-1 therapy for Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) after a 3-year history of classical HL that was refractory to classical chemotherapeutic agents. The patient began intravenous administration of an anti-PD-1 antibody (SHR-1210, 200 mg) every 2 weeks. Urine protein was negative prior to the initiation of treatment. After the third dose of the anti-PD1 antibody (30 days from initial treatment), the patient developed massive proteinuria (5.47 g/day) with normal serum albumin and creatinine levels (35.3 g/L and 68 μmol/L, respectively). The treatment was suspended and proteinuria was monitored regularly. His urine protein excretion decreased to 0.47 g/day and further to 0.1 g/day on days 30 and 37, respectively, following the final dose of anti-PD1 antibody. However, 2 weeks later, urine protein excretion increased to 3.21 g/day, and to 30 g/day following an additional 14 days. The patient denied receiving administration of any additional drugs during this period and was admitted for further evaluation. Upon admission, his blood pressure was 110/75 mmHg with moderate pitting edema of both lower limbs. Laboratory tests revealed hypoalbuminemia (21 g/L), normal serum creatinine (80 μmol/L), and elevated total serum cholesterol (6.58 mmol/L). A positron emission tomography/computed tomography scan showed complete metabolic remission of HL .
A kidney biopsy was performed. Upon light microscopy, there were 20 glomeruli with no obvious changes. The tubulointerstitium and small arterioles showed no remarkable changes. Immunofluorescence showed the specimen was negative for immunoglobulin G, M, and A, C3, C1q, and κ and λ light chains. Electron microscopy demonstrated diffuse podocyte foot process effacement. The final diagnosis was MCD . We further screened the secondary causes of MCD. A panel of viral antibodies including hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, human immunodeficiency virus were screened and showed no significant positive results.
The patient was prescribed prednisone (1 mg/kg/day). Proteinuria improved within 2 weeks (protein excretion decreased to 1.7 g/day, and serum albumin increased to 31.3 g/L). One month following the initiation of prednisone, proteinuria was fully remitted with serum albumin of 37 g/L. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers were not used. Prednisone was tapered after 8 weeks. Figure shows the changes in serum albumin and 24-h urine protein excretion over the course of treatment.