The subject was a 55-year-old man (162 cm, 64 kg) with a 5-year history of stomach-ache that had worsened during the prior year. He also complained of hypologia, depression, insomnia and hypomnesis during the previous 2 years. Eight months prior to surgery at our hospital, he was admitted to Peking Union Medical College Hospital for medical evaluation immediately after he developed left upper limb twitching. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis revealed the following: cells 280 × 106 L−1 (normal values 0–8 × 106 L−1); lymphocyte 75% (normal values 49–73%); neutrophil 24% (normal values 0–2%); glucose 2.9 mmol·L−1 (normal values 2.8–4.5 mmol·L−1); protein 0.8 g·L−1 (normal values 0.1–0.4 g·L−1); IgG 61.30 mg·L−1 (normal values 10.00–40.00 mg·L−1); and positive antigen-specific oligoclonal bands and NMDAR antibody. Tests for paraneoplastic antibodies, including Hu, Yo, Ri, amphiphysin, CV2 and Ma2, were all negative. A previous PET scan and electronic gastroscopy did not show obvious lesions. The patient was diagnosed with anti-NMDAR encephalitis and treated with intravenous methylprednisolone and immunoglobulin for 8 days, followed by oral prednisone for 2 months. Eventually, his symptoms gradually improved. Two months later, gastroscopy and pathology revealed a malignant lesion in the gastric fundus and cardia (0.6 × 0.7 cm2). Based on previous reports, a neurologist suggested that the perioperative risk for this patient with anti-NMDAR encephalitis was extremely high if the patient underwent gastric cancer surgery, even if this surgery occurred during the recovery period, and recommended that the surgery be performed in our hospital—one of the most advanced and authoritative hospitals on gastric cancer surgery in China—by an experienced perioperative medical management team.
Radical gastrectomy was scheduled after the administration of chemotherapy for 4 months. Prior to surgery, the patient still exhibited a slight but very rare quiver in the left upper limb, but blood tests were all negative for NMDAR antibodies. Therefore, the patient was considered to be in convalescence. Dexamethasone (10 mg) was administered as a pre-anaesthetic medication. Upon the patient’s arrival to the operating room, invasive blood pressure monitoring was established. The patient’s blood pressure was 150/75 mmHg, his heart rate was 90 beats·min−1, and his arterial oxygen saturation was 97% when breathing room air. To ensure stable vital signs, vasopressors, beta blockers, anti-hypertensives and anti-cholinergics were readily available. General anaesthesia was intravenously induced with remifentanil (100 μg), cisatracurium (20 mg) and propofol (150 mg) to facilitate tracheal intubation and was maintained with oxygen (1 L·min−1), air (1 L·min−1), sevoflurane (1.5–2.0%) and remifentanil (0.3 μg·kg−1·min−1). Neuromuscular blockade was maintained with intermittent cisatracurium. The monitored parameters included ECG, ABP, capnography, pulse oximetry and the bispectral index (BIS). The patient’s intraoperative systolic blood pressure was 100–135 mmHg, his heart rate was 60–80 beats·min−1 and his BIS was 40–60. Surgery was completed without any complications. The durations of surgery and anaesthesia were 2 h 22 min and 3 h 18 min, respectively. Intraoperatively, total blood loss was 80 ml, urine output was 200 ml, and total infusion volume was 1600 ml. The patient was then transferred to the ICU with a tracheal tube and mechanical ventilation, administered a low dose of propofol for sedation and monitored closely. Considering that the patient was in convalescence from anti-NMDAR encephalitis, the neurologist suggested that there was no need to use corticosteroids or immunoglobulin. The patient was stable and successfully extubated two days after surgery. No evidence of post-operative complications or worsened neurological symptoms were observed. With an uneventful recovery and disappearance of the quiver, the patient was discharged on the 26th post-operative day after the risk of recurrence of anti-NMDAR encephalitis was evaluated. At the 2-month follow-up, he was symptom-free and exhibited no signs of any post-operative complications.