The patient, a 69-year-old Chinese woman, was admitted to hospital with the complaints of memory loss for one year and nausea and vomiting for four days.
One year previously, the patient began to suffer from memory disorder, and her main clinical manifestation was forgetting recent events. She could not find her way home after going out alone, experienced a loss of calculating power, and used the wrong money for shopping. She gradually showed abnormal behavior, such as repeating requests to return to her original house to find something and simultaneously wearing dirty and clean clothes after bathing. She was diagnosed with cerebral small vessel disease and vascular dementia in another hospital. Her treatment consisted of regulating her blood lipids, loweringher blood pressure, and providing antiplatelet therapy, but her symptoms did not improve. One month prior to admission, she developed intermittent involuntary twitching of the right index finger for a few seconds at a time. Four days before admission, the patient developed nausea and non-projectile vomiting, and her vomitus was biliary fluid. Two days previously, she visited the local hospital, where she underwent head and chest computed tomography (CT) scans that showed bilateral basal ganglia infarction, demyelination of bilateral paraventricular white matter, brain atrophy, slight inflammation and multiple small nodules in both lungs, and bilateral pleural thickening. The symptoms of nausea and vomiting did not improve following treatment with acid suppression and stomach protection. Due to aggravation of symptoms and ineffective treatment she was hospitalized.
The patient was a primary school teacher, otherwise healthy, a nonsmoker and without any medical history of disease.
The patient denied a family history of malignant tumors.
Physical examination revealed a body temperature of 36.4°C, pulse of 92 bpm, a respiratory rate of 18 breaths/min, and blood pressure of 152/96 mmHg. She was conscious, but indifferent. Her pupils were equally large (2.5 mm in diameter) and sensitive to light. When she stared to the left, a small horizontal nystagmus could be seen. Her bilateral frontal lines and nasolabial grooves were symmetrical, and her tongue was in the middle. Her limbs had normal muscle strength and tension. Her bilateral deep and shallow sensations were symmetrical, and her bilateral Babinski sign was negative. Her rallying movement was steady. Her neck was soft, and her meningeal irritation sign was negative. An advanced cognitive function test showed that her orientation of person, time, and place was normal, but her memory, calculation, and judgment abilities were decreased. Her Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score was 21 and included a 3-point reduction in recall, a 5-point reduction in computational power, and a 1-point reduction in judgment.
After admission, a routine urine test showed urinary protein 3+, urinary nitrite +, urinary occult blood 3+, and 92 red blood cells/μL under microscope. Her blood electrolytes showed a potassium level of 2.60 mmol/Land chlorine level of 95.0 mmol/L. Her blood potassium level fluctuated between 2.60 and 3.70 mmol/L; however, this level was normal after vomiting stopped. Her total cholesterol level was 7.04 mmol/L, and her low-density lipoprotein level was 5.17 mmol/L. Her myocardial zymogram showed a lactate dehydrogenase level of 633.0 U/L, homocysteine level of 32.7 μmol/L, and folic acid level of 2.67 μg/L. Her fasting blood sugar level, glycated hemoglobin level, renal function, HIV status, syphilis status, and hepatitis C status were normal. Paraneoplastic tumor markers (anti-Hu antibody, anti-Ri antibody, anti-Yo antibody, anti-amphiphysin antibody, anti-Tr antibody, anti-BAD antibody, anti-CV2 antibody, anti-ANN-3 antibody, anti-PCA-2 antibody, anti-Ma antibody, anti-Ma2/Ta antibody, anti-glutamate receptor NMDA/A1/A2 antibody, anti-GABA B receptor antibody, anti-LGI-1 antibody, andanti-CASPR2 antibody) were normal. Her thyroid function and antibodies, parathyroid hormone, and vitamin B12 levels were normal. Color Doppler ultrasound of her neck blood vessels showed atherosclerotic plaque formation in the left common carotid artery. Color Doppler ultrasound of her heart and electrocardiogram were normal. She underwent lumbar puncture, her cerebrospinal fluid pressure was 130 mmH2O, and routine cerebrospinal fluid, biochemical, and immunoglobulin tests were normal. An EEG showed mild-to-moderate abnormalities, and no spikes or-slow complex waves were found.
A gastroscopy suggested moderate chronic gastritis and antral mucosal erosion. Cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed that her bilateral cerebral hemisphere white matter, brain stem and pons arms were symmetrically flaky, they also had a long T1and T2 sequence signal, a high fluid-attenuated inversion recovery sequence signal, and a high diffusion weighted image sequence signal . A total abdominal CT scan showed multiple thickened areas on the bladder wall with local prominence; multiple cysts in the liver, multiple cysts in the right kidney, and a calcified focus in the spleen. Cystoscopy revealed a volcanic protuberance on the posterior wall of the bladder with a diameter of 6 cm and no pedicle. The pathological diagnosis was CG .
As small cerebrovascular disease was first considered, treatment consisted of blood pressure control, donepezil hydrochloride, and statin treatment for lipid lowering and plaque stabilization was initiated. However, this treatment had no beneficial effect. The patient was also treated continuously with vitamin B1, vitamin B2, vitamin B6, and methyl cobalamin; however, her symptoms did not change, which ruled out Wernicke's encephalopathy. She received an infusion of methylprednisolone 500 mg for five days, which was gradually discontinued. The patient's symptoms, including giggling, ignorance of family, persistent vomiting, inability to eat and walk, and incontinence deteriorated. Her cognitive function worsened, and she could not cooperate to complete the MMSE.
As the patient had CG on the posterior wall of the bladder, which was considered a precancerous lesion, a partial cystectomy was performed on the 31st day after admission. On the second week after surgery, the symptoms of nausea and vomiting were alleviated and the indwelling catheter was removed. The patient was able to eat, and her finger shaking disappeared. On the sixth week after surgery, the patient was able to get out of bed, walk with a stick, and went to the toilet by herself. Her memory also recovered significantly. Her MMSE score was 26, her recall decreased by 3 points, and her computational ability decreased by 1 point.