An 18-year-old Caucasian woman with unremarkable medical history was admitted to the emergency room due to neurological symptoms. She presented with month-long worsening dysphagia, rhinolalia, bilateral ptosis, and skeletal muscle weakness. Signs of muscle fatigability were elicited at the physical exam and then confirmed by electromyography, consistently with neuromuscular junction disease. Blood tests were unremarkable with the exception of acetylcholine receptor antibodies (43 nmol/l, normal if < 0.5 nmol/l). Hence, MG class III, according to the Myasthenia Gravis Foundation of America (MGFA) scale, was diagnosed [, ]. Partial regression of symptoms to class II MG was achieved by oral administration of pyridostigmine 60 mg every 3 hours during the daytime, pyridostigmine sustained-release 180 mg orally before sleeping, prednisone 25 mg orally each day, and immunoglobulins 0.4 g/kg intravenously for 5 days [, ]. Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed a 12 cm anterior mediastinal mass suspicious for thymoma, with confirmed infiltration of the anterior chest wall, lung parenchyma, and pericardium at chest magnetic resonance imaging with contrast. CT-guided fine needle aspiration biopsy yielded a histological diagnosis of B2 thymoma . Due to the young age, a family history of cancer was excluded. Physical exam was negative for signs of mediastinal syndrome and superficial lymph nodes. Metastatic disease was excluded by 18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (18FDG-PET). Patient imaging is shown in Fig. . Accordingly, the clinical stage was cT3 cN0 cM0 (Masaoka-Koga III) . After multidisciplinary team discussion, the tumor was defined as unresectable, and the patient was offered primary chemotherapy with intravenous cyclophosphamide 500 mg/m2, doxorubicin 50 mg/m2 and cisplatin 50 mg/m2 (CAP regimen) on day 1 every 21 days . Primary prophylaxis of chemotherapy-induced neutropenia was not planned due to the potential risk of worsening MG, without evidence about the safety of administering granulocyte colony-stimulating factor in unstable myasthenic patients . Ovarian preservation by gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogue leuprorelin was preferred over oocyte retrieval to expedite the start of chemotherapy . Standard pre-medication with intravenous administration of ondansetron 8 mg, dexamethasone 8 mg and saline was chosen .
Two hours after starting administration of the first course of chemotherapy, following doxorubicin bolus, the patient experienced sudden onset of acute dyspnea with severe respiratory failure (oxygen saturation 75% on room air), refractory to oxygen therapy and bolus hydrocortisone 500 mg and chlorphenamine 10 mg administered intravenously . Physical exam was negative for bronchospasm with diminished vesicular breath sounds. Due to unstable clinical conditions and development of acute respiratory acidosis (pH 7.21, partial pressure of carbon dioxide 88 mmHg), tracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation in the intensive care unit (ICU) were needed. Urgent chest CT scan excluded acute cardiopulmonary events. Life-threatening MGFA class V MC was diagnosed, likely triggered by chemotherapy, thus classified as grade 4 according to the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events version 5.0 (CTCAE v5.0) [, ]. Chemotherapy was held for 2 hours and then, considering its curative intent and in agreement with the family, it was resumed and fully administered during mechanical ventilation. After 24 hours, upon remission of MC and weaning from ventilation, the patient was extubated and could continue receiving MG treatment, together with starting PEX once every three days to control MG and prevent new crises (by replacing 1 plasma volume with 5% human albumin) . In week 2, owing to CTCAE v5.0 grade 3 febrile neutropenia (absolute neutrophil count 60/mm3 and body temperature 38.4 °C), the patient was successfully treated with empirical piperacillin/tazobactam 4 g/0.5 g intravenously every 6 hours until recovery .
After completing a second course of CAP chemotherapy with interposed PEX allowing symptom control, radiological assessment in week 6 documented objective partial response according to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors version 1.1 (RECIST 1.1), with 33% tumor shrinkage (maximum diameter 8 versus 12 cm) . This allowed us to perform radical (R0) extended thymectomy, left upper lung lobectomy and subtotal pericardiectomy, with histological diagnosis of Masaoka-Koga stage III type B2 [, ]. For patient histology, please see Fig. . The patient required early mediastinum and pleural cavity re-exploration due to postsurgical bleeding; persistent hypophonia developed due to postsurgical left vocal cord paralysis. A comparison of CT imaging at baseline and after surgery is shown in Fig. . As suggested for Masaoka-Koga stage III, radiotherapy of 50.4 Gy in 28 fractions was given as postoperative treatment in weeks 15–20 . At the last follow-up visit, 6 months after surgery, the patient was in complete remission with gradually improving MGFA class I MG and mild persistent hypophonia . Despite remarkable levels of psychological burden, the patient’s resilience and high-priority treatment goals were fundamental for successful coping.