A previously healthy 56-year-old woman was diagnosed with chronic myeloid leukemia in the accelerated phase (CML-AP) at the age of 53 years. She soon began induction therapy with dasatinib at a daily dose of 100 mg and successfully achieved a deep molecular response (DMR), defined according to the international scale as ≤ 0.01% BCR-ABL1 transcripts, within 12 months. In peripheral blood samples, marked lymphocytosis was observed at 9 months after initiation of dasatinib, which continued throughout the period of therapy. However, other adverse events including myelosuppression were not observed during dasatinib treatment. At 12 months after starting dasatinib, fecal occult blood was detected at a medical check-up for the first time, which the patient had not previously noticed. Furthermore, she reported no gastrointestinal symptoms, such as abdominal pain, diarrhea, or hematochezia, at that examination. Stool cultures were negative for pathogenic enteric bacteria and parasites, and the cytomegalovirus (CMV) antigen C7-HRP was negative in peripheral blood leukocytes. A total colonoscopy was performed and no active bleeding was seen in the colon. However, multiple shallow areas of mucosal erosion with yellow exudate and congested erythematous lesions, which seemed to occur in a longitudinal direction from the transverse to descending colon, were noted . Mucosal biopsy samples from areas of erosion were obtained and histological results showed increased lymphocytes infiltration to the lamina propria with cryptitis . Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining for CD3 and CD8 was strongly positive, while that for CD4 was relatively weak. These observations led to a clinical diagnosis of colitis associated with dasatinib administration. Although patients with drug-induced colitis are typically required to stop the medication, dasatinib was continued without interruption or dose adjustment in the present patient because of the absence of gastrointestinal symptoms, such as bloody stool and abdominal pain, and peripheral blood test findings were nearly within normal ranges, except for leukocytosis.
Endoscopic follow-up examinations were performed at 6, 12, and 24 months after the diagnosis of colitis, each of which showed no exacerbation of inflammation in the colon . During the follow-up period, the patient had no abdominal symptoms, while marked lymphocytosis was continuously observed. At 30 months after the diagnosis of colitis, a small amount of left pleural effusion without respiratory symptoms was noted, along with dyspnea and a cough during a routine chest X-ray examination. Since dasatinib is thought to cause pleural effusion, the drug was temporarily discontinued. Pleural effusion immediately disappeared along with improvement of lymphocytosis, thus a lower dose of dasatinib (70 mg daily) was started, which maintained the DMR. At 36 months after the initial diagnosis of colitis, follow-up endoscopy revealed that the shallow erosion areas were mostly improved and colonic mucosa was in a near-normal state. Biopsy samples were obtained from colonic mucosa and histological results showed that lymphocytic infiltration was significantly lower in the lamina propria as compared to the past findings of inflamed mucosa of the colon.
Colonic mucosal tissue samples were obtained from areas of shallow erosion during diagnostic and follow-up colonoscopy examinations. Following the biopsy, the specimens were placed in RNAlater solution (Qiagen, Valencia, USA) at room temperature and then stored at -80 °C until gene expression profiling. Microarray analysis (Affymetrix, Inc., Santa Clara, USA) was performed according to the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, total RNA was extracted using an RNeasy Micro kit (Qiagen) and then evaluated with an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, USA). Gene expression profiles were assessed using microarray technology with a Human Gene 2.0 ST Array (Affymetrix, Inc.). Data analysis was performed using Microarray Data Analysis Tool, ver. 3.2 (Filagen, Nagoya, Japan). To normalize variations in staining intensity between the microarrays, the average difference for all genes with a given microarray was divided by the median of all measurements with that microarray. In addition, to identify more specific biological processes, we performed gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of differentially expressed genes in colonic inflamed mucosa. For comparing differences between samples, statistical analysis was performed using a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test.
Of 53,617 transcripts represented by the microarray, 194 were differentially over- or under-expressed (> 2- or < 0.5-fold difference, adjusted p-value < 0.05) in inflamed colonic mucosa samples obtained at the diagnostic colonoscopy examination as compared to normal samples obtained at the follow-up colonoscopy examination. Of those 194 transcripts, 126 were expressed more abundantly and 68 less abundantly in colonic mucosa of our patient with colitis . A list of the 194 dysregulated transcripts for dasatinib-induced colitis is shown in Supplementary Table 1.
Levels of expression of lymphocyte-associated genes and chemokines were substantially increased in inflamed colonic mucosa samples. Moreover, gene ontology (GO) analysis of the entire transcriptome was performed to elucidate the biological meaning of the differentially expressed genes in inflamed colonic mucosa. Of 3214 functional categories examined, the top 20 for differential gene expression are presented in Fig. B. The most prominent biological processes shown in GO analysis were immune system process (GO: 0,002,376), immune response (GO: 0,006,955), positive regulation of immune system process (GO: 0,002,684), regulation of leukocyte proliferation (GO: 0,070,663), and regulation of lymphocyte proliferation (GO: 0,050,670) . GO analysis of the transcriptome for dasatinib-induced colitis also revealed that significant categories for highly expressed genes seemed to have a strong correlation with response to the mucosal immune system occurring on leukocytes, including lymphocytes in colonic mucosa.