A 74-year-old gentleman who was referred to vascular surgery clinic with a 9-cm infra-renal abdominal aortic aneurysm and mild back pain. He is known to have hypertension, coronary artery disease, with history of CABG. He was declared as a high risk for open repair by cardiologist, so percutaneous elective EVAR under local anesthesia was planned. His family and psychosocial history were unremarkable.
A low-profile tri-modular device was chosen because of his small iliac arteries and tortuosity. The procedure was performed by a senior vascular surgery consultant with immense experience in endovascular interventions.
The EVAR was started with bilateral femoral percutaneous access. The main body of the endograft was deployed successfully (right femoral access) with its both short limbs facing anterioposterior position due to the severe iliac tortuosity. The CLG was cannulated without difficulty and the position inside the main body of the graft was confirmed by twisting the pig tail catheter inside.
According to the fluoroscopy images, the location of the wire seemed to be in the correct place so deployment of both iliac limbs was performed. Completion angiogram revealed maldeployment of both limbs in to the ipsilateral gate .
After recognition of the problem we proceeded endovascular salvage. Cannulation of the contra lateral gate was achieved via a retrograde access from the left femoral artery. Hydrophilic wire was manipulated between the maldeployed left iliac limb and the native common iliac artery with the help of Vertebral catheter until we accessed the aneurysmal sac. Another wire was passed and crossed over the flow divider from the ipsilateral limb (right femoral artery). This wire was snared from the left femoral access. Afterwards, three balloon expandable covered stents were deployed starting from the flow divider of the main stent graft all the way down the left CIA bifurcation. The maldeployed limb was squeezed between both iliac stent grafts using kissing balloon technique .
Patient recovered from the procedure without complications and discharged home after two days. He was placed on dual antiplatelets therapy for 6 months. At 3-, 6-, and 12-months follow-up, the patient was symptom free and had good distal pulses on physical examination. Computed tomography angiogram (CTA) follow-up revealed complete exclusion of the aneurysm sac, no endoleak, decreased aneurysm size, and patent bilateral EVAR limbs (, ). The patient was instructed to continue aspirin for life and educated about the importance of an annual CTA follow-up.