Fever with frequent convulsions for half a day.
A 4-year-old girl (weighing 17 kg) got type A influenza with a high fever onset, who did not have influenza vaccination, and rapidly developed frequent convulsions, which resulted in her emergency admission. After admission, the patient underwent clinical and biochemistry examinations as well as Oseltamivir and intravenous immunoglobulin treatments. On the second day of the illness, she developed an acute disorder of consciousness. Therefore, lumbar puncture was performed, and the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pressure was as high as 250 mmH2O , then her first neuroimaging examination showed the Dandy-Walker variant (DWV) and pontocerebellar hypoplasia (PCH) . When predicting that unstable intracranial structures detected by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) might have disastrous consequences in the progression of IAE, she was transferred into the pediatric intensive care unit immediately and underwent continuous assessment of clinical condition while she did not have instability of basic vital signs; at the same time, her parents were fully informed about the risk and prognosis.
On the fifth day of the disease, she suddenly developed anisocoria and disappearance of light reflection, irregular breathing rhythm, acute pulmonary edema, and deep coma. After this, her brain MRI showed that the brainstem was significantly displaced by pressure, and the medulla oblongata exhibited “Z-like compressive folding”; cerebellar incision was observed; some ventricles disappeared; and there were multiple intracranial lesions. Before she was died of brain stem functional failure, her neuroelectrophysiology examination showed electric silence . Although she was ultimately died within three weeks after onset, the parents expressed understanding and did not trigger a doctor-patient conflict.
She had backward neurodevelopment, and could not stand alone until being over 1 year old and walk alone until being over 2 years old. However, the cause had not been diagnosed until this admission.
Unremarkable.
The patient was diagnosed with influenza A by real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. Clinical biochemistry showed that blood ALT, AST, LDH, and CK were higher than those in the flu-survivor group, AQP-4 Ab in blood was positive (388.154 ng/mL), and CSF-pressure was as high as 250 mmH2O with normal biochemical and routine indicators of CSF. On the second day after the onset, which was 3 d before brainstem lesions, she underwent the first brain MRI and was found to have DWV . Sagittal T1WI MRI showed posterior fossa cystic lesions, cyst-like dilatation of the fourth ventricle and communication with the cistern magnum (blue arrow), and hypoplasia of the inferior vermis of cerebellum. The developed superior vermis was elevated upwardly and rotated by posterior fossa cystic lesions (yellow arrow), which caused the death. The pons was smaller, and the medulla was not compressed (white arrow). Sagittal T2WI MRI showed that the gyri were swelling, the sulcus became superficial (arrow), the supratentorial cranial pressure was increased, the pressure gradient pushed the supratentorial structure down (blue arrow), resulting in compression of the posterior fossa cystic lesion and volume decrease , and the medulla moved down and folded into a “Z-like” shape (white arrow). Axial T2WI MRI showed that the supratentorial structure pushed down the curtain, the pons and medulla were obviously compressed by the hernia tissue (blue arrow), and the surrounding CSF gap disappeared. Posterior fossa cystic lesions shrank in volume under compression, with residual bilateral cystic areas (orange arrow). Figure shows axial T2WI MRI of the basal ganglia after and before brainstem folding. After brain stem folding, swelling of the bilateral putamen, cauda nucleus, frontal lobe, parietal lobe, and occipital cortex, increased T2WI signals, and slightly enlarged bilateral lateral ventricle can be seen . Three days before brain stem folding, no swelling was observed in the bilateral putamen, caudate nucleus, frontal lobe, parietal lobe, or occipital cortex, with normal T2WI signals, and no expansion was observed in the bilateral lateral ventricles. Before the patient died, continuous electroencephalograph monitoring at bedside revealed electric silence .