A 30-year-old man presented with a 6-month history of horizontal diplopia without other symptoms. He was diagnosed with left-sided abducens nerve palsy by an ophthalmologist and referred to our hospital for further investigation. Other than bronchial asthma, his medical history was not significant. Neurological examination revealed left abducens nerve palsy without signs of impairment of any other cerebral nerves. His visual acuity was 1.2 on the right side and 1.0 on the left side. Laboratory test results, including HbA1c, C-reactive protein, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate, were normal. MRI with high-resolution T2-weighted imaging driven equilibrium radiofrequency reset pulse (T2WI-DRIVE) sequence showed pinching of the left abducens nerve between the elongated left VA and left AICA . MRI showed no abnormal findings in the brainstem, cavernous sinus, or orbit. Based on these MRI findings, sandwich-type neurovascular compression was thought to be the cause of the abducens nerve palsy.
Because his symptoms did not improve spontaneously in 6 months, we decided to perform MVD for this patient. Surgery was performed using a standard lateral suboccipital approach. After the dural incision, the cerebellomedullary cistern was opened to release cerebrospinal fluid and allow sufficient cerebellar relaxation. The arachnoid membrane just above the lower cranial nerves was dissected. The lower cranial nerves were further dissected free from the choroid plexus to enable a clear view of the abducens nerve. The abducens nerve was found to be severely compressed from both sides by the VA and AICA . Severe indentation of the abducens nerve was observed after moving the VA away from the abducens nerve . The VA was first transposed and fixed to the dura mater of the petrous bone using a Teflon sling with the dripping of fibrin glue. Next, when we tried to mobilize the AICA toward the petrous bone, the AICA was found to penetrate the abducens nerve . Because this penetration limited mobilization of the AICA toward the petrous bone, the AICA was attached to the pons with Teflon felt and fibrin glue to move it away from the main trunk of the abducens nerve. The neurovascular compression of the abducens nerve was resolved after these procedures .
Postoperatively, the patient presented transient dysphagia, presumably due to intraoperative retraction of the lower cranial nerves, which recovered after a few weeks. MRI demonstrated the disappearance of the neurovascular conflict of the abducens nerve with the VA and AICA . The abducens nerve palsy gradually improved and eventually resolved 4 months after the operation.