A 52-year-old male presented to our hospital with low back pain for 1 mo and numbness and pain in the left thigh for 27 d.
One month ago, the patient experienced low back pain and discomfort, as well as obvious limitations in inactivity, whenever he suddenly turned around. The pain was constant, aggravated by activity, and occasionally worsened at night. He visited our hospital for treatment after experiencing numbness in the lateral side of his left thigh, pain, and weakness for 27 d.
The patient had diabetes and had been taking insulin injection, with good glycemic control. He denied any history of hypertension, coronary heart disease, tuberculosis, malaria, and other infectious diseases, other surgical histories, major trauma, blood transfusion history, and food or drug allergy.
The patient married at the appropriate age, had two daughters, and a healthy spouse and parents, and denied any family history of infectious or genetic diseases.
Consciousness is clear, walking into the ward, the waist does not touch an obvious mass, the skin color is normal, tenderness and percussion pain are positive, the pain radiates to the back of the left thigh, bilateral iliopsoas muscle strength level 5, both lower limb sensation and muscle strength are normal, bilateral dorsal foot and posterior tibial artery pulse can be palpatible, bilateral tendon reflex and Achilles tendon reflex are normal, bilateral patellar clonic and ankle clonic are negative.
Routine blood test results were as follows: White blood cells, 8 × 109 cells/L; hemoglobin, 145 g/L; and total platelet count, 438 × 109 cells/L. Biochemical analysis revealed the following: Total protein level, 71 g/L; albumin, 46.8 g/L; creatinine 61 μmol/L; C-reactive protein, 2.8 mg/L; D-dimer, 2.39 mg/L; and erythrocyte sedimentation rate, 16 mm. The urine and stool examination results were normal.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of lumbar spine showed that the lumbar 2 vertebral body was irregularly and slightly longer, short T1-weighted imaging (T1WI) and slightly longer and short T2-weighted imaging (T2WI) mixed signals, local protrusion to the left posterior, spinal canal and left intervertebral foramen compression changes, left pedicle involvement. Computed tomography (CT) findings of the lumbar vertebrae showed pathological changes in lumbar vertebra 2, bone destruction, involvement of the left vertebral arch, and pathological fractures. Combined positron emission tomography (PET) and CT (PET/CT): First, there was local bone destruction and increased metabolism in the lumbar vertebrae 2, small cavities in cervical 7, thoracic 3, 7, and normal metabolism in 8 vertebral bodies. Second, multiple slightly low-density nodular shadows with normal metabolism suggested that the liver was punctured and biopsied in the lumbar vertebrae 2. Therefore, it was recommended to combine enhanced CT and MRI examinations. Third, both lungs had multiple nodules but no increase in metabolism. Therefore, it was advisable to re-examine the anti-inflammatory treatment. Finally, PET/CT of the brain revealed no clear signs of abnormal metabolisms .
Lumbar puncture biopsy showed small round cell tumors in the trabecula, with small, medium, large and nucleoli. Combined with the immunohistochemical results, this finding was consistent with that of metastatic MM .
Immunohistochemistry results were as follows: HMB45(+), S100(+), CK(-), CK20(-), Villin(-), CD3(-), CD138(-), Kap(-), Lam(-), PLAP(-), alkp80(NKX2.2(+)), CD43(-), MPO(-), CD1a(-), CgA(-), Syn(-), CD56(-), and Ki-67(40%+).