A 75-year-old female pedestrian was hit by a motor vehicle. Examination by the emergency medical service crew found her heart rate 130/min, systolic blood pressure 84 mmHg, initial oxygen saturation 78% without supplemental oxygen. On the way to our hospital, an emergency physician got into the ambulance, established two intravenous lines and started fluid resuscitation. He noticed that her lung sounds were decreased on both sides.
Upon admission to our resuscitation bay, she had developed cardiac arrest but still breathed spontaneously. While undergoing cardiopulmonary resuscitation, we detected a pelvic fracture on palpation and found no fluid accumulation in the thoracic or abdominal cavities with ultrasound. We then performed a resuscitative thoracotomy in order to clamp the descending aorta and perform direct cardiac massage because we expected that the cause of cardiac arrest was bleeding from the severe pelvic fracture. At the time of the thoracotomy, the stomach and greater omentum prolapsed out of the body and spontaneous circulation was immediately recovered. We also found that the descending aorta and heart were not collapsed, and the heart was beating strongly. Although we were puzzled why the aorta and heart did not collapse despite the expected severe bleeding, we moved on to manage the pelvic fracture.
While placing a pelvic C clamp to stabilize the pelvic ring and pelvic packing to control bleeding from the retroperitoneal space, we temporarily closed the thoracotomy incision to control wound surface bleeding without clamping the aorta. In spite of these treatments, she gradually became hemodynamically unstable, so resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta (REBOA) was performed. A contrast computed tomography (CT) scan was performed of the head, chest, and abdomen, which revealed multiple trauma, including traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage, left diaphragm rupture, multiple rib fractures, and a severe pelvic fracture . After confirming the absence of a basal skull fracture, a nasogastric tube was inserted, but it was unable to reduce gastric contents. To control hemodynamic instability, we performed a transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) of the internal iliac artery and transformed the patient to the intensive care unit (ICU).
Despite treatment of the severe pelvic fracture with a pelvic C clamp, pelvic packing, and TAE, her hemodynamic instability continued. We considered that the persistent shock was caused by an injury other than pelvic fracture, so we decided to explore the abdominal and thoracic cavities because of the presence of the diaphragmatic injury. As we were unable to maintain adequate hemodynamics in spite of administering massive transfusion protocol and continuous epinephrine infusion, we introduced arterio-venous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO). Under ECMO support, an emergency operation was performed with a two-pronged approach with a laparotomy and thoracotomy. Exploring the thoracic and abdominal cavities, we detected only the diaphragm rupture and prolapsed stomach. There was no other obvious intraabdominal organ or thoracic injury. We closed the diaphragm rupture site and chose an open abdominal management to avoid abdominal compartment syndrome. Despite these treatments, the patient died shortly after returning to the ICU. We think that the cause of death was a combination of hemorrhagic shock, traumatic coagulopathy, and post cardiac arrest syndrome caused by the tension gastrothorax.