A 31-year-old woman experienced a headache and a slight fever the day after her second inoculation of the COVID-19 vaccination (Comirnaty, Pfizer-BioNTech). Incidentally, she had no adverse reactions after her first vaccine (Comirnaty) other than a fever lasting 2 days. She recovered from the headache and fever the next day; however, 4 days later, she experienced bilateral hyperemia and blurred vision. Then, she visited an ophthalmology clinic where bilateral decreased visual acuity and panuveitis were observed. She was referred to our hospital 2 days later. She had no particular past history and family history. In addition, she did not show any neurological symptoms and skin lesions.
At her first visit, her best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 0.2 in her right eye (OD) and 0.1 in her left eye (OS) with mild myopia. The intraocular pressure was normal in both eyes (OU). Slit-lamp examination revealed bilateral ciliary injections and bilateral anterior chamber inflammation (2 + flare and 3 + cells) with fine keratic precipitates and anterior vitreous cells. Fundus examination revealed redness of the optic disc and a scattering of cream-white placoid lesions OU. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) revealed serous retinal detachment (SRD) and choroidal thickening OU. Fundus autofluorescence (FAF) examination did not reveal any abnormal findings . Fluorescein angiography (FA) revealed hypofluorescence in the early phase and hyperfluorescence in the late phase corresponding to the cream-white lesions OU. Indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) revealed sharply marginated hypofluorescent dots of various sizes throughout the mid-venous and late phases OU , which differed from typical findings seen in Vogt–Koyanagi–Harada (VKH) disease (i.e., vaguely marginated hypofluorescent small dots scattered throughout the fundus). Both blood analysis and urine analysis showed normal results, including a negative T-SPOT.TB, and cerebrospinal fluid examination did not show pleocytosis. Positron emission tomography–computed tomography also showed no abnormality. We did not request a brain MRI due to the absence of any neurological symptoms (including headache). The patient was suspected of having APMPPE with relatively severe anterior chamber inflammation; therefore, she was observed without any medications. Three days later, her SRD disappeared spontaneously.
However, her anterior chamber inflammation persisted, and her subjective symptom (darkening of vision) did not improve. At the request of the patient and her family, she received prednisolone (PSL; 100 mg for 3 days following 80 mg for 2 days). Seven days after the first visit, the hyperfluorescent lesions on FA and the hypofluorescent dots on ICGA partially improved; however, the patient complained that her vision was becoming darker. Her BCVA improved only to 0.7 OD and 0.6 OS. Additionally, FAF examination revealed the development of hyperautofluorescent lesions, and OCT revealed impairment of the outer retinal layer showing irregularity in or disappearance of the ellipsoid and interdigitation zones . These findings were seen more broadly than the scattering white spots. According to these findings, we considered that the inflammation was exacerbating that required additional anti-inflammatory treatments. Therefore, steroid pulse therapy (1,000 mg of methylprednisolone daily for 3 days) was performed, followed by 60 mg of oral PSL.
Five days after the steroid pulse treatment, the hyperfluorescence on FAF disappeared, and the outer retinal layer on OCT improved . The patient’s BCVA recovered to 1.0 OU, and oral PSL was tapered and stopped 5 weeks later. Twelve months after the end of treatment, the patient did not show any recurrences, and no retinal scar lesions have developed. She did not receive a third COVID-19 vaccination.