A 54-year-old Sinhalese female who is a known patient with type 2 diabetes mellitus for 2 years presented with a history of left-sided (L/S) ankle joint (AJ) pain and swelling starting 5 months ago. A month later, she developed right-sided (R/S) AJ pain followed by L/S knee joint pain and multiple small joints of both hands with some morning stiffness lasting approximately 1–2 hours each day. While joint pain was progressing, she also developed dryness of the mouth and eyes, which became prominent 2 months before presentation. For 2 months she also had pain in the bilateral calf and thigh with difficulty getting up from the seated position. For 1 month, she noticed some roughening of the tips and sides of her fingers. She also had constitutional symptoms including generalized malaise, loss of weight, and loss of appetite. At the time of presentation, she had R/S knee joint (KJ) pain, pain in the small joints of the hands, L/S calf pain, dry eyes, and dry mouth with difficulty swallowing solid foods. She did not have excessive loss of hair oral ulcers or photosensitive rashes. There was no skin tightening in the hands, finger discoloration, recurrent oral ulcers, hair loss, photosensitivity, or any other skin rashes. Moreover, there was no significant weight gain, cold intolerance, or any other features of hypothyroidism, and bowel habits were normal.
She did not have a history suggestive of venous thrombosis or pregnancy loss. Her diabetes was well controlled with oral hypoglycemic, and no evidence of macro- or microvascular complications was evident in history. There was no family history of autoimmune disease. She had undergone two lower (uterine) segment cesarean sections (LSCS), appendectomy, paraumbilical hernia repair (PUH), and total abdominal hysterectomy (TAH) previously without any anesthetic complications.
On examination, she was of average build and her lips were dry with white depositions in gums but no parotid swelling. Thickened skin over the tips and sides of her fingers was compatible with the mechanic’s hand sign . No other skin manifestations of autoimmune disease were found, including Gottron papules or malar rash. She was not pale or icteric and had no hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, or parotid swelling.
Her musculoskeletal examination revealed mild tenderness on her L/S KJ, metacarpophalangeal joints (MCP), and proximal interphalangeal joints (PIP) of both hands, which sum up to a Disease Activity Score 28 (DAS 28) of 6.90, indicating severe disease activity. Muscle examination using Manual Muscle Testing Grading system (MMT) showed an asymmetric proximal myopathic pattern in bilateral lower limbs (left hip flexion 3+, right hip flexion 4, and hip extension 5 bilaterally) without any small muscle involvement in both upper and lower limbs.
Her breast examination revealed a firm-to-soft small mobile lump at the left breast with no skin changes or axillary lymphadenopathy suggestive of malignancy. She had a heart rate 88 beats per minute, blood pressure 110/70 mmHg, and normal first and second heart sounds. Her systemic examination was normal without any fine bibasal crepitation, organomegaly, or neuropathy.
Her Initial investigations are summarized below . Her blood panel revealed high total white blood cell count (WBC) with mild eosinophilia and few atypical lymphocytes, normochromic normocytic red cells, and rouleaux formation. Her erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 125 mm per hour, rheumatoid factor (RhF) 202 U/ml, and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody level (anti-CCP) 717 U/ml confirmed rheumatoid arthritis. As part of the diagnostic workup, screening for hepatitis B, hepatitis C, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) serologies were done and found to be negative.
Electromyography (EMG) showed fibrillatory potentials of short duration and small amplitude, as well as polyphasic motor unit action potentials (MUAPs) with early recruitment consistent with myositis. Muscle biopsy showed occasional atrophic fibers, focal reduction of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class 1 stain, and deposits of C5b9 membrane complex in the capillaries; observations are consistent with early changes of dermatomyositis .
An extractable nuclear antigen panel (ENA) was done (immunoblot method), revealing borderline-positive anti-aminoacyl-tRNA antibodies (anti-Jo-1), and anti-double-stranded DNA (DS DNA), anti-Sjögren syndrome A-native (60 kDa) (SSA), RO-52 recombinant, anti-Sjögren syndrome B (SSB), antibodies directed against the U1 ribonucleoprotein/anti-Smiths (RNP/SM), anti-PM/Scl antibodies, centromere B (CB), proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), nucleosome (NUC), histone (HI), ribosomal-P-protein antibody, and anti-mitochondrial M2 antibody (AMA-M2) were negative.
Her lung functions were assessed for possible ILD. Chest x-ray was normal, oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 96% at rest and 98% after 6 minutes walking (408 m), spirometry was normal [FEV1/FVC 83, FEV1 1.86 L (108%), FVC—2.24 L (110%), FEV25-75 68%]. As the lung function test was normal and the patient was not symptomatic, high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) was not done. Considering the symptoms and the autoantibody profile, a diagnosis of ASA overlap with RA was made.
She was also evaluated for SS and was found to have a positive Schirmer's test and reduced saliva flow on sialometry and sialogram . A minor salivary gland biopsy of the lower lip showed minor salivary tissue containing a dense localized periductal lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate in a few foci with epimyoepithelial islands confirming SS; however, the Focus Score (FS), which correlates with the disease activity, was not given in the histology report .
Serum protein electrophoresis showed a mild polyclonal increase in gamma globulins and no abnormal monoclonal bands. Her chest x-ray was normal, and her x-ray hands showed no calcifications of deformities. Ultrasound abdomen was normal with no organomegaly or lymphadenopathy. Two-dimensional echocardiogram was normal with ejection fraction (EF) of > 60%.
Her breast lump was evaluated with mammography, showing a mass at left breast 11 o’clock position that could represent a fibroadenoma (typical), a focal asymmetry at the upper outer quadrant of the right breast (RUOQ) with a corresponding complex cystic lesion on ultrasound scan (USS) [Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System (BIRADS) IVa: low level of suspicion for malignancy], and fine pleomorphic group calcification in lower inner quadrant of the right breast, suggesting true cut biopsy and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for further evaluation. MRI of the breast showed two solid lesions, likely benign, at the 10 o’clock position of the right breast and 9 o’clock position of the left breast. The true cut biopsy was unsuccessful, but further assessment was not done owing to the benign nature of the lump after a discussion with radiologists and the surgical team.
After confirming the diagnosis of overlapping rheumatoid arthritis–antisynthetase syndrome and secondary Sjögren’s syndrome, she was started on methotrexate (MTX) 7.5 mg weekly and sulfasalazine 500 mg three times daily (tds) with oral prednisolone 40 mg/day bridging therapy and tailed off later. A course of oral amoxicillin 500 mg tds, metronidazole 400 mg tds for 3 days was given, and long-term 0.2% chlorhexidine mouthwash 10 ml two times daily (bd) and pilocarpine eye drops were also prescribed for the SS by the oral and maxillofacial surgery team. Her MTX dose increased according to the response and disease activity monitored at the medical clinic, and her DAS 28 score decreased from 6.90 to 2.40 within 4 months of treatment, indicating remission. Her muscle power improved to MMT grade 5, but we were unable to repeat the shimmers test or salivary gland biopsy, yet she showed remarkable improvement of her xerostomia, and parotid swelling. Owing to her good compliance, the disease was in remission without the development of any joint deformity on 6-month follow-up visit.