A 45-year-old Caucasian man was referred for evaluation of a large right subcostal hernia and associated loss of abdominal domain, in that the majority of the patient’s abdominal contents were outside the abdominal cavity. Three years prior to referral he had undergone an open cholecystectomy via a generous right subcostal incision. He subsequently developed a lateral subcostal incisional hernia, which was repaired on three separate occasions using an underlay of composite synthetic mesh. The third repair was complicated by infection of the mesh, which required explantation of the prosthesis. The skin was simply closed over the remaining hernia defect, which continued to enlarge, resulting in loss of domain and ulceration of the overlying skin. Fearing evisceration, the patient sought a second opinion at our institution.
On initial presentation, our patient was noted to be obese (with a body mass index of 33.6kg/m2). He acknowledged tobacco usage of one pack per day. A history of diabetes mellitus was not present. On examination, he was noted to have an extensive subcostal hernia defect, with the fascial defect measuring approximately 25 × 20cm (500cm2) by palpation, with ulceration of the overlying skin . The patient was counseled to stop smoking, which he subsequently did. He was reevaluated approximately eight weeks later, at which time he was scheduled for elective repair.
Repair of the hernia was approached as follows: The ulcerated skin overlying the defect was excised completely via an elliptical incision. An extensive enterolysis was then performed to free the viscera from the overlying skin and the undersurface of the fascia. An omental flap measuring 25cm in length and 10cm in width was mobilized, based on the right gastroepiploic blood supply. Subcutaneous flaps were then raised to expose the inferior, medial, and lateral fascial surfaces for fixation of a porcine acellular dermal matrix (PADM, Strattice™, LifeCell Corporation, Branchburg, NJ, USA). PADM was chosen due to the presence of active skin ulceration. No fascia could be identified superiorly, so the superior subcutaneous flap was raised to expose the costal margin. A 20 × 30cm piece of PADM was placed into the wound and secured to the medial, lateral, and inferior aspects of the defect using interrupted permanent mattress sutures placed 2cm apart with a minimum of a 5cm underlay. Superiorly, the PADM was secured to the body of the rib using Mitek™ (DePuy, Raynham, MA, USA) bone anchors with pre-attached sutures, placed 2 to 3cm apart . After placement of the bone anchors, the suture material was passed over the superior border of the rib and into the abdomen, thereby avoiding the neurovascular bundle. The sutures were then used to achieve a 5cm underlay under the costal margin as well. A small defect measuring 2 × 3cm was left in the epigastric region immediately below the xiphoid process, which was used to deliver the omental flap into the wound . The flap was oriented over the PADM implant, two 19 French™ (Ethicon, Somerville, NJ, USA) closed suction drains were placed, and the skin flaps were closed over the repair .
Postoperatively, antibiotics were discontinued within 24 hours. The patient did well and was discharged home on postoperative day 5 with all drains removed. His wound healed without complication. Follow-up computerized tomography was done six weeks postoperatively, which revealed no evidence of recurrence or seroma .
Approximately nine weeks postoperatively, he presented to the clinic with fever, as well as erythema and fluctuance of his incision site. He was subsequently taken to the operating room for wound exploration and debridement. Upon opening the wound, it was discovered that a portion of the omental flap had become necrotic. This was excised without difficulty and the remaining healthy omentum left in situ. The PADM underlay repair was still intact and was fully incorporated at the wound edges. Exuberant granulation tissue was present on the surface of the PADM, indicating ongoing neovascularization . The wound was then re-closed over drains and our patient was discharged the following day. He healed without further incident and has no evidence of recurrent hernia at six months of follow-up .