An 80-year-old female with no significant medical history presented with sudden onset, left-sided chest pain. Twelve-lead ECG performed a few minutes after the onset of chest pain by the ambulance crew resulted in a diagnosis of acute anterior ST-elevation myocardial infarction. Upon arrival to our institution, she was administered oral loading doses of antiplatelet medications (aspirin 300 mg and ticagrelor 180 mg) and transferred to the cardiac catheter laboratory for emergency invasive coronary angiography with a view to percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). Prior to angiography, a full cardiovascular examination excluded a murmur and there were no signs of a cardiac shunt.
Coronary angiography demonstrated mild, non-flow-limiting stenosis in the proximal left anterior descending (LAD) artery which was not felt to be unstable by the interventional cardiologist and hence intracoronary imaging and provocation testing were not performed (Video 1). The remaining arteries had minor, non-flow-limiting atheroma . Left ventriculography showed apical ballooning consistent with TTC (Video 2) and in the absence of flow-limiting coronary artery disease and presence of laminar (Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction-3) flow, a decision was made not to proceed to PCI. The initial diagnosis of TTC was established by angiographic assessment.
Relevant admission blood tests are shown in . Serum Troponin-T was significantly elevated at 1940 ng/L. An angiotensin-converting enzyme-inhibitor and a beta-blocker were commenced. The following day, a physical examination revealed a new pansystolic murmur. After discussion with the patient’s primary care provider, there was no previously documented cardiac murmur. Urgent contrast-enhanced echocardiography performed the day after admission (Video 3) showed a significant apical septal defect suggestive of a ventricular septal defect (VSD). LV systolic function was moderately impaired with an ejection fraction of 40% in the presence of dyskinesis of all four apical LV segments resulting in apical ballooning. There was no LV outflow tract obstruction, systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve or mitral regurgitation. These echocardiographic findings could be consistent with TTC, however, the presence of a VSD raised the suspicion of an alternative diagnosis.
Repeat ECG on Day 2 showed progressive deep T wave inversion in anterolateral leads. By Day 3, the patient developed urosepsis with atrial fibrillation, hyperactive delirium, and hyponatraemia. The patient became clinically unstable requiring intravenous antibiotics and careful fluid balance monitoring. Due to the development of a VSD, the diagnosis of TTC was re-evaluated. Cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging was performed on Day 10 once the patient was clinically stable and her delirium resolved, permitting safe and feasible CMR imaging.
CMR demonstrated transmural late gadolinium hyperenhancement (LGE) at the apical septal, apical anterior, and apical inferior LV segments with extension into the apical right ventricular (RV) which became subendocardial on extension into the mid-septal and mid-anterior segments, in keeping with acute transmural MI in the mid-LAD territory. There was resultant akinesis of the LV and RV apices and associated apical VSD measuring 9 mm × 12 mm with Qp:Qs 2.7 (RV stroke volume = 2.7 × LV stroke volume) in keeping with significant left-to-right shunting . No significant valve dysfunction was present thus allowing this method of Qp:Qs calculation to be employed. Oedema imaging was not performed in order not to jeopardize the ability to perform LGE imaging as the patient struggled with breath-holding and tolerating the study.
Following joint cardiology and cardiothoracic surgery multidisciplinary team discussion, the diagnosis was revised to an anterior MI with spontaneous LAD recanalization. The prospect of surgical intervention was assessed. The P-Possum score was calculated; the predicted mortality was 26.7% and predicted morbidity 79.9%. The consensus was that percutaneous device closure would be the best option due to prohibitively high surgical risk.
Under general anaesthesia and transoesophageal echocardiographic and fluoroscopic guidance, the VSD was found to be serpiginous. Successful percutaneous closure was achieved with the deployment of three Amplatzer Vascular Plugs-II: 9 mm × 22 mm, 12 mm × 9 mm, and 9 mm × 20 mm with resultant significantly reduced shunting . Following an uncomplicated recovery, the patient was discharged after 4 days, with recovery to her baseline functional status and mobilization with no cardiovascular symptoms. At clinic review 1-month later she remains well with no intrusive cardiovascular symptoms. ECG findings showed the same T wave inversion anteriorly and no significant ST-segment changes. The patient was re-reviewed again in clinic after referral from her Primary Care Physician as she complained of mild breathlessness. A repeat CMR was arranged 4 months post-device closure. This showed a mildly dilated LV with thinned and akinetic apical segments. All other segments were normokinetic with uniformly normal wall thickness (max 8 mm basally). Mild LV systolic dysfunction with an ejection fraction of 60% (previously 50%) was present. All three VSD devices were well seated with only minimal residual shunting . No valvular abnormalities noted apart from mild tricuspid regurgitation. The symptoms are stable and annual cardiology follow-up is being arranged.