The patient is a 66-year-old male who developed left upper extremity swelling.
The patient had an episode of syncope of unclear etiology in January 2020. He started to have pain under his left arm in February that waxed and waned. Then over the course of a few weeks, he started having left upper extremity swelling. The patient had an ultrasound and mammogram that were reportedly negative. This was followed by a computed tomography (CT) of the chest without contrast on April 9, 2020 that showed a large, irregularly marginated mass arising in the left axilla.
Past medical history is notable for benign prostatic hyperplasia, chronic kidney disease stage III, type 2 diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and pulmonary hypertension.
The patient had a mother with history of breast cancer and colon cancer.
Temperature: 36.78 °C, heart rate: 93/min, respiratory rate: 16/min, blood pressure: 125/73 mmHg, SpO2: 100%, weight: 104.5 kg, body mass index: 31.20 kg/m2. General: Alert and oriented, no acute distress. Eye: Normal conjunctivae, anicteric. Head/ears/nose/mouth/throat: Normocephalic, no trauma, normal hearing. Neck: Supple, non-tender. Cardiovascular: Regular rate and rhythm, normal peripheral perfusion. Lung: Lungs were clear to auscultation, respirations were non-labored. Abdomen: Soft, nontender, nondistended, no splenomegaly. Hematological/lymphatics: No lymphadenopathy: Cervical, supraclavicular, axillary, inguinal. Extremities: Normal range of motion, normal strength, no deformity. Integumentary: Warm, dry, intact. Neurologic: Alert, oriented, no focal defects. Cognition and speech: Oriented, speech clear and coherent, functional cognition intact. Psychiatric: Cooperative, appropriate mood and affect.
The specific examinations and results are listed in Table . Pathology results are provided in Figures -.
Chest CT in September 2020 showed a 14 cm irregularly, marginated mass arising in left axilla. There was questionable invasion of the left subscapularis muscle and thickening the right pectoralis minor muscle. Positron emission tomography (PET) scan showed standardized uptake value (SUV) of 26.