The EOM flap was performed in a 57-year-old female for chest wall reconstruction after resection of a grade 3 angiosarcoma of the left breast. The patient first underwent a modified radical mastectomy without breast reconstruction, followed by wide excision of the chest wall skin once angiosarcoma was confirmed. The EOM flap was used for delayed reconstruction of the patient’s chest wall defect which measured approximately 30 cm × 30 cm , a surface area of 900 cm2. The flap was elevated without the anterior rectus sheath, in the inter-fascial planes between the deep surface of the external oblique muscle and the superficial surface of the internal oblique, with minimal muscle mobilization, and with no sacrifice to the vascular pedicle or perforating vessels from the external oblique to the subcutaneous flap, which were all clearly identified and preserved during the procedure for safety precautions. It was then inserted with minimal tension. Further mobilization could easily have been performed with complete elevation of the muscle to the posterior axillary line and detachment of the EOM off its costal origins and its iliac crest insertion; care taken to avoid injury to its blood supply. The patient was discharged postoperative day #7 and was directed to shower and perform local wound care with Xeroform and abdominal pad dressings. The patient was followed in the office every 4–6 weeks for 6 months. Serial physical exams revealed some epidermolysis and partial thickness necrosis that was appreciated at the superior medial borders, measuring collectively less than 4 cm × 2 cm. The patient was instructed to continue with local wound care as described. The patient did not experience any frank wound dehiscence or any other concerning complications. Thirteen months after the initial procedure, the patient underwent replacement of the aortic valve. In anticipation of cardiac exploration, re-elevation, and mobilization of the prior EOM flap was required. Incisions were made over the healed EOM flap extending over the sternum inferiorly allowing for re-elevation and closure without tension. By postoperative day 2, there was a possible area of partial versus full thickness necrosis versus intermittent venous congestion. Local wound care was initiated, and patient was followed throughout her hospital stay and seen as an outpatient every 2 weeks for 2 months postoperatively. The flap remained viable and healed without evidence of frank dehiscence or necrosis .