A 58-year-old Palestinian male, with free past medical history, presented to our hospital with complaints of mild, tolerable lower back pain of 2 months duration, which was responding well to celecoxib. Later on, the pain was associated with bilateral numbness down the back of his legs, which was more prominent on the left side, consistent with S1 radiculopathy. Thus, the patient sought medical advice and underwent a lumbosacral spine computed tomography (CT) scan, which was unremarkable, so the patient continued on celecoxib with no improvement. Two weeks prior to admission to our hospital, the patient’s pain increased dramatically with increasing radiculopathy and numbness not specific to any dermatome, with distal weakness of the lower limbs more prominent on the left side and affected his daily life activities. In addition he had a history of sphincter dysfunction with a description of constipation and incontinence.
Neurological examination showed positive bilateral straight leg raise test, bilateral hypoesthesia on S1 dermatome, positive patellar tendon reflex, and decreased Achilles tendon reflex. Babinski and Chaddock reflexes were negative on both sides. The manual muscle test score was 3/5 in the left dorsiflexion and plantarflexion of the foot, while it was 4/5 on the right foot. All proximal muscles were intact. Pre- and post-voiding ultrasounds were done and suggested neurogenic bladder. Accordingly, lumbar spine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was done and showed a 7 cm oval-shaped mass obliterating the spinal canal from L3/L4 to L5/S1 levels with homogeneous enhancement on contrast administration as shown in Fig. .
During hospitalization, there was a worsening of power in both feet dorsiflexion, extensor hallucis longus extension, and plantar flexion, especially on the left side with manual muscle power of 1/5. Thus, MRI of the spine and brain was done and showed heterogeneous contrast enhancement suggesting acute intratumoral hemorrhage with a subsequent increase in the cephalo-caudal dimension of the lesion, as demonstrated in Fig. . To prevent further neurological deficits, the patient was transferred to the neurosurgery department and underwent emergent L3–L5 laminotomy with microscopic intradural gross total resection of the tumor and laminoplasty under neuromonitoring on 4 May 2022. The amplitude of intraoperative neurological monitoring, measured using motor evoked potential test (MEPs) and somatosensory evoked potential test (SEPs), in the bilateral lower limbs’ distal muscles and sphincters improved significantly during and after tumor resection. Histopathology of the tumor showed undifferentiated small round cell sarcoma, morphologically and immunohistochemically consistent with extraskeletal Ewing sarcoma as shown in Fig. . Immunohistochemical studies showed that the tumor cells were positive for cluster of differentiation 99 (CD99) (diffuse, membranous) and friend leukemia integration 1 transcription factor (FLI1) (nuclear, weak), while they were negative for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), Desmin, leukocyte common antigen (LCA), Sry-related HMg-Box gene 10 (SOX10), myogenin, and synaptophysin.
Postoperative MRIs of the spine were done and revealed complete resection of the primary tumor . The postoperative hospital course of the patient went smoothly with dramatic improvement of lower limb power bilaterally with dorsiflexion grade 4/5 in both limbs and intact sensations. After the surgical resection of the tumor, whole-body positron emission tomography (PET) was done and showed no evidence of local residual or distant metastasis. The patient was then supposed to start 17 cycles of a combined alternating vincristine, adriamycin, cyclophosphamide (VAC)/ifosfamide and etoposide (IE) regimen as an adjuvant treatment. However, the patient only received three cycles.
The patient had his first course of IE, followed after 21 days by VAC. Then, he was given IE again 3 weeks later. The first course of IE and the second course of VAC were administrated as full doses. However, the first one was complicated by neutropenic fever and electrolyte disturbances, while the second one, was complicated neutropenia, prolonged diarrhea, and acute kidney injury. The third course of IE was only given for 2 days instead of 5 because the patient’s status was complicated by ifosfamide-induced encephalopathy.
Thus, the oncologist decided to stop chemotherapy temporarily due to its complications and influence on the patient’s quality of life and recommended starting adjuvant radiotherapy. Accordingly, he was started on radiotherapy (total dose of 45 Gray in 25 fractions for the lumbosacral region only). Following the completion of radiotherapy on 16 November 2022, the patient’s symptoms improved, and he resumed his previous daily routine. On 12 January 2023, a comprehensive assessment using F18-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET and CT scans revealed physiologic metabolic activity in various body regions, including the brain, cervical glands, and liver. Stable mediastinal lymph nodes were observed with no significant fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake. No concerning findings were noted in the chest or abdomen/pelvis, except for mild thickening in the left adrenal gland and metabolic activity in the large bowel due to metformin consumption. Postoperative and postradiation changes were observed in the musculoskeletal system, which were related to the prior tumor resection. Overall, the assessment suggests complete metabolic remission in a known case of lumbar spine extraskeletal Ewing sarcoma, with no other concerning hypermetabolic activity detected.
During the follow-up visit on 6 June 2023, the new PET–CT scan showed a newly developed focal bone FDG lesion within the right ischium, requiring further assessment and additional follow-up to rule out serious pathology, with no evidence of other suspicious lesions in this study. On 22 August 2023, a PET–CT scan was performed to assess the progression of this patient’s tumor. The study showed resolution of the focal FDG uptake at the level of the right inferior pubic bone, along with a healing fracture seen on the corresponding CT scan. However, since 6 June 2023, there has been an increase in the FDG uptake and extent of focal spinal canal uptake at the level of L4, which is suspicious for local tumor recurrence, with no evidence of distal metastasis. The case will be discussed in the tumor board to carefully analyze the possibilities for surgery or adjuvant radio-chemotherapy.