A 28-year-old Caucasian woman presented to our hospital with a previous history of abnormal vaginal bleeding and abdominal pain that had begun four months prior to her initial presentation. A transvaginal ultrasound was performed at that time and demonstrated solid lesions in her left adnexal region, confirmed two weeks later with magnetic resonance imaging. She then underwent an exploratory laparotomy with a bilateral anexectomia. A pathological examination diagnosed a solid poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, with signet ring cells diffusely infiltrating the ovaries and fallopian tubes bilaterally, compatible with a metastatic pelvic tumor of probable gastric origin, traditionally known as a Krukenberg tumor. After surgery, during the staging and treatment planning, our patient presented to our Emergency Room complaining of dry cough and shortness of breath of recent onset, with intense and progressive worsening. She had no other complaints and no fever. On examination, she was in generally poor condition, malnourished, dehydrated, with tachycardia and dyspnea; pulmonary auscultation revealed decreased breath sounds and mild wheezing in both lungs. Her leukocyte count showed no signs of infection; a blood test revealed the presence of mild anemia and a chest X-ray showed no abnormalities. Due to clinical suspicion of a pulmonary thromboembolism, our patient underwent a computed tomography (CT) scan of her chest, pelvis and thighs. Although the angiographic phase did not present any signs of pulmonary thromboembolism, the CT scan showed signs of acute cor pulmonale characterized by increased right heart chamber dimensions, slight interventricular septum deviation and a right ventricular to left ventricular ratio greater than 1.5 . In the lung window, the CT scan showed diffuse centrilobular nodular opacities with ground-glass attenuation, associated with a tree-in-bud pattern disseminated through her lungs, suggestive of bronchiolitis . Our patient's condition worsened and, due to diagnostic uncertainty, she underwent a surgical biopsy with a wedge resection of her lung parenchyma. A right posterolateral thoracotomy was performed. Our patient's condition evolved with progressive clinical deterioration and she died less than 24 hours after the biopsy. Pathologic analysis of the biopsy specimens revealed pulmonary tumor thrombotic microangiopathy .
Laboratory investigations were remarkable for microcytic anemia (hemoglobin 11.2 g/dL, mean corpuscular volume 77 fL) and a strongly positive D dimer (1100 ng/mL). Her arterial blood gas examination breathing room air showed hypoxia with respiratory alkalosis (partial pressure of oxygen, 7.6 kPa; partial pressure of carbon dioxide, 3.9 kPa, pH 7.5). Our patient was admitted with a presumptive diagnosis of pulmonary thromboembolic disease.