An otherwise healthy 41-year-old man complained of paroxysmal occipital headaches lasting over a week, with increased severity for 3 days accompanied by slight dizziness and mild nausea. These symptoms lasted 10–20 min every time and were exacerbated by postural changes. No coma, seizure, or other signs were reported. Neurological examination showed no evidence of focal deficit. Computer tomography (CT) of brain revealed a hyper-dense lesion in the prepontine cistern , and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an oval cystic lesion located between clivus and brainstem, measuring 4.6 cm × 1.6 cm. The cyst contents were inhomogeneous hyper-intense on T1-weighted and T2-weighted images . The fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequences showed cyst hyperintensity to CSF . Gadolinium administration caused no enhancement of the cyst wall and contents . The patient underwent surgery for removal of the lesion via the right-sided far-later approach. The wall of the lesion was semi-transparent, white-grayish and fragile. Disruption of the cyst wall released gelatinous and yellowish cystic contents slowly. After aspiration of the contents, the lesion was dissected away from the surrounding neurovascular structures and removed totally. The postoperative MRI revealed that the lesion disappeared completely. Postoperatively, the patient manifested fever, headache, nausea, and positive signs of meningeal irritation. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) specimens were collected by lumbar punctures and laboratory results showed polymorphonuclear pleocytosis, slightly higher protein and negative culture results. Repeated lumber punctures were performed and a continuous lumbar subarachnoid drainage was retained for 3 days. The leukocyte count in the CSF decreased gradually, accompanied with a gradual normalization of body temperature. Seven days after operation, the symptoms caused by meningeal irritation were relieved, and the patient was discharged uneventfully. The patient remains asymptomatic 6 months after the operation and the follow-up MRI demonstrated no recurrence of the cyst.