An 80-year-old male with hypertension and chronic kidney disease was admitted to our hospital because of epigastric pain that had begun after dinner 1 day before admission. The patient reported no use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
On examination, the patient’s temperature was 37.0 °C, heart rate was 101 beats per minute, blood pressure was 185/93 mmHg, respiratory rate was 18 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation was 96% while the patient was breathing ambient air. The patient’s body mass index was 26.3 kg/m2. Mild epigastric tenderness was present. The remainder of the physical examination was normal. The laboratory data on admission were as follows: white blood count 9400/mm3, the C-reactive protein level 7.53 mg/dl, red blood count 419 × 104/mm3, hemoglobin 13.4 g/dl, platelets 16.8 × 104/mm3, total bilirubin 0.8 mg/dl, aspirate aminotransferase 21 IU/l, alanine aminotransferase 16 IU/l, alkaline phosphatase 232 IU/l, γ-glutamyl transferase 15 IU/l, amylase 86 IU/l, blood urea nitrogen 32 mg/dl, and creatinine 1.99 mg/dl, and estimated glomerular filtration rate is 26 ml per minute per 1.73 m2 of body surface area. Chest and abdominal radiography showed no abnormalities. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen showed a linear, hyperdense, foreign body that appeared to penetrate through the posterior wall of the gastric antrum . There was no evidence of free air, abscess formation, migration of the foreign body into the pancreas, or pancreatitis .
As the patient had a history of fish bone ingestion, we made a diagnosis of localized peritonitis caused by fish bone penetration of the posterior wall of the gastric antrum. We first attempted to remove the foreign body endoscopically, but failed because it was not detected. Hence, an emergency laparoscopic surgery was performed. The patient was placed in a supine position. The operator stood on the left side of the patient, the assistant on the right side, and the scopist between the patient’s legs. Four trocars were placed: one above the navel for the laparoscopy (12 mm), two in the upper left abdominal quadrant (5 mm), and one in the upper right abdominal quadrant (5 mm). Laparoscopic gastrectomy techniques were used to separate the greater omentum from the transverse colon and open the lesser sac. A linear, hard, foreign body was found in the adhesive tissue between the gastric antrum and the pancreatic body . The foreign body was safely removed from both the pancreas and stomach laparoscopically. The foreign body was identified as a 2.5-cm-long fish bone, . The length of the fish bone embedded in the pancreas was about 2 cm. There was a minor laceration at the site of the pancreatic injury. Neither fat saponification nor hematoma around the pancreas was identified. We did not perform suture repair or local debridement for the site of the pancreatic injury. Because the site of the penetrated gastric wall was small and a leak was not observed, we did not perform suture repair or cover the site of the penetrated gastric wall with the omentum. Intraperitoneal lavage was performed, and a drain was placed in the lesser sac.
Clear fluid was drained, and the postoperative serum amylase levels were normal. The patient recovered without complications and was discharged on the seventh postoperative day.