A 53-year-old, non-diabetic, Chinese gentleman, presented with multiple episodes of bilateral lower extremities edema in 2012. There was no prior history of weight loss, skin rash, heart failure symptom or numbness over the lower extremities. Physical examination revealed a well-built gentleman with an elevated blood pressure reading of 160/90 mmHg. There was bilateral lower limbs edema but no organ enlargement was noted. Blood investigation showed normal full blood count, mildly impaired renal function with serum creatinine of 202 μmol/L and hypoalbuminemia without raised globulin level. Connective tissue disease screening was negative. 24 h urinary protein collection revealed proteinuria of 9 g per day Ultrasonography scan of the kidneys showed normal renal parenchymal echogenicity with bilateral kidneys’ size measuring at 9.5 cm and 9.6 cm respectively. Renal biopsy carried out showed AL amyloidosis with no evidence of free light chain deposition (as evidenced by the Congo red staining and negative for other specific staining). Extensive workup to look for other features of primary amyloidosis failed to show any association with systemic involvement (bone marrow aspiration and trephine biopsy, skeletal survey, echocardiogram, rectal biopsy was all reported negative). The only positive results was from the serum electrophoresis whereby it demonstrated the presence of IgG lambda paraprotein < 0.2 g/L migrating towards beta zone without any evidence of immunoparesis. The urine electrophoresis showed albuminuria of 14.1 g/L with mixed IgG lambda paraproteinuria of < 0.15 g/L. He was subsequently referred to hematologist for an opinion and was treated with 2 cycles of CTD (cyclophosphamide, thalidomide and dexamethasone) and VTD (bortezomide, thalidomide and dexamethaosone) with no resolution of the nephrotic syndrome. A repeated renal biopsy performed 3 years later showed no histological difference as compare with the first biopsy. A repeated systemic amyloidosis workup again showed inconclusive result. Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy repeated showed normal cellularity with presence of 2–3% plasma cells likely to be reactive in nature. Flow cytometry result showed 6% lymphocytes and 0.5% plasma cells with no aberrant plasma cells detected. He remains in overt proteinuria (7.8 g–10 g/dl) with a slowly creeping serum creatinine.