An 18-year-old Japanese female presented with complaint of floaters in the left eye. She was myopic and was using glasses since elementary school but did not have any other ocular or systemic diseases. Ophthalmological examinations a few months earlier revealed no abnormal findings. She received the second COVID-19 vaccine (Pfizer Inc.) after the uneventful first vaccination and became aware of floaters in her left eye the following day. She visited an ophthalmology clinic 8 days later when her symptoms worsened. A retinal hemorrhage was observed around the optic disc, and the patient was referred to our department 10 days after the vaccination. Her blood pressure was 103/56 mmHg and her heart rate was 76 beats per minute. Her visual acuity was 20/20 and the intraocular pressure was 15 mmHg in both eyes. The critical flicker fusion frequency was 37.5 Hz and 37.0 Hz in the right and left eye, respectively. There was no family history, medication, preceding symptoms, nor an intense Valsalva maneuver. Ophthalmologic examination revealed no relative afferent pupillary defect and no sign of inflammation. Hemorrhage around the left optic disc and accompanying disc swelling was noted. The hemorrhage extended from the subretina to the preretina. A mild vitreous hemorrhage was also observed and was considered the cause of the floaters. The patient underwent fundus photography, kinetic visual fields on the Goldmann perimeter (GP), optical coherence tomography (OCT), and OCT angiography (OCTA); the images are shown in Fig. .
We considered papilledema, optic neuritis, ischemic optic neuropathy, optic neuroretinitis, Terson syndrome, posterior vitreous detachment, vascular tumor, uveitis, and Valsalva retinopathy as the differential diagnoses. Papilledema and Terson syndrome were considered unlikely because the findings were monocular, and the patient did not have headache, neurologic signs, or medical history. Optic neuritis, ischemic optic neuropathy, and optic neuroretinitis were also less likely because there were no visual defects, despite the prominent hemorrhage. Posterior vitreous detachment was absent and hence was not the cause of the hemorrhage. Uveitic entities such as sarcoidosis were not likely because there was no inflammatory findings in the anterior chamber and vitreous cavity. Valsalva retinopathy was suspected but there was no history of an intense Valsalva maneuver and the finding was not very typical. We kept her under observation without any medication. The findings gradually regressed within 5 months (shown in Fig. ).