We report on a 72-year-old male who had developed diabetes mellitus at 20 years of age, and whose blood glucose levels (HbA1c = 11%) had been poorly controlled. The patient's local doctor diagnosed PDR and administered panretinal photocoagulation on both eyes. However, the DR got worse in the patient's right eye, and he was referred to our hospital for vitrectomy. Upon initial examination, the patient's visual acuity (VA) was as follows: RV = (0.02x + 0.125D = C −1.5DA × 95°), LV = (0.8x + 1.5D = C −1.0DA × 90°). The intraocular pressure was 9 mm Hg in the right eye and 10 mm Hg in the left eye, and mild cataracts were found in both eyes. In addition, both eyes showed PDR in the ocular fundus, and his right eye exhibited vitreous hemorrhage.
Although the patient was scheduled for vitrectomy on his right eye, we decided to postpone the operation due to the lack of control of the patient's diabetes and to first bring his blood glucose levels under control in our hospital's Department of Internal Medicine. Three weeks after the initial examination, the patient developed a sudden fever, which upon further evaluation was diagnosed as pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP). Blood tests revealed that the patient was HIV positive (102.90 s/co under the CLIA method, above 64× under the PA method), and the illness was diagnosed as PCP associated with AIDS patients. Blood tests revealed anemia (RBC 2.79/μL, Ht 8.8 g/dL), blood clotting irregularities (a prothrombin test time of 15.3 s), were negative for hepatitis type B and type C antibodies, positive for syphilis reaction (positive RPR test, positive TPHA test), positive for CD4, and revealed T lymphocytes 333/μL. A subsequent deterioration of the patient's overall condition rendered vitrectomy on his right eye problematic.
Following the patient's first examination at our department, the retinopathy in his right eye devolved rapidly accompanied by vitreous hemorrhage, tractional retinal detachment, and neovascular glaucoma leading to nearly complete loss of vision 3 months later. The patient's VA was then slight light perception in the right eye and 0.7 in the left eye. The patient then started HAART at the Department of Internal Medicine to combat the HIV infection. After starting HAART, the progression of PDR in the patient's left eye clearly slowed down compared to his right eye, stabilizing to a point at which the patient experienced lapses of mild vitreous hemorrhage. At 3 months after starting HAART, the patient's VA in the left eye remained at 0.7, yet had worsened to no light perception in the right eye. However, at 8 months after starting HAART, we found an aggravation of the vitreous hemorrhage and vitreoretinal adhesions and performed vitrectomy and cataract surgery on the patient's left eye, as his corrected VA had dropped to 0.09 (noncorrectable). We performed cataract and vitreous surgery to remove the vitreous hemorrhage. The posterior vitreous had not detached, so the fibrovascular proliferative membranes from the optic disc to the vascular arcade were removed using a vitreous cutter . Subsequently, we performed panretinal endophotocoagulation on the peripheral area. The patient's postoperative course was favorable and he maintains a corrected VA of 0.6 at 2 years postoperatively . He still has no light perception in his right eye.