We report the case of a 16-year-old female Caucasian patient, single, G0P0, who had menarche at the age of 13 years. No personal or family medical history to report. The patient consulted for amenorrhea preceded by an irregular cycle for 3 months. No melanocytic macules were seen on her lips. Ultrasonography revealed a left ovarian mass. Prolactin, thyroid function, estrogen, and androgen levels were normal. Serum levels of CA125 tumor antigen, α-foetoprotein, and sex hormone-biding globulin were also normal. She had undergone exploratory laparotomy, during which we discovered a left adnexal mass. No ascites or lymph nodes were observed. Contralateral ovary was normal, and no contralateral adnexal biopsy was performed. The patient underwent a left salpingo-oophorectomy without rupture of the mass. Histologic examination showed circumscribed columnar epithelial nests composed of ring-shaped tubules, which are encircled by hyalinized basement membrane-like material. No mitotic count was reported. The diagnosis of ovarian sex cord tumor with annular tubules staged IA Fédération Internationale de Gynécologie et d'Obstétrique was confirmed. No adjuvant treatment was administered. The patient was subsequently lost to follow-up.
The patient presented 16 years later with amenorrhea. During this period, she was married at the age of 28 years and was pregnant at the age of 29 years, no details of the course and evolution of the pregnancy were available. Physical examination showed a left abdominopelvic mass of 20 cm without palpable adenopathy. Thoracoabdominopelvic computed tomography (CT) revealed a solid heterogeneous well-limited mass with calcifications situated in the left retroperitoneal region, measuring 16 × 14 × 10 cm. The mass was pushing back the left kidney and compressing the left ureter, leading to left hydronephrosis. Laboratory testing showed a high anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) level at 5817 ng/ml. Serum inhibin B level was over 5000 pg/ml. Serum levels of CA125 tumor antigen, α-foetoprotein, and sex hormone-biding globulin were normal. A CT guided biopsy was performed. Histology examination confirmed the diagnosis of SCTAT recurrence. The patient underwent surgery by laparotomy. During intraoperative exploration, we found a voluminous retroperitoneal left encapsulated mass, with smooth limits, measuring 20 × 15 cm. The tumor was placed over aorta and intimately attached to the left renal vein and tail of pancreas without invasion. It was massively adherent to the left mesocolon. The right ovary and uterus were normal. We performed a resection of the tumor, of the left segmental colon, and paraaortic lymphadenectomy since there were palpable nodes in this region. There was no macroscopic residual tumor at the end of the operation. Final histological examination of the resection specimen confirmed the diagnosis with no metastatic lymph node. The postoperative course was free from complication. AMH and inhibin B levels decreased postoperatively at 2.44 ng/ml and < 8 ng/ml, respectively. The multidisciplinary medical committee decided that no adjuvant therapy was indicated. The patient was lost to follow-up again for 4 years. She then presented at the age of 36 years to our surgical department because of amenorrhea. Physical examination did not show any abnormalities: abdominal and gynecological examinations were normal. Laboratory testing showed a high serum inhibin B level at 717 pg/ml. Serum levels of CA125 tumor antigen, α-foetoprotein, and sex hormone-biding globulin were normal. AMH, estradiol, and progesterone testing were not performed. Abdominopelvic CT scan showed paraaortic lymph node measuring 17 × 12 mm and left pelvic lymph node measuring 16 × 5 × 10 mm; the uterine and the right ovary were normal . We performed positron emission tomography (PET)-CT, which showed recurrence in pelvic lymph node (SUV = 4.2) and paraaortic lymph node (SUV = 3.4) . The patient underwent laparoscopic surgery. During the intraoperative exploration, the left ovary, Fallopian tubes, and uterus, as well as the abdominal cavity, were free of nodes. The dissection of the left pelvic region uncovered the suspected lymph node, so we performed a left pelvic lymphadenectomy. In addition, the dissection of the paraaortic region uncovered the suspected lymph node, so we performed a paraaortic lymphadenectomy. The postoperative course was free from complications and the patient was discharged 3 days after surgery. Histological examination revealed one metastatic pelvic lymph node and one metastatic paraaortic lymph node for SCTAT without extranodal extension. The tumor was composed of a proliferation with annular, alveolar trabecular structures. Tumor cells presented eosinophilic to pale cytoplasm with round nuclei. The cells were arranged into peripheral placement. Hyaline and calcifications deposits were present as well as disseminated necrosis sites. This histological finding confirms the diagnosis of SCTAT .
A multidisciplinary medical committee did not indicate adjuvant chemotherapy because the resection was qualified R0, given that the evolution of SCTAT is usually slow, and that the patient intended to conceive. The patient was regular to follow-up, and 3 months after surgery the patient was pregnant and lost to follow-up again.