A 79-year-old woman was admitted to our cardiology department with progressively worsening dyspnoea (New York Heart Association Classification III) in the last 6 weeks. She suffered from idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy with moderately reduced systolic left ventricular function for 5 years. Her other medical history included arterial hypertension and permanent atrial fibrillation. Her medication included Candesartan, Carvedilol, Torasemide, Spironolactone, Digoxin in addition to Edoxaban. On admission she had a holosystolic apical murmur radiating to the axilla. Bibasilar crackles were audible and there was bilateral lower extremity pitting oedema. Blood pressure was 130/70 mmHg, heart rate was 65 b.p.m. Electrocardiogram revealed atrial fibrillation, narrow QRS complex (95 ms) with asymmetric T-wave inversion in leads II, III, aVF, and V4–V6, potentially related to digitalis therapy. Chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly with sharp costophrenic angles . NT-pro brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP)-level was elevated (3500 pg/mL). Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed dilation of both atria, dilatation of the left ventricle (LV), and moderately reduced left ventricular systolic function with an estimated ejection fraction [left ventricle ejection fraction (LVEF)] of 35%, mild dilation of the right ventricle (RV) with mildly reduced systolic function [right ventricle ejection fraction (RVEF)] and moderate tricuspid regurgitation. In addition, severe mitral valve regurgitation (MR) due to ring dilation and restrictive motion of the posterior mitral leaflet was demonstrated. The aortic and pulmonary valves showed no relevant pathology. Transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) confirmed the presence of severe functional MR (proximal isovelocity hemispheric surface area radius 10 mm, effective regurgitant orifice 50 mm2, regurgitation volume 66 mL). Coronary angiography excluded stenosing coronary artery disease. Moderate post-capillary pulmonary hypertension was detected by pulmonary artery catheterization (pulmonary artery pressure 40/16/30 mmHg, post-capillary wedge pressure 26 mmHg).
The case was discussed extensively in our Heart-team. Due to persistence of symptoms despite optimal medical therapy and because of a high surgical risk (EuroScore II of 7%), it was decided to proceed with TMVr.
The procedure was successfully performed and placement of one mitral clip reduced severe MR to mild residual regurgitation. Transthoracic echocardiogram performed immediately, and on Day 1 after the procedure showed no evidence of pericardial effusion. On Day 3, the patient complained of fatigue, malaise and non-specific epigastric pain. Laboratory investigations revealed an elevated C-reactive protein (CRP 70 mg/L) with normal white blood cell count (WBC 9/nL) and normal procalcitonin (PCT 0.16 ng/mL). Chest X-ray detected bilateral pleural effusion without pulmonary congestion or infiltrate . Electrocardiogram did not reveal any new changes. Over the next few days, CRP increased further (200 mg/L on Day 5) while no change of PCT was detected. Blood cultures remained sterile and antibiotics were not applied. TTE on Day 5 revealed a circular mild pericardial effusion (8 mm), which progressed to a moderate effusion (13 mm) on Day 7 . However, the pericardial effusion remained without haemodynamic relevance. Cardiac computed tomography (CT) confirmed the presence of pericardial and pleural effusion. Both had a similar, low density (about 10 Hounsfield units) suggesting serous rather than a haemorrhagic fluid . Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) showed thickened pericardium with late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) of both pericardium and pleura, suggesting an acute pleuro-pericarditis .
Given the new onset pericardial and pleural effusion, the elevated inflammatory markers and signs of inflammation demonstrated by CMR, the diagnosis of acute pericarditis in the context of PCIS was confirmed. We initiated an anti-inflammatory therapy with high dose Aspirin (3g/day) and Colchicine (0.5 mg/day) under gastric protection with a proton pump inhibitor. Within days after initiating the therapy, CRP decreased, pericardial effusion receded and was no longer detectable after 9 days of treatment. The clinical situation of the patient improved markedly, and she was discharged home. The anti-inflammatory therapy with Aspirin was gradually tapered and reduced by 500 mg every 2 weeks. After 1 month, the patient reported an improvement of her heart failure symptoms especially dyspnoea. TTE showed a proper position of the mitral clip with only mild residual MR . The LVEF and RVEF were unchanged. Other than the previously described moderate tricuspid regurgitation there were no relevant valvular pathologies. Importantly, there was no evidence of pericardial effusion. Chest X-ray did not show any pleural effusion. C-reactive protein level was in the normal range and NT-ProBNP declined to 1900 pg/mL. Aspirin was further reduced and was together with Colchicine discontinued after a total of 3 months. Otherwise, there was no change in the heart failure therapy.