A 65-year-old Japanese woman fell as she was getting out of bed and injured her left shoulder. Plain radiograph and computed tomography (CT) revealed an osteolytic lesion in her proximal humerus with a wide zone of transition between the tumor and uninvolved bone (Figures and
). The cortex of her proximal humerus was thinned, and a pathological fracture was also seen, but cortical expansion was absent in that lesion. Magnetic resonance imaging showed a lesion with low intensity on T1-weighted images and intermediate intensity on T2-weighted images (Figure
). Gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted images showed heterogeneous enhancement of the lesion. Fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography imaging demonstrated no distant metastases. Open biopsy revealed a tumor composed of anastomosing vascular channels and cystic spaces lined by malignant cells (Figure
). Immunohistochemical analysis showed CD31, CD34, and factor VIII RA positivity, confirming the vascular origin of the tumor, and a diagnosis of primary angiosarcoma of bone was made (Figure
).
Our patient was treated with three cycles of pre-operative chemotherapy composed of mesna, doxorubicin, ifosfamide, and dacarbazine, which is the MAID protocol. During the three cycles of pre-operative chemotherapy, the size of the mass did not change, but her spontaneous pain decreased.
After pre-operative chemotherapy, en bloc resection of the tumor was performed by extra-articular humeral and glenoid resection (Figures and
). The clavicula pro humero method was initially planned for reconstruction, but the acromioclavicular joint was collapsed, and the distal clavicular end detached from surrounding soft tissue during osteotomy of the lower aspect of acromion. Therefore, reconstruction with this method failed, resulting in a flail shoulder. After surgery, our patient did not wish to receive additional reconstruction surgery and adjuvant radiotherapy. Two months after surgery, she had moderate function according to a Musculoskeletal Tumor Society and International Symposium on Limb Salvage evaluation; she had scores of five for pain, one for function, three for emotional acceptance, one for positioning of the hand, five for manual dexterity, and zero for lifting ability. The total score was 15 points (50%). Our patient did not complain of any pain. Impairment of activity of daily living was slight when a sling was used.
Histological examination of the excised tumor indicated that the surgical margin was wide in all directions, and necrosis was observed in more than approximately 90% of the maximum cut surface. After surgery, our patient's upper limb was immobilized with a stockinette-Gilchrist bandage. Four weeks after surgery, CT scans of her abdomen revealed distant metastases in her liver and spleen (Figure
). One cycle of post-operative chemotherapy using the MAID protocol was performed, but she discontinued additional post-operative chemotherapy. We did not see local recurrence until the final follow-up. Five months after surgery, she transferred to another hospital because she had changed residence.