A previously healthy 29-year-old Japanese man presented with numbness of the left face that progressed over the next month, followed by chewing difficulty. A physical examination revealed left fifth cranial nerve palsy. Computed tomography scanning of the head demonstrated a mass in the left middle cranial fossa and widening of the foramen ovale (Figure ). Magnetic resonance imaging revealed the mass involving the left infra-temporal and middle cranial fossa (Figure ). The mass was removed via a subtemporal epidural and infra-temporal fossa approach; after total removal of the mass in the middle fossa, the dilated foramen ovale was visible, and an infratemporal fossa mass was removed as much as possible (Figure ). Intraoperative findings supposed the infratemporal fossa tumor extending intracranially along the mandibular nerve. Histological examination revealed a moderately cellular tumor composed of compact epithelial cells showing tubular pattern surrounded by fibrovascular septa (Figure ). In differentiated tubules, myxoid and colloid materials were contained. Degenerative neural bundles were also seen, suggesting a perineural invasion. The tumor cells were immunoreactive for cytokeratin AE1/AE3. Molecular immunology Borstel-1 (MIB-1) staining index in the solid form were around 10%, suggesting higher grade than typical ACC. This pathological analysis indicated ACC of the minor salivary glands. The patient underwent fractionated irradiation of the lesion.
For better understanding of the biological factors associated with ACC metastasis, we performed immunohistochemical analyses. First, we hypothesized that EMT might be involved in the metastatic process of ACC, because accumulating evidence suggest that epithelial tumor cells can switch from a sessile, epithelial phenotype to a motile, mesenchymal phenotype referred to as EMT, resulting in tumor migration and metastasis
. The loss of typical epithelial cell markers, such as E-cadherin, and the gain of mesenchymal markers, such as vimentin, are hallmarks of EMT
. Indeed, the neoplastic cells were immunoreactive for E-cadherin, but not for vimentin in the present case (Figure ). Correspondingly, immunoreactivity of transcriptional factors, such as Slug, Twist, MMP-2 and MMP-9, which have been reported to be involved in EMT, were observed (Figure ). These findings suggest that EMT might be induced in this case, although it remains unclear which factor could induce this event. Second, we suspected the involvement of aberrant expression of Eph receptor tyrosine kinases and their ephrin ligands in the ACC metastasis, because Eph receptors and ephrins have been shown to affect the migration and invasion of cancer cells in culture as well as tumor invasiveness and metastasis in vivo. In the present case, higher staining intensity for EphA2 receptor, not for ephrin-A1, was notable in the neoplastic cells (Figure ). For reference, the EphA2 were identified in ACC frozen tissues by RT-PCR, with higher mRNA expression in ACC tissues than normal salivary glands (Figure ). From these findings, it was revealed that elevated expression of EphA2 without ephrin-A1 might occur in this case. Taken together, our immunohistochemical analyses suggest that EphA2 signaling and EMT program might be associated with ACC metastatic process.