A 3-year-old girl with no medical comorbidities presented with deterioration in her general condition since 2 weeks (fever and asthenia). She was admitted to another hospital where a possible diagnosis of atypical Kawasaki syndrome was considered based on a prolonged fever of 39°C associated with cheilitis and cervical lymphadenopathy; therefore, the patient received human immunoglobulin and an anti-inflammatory dose of aspirin. Apyrexia was immediately achieved with no recurrence of febrile peaks after aspirin. Then, the patient was transferred to our institution. Her immunizations were up to date including the 7-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (when she was 2 months, 4 months, and 11 months old).
The medical examination in our centre revealed a heart rate at 110 b.p.m., blood pressure in the right upper limb was 139/83 mmHg and 99/71 mmHg in the right lower limb. There was no fever, no cheilitis, and no cervical lymphadenopathy anymore. There was no evidence of heart failure. The femoral pulse was weak and cardiac auscultation revealed a discrete systolic murmur audible throughout the thorax but loudest in the third left intercostal space. Systolic functional murmur is frequently detected in paediatric populations, especially during bouts of fever. There was no radial femoral delay. There was a moderate biological inflammatory syndrome [CRP was 74 mg/L (0–6 mg/L)]. The white cell count was 24 000 G/L (7000–11 000 G/L) with 85% of neutrophils. Urine testing showed aseptic leucocyturia. Stomatological examination did not highlight any infectious focus. There was no evidence of immune deficiency.
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) demonstrated mild hypoplasia of the aortic arch associated with localized isthmic coarctation. The flow in the abdominal aorta was dampened. The aortic tract between the aortic arch and the coarctation was oddly configured and could not be clearly visualized on ultrasound examination . Transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) was not performed because the transthoracic window is good in children. We did not see any vegetation or abscess in TTE technique and TOE technique is very difficult to implement in paediatric population.
Therefore, a cardiac computed tomography (CT) scan was performed to complete the evaluation. A Gothic-type aortic arch was observed. Aortic coarctation was located below the ductus arteriosus . The aortic wall in the descending thoracic aorta was very irregular and indicative of pseudoaneurysm. These findings were associated with low attenuation periaortic collection with enhanced periphery . There was an arteria lusoria (aberrant right subclavian artery), the origin of which was occluded within the collection. Collaterals across the occluded segment were visualized.
Based on the imaging findings, the final diagnosis was coarctation of the aorta complicated by pseudoaneurysm and a thoracic aortic rupture contained by the compressive effect of the adjacent structures.
Consequently, the patient was prepared for emergency surgical treatment of this pseudoaneurysm and aortic coarctation.
The procedure was carried out by left thoracotomy at the fourth intercostal space under extra corporeal circulation. The CT diagnosis of contained rupture was surgically confirmed: aortic rupture was contained by the parietal pleura.
After careful dissection of the tissues near the aortic rupture, two aortic clamps were positioned before and after the rupture zone with no changes in cerebral and distal perfusion monitoring. Following double aortic cross-clamping, the pleura and the rearranged aortic tissues were incised and flattened. Surgical treatment included extensive debridement of all the rearranged tissues. The healthy part of the aortic wall was anatomically and macroscopically normal. There was no obvious sign of infection.
The aortic reconstruction was obtained by end-to-end anastomosis using the Crafoord technique.
The peripheral pulse was clearly perceived immediately after surgery. Intraoperative TOE did not reveal any vegetation.
Microscopic examination of surgical specimens confirmed extracardiac aortitis. A parietal inflammatory infiltrate with the formation of an aortic and periaortic abscess was also noted. Furthermore, bacteriological analysis of the surgical specimens revealed bacterial DNA (PCR RNA 16S), which tested positive for S. pneumoniae. Surgical specimen and abscess cultures proved negative.
After initial empirical antibiotic therapy, treatment targeted Pneumococcal infection with amoxicillin followed by a switch to ceftriaxone for a total of 6 weeks.
The post-operative course was free from any cardiovascular or neurological complications. The biological inflammatory syndrome disappeared [CRP at 4 mg/L (0–6 mg/L)], and the white cell count was 8000 G/L (7000–11 000 G/L) with 3500 neutrophils (3500–6 000 G/L). A thoracic–abdominal–pelvic follow-up CT scan did not detect any vascular abnormality in the sub-diaphragmatic region. There was no evidence of septic emboli or secondary infectious sites of endocarditis and the aorta was well repaired .
The patient was able to return home 20 days after surgery. Anti-hypertensive drugs could be discontinued 4 months later and the last echocardiographic check-up performed after 1 year of follow-up was good.