A 43-year-old man presented to our hospital with a 10-day history of mild epigastric pain, without weight loss or jaundice. This patient had a medical history of acute pancreatitis about 6 months before the current admission. He had a cystic neoplasm in the pancreatic tail 4 months later and was diagnosed with pancreatic pseudocysts at a local hospital. He was a non-smoker and denied any history of prior surgery. After admission, a mass was palpated on the left upper abdomen during physical examination. Routine laboratory tests results for liver function and pancreatic amylase were normal. The tumor markers of carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen 19–9, and carbohydrate antigen 125 were also within normal limits. Abdominal contrast-enhanced ultrasonography revealed multifocal hypoechoic mass in the pancreas . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the upper abdomen revealed multifocal masses occupying the entire enlarged pancreas. The lesions were hypointense on T1-weighted image and isointense on T2-weighted image . The lesions were heterogeneously enhanced during the arterial phase and portal venous phase . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) also showed that these lesions were multifocal with low density and the largest one had a diameter of 2.6 cm . Three-dimensional vascular reconstruction of CT showed that a tumor thrombus formed in the superior mesenteric vein and central segment of the splenic vein .
The patient was diagnosed with pancreatic carcinoma with superior mesenteric and splenic vein tumor thrombus formation. Extended total pancreatectomy together with portal vein reconstruction and extensive lymphadenectomy was performed after thorough exploration of the whole abdominal cavity . Pathologic examination showed surgical margins were negative. No metastasis was found within the detected lymph nodes. Immunostaining of the pancreatic tumor cells established the diagnosis of pancreatic malignant melanoma: the tumor cells were positive for Human Melanoma Black 45 (original magnification: 400×, Fig. c) and S-100 (original magnification: 400×, Fig. d) and negative for CA19–9, CA125, CK7, and CK8/18. Detailed medical history-taking and thorough physical examination including ophthalmologic, anal, genital, and nasal cavity were performed, and no other malignant location was found. Full-body positron emission tomography scan 4 months after the operation showed no evidence of malignancy. Therefore, according to diagnostic criteria set forth by Das Gupta , the patient was diagnosed with pancreatic MUP. The postoperative pathological stage was stage IV . The patient subsequently underwent high-dose interferon-alpha 2b therapy. He was still alive 20 months after the operation without any evidence of recurrence.