A 26-years-old Caucasian, white woman was referred to our department of Urology to extract the former implanted ureteral stents. In reporting her history, the patient indicated that she got ureteral stents on both sides because of nephrolithiasis in June 2003. While hospital stay in April 2007 because of pregnancy the encrusted ureteral stents were found. The time of pregnancy and birth as well was without any complications. The attempt of transurethral extraction of the right ureteral stent was frustrating. The patient was reporting intermittent right flank pain.
The first presentation with the forgotten ureteral stents in our Department of Urology in June 2007 was 48 months after insertion, right one dislocated after frustrating attempt of extraction, left one with a partial staghorn calculus . Preoperative investigations consisted of a hemogram, urine culture, serum biochemistry, abdominal ultrasonography, plain radiograph, and radionuclide renal scan. Stents were polyurethane Double-J stents. Patient anatomy, stent encrustration, and the complexity were evaluated by plain radiographs and kidney function test. The reason for stent retention was poor compliance. The kidney function test (clearance) shows a normal tubular function of 248 ml/min/1.73 m2 body surface without side difference, right side hydronephrosis. Serum creatinine level was 58 μmol/l, urine culture was negative. The treatment decision was based on the clinical presentation and image finding. In this case a combination of transurethral cystolithotripsy with Lithoclast for the bladder stone, open ureterolithotomy for the dislocated right ureteral stent, and PCNL, SWL and URS for the left encrusted ureteral stent was chosen.
First part of the treatment in July 2007 was transurethral disintegration of the bladder stone with the Lithoclast, abscission of the distal part of the ureteral stents at ostium level, and removal of the stones. Five days later an open ureterolithotomy for removal of the upper part of the right ureteral stent has been done. While this operation a new ureteral stent was inserted on the right side. Three months before this operation there was a frustrating attempt to remove this right stent. As it can be seen in figure there is a big stone mass in the lower part of the ureter. While the transurethral operation a manipulation at the right ureteral stent was made without success as well. The whole mass of the stones and the lower part of the stents is shown in figure .
Second part of the treatment in September 2007 consists of PCNL and an antegrade change of the ureteral stent on the left side. PCNL was performed by only one puncture, after operation the middle and lower calyx were stone free.
Third part of the treatment in October 2007 with SWL for the left stones in the upper calyx has been done. After that URS on the left side with free ureter and extraction of both ureteral stents was performed.
Last part of the treatment in November 2007 was performed with PCNL on the left side, and SWL of the right side. After this treatment the patient was stone free . The kidney function test (clearance) in January 2008 shows a normal tubular function of 264 ml/min/1.73 m2 body surface without side difference, no hydronephrosis. IVU in this time shows a chronic dilated renal pelvis with a delayed flow. After a follow-up time of six months renal function remains equal and no new stone has been diagnosed.