51 year old male presented with low back ache with radiation of pain to the right lower limb for 1 ½ months duration. He had pain at rest which aggravated on walking. He walked with a limp. Patient was given epidural injection 3 weeks before he presented to us at another center. There was no relief of pain post injection. Currently he did not have relief with analgesics and physiotherapy and had no relief from epidural injection. There was no history of any previous interventions to the spine or bowel or bladder symptoms. Ankle jerk was absent on the right side. Plantar reflex was equivocal on the right side and down going on the left side. There was no motor power loss or sensory deficit. MRI done showed hypointense lesion that appeared intraradicular in S1 root (arrow mark) with a clear layer of CSF all around the lesion . Gadolinium MRI did not show any enhancement. There was a clear gap between the dura and the fusiform swelling in the nerve root with no evidence of disc prolapse. A diagnosis of nerve root tumor was made and surgery was advised. Surgery was done with a midline incision with patient in the prone position. Ligamentum flavum on the right side was removed.
The upper edge of the S1 lamina was nibbled and the swelling exposed. Due to the long intra spinal course of S1 root, the swelling could be very well exposed.
The swelling was seen at a distance from the dura with a definite segment of normal looking nerve root in between . The swelling was opened longitudinally. Fluffy disc like materials came out from n between the nerve fibres . No CSF came out from the incision. Material was sent for histopathological examination. The nerve sheath was repaired with 8-0 prolene under microscopic vision. Histopathology report was consistent with degenerated disc material with collagenous tissue showing characteristic cell clusters .
Post operatively the patient was relieved of his symptoms except for dysesthesia at the sole of foot which remained for one year post surgery. At 5 years follow up the patient has no complains and is doing all his functional activities normally. There is no sensory motor deficient at present.