A 17-year-old male was diagnosed at birth with ccTGA, VSD, bicuspid aortic valve, and cerebral palsy. During childhood VSD closure occurred spontaneously and he was virtually asymptomatic until age 15. At that time, he was noted to have progressive bicuspid AR associated with SRV dysfunction. He developed worsening symptoms of heart failure despite the institution of medical therapy. He presented at our hospital for consultation on alternative treatment strategies for his AR. Physical examination revealed malaise and fatigue. His blood pressure was 102/49 mmHg. A grade 3/6 diastolic murmur was present. Water hammer wrist pulses were felt. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed an enlarged SRV with ejection fraction (EF) decreased to 28%. Aortic valve morphology was bicuspid, with severe AR. There was mild mitral regurgitation and mild-to-moderate systemic tricuspid regurgitation (TR). Transoesophageal echocardiography demonstrated severe eccentric AR without an atrial- or ventricular-level shunt. Multidetector computed tomography showed an annulus mean diameter of 26.9 mm, annulus area of 506.3 mm2, annulus perimeter of 80.9 mm, and sinus of valsalva area was 908.9 mm2. The right coronary height was 18.8 mm, and the left coronary height was 27.5 mm. There was no calcification in the aortic valve complex. The SRV outflow tract had an irregular shape . The heart team, including an experienced cardiac surgeon and a congenital interventional cardiologist discussed the treatment strategy based on these results and ultimately decided to proceed with TAVR as surgical aortic valve replacement was deemed high risk. Under general anaesthesia, TAVR was performed using a transfemoral approach, and a 34 mm Medtronic Evolut R was implanted. Shortly after the procedure, post-operative echocardiography demonstrated severe paravalvular leak (PVL) necessitating a valve-in-valve TAVR using a 29 mm Edwards SAPIEN 3 performed on post-operative Day 2 for the purpose of PVL reduction . Following this second procedure, PVL was significantly improved . The final pre-discharge echocardiogram shows that the peak aortic valve jet velocity was 3.58 m/s, while the aortic valve mean pressure gradient was 23.84 mmHg, and there was no description of the right ventricular ejection fraction (RVEF). The patient was discharged in a stable condition on post-operative Day 4. No further follow-up is available because of the patient transferred their care to another hospital.