A 51 year-old female patient was admitted to our emergency department due to fever and general malaise.
Three years earlier, the patient had been treated for locally advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix. The initial stage of the tumor was reported to be TNM; T3b-T4a, N1, M0; International federation of gynecology and obstetrics; FIGO stage IIIb based on pelvic MRI and whole body PET-CT scan. There was an involvement of the parametria, upper third of the vagina, external compression of the right ureter causing hydronephrosis (biopsy of the pelvic sidewall on the right side revealed no cancer) and three suspicious iliac lymph nodes. She was treated with a curative intent using concurrent chemo-radiotherapy. For external beam radiotherapy, whole pelvic irradiation of 50.4 Gy was delivered in 25 fractions over 5 weeks as intensity modulated radiotherapy concurrently with chemotherapy (Vinorelbin) followed by boost irradiation to the tumor region of 9 Gy in 5 fractions. Weekly high-dose rate intracavitary brachytherapy delivered 20 Gy in 4 fractions (over a duration of 5-weeks). Follow up indicated no evidence of local recurrence or metastatic disease, with the exception of an enlarged paracaval lymph node.
Initial laboratory investigation demonstrated an elevated leukocyte count and C-reactive protein. A CT-scan showed an abscess formation in the right psoas muscle and retroperitoneum with connection to the right kidney capsule and a fistula with intestinal lumen . A CT guided interventional drain was placed. Microbiological culture grew Citrobacter freundii, Enterococcus faecalis and Prevotella buccae. All of those belong to the bacterial flora of the intestine suggestive of intestinal perforation. An antibiotic regime with sultamicilline/clavulanic acid was started in accordance with the findings of microbiology. We irrigated the abscess continuously. This resulted in a significant decrease of the initially elevated inflammatory parameters. Additionally an endoscopic examination was performed to further investigate the suspicion of a duodenal perforation. This confirmed a duodenal ulcer with covered perforation at the ventral side of the second part of the duodenum. Biopsies showed cell formations in accordance with an edge of a perforated ulcer but no malignancy. Closure with an over the scope clipping (OTSC) and high-dose proton pump inhibitor therapy resulted in local control and significant clinical improvement. Surgical intervention was not intended at that point because the abscess decreased in size. After further improvement of the clinical condition of the patient, she was discharged to follow-up with the drains in place.
Two months after discharge she presented with a transient ischemic attack (TIA) to our neurology department caused by a high grade stenosis of the left internal carotid artery. She was treated with carotid endarterectomy in our vascular surgery department and commenced on aspirin. Because of continuous and partially bloody secretion from the drain we performed a follow up gastroscopy and CT-Scan which showed no intraluminal duodenal changes and a continuous decrease in the size of the ulcer. It did however note regional progress of the known psoas abscess and partial destruction of the second lumbar vertebral body which was interpreted as osteitis. Furthermore, imaging revealed an involvement of the inferior vena cava and aorta in the abscess with discrete retroperitoneal air attributed to inflammation. Antibiotic therapy was administered with piperacilline/tazobactame in accordance with microbiological findings from the drain of Klebsiella pneumoniae, Escherichia coli and still Enterococcus facalis and Citrobacter freundii. The patient was discharged again but returned to our emergency department two weeks later complaining of back pain radiating to her right thigh. Blood tests demonstrated newly elevated inflammatory parameters and anemia. This time a CT-Scan showed progression of the vertebral body destruction and a complete thrombosis of the inferior vena cava with an inflammatory reaction of the vessel . In view of the high risk of life threatening hemorrhage from possible perforation of the inferior vena cava we decided on an explorative laparotomy. This revealed a massive tumorous infiltration of the duodenum. The tumor was closely attached to the surrounding organs; therefore the only reasonable treatment option was a pylorus preserving partial duodenopancreatectomy (Whipple procedure). Cellular pathology reported a metastatic cervical squamous cell carcinoma. After an uneventful postoperative course the patient was discharged two weeks post-surgery. Following surgery, the case of the patient was discussed in our interdisciplinary tumor board and palliative chemotherapy was recommended. However, due to multiple comorbidities and the patient’s suboptimal performance status, chemotherapy was not performed. During the last 12 months of follow-up period, the patient showed no clear evidence of an extensive local recurrence or distant metastatic disease. However, the patient is still suffering from chronic back pain related to spondylodiscitis at L2/L3. After orthopedic evaluation surgical therapy was recommended. However, she refused further surgery and opted for outpatient antibiotic treatment.