A 39-year-old female—previously healthy—developed sudden onset crushing retrosternal chest pain. Her initial electrocardiogram showed ST-segment elevation in the anteroseptal leads. She received high-dose aspirin and was emergently transferred to the primary revascularization centre. During her transfer to the hospital, she developed sustained episodes of ventricular tachycardia (VT) and ventricular fibrillation (VF) and she required two cycles of advanced cardiac life support till she had a return of spontaneous circulation. On arrival at the emergency department, she developed another episode of monomorphic VT , and after a prolonged resuscitation, an extracorporeal cardiopulmonary resuscitation (eCPR) was initiated with venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA-ECMO) and she was taken emergently to the cardiac catheterization laboratory.
She had no cardiac history, and she is known to have congenital solitary right kidney and migraine. She had two uncomplicated pregnancies delivered at term and one spontaneous miscarriage with two caesarean sections; her last pregnancy was 6 years before this presentation. Following her last delivery, she underwent a placement of a levonorgestrel intrauterine device for contraception. She takes no medication and has no reported history of cigarette smoking, excessive alcohol drinking, or any form of recreational drug use. The differential diagnosis was ACS, acute fulminant myocarditis, or SCAD.
Following her eCPR with VA-ECMO cannulation, she underwent coronary angiography, which demonstrated ulcerated 80% stenosis of the LMCA, angiographically suspicious for SCAD . Intravascular imaging ultrasound was performed using intravascular ultrasound and it showed no flow-limiting lesion, and thus, the decision was made to treat conservatively. Initial transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed profound LV systolic dysfunction with an estimated LVEF of 5–10% (normal > 55%) with severe diffuse global hypokinesis and with normal right ventricle and no significant valvulopathy. Initial laboratory investigations were notable for high-sensitivity troponin > 27 000 ng/L, venous pH 6.88, bicarbonate 10.3 mmol/L, and lactate 3.9 mmol/L. Her cardiac magnetic resonance imaging revealed dilated ischaemic cardiomyopathy with diffuse non-viable myocardium in the anterior, septal, and lateral myocardium .
Following her diagnosis of LMCA SCAD, she underwent temporary MCS with Impella CP (Abiomed, Danvers, MA, USA). She had an uneventful cardiac critical care stay with the ability to wean off and eventually de-cannulated VA-ECMO in the first week. Her LVEF improved to 25–30%, and she underwent an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) as a secondary prevention of sudden cardiac death (SCD). The decision was made to treat her LMCA SCAD conservatively. She was discharged from her first admission after 4 weeks of hospital stay with guideline-directed medical therapy (GDMT). Further investigation including autoimmune workup and cerebral and renal computed tomography angiography (CTA)—to rule out fibromuscular dysplasia—was unremarkable.
Four months later, she developed recurrent atypical anginal symptoms and these symptoms were associated with an increase in cardiac biomarker [i.e. high-sensitivity troponin 264 ng/L (normal range < 14 ng/L) and N-terminal natriuretic peptide of almost 3000 pg/mL (normal range < 125 ng/mL)]. Implantable cardioverter defibrillator interrogation showed no sustained malignant arrhythmias. Her repeated TTE revealed stable findings with still severely reduced LVEF (15–20%). With suspicion of LMCA SCAD worsening, she underwent cardiac CTA, which showed progression of LMCA SCAD to the left anterior descending (LAD) and left circumflex arteries and the presence of LMCA pseudoaneurysm . After a multi-disciplinary team discussion, we elected to proceed with revascularization with coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG). She underwent ligation of LMCA false aneurysm and two coronary bypasses (i.e. left internal mammary artery to LAD and saphenous venous graft to the first obtuse marginal artery). She had no complication following CABG and was discharged in 2 weeks post-operatively.
One month following her CABG, she presented with worsening symptoms of heart failure, and her TTE showed worsening dilation of the left ventricular cavity and worsening her functional mitral regurgitation. Subsequent transoesophageal echocardiography revealed mitral annular dilatation, apical tethering of both leaflets resulting in decreased coaptation and severe posteriorly directed MR with systolic flow reversal in pulmonary veins, and severe LV dilatation and LVEF 15–20% . Given her recent sternotomy, she was managed with transcatheter edge-to-edge repair with improvement in her functional status and ability to tolerate GDMT.
In the following weeks, she had episodes of decline in her functional status, and her ICD interrogation showed more frequent episodes of VT, and some events were treated with ICD shocks. She was started on amiodarone (as an intravenous loading dose followed by an oral of 400 mg daily) as an antiarrhythmic agent. Her follow-up TTE showed declining in her LVEF to 15–20% and withdrawal of multiple GDMT due to intolerance. One week later, she presented to the hospital with multiple sustained events of VT that ICD failed to successfully treat with shocks. This was attributed to the failure to capture the malignant arrhythmia. On her arrival at the emergency department, she developed another VF arrest, where she underwent her second eCPR with VA-ECMO. Her repeated coronary angiography showed intact bypass grafts. At this stage, she was formally listed for orthotopic heart transplantation (OHTx).
Despite being listed for urgent OHTx (highest status in Canada), multiple factors including her low body mass index < 19 kg/m2, blood group O, and elevated panel reactive antibodies make her waiting time for OHTx relatively long. In her third week of being on MCS, she underwent a durable left ventricular assist device (LVAD) with HeartMate III (Abbott, Chicago, IL, USA) as a bridge to transplant. Her recurrent frequent VT was managed with a combination of amiodarone and selective metoprolol. She had an uneventful course following LVAD implantation, and during her hospital stay and in subsequent follow-up in 3 and 6 months, she had no further episode of malignant arrhythmia. She was on warfarin for anticoagulation for her LVAD, amiodarone 400 mg daily, and metoprolol 50 mg twice daily. She spent around 7 months in the transplant list before she successfully underwent an OHTx .