A 45-year-old Caucasian woman was admitted to our hospital for surgical correction of progressive right convex scoliosis. The patient had suffered from an unbalanced adolescent idiopathic thoracolumbar right scoliosis with improvement in adulthood. A pre-operative physical examination revealed painful, rigid right thoracolumbar scoliosis and unsupported sitting. A radiograph showed right convex thoracolumbar scoliosis of 68° with a type IV pelvic obliquity graded according to the classification of King et al. . Her medical history revealed chronic urinary tract infections. She was treated with single-stage scoliosis correction involving posterior instrumentation (Euros spinal system; Euros, La Ciotat, France) from T4 to L5. The spondylodesis was completed by applying allograft bone chips (Etablissement Français du Sang Alpes-Méditerrannée, Tissue Bank, Marseille, France) over the laminae in the thoracolumbar region. Prophylactic cefazolin (1000 mg) was administered intravenously at the induction of anesthesia. At day 8 after the operation, the wound produced negligible clear fluid without any sign of infection and our patient was discharged to a rehabilitation center. At day 16 after the operation, she developed a fever (38.6°C) and was readmitted to our hospital. A physical examination found an enlarged distal wound dehiscence with increased fluid production. Remarkable laboratory parameters included an increased level of C-reactive protein (65 mg/L; normal is less than 10 mg/L), a white blood cell count of 10.9 cells×109/L (normal is 4 to 10 cells×109/L), and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 150 mm (normal is less than 8 mm). A thorough debridement of necrotic tissue and the removal of the bone grafts were performed with the instrumentation left in place. Samples were collected from various deep areas by fluid aspiration and from the applied bone graft. Therapy with three grams of amoxicillin/clavulanate daily was initiated immediately after appropriate intra-operative cultures were obtained.
Three intra-operative specimens were received in the laboratory; direct Gram staining was negative. Samples were inoculated on blood agar and chocolate agar (bioMérieux, Marcy l’Etoile, France) and incubated at 37°C both aerobically with 5% carbon dioxide and anaerobically. All specimens incubated under anaerobic atmosphere yielded positive cultures with tiny, non-hemolytic colonies of Gram-positive rod-shaped bacilli. In vitro susceptibility testing using the disk diffusion method was interpreted in accordance with the guidelines of the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute . It indicated susceptibility to amoxicillin/clavulanate, rifampicin, imipenem, metronidazole, clindamycin, and vancomycin and resistance to penicillin G. An attempt was made to identify the isolate by using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-MS) (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). Non-inoculted alpha-cyano-hydroxycinnamic acid matrix was used as a negative control, and positive control consisted of 1.5μL of Bruker Bacterial Test Standard, a protein extract of Escherichia coli DH5alpha. The two negative control spots remained negative, and the two positive control spots identified E. coli with score values of 2.281 and 2.363, thus validating the MALDI-TOF-MS manipulation. The isolate yielded a non-identifying spectrum with identification score values of greater than 1.699. PCR amplification and sequencing yielded a 1466-base pair (bp) 16 S rRNA gene sequence differing at only 10 nucleotide positions from that of reference R. peoriensis (GenBank AF445285; 99.3% sequence similarity) . In parallel, a 951-bp 16 S rRNA gene sequence obtained from two patients’ specimens as previously reported differed at only three nucleotide positions (similarity of 99.6%) from that of R. peoriensis reference (GenBank AF445285). Amoxicillin/clavulanate was replaced by a combination of rifampicin (300 mg) and clindamycin (600 mg) administered orally at eight-hour intervals for six months. Our patient was discharged five days after surgery. Wound healing and temperature were monitored at regular intervals at the out-patient clinic. At three-month follow-up, our patient was afebrile, the wound had healed, and there was no longer biological inflammation. At one-year follow-up, radiographs showed a complete correction of the scoliotic deformity and no instrumentation failure.