A 61-year-old male presented for surgical consultation of a long-standing right direct inguinal hernia that had increased in size and intensified in pain frequency over the past two months. He denied any symptoms of bowel obstruction or endocrine derangements. His past medical history was inclusive of well-controlled hypertension with Valsartan and recently diagnosed prostate cancer being observed without therapy. Family history was non-significant. On physical examination, the hernia was readily reducible.
An open right anterior inguinal hernia repair with mesh was performed under local anesthesia with sedation by a senior, board-certified general surgeon at a major academic medical center. With the patient in supine position, a transverse incision was made over the inguinal canal and superficial veins were ligated with 3−0 silk. Scarpa’s fascia and the external oblique over the course of its fibers to the superficial ring were opened. The spermatic cord was mobilized with a Penrose drain and dissected out. During dissection, a large lipoma of the cord was identified, high ligated with 3-0 silk, and removed to optimize repair. A direct hernia was subsequently reduced off the bottom of the cord. Repair was performed with a Prolene mesh patch sewn in place with 2-0 Prolene to the inguinal ligament and anterior rectus sheath, as well as 2-0 PDS to the pubic tubercle region. The previously dissected cord and ilioinguinal nerve were placed through a slit in the mesh and it was re-closed with a running 2-0 Prolene to recreate the deep ring. Tails of the mesh were tucked laterally and medially over the transversus arch, and inferiorly over the pubic tubercle to prevent recurrence. The external oblique was closed with 3-0 Vicryl, Scarpa’s with 3-0 plain, and the skin with 4-0 Monocryl subcuticular suture and Dermabond.
Gross examination of the lipoma specimen revealed an irregular fragment of yellow-tan, lobulated fibroadipose tissue covered by a semi-translucent fibrous capsule and measuring 4.7 × 2.0 cm. Upon sectioning, a central tan-orange, rubbery nodule measuring 0.5 cm in greatest dimension was discovered amid the fatty exterior. Further histopathological examination was consistent with adrenocortical tissue displaying the customary zonation pattern of cells surrounded by a well-defined fibrous capsule and layers of fibroadipose tissue . No adrenal medullary tissue or dysplastic changes were identified upon subsequent submission of the entirety of the specimen. The final case diagnosis was reported as a hernial sac containing a benign “lipoma of the cord” with accessory adrenal gland tissue. Our patient received no further interventions and has had no significant changes in health throughout the 2-year follow-up period.