A 66-year-old woman of Greek origin was referred by oncologists to our department of infectious disease for pyrexia and pelvic complaints. The patient reported a growing pain localised in the right pubis for 3 weeks. The symptoms were exacerbated by physical exercise and woke her up at night. There was no history of previous trauma. She also presented with low-grade fever (38,2°C), occasionally accompanied by chills. Technetium-99m methyl diphosphonate bone scan showed uptake on right pelvis. She had no recent history of neither urological nor gynaecological interventions.
Her medical history included end-stage renal disease, hypertension, narrow lumbar spinal canal and bilateral breast cancer, treated by surgical resection, radiotherapy and hormonotherapy (Tamoxifen and then Letrozole, stopped in January 2010). The patient had been followed regularly in our Oncology department for over 10 years and her cancer was in complete remission. Her current treatment consisted in lisinopril, simvastatin, cholecalciferol, calcifediol and calcium carbonate.
At the outpatient clinic, the patient was apyretic. Clinical exam showed difficulty walking and a wide-based waddling gait. Reflexes were present symmetrically at both lower limbs and no muscle weakness was objectivised. Heart murmur on Erb site was noted. There were no further abnormal findings.
Blood sample showed a mildly elevated C-reactive protein at 3,3 mg/dL (normal value < 1 mg/dl), elevation of creatinin at 5,95 mg/dL (normal range 0,6-1,3 mg/dl) with a calculated glomerular filtration rate at 8 ml/min/m2. Haemoglobin level was low at 10,2 g/dL (normal range 12,0-16,0 g/dl), in association with a high ferritin level, suggesting an inflammatory origin of this normocytic anaemia. Platelet count was raised at 508 000/μl (normal range 150 000–350 000/μl). White blood cell count was normal. Urinary sediment was bland. Two sets of blood cultures and urinary culture were taken the same day and remained negative.
Chest X-Ray was normal. Echocardiography found a little mitral and aortic insufficiency but no evidence of endocarditis. Anteroposterior radiograph of the pelvis showed a fracture of the inferior pubis ramus and irregularity of the symphysis pubis . Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) showed high signal intensity on T2 weighted sequences suggesting pubic symphysitis . These abnormalities seemed to be continuous with a voluminous abscess (48 x 22 x 8 mm) extending to the external genitalia. Furthermore important oedematous infiltration of the right adductor and of the right and left obturator internus and externus was revealed.
We decided to assess the extension of the pelvic abnormalities (by injecting contrast material) and to perform an aspiration of the symphysitis for bacterial analysis under Computed Tomography (CT) guidance. We confirmed continuity of the arthritis with the collection, which prolonged to the fracture on one side and to the major labia on the other side . Detailed gynaecologic examination showed swelling of the right major labia, but did not find any entry point for infection nor any fistula.
The culture of the aspirate inoculated in BACTEC aerobe and anaerobe vials, yielded Kingella kingae (K. kingae). Antibiotic susceptibility testing of the isolate showed no resistance. We concluded to pubic osteomyelitis caused by K. kingae without any clear entry site. Treatment was started with Amoxicillin 3 grams. We started directly by an oral treatment because the patient did not want a hospitalisation and because sensitivity of K. kingae to antibiotics is known to be very good. Furthermore we considered this symphisitis as a chronic osteorticular infection and treated it during 12 weeks. Symptoms disappeared quickly after initiating treatment. A second MRI performed three month later, showed vanishing of the collection, as well as of the symphysitis and a clear regression of the muscle signal abnormalities.