A 33-year-old female with transfusion-dependent beta thalassemia major resulting in severe iron overload, amenorrhea, extramedullary haematopoiesis, and osteoporosis with rib fractures, presented to our tertiary care hospital with febrile neutropenia. Two years prior, she began IV deferoxamine therapy at the maximal dose of 50 mg kg−1 day for severe iron overload. However, three months prior to admission, she was switched from IV deferoxamine to deferiprone due to her cardiac MRI showing persistently high cardiac iron levels despite 18 months of deferoxamine therapy.
On admission, she presented with a two-day history of sore throat and fever. She had no known infectious contacts. She travelled to India for her work six months prior to presentation, but remained well during and after the trip. A computed tomography (CT) scan of her neck revealed a retropharyngeal abscess, which was treated empirically with IV piperacillin-tazobactam and dexamethasone. She improved clinically over the next 48–72 h with resolution of her fever and improvement in her neck pain. An initial chest X-ray was normal and blood cultures were negative.
Seven days after admission, she experienced recurrent fever with pleuritic chest pain and shortness of breath. A chest X-ray revealed a right upper lobe and left lower lobe consolidation and her antimicrobial therapy was broadened to azithromycin, meropenem and vancomycin. The tip of her peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC) line was culture positive for coagulase-negative Staphylococcus, but blood cultures remained negative. An ultrasound of her right arm initially revealed no deep vein thrombosis (DVT). However, four days later, her right arm was erythematous and swollen, and a repeat ultrasound revealed a right innominate vein DVT. Enoxaparin was started.
Two weeks after admission, the patient developed word-finding difficulties and a CT head scan showed ill-defined hypodensities in the frontal lobe bilaterally and the left occipital lobe believed to be secondary to ischemic versus infectious aetiology. She developed focal seizures with dyscognitive features which manifested as the patient suddenly became unable to look to her left with right-sided facial twitching and a decreased level of consciousness. Neurology was consulted and the patient began therapy with levetiracetam with good response. An MRI was performed a few days after which demonstrated bilateral frontal and left occipital cortical/subcortical acute infarction as seen on CT the day of her ictal episode, as well as new small areas infarct involving the left caudate and right parietal cortex . Repeat blood and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) cultures were negative for bacterial and fungal organisms. However, given her persistent febrile neutropenia and possible brain abscesses, voriconazole was added to her empiric antimicrobial regimen.
Meanwhile, the clinical status of the patient continued to decline and the critical care team was consulted for sinus tachycardia, tachypnea, leukocytosis (white blood cell count of 63.3×109 l−1), and acute kidney failure, including hyperkalemia of 7.2 mmol l−1 and a creatinine of 144 mmol‌ l−1. She was transferred to the ICU and underwent urgent dialysis for the severe hyperkalemia. A repeat CT head scan was ordered and showed no evidence of haemorrhage and the same previously seen hypodensities. A lumbar puncture was unremarkable. An MRI of her brain showed the same bilateral frontal and left occipital cortical and subcortical acute infarctions with small areas of infarct of the left caudate and right parietal cortex with no mycotic aneurysm and no brain abscess. While a transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) was unremarkable except for an incidental finding of an atrial septal aneurysm, a transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) revealed the presence of an intracardiac mass of the right atrium infiltrating a patent foramen ovale (PFO) and measuring 4.1×1.2 cm in the right atrium . There was no valvular pathology. Given these findings, along with the filamentous fungus found on blood culture, the anti-fungal treatment was broadened to amphotericin B. The patient was then transferred to another tertiary care hospital for cardiac embolectomy. In the operating room, a large amount of infected tissue was noted to be sitting at the level of the atrial septum in the right atrium. Microscopic mount of the resected tissue under histopathological examination showed hyphae with calcofluor white mount , and non-septate hyphal elements with Gram stain . While, Gomori methenamine silver stain showed aseptate hyphae in the tissue . These findings are consistent with Rhizopus species. The interatrial septum was noted to be largely intact with likely only a small PFO. When the fossa ovalis was incised, a pocket of purulent material was entered, which was believed to be an abscess-like cavity. This cavity was then debrided. The fossa ovalis was completely resected and patched with bovine pericardium.
Twelve days post-operatively, the patient developed new onset left-sided weakness. Repeat imaging with CT angiogram identified the presence of a small (2.2×1.4 mm) mycotic aneurysm of the right lenticulostriate artery with an associated 3 cm intracerebral haemorrhage . She then underwent a right pterional craniotomy and mycotic aneurysm clipping without any complications. Incidentally, an MRI showed the previously described lesions within the frontal lobes and left occipital lobe which demonstrated signal MR characteristics compatible with fungal abscesses secondary to septic emboli. There was also new infarction that had developed within the right caudate nucleus, lentiform nucleus and internal capsule, as well as in a small region lateral to the right frontal horn. Finally, there was subarachnoid and subdural haemorrhage that remained comparable in size and extent to on the recently performed CT head. There was no significant hydrocephalus and no herniation. Imaging also showed progression of a necrotizing pneumonia with adjacent rib osteomyelitis . Bronchoscopy revealed that she bled into the involved lung segment requiring embolization of five arteries under interventional radiology. Caspofungin was added to the amphotericin B. Yet despite the worsening radiological findings, the neurological status of the patient gradually improved and she recovered some function on her left side.
The patient recovered slowly from her acute hospitalization, requiring an extensive stay in the rehabilitation unit after having been severely weakened by her illness. She returned home more than four months after her admission. Caspofungin and amphotericin B were continued in combination for a total of five months. Caspofungin was discontinued after repeat imaging showed satisfactory response to treatment. Amphotericin B was discontinued after a total of six months of treatment, with no further step-down or oral antifungal therapy.