A 72-year-old male mCSPC [prostate-specific antigen, 89.8; Gleason score, 5 + 5; cT3aN0M1(multiple bone metastasis)] patient with histories of transverse colon cancer, chronic glomerulonephritis, cerebral infarction (no aftereffects) and no allergies was initially administered apalutamide orally (240 mg/day) with a gonadotropin-releasing hormone antagonist. The patient's height, weight, and body mass index were 162.0 cm, 57.7 kg, and 23.8 kg/m2, respectively. No new drugs other than apalutamide were administered. Forty-one days after the initiation of apalutamide, the patient developed multiple, small erythema on the face and trunk with no high fever. Topical corticosteroid administration was not effective. Three days later, apalutamide was discontinued and oral antihistamine was administered on the order of the attending urologist. Nine days after the discontinuation of apalutamide, the patient had a fever of 38.1°C and his blood pressure decreased to 77/50 mmHg. The edematous erythema spread to the body, both forearms, and both legs . Generalized edema also appeared and multiple small pustules developed within the erythema . Mucosal erosion and Nikolsky's sign were not found. The erythema covered more than 30% of the body's area and was classified as grade 3 according to the National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events, version 5.0. Laboratory data showed slightly elevated levels of C-reactive protein, 3.30 mg/dL; white blood cells, 11,610/μL; neutrophils, 8,816/μL; and eosinophils, 8.5% and normal liver function. No atypical lymphocytes were found. Echocardiography showed no cardiac dysfunction. The drug-induced lymphocyte stimulation test was negative for apalutamide; however, no other drugs were changed or added except for apalutamide. AGEP was the most suspected diagnosis because of high fever and acute onset of edematous erythema and pustules with increased neutrophils without involvement of internal organs. Skin biopsy revealed subcorneal and intraepidermal pustules admixed with many eosinophils , which confirmed AGEP. However, drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS) was also listed to the differential diagnosis, with a score of 4 (probable DRESS) on the RegiSCAR scoring system. The patient required intensive care unit (ICU) management because his hemodynamic instability was not improved by transfusions. All medications were discontinued and 60 mg methylprednisolone (mPSL) was administered. The next day, 1,000 mg mPSL pulse therapy was initiated for 3 days and the patient's hemodynamics and fever stabilized. The patient was discharged from the ICU after 4 days. The skin rash did not progress and gradually improved to grade 1 on the 14th day after admission. All drugs except apalutamide were resumed and systemic mPSL was tapered. As a sequential treatment and because the patient was considered as high-risk mCSPC according to the LATITUDE criteria, abiraterone was started on day 53 after the discontinuation of apalutamide . The skin rash has not recurred.