A 62-year-old male patient referred to the pain specialist with a chief complaint of 10 years of low back pain, gradually worsening for the last two years. The patient was a former member of the armed forces with a history of hard training. The pain started from the left part of the back; the buttock fascinating pain that went down to the medial part of the thigh to the calf and presented as a constant, sharp, burn-like sensation with paresthesia of the toe and exceeded by coughing and walking. At best, his pain score was 4/l0 based on the visual analogue scale (VAS) and 10/10 at its worst. He took diazepam and underwent a physiotherapy program; both were fruitless. He denied any bladder symptoms. The patient had hypertension and chronic kidney disease with routine dialysis twice a week.
Physical examinations on admission showed lumbar lordosis and limited trunk movement, increased stuffiness in the bilateral lumbar paraspinal muscles, latissimus dorsi, and gluteal by palpation. There was hyperalgesia at approximately L4 - S1, bilateral lumbar paraspinal muscles, latissimus dorsi, gluteal, and posterior-superior iliac spines (PSISs). Physiological reflex was normal and pathological reflexes were negative on both lower extremities. The results of the straight leg raise test and manual lumbar distraction were positive. The results of laboratory tests, including hemoglobin, leukocyte, thrombocyte, hematocrit, natrium, potassium, chloride, and the prothrombin time/ partial thromboplastin time, were within the normal range. There were slight increases in urea and creatinine and decreases in calcium levels. MR (magnetic resonance) image of the thoracolumbar spine is shown in .
Pain physician decided to perform lumbar medial branch block using radiofrequency and radiofrequency nucleoplasty of L4-L5 (Flextrode introducer kit, FLEX-K151320-5P, Cosman, USA). A motor stimulation at 2 Hz, sensory stimulation at 50 Hz, and lesioning at 67°C for 60 seconds were also conducted. His complaint disappeared immediately after the interventions.
Three days later, the patient felt pain in the same location before the intervention and weakness in the lower limbs. Then, he did not visit the pain specialist until unable to move his legs and complain of urinary and fecal incontinence three weeks after the interventions. The patient decided to check his condition with the pain specialist.
Physical examinations indicated the loss of sensory functions in the legs, and the motoric test showed an inability to lift legs. Muscle stretch reflexes were 0/0 in the bilateral knee jerk and bilateral Achilles tendon reflexes, while the Babinski sign on the lower extremities was negative. MRI of the lumbar spine was performed, and the results were hyperintensity at discus vertebra L4 and L5, suspicious discitis Laminectomy at L4 and L5 was performed, and an inflamed intervertebral disc was found; no pus or abscess was detected. The culture of the specimens had negative results. The patient recovered from the surgery, and after eight months, he could feel and lift legs, and urinary and fecal incontinence was also controlled. On the last physical examination, the patient reported pain on the left part of the back, prickling to the medial aspect of the thigh. The sensory and motor examinations noted a 5/5 disturbance in legs.