This case involves a 29-year-old male with a past medical history of three episodes of perimyocarditis during the last five years (the previous 21 months) characterized by a progressive decrease in the left ventricular global longitudinal strain (LVGLS) since the last event .
Ten days before, he received the first dose of the anti-SARS-CoV-2 vaccine (Pfizer BioNTech) without immediate side effects. The patient arrived at the ER on Apr 4, 2021, with a 48-hour history of mild abdominal pain, cramps, and diarrhea. He presented with severe pericardial pain resembling previous perimyocarditis episodes five hours before arrival. For the last 21 months, the current medication was colchicine 0.5 mg OD [, ] and metoprolol succinate 95 mg OD. Vital signs showed blood pressure 120/60 mmHg, heart rate 88 bpm, respiratory rate 14 rpm, temperature 36.8 ºC, and O2 saturation at room air 97%. The physical examination was unremarkable. The initial ECG revealed sinus arrhythmia, and the chest X-ray was normal upon admission. Figure shows myocarditis and pericarditis ECG findings.
Initial laboratory and inflammatory cytokine findings demonstrated ultra-sensitive C-reactive protein (CRP) (5.51 mg/dL) and high-sensitivity cardiac troponin I (hs-cTnI) abnormal measurements (805.1 ng/L) with normal B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) (30.1 pg/mL), and high levels of IL-8, IL-18, and MCP-1 . The nasopharyngeal RT-PCR SARS-CoV-2 was negative. The patient was admitted, and we started an anti-inflammatory treatment with oral colchicine [, ] and ibuprofen. CMR with late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) showed normal right (RVEF 54.2%) and left (LVEF 57%) ventricular systolic function with abnormal LVGLS (-12.61%) and a normal right ventricle global longitudinal strain (RVGLS) (-21.0%). We also detected a reduced reservoir left atrial strain (-22.25%) and conduit left atrial strain (-14.0%) , with mild mitral regurgitation (regurgitation fraction 10%) without myocardial early gadolinium enhancement (EGE) images . In addition, we identified multiple pericardial LGE areas (anterior, inferior, and lateral myocardial walls) .
The in-hospital stay was uneventful, and we discharged the patient with oral colchicine, ibuprofen, and metoprolol succinate. The patient was asymptomatic and in functional class, I, significantly improving CMR findings in the follow-up .
He received the second anti-SARS-CoV-2 vaccine four weeks after the perimyocarditis episode without any side effects. On day 42, since a hospital admission, the patient returned to the hospital for a routine observation (recovery phase).