According to Imam Khomeini Hospital medical records a 25-year-old man was admitted to the Imam Khomeini Hospital Cancer Institute in December 2008 for a rapidly growing mass on his left leg that had appeared two months earlier. The patient underwent bone marrow transplantation due to Hodgkin's lymphoma in 2002. Upon physical examination a 5 × 3 cm, solitary, firm, shiny red-purple nodule was noted (unfortunately there was not any photo from lesion in his medical records). Examination of the inguinal region revealed superficial lymph nodes enlargement. The patient subjected to surgical mass excision and histopathological examination by routine hematoxylin-eosin staining mainly showed subcutaneous tissue which is focally infiltrated by neoplastic cells composed of small round cells with scant eosinophilic cytoplasm, round hyperchromatic nuclei arranged individually and finely dispersed salt and pepper nuclear chromatin .
The immunohistochemical staining of the tumor cells showed the characteristic perinuclear dot-like patterns of cytokeratin 20 (CK20) and was negative for cytokeratin-7 (CK7), leukocyte common antigen (LCA) and thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1) (, negative results not shown). On the basis of immunohistochemical features, MCC diagnosis was established. In July 2009, eight months after the surgical removal of the leg skin tumor, patient complained of a solitary, 5 × 4 cm nodule on his scalp. The mass was removed by surgical operation and MCC was found in the resected specimen by either hematoxylin-eosin stain or immunostaining for CK20. The patient passes away eight month later. The Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue sections were investigated to determine if they harbored MCPyV DNA sequences or not. Tissue sections (10 µm thick) were deparaffinized with xylene and subjected to absolute ethanol to remove the xylene. Genomic DNA was then extracted using a QIAamp DNA Mini kit (Qiagen GmbH, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
A 123-base pair (bp) segment of human β-globin gene was used as amplification control to ascertain the quality of the DNA, as described previously . For detection of MCPyV DNA, LT3 primer which is very specific for amplification of the MCPyV T antigen (TAg) sequence was used . All primers were synthesized by Metabion International AG (Martinsried, Germany). Merkel Cell Polyomavirus DNA was detected in both tumors of patient and 309 bp putative PCR product was cloned into the pTZ57R/T PCR cloning vector (InsTAclone™ PCR cloning Kit, Fermentas, MD, USA), then submitted for sequencing (Bioneer, Daejeon, South Korea). The sequences were aligned with reference sequences of MCPyV (MCC350, MCC339, TKS, MKL-1) using the National Center for Biotechnology Information Blast algorithm. The sequences were deposited in GenBank with the Accession Numbers KF442250 and KF442251. The results of sequence alignment showed that they were 100% identical to those of the MCC339 and MKL-1 isolates.