A 13-year-old Caucasian boy presented with acute appendicitis, characterized by right lower quadrant pain. He underwent a laparoscopic appendectomy, and a pathology report confirmed the diagnosis of focal acute appendicitis. No intra-abdominal masses were noted at the time of surgery. However, after the operation, the patient experienced persistent drainage of serosanginous fluid from a trochar site. Once this drainage ceased, the patient was discharged home ten days after admission.
During the next six months he continued to experience intermittent abdominal pain, which led to representation to the emergency room. Additionally, the patient experienced an increase in abdominal girth, abdominal pain, and weight loss. No constipation, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting or jaundice was reported. A CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis demonstrated a 23 by 12.5 cm fatty soft tissue mass surrounded by mesenteric fat . The tumor encased branches of the superior mesenteric artery and displaced the small bowel. Multiple fluid collections were also seen in the right lower quadrant. A subsequent CT-guided biopsy suggested a benign fatty tumor; the differential diagnosis included lymphangioma, lipoma and fibrolipoma. The patient was then transferred to our institution for definitive care.
A physical examination of the patient revealed that his vital signs were within normal limits and that his abdomen was distended with a large palpable mass extending from the left flank to the right semilunar line. A large part of the bowel appeared to be displaced in the right abdomen, and the presence of shifting dullness suggested ascites.
The patient was taken to the operating room where a diagnostic laparoscopy confirmed a large intra-abdominal tumor arising from the mesentery and a significant amount of free chylous fluid. The tumor adhered to the duodenum and the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) and vein (SMV). A frozen biopsy performed during the operation suggested that the mass was a lymphatic vascular malformation with a fibrous stroma and fibrous capsule consistent with a benign tumor. The operation was converted to a midline laparotomy for tumor resection. As mentioned earlier, the tumor was largely entangled with the mesentery. However, a circumferential dissection was performed through the creation of a plane between the tumor and mesentery. The SMA, the third and fourth portions of the duodenum, and the proximal small bowel were each affixed to the tumor but were successfully dissected off. The tumor was excised along with 50 cm of small bowel, and a primary anastamosis was performed . The final pathology demonstrated a 27.5-cm lymphatic malformation with no evidence of malignancy ; the ascitic fluid aspiration was deemed to be chylous ascites. The patient recovered well and was discharged home eight days after the operation. At a follow-up visit six months after the operation, the patient is doing well and tolerating full oral feeding, with complete resolution of his abdominal complaints.