A 55-year-old male with a one-month history of blurry vision in both eyes presented at our department after suffering from heatstroke. One month prior, the patient did outdoor work on a hot (ambient temperature up to 40°C) and humid day. Approximately 3 h later, he developed a consciousness disorder. He was immediately transported to the neurological intensive care unit and diagnosed with heat stroke. The vital signs of this patient were checked. His body temperature was 39.8°C, his blood pressure was 111/59 mmHg, his heart rate was 159 beats/min, and his oxygen saturation was 92%. Subsequently, the comatose patient suffered from generalized epileptic seizures, gastrointestinal hemorrhage and respiratory insufficiency. His blood pressure reduced to 72/39 mmHg. Laboratory tests revealed anemia (hemoglobin 106 g/L), decreased platelet count (15 × 109/L), elevated lactic dehydrogenase (LDH 410 IU/L), elevated D-dimer (1.26 mg/L), and positivity for fecal and urinary occult blood (the normal ranges are usually 130–175 g/L for hemoglobin, 100–300*109/L for platelets, 120–250 IU/L for LDH and < 0.5 mg/L for D-dimer). Computed tomography (CT) of the brain was performed, and no specific parenchymal lesions were detected. Immediate cooling was initiated by applying cooling blankets to the patient and putting ice packs to the patient’s head, neck, and groin. The patient was also infused with cold normal saline, and iced gastric and colonic lavage were performed. In addition, he received treatment, including oxygen inhalation, replenishment of platelets, and support of his airways, breathing, and circulation. Treatments to control seizures, improve blood pressure and organ perfusion, and manage complications were also given to this patient. Antibiotic treatment was given. The patient regained consciousness 8 days after the onset of coma. Since this patient regained consciousness, he complained of blurry vision in both eyes, but he did not receive any special ophthalmological treatment. He had no history of diabetes, hypertension, systemic vascular disease, inflammatory disease, ocular discharge or ocular trauma. His family history was also unremarkable.
On the current examination, his visual acuity was 5/20 OD and 10/20 OS. The patient’s intraocular pressure was 11.5 mmHg OD and 11.1 mmHg OS. The anterior segment examination was unremarkable. Fundus examination revealed multilayered retinal hemorrhages in both eyes (,, , ), including preretinal hemorrhages and intraretinal hemorrhages. On his fundus images, we could see that his retinal hemorrhages were mainly distributed around the macular region and optic disk. The preretinal hemorrhages were dark red, while the intraretinal hemorrhages were light red. All retinal hemorrhages appeared as circular patches, with a size between 1/5–1 papillary diameter. Fundus autofluorescence (FAF) images of both eyes revealed that the lesions were either hyper-FAF or hypo-FAF (,, , ), representing different periods of hemorrhages. Near-infrared reflectance (NIR) images showed well-defined retinal lesions (,, ). Optical coherence tomography (OCT) helped to accurately locate the different layers of the lesions, including the retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) , sub-inner limiting membrane (sub-ILM) , outer plexiform layer (OPL) , ellipsoid zone (EZ) and Henle fiber layer (HFL) (,) hemorrhages. Laboratory tests revealed that his hemoglobin level was 131 g/L, LDH was 196 IU/L and platelet count was 128*109/L. The laboratory test results were normal, and his retinal hemorrhages were partially absorbed. We did not administer any special treatment except for observation. At the follow-up visit 8 months later, his visual acuity was 20/20 in both eyes, and fundus examination showed that his retinal hemorrhages were almost completely absorbed (,). However, FAF (,) and NIR (,) imaging helped to detect that mild retinal lesions were remained. OCT through the macula also revealed changes in the outer layers of the retina (,). The continuities of the EZ and interdigitation zone were not fully recovered.