A 34-year-old Chinese woman presented with a permanent fever over 20 days, was acutely dizzy for one day and had low red blood cell (RBC), hemoglobin (Hgb), and platelet (Plt) counts. She was admitted to the Department of Hematology at Shanxi Province Fenyang Hospital. She claimed intermittent fever with a maximum temperature of 38.0℃, mainly at noon and at night. Thirteen days prior, the patient had been hospitalized for three days due to an infection, and at discharge, her complete blood cell (CBC) count was within the reference ranges. One day prior, she had suddenly felt dizzy and sweaty, which ceased after approximately 5 minutes. The outpatient examination revealed an abnormal CBC count.
At the initial physical examination, the patient had a temperature of 36.7℃, a pulse of 140 beats per minute, a respiration rate of 20 incursions per minute, and a blood pressure of 109/85 mmHg. She had an anemic appearance and positive tenderness on the sternum. Her breathing and heart sounds were essentially normal. Her mind was clear, and no other obvious abnormalities were detected during the rest of the physical examination.
Initial laboratory findings showed noticeably elevated counts related to white blood cells, neutrophils, monocytes, a decreased RBC count, a decreased Hgb concentration, and lower Plt count. Both the count and percentage of reticulocytes were markedly higher than the reference ranges. Biochemistry assay, serum alanine transaminase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alkaline phosphatase, gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), alpha-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase, creatine kinase isoenzyme MB, glucose, C-reactive protein, and procalcitonin levels were noticeably higher. A chemiluminescent immunoassay revealed mildly elevated serum carcinoembryonic antigen, an extremely high carbohydrate antigen 125 and ferritin levels. In addition, the case initially also revealed a prolonged prothrombin time, activated partial thromboplastin time, and elevated D-dimer levels . Viral respiratory pathogen panels, an autoimmune diseases workup, human immunodeficiency virus, syphilis, and viral hepatitis panels were also sent, all of which came back negative.
An abdominal ultrasound showed an increased liver parenchyma echo, splenomegaly, a small amount of effusion in the right iliac fossa, and a bilateral pelvic-cyst solid mass . Computed tomography scanning showed an effusion of bilateral thoracic cavities . Furthermore, magnetic resonance imaging showed abnormal signals of the bilateral appendages, abnormal lymph node shadows of the lesser curvature of the stomach in the abdominal cavity, multiple small nodule shadows in the greater omentum, lesser omentum, and mesentery, abnormal signal shadows in the pelvis, sacrum, thoracic vertebrae, and lumbar vertebrae, and effusion in the abdominal and pelvic cavities .
Based on the above observations, this case was diagnosed as ovarian cancer with a high suspicion of HLH. To start a specific treatment, it was necessary to affirm the occurrence of HLH, for which external laboratory tests were required. The patient’s serum triglyceride level was 1.46 mmol/L, which was within the reference range. Epstein–Barr virus deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and cytomegalovirus DNA were negative. Peripheral lymphocyte subsets revealed that percentages of CD4+T (helper T, Th), CD8+T (cytotoxicity T, Tc) and B cells were slightly higher, natural killer (NK) percentages and counts were noticeably decreased, and the remaining lymphocyte subsets and CD4/CD8 were within the reference ranges . Bone marrow cytomorphology revealed clustered abnormal cells and hemophagocytes, mainly RBC and hemosiderin in the cytoplasm . The histopathological findings of ultrasound-guided puncture biopsy specimens on Hematoxylin and Eosin staining showed ovarian adenocarcinoma. Over the following five days, her ferritin level increased, and her RBC and platelet counts and fibrinogen levels decreased. Her body temperature remained between 36.5℃ and 36.9℃.
The case met 6 of the 8 HLH-2004 diagnostic criteria (fever, splenomegaly, bicytopenia, hemophagocytes in bone marrow, low NK cell activity, and hyperferritinemia) and the presentation was compatible with rHLH, despite an HScore score of only 131. She was diagnosed with rHLH (sHLH) secondary to ovarian adenocarcinoma and treated to correct anemia and increase platelets; glucocorticoid therapy was also included. Unfortunately, no obvious improvement occurred, and her condition worsened. On day 15 of admission, she was discharged voluntarily. The patient died 55 days later.
All procedures that were performed for the current case were in accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional and national research committee(s) and with the Declaration of Helsinki (as revised in 2013). Written informed consent for data publication was obtained from the patient’s relative because she had died 55 days following discharge from the hospital.