A 26-year-old female presented to the emergency department (ED) complaining of epigastric discomfort and nausea.
One month prior, the patient had developed insomnia and anxiety due to domestic difficulties. She consulted a psychiatrist and was prescribed anti-anxiety and hypnotic medications relevant to a diagnosis of adjustment disorders. On the day of the ED visit, she had experienced an auditory hallucination and had ingested 30 tablets of slow-release KCl (each tablet containing 8mmol potassium) in a suicide attempt. She then called her father because of the epigastric discomfort and nausea and he transported her to the ED four hours after ingestion.
At 16 months old, this patient was diagnosed with CCD based on hypochloremic alkalosis, hyponatremia, hypokalemia with increased plasma renin and aldosterone levels, and high fecal Cl−. In this case, because repeated sweat testing showed normal Cl− concentration and because pulmonary illness did not develop during her clinical course, we are sure that the patient did not have cystic fibrosis. She has undergone substitution therapy with NaCl and KCl. On follow-up, watery diarrhea persisted, but she developed normally. In adulthood, she married and produced a healthy child after an uneventful pregnancy at the age of 24 years. Subsequently, the patient continued to visit the pediatric outpatient clinic four times a year. Her usual serum electrolyte concentrations were as follows: Na+: 140-143 mmol/L; K+: 2.8-3.4 mmol/L, and Cl−: 96-100 mmol/L, with a daily substitution of 48 mmol slow-release KCl. In this case, genetic diagnosis was considered; however, the patient did not approve of this diagnostic method and therefore, it was not performed.
This patient was born with polyhydramnios at 36 wk gestation and weighing 2550 g. Both her parents are healthy but consanguineous. Her grandmother's brother died immediately after birth; however, the cause of death was unclear.
The patient was agitated, but her general condition was good. Her pulse rate was 105 beats/min and her blood pressure was 101/77 mmHg.
Initial laboratory blood test results were as follows: pH: 7.419; partial pressure of carbon dioxide (CO2): 30.8 mmHg; bicarbonate (HCO3−): 20.0 mmol/L; base excess (BE): -5.0; Na+: 139 mmol/L; K+: 7.0 mmol/L; Cl−: 105 mmol/L; urea nitrogen: 7.3 mg/dL, and creatinine: 0.52 mg/dL.
Electrocardiographic changes of hyperkalemia were observed, with tenting of T-waves and smaller P-waves.