A nine-year-old girl of Indian origin presented to our hospital with global developmental delay and failure to gain height. Her mother stated that she was late in sitting and standing compared to her siblings. She started sitting at one year and walking at around three years of age. Her speech was also delayed, and at nine years, she could understand only simple commands and speak few words.
She was a child of a non-consanguineous marriage, second in birth order with an uneventful birth history. Her birth weight was around 2.7 kg and her Apgar scores were normal. Her family history was unremarkable and her parents were both healthy.
On physical examination, her height was 107 cm (below third percentile by World Health Organization standards). Her upper segment to lower segment ratio was 1:1. Her mid-parental height was 159 cm (25th percentile). She had a head circumference of 48 cm (below third percentile). She had coarse facial features, a broad nose, a thick lower lip, thick eyebrows, long eyelashes and small eyes. She had hirsutism and her scalp hair was normal . She had hypoplastic nails of the fifth fingers on both sides . Other abnormal findings include lax joints and pilonidal sinus. Neurological and other systemic examination were normal.
Her developmental examination results revealed global developmental delay (developmental quotient = 40%), more pronounced in the linguistic field. Her eye examination results revealed micro-ophthalmia and a hypermetropic disc (+6.0 dioptre in both eyes). Her ears were grossly normal. Formal audiometry tests could not be performed on our patient as she was uncooperative. Brainstem evoked response audiometry (BERA) results revealed she had normal hearing.
The results of blood chemistry tests including hemoglobin, total leukocyte count, platelets, serum creatinine, blood urea, calcium profile, liver function tests and thyroid function tests were normal. Her testosterone levels were not detectable.
The results of a radiographic examination of the hands and spine were normal. Her bone age was also appropriate for her chronological age. The results of a chest radiograph, electrocardiogram and echocardiogram were all normal. An MRI scan of her head was also normal. An MRI scan of her abdomen and pelvis revealed an absent vagina, uterus and fallopian tubes. The rest of her visceral organs were normal. Chromosomal analysis performed on the peripheral blood lymphocytes showed a normal 46, XX karyotype.