A 64-year-old female presented with cephalea, left ptosis and diplopia. Neurological examination detected left oculomotor nerve palsy. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a partially thrombosed giant aneurysm at the tip of the BA . The aneurysm projected posteriorly, significantly distorting the midbrain. An angiogram was performed, revealing a giant aneurysm at the basilar apex. Importantly, angiogram showed good collateral flow to the posterior circulation through at least one robust posterior communicating artery (PCoA).
The patient underwent BA surgical occlusion. The BA was accessed using a pterional craniotomy and a transsylvian approach. The clip placement was selected on visual inspection after identifying a perforator-free zone of the BA between the origins of the anterior inferior cerebellar arteries (AICAs) and SCAs. Electrophysiological monitoring of evoked potentials (EPs) showed no decrease of motor evoked potentials (MEPs) or somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEPs). Post-surgery angiography demonstrated stagnant flow in the dome of the aneurysm, now filling from the PCoAs . Antiplatelet treatment with aspirin was initiated. Postoperatively, the patient developed a decreased level of consciousness and right hemiparesis. MRI demonstrated a marked reduction in the size of the giant aneurysm . In addition, MRI showed no ischemic lesion next to the aneurysm given that no infarct was observed on diffusion-weighted MR imaging. High signal on T2-weighted images of the brain stem adjacent to the aneurysm was interpreted as edema. Over the following weeks she showed progressively increased strength and improved mentation, and was transferred to an acute rehabilitation facility. Prior to discharge, she was ambulating independently.
Three months after BA occlusion, she was referred to our institution because of progressive gait instability, urinary incontinence, worsening right hemiparesis, binge eating behaviour and memory difficulties. Plain CT scan demonstrated ventricular dilatation . MRI showed high signal at the periphery of the aneurysm on T1-weighted imaging, which was interpreted as a fresh intramural clot . Aneurysm dissection caused severe brain-stem compression and obstructive hydrocephalus. Increased brain edema was also evident on MR images. Obstructive hydrocephalus was treated by a ventriculoperitoneal shunt placement.
Long-term follow-up has extended for 5 years. The patient has made an excellent recovery and the hemiparesis has almost resolved. Left oculomotor palsy was completely recovered. Follow-up MR imaging demonstrated a marked reduction in the size of the giant aneurysm with no filling of the aneurysm sac, and filling of the upper BA via the PCoAs . Intramural hematoma resolved and brain edema markedly diminished.