A 77-year-old female presented with a 1-year history of lumbago and right-sided L3 dermatomal hypoesthesia. Her muscle strength and deep tendon reflexes were normal. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbar spine revealed an irregularly-shaped, well-circumscribed paraspinal mass with minor intraspinal extension through the L2/3 intervertebral foramen. The lesion was isointense on T1-weighted (T1W) and hyperintense on T2W and diffusion-weighted images, with strong homogenous enhancement in a gadolinium (Gd) contrast study . In the Gd-enhanced images, involvement of the nonenhanced right L3 nerve root in the tumor was identified [Figure and ]. Computed tomography (CT) demonstrated mild enlargement of the right neural foramen at L2–3, but there were no remarkable erosive changes of the vertebral body, pedicle or lamina [Figure and ]. All modalities of sensations (pin prick, touch, temperature, vibration) at the L3 dermatomes on the right side were observed. The bilateral lower limb power was normal. The results of the general examination were unremarkable, and no sensorimotor deficits were detected in the upper limbs. A presumptive diagnosis was schwannoma, but the possibility of a neurofibroma or other malignant neoplasm was considered because of the tumor's irregular shape, lack of an enlarged neural foramen and the involvement of the nonenhanced L3 nerve root. The patient underwent surgery with a lateral extracavitary approach.
A longitudinal right paravertebral skin incision 15 cm in length at the L1–L3 level was made, followed by clear identification of the lumbodorsal fascia. The fascia was then incised in line, and a clear plane was identified between the multifidus medially and the longissimus laterally. The muscles were meticulously teased apart. The transverse processes of Th2 and Th3 were identified by fluoroscopy , and were exposed with monopolar cautery. A Th3/4 external foraminotomy was performed and the transverse processes of Th2 and Th3 were removed, then a brownish-red, highly vascular mass was identified . The tumor was highly vascular and bled heavily upon the acquisition of a small biopsy. The capsule was coagulated to control the hemorrhage. An intraoperative histopathological examination indicated that the tumor was a hemangiomatous neoplasm, without evidence of malignancy. The tumor extended into the intrathecal region through the L2/3 neural foramen. The right L3 nerve root was identified in the ventral part of the tumor. The tumor adhesion to the nerve root was severe; therefore, we left the tumor around the nerve root behind due to concerns about possible nerve root damage. The tumor was removed subtotally. The patient's postoperative course was uneventful. She was discharged 2 weeks after surgery. The histological examination of the tumor showed it to be a cavernous hemangioma .