A 68-year-old right-handed man with an educational background of a high school diploma had visited the hospital due to weakness in the bilateral upper limbs and lower limbs, decreased sensation of lower extremities and dysuria occurred 5 days ago as main complaints. Due to decreased vision of the left eye, which had occurred seven years ago, and decreased vision of the right eye occurring 2 months before visiting the hospital, he was diagnosed as optic neuritis and received a steroid treatment from other hospital. He had discontinued the medication and was under prognostic observation. The vision in both of his eyes at the time of visiting the hospital were decreased but still he was able to distinguish shapes or colors of all objects.
His consciousness was clear, and eye movements, facial symmetry and sensory functions were normal other than the existing sight disorder. The muscular strength of extremities showed MRC grade III in the right upper limb, grade IV in the left upper limb, and grade IV in both lower limbs. When conducting the sensory test, there were slightly degraded pain senses, vibration senses, tactile senses and location senses below T4 skin fragments. He showed a positive response to Lhermitte's sign where the patient has sensations of electrical current flowing through his bilateral arms when suddenly flexing his head forward. The deep tendon reflexes of extremities were all normal, and both sides showed negative responses to the Babinski reflex. As abdominal distention was observed, 1000 cc of urine was drained after insertion of a urinary catheter.
During the spinal magnetic resonance imaging (spine MRI), a high intensity signal of T2 was shown from C1-T8 spine and the findings from the brain MRI were normal. The number of cells, the chemical values and IgG index were normal in the cerebrospinal fluid tests, whereas the oligoclonal band was negative also.
The visual evoked potential test showed poor waveforms from both sides, whereas the left posterior tibial nerve sensory evoked a potential test among the somatosensory evoked potential test showing an abnormality reasonable for central nerve conduction disorder, and the auditory evoked potential test results were normal. Basic blood tests, urinalysis, vasculitis test and thyroid function tests were all normal and from the autoimmune antibody test, it showed positive response to the AQP4 antibody.
As the guardian commented that the patient is gradually speaking less, has a reduction of interest in hobby activities, and has character and behavioral changes such as being unable to control his appetite and becoming furious to insignificant matter, we conducted the Seoul Neuropsychological Screening Battery for additional evaluation. The patient's education level was graduation from high school; his score on the Korean Version of the Mini-Mental State Examination was 22 points whereas the clinical dementia rating was 1 point . In the case of this patient, the profile of frontal lobe dysfunctions was prominent compared to other cognitive domains.
The patient was diagnosed as NMO and treated with methylprednisolone 1g via IV administration once daily for 5 days. After the treatment, the muscle power of the bilateral upper limbs was observed as MRC grade IV, and the muscle power of his lower limbs was the same as measured at the time of admission. Since the patient had no large scale change in the conditions, he is under prognostic observation as being treated with prednisolone and azathioprine from the out-patient department currently without recurrence for about 1 year. After 1 year of time lapse, we conducted the Neuropsychological Screening Battery (NSB) again for cognitive function evaluation, and frontal lobe functions showing an improving trend but there were no large changes in other domains compared to the conditions before NSB .