An 82-year-old Caucasian female with a history of hypertension on candesartan, diabetes mellitus type 2 poorly controlled on glimepiride, repaglinide, and vildagliptin, dyslipidemia on fenofibrate, and no history of auto-immune disease, was treated with her second dose of the first-line pembrolizumab for invasive poorly differentiated urothelial carcinoma.
The patient was diagnosed with papillary transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder in 2009 for which she underwent a transurethral resection (TURBT). This was followed by another resection in 2013, followed by gemcitabine chemotherapy, then several resections in 2015, followed by chemoradiation with cisplatin and gemcitabine. She underwent resections in 2016 and 2018, followed by intravesical instillation of mitomycin C. She presented in July 2019 for an increased size caruncle which was resected. The tissue was positive for invasive poorly-differentiated urothelial carcinoma, expressing PD-L1 in 50% of the tumor cells. A CT of the abdomen and pelvis showed enlarged bilateral inguinal lymph nodes suggestive of metastatic disease. Subsequently, a lymph node biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of metastatic poorly differentiated urothelial carcinoma stage IV A (AJCC 8th Edition) for which she was started on first-line immunotherapy with pembrolizumab 200 mg intravenous drip every 3 weeks. She received her first cycle in September 2019 without complications, presented for her second cycle 21 days later with mild fatigue, and received her second dose. Four days later she contacted her oncologist complaining of severe neck pain and was advised to present to the emergency department.
The patient was admitted to the hospital 25 days after the initial dose of pembrolizumab for severe asthenia, diffuse muscle aches, neck pain, and lethargy. She denied chest pain, orthopnea, or paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea. In the ED, she had several episodes of bradycardia reaching 40–46 beats per minute associated with general discomfort and fatigue. The initial workup revealed a third-degree atrioventricular (AV) heart block in the electrocardiogram (ECG; Fig. ) while the patient was normotensive. Moreover, cardiac damage parameters were altered with elevated levels of creatine phosphokinase kinase (CPK) of 8930 U/L [normal range (NR) 20–165 U/L], suggestive of severe rhabdomyolysis, and troponin T (TnT) of 1.060 ng/mL (NR ≤ 0.030 ng/mL) . Additionally, her serum potassium was elevated (6.5 mmol/L, [NR 3.5–5.1 mmol/L]). Due to these alterations, a transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) was performed urgently, showing a preserved left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF). Urine chemistry showed positive myoglobin. Serum creatinine, as well as liver function tests, were within normal limits. The chest radiograph showed a clear lung field. Acetylcholine receptor binding antibodies’ (AChR-Ab) level was positive borderline at 0.31 nmol/L (NR < 0.25 nmol/L; Borderline 0.25–0.4 nmol/L) and antibodies to muscle-specific tyrosine kinase (MuSK-Ab) were negative.
Given the elevation of markers of cardiac injury and ECG changes with the absence of other cardiac syndromes or infectious signs, alongside the history of immunotherapy and concomitant myositis, pembrolizumab-induced myocarditis was suspected. An endomyocardial biopsy could not be performed due to the invasive nature of the procedure and the risk of potential acute and chronic complications. Other etiologies of myocarditis (that is, viral myocarditis, giant cell myocarditis, eosinophile myocarditis, endomyocardial fibrosis, sarcoidosis) were excluded. The elevated CPK was linked to pembrolizumab-induced myositis rather than fibrate-induced rhabdomyolysis, knowing the patient was maintained on fenofibrate for several years. It was however judged preferable to discontinue the medication. The borderline positive AChR-Ab was suggestive of possible myasthenia gravis. The patient was started on a dopamine drip and treatment was initiated with high-dose glucocorticoids (1 mg/kg/day of intravenous methylprednisolone) for 5 days. The patient was then transitioned to oral prednisone followed by a long taper over five weeks. A pacemaker was implanted 3 days later. A follow-up ECG showed complete recovery of sinus rhythm and heart rate.