Without any previous history of penile-related illness or family history of penile cancer, the patient, a 72-year-old male smoker, presented at our hospital (for dysuria with penile mild pain two months and acute urinary retention for one hour). The patient was admitted to Jiangxi cancer hospital on April 26, 2020 for the first time, because of neck pain for 8 months and higher symptoms for one day. C3/C4 vertebral bodies and their right attachments presented bone destruction with soft tissue mass by cervical spine MRI . T1WI slightly low signal, T2WI slightly high signal, and DWI high signal . Based on the MRI results, we considered tumor metastasis. Enhanced chest computed tomography revealed an irregular moderate enhancement soft tissue mass measuring 3.5 cm×3.9 cm in the right lower lobe of the lung with adjacent pleural thickening and pulling . Multiple enhanced nodular shadows were observed in the mediastinum and right hilar lobe. The largest one, approximately 1.8 cm in diameter, was located in the right hilar area. Based on the enhanced chest computed tomography results, we considered lymph node metastasis. Additionally, osteolytic bone destruction was observed at the left edge of the sternum . The radionuclide bone scan revealed multiple bone metastases, including 4th cervical vertebral body, the left sternoclavicular joint, sternum, sacrum, and the right sacroiliac joint . Ultrasound doppler showed no obvious enlarged lymph nodes in the double neck or double clavicle. No abnormality was observed undergoing an electronic bronchoscopy. Laboratory examination revealed carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level was 54.47 ng/mL (reference value 0-5 ng/mL). Percutaneous lung fine needle aspiration pathology revealed adenocarcinoma . The patient was diagnosed right lung adenocarcinoma with multiple bone metastasis. The stage was cT2aN2M1c phase IVc. The result of genetic test showed EGFR-del19 mutation. EGFR-TKIs are the preferential options for advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients harboring EGFR mutations. Osimertinib was recommended as the standard first-line treatment for advanced or metastatic NSCLC patients with EGFR mutations. The patient received C3/C4 vertebral bodies metastatic site palliative radiation (DT: 30Gy/10F) on May 8, 2020, and was treated with Osimertinib (80mg po qd) on May 11, 2020. He had received treatment with “targeted” therapy for 3 years due to lung adenocarcinoma with multiple bone metastasis.
The patient was once again admitted to our hospital with the complaint of dysuria with penile mild pain for two months and acute urinary retention one hour on June 6, 2023. He was in good performance status (ECOG=1). However, it was difficult to insert a foley catheter into the patient’s bladder. Physical examination revealed a mass in the middle of penile measuring 1 cm×1.5 cm with ambiguous boundaries, poor activity, mild tenderness, no redness around, and normal skin temperature. We considered obstructive uropathy resulting in acute urinary retention, and immediately performed transabdominal cystostomy. A mass located in the middle cavernous body of penile measuring 1.1 cm×1.4 cm was detected by pelvic CT . Local urethral stricture and proximal urethral dilation (widest diameter about 1.5 cm) were observed . A heterogeneously enhancing mass located in the middle cavernous body of penile measuring 1.2 cm×1.3 cm was also detected by pelvic MRI . Local urethral stricture and proximal urethral dilation were observed . We considered that it may be a metastatic tumor. Fortunately, the patient’s head MRI did not reveal any abnormal changes. Laboratory examination revealed the total prostate specific antigen level was 0.778 ng/mL (reference value 0-4 ng/mL), and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level was 46.51 ng/mL (reference value 0-5 ng/mL).
Cytology of penile mass by fine needle aspiration guided by color ultrasound showed adenocarcinoma. Based on the patient’s previous lung cancer history, we highly suspected that the penile mass was of lung cancer origin. The anterior urethra was crushed and narrowed by the tumor when the electronic cystoscope enters the urethra at a 6 cm distance . The patient underwent penile mass incisional biopsy on June 19, 2023. One fused nodule was found on the right of corpus cavernosum penis with urethral invasion . The histological diagnosis of the nodule of corpus cavernosum penis was poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with CK(+), TTF-1(+), NapsinA(+), CK7(+), Ki-67(+, 10%), P40 (-), P63 (-) , and the histological diagnosis of the nodule of corpus cavernosum urethra was poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with CK(+), TTF-1(+), NapsinA(+), CK7(+), GATA-3(-), P40(-), P63(-) , which indicated that the penile metastasis from adenocarcinoma of lung. Currently, the patient was remaining on treatment .