A 51-year-old male had no systemic disease or medication history before. Dysarthria was noted since his childhoods. There was no functional impairment in his daily activity including walking, writing, using chopsticks or combing his hair.
He fell down when he was dancing and bumped on floor with his buttock. Weakness of both upper limbs and neck pain were noted without loss of consciousness. He was brought to our emergent department immediately. Neurological examination revealed intact cranial nerve function. Weakness over bilateral upper limbs was found. (Muscle power of right proximal/distal: 4/3, Left proximal/distal: 4/4 in Medical Research Council grading) There was no weakness over lower limbs. Sensory test was intact either in pin-prick or proprioception. However, bilateral dysmetria was noted in finger-nose-finger test, especially the left hand, even when his elbows were held. The dysmetria was confirmed by three neurologists, and was out of proportion to his weakness. In the Heel-knee-shin test, there was no dysmetria. Ataxia was seen while he was standing even the muscle power was full in his legs. The deep tendon reflex of four limbs was increased. When checking Babinski signs, bilateral dorsiflexion was noted. The presence of neck pain and bilateral upper limbs weakness may be resulted from a cervical spine lesion. Bilateral upper limbs dysmetria was not so common clinically. Considering the possibility of a vascular episode in the cerebellum, which resulted in his falling, a brain image was also arranged even when there were no other clinical signs of brain lesion at time of examination. C-spine X-ray was done and mild degenerative disc disease at C4-5 was noted, and there was no definite lesion seen in brain Computed tomography (CT).
After admission, Methylprednisolone therapy was initiated about 5 hours after the trauma. The dose was 100 mg/hour (1.6 mg/kg/hour) for 48 hours without any additional bolus dose.
We arranged brain MRI, but there was only old ischemic-gliotic change over left frontal lobe without any gross lesion over brainstem or cerebellum. The C-spine MRI was also arranged. There was hyper intense lesion over C1 spinal cord, and bulged discs over C4-5, C5-6 with spinal cord compression were seen. The hyper intense lesion at C1 was distributed over the central area and bilateral lateral column. The cord compression at C4-6 was in the anterior aspect. C1 myelopathy and C4-6 spinal cord compression by bulged discs were impressed. And the hyper intense lesion at C1 was supposed to be caused by the cord injury. After the steroids treatment, there was partial improvement but certain portion of the weakness and dysmetria persisted. We then consulted neurosurgeon for surgical intervention and an operation was performed nine days after the trauma. After the operation, his weakness and dysmetria further improved and the patient could walk without obvious ataxia. Written consent was obtained from the patient for publication of study.