A 68-year-old man with liver cancer due to liver cirrhosis was referred to our hospital on March 3, 2020, with persistent melena for 4 d.
The patient’s symptoms started a month ago with abdominal pain and weakness.
His significant past history included liver cancer, colon cancer, diabetes, hypertension, and benign prostatic hyperplasia.
The patient’s family had no previous medical history.
The patient’s temperature was 36.5°C, heart rate was 92 bpm, respiratory rate was 16 breaths/min, blood pressure was 120/70 mmHg and oxygen saturation in room air was 98%. No other pathological signs were observed. Physical examination revealed abdominal tenderness. Our clinical consideration was gastrointestinal bleeding.
His hemoglobin level was 56 g/L (normal range 120-160 g/L).
He underwent multiple esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) procedures that failed to identify the source of bleeding. For the initial diagnosis, we believed that decompensated cirrhosis led to gastrointestinal bleeding caused by esophageal and gastric varices. However, EGD revealed no bleeding from the esophagus fundus ventricularis varication or duodenal ulcer . To determine the location of bleeding, an abdominal CT examination was conducted using a multidetector row CT. CT (scan and enhancement) revealed numerous enlarged branches of the blood vessels of the jejunum and tortuous irregular vessels relative to the prior physical examination on May 29, 2019 . Imaging of the stomach and the bottom of the pelvis showed varices but no bleeding. Postoperative changes indicated liver cancer and sigmoid colon cancer, liver cirrhosis, splenomegaly, and ascites. Follow-up CT and routine blood reexamination and routine stool examination showed no complications, such as bleeding, between May 2019 and March 2020. The MPR image clearly showed a varicocele on the left side and the venae testicularis as a tangled mass of vessels that formed varicose veins, which anastomosed with the superior mesenteric vein. It also showed local bleeding. On CT, it presented as a high-density hemorrhage and a hematoma (orange arrows in Figure ). Axial, coronal, and sagittal volume rendering CT images, including maximum intensity projection (MIP), with contrast showed venous anastomosis, varicose veins, and a tortuous collection of irregular vessels . To further confirm the diagnosis, we conducted CT of the arterial-phase, portal-phase, equilibrium-phase, and delayed-phase scanning, and then performed dynamic observation of the changes in jejunal bleeding. The results showed vascular mass enlargement during the delayed phase . Portal angiography indicated that the portal, splenic, and superior mesenteric veins were twisted and dilated. We not only observed spermatic veins but also noted connections with the superior mesenteric vein, and they formed an anastomosis. Contrast media had also leaked into the intestine. An inferior vena digital subtraction angiography (DSA) also showed that the superior mesenteric vein and the spermatic vein had formed a varicose venous anastomosis .