A 66-year-old Asian male patient first presented to another hospital with complaints of a sense of residual urine and pollakiuria in March 2019. There was no family history of malignancy to the fourth degree of consanguinity, and the patient himself had no history of other malignancies. The prostate-specific antigen (PSA) was 50.2 ng/ml (<4.0 ng/ml), resulting in a suspicion of prostate cancer. Transrectal prostate needle biopsy was performed in April 2019 resulting in a Gleason score of 4 + 4 adenocarcinoma . The tumor proportion score (TPS) of PD-L1 was approximately 50% using the clone 22C3 pharmDx kit (Agilent Technologies, Inc., Santa Clara, CA, USA) .
The patient was diagnosed with cT3aN0M1c (PUL) prostate cancer, and combined androgen blockade (CAB) with bicalutamide and degarelix was administered. In August 2019, the PSA decreased to 1.151 ng/ml, but it rose again to 3.800 ng/ml in November 2019, and the patient was referred to our hospital for further treatment. Serum PSA, neuron-specific enolase (NSE), and progastrin-releasing peptide (proGRP) were present at high levels at the first visit to our department with values of 4.220 ng/ml, 24.3 ng/ml (<16.3 ng/ml), and 206 pg/ml (≤75 pg/ml), respectively. Serum testosterone was at a castration level of 0.05 ng/ml. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) showed an irregular contrast effect over the entire prostate, and somatostatin receptor scintigraphy showed mild accumulation in the prostate . After changing from degarelix to leuprorelin acetate, a prostate re-biopsy was performed in December 2019, and small cell carcinoma was detected . The patient had metastatic CRPC-NE and was treated with etoposide plus cisplatin (EP) (etoposide, 100 mg/m2/day, days 1–3; cisplatin, 80 mg/m2/day, day 1, repeated every 3 weeks). After the first EP course, renal function declined, so cisplatin was replaced by carboplatin (CBDCA) with a total of two courses of etoposide plus CBDCA (etoposide, 80 mg/m2/day, days 1–3; CBDCA: AUC 5, day 1, repeated every 4 weeks). This was followed by irradiation of the prostate region (external beam radiation therapy, 70 Gy, 35 fractions). However, after completing irradiation, the patient complained of perineal pain and pain during urination, and CECT showed recurrent prostate staining, lymph node metastasis, and de-novo pancreatic metastasis. Two courses of single agent CPT-11 (100 mg/m2/day, days 1, 8, and 15, repeated every 5 weeks) were administered as salvage chemotherapy, and concurrent MSI was investigated. MSI status was investigated using an approved kit (MSI-IVD kit, FALCO biosystems, Kyoto, Japan). The analysis of prostate re-biopsy specimens showed a high MSI status, and the patient was given pembrolizumab (200 mg/day, day 1, every 3 weeks). Following pembrolizumab administration, the local prostate, lymph node, and pancreatic metastases were all reduced, and complete remission was achieved with the resolution of symptoms . The patient is still undergoing treatment after more than 14 months of response without any immune-related adverse events. illustrates the transient changes in his PSA, NSE, and proGRP levels and the treatment course received by the patient.