A 35-day-old male Egyptian baby was referred to our institution from a regional hospital for evaluation of a two-week history of recurrent vomiting associated with hyponatremia, hyperkalemia and failure to gain weight. He was the first child of related Egyptian parents. The pregnancy was uneventful and his mother had not been treated with any drugs. The existence of other children with this condition had not previously been mentioned. He was delivered at term by Caesarean section with a birth weight of 3.4kg, and cried immediately after delivery. He required admission to the special care baby unit shortly after birth for hypoglycemia; his blood sugar levels were easily maintained on 10% dextrose and then on milk feeds.
On examination, our patient’s weight was 3.5kg (below the third percentile), he was dehydrated, his blood pressure was 70/40mmHg, and he had no hyperpigmentation or dysmorphic features. A genital examination revealed distal penile hypospadias with chordee and normal testes . Laboratory investigation results showed a serum sodium level of 119mmol/L, potassium 6.5mmol/L and glucose 55mg/dL. Blood gas analysis results showed a pH of 7.31, bicarbonate ion level of 16.9mmHg and a base excess of 6.3mmol/L. His cortisol level was 0.3μg/dL (normal range: 2.8 to 23μg/dL) and adrenocorticotropic hormone level, 512pg/mL (normal range: 6 to 48pg/mL). An adrenocorticotropic hormone stimulation test did not cause a rise in his cortisol level. His 17-hydroxyprogesterone level was 0.005ng/mL (normal range: 0.03 to 0.9ng/mL), androstenedione 0.012ng/mL (normal range: 0.1 to 0.17ng/mL), dehydroepiandrosterone 6ng/mL (normal range: 50 to 480ng/mL), plasma renin activity 90ng/mL/hour (normal range: 2.35 to 37ng/mL/hour) and aldosterone 31pg/mL (normal range: 50 to 900pg/mL). His triglyceride and creatine kinase levels were normal. His blood karyotype was 46,XY. A magnetic resonance imaging study of his abdomen revealed small adrenal glands and a normal genitourinary system.
Based on the clinical history and investigative findings, a provisional diagnosis of congenital adrenal hypoplasia associated with hypospadias was made. A molecular genetic study detected hemizygous mutations (p.Arg327Pro). A deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) study of our patient’s mother confirmed her to be heterozygous for the same mutation. No mutation was found in his father. With the identification of a hemizygous mutation in the DAX-1 gene, a clinical diagnosis of X-linked congenital adrenal hypoplasia was confirmed. Further, mutation c.325delG in the MAMLD1 gene was detected, which may point to a possible etiology of hypospadias in our patient’s case. He was started on hydrocortisone at a dose of 10mg/m2/day and fludrocortisone 0.05mg/day. After three weeks of treatment the vomiting stopped, his weight was 4.1kg and his blood sugar, sodium, potassium and cortisol levels normalized. At the age of three months, a human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) loading test was performed to evaluate his gonadal function. Basal values of luteinizing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone were <0.5IU/L and 0.41IU/L, respectively, which is within normal prepubertal limits. The hCG loading test resulted in a normal testosterone response from <0.05ng/mL to 4.24ng/mL. The ratio of testosterone to DHT after hCG loading was 7.3:1.