At first diagnosis, in 1999, the patient was a 65-year old man, Caucasian type, without any specific medical personal or familial history. His medical story began in January with chronic and rebel lumbar pain. In April 1999, pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a sacral tumor. A distal sacral and coccygeal surgical resection was performed. Histological and immunohistochemical (IHC positivity for CK AE1/AE3, EMA, PS100) analyses confirmed the diagnosis of chordoma obtained by pre-operative biopsy. Post-operative radiotherapy was delivered with a total dose of 60 Grays in 30 fractions.
In April 2006, computed tomography (CT) revealed 3 subcutaneous lesions located behind the left scapula, below the right scapula, and next to the temporal bone. Two lesions (near the left scapula and temporal bone) were surgically removed, and corresponded histologically to typical relapses of chordoma. Two months later, a new recurrence was observed with a right supraclavicular tumor of 2 cm, which was treated by radiotherapy (30 grays in 10 fractions).
In July 2007, a CT scan revealed disease progression with appearance of a multilocular tumor under the left scapula, several infra- and supracentimetric lung nodules suggesting metastases, and an increase in size of the right supraclavicular lesion. Once again, the two soft tissue lesions were surgically removed. Their largest pathological diameters were 9 and 5 cm respectively. Histological analysis confirmed the diagnosis of chordoma. Owing to the positive margins of the peri-scapular lesion, adjuvant radiotherapy was delivered (30 grays in 10 fractions), followed in October 2007 by introduction of imatinib (400 mg/day orally). Treatment was well tolerated. In February 2008, a slowly progressive subcutaneous tumor nodule located under the right scapula was surgically excised. Histological analysis again confirmed the diagnosis of chordoma. Imatinib was continued. Subsequent clinical examination and imaging monitored the stability of the disease until February 2009, at which time a CT scan showed progression at various sites: increase in size of the lung nodules, right cervical adenopathy, and two solid lesions located inside the right pectoralis minor muscle and the right paravertebral back muscle. In spite of an increased dose of imatinib (600 mg daily), the disease continued to progress slowly, even though the patient remained asymptomatic with good performance status.
Clinical examination and a CT scan in February 2010, revealed further progression, notably regarding the right cervical adenopathy (2.2 × 1.5 cm) and the right pectoral lesion (8.5 × 4.2 cm) . Clinical status deteriorated with a performance status equal to ECOG 1-2, and the appearance of a right anterior thoracic pain. Imatinib was stopped. Recent reports describing antitumor activity of EGFR inhibitors in chordoma [-] led us to analyze tumor samples collected from relapses excised in July 2007 and February 2008. Results were similar in both samples. Immunohistochemistry showed a strong EGFR staining in ~90% of tumor cells . Tumor DNA was sequenced and no mutation was discovered in EGFR, KRAS, BRAF, KIT, and PDGFRA. Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) did not indicate EGFR amplification, but showed chromosome 7 trisomy in 38% of the tumor cells. Given these results and the absence of any alternative therapeutic option, in February 2010, the 76-year-old patient was started on erlotinib 150 mg daily. After 4 weeks and no side effect, the patient reported a significant improvement of asthenia, and the thoracic pain had completely disappeared. In May 2010, after 3 months of erlotinib, the patient fared very well, the pectoral lesion had decreased, and the CT scan revealed a stabilization of the right cervical adenopathy (2 × 1.5 cm) and a regression by 53% of the pectoral lesion volume (7.6 × 2.3 cm). Lung nodules were stable in size and number. Treatment was continued. In September 2010, a CT scan showed further regression of the pectoral lesion (6.8 × 1.7 cm; regression of the tumor volume by 70% when compared to February 2010). Other lesions, including the right cervical adenopathy and lung lesions, were stable. Erlotinib was continued without any significant toxicity. In February 2011, after 12 months of erlotinib, all target lesions were clinically and radiologically stable, except the right cervical adenopathy, which progressed slightly (2.1 × 2.8 cm) and was treated by radiotherapy.