Mr. A, a 31-year-old male sport climbing athlete was referred to the orthopedic outpatient clinic with excruciating pain in the right middle finger due to an injury in the distal phalangeal area. He was unable to flex the DIPJ of the right middle finger, hence he could not continue the sport climbing competition. Prior to the trauma, the patient was an exceptional athlete who won many medals in the speed category of climbing. He sustained this injury two months earlier while climbing up a natural cliff. He used his right middle finger to hold on to the point pocket while climbing the 4 m cliff. In response to a sudden loss of footing, his right middle finger became trapped in the point pocket, creating an audible pop. He was treated with an ice pack due to the swelling, pain, and inability to flex caused by the injury. Following several analgesic and steroid injections at a Yogyakarta orthopedic outpatient clinic for one month, the patient was referred to a Surabaya orthopedic outpatient clinic. illustrates the timeline from accident to surgery.
He had no previous trauma to the finger and no history of diabetes mellitus or other chronic disease. The physical examination showed positive result of FDPT test and negative result of sublimus test. The finger flexion cascade revealed that the right middle finger resting position was out of alignment. We did not find any deformities or wound scars on his right middle finger. During palpation, there was no palpable bulging along the FDPT with intensifying pain felt from the distal interphalangeal joint (PIPJ) to the metacarpophalangeal joint (MCPJ). The physical examination results can be seen in . It was found that the right middle finger was neurologically and vascularly normal. Ultrasonography (USG) revealed a rupture about 1 cm from its insertion in the right middle finger, and a retracted proximal stump in zone II. There were no fractures in the distal, medial, or proximal phalanges on plain radiographs. USG, radiographs, and clinical pictures were unavailable. The patient was diagnosed with FDPT rupture in zone I of the 3rd digit of the right hand.
We used hAM from Surabaya Cell and Tissue Bank for this procedure. ASCs derived from the other human lipid source were prepared by the Surabaya cell and tissue bank using standard allogenic mesenchymal stem cell preparation. As a result of scanning electron microscope spectroscopy (SEM), we obtained a picture of ASCs attached to hAM evenly distributed (A). In our procedure, the hAM which acted as a scaffold had an average pore diameter of 1.9 ± 0.3 μm. Furthermore, the ASCs had a concentration of 1.533 × 106 cells/mL. Cytotoxicity evaluations showed that the hAM seeded by ASCs had no toxicity to living cells, which its living cells increased five times higher than before ASC seeding. The CD105 expressions were shown in B.
We performed elective surgery under peripheral nerve block anesthesia. The patient was positioned supine on a hand table with clear exposure of the right lower arm and manus. We performed Bruner's proximal incision to explore the FDPT proximal stump and continued to zone I. The FDPT proximal stump was found to have receded to zone II. Its distal stump was located about 1 cm from the insertion site. It was noted that the annular and cruciate ligaments did not rupture. In order to fill the defect, we harvested 10 cm of PL tendon from the wrist area. We folded the graft in half to equalize the thickness of the FDPT proximal stump. A modified Kessler sutures were used for the FDPT and PL proximal stumps, enhanced by running sutures. A tension strength test was performed on the suture to determine its strength.
We inserted this tethered tendon into the A2 annular ligament via the camper chiasm and connected it to the distal stump of FDPT seen in the proximal A5 annular ligament. Based on the finger flexion cascade, we slightly overcorrected tension between PL and FDPT distal stumps. A modified Kessler suture technique with running sutures around the sutured stump was used. A monofilament non-absorbable 4.0 suture was used for the core suture, while a monofilament non-absorbable 6.0 suture was used for the running suture. By pulling the repaired FDPT in zone II, we tested it for ROM, strength, and stability . As shown in , we shielded the distal and proximal sutured areas with hAM augmented with ASCs. There was no splint on the finger after closing the incision and dressing it with freeze-dried amniotic membrane. The first author performed this procedure in 1 h and 30 min.
After surgery, passive and active rehabilitation was provided without the use of a splint to allow all fingers to be flexed and extended early as long as the pain was manageable. A two-week postoperative evaluation revealed improvement in middle finger function. Some limited ROM was observed during the evaluation, but the finger flexion cascade was aligned to acceptable levels.
The rehabilitation program continued with active-progressive ROM exercise for 6 weeks. Due to depression, the patient was unable to comply with the rehabilitation program. The impact of this injury on his career was substantial because sport climbing relies on the strength and stability of the fingers. After three months of absence from the clinic, the patient returned to begin rehabilitation. Active ROM exercises with resistance, such as grasping the rehabilitation ball and exercising finger extensors with rubber bands, were provided for the patient. After one-year, middle finger movement and function were near normal with more power than previous evaluation.
The patient returned to sport climbing training and competition in the male speed category. As a result of his consistency and perseverance, he won the male speed category at the 2022 International Federation of Sport Climbing World Championships. A clinical evaluation revealed that his finger function was within the normal finger cascade without any restrictions at his last follow up 3 years after surgery . The post-operative evaluation of hand function is provided in .