An 11-year-old Japanese girl was admitted to undergo cardiac catheterization and coronary angiography (CAG) for the evaluation of a ventricular septal defect (VSD) and follow-up of KD.
A heart murmur had been detected after birth, and she had been diagnosed with perimembranous VSD by echocardiography. She had been followed-up for VSD at the outpatient unit periodically.
At 17 months old, she was referred by an affiliated clinic for a fever for the past 2 days, polymorphous rash, and erythema of the hand. On admission, laboratory test findings were as follows: white blood cell counts 8,000/mm3, hemoglobin 14.4 g/dL, hematocrit 41.0%, platelet count 20.3 × 104/mm3, serum albumin 4.4 g/dL, alanine transaminase 38 IU/L, and C-reactive protein (CRP) 8.59 mg/dL. Blood culture and serology of Epstein Barr virus to rule out the infectious origin of symptoms were negative. She was diagnosed with incomplete KD. Oral treatment with medium-dose acetylsalicylic acid (30 mg/kg/day) immediately improved these symptoms. Four days after admission, the CRP level decreased to 1.25 mg/dL. She was not on intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), because her Harada score was <4/7 (2/7) , and she did not meet the criteria for incomplete KD treatment established by the American Heart Association .
After the fever had disappeared, low-dose aspirin therapy (5 mg/kg/day) was started and then completed 2 months later. No dilatation or coronary artery aneurysm was observed on transthoracic echocardiography in the acute or follow-up period. There were no obvious coronary aneurysms on the cardiac catheterization to evaluate the VSD 3 months after the onset of KD . She was followed up for VSD without surgery, as her pulmonary blood flow/systemic blood flow ratio (Qp/Qs) was 1.3.
Her height and weight were 139.9 cm (−0.5 standard deviations [SD]) and 33.8 kg (−0.4 SD), respectively. Her heart rate was 80 bpm, and blood pressure was 96/60 mmHg. A physical examination revealed a grade 4/6 pansystolic murmur at the left sternal border in the third to the fourth intercostal space. The liver was not palpable below the right costal margin. There were no abnormal findings in the abdomen or extremities or irregular and blood chemistry test results.
The cardiothoracic ratio on chest X-ray was 52%. The 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed mild left ventricular hypertrophy and normal sinus rhythm without ST-T segment change or an abnormal Q wave. Exercise stress testing showed no abnormal findings on ECG and the patient had no symptoms at maximum effort. Two-dimensional transthoracic echocardiography showed a 5.0-mm perimembranous VSD with left-to-right shunt and a normal left ventricular ejection fraction of 70% without local asynergy.
CAG demonstrated no aneurysm, dilatation, or significant stenosis of the coronary arteries. We performed an OCT study (ILUMIEN™ OCT Imaging System: St. Jude/LightLab, St. Paul, MN, USA), which revealed the presence of intimal thickening, disruption of the media, and neovascularization in the left anterior descending artery . There were no abnormal OCT findings in the other coronary artery branches.
CAG and OCT were approved by the Ethics Committee of Hamamatsu University School of Medicine (18-029), and the parents provided their informed consent. The patient received surgical closure of the VSD, as the Qp/Qs ratio was 1.5 on cardiac catheterization. No coronary artery abnormalities were observed in the perioperative period.