We report a case of a 38-year-old male, native of Ivory Coast, living in Portugal for the past 6 years, presenting with a history of 1 month of deterioration of motor function in his lower limbs with symptoms of neurogenic bladder (urinary retention and overflow incontinence). The patient was admitted to our emergency room, with assymetric paraparesis with motor strength grade 3 (right lower limb) and 4 (left lower limb), with diminished deep tendon reflexes of the lower limbs, sensory level at D10, and urinary retention ensuring the need to bladder catheterization, with otherwise unremarkable neurologic examination.
The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) documented a moderate and diffuse enlargement of medullary cord, in the D4-D5 region, with a central nonhomogeneous T2 hypersignal as well as heterogeneous enhancement after intravenous injection of gadolinium, with a granular pattern (disruption of the blood-brain barrier) . Laminotomy of D3 to D5 was carried out, and the durotomy revealed an expanded cord at the level of D4 and D5. Posterior midline myelotomy was performed using microsurgical dissection . A grayish coal-like lesion was found at the center of the cord, which was gently excised with micro dissectors and micro pituitary rongeurs, piecemeal, until the macroscopic tumor was removed. Preliminary histopathologic review found the lesion to be suggestive of a high grade glioma. That result being known, after gross total removal, the dura was closed with 3/0 vycril suture, and the laminae were not put in place as previously planned in order to allow lesion growth without cord compression.
The postoperative period was uneventful, with slight decrease in lower limb proprioception and suspended sensory level between D10 and D12 in the immediate postoperative period, which progressively disappeared .
The diagnosis of schistosomiasis was based solely on the demonstration of eggs and adult worm in the granuloma supplied for histopathology review , and later confirmed by positivity in serological tests hemagglutination, with all other work-ups inconclusive (no eggs found on stool or urine or rectal snipes, no eosinophilia in peripheral blood, no augmented VS). The CSF biochemical analysis was normal, with no pleiocytosis, no eosinophils, normal protein, and glucose levels.
On histopathological examination, the spinal cord tissue showed edema, demyelination, and a chronic inflammatory cellular infiltrate with some eosinophils. Numerous eggs were observed, some containing miracidia with intact nuclei and a few showed calcifications. Occasional giant cells were seen around the eggs.
As described by Salomão et al., the vascular alterations seen in the medullary tissue surrounding the granuloma, with vascular proliferation (presumably veins), with enlarged lumina, parietal thickening and tortuous, may very well justify the edematous enlargement of the medullary cord surrounding the granuloma (due to venous stasis), suggesting that in these forms, the best treatment should entail surgical removal of the lesion.
After diagnosis, the patient was treated medically with praziquantel at a dose of 40 mg/kg/day in two doses 6 h apart for two consecutive days and steroids (prednisolone 5 mg/day for 6 weeks).
The postoperative MRI, under steroid and antihelminthic, showed progressive reduction in the edema and enlargement of the cord, with concurrent regression of neurologic deficits, allowing deambulation with support of a clutch at his 2-month follow-up. At 6 months, deambulation was independent, maintaining urinary catheterization, however.