An 81-year-old smoking man complained of bilateral wrist, knee and ankle pain (grade 1) with mild edema (grade 1) after the 5th cycle of pembrolizumab administration for lung cancer.
The patient was admitted to the Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine on May 31, 2020 due to left chest pain for 9 mo. Diffuse thickening of the left pleura and interlobar pleura was found on a chest computed tomography (CT) scan . CT-guided lung puncture was performed and pathology revealed adenocarcinoma of the lung, with programmed cell death 1 ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression of 70%. He was finally diagnosed with NSCLC (stage IV, adenocarcinoma) at our hospital. Lung cancer related genes including EGFR, ALK, and ROS1 were negative. The patient was treated with first-line pembrolizumab monotherapy at a standard dosage of 2 mg/kg every 3 wk. From June 2020 to August 2020, the patient received three cycles of pembrolizumab. His left chest pain was relieved and chest CT scanning revealed stable disease . The patient complained of mild weakness, which was grade 1 according to the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE v4.0). Another two cycles of pembrolizumab were administered. Left chest pain disappeared and he achieved CR .
The patient had a history of lumbar 2 vertebral compression fractures and recovered well after surgical treatment.
The patient had smoked for more than 50 years, 20 cigarettes/d, and stopped smoking following the diagnosis of lung cancer. He had a history of penicillin anaphylaxis. The patient had no previous rheumatoid arthritis or rheumatic immune system diseases.
Bilateral wrists, knees, and ankles showed slightly depressed edema with pain. Functional limitation was reported and symptoms did not abate after mobilization.
Anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody, rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibody, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, and hepatic and renal function analysis were performed and were found to be normal. C-reactive protein level was 18.5 mg/L, and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 44 mm/h. The CDAI score was 43.
X-ray of the hands was normal .