A 62-year-old male without any history of previous disease, has complained from sudden frontal headache, nausea, vomiting, decreased vision in the left eye, blurred vision and double vision. These signs have gradually deteriorated. We have observed in the cranial nerves examination paralysis of the left abducens nerve (impaired movement in his left eye to the outside), visual impairment in the right eye, and a severe defect in the nasal and temporal field in the left eye. The vision activity of the left eye was 7/10, and then, 10/10 for the right eye. In fundoscopy, the retina has normal but partial atrophy that has observed in optic nerves.
In skull radiographic, there was an expansion of sellaturcica and a lesion with clear border on T1; heterogeneous; iso - to hypotense; size about 3/5 × 2/5 cm with no surrounding edema that it has homogeneously attracted contrast Lesion, that shown a signal hypointensity on T2 with heterogeneous enhancement.
In the coronal sections, the tumor expanded to the suprasellar region and optic chiasmatic that has compressed especially on the left side. Also, it has found an enhancement of the carotid artery without obstructive symptoms and brief extension into the left cavernous sinus ( and ). Clivus and cavernous sinus were intact.
There was not a compression on the forth ventricle or pons. There was also a shift of the middle cerebral artery. The serum levels of GH = 0.1; IGF = 300; prolactin = 7.8; TSH = 0.5 were normal. The serum concentration of ACTH was low (ACTH = 1). Serum Levels for LH and FSH were in normal range, 1.3 and 10 mIU/mL, respectively.
Clinical diagnosis has confirmed the pituitary adenomas. After clinical diagnosis, a partial tumor resection has conducted. The surgery has done by a transsphenoidal approach. We have faced to a creamy soft tissue tumor in sella turcica that was relatively hypervascular with tendency to bleeding. There was no any evidence of bone invasion.
The surgery has done by a transsphenoidal approach. On surgical operation we have found a soft creamy soft tissue tumor in sella turcica without any evidence of bone invasion. Partial resection has done and no complications have found after surgery. The pathologist has diagnosed a glioblastoma multiform due to neoplastic tissue with severe atypia proliferation and extensive necrosis in the microscopic slides. This diagnosis has confirmed using immunohistochemistry technique. Microscopic examination has revealed proliferation of mitotically active highly atypical cells in a fibrillary background with tumoral coagulative necrosis and capillary proliferation, some with glomeruloid feature ( - ). Regarding localization of the tumor, immunohistochemical staining has performed to establish the true nature of the neoplastic cells. These cells have shown strong positive reactivity with GFAP (Glial Fibrillary Acidophilic Protein, ) and were negative for epithelial markers of cytokeratin (CK) and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA). Synaptophysin was also negative in tumoral cells. So the tumor has diagnosed as glioblastoma multiforme.