A 68-year-old woman with hypertension and dyslipidemia had intermittent right retroauricular pain, which was controlled by analgesics. Two weeks later, she presented with severe vertigo and nausea accompanied with the right-sided deafness and tinnitus. Computed tomography (CT) showed no abnormalities such as SAH or hematoma. Neurological examination showed no abnormalities, except unilateral deafness and persistent spontaneous left beating nystagmus. Pure tone audiogram revealed severe sensorineural hearing loss with an average air conduction threshold of 92.5 dB .
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed no abnormalities suggestive of prior SAH on fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) and T2* images . In source images of magnetic resonance angiogram (MRA), a 3 mm tiny mass was located in the right IAC .
MRA showed narrowing in the premeatal portion of the lateral pontine segment and aneurysmal dilatation in the meatal portion, the string and pearl sign, in the right AICA, suggestive of dissecting aneurysm [ and ]. Based on the presumptive diagnosis of vestibular and cochlear ischemia and neuritis caused by dissecting aneurysm, the patient was treated with hydrocortisone drip infusion (initial dose of 500 mg, which was tapered to 100 mg over 8 days), oral Vitamin B12, and adenosine triphosphate disodium. This provided considerable improvement of vertigo. Due to the absence of rupture and with the improvement of symptoms, the patient was placed under strict blood pressure control and close monitoring instead of undergoing direct intervention for the lesion. On the follow-up visit at 3 months after onset, the patient was almost vertigo free, with slight improvement of air conduction hearing, with a threshold of 67.5 dB.
Five months after onset, the patient had transient right retroauricular pain again, followed by right facial paresis, which gradually progressed to House–Brackmann (HB) Grade IV. The average air conduction hearing was almost same as 2 months before, with a threshold of 73.8 dB. MRA showed a similar degree of narrowing of the AICA and intrameatal aneurysm with different shape . Digital subtraction angiography confirmed the dissecting aneurysm and aplasia of the ipsilateral posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) . FLAIR and T2* MR images showed no evidence of the present and previous SAH. The patient was administered a tapering dosage of oral prednisolone (initial dose of 30 mg) for 2 weeks. Her facial nerve paresis greatly improved to HB Grade II during the 6-month follow-up.
MRA at 18 months after onset showed slight increase in diameter of the AICA and slight decrease in the aneurysmal size compared to those 13 months before [ and ]. At the latest follow-up, 21 months after onset, the patient was working as a helper for a nursing home despite her right-sided hearing loss and slight right facial paresis.
Due to the absence of rupture during the clinical course, mild residual symptoms, improvement in the narrowing of the parent artery, and supposed wide irrigation area by the AICA due to the lack of ipsilateral PICA, we considered further follow-up under blood pressure control rather than direct intervention, which may result in serious neurological sequelae.