A 53 years-old Asian male, a civil servant by profession, with a history of smoking and drinking, experienced joint pain in his youth, which was diagnosed as gouty arthritis. Initially, the duration of pain during flare-ups was short, and the analgesics provided relief, so he did not pay much attention to high uric acid levels. His highest recorded uric acid level was over 800+. Over time, the frequency and intensity of his joint pain episodes increased. Due to his busy work schedule, the patient relied on painkillers as needed and occasionally used allopurinol for uric acid-lowering treatment.
Subsequently, the patient developed arthritis in the knee joints and hand joints, with the appearance of tophi in the joints approximately 10 years ago. During this period, he received on-demand treatment with colchicine, febuxostat, and diclofenac sodium. Starting this year, he experienced flare-ups every 2–3 months. Half a month prior to his presentation at our hospital, the patient had another episode of severe joint pain affecting the knees, ankles, and hand joints, accompanied by limited mobility. He self-medicated with diclofenac sodium and colchicine tablets, but the effect was unsatisfactory. Consequently, he sought medical attention and was treated with intravenous dexamethasone 7.5 mg, which resulted in reduced pain. The attending physician recommended hospitalization for further treatment. The main laboratory results are shown in .
Upon admission, physical examination revealed tophi in the first metatarsophalangeal joint of the left foot and the small finger of the right hand. Multiple joints were tender, and there was limited range of motion. Laboratory investigations are detailed in . Electrocardiography showed sinus rhythm and a Q wave in lead III and aVF. Echocardiography indicated left ventricular hypertrophy. Abdominal ultrasound revealed fatty liver, gallbladder polyps, and a cyst in the right kidney. Further imaging studies were conducted to evaluate the affected joints. Hand joint ultrasonography revealed possible synovial hyperplasia with tophi formation in the bilateral first, second, and fifth metacarpophalangeal joints, and erosions in the first and fifth metacarpophalangeal joints of the right hand. Knee joint ultrasonography showed synovial hyperplasia with erosions in both knee joints, as well as joint effusion in the right knee. Tophi formation was also possible in the knee joints . Plain radiography of the right knee showed degenerative changes, synovitis, joint effusion, posterior cruciate ligament injury, and degeneration of the medial and lateral menisci .
According to the patient’s clinical manifestations and relevant examinations, and based on the ACR/EULAR 2015 diagnostic criteria for gout, other rheumatic systemic diseases were ruled out. The patient scored above 8 points, confirming the diagnosis of gouty arthritis. After admission, despite the use of colchicine and low-dose steroids, his pain did not improve. Therefore, on the second day of hospitalization, we administered intravenous methylprednisolone 20 mg daily for 5 days, combined with tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) antagonists and intra-articular steroid injections. The patient reported subjective improvement and was discharged. He was prescribed oral prednisone 5 mg three times a day upon discharge.
Ten days later, he experienced generalized joint pain again. We increased the steroid dosage to intravenous methylprednisolone 40 mg daily for 6 days, in combination with tocilizumab injection (an IL-6 inhibitor). Unfortunately, the treatment did not yield satisfactory results, and the patient still complained of joint pain, requiring further escalation of steroid dosage. At this point, we decided to add upadacitinib tablets. Thankfully, the steroid dosage was eventually successfully reduced. The patient was discharged 10 days later (prescribed prednisone 10 mg three times a day), and 1 month after discharge, all steroids were completely discontinued. Follow-up for 7 months to date has shown no recurrence of acute joint pain. The patient reports no impact on diet, sleep, or daily activities, follows medical advice, remains physically active, consumes a low-purine diet, and continues urate-lowering therapy with febuxostat at a dose of 40 mg/day. Detailed changes in the patient’s main laboratory parameters are shown in .