A 64-year-old male with diabetic nephropathy received an ABO-incompatible kidney transplantation using a donated kidney from his wife in August 2011. Splenectomy was performed one month before the transplant and plasmapheresis was performed three times for the preconditioning treatment. An interleukin-2-receptor monoclonal antibody (basiliximab) was used as an induction immunosuppressant and maintenance immunosuppression included cyclosporine (target trough level, 150–200 ng/mL for the first month after transplant; 100–150 ng/mL for the second month; 50–100 ng/mL from the third month to one year after transplant; and 30–50 ng/mL thereafter), mycophenolate mofetil (1500 mg daily), and methylprednisolone (starting dose of 20 mg daily with a subsequent weekly reduction by 4 mg and maintenance dosage at 4 mg thereafter). His postoperative course was good with no evidence of acute rejection. His serum creatinine level and estimated glomerular filtration rate level were 1.3 ± 0.6 mg/dL and 48 ± 5 mL/min/1.73 m2, respectively, at 6 years after transplantation.
He visited our outpatient department of surgery in July 2017 (72 months after the transplant), suffering from right colic pain, abdominal distention, and diarrhea. The initial non-contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a solitary tumor with a diameter of 11 cm in his lower abdomen. CT colonography was performed to determine the tumor location, which revealed an origin from the small intestine, not the colon or the sigmoid rectum, expanding outside the lumen . The tumor was well circumscribed with a smooth boundary and lobulated contour. There were relatively low attenuation areas in the tumor, which were suspected to correspond to the areas of necrotic degeneration. Moreover, a trapped air bubble was detected in the tumor and mucosal ulcer formation at the tumor site was suspected. Distant metastasis was not observed on CT. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a moderately high signal intensity on fat-suppressed T2-weighed images and a clear high signal intensity on diffusion-weighted images, which suggested the tumor had malignant potential . The preoperative differential diagnosis was GIST or post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder of the small intestine. Resection of the tumor was planned several weeks later because operation room schedule was very tight at that time.
One week after diagnosis, the patient visited the emergency room suffering from acute onset of abdominal pain. Emergent CT revealed free air around the tumor and in the upper peritoneal cavity, suggesting perforation of the small intestine . Emergent laparotomy was performed and revealed that small intestinal perforation had occurred due to tumor necrosis on the luminal side. Cytological examination of ascites, which were collected during the operation, showed no malignant cells. Resection of the tumor and intestinal anastomosis was performed simultaneously. The patient’s postoperative course was good without any comorbidity. The pathological findings showed a perforation hole, 2 mm in diameter, at the intestinal wall above the tumor . The tumor had a clear boundary and grew nodularly from just below the muscularis mucosa towards the abdominal cavity . In the center of the tumor there was a cavity due to coagulative necrosis, which resulted in tumor rupture . The tumor consisted of a bundle of spindle cells that were strongly positive for KIT, CD-34, and discovered on gastrointestinal stromal tumor 1 (DOG1); the positive ratio of Ki-67 was 20% . The nuclear mitotic count was 20/50 in high power fields. Negative staining of desmin and weak staining for S-100 protein excluded the possibility of a leiomyoma or schwannoma . These pathological findings supported a diagnosis of GIST. Risk classification of the tumor was classified as high-risk. Genetic screening revealed a mutation in exon 11 of c-kit and the deletion of two amino acids (Tyr553Trp557del).
Imatinib mesylate at a dose of 400 mg daily was introduced 2 months after the operation as an adjuvant therapy due to the tumor’s high malignant potential, its size (> 5 cm), and the mitotic count (20/50 in high power fields) [, ]. We needed to decrease the dose at 300 mg daily a month after the introduction of imatinib because the patient experienced severe hyponatremia (112.7 mmol/L). Although the cyclosporine trough level was relatively low (30–50 ng/mL) before and after the operation, we withdrew cyclosporine 2 months after the operation without tapering off. Therefore, maintenance immunosuppression comprised mycophenolate mofetil (1500 mg daily) and methylprednisolone (4 mg daily). The patient tolerated reduced imatinib treatment well and his kidney function was well preserved without any evidence of rejection. At follow-up 18 months after the operation, there was no recurrence of the tumor.