A 72-year-old man presented with acute shortness of breath. Telemetry showed ST elevation, but this was not evident in a 12-lead ECG. Before life-flight to our center shortness of breath worsen, and ECG showed ST elevation in inferior leads . His vital signs were significant for a heart rate of 102 beats/min, blood pressure 140/80 mmHg, afebrile, and oxygen saturation of 90% on room air. Physical exam notable for confusion not able to provide a detailed history.
His medical history was significant for CKD, dyslipidemia, and renal cell carcinoma, which was diagnosed 8 months before presentation, after a 12.8 cm right renal mass was found. 14-days later underwent radical right nephrectomy which showed clear cell renal cell carcinoma (RCC) limited to kidneys. Follow-up CT scan showed 4 cm inferior left adrenal gland mass avid for FDG-PET and IR guided biopsy demonstrated RCC. Was started on pembrolizumab 200 mg IV every 3 weeks and axitinib 5 mg PO q12h for the past 5 months.
Coronary angiogram showed a thrombotic lesion in RCA with normal rest of coronaries without evidence of atherosclerosis or bystander plaque which underwent successful PCI with a DES . After PCI patient provided more history, has been complaining of dyspnea on exertion for the past 3 months that is worsening, chronic diarrhea, and waxing, and waning altered mental status. Transthoracic echocardiogram showed inferior wall hypokinesis, normal ejection fraction, normal diastolic function, and small to moderate pericardial effusion with organized material . CRP was elevated at 3 mg/mL and ESR at 42 cm. During the next days, shortness of breath did not improve, and the patient was not able to walk more than 20 feet and supplemental oxygen is needed. We perused further workup with VQ scan which showed a very low probability of pulmonary embolism, Pulmonary function test (PFT) with mild obstructive lung defect with severe reduction of diffusion capacity, high-resolution CT chest showed moderate emphysema, bronchial wall thickening and septal thickening, and normal hemodynamics in right heart catheterization .
At this time patient is still complaining of severe shortness of breath with mild exertion, multiorgan involvement with chronic diarrhea, mild elevation of liver function test, pericardial effusion, altered mental status, and possible pneumonitis. Cardiac MRI was obtained showed moderate complex hemorrhagic pericardial effusion with internal debris with enhancement in FIESTA images, LVEF 38%, triple IR (T1W) showed increased signal intensity basal to mid inferior and inferior-lateral wall with signal intensity (SI) ratio > 2 compared to skeletal muscle, early GAD imaging (600 TI) showed hyperenhancement basal to mid inferolateral wall, and myocardial LGE imaging showed mid myocardium enhancement in basal to mid inferior and inferolateral wall. (Additional file : Fig. S3). The main differential was ICI-multiorgan inflammation with possible myocarditis due possible CMR findings (Based on prior Lake Louis Criteria) and myocarditis syndrome.
An empirical trial of IV-methylprednisone 500 mg IV q12 was started with drastic improvement of shortness of breath, resolution of AMS, and discontinuation of oxygen. Discharge with prednisone taper, and GDMT for HF. At 2, and 6 weeks visit the dyspnea on exertion, diarrhea, and AMS diarrhea had resolved. Because of recent myocardial infarction we did not trend cardiac troponins to avoid confounders. Follow-up echocardiogram improvement of ejection fraction with the resolution of pericardial effusion and wall motions. Plan for multidisciplinary meeting for evaluation of further chemotherapy.