A 4-year-old boy living in the southern region of Saudi Arabia, who did not have any history of health problems, was not on any medication, and had no contact with animals such as dogs, frogs, and lizards, presented to the emergency department of King Abdul-Aziz Hospital in Jeddah with a history of persistent abdominal pain (since 1 month). Upon onset, the pain was colicky in nature, and was associated with persistent nausea, non-bilious vomiting with food content, and weight loss, with a negative history of fever, changes in bowel habits such as constipation, diarrhea or red currant jelly stool, jaundice, dysphagia, pica or urinary changes. The family reported that they had sought medical care three times, but each time the patient had been given analgesics (acetaminophen and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs), which only provided temporary relief. The pain was generalized, non-specific, and intermittent, and had worsened progressively during the past 10 days. The pain interfered with sleep and daily activities.
On examination in the emergency department, the patient was conscious, alert, cachectic, and in pain. His vital signs on examination were as follows: pulse, 110 beats per min; blood pressure, 95/64 mmHg; oxygen saturation, 99% at room air; and temperature, 37.3 °C. Physical examination revealed a soft and lax abdomen, without rigidity or guarding, no palpable abdominal mass, and no localized tenderness. The initial laboratory workup revealed the following: white blood cell (WBC) count, 10,500 cells/μL with 10.5% eosinophils; hemoglobin level, 11.6 g/dL; platelet count, 362 × 103/μL; normal electrolyte profile (Na, K, Cl, Mg, P); C-reactive protein (CRP) level, 3.4 mg/L; and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), 30 mm/hr. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed matted bowel loops in whorled formation in the right lumbar region, resembling a target sign, with a small amount of free intraperitoneal fluid .
After consultation with a pediatric surgeon, emergency laparotomy was performed for suspected intussusception.
Intraoperative findings revealed ileocecal intussusception, which was reduced. After reduction, a palpable mass was identified in the ileocecal valve and cecum with enlarged lymph nodes. The other intra-abdominal organs were normal. Limited resection of the terminal ileum, ileocecal valve, and cecum up to the beginning of the ascending colon was performed with an ilio-ascending anastomosis in two layers and drainage in the paracolic gutter. The colonic biopsy specimen was sent for histopathological examination.
The postoperative course was smooth, and the patient was extubated and moved to the ward. The results of post-operative laboratory tests performed on the day after surgery were as follows: WBC count, 19,500 cells/μL with 6.8% eosinophils; hemoglobin level, 11.2 g/dL; platelet count, 579 × 103/μL; and ESR, 30 mm/h. The CRP, alanine aminotransferase, and aspartate aminotransferase levels were 3.4 mg/L, 12 IU/L, and 32 IU/L, respectively; and the electrolyte profile was normal. Serological tests for hepatitis and human immunodeficiency virus were negative. The patient did not undergo an immunological work-up because it was not indicated. The patient stayed in the ward for 6 days and was discharged in good condition.
One week after discharge, histopathological examination revealed a necrotizing granuloma comprising epithelioid histocytes and multinucleated giant cells with a necrotic central area containing eosinophils. The Splendore–Hoeppli phenomenon was present, which was surrounded by oval-shaped organisms with septate hyphae .
We used a Nikon DS–Rio microscope with the NIS Elements imaging software.
Based on the histopathological findings, the patient was diagnosed with colonic basidiobolomycosis. Polymerase chain reaction testing was not available. Thus, the family was contacted, and the patient was readmitted for further therapy. The patient was initially administered intravenous (IV) voriconazole (7 mg/kg/dose every 12 h) with continuous monitoring of liver function. Detailed history-taking revealed that the patient played in the soil and swam in a small local lake. One week after the second admission, the patient developed abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting, intolerance to oral intake of food, and constipation. Laboratory findings showed a WBC count of 23,000 cells/μL with mainly neutrophils, and normal hemoglobin, platelets, and electrolyte levels. Abdominal ultrasonography was requested based on a surgical consultation, and the findings were suggestive of small bowel obstruction representing adhesive bands. A decision was made to manage the bowel obstruction conservatively, and a nasogastric tube was inserted for free drainage. However, the infectious disease team suspected a healthcare-associated infection and initiated IV piperacillin-tazobactam. The patient did not show much improvement, and piperacillin-tazobactam was replaced with meropenem. Subsequently, the patient’s clinical condition improved, the abdominal pain resolved, and the patient was able to resume oral intake of food.
Two weeks after completing the course of IV meropenem, the patient was discharged with a prescription of oral voriconazole in a good general condition. Thereafter, outpatient follow-up was performed every 2 weeks for four visits, followed by monthly follow-up visits. The patient appeared to be doing well on the subsequent outpatient visits, with good oral intake of food and weight gain. The patient complied with the therapy, and the liver function test results remained normal. The patient took oral voriconazole for 1 year. During the annual follow-up, the patient showed good tolerance and compliance with the medication with no reported side-effects, and follow-up computed tomography of the abdomen showed normal findings. The patient was examined at the outpatient clinic 2 years after diagnosis and treatment and was doing well with no intestinal obstruction observed on radiological imaging.