A 78-year-old woman of African descent presented to us with severe inflammation, pain, suppuration, ulceration, and digit deformation in both upper and lower limbs . She had a total of 1146 embedded sand fleas: 812 in lower limbs and 334 in her hands. All the nails of her four limbs were lost. She had severe desquamation, persistent pain, and had been unwell for approximately 8 months prior to this index visit. She had manipulated her itchy lesions with unsterile objects and denied a history of over-the-counter medication use. She lived alone in a grass-roofed mud hut with no running water or electricity, and had not taken a shower for a couple of weeks. She had been a peasant all her life but for approximately 1 year she had not taken part in any productive physical activity. Her past medical history could not be ascertained.
She had a blood pressure of 89/54 mmHg, respiratory rate of 28 breaths/minute, heart rate of 108 beats/minute, and temperature of 38.6 °C. She was emaciated with a body mass index of 16.3 kg/m2 (weight 44.5 kg and height 1.65 m). A physical examination apart from the obvious skin lesions was positive for conjunctival pallor and reduced muscle bulkiness and power (grade 3/5) in all four limbs. Her full blood picture revealed iron deficiency anemia (hemoglobin, Hb, 7.6 g/dL; mean corpuscular volume, MCV, 62 fL; mean cell hemoglobin, MCH, 19 pg/cell; red cell distribution width, RDW, 23.5%), neutropenia (neutrophils 2.7 × 109/L), and thrombocytopenia (platelets 136 × 109/L). A blood slide for malaria parasite was negative but she had elevated liver enzymes (aspartate aminotransferase, AST, 38 IU/L and alanine transaminase, ALT, 66 IU/L) and hyponatremia (sodium, Na+, 116 mEq/L). Her renal functions, bleeding indices, echocardiographic findings, and serology for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B and C, and Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) tests were unremarkable. Blood cultures isolated Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus pyogenes species.
A diagnosis of severe Tunga infestation with secondary septicemia was reached based on the typical clinical picture, evidence of embedded sand fleas, and positive blood cultures. We applied 20% salicylated petroleum jelly followed by the manual removal of embedded fleas with a sterile needle. The residual cavity was then cleaned to ensure the entire flea contents were removed. Piperacillin-tazobactam 4.5 g administered intravenously four times a day for 5 days was used successfully to treat sepsis. Moreover, ferrous sulfate (200 mg once a day), folic acid (5 mg once a day), tolvaptan (15 mg once a day), albendazole (400 mg), multivitamins, and tetanus prophylaxis were also administered when her fever subsided. She was also reviewed by nutritionists and she was prescribed a high protein diet. She was discharged home after 16 days of hospitalization with topical ivermectin, ferrous sulfate, folic acid, and multivitamins. She was followed-up through a regional hospital contact at 30 and 90 days with no sign of residual or recurrent manifestation. Furthermore, we managed to contact one of her sons who agreed to live with and take care of his mother at his home located in the city.