A 74-year-old female patient was referred to our cancer center regarding elevated platelet count and suspected MPN. Her past medical history was significant for hypertension, and gastroesophageal reflux disease only. Home medications included perindopril 4 mg daily and, in the past, she was on omeprazole, stopped recently. She did not take anticoagulants or antiplatelet agents. There was no family history of excessive bleeding or coagulopathies. Her physical exam showed a body max index of 24.5, elevated systolic blood pressure (187/78 mm Hg), and no organomegaly, petechiae, or hematomas. Complete blood count showed normal hemoglobin (Hb) and white blood cell count, but platelet count was markedly elevated at 1,292x109/L . Partial Thromboplastin time (PTT) was 35 sec, at the upper limit of normal. International normalized ratio (INR) was 1.0 (normal). Biochemistry was unremarkable with normal lactic acid dehydrogenase and uric acid. Myeloproliferative neoplasm, in particular, Essential Thrombocythemia was suspected, and the patient was offered a bone marrow examination along with the molecular tests.
Due to personal reasons diagnostic bone marrow exam was delayed for two weeks. At that time her physical exam was unremarkable with no petechiae or hematomas. The procedure was technically uncomplicated, however, the patient developed bleeding from the biopsy site. Local pressure and an ice pack were ineffective, so 20 mcg of desmopressin subcutaneously, and one unit of fresh frozen plasma were given. Tranexamic acid 1,000 mg PO every 8 hours was also initiated. The patient was admitted for bleeding control and received another dose of desmopressin. As shown in the patient had extreme thrombocytosis (platelet count rose to 1,491x109/L), elevated PTT (43 sec), normal INR and Hb 145 g/L. A sample for testing for von Willebrand disease was sent out. The next day her bleeding continued and her Hb decreased to 89 g/L, she became symptomatic (tachycardia) and fatigued. The coagulation profile was consistent with AVWS type 2 subtype with a reduction in vWF: Ag: vWF Antigen 0.25 U/mL (normal 0.56-1.62), vWF Activity was 0.33 U/mL (normal 0.50-1.87), Coagulation Factor VIII Activity was 0.39 U/mL (normal 0.60-1.71. The patient’s blood group was O-negative with a negative antibody screen.
She received one unit of packed red blood cells and a high dose of HU (3g/day) was started urgently; within 24h platelet count dropped to 798x109/L and the bleeding resolved. Repeated blood work showed normalization of PTT (34 sec) and vWF profile . The dose of HU was decreased to 500 mg PO every 12 hours. She was seen in follow-up in 2 weeks. At that time Hb was 125 g/L, reticulocyte count was appropriately elevated (128), and she developed iron deficiency. The platelet count was down to 450x109/L. She started on oral iron supplements and the HU dose was further decreased to 500 mg daily. She started aspirin and had no further bleeding. Diagnosis of ET was confirmed on a bone marrow biopsy. It showed hypercellular bone marrow with clusters of abnormal megakaryocytes . The molecular test was positive for JAK2 V617F mutation in both alleles. She remained on this dose of HU for several years.