In October 2012, a 49-year-old man was diagnosed with Ph+ B-ALL. At diagnosis, the patient presented with hyperleukocytosis and lymphoblasts expressing B-ALL immunophenotype (CD34+, CD19+, CD20+, CD10+). The Ph+ t(9; 22) translocation resulted in a p190 protein (e1a2 transcript type), determining a high risk (HR) of disease relapse. The patient did not present any significant comorbidities, and he was enrolled in the NILG ALL10/07 trial ( and ), combining chemotherapy (idarubicin, cyclophosphamide, 6-mercaptopurine, dexamethasone, and intrathecal chemotherapy) and imatinib (800 mg/day).
The treatment was well tolerated, and the patient obtained a complete morphological, cytogenetic, and molecular response after induction therapy with no significant side effects. In April 2013, the patient underwent allo-SCT from a matched related donor (53-year-old patient’s sister, with no history of neoplasia or hematologic malignancies), considering the HR disease relapse. The conditioning regimen was based on cyclophosphamide 60 mg/kg for 2 days (4,800 mg total dose) and total body irradiation (total dose: 1,200 cGy), and he received methotrexate and cyclosporine-A (CyA) for graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) prophylaxis.
In the first 100 days after transplant, the patient developed a WHO grade 4 acute GVHD (aGVHD) of the skin (stage III), gut (stage II), and liver (stage II). He was treated with steroids (6-methylprednisone 2 mg/kg per day), infliximab (four total doses), and extracorporeal photopheresis (ECP), obtaining complete remission.
Four months later, he developed severe chronic GVHD (cGVHD) involving the skin (score 4), mucous membranes (score 2), eyes (score 1), and joints (score 1). The cGVHD was treated with UVA phototherapy, then with methotrexate, and lastly with imatinib, ECP, and rituximab. The posttransplant course was also characterized by several CMV reactivations and multiple infections of skin ulcers, complicated by recurrent sepsis and one episode of septic shock caused by (July 2018).
During all the follow–up, the patient remained in continuous complete morphological/molecular remission with 100% CD34+ donor chimerism.
Five years after allo-SCT (January 2018), the patient presented with anemia [hemoglobin (Hb) 12.2 g/dl], thrombocytopenia [platelet (PLT): 71 × 109/L], and hyperleukocytosis [white blood cell count (WBC): 20.45 × 109/L] . MDS with excess blasts type 1 (MDS-EB1) was diagnosed according to the last WHO classification , with a very high International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS)-revised score risk. The patient was still on cGVHD treatment with imatinib and tacrolimus. In the meantime, the primitive Ph+ B-ALL was still in complete response (CR) (p190 negative; IF: CD34+, CD19+, CD10+ = 0% of cells).
The cytogenetic analysis suggested the donor cell origin of MDS due to the female karyotype. Moreover, the karyotype was characterized by the presence of a monosomy of chromosome 7 (45 XX, −7, add(18p) [26]; 45 XX, −7q [2]). Conversely, no Ph+ metaphases were found. The chimerism on CD34+ cells (100% donor), together with the fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) for sex mismatch (361/361 XX), confirmed the donor cell origin (patient’s sister) of the MDS. At the time of DC-MDS, the patient presented severe lymphopenia (CD4+ : 80/μl; total lymphocytes: 500/μl). In parallel, the patient’s sister has been periodically evaluated, and her peripheral blood counts have always been in range.
A gene panel deep sequencing has been performed at DC-MDS diagnosis to analyze some genes known to be related to myeloid malignancies . All the promoters and coding sequences of the genes were considered for the analysis. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) analysis revealed NRAS [variant allele frequency (VAF) 51%], RUNX1 (VAF 62.2%), and BCOR (VAF 44.7%) mutations. Notably, the variants detected were not known to be associated with malignancies or other diseases. Considering the VAF of NRAS and the familial history for neoplasia (mother and a sister, not the transplant donor, with colorectal cancer), we investigated the presence of a familiar genetic predisposition for the development of hematologic and solid malignancies. To this purpose, the patient and the donor were enrolled in the NEXT-FamlY clinical trial (NCT03058588) . This is a national multicentric study focused on the analysis of known and unknown mutations related to familiar predisposition to hematologic malignancies. The germline DNA of both the donor and the recipient resulted negative for the NRAS mutation.
Unfortunately, because of the patient’s conditions compromised by the recurrent infections and GVHD complications, any treatments for the MDS could not be given and the patient died of septic shock a few months after the onset of DC-MDS (September 2018).