A 27-year-old man from Colombia presented to our emergency department with fever (38.9 °C) and progressively worsening lower abdominal pain for the last 6 months, peaking at the day of admission. The patient also reported mild nausea, intermittent night sweats, weight loss, and fever during the last few months prior to admission. Physical examination revealed no noticeable findings aside from pressure pain in the lower right abdominal region. Laboratory inflammatory markers were elevated (leukocyte count 13 g/L, C-reactive protein [CRP] 17 mg/dL). The patient was admitted to our hospital. Due to findings of ascites in an ultrasound examination, a computed tomography (CT) scan was performed and revealed a pleural mass, necrotic abdominal lymph nodes, and bowel wall thickening .
A computed tomography (CT)-guided biopsy of the pleural tumor was performed. While histopathological results were still pending, the patient developed increasing abdominal pain and vomiting, so another CT scan was conducted, which showed a small bowel ileus. Subsequently, a laparoscopy with peritoneal biopsy and creation of a protective ileostomy was performed. The histological examination of the pleural and abdominal specimens showed granulomatous inflammation without direct microscopic detection of acid-fast bacilli. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for M. tuberculosis complex from pleural and intra-abdominal specimens revealed a negative result.
As intestinal malabsorption was assumed due to a massive post-stenotic atrophied intestinal bowel, parenteral nutrition and empirical intravenous MTB treatment with ethambutol, levofloxacin, rifampicin, and isoniazid was initiated using a totally implantable venous access device (port). After 5 weeks, MTB cultures of pleural biopsy and intra-abdominal lymph nodes showed growth of a pan-sensitive M. tuberculosis complex strain.
In the further in-hospital course, the patient developed severe abdominal pain in the region of the ileostomy as well as high inflammatory markers. A CT scan displayed free air within the peritoneal cavity indicating a bowel perforation and an intra-abdominal abscess, leading to the performance of a laparotomy with small bowel segment resection and preparation of a split stoma. Two months later, the split stoma was reversed. After 3 months of in-patient care, the patient was discharged in good condition, and MTB treatment was switched to oral therapy with isoniazid and rifampicin. After a total duration of 10 months, a CT scan showed no evidence of persistent MTB disease, so the MTB treatment was terminated.