On April 1, 2021, a 42-year-old man was admitted to our hospital for neck pain and limb weakness that persisted for 1 mo.
The patient’s family found him delirious and the medicine bottle used to store quetiapine [20 tablets (200 mg)] was empty. The patient was suspected of taking high doses of quetiapine. Gastric lavage was performed and he was admitted to the intensive care unit for further treatment.
He had no history of smoking or alcoholism, nor a history of drug or food allergies. He had a history of gout for more than 10 years and did not take medication regularly. No history of chronic diseases such as hypertension and diabetes were reported. In June 2020, he underwent right 1st toe amputation at another hospital for gouty arthritis, and recovered well after the surgery.
No abnormalities were found in the patient’s personal and family history.
The patient’s physical signs were as follows: Sensory numbness in the limbs, lumbosacral pain, pain and swelling in both elbows, interphalangeal joints of both hands, knees, and ankles, and limited mobility. The muscle strength of the extremities was classified as grade IV; the tendon reflexes of both upper extremities were hyperactive, the Hoffmann sign was positive, and the straight leg raise test was negative. Scattered multiple tophus were seen in both elbows, interphalangeal joints, knees, and ankles, with the size of a soybean. The first toe of the right foot was absent. The patient was 170 cm tall and weighed 60 kg (BMI: 20.8).
The test results showed C-reactive protein 7.73 mg/L, leukocytes 10.61 × 109/L, neutrophils (%) 79.20%, and calcitoninogen 0.02 ng/mL.
Ultrasound revealed echogenic changes in both kidneys and right kidney stones. X-ray showed bilateral elbow joints, bilateral knee joints, bilateral ankle joints, gouty arthritic changes in both hands, destruction of the left olecranon and right medial humeral condyle, and multiple metacarpals and carpal bones in both hands. Defects of the right foot 1st metatarsal with exposed stump was considered postoperative changes. Preoperative Computed tomography (CT) of the cervical, thoracic, lumbar, and sacral spine showed: (1) Multiple tophi throughout the spine, with spinal cord compression and degeneration at C7/T1, T5, and T6 Levels; and (2) multiple abnormal high signals that might indicate tophus deposition in the lumbar and sacral vertebral subtalar joints . Cervical and thoracic spine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) suggested: (1) Multiple tophus deposits in and around the left vertebral subtalar joint at C7/T1, right T4/5 and bilateral subtalar joints at T5/6, and spinal cord compression and degeneration at C7/T1, T5 and T6 Levels .