A previously fit and well 69-year-old man was admitted to the gastroenterology department with a short one month history of lethargy, decreased appetite, persistent vomiting, significant weight loss of six kilograms over 1 month and a dry cough. He denied abdominal pain, haematemesis, dysphagia and a change in bowel habit and described no cardiac, respiratory, neurological symptoms or bone pain. His past medical history includes appendectomy and total hip joint replacement. At the time of admission, he was not on any regular medication.
Physical examination revealed that he was febrile (38.8C°) and appeared cachexic but with no peripheral stigmata of chronic liver disease. His abdominal examination revealed hepatomegaly but no other organomegaly, per rectal examination was unremarkable. His cardiopulmonary examinations were unremarkable apart from bilateral pitting edema up to his ankles. Peripheral blood analysis revealed an anaemia of chronic disease with hemoglobin of 108 g/L (norm - male 130 - 175 g/L), serum iron 2 μmol/L (norm 10 - 30 μmol/L), transferrin 1.4 g/L (2 - 3.5 g/L), transferrin saturation 6% (norm 16 - 50%) and ferritin 354 μg/L (norm 20 - 500 μg/L). Consistent with a systemic illness the c-reactive protein was increased to 208 mg/L (norm < 5 mg/L) but multiple urine and blood cultures were negative for bacterial infection. Normal serum electrolytes and creatinine of 83 μmol/L (norm 50 - 120 μmol/L). Liver function test was normal apart from a marked hypoalbuminaemia of 28 g/L (norm 35 - 50 g/L). Protein electrophoresis, Vitamin B12, folate, and thyroid functions were normal. Chest X-ray showed interstitial infiltration involving both lung bases. Lung function test was consistent with a restrictive lung disease (FVC 3.33 L (73%), FEV1 2.49 L (72%), FEV1/FVC 75% and decreased in diffusion capacity (DLCO 17.81 ml/min/mmHg). Ultrasound of the abdomen confirmed a 19 cm hepatomegaly, with normal liver texture and no evidence of a mass lesion. Due to ongoing vomiting and weight loss, a gastroscopy was performed with no significant pathology. Computer tomography (CT) of the chest showed peri-aortic tissue infiltration creating the appearance of "coated aorta" as well as thickening of the interlobular septa in both lungs . The infiltration processes also involved the pulmonary vessels, pericardium, lung parenchyma and the oesophagus. CT of the abdomen showed hypo-attenuated homogenous tissue infiltration with weak contrast enhancement in the renal fossa. Symmetric and bilateral infiltration of the peri-renal, anterior and posterior para-renal spaces gave the appearance of "hairy kidney" . Inferior vena cava, aorta and mesentery were also involved. These findings were seen as consistent with a possible diagnosis of Erdheim-Chester Disease (ECD) [-].
A CT guided biopsy of the retroperitoneal space and a bone marrow aspiration were performed which were inconclusive, consistent with reactive inflammatory processes. To confirm the diagnosis of ECD a laparotomy was performed to obtain tissue for diagnostic purposes. Operative findings revealed an infiltrating process involving the liver, omentum and small bowel mesentery. Biopsies were taken from the liver , the omentum and mesenteric lymph nodes . Histological examination of the tissue showed xanthomatous infiltration involving the liver, omentum and surrounding the lymph nodes. The xanthomatous process was characterized by prominent foamy histiocytes, admixed with occasional giant cells and chronic inflammatory cells. Immunohistochemical stains revealed that these cells were positive for CD68 and negative for S100 and CD1a. There was no evidence of malignancy and the findings allowed a diagnosis of severe multi-organ ECD .
Subsequent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the whole body showed an increased marrow signal in the distal femur and proximal tibia consistent with ECD . Due to further rapid decline, the patient was started on total parenteral nutrition, IV hydrocortisone at 1 g once daily for 2 days, then 500 mg once daily for 8 days before changing to oral prednisone at 100 mg (1 mg/kg/day) for a week. The prednisone dose was then tapered down to 30 mg once daily. Although the patient's appetite improved after the initiation of steroid treatment, hypoalbuminaemia persisted and thrombocytopenia developed. One month after initiation of treatment the patient died of respiratory failure.