A 37-year-old Japanese female, generally in good health, began to experience visual difficulties in the lower part of her left eye, which gradually spread to her entire field of vision, resulting in blurred vision in her left eye. On day 5 after onset, she visited a local ophthalmologist, who noted significant vision loss in her left eye and promptly referred her to our hospital on the same day. At the time of onset, she was engaged and had plans to get married the following month. At the initial examination, her left visual acuity was significantly decreased, with unaided visual acuity measuring counting fingers at a distance of 50 cm and corrected visual acuity measuring 0.02. The critical fusion frequency could not be measured in the left eye. The left eye exhibited a positive relative afferent pupillary defect, and visual evoked potentials revealed the absence of a P100 response upon stimulation of the left eye. No significant abnormalities were found in the blood or cerebrospinal fluid, and head and spinal cord magnetic resonance imaging revealed no apparent lesions other than left optic neuritis. On day 12, she tested positive for anti-AQP4 antibody by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, leading to a diagnosis of NMOSD.
The administration of 1,000 mg/day intravenous methylprednisolone for 3 days starting on day 5 led to an improvement in the condition of her left visual field blindness. As post-therapy, 50 mg/day of oral prednisolone (PSL) was initiated on day 8 and gradually tapered off. However, because visual field impairment persisted thereafter, intravenous methylprednisolone at a daily dose of 1,000 mg for 3 days was repeated three more times over the course of the following 2 months, resulting in a total of four treatments. In addition, azathioprine was initiated and gradually increased up to 75 mg/day. Subsequently, there was a gradual improvement in her left visual acuity, but it remained insufficient; therefore, intravenous immunoglobulin therapy was initiated once a month starting on day 31. Thereafter, with no relapse, her left corrected visual acuity improved from 0.02 to 0.60, enabling her to decrease the dosage of PSL to 20 mg/day on day 85. However, moon face and weight gain became evident because of the prolonged use of steroids, and she expressed a desire to reduce the steroid dosage as soon as possible. She also wanted to conceive a child and have a safe and preferably early pregnancy and parturition.
Because pregnancy and parturition after the onset of NMOSD elevate the risk of relapse and miscarriage (further details will be provided later), we considered introducing satralizumab. After being informed that the safety of satralizumab in pregnant females had not been established and that there might be a risk of transfer to the fetus, the patient requested treatment with satralizumab, which was initiated on day 110.
After the administration of satralizumab, no specific adverse events were observed, and a positive pregnancy test was detected on day 140. Considering the risks of gestational diabetes and hypertension, discontinuing steroids was also contemplated. However, following consultations with our obstetrics and gynecology department, it was determined that the risks of disease relapse and miscarriage associated with discontinuing PSL and azathioprine were greater. Ultimately, the patient expressed a desire to continue the medication, so the decision was made to continue with PSL and azathioprine. During pregnancy, the regular monitoring of parameters including blood sugar levels and blood pressure was conducted, and all values remained within the normal range.
She received regular satralizumab doses and gave birth to a female infant weighing 3,200 g by normal vaginal parturition on day 380, at 39 weeks and 5 days of gestation. Both the mother and infant progressed smoothly without any abnormalities, and breastfeeding was continued until 10 months after birth. Throughout this period, the infant did not experience any serious infections and did not show any developmental delays. Anti-AQP4 antibody in the patient's serum was confirmed negative 20 months after onset. A total of 34 doses of satralizumab were administered over 2 years and 6 months, during which there were no relapses, and the PSL dosage was reduced to 8 mg/day .
The concentrations of satralizumab were measured in the maternal serum 21 days before parturition, in the maternal serum and umbilical cord blood immediately after parturition, and in the maternal serum, breast milk, and infant serum 5 and 26 days after parturition . On the day of parturition (21 days after satralizumab administration), the concentration in the maternal serum was 9.59 μg/ml, and the umbilical cord blood concentration was below the detection sensitivity (< 0.200 μg/ml). Additionally, the maternal serum concentration 5 days after parturition (26 days after satralizumab administration) was 4.69 μg/ml, and the maternal serum concentration 26 days after parturition (19 days after satralizumab administration) was 10.3 μg/ml, whereas the concentrations in breast milk and infant serum were below the detection sensitivity.