The patient was a 76-year-old man with abdominal pain who was transferred to our hospital in August, 2013 from another institution. He had experienced 48 hours of obstipation, and computed tomography of the abdomen was concerning for an incarcerated Morgagni’s hernia. He had a 10-month history of intermittent abdominal discomfort after eating large meals. Evaluation at another institution in 2012 had revealed a right Morgagni’s hernia that was managed non-operatively. He also had a longstanding history of gastroesophageal reflux disease and a known moderate-sized paraesophageal hernia.
A physical examination revealed decreased breath sounds in the base of the right lung and diffuse abdominal tenderness with guarding. There was focal tenderness at the right lateral chest wall. Computed tomography (CT) scans of the chest, abdomen and pelvis obtained for operative planning showed a large right Morgagni hernia containing small bowel, large bowel, and appendix with interval development of acute appendicitis when compared to CT scans obtained at the referring facility . A moderate paraesophageal hernia was stable in size compared to its appearance in prior studies. These physical and imaging findings indicated the need for surgical intervention.
We chose an upper midline laparotomy over a laparoscopic approach, given the possibility of ischemic or necrotic bowel. There was a 4 cm by 6 cm anterior defect 5 cm right of midline, anterior to the liver , containing approximately 100 cm of distal ileum, cecum, appendix, and a portion of the ascending and transverse colon. The cecum was dilated but viable and the appendix had a dilated tip without evidence of perforation.
The Morgagni hernia contents were reduced and an appendectomy was performed. The paraesophageal hernia was reduced, the hiatal defect was repaired and a Nissen fundoplication was performed. The Morgagni defect was repaired primarily with interrupted prolene sutures without removal of the hernia sac .
Postoperatively, the patient’s course was complicated by a pulmonary embolism that required anticoagulation with a direct thrombin inhibitor because of heparin resistance, new onset atrial fibrillation secondary to volume overload that improved with aggressive diuresis, Clostridium difficile colitis treated with oral vancomycin, and ileus that resolved with nasogastric decompression and bowel rest. He was discharged home on postoperative day 14. The final pathology report confirmed acute appendicitis and periappendiceal inflammation. At his follow-up visit, the patient was doing well and eating a normal diet without dysphagia or persistent gastroesophageal reflux.