A 49-year-old Japanese woman was referred to our hospital with symptoms of anorexia, abdominal discomfort, and a palpable abdominal mass. She reported a 7 kg weight loss in a few months and had a medical history of hypertension and hyperlipidemia as well as a maternal history of gastric cancer. On performing a physical examination, a palpable mass was detected in her left upper abdominal quadrant. She had regular bowel movements with normal stools.
A complete blood count test revealed only mild microcytic hypochromic anemia (hemoglobin, 11.0 g/dL). A blood biochemical test revealed no abnormalities, except for an elevated lactate dehydrogenase level of 401 U/L. Her levels of tumor markers were assessed, including carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen 19-9, and α-fetoprotein, all of which were within normal ranges.
An abdominal X-ray revealed a diffuse opaque area in her upper abdomen without a gastrointestinal gas shadow; accompanying the finding, her transverse colon was dislocated downward . Endoscopy showed compression of the posterior wall of her gastric body along with mucosal redness. Several biopsy specimens were taken, which showed evidence of erosive atrophic gastritis. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a huge mass with an irregular wall, approximately 22 cm in size, located between the posterior gastric wall and her pancreas . The mass demonstrated heterogeneous contrast and internal low-density components, suggestive of necrosis. The mass was mainly supplied by her left gastric artery branches. Moreover, many small nodules around her stomach were observed, suggestive of enlarged lymph nodes or disseminated lesions. There were no signs of hepatic masses. Based on these findings, a mesenchymal tumor, such as a GIST, leiomyoma, leiomyosarcoma, or a neurogenic tumor, was suspected.
The tumor grew rapidly, and her abdominal symptoms worsened; therefore, a semi-urgent laparotomy was performed, although a definitive diagnosis could not be preoperatively made. After gastrocolic ligament division, a giant extraluminal tumor arising from the posterior wall of her upper stomach on the lesser curvature was noted. Furthermore, multiple white nodules, suspected of being disseminated lesions, were widely distributed in her greater omentum, lesser omentum, transverse mesocolon, and retroperitoneum. Serous ascites was also seen in the pouch of Douglas. The giant tumor adhered to her pancreas, transverse mesocolon, and transverse colon; however, the tumor was removed by wedge resection of her stomach following ligation of the vessels supplying the mass, without resecting other organs. The radical resection of the multiple white nodules was impossible; therefore, the nodules were resected as far as possible.
The resected specimen was a well-circumscribed tumor . The cut surface of the tumor revealed a white–gray solid mass with coagulative necrosis, accompanying a large central cavity .
The microscopic findings of hematoxylin–eosin staining revealed a bundle-like growth of spindle-shaped tumor cells, with acidophilic cytoplasm and enlarged nuclei accompanying increased chromatin levels . Nuclear atypia was prominent, and the mitotic count was over 150 per 50 high-power fields . Tumor cells grew externally from the proper muscle layer of her stomach . The resection margins were free of tumor cells. Immunohistochemical staining revealed that the tumor was positive for KIT and CD34 and negative for desmin and S-100 protein . The MIB-1 labeling index of the tumor cells was 40 to 50 %. On histologic examination, the resected white nodules had the same appearance as the primary tumor and contained no components of lymph nodes . Based on these pathological findings, a final diagnosis of gastric GIST with peritoneal dissemination was made. According to the modified Fletcher’s classification, our patient was classified in the high-risk category .
Our patient had an uneventful postoperative course and was discharged from our hospital on postoperative day 15. Postoperative CT showed several recognizable disseminated lesions in her abdominal cavity . Treatment with imatinib at 400 mg per day was started from 1 month postoperatively. The treatment was well tolerated, with grade 1 eyelid swelling and grade 1 skin rash, which improved immediately. A follow-up CT, 9 months after imatinib administration, revealed ambiguous residual disseminated lesions . She is now doing well, 12 months after surgery. Imatinib administration at 400 mg per day is to be continued until disease progression is favorably controlled, with follow-up CT planned once every 3 months.