A 29-year-old woman (II-11) was referred to the Genetic Outpatient Clinic for consultation in the 12th week of her fifth pregnancy with a diagnosis of generalised hydrops foetalis.
In anamnesis, the child - a boy from her fourth pregnancy, born prematurely using Caesarean section at 36 weeks of gestation, with an Apgar score of 7, birth weight 2600 g (> 50th centile), length 47 cm (> 50 centile), occipotofrontal head circumference 34 cm (> 10 centile), had numerous birth defects. They were as follows: heart defects, i.e. ventricular septal defect (VSD) and atrial septal defect II (ASD II); central nervous system (CNS) defects, i.e. lack of the cerebellar vermis and slight enlargement of the lateral ventricles; eyeball defects, i.e. defects of the eyelids and eyeballs, and lenticular staphyloma diagnosed in the left eye.
An orofacial cleft, hearing loss, and limb defects were also present. Among the dysmorphic features observed in the child were: synophrys, eyelids defect, wide nose root, anteverted nostrils, large maxilla, small retracted mandible, dysmorphic auricles.
The child died at 8 months of age due to a complex heart defect with pulmonary hypertension and circulatory insufficiency.
Medical records were obtained after the child’s death, and the previously begun genetic diagnostics was completed only after the diagnosis of congenital defects of the foetus in the subsequent pregnancy (III-22), using earlier sampled material from the child (III-21). The remaining three older children showed no signs of disease.
The mother had a sister with a clinically diagnosed Down syndrome (II-14) and other six healthy siblings who had healthy children. The information about the clinical diagnosis of Down syndrome in the sister was obtained while collecting the interview from the mother before performing prenatal tests. However, the family did not agree to carry out genetic diagnosis in the patient. Therefore, the final diagnosis is unknown.
In the family of the child’s father (II-10), no congenital defects or disabilities were found .
In the ultrasound examination done in the fifth pregnancy, the foetal CRL (Crown–Rump Length) value at 12 weeks was 50 mm and NT (Nuchal Translucency) was 8 mm, while in a biochemical examination MoM for PAPP-A was 0.47, and MoM for BHCG was 1.49.
Nuchal translucency [NT] is an ultrasound marker used in non-invasive prenatal screening to assess the risk of foetal aneuploidy in the first trimester of pregnancy. It arises due to the accumulation of fluid around the neck of the foetus. In the examined case, in the foetus the NT was 8 mm (> 95th centile) with enlargement of the skin edema up to the sacral and pericranial regions. The basic mechanism of formation of non-immune hydrops foetalis - (NIHF) are imbalances between the production and absorption of interstitial fluids. Generalized swelling may be a consequence of increased venous pressure in the course of foetal failure, the presence of abnormal structures in the chest, increased capillary permeability, impaired lymphatic flow or reduced plasma oncotic pressure.
A combination of nuchal translucency with the maternal serum PAPP-A and B-hCG has a detection rate of approximately 90% for trisomies 21,18 and 13 with a 5% false positive rate.
Because of the abnormal presentation of the foetus in ultrasound examination and an elevated risk of aneuploidy shown in at 15 weeks of pregnancy, the mother decided to undergo amniocentesis with amniocytes genetic tests.
In the ultrasound examination at 18 weeks of pregnancy, intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) of 2 weeks was found. Furthermore, abnormal foetal head contour, with agenesis of the corpus callosum, enlargement of the lateral ventricle anterior horns and hypoplasia of the cerebellar vermis, were diagnosed. The nuchal fold thickness (NF) of 8.5 mm with numerous cysts was found. Abnormal facial profile with retrognathy, hypertelorism and anteverted nostrils was also noted. The palatopharyngeal arch had an extended angle with preserved continuity . In the spine, important shortening of the sacrocaudal section, and in the limbs shortening of all long bones by approximately 2 weeks in relation to other dimensions of foetal biometry and its age, were observed. Hands with a normal number of fingers and bilateral clinodactyly of the fifth finger were found. Moreover, subaortic ventricular septal defect (VSD), double outlet right ventricle (DORV) and pericardial effusion were observed.
The parents (II - 10 and II-11) were informed about the unfavourable prognosis due to severe brain abnormalities and other foetal defects, high probability of its death in utero or shortly after birth, and if surviving, severe intellectual disability. Therefore, the parents elected a termination of the pregnancy.