A 67-year-old Japanese man presented with a 1-day history of nausea, vomiting, and upper abdominal pain. He described that these symptoms had occurred intermittently for several years, and had previously alleviated naturally; however, in this instance, they did not alleviate. Although he used to take medication for hypertension, he had no surgical, family, social, or environmental history. A physical examination revealed only a slightly distended abdomen. A neurological examination showed no abnormality. His vital signs on admission were: blood pressure 152/96 mmHg, heart rate 54 beats per minute (bpm), and body temperature 36.5 °C. A laboratory investigation revealed a white blood cell count of 11,900 cells/μL comprising 82.6 % segmented neutrophils . Abdominal radiography revealed a prominently dilated small intestine with some air–fluid interfaces. A contrast-enhanced computed tomography scan of his abdomen revealed a dilated intestine, a small intestine volvulus, and a well-capsulated homogeneous mass . Volvulus of the intestine, by the twisted appearance of the main mesenteric vessels in their root, was discovered. He was diagnosed as having a small intestine volvulus that was affected by a lipoma. Single-port laparoscopic surgery was performed.
He was placed under general anesthesia in the supine position. A 2 cm incision was created in his umbilical region, and covered with a wrapping protector. Three 5 mm laparoscopic cannulae were introduced through the access channels of the multi-trocar device at the 3, 7, and 11 o’clock positions. Following initial abdominal exploration, a twisted small intestine and congested tissue were found. The congested tissue was caused by the greater omentum band ; therefore, the band was removed. After having resolved the twisting, we determined that the congested tissue was a mesenteric lipoma. A mesenteric lipoma was identified in the terminal ileum approximately 20 cm proximal to the ileocecal valve; it was a well-capsulated, 10×9 cm, smooth, yellowish mass originating from the small mesentery. Because this tumor occurred from the mesentery , resection of his small intestine was unnecessary. Laparoscopic resection of the origin of this tumor was performed using an ultrasonic coagulation device. The umbilical incision was extended to 5 cm and the tumor was retrieved through the incision using a bag without injury. The tumor was removed en bloc. Surgical blood loss was 20 ml, and operative time was 92 minutes. Our patient had no postoperative complications and was discharged on postoperative day 6. A histopathological examination revealed that the tumor was composed of mature adipocyte-like normal adipose tissue, confirming that it was a lipoma . There was no recurrence or complications 1-year post-operation.