The patient was a 70-year-old Asian woman who had been referred to our hospital complaining of a right breast tumor. Physical examination revealed a 20-mm movable hard mass within the inferolateral quadrant of the right breast with no findings on the overlying skin. Mammography revealed a spiculated mass with segmental and linear calcifications in the mediolateral portion of the right breast . Ultrasonography revealed a rough-bordered mass showing internal hypoechogenicity and measuring 16 × 12 × 11 mm3 in size, in the inferolateral quadrant of the right breast . Magnetic resonance imaging showed a round mass, measuring 14 × 13 × 11 mm3 in size with rim enhancement . The tumor was diagnosed as estrogen receptor-positive, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-positive invasive ductal carcinoma from core needle biopsy . Fine needle aspiration cytology of an axillary lymph node measuring 12 mm in diameter revealed the presence of malignant cells . PET/CT also showed fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) accumulation in the right breast primary [maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) 11.5] and right axillary lymph node (SUVmax 2.1). Multiple lymph nodes in the right supraclavicular fossa, mediastinum, and around the bilateral hilar, dorsal pancreatic head, abdominal aorta, right common iliac region, and bilateral external iliac region appeared swollen and positive for FDG accumulation (SUVmax 17.0), suggesting distant lymph node metastases from breast cancer . Differential diagnoses for multiple lymphadenopathy were required because of the large dissociation between the primary breast cancer and locoregional and distant metastases. Lymph node involvement by malignant tumor, especially malignant lymphoma, and granulomatous disease could be enumerated as differential diagnoses. Suitable lymph nodes that appeared swollen and positive for FDG accumulation near the body surface could not be found for biopsy. For histological diagnosis of multiple lymphadenopathy, EBUS-TBNA of mediastinal lymph nodes was performed . Histological findings revealed noncaseous epithelioid granulomas and multinucleated giant cells in mediastinal lymph nodes . Tuberculosis had not been suspected strongly because CT scan did not reveal any exudative lesion in the lung field. Caseous granulomas were not found in all areas on the biopsy sample; therefore, acid-fast bacillus staining was omitted. This patient had been diagnosed with uveitis of unknown cause 5 years before. Systemic disease including sarcoidosis had been suspected, and necessary screening examining unknown details had been performed. The serum angiotensin-converting enzyme was 9.9 U/mL in therange of 7–25 U/mL, and soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sIL-2R) was increased to 627 U/mL (reference range 122–496 U/mL) just before this EBUS-TBNA. Based on a history of uveitis, the elevated concentration of serum soluble interleukin-2 receptor, and the histological findings, we diagnosed sarcoidosis lymphadenopathy and T1cN1M0 stage IIA breast cancer. Though further lymph nodes should be examined by EBUS-TBNA or mediastinoscopy to completely exclude malignant lymphoma, sarcoid-like reaction, and granulomatous disease, we reached these diagnoses comprehensively.
Right partial mastectomy and axillary lymph node dissection were performed after preoperative chemotherapy (four cycles of trastuzumab, pertuzumab, and docetaxel, followed by four cycles of epirubicin and cyclophosphamide). Histological examination of the surgical specimen revealed disappearance of the tumor. She had completed postoperative radiotherapy to the right breast and the right supraclavicular fossa and 14 cycles of adjuvant trastuzumab therapy. The endocrine therapy with letrozole has continued. She remained free of symptoms of sarcoidosis exacerbation at 2 years after her breast surgery, visiting cardiology, respiratory medicine, and ophthalmology every 3 months.