A 68-year-old woman was referred to our department in February 2008 for a second opinion regarding a metastatic urothelial carcinoma. Her history began six months prior to her visit when she presented with recurrent urinary tract infections. A cystoscopy and TUR revealed a high grade infiltrating urothelial carcinoma in the lateral right wall of the bladder (T2a). Staging CT scans were performed and showed metastatic disease mediastinal and hiliar lymph nodes, multiple and bilateral lung nodules, and metastases located in the internal iliac lymph nodes. The patient was initially treated with six cycles of chemotherapy with gemcitabine 1200 mg/m2 on day 1 and 60 mg/m2 cisplatin on days 1 and 8 every 21 days, showing a partial response after three cycles. The disease was followed up until January 2009, when imaging studies demonstrated the presence of a single metastatic lesion in the left lower lung lobe. A second line of chemotherapy using carboplatin AUC = 3 on day 1 and 1500 mg/m2 gemcitabine on day 1 every 15 days was initiated, and after eight cycles, new progression of the described lung lesion was documented. A third line of chemotherapy was proposed, and in June 2009, the patient was started on cisplatin 60 mg/m2 and pemetrexed 500 mg/m2 day 1 every 28 days. She had a partial response after two cycles, and after four cycles of chemotherapy, a slight increase in the size of the left lower lung nodule was revealed on the CT scan, although a bone scan was negative.
With the diagnosis of a recurrence of a single lung metastatic nodule measuring 56 × 53 × 51 millimeters, in October 2009, a hypo-fractionated course of SBRT was delivered to the lung nodule. This patient was placed in a supine position and was immobilized using an alpha cradle device to improve the reproducibility of the setup during daily treatments. A planning CT scan was performed. A combination of three sets of CT scans obtained during free breathing, deep inspiration and deep expiration were used to generate an internal target volume (ITV) that accounts for respiratory motion. The gross tumor volume (GTV) was the lung nodule, and the clinical target volume (CTV) included the ITV with a symmetric 0.5 cm margin. Respiratory tumor movement was observed under fluoroscopy. The delimited organs at risk (OARS) and the applied constraints are listed in Figure .
A 3D-conformal multifield technique was used with six coplanar and one non-coplanar statics beams. SBRT was delivered by a linear accelerator (Oncor, Siemens, Palo Alto, California, USA) with 6-MV photons. A total dose of 48 Gy in three fractions over six days was prescribed to the 95% of the CTV . Patient positioning and isocenter verification were checked using cone beam CT.