A 61-year-old female with a 10-year history of hypertension was being treated with enalapril 10 mg po qd. She received a consultation from a general practitioner for a 2-year clinical presentation characterized by asthenia, adynamia, thick cardboard-like skin, sclerodactyly , limited ability to open her mouth, and a 10-kg weight loss associated with dry eye and mouth with no other manifestations. There was no evidence of elevated basal creatinine values, and the patient denied the presence of kidney disease. The first laboratory results sent by the general practitioner showed serum creatinine of 1.53 mg/dL, urea of 40 mg/dL, urinalysis with uncountable erythrocytes, and proteinuria +++ (qualitative evaluation).
The 3-month serology work-up presented elevated levels of serum creatinine (5.5 mg/dL) and urea (122 mg/dL) and a urinary protein-to-creatinine ratio (PrU/CrU) of 4.9 g/g . The patient was referred to our tertiary care hospital for further evaluation and laboratory testing. In the nephrology consultation, the presence of countless erythrocytes with more than 50% dysmorphic RBC was reported. A diagnosis of rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis (RPGN) was established. Due to the increase in levels of nitrogen compound up to creatinine 5.7 mg/dL and urea 182 mg/dL, a hemodialysis catheter was inserted, and hemodialysis was initiated. Further immunological work-up revealed anti-Ro of 96 U/mL (positive), anti-La of 141 U/mL (positive), anti-SCL-70 of 702.92 U/mL (positive), anti-MPO (positive), and anti-PR3 (negative). A salivary gland biopsy was consistent with Sjögren syndrome. In a rheumatology consultation, overlap syndrome of diffuse systemic sclerosis and Sjögren syndrome were diagnosed, with a modified Rodnan score of 15/51 points.
After the initiation of hemodialysis, a kidney biopsy was performed, in which extracapillary glomerulonephritis with fibrous predominance (EUVAS-Berden sclerotic class), active tubulointerstitial nephritis rich in plasma cells, focal tubular injury, and narrowing of the arterial diameter with marked fibrotic changes in the intima were identified ( a–j). An overlap syndrome of systemic sclerosis, Sjögren syndrome, and anti-MPO ANCA-associated vasculitis (microscopic polyangiitis) were diagnosed according to the ACR-EULAR Criteria. Extrarenal involvement of vasculitis was excluded with sinus cavity tomography and high-resolution lung tomography. The abnormal finding on the tomography was esophageal dilatation and data suggestive of early pulmonary hypertension, both attributed to scleroderma. Screening for systemic sclerosis was performed with transthoracic echocardiography and right heart catheterization with normal values, ruling out pulmonary hypertension. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was performed with normal findings. Esophageal manometry could not be performed to rule out esophageal dysmotility, but it was suspected based on the tomographic findings. Induction treatment was started based on the results of the renal biopsy with methylprednisolone 1 g/day for 3 days followed by prednisone with a reduction phase as proposed by the PEXIVAS study . Additionally, a CYCLOPS scheme with intravenous cyclophosphamide at a dose of 12.5 mg/kg was used in weeks 0, 2, 4, 7, 10, and 13 . As maintenance treatment, a low-dose steroid regimen was established with prednisone 5 mg/day and mycophenolate mofetil 500 mg po bid. This treatment regimen was established by a rheumatologist based on the multisystem involvement of systemic sclerosis and the absence of recurrence risk factors for ANCA-associated vasculitis, with progressive improvement. During hospitalization, the patient required temporary withholding of the ACE inhibitor due to blood pressure at the lower limit. Which was reintroduced as soon as the pressure improved. A year later, at the clinical level, there was improvement in asthenia, thick cardboard-like skin, and sclerodactyly, and the modified RODNAN score was reduced to 5/51 points, as reported by Rheumatology. The Birmingham Vasculitis Activity Score (BVAS) score improved with no signs of reactivation except for the chronic involvement mentioned above. Her serum creatinine was reported to be 2.6 mg/dL; urea, 132 mg/dL with no erythrocyturia; and the PrU/CrU, 0.41 gr/gr, with no requirement for kidney replacement therapy. Given the interstitial involvement with interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy of over 50%, the patient was not expected to recover renal function as initially reported and was diagnosed with chronic kidney disease (KDIGO G4A2).