A 4-year-old boy with no known medical condition presents to an outpatient clinic with history of left foot swelling and diarrhea. The swelling was noted by parents at the age of 4 months, which had been evaluated by medical professionals and attributed to a local infection according to parents. It had never disappeared completely, despite a waxing and waning course, which led parents to believe it was a congenital condition. During the course, a physician mislabeled the swelling as hemihyperplasia (hemihypertrophy), due to the stark difference in the size of the feet. More recently, the patient started complaining of intermittent watery to semi-formed stools, 3–6 times per day, that were aggravated by fatty diet, and were occasionally difficult to flush. He was noted to have poor subcutaneous fat in his face and arms but did not lose weight. Family history was negative for lymphedema, or any other genetic disorder.
On examination, he was vitally stable. He looked undernourished even though his weight was on the 90th centile, likely due to ascites. Abdominal examination revealed mild ascites, normal bowel sounds, and no organomegaly. Cardiac and respiratory examinations were unremarkable. His right foot showed almost no edema. Left foot examination revealed a significantly swollen dorsal aspect of the foot and toes confirming presence of edema up to the level of his ankle. The edema was minimally pitting, with a positive Stemmer’s sign . Ankle joint examination was otherwise unremarkable.
Laboratory workup showed a low albumin at 2 g/dl (normal range 3.5–5.5 g/dl), total protein at 2.9 g/dl (normal range 6–8 g/dl), total IgG at 147 mg/dl (normal range 565–1765 mg/dl), IgM at 16 mg/dl (normal range 55–375 mg/dl), and IgA at 30 mg/dl (normal range 85–385 mg/dl). Other tests were essentially within normal limits including a negative urine protein, normal liver enzyme levels, and a negative tissue transglutaminase IgA antibody. Upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopies were performed and showed the classic appearance of white spots or dilated “lacteals” in the duodenum . The colon showed lymphoid nodular hyperplasia. Otherwise, endoscopy was unremarkable. Histopathologic examination showed a remarkably dilated lamina propria lymphatic vessels in the duodenum . Otherwise, no other significant abnormalities were observed. Lymphoscintigraphy of his left foot showed failure of progression to the proximal lymph nodes confirming the presence of massively dilated lymphatics.
The diagnosis of primary intestinal lymphangiectasia was made based on the constellation of clinical, biochemical, endoscopic, and histological findings.
The patient was started on high protein, minimal fat diet, along with supplemental high medium chain triglyceride (MCT) formula.
On follow up, his weight remained on the 90th centile, however, his mid-arm circumference was on the 75th centile. His bowel movement frequency, and consistency improved immediately, and so did his subcutaneous fat eventually. His ascites resolved completely, and his left leg swelling was significantly improving as well , with persistence of Stemmer’s sign however. His Albumin and total protein levels improved as well.