A 38-year-old caucasic woman, G1P0, with a dichorionic twin pregnancy was referred to our center at 20 and 1/7 weeks for an excisional breast biopsy due to a suspected breast cancer. The patient underwent right external quadrantectomy with first level lymphnode (LN) dissection. Neither family history for breast cancer nor previous surgical interventions were reported. The pathology report showed an invasive and poorly differentiated (G3) ductal carcinoma not otherwise specified (NOS) measuring 2 cm in diameter (pT1). Examined LN (10) were negative for metastasis. The immunohistochemical evaluation [absent estrogen receptors (ER 0 %) and C-erb-Neu expression, positive progesteron receptors (PgR 40 %), and Ki-67 67 %] suggested a high risk of relapse, prompting the start of adjuvant chemotherapy. Maternal echocardiogram and laboratory tests were all within the normal range. A chemotherapy regimen based on epirubicin 90 mg/ m2 and cyclophosphamide 600 mg/m2 was started at a gestational age of 27 and 0/7 weeks; overall, the patient received 2 cycles of chemotherapy on a 21 days outpatient basis.
A complete assessment of fetal well-being, including the combined evaluations of fetal heart rate short term variation (STV), the largest vertical pocket of amniotic fluid (LVP-AF), pulsatility indices of the umbilical artery (UA-PI), middle cerebral artery (MCA-PI) and ductus venosus (DV-PIV), was performed before the start of chemotherapy and weekly thereafter; control of fetal growth pattern was scheduled every 3 weeks.
At baseline fetal ultrasound evaluation (26 and 6/7 weeks), one twin (A) displayed normal anatomy and was scored as small for gestational age (SGA), due to an estimated fetal weight (EFW) < 10 percentile for gestational age (679 gr) in the absence of signs of chronic placental dysfunction including fetal circulatory redistribution (UA-PI: 1 and MCA-PI: 1.5) and/or abnormal Doppler analysis of the uterine arteries (mean resistence index: 0.4); for twin A a condition of oligohydramnios was also evidenced (LVP-AF: 15 mm).
Fetal surveillance was completely unremarkable for both twin A and B during the two weeks that followed the first cycle of chemotherapy. At 31 and 0/7 weeks, immediately after the second chemotherapy cycle, all parameters of twin B were scored as normal. Twin A presented an unaltered growth pattern (EFW <10 percentile) and a persistent oligohydramnios (LVP-AF of 12 mm) along with normal UA-PI (1.19), MCA-PI (1.6) and STV (6.3 msec); of note, right cardiac sections appeared dilated and an abnormally high DV-PIV (1.1) was recorded, although with no evidence of reverse flow . Antenatal corticosteroids were administered (desamethasone 12 mg, 24 h apart). The following day (31 and 1/7 weeks), STV values were normal (5.9 and 6.3 msec for twins A and B, respectively).
At 31 and 3/7 weeks, ultrasounds evidenced the demise of twin A; an echocardiogram of twin B showed a monophasic diastolic filling addressing a diastolic dysfunction of the right ventricle, together with a mild hypokinesia of the ventricular septum .
At 31 and 4/7 weeks of gestation, twin B (2028 gr) was delivered by emergency cesarean section due to grade II placental abruption (Apgar score 7/9 at 1 and 5 min, respectively).
The autopsy of twin A (900 g) did not evidence structural abnormalities; cardiac histology showed severe myocardial interstitial edema with fiber dissociation and sporadic vacuolar myocyte degeneration . The only other remarkable findings were found in twin A extravillous throphoblast (hypertrophic vacuolization and nuclear pleomorphism) and chorionic villi (interstitial edema and fibrinoid necrosis) . Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) analysis, performed on umbilical cord extracted DNA, did not show any genomic rearrangement.
Routine laboratory tests obtained for twin B during the first day of life (DOL) were normal; however, a documented significant septal hypokinesia , confirmed by a pediatric cardiologist with 20 years of experience in perinatal cardiac assessment, was associated to extremely high concentrations of troponin (Tn1) (Tn1: 0.21 μg/L; reference < 0.0014 μg/L); Tn1 was still abnormally elevated on DOL 19 (Tn1: 0.06 μg/L) but progressively decreased back to normal values on DOL 40. Pediatric cardiology examinations were regularly performed (every four weeks) up to six months of age and confirmed regular post-natal cardiac function.
Overall, the causative role of epirubicin cardiotoxicity in the death of twin A is supported by various evidences including: 1- the post-mortem cardiac examination revealing the hallmarks of subacute anthracycline toxicity, i.e. massive interstitial edema without cellular infiltrates and myofibrillar damage/vacuolization ; 2- the histologic findings in both chorionic villi and extravillous throphoblast, well fitting the described placental effects of anthracycline exposure ; 3- the manifestation of acute myocardial diastolic dysfunction, evidenced by the enlarged right cardiac chambers and an elevated ductus venosus pulsatility index, preceding fetal death; 4 – the absence of structural or genomic abnormalities that may indicate an alternative etiology of fetal demise. Of note, neither arterial Doppler nor STV evaluation anticipated the impending fetal demise.