A 40-year-old lady presented with abdominal pain, diarrhea and bilious vomiting for 3 days. The pain was colicky in nature and radiated to the flanks, it was relieved by vomiting. The patients had history of cesarean section which was performed before 4 months, the cesarean section was difficult because of the transverse lie of the baby.
The patient was admitted to the medical department for one day, then referred to the surgical department. During examination the pulse rate was 90 beats/minute, the blood pressure was 100/60 mmHg, and the temperature was 37.5 °C.
During general examination; the patient was pale with no jaundice. Abdominal examination showed tenderness in the lower abdomen with muscle guarding, with no distension.
The hemoglobin level was 8.6 g/L, the WBC count were 8700 c/mm, the renal function test and the electrolytes were normal. Urinalysis showed evidence of one plus pus cells per high power field, with no RBC or crystals in the examined sample.
Abdominal ultrasound showed no abnormal findings apart from mild hydronephrosis in the left side. CT-scan of the abdomen showed thickening of the wall of the sigmoid colon with evidence of intramural air and dilated small bowel loops. Other organs showed no abnormalities. Although the surgical sponge contained a radio-opaque line, but it was not evident in CT-scan, possibly because it was mixed with hard fecal material and air .
During colonoscopy there was an evidence of a surgical sponge causing transmural erosion and ulceration of the wall of the sigmoid colon .
The past medical history was negative for chronic illnesses and patient had previous history of appendicectomy and 2 cesarean sections.
Exploratory laparotomy was performed. During surgery there was an evidence of a retained surgical sponge in the pelvic cavity causing erosions and fistula between the ileum and the sigmoid colon. Resection of the involved parts of the ileum and the sigmoid colon was done with end-end anastomosis (, , , ).
We contacted the obstetric team about our finding and they reported it in the hospital records.
The patient was admitted for one week after surgery, with improvement of the general condition and returning of the normal bowel function and was discharged home after that. At the 10th postoperative day, she developed complete abdominal dehiscence and she was readmitted to the emergency department, resuscitation was done and an emergency operation was performed. The abdomen was closed with tension sutures. The patient was admitted for 5 days and was then discharged home later with good medical condition.
The tension sutures were removed after 3 weeks and the patient was followed for 1 month after that with no further complications.