A healthy looking, 50-year-old Nepali man came to our clinic with a complaint of multiple growths on his scrotum for 15 years. The growths started as a single lesion on the right side of his scrotum, with the gradual appearance of similar lesions on other parts. Several of these lesions coalesced at various places to form large-sized nodules. The condition was mostly asymptomatic with an occasional complaint of itching. There was no history of pain, burning sensation, trauma, ulceration, or discharge. The lesions did not interfere with urination or sexual activities. He was worried because of the increasing size of the growth and hence came to us for advice. He did not give a history of any systemic illness including metabolic, autoimmune, or malignant disorders. There was also no history of a similar complaint in his family.
On physical examination, multiple pink to brown nodules ranging in size from 0.5 × 0.5 × 0.5 cm to 3 × 3 × 1 cm involving almost half of his scrotum were noticed . The skin over the nodules was shiny with several yellowish points indicative of underlying calcium deposition. The skin surrounding the nodules, testis, and penis was normal on palpation. The nodules were painless and firm in consistency. On laboratory examinations the following were found to be within normal limits: serum calcium, phosphorus, parathyroid hormone, and vitamin D hormone levels; uric acid; alkaline phosphatase; and lipid profile. Based on clinical features and laboratory reports, a diagnosis of ICCS was made.
He was advised a scrotectomy under spinal anesthesia, which he refused. The nodules were excised under local anesthesia in several sittings. The skin was sutured using chromic catgut (4–0). His postoperative period was unremarkable with good cosmetic result and no evidence of recurrence in a 1-year follow-up period. The cut section of nodules showed solid white to yellow homogenous areas. Histopathological examination revealed skin tissue lined by keratinized stratified squamous epithelium. The underlying dermis had areas of fibrosis and calcification . Numerous multinucleated giant cells were also seen . An obvious cystic structure was absent.