The patient was a 35-year-old male presented to the ER with right craniofacial trauma due to an occupational injury caused by falling of a plastic pipe on his head. He was awake and aware at the time of arrival. The initial assessment revealed a GCS level of 14. Signs of traumatic injuries in the right side of his face included swollen eyelids due to trauma to the soft tissue of the right periorbital and frontal area along with right superior eyelid laceration, redness, and tenderness. The visual acuity in his right eye was almost no light perception. Right optic neuropathy was evident with a relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD) of 4+. The eye movements of the right eye were restricted in all directions, but the other side was normal. Other examinations revealed no further abnormal findings.
CT-Scan depicted a small focus at the level of the right Sylvian fissure in favor of a pneumocephalus and a hyperdense structure in the right orbital cavity, posterior to the globe, suggestive of a bony material . As we were not sure about the origin and material of hyperdense structure demonstrated on CT-Scan, use of MRI was waived in order to prevent subsequent complications in case of metal object foreign body. However, initial assessments of patient’s images amplified the suspicion of skull base fracture, regarding the foci of pneumocephalus, especially at the region of the right superior orbital wall. Based on these findings, the patient was admitted to the trauma section of the neurosurgery ward and received initial necessary supportive care. Antibiotic therapy was commenced for surgery preparation and preventing probable meningitis, with Cefepime and Vancomycin. A consult with ophthalmologists was performed, and regarding their evaluation, both ophthalmologists and neurosurgeons were agreeing with choosing a craniotomy approach. The procedure was performed by using the method of “extra-dural orbitocranial approach to the anterior cranial fossa” craniotomy. After a right brow skin incision with a soft tissue dissection with four burr holes trephination, a right frontal craniotomy was performed. Then, the roof of the orbital cavity was explored. No signs of fracture were detected in the superior orbital wall. To asses the orbital cavity, a supraorbital craniotomy was carried out, and the surgical field was extended to the right orbital cavity by removing the superior orbital wall, with a diameter of 1.5 × 2.5 cm. An exploration and dissection throughout the intraorbital muscles and structures were accomplished . An intraorbital foreign body was successfully (a piece of plastic pipe) removed from the orbital cavity . Cranioplasty was carried out by titanium mesh and bone wax with wound closure as well . The patient was transferred to the neurosurgery ward to receive his post-op cares and subsequent follow-ups.
On microbiological culture of resected specimen colonies of Staphylococcus epidermidis were isolated which was sensitive to given antibiotics.
The patient was febrile, thus antibiotic therapy was continued with Cefepime and Vancomycin for 7 days based on the consult performed by an infectious disease specialist. In the patient’s initial evaluation after the operation, the overall condition was good, and his GCS level was 15. Eye-movements were normal on both sides. Regarding the patient’s visual loss and its effect on his quality of life in order to treat the consequences of traumatic optic neuropathy (TON) both ophthalmologists and neurosurgeons were agreeing with the administration of intravenous methylprednisolone (IVMP) with close monitoring of the patient. The patient received 250 mg methylprednisolone intravenously every 6 h for 3 days. Despite the foreign body removal and administration of high dose IVMP, patient’s visual acuity in his right eye was merely confined to light perception and did not improve, subsequently.
We presume that the patient’s vision loss occurred due to direct and high impact trauma to the optic nerve based on the location of the foreign body, which was embedded in the posterior part of the globe, just beside the optic nerve (arrow heads on Figure-3).
The patient was discharged from hospital 2 weeks after admission with a good general condition.