Our patient was a 50-year-old Caucasian woman, a non-smoker, with a 20-year history of undifferentiated schizophrenia, according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, Fourth Edition, Text Revision criteria. She was admitted to our clinic for acute psychotic exacerbation. Due to numerous treatments in our clinic over the last 10 years, our patient was well known and the diagnosis of schizophrenia had been secured based on several psychotic episodes and unremarkable somatic examination, including analysis of her cerebrospinal fluid, an electroencephalogram and magnetic resonance imaging of her brain.
Initially, she presented with auditory hallucinations, disorganized speech, inappropriate affect with an occasionally euphoric mood, grossly disorganized behavior and excitability. Prior to this hospital admission, her antipsychotic treatment (retard preparation of quetiapine, 700 mg per day) was taken irregularly. Further, impaired glucose tolerance due to adiposity and metabolic syndrome (weight 102.8 kg, height 156 cm, body mass index 42.2 kg/m2) was treated with metformin (500 mg per day). We first continued quetiapine for seven days without amelioration of the clinical situation. In view of sufficient quetiapine serum levels (854 ng/mL) and remarkable obesity, a treatment trial with an increased dosage of quetiapine was not performed. While tapering off quetiapine, we administered amisulpride and titrated up to a daily dosage of 1200 mg within five days. No substantial improvement was achieved with this regimen within 21 days.
Phenotypic testing in our patient with dextromethorphan (DM) revealed CYP2D6 UM status (DM < 5 ng/mL; dextrorphan (DO) 640 ng/mL; DM/DO ratio: < 0.008; 3-methoxymorphinan (MM) < 5 ng/mL; 3-hydroxymorphinan (HM) 24 ng/mL; MM/HM ratio: 0.21), which also explained recent ineffective treatment attempts with risperidone (up to 8 mg per day) and haloperidol-decanoate (up to 150 mg per injection). This phenotypic testing was performed by taking a blood sample (120 mL) exactly one hour after the oral application of 40 mL NeoTussan® cough syrup (111 mg dextromethorphan per 100 g suspension (Novartis Consumer Health GmbH; city: Munich; state: Bavaria; country: Germany). Her blood was analyzed for metabolites of DM and MM, which are substrates of CYP2D6. The DM to DO and MM to HM ratios are surrogate parameters for CYP2D6 activity.
Following the reduction of amisulpride down to 800 mg per day, haloperidol (10 mg per day) was applied as an additional antipsychotic. Simultaneously, trazodone (100 mg per day) was added on in order to augment the haloperidol by CYP2D6 inhibition, but did not show significant clinical success in the next days. Gradual escalation of haloperidol and trazodone doses over a period of one month did not obtain amelioration of the psychotic phenomena. At that time, haloperidol plasma levels (current medication: amisulpride 800 mg per day; haloperidol 15 mg per day; trazodone 200 mg per day; and metformin 500 mg per day) were at 10 ng/mL. A subsequent increase of haloperidol up to 20 mg per day did neither improve the clinical situation nor serum plasma levels (9 ng/mL). Since her psychopathological findings did not change under treatment with amisulpride and still presented as on admission time, the antipsychotic effect of amisulpride was evaluated to be insufficient according to the treatment guideline for schizophrenia of the German Association for Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and Neuroscience . After discontinuation of trazodone and amisulpride, we administered melperone (100 mg per day), in order to inhibit CYP2D6, and elevated haloperidol up to 30 mg per day. After 14 days, her haloperidol plasma levels were at 19 ng/mL. This result was confirmed in a second test (haloperidol: 20 ng/mL). In line with this, her clinical performance improved slightly, and she demonstrated attenuation in her auditory hallucinations, redevelopment of day structure and a marked improvement regarding behavior and speech. Our patient was then discharged with this medication in a clearly improved clinical condition.