In April 2013, a 61-year-old man was found to have a liver mass by abdominal ultrasonography during regular physical examination. The patient did not exhibit gastrointestinal reactions or abdominal pain symptoms, and he was therefore referred to the Dongyang People’s Hospital for further examination. There was no significant personal or family history that could have aided the diagnosis. During hospitalization, he was diagnosed with chronic hepatitis B (no hepatitis C) with liver cirrhosis, and the level of HBV-DNA was 3.33x10^5 IU/ml. The levels of serum tumor markers such as AFP and CEA were found to be 48.32 ng/ml and 5.71 U/ml, respectively. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed a left lateral segment lesion of the liver with multiple enlarged lymph nodes around the lesser peritoneal sac, porta hepatis, retroperitoneum, and right paracardiac regions, which was radiologically suspected for small HCC and lymphadenopathy of infectious etiology. He was subjected to the left lateral lobe hepatectomy and celiac lymphadenectomy for the clinical diagnosis of HCC. Intraoperative findings revealed that the diameter of the lump was 0.9 x 0.8 cm. Pathology indicated hepatocellular carcinoma , while the two lymph nodes were negative. Therefore, his final diagnosis was HCC (pT1N0M0 stage I, BCLC 0). The patient was administered with entecavir (0.5 mg) once a day for antiviral treatment. Regular follow-up showed no tumor recurrence or active hepatitis for more than three years .
Unfortunately, in July 2016, a new lesion in the right lobe segment was discovered by abdominal CT, without abnormal levels of serum liver function and tumor markers. However, the patient declined treatment with western medicines. In December 2016, the CT scan showed enlarged multiple liver nodules with vascular involvement, and he was hospitalized with HCC (cT3bN0M0 stage IIIB, BCLC B) in our hospital. Transarterial chemoembolization (TACE) was successively performed twice to downstage the tumor. After neoadjuvant therapy, he was histologically reassessed as HCC (ypT3N0M0 stage IIIB, BCLC B). Then, laparoscopic R0 resection of the right posterior liver lobe as well as the gall bladder was performed in April 2017 to eliminate residue lesions. Intraoperative findings revealed that lesion diameters were 9x8.5x10 cm with negative surgical margins. After partial liver resection, the patient’s HBV-DNA copies increased to 2.35x10^4 IU/ml, with mildly abnormal AST, ALT, and bilirubin levels. He was continuously administered with antiviral therapies and other medicines to protect liver functions. After successful management of the disease, he was discharged and regular follow-ups were performed thereafter. In December 2018, the patient was found to have hepatopulmonary metastases. CT scans showed multiple small nodules, the largest of which (in the lung) was about 8.6x6 mm, most possibly a result of HCC metastases, and about 18 mm in the liver. The patient was clinically diagnosed with HCC (cT3N0M1 stage IV, BCLC C). Notably, these enlarged lymph nodes in the peritoneum remained the same as before. Systemic therapies are available to treat patients with unresectable HCC. Multitargeted tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), such as sorafenib or lenvatinib, are first-line systemic therapies. The patient had not had a previous prescription of systemic treatments, and therefore, he met the inclusion criteria for BGB-A317-301(NCT03412773), a global study designed to compare the clinical efficacy as well as safety of tislelizumab and sorafenib (1:1 randomized) as a first-line systemic treatment for unresectable HCC, which was considered beneficially to the patient (clinical trial protocols are provided in the supplementary materials). After signing the informed consent, the patient was serially screened for confounding factors (exclusion criteria). On January 18th 2019, he was administered with tislelizumab 200 mg igtt q3w. To accurately evaluate immunotherapeutic efficacy, we used iRECIST to determine disease progression . Reductions in pseudo-progressions (PsPDs) during immunotherapy were recorded. During two cycles of tislelizumab, the patient developed multiple rashes with pruritus (grade 2, CTCAE 5.0), and on February 1st 2019, he was treated with loratadine, ebastin, and mometasone ointment. Since the rashes got worse (grade 3, CTCAE 5.0), the third cycle of therapy was suspended. From February 25th 2019, the patient was orally administered with 35 mg prednisolone tablet once a day, and the rash was gradually alleviated. Dosage of prednisolone was reduced stepwise by the order of 25 mg, 15 mg, and 10 mg, with the last dose on March 21st, 2019. Before the third immunotherapeutic cycle, CT scans indicated that pulmonary lesions almost disappeared while the liver lesions remained stable . Moreover, before the seventh cycle, the liver lesions were significantly enlarged, without a corresponding enlargement of lymph nodes, evaluated as iuPD (immunity unconfirmed progressive disease). In the ninth cycle, lesions were similar to the seventh cycle and evaluated as icPD (immunity confirmed progressive disease). During the treatment, AFP reached the highest level (696.18 ng/ml) before the eighth treatment . Given that the patient did not meet the exclusion criteria, it was considered that he could still benefit from tislelizumab, and therefore, his participation in the clinical trial was continued after deep consideration. CT scan before the tenth cycle showed that the lesion size was smaller than the last assessment, and simultaneously, AFP decreased to normal (21.14 ng/mL). Therefore, the researchers considered that the patient exhibited “false progression” in the previous treatment. Liver lesions remained stable until the thirteenth cycle. Before the sixteenth cycle, there was slow disease progression, while before the 22nd cycle (2020–4–2), liver lesions exhibited significant progression. Therefore, it was considered that tislelizumab was no longer beneficial to the patient, and he was withdrawn from the clinical trial. Disease progression is shown in , and except for the maculo-papule, all adverse events are described in .