A 49-year-old male of Afro-Caribbean origin with a background of hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, high body mass index of 40 and ESKD secondary to focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) diagnosed in 2007 and received only 1 month of corticosteroids. He presented to our PD unit with mild abdominal discomfort and cloudy PD effluent in July 2019. He had been on PD for 4 years and had experienced one previous episode of PD peritonitis caused by Staphylococcus aureus requiring catheter replacement 2 years ago. The PD regimen consisted of automated peritoneal dialysis [APD] of 8.5 h duration with 5 cycles of 3 l fills. The dialysate fluid consisted of 1.36% glucose concentration of 10 l and 2.27% glucose concentration of 5 l with extraneal (Icodextrin 7.5%) solution as a last fill of 1.7 l. He also received an Opti exchange of 2.0 l of 1.36% solution in the evenings.
He was clinically and haemodynamically stable with mild abdominal discomfort as his symptom. Serum inflammatory markers showed a white cell count [WCC] of 6.0 × 106/L and a C-reactive protein [CRP] of 80.7 mg/L (normal range < 5 mg/L). Microscopy of the PD fluid showed a WCC of 155 x 106cells/L and a total eosinophil count of 1 × 106 cells/L, but the Gram stain was negative. Empirical broad-spectrum intra-peritoneal antibiotics (Vancomycin and Gentamicin) were commenced. On day 5, he developed worsening abdominal pain. On examination, his blood pressure was 158/100 mmHg; heart rate 90/min, temperature 37.5 °C. His abdomen was tender on palpation. There was no evidence of PD catheter exit site infection or any tunnel infection. The CRP was 456.9 mg/L, and WCC was 12.3 × 106/L. He was admitted to the renal unit and treatment was escalated to intravenous Gentamicin and Vancomycin, and subsequently to intravenous Meropenem on day 7 in view of persistent symptoms and raised inflammatory markers. He underwent rapid PD fluid exchanges to help relieve abdominal pain. On day 8, his CRP was 534 mg/L, WCC was 20.5 × 106/L with a temperature of 39.8 °C. He underwent emergency surgical PD catheter removal with peritoneal washout. Intra-operative findings did not reveal any bowel perforation. A haemodialysis catheter was inserted, and regular haemodialysis (HD) was commenced. On day 8, acid-fast bacilli [AFB] were grown from the PD fluid sample, which was confirmed by the National Mycobacterium Reference Laboratory through whole-genome sequencing to be Mycobacterium abscessus. In view of this, he was commenced on quadruple therapy with intravenous Amikacin, Clarithromycin, Tigecycline and Imipenem with cilastatin. He developed new QTc prolongation on the electrocardiogram (ECG) on day 16, which was attributed to Clarithromycin, so this was therefore discontinued. Furthermore, he developed acute hepatic impairment which resolved following cessation of Tigecycline on day 26.
He remained clinically well on dual therapy with intravenous Amikacin and Imipenem and was discharged on day 35 . A peripherally inserted central venous catheter was placed, to facilitate daily intravenous antibiotics as an outpatient. He continued on antibiotics for a total of 5 months. Linezolid was added during the last 6 weeks of therapy. He had a regular review by the Audiologists, but in spite of close monitoring to maintain the Amikacin levels within the therapeutic range, he has sustained a degree of sensorineural hearing loss.