A 38-year-old Chinese woman (patient II: 4)was hospitalized due to acute psychiatric manifestations that started four days prior after she had a quarrel with her colleague at work. She presented with disorganized speech, disorganized behaviour, and emotional instability and lability. Initially, she roamed around the whole day and became overtalkative but without a clear theme. She spoke in a heightened voice and displayed a euphoric mood and disordered dance. When others interrupted her speaking, she became irritable. Gradually, she developed abnormal thoughts and said, “There is a devil threatening to hurt me”. She also developed insomnia and got up late at night to read the Bible and kneel down to pray for God’s favour and protection. She thought that none of her family members cared about her, and she subsequently often cried loudly. There was no consciousness disorder, anxiety, depression, hallucination, impulsive or aggressive behaviour, suicide or self-injurious behaviour. There were also no headaches, dizziness, epilepsy, cognitive impairments, extrapyramidal symptoms, or cerebellar ataxic symptoms. No psychiatric illness, intellectual disability, or organic medical disorders were reported in her personal and family history except for her older son, who suffered from hypoxic-ischaemic encephalopathy at birth and presented with psychomotor retardation. The findings of a neurological examination were normal. Psychiatric examination revealed increased psychomotor activity; increased speech production with accelerated tempo; disordered thought contents; disorganized communication; and grandiose words, actions and facial expressions. An instability and lability of the mood, feelings and emotions; a difficulty in sustaining attention; decreased wilful actions; a lack of cognitive and critical-thinking ability about her condition; and a disturbance of self-consciousness were observed. Her emotional response was inharmonious with her inner experience and the external surroundings.
Her serum calcium, phosphate, vitamin D, and parathyroid hormone levels were normal. Her 24-hour video-electroencephalography results were also normal. Brain computerized tomography (CT) revealed bilateral symmetrical calcification in the basal ganglia and cerebellar dentate nuclei. The subcortical and periventricular white matter were also affected . Mild to severe similar calcification was also detected in the brain of her father, aged 67 years (patient I: 1) ; her older brother’s older son, aged 13 years (patient III: 1) ; her older brother, aged 41 years (patient II: 1) ; her younger son, aged 12 years (patient III: 5) ; and her older brother’s younger son, aged five years (patient III: 3) . All of these family members were asymptomatic, and the findings of neurological examinations were normal, except for her father, who complained of intermittent headaches over the last 10 years. Her mother, aged 65 years, and her older brother’s daughter, aged seven years, had no calcification in the brain. A brain CT of her older son, aged 16 years, showed abnormal changes related to hypoxic-ischaemic encephalopathy at birth. An additional file shows these findings in more detail [see Additional file ].
Informed consent was obtained, and the total DNA of peripheral blood samples extracted from nine participants was analysed. Whole-exome sequencing was performed on the proband to assess the whole exome, and Sanger sequencing was used to confirm the specific SLC20A2 gene mutation in all participants. A heterozygous mutation, c.1723G > T, p.(Glu575*), was discovered in exon 10 of the SLC20A2 gene in this family . This mutation was found in two symptomatic patients (patients I: 1 and II: 4) and four asymptomatic patients (patients II: 1, III: 1, III: 3 and III: 5 ) and was absent in family members I: 2, III: 2 and III: 4. An additional file shows these findings in more detail [see Additional file ]. The mutation segregated perfectly with the imaging findings. This mutation had already been submitted to ClinVar and classified as pathogenic (information available on ClinVar ). Therefore, these individuals were diagnosed as having genetically confirmed PFBC.
The proband was treated with a low dose of quetiapine (200 mg/day). Her psychiatric symptoms completely resolved in ten days, and she was discharged from the hospital. After one month of maintenance treatment on the same dose, the patient terminated the medication at her own discretion. She responded well to a low-dose quetiapine without any side effects. At the one-year follow-up, no recurrence of the psychiatric symptoms was reported.