An 82-year-old man presented to our hospital with weakness of the right side of his body. He had a past history of hypertension and gastric cancer. On admission, neurological examination showed mild right hemiparesis (manual muscle testing (MMT) 4). The NIH Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score was 3. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a small acute cerebral infarction of the deep white matter in the right parietal lobe . MR angiography showed occlusion of the M2 inferior trunk of the right MCA . Though he was started on anti-platelet therapy, his left hemiparesis gradually progressed (MMT 2), and his NIHSS score was 7. MRI showed expansion of the cerebral infarction . Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) showed occlusion of the M2 inferior trunk of the MCA with retrograde flows from the anterior cerebral artery (ACA) . Arterial spin labeling (ASL) perfusion imaging showed decreased intensity in the M2 inferior trunk of the right MCA territory . Hyperdynamic and induced-hypertension therapies resulted in improvement of his hemiparesis. Progressive cerebral ischemia due to hemodynamic factors was considered, and the patient underwent STA-MCA bypass to prevent progression of cerebral infarction 1 week after the initial stroke. The initial plan involved anastomosis of the M2–3 segment of the inferior trunk. Unexpectedly, the occluded portion was so long that deep dissection of the Sylvian fissure was necessary . To avoid a deep and narrow site for the anastomosis, the plan was modified to anastomose to the M4 cortical artery instead. However, selecting the recipient arteries was difficult, because it was not obvious which M4 arteries were fed by the inferior trunk in the operative field . On intraoperative ICG-VA, the M4 arteries of the inferior trunk showed delayed luminescence . Thus, two recipient arteries fed by the inferior trunk were selected, and STA-MCA double bypass was performed. After the bypass surgery, the patient showed no further ischemia. Postoperative MR angiography showed visualization of the M2 inferior trunk of the right MCA connected with the STA . Moreover, postoperative ASL perfusion imaging showed increased intensity in the M2 inferior trunk of the right MCA territory . His hemiparesis gradually improved (MMT4) and he was able to walk with partial assistance.
We obtained consent from the patient for publication of this case report. The case report was approved by the institutional review board of the Eisyokai Yosida Hospital.