A 22-year-old boy, known case of CAH who was diagnosed as female pseudohermaphroditism due to ambiguous genitalia, was referred to Shahid Sadoughi Hospital, Yazd, Iran with colicky abdominal pain and hematuria. His first presentations were ambiguous genitalia, nausea and vomiting. He was under irregular treatment with prednisolone and fludrocortisone since diagnosis. Parents were relatives. No CAH or other endocrine abnormalities had been diagnosed in his family members.
He was referred because of colicky abdominal pain and hematuria without nausea or vomiting. He weighed 60 kg (height 156 cm; body mass index 24.7 kg/m2), blood pressure was 125/80 mmHg, with no orthostatic change. Thyroid and abdomen examination were normal. In breast examination, there was no gynecomastia. Skin examination revealed marked genitalial, areola and gingival hyperpigmentation. Phallus length was 6 cm. testes were not palpable in scrotum. He had axillary and pubic terminal hair (his pubarche was Tanner V). His bone age was 18. Other systemic examinations were normal.
Because of hematuria, some tests were done. In ultrasonography prostate tissue was reported which was smaller than normal size. According to these findings, some other tests were requested which are presented in . According to lab findings, treatment started with dexamethasone 0.5 mg/day and fludrocortisone 0.05 mg/day in single dosage and tests were repeated after a month. Karyotyping was performed because of uncertainty in primary diagnosis, which revealed 46XY. For finding the location of testes, ultrasonography and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were done and nothing was found in abdomen, inguinal canal or scrotum.
Appendectomy was performed because of persistence of abdominal pain. Despite appendectomy, the abdominal pain continued. Laparoscopy was performed to find the testes which were unrevealing. Inhibin B serum level was measured to find out whether testis tissue was present in the body which was <1 pg/ml and vanishing testis was confirmed. After one month of therapy, serum level of testosterone decreased to level 0.025 ng/ml. Oral consent was obtained from the patient.