A 69-year-old male with a past medical history of hypertension and coronary artery disease with remote stenting presented with chest pain and abdominal pain for the past week as well as associated orthopnea. On arrival, the patient had a blood pressure of 86/48 mmHg and a heart rate of 104 bpm; he was afebrile and did not require supplemental oxygen. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus rhythm with a left bundle branch block and premature ventricular complexes .
Physical exam revealed jugular venous distention but no obvious murmur or rubs. Laboratory results were significant for a leukocytosis of 19,000 cells/mm3, elevated C-reactive protein of 25.1 mg/dL, and an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate of > 130 mm/hr. Chest X-ray showed an enlarged cardiac silhouette and bibasilar atelectasis but no obvious effusion .
Computed Tomography showed a large pericardial effusion with moderate pleural effusion but otherwise no intra-abdominal pathology . Bedside transthoracic echocardiography confirmed a large pericardial effusion with tamponade physiology. The patient was emergently taken for pericardiocentesis and 500 cc of straw-colored fluid was aspirated with resulting hemodynamic stability of the patient.
Analysis of the pericardial fluid revealed 2565 nucleated cells (95% neutrophils), glucose of 52 giving a fluid-to-serum glucose ratio of 0.5, and <2000 red blood cells (RBC). Culture of the aspirated fluid grew methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA). Interestingly, all blood cultures remained negative and the patient had no history of chest trauma or previous intrathoracic procedures.
The patient had a persistent leukocytosis and again was persistently hypotensive. A transesophageal echocardiogram showed preserved ejection fraction, no valve vegetations concerning for endocarditis, and a reduction in the pericardial effusion with evidence of fibrin products .
It was decided to take the patient's sternotomy and mediastinal washout. Direct examination of the mediastinum revealed extensive inflammation and adhesions of the pericardium and aorta with purulent effusion . Intra-operative cultures also grew MSSA. Biopsy of the pericardium was consistent with fibrosis, chronic inflammation, and fibrinopurulent debris. Cytology was negative for malignancy. The patient was treated with four weeks of intravenous cefazolin from the date of the pericardial washout. The patient required multiple washouts to achieve sterility of the pericardial space.