A fourteen-year-old adolescent female of Anglo-Australian background, living with her
biological parents and attending grade eight high school, was referred to the child and
youth mental health service (CYMHS) team for assessment and management of her
pseudo-seizures.
Her problems started around one and half years before the CYMHS referral, when she was
unresponsive to external stimuli for 2-3 minutes in the context of knee pain, with minimal
recollection after recovery. A few months later, she had another episode while sitting in
her classroom. She was again unresponsive to stimuli, slid from her seat to the floor and
required an emergency department (ED) visit. Subsequently, her episodes became more
frequent, occurring almost once a month. Triggers were variable including throbbing headache
and body ache, feeling lethargic and exhausted, difficulty with vision, numbness, describing
a sense of impending doom, depersonalization and derealization. Some episodes were also
preceded by nose bleeds.
During the episodes, which occurred in various locations and lasted from 5 minutes to few
hours, she would become unresponsive with her eyes closed and would have intermittent
jerking or thrusting of the shoulders with associated neck extension, back arching, pelvic
thrusting and side-to-side head movements. Hyperventilation, up-rolling of the eyeball and
twitching of the eye lids were part of the presentation in some episodes.
The headaches did not have migrainoid quality. The unresponsive episodes were not
associated with frothing from mouth, tongue biting, physical injury due to fall or bladder
or bowel incontinence. Usually, she appeared tired after the episodes and required up to an
hour to get back to baseline; she never appeared disoriented during these periods.
Detailed evaluation revealed low haemoglobin (115 gm/L), normal MRI of the brain and normal
EEG (standard activation protocols like hyperventilation and photic stimulation were used
during the study). She was treated for absence seizures with oral and intravenous
levetiracetam (optimized to a dose of 1500 mg/day over several months) with ongoing episodes
even on medication. Her family members were trained to use recovery position and intra-nasal
midazolam whenever she had these episodes. Later, when her video EEG during episode did not
reveal any epileptiform activity, her diagnosis was changed to conversion disorder,
medications were tapered and stopped, and she was referred to CYMHS for further
management.
CYMHS evaluation found this adolescent girl to be in emotional distress in the context of
longstanding family conflict, characterized by parental discord and ongoing emotional and
financial abuse by her father. Emotional neglect was also noted with the father described as
emotionally distant and dictatorial towards the patient, resulting in frequent
arguments.
There was temporal association of the death of her maternal grandmother, who was
emotionally close, movement from primary school to secondary school and the onset of
pseudo-seizures. The patient was described as a high achiever in school by her teachers.
However, she reported to have difficulty coping with both the conflictual family situation
and academic demands. On occasion, she coped by superficial cutting, which were
misinterpreted by the mother as scratches by the pet dog and ignored. She felt disconnected
and isolated from her family.
She had genetic loading for mental health and neurological problems, depression and
schizophrenia on the maternal side, a distant relative with epilepsy on the paternal side
and multiple relatives with substance use disorder. Her developmental challenges included
being a poor sleeper including irregular sleep routines. Despite having high academic
aspirations, she struggled with inattention in class where her mind regularly wandered, and
she was described as talkative and fidgety. She also reported significant effort required to
focus on her studies and spent a lot of time trying to finish her schoolwork. At school, she
had engaged in fights with peers and was bullied, which had worsened in the context of her
pseudo-seizures. However, her academic performance remained reasonable, and her teachers
were happy with her progress.
ADHD workup included collateral information from parents and the school, psychiatric
assessments, and scores of Conner’s and Vanderbilt questionnaires (parent and teacher ratings). The client, who was observed to be having average
intelligence, was diagnosed with comorbid conversion disorder and ADHD – combined type,
nonorganic insomnia and childhood emotional disorder unspecified. She also qualified for the
Z codes (ICD-10-AM): other specified problems related to primary support group (Z63.8) and
emotional neglect of child (Z62.4). Secondary gain was also noted, given her pseudo-seizures
made her family members more caring and sensitive to her needs. Though she reported anxiety
symptoms and low mood at different times, she did not meet criteria for any separate mood or
anxiety disorder.
She was instructed to follow sleep hygiene, and was started on methylphenidate and
individual psychotherapy using CBT principles. Family meetings were held to explore family
members’ understandings of the problem and to provide them psychoeducation. On follow-up,
she reported to be compliant on the medication, which was optimized to 20 mg/day and
converted to long-acting preparation; she reported better productivity regarding her
schoolwork, feeling calmer and less angry than before; and her family members and teachers
also noted improvement in her behaviour and relationships which were reflected in her
follow-up Vanderbilt scores. Her pseudo-seizures stopped, sleep improved and she felt her coping had improved
too.