A 35 year old unmarried female patient presented to us with abdominal pain. On examination, a vague mass was palpable in the left lumbar region. The patient had history of excision of bilateral ovarian cystic masses for cystic teratoma twelve years earlier. Computerized tomographic scan of the abdomen and pelvis showed a 9 × 7 cm uniformly solid mass with poor contrast enhancement situated in the inferomedial aspect of the left kidney [Fig ]. It was difficult to determine whether the mass was arising from renal parenchyma or renal pelvis. There were no retroperitoneal lymphnodes. Urine cytology, cystoscopy and retrograde ureterography were normal. There was no evidence of distant metastases. The patient also had a pelvic adnexal mass. On abdominal exploration, there was a well defined mass arising from the inferior and anterior aspect of the left renal pelvis, and attached to it with a narrow pedicle. There was no adherence or attachment to the renal parenchyma [Fig ]. The renal pelvis was opened to remove it completely. There was no intrapelvic growth. The part of the renal pelvis (about 1.5 cm) from which the tumor was arising was excised. Frozen section revealed a benign nature. The renal pelvis was closed after inserting a double J stent into left ureter. The left adnexal mass was excised with preservation of uterus and other ovary.
On pathological examination, the tumor was well-defined and capsulated. On cut section it had a firm, whitish solid appearance without areas of necrosis or hemorrhage.
Microscopically, the tumor was composed of large collagenized areas containing bundles of spindle cells. These areas were interspersed with thick walled, blood vessels, fatty tissue and several 'microcysts' lined by cuboidal epithelium [Fig ]. Normal renal parenchyma was not seen. Immunohistochemistry showed strong positivity for SMA and desmin in the spindle cell areas. Cytokeratin (CK) and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) were positive in cells lining the microcysts. Estrogen receptor (ER), Progesterone receptor (PR) and HMB 45 (Human melanoma antibody) were negative. The pelvic adnexal mass was found to be a mature cystic teratoma. After one year of follow up, the patient was well with no adverse effects from the surgery.