A 41-year-old male patient with no comorbidities except history of alcoholism—consumption of distillates daily in the last twenty-five years—and smoking (60 pack-years) presented with dysphonia and right cervical lymphadenopathy in October 2017. The symptoms worsened to progressive dysphagia and odynophagia and emergence of small subcutaneous implants in the right flank. He underwent a digestive endoscopy in November 2017, which showed a 5-centimeter lesion from 20 centimeter of the upper dental arch, compatible with a well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma on the pathological report.
After initial evaluation by the surgical staff, the patient was referred to exclusive treatment with clinical oncology and radiotherapy, since the tumor was not amenable to curative surgery. The staging computed tomographies demonstrated supraclavicular, mediastinal, paratracheal, infracarinal, and cervical bilateral lymphadenopathy, in addition to neoplastic implants on the right flank and right hemithorax and retroperitoneal and pleural nodules, as well as right fourth rib osteolysis. At this time, a biopsy in one of the subcutaneous implants located in the right flank was performed, confirming metastasis from esophageal squamous cell carcinoma and immunohistochemistry (IHQ) was also performed, whose morphological findings were compatible with keratinizing epidermoid carcinoma infiltrating adipose tissue positive for p63/4A4 and cytokeratin cocktail.
In February 2018, the patient started his chemotherapy treatment with weekly paclitaxel and carboplatin with concomitant radiotherapy. Although metastatic, we chose this approach for a better response due to the bulky cervical disease, which engendered pain and discomfort.
Two months after beginning his treatment, the patient developed an intense lumbar and right thigh pain, associated with walking impairment. After a medical visit, hospitalization was chosen in order to evaluate the clinical etiology. A tomography was performed, and it showed a 38 mm right paravertebral expansive lesion on the L5 level, infiltrating the psoas muscle, lesions in soft parts of the left paramedian dorsal region, worsening of the armpit and right flank subcutaneous nodules , and multiple lymph node, bone, and pulmonary metastases.
Since the radiologic changes would justify the symptoms reported by the patient, palliative radiotherapy was indicated. However, the patient became drowsy and confused because of malignant hypercalcemia (serum calcium of 15,5 mg/dl). Altered mental status and elevated serum calcium persisted despite hyperhydration and administration of zoledronic acid. Few days later, he developed aspiration pneumonia followed by pulmonary focus sepsis.
The septic condition, as well as hypercalcemia, proved to be refractory to the proposed treatment. Considering the advanced disease, clinical intractability, and poor-performance status, exclusive palliative care was chosen. The patient died two and a half months after beginning his treatment.