A 68-year-old man with a history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and myocardial infarction was taken by ambulance to our tertiary referral hospital’s emergency department because of sudden-onset left upper quadrant pain of 1-h duration accompanied by nausea and sweating. The patient had a treatment history of percutaneous coronary intervention and placement of three stents in his coronary arteries, and he was taking two kinds of anticoagulant drugs, 100 mg of aspirin and 75 mg of thienopiridines.
At the first visit, the patient’s blood pressure was 118/56 mmHg, heart rate was 82 beats/min, and body temperature was 36.8 °C. Physical examination revealed abdominal distention with tenderness in the epigastric area. Blood tests showed slight anemia (hemoglobin, 12.4 g/dL) and increased concentrations of aspartate aminotransferase (53 U/L), lactate dehydrogenase (492 U/L), d-dimers (2.9 µg/mL), and hemoglobin A1c (9.0%); his myocardial deviation enzymes were not elevated . A cardiologist performed electrocardiogram and echocardiography to rule out acute coronary syndrome. The electrocardiogram showed a poor R-wave progression pattern in the II, III, and aVF induction leads, but echocardiography showed no apparent or significant local asynergy. There was no evidence of acute coronary syndrome. For further examination, the patient underwent abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT). This examination revealed a huge low-density mass measuring 99 × 70 mm in the pancreatic tail with enhanced rim staining in the peripheral area . Imaging also revealed extravasation and fluid collection beside the tumor (between the stomach and pancreas or spleen) as well as ascites under both sides of the diaphragm and in the pouch of Douglas . Hence, spontaneous rupture of a pancreatic tumor [gastrointestinal stromal tumor, mucinous cystadenoma (adenocarcinoma), or malignant lymphoma] or aneurysm were considered as differential diagnoses. Emergency laparotomy was performed. The abdominal cavity was full of gross blood and clots. Active bleeding was observed from the top of a ruptured mass in the pancreatic tail. A large tumor was found originating from the pancreatic tail . There were no signs of distant metastasis, regional lymphadenopathy, or dissemination, while intra-peritoneal cytology was not examined. With an intraoperative diagnosis of spontaneous rupture of a pancreatic tumor, standard distal pancreatectomy with (regional) lymph node dissection was successfully performed.
Macroscopic examination of the resected specimen revealed that the ruptured tumor was located in the pancreatic tail. It was approximately 80 mm in diameter, multilocular-cystic, and well-defined; hemorrhage was present, and the tumor had a septum . Histologically, hematoxylin and eosin staining showed rupture of the tumor distension due to an intra-tumoral hemorrhage as well as round to spindle-shaped, highly pleomorphic mononuclear cells and multinucleated histiocytic giant cells as well as a component of ductal adenocarcinoma . Elastic fiber staining showed extensive tumor infiltration into the splenic vein . Immunohistochemical staining showed that the tumor cells were negative for cytokeratin AE1/AE3 , whereas the non-neoplastic osteoclast-like giant cells were positive for CD68 . There was no lymph node metastasis nor perineural invasion, while there was vascular invasion in accordance with the general rules for the study of pancreatic cancer (7th edition). Taken together, these results led to a diagnosis of undifferentiated carcinoma with osteoclast-like giant cells. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, while the patient chose best supportive care 3 months after surgery.