An 18-year-old right hand dominant female, who is a former avid tennis player, presented to the orthopaedic clinic with bilateral shoulder pain. She had two prior surgeries on the right shoulder by an outside orthopaedic surgeon and unfortunately developed CRPS shortly after the second surgery. Nerve blocks were ineffective, and a constant burning sensation was felt over the right shoulder. In addition, the patient scored 9 out of 9 on the Beighton Scoring System and was diagnosed with EDS.
Physical examination revealed bilateral scapular dyskinesia and multiple scars on her anterior right shoulder, along with hyperesthesia. Palpation of the scars reproduced local and referred pain down the right arm. The treatment included scapular bracing and physical therapy for the left shoulder, while the right shoulder underwent extensive debridement, posterior capsule plication, and anteroinferior glenohumeral ligament reconstruction with a gracilis allograft. The patient was progressing well until 16 months postoperatively when she returned to the clinic with a complaint of constant burning and sharp pain around the right shoulder that radiated toward the chest. She also experienced numbness, tingling, and weakness in the right shoulder along with pain and weakness in the left shoulder. The patient was tender over the right musculocutaneous nerve and both shoulders were inflamed on ultrasound. She had trouble sleeping and woke up frequently throughout the night due to the severe pain.
Physiatry was consulted and electromyography (EMG) and nerve conduction studies were performed . Abnormal EMG findings were consistent with a bilateral subacute on chronic brachial plexopathy, suggestive of Parsonage-Turner syndrome. She had full neck flexion and extension with a negative Spurling’s maneuver and unremarkable MRI of the cervical spine. Interestingly, after this diagnosis, it was discovered that the patient had a family history of autoimmune conditions as her mother had fibromyalgia and was an HLA-B27 carrier, her brother had spondyloarthropathy, and her aunt had rheumatoid arthritis. She was then referred to rheumatology who noted that the patient reported morning stiffness in her upper back for 2 h every day for the past year. A laboratory workup of autoimmune diseases was conducted, and the patient tested positive for the HLA-B27 allele. She was then diagnosed with ankylosing spondylitis.
The patient’s bilateral shoulder pain continued to improve over the following year with physical therapy and prolotherapy treatments. During this time, she also underwent medial patellofemoral ligament reconstruction with allograft due to chondromalacia patella and recurrent patellar dislocations, which may have been partially due to the patient’s EDS. The current treatment regimen is to continue with regular physical therapy and prolotherapy treatments for the Parsonage-Turner syndrome and EDS, pain management for the CRPS, and follow-up with rheumatology for the ankylosing spondylitis.