In this study, we have evaluated a patient admitted to the spinal unit of the clinical scientific institute Maugeri of Pavia in the period between April and October 2021.
The patient was a 26-year-old Chinese man, who had a history of sudden back pain at dorsal level immediately complicated by paraplegia. He had no medical history before this event. MRI of the dorsal spine showed somatic collapse of D11 with retraction of the posterior wall and compression of the medullary cord . On February 14, 2021, patient was operated with decompressive D10-D12 laminectomy and lateral mass screw-rod arthrodesis. Post-surgical course was characterized both no motor functional recovery of the lower limbs and normal sensation to light touch, temperature, and pain. The histological examination of biopsies resulted positive for GCT of bone. A case report was performed with D11 tumorectomy in lateral access with positioning the inter-body mesh and he was transferred on April 6, 2021, to U.O. Spinal for starting the rehabilitation program.
SCIs were classified as complete and incomplete by the American spinal injury association (ASIA) classification . The ASIA scale grades patients based on their functional impairment from A to E, where A represents the greatest impairment and E represents the normal condition.
Physical examination revealed paraplegia and atrophy of the lower limb muscles. He demonstrated hyperreflexia in the lower extremities and spasticity of muscles and joints in both limb. Sensation to light touch, temperature, and pain were normal. Bladder function was impaired: Patient was unable to empty his bladder completely than a permanent indwelling bladder catheter was placed. A case report was classified in ASIA B. NMR evidenced focal signal alteration of the spinal cord at D11 level, extending in the craniocaudal direction for about 7 mm hyperintense in the long TR sequences and not equipped with contrast impregnation. Needle electromyography of the right and left external anal sphincter muscle, innervated by S3, S4, S5 roots, evidenced chronic denervation signs, without denervation activity at rest superficial anal reflex was present. Motor evoked potentials, of the lower limbs showed a pathology of the first motor neuron and/or intra-rachide of the second motor neuron. Somatosensory evoked potentials, (SEPs) resulting from stimulation of the dorsal nerve of the penis, evidenced the absence of cortical response (P1). Peripheral conduction (ankle-popliteal fossa) and cortical response (P40) resulting from electrical stimulation of the tibial nerve at the ankle resulted absent.
Individual rehabilitation program (PRI) aimed to: Improve motor performances and the grade of autonomy, to increase the control of pain and spasticity. Patient was educated to stretching the lower limbs and training postural passages verticalization is an important factor of early rehabilitation in the patients with SCI before to begin walking training.
The time walking test (TWT) evaluated the improvement in walking endurance. The TWT was developed by the American Thoracic Society and it was officially introduced in 2002, coming along with a comprehensive guideline . The TWT is a sub-maximal exercise test used to assess aerobic capacity and endurance. A case report evidenced an improvement in walking performance during PRI. The walking index for spinal cord injury (WISCII) is a scale that measures the type and amount of assistance (in terms of requirements of assistive devices, or human helpers) required by a person with SCI for walking . It is an ordinal scale which rates people with SCI from being unable to walk to independent walking and designed to indicate the grades of impairment occurring after SCI and their relationship to the function of walking .
The results in TWT and WISCII evidenced an improvement in independent walking . At the end of rehabilitation program, SEPs have been controlled. P40 resulting present after stimulation of the tibial nerve at the ankle evidenced with long latency.