A 74-year-old Ethiopian male patient presented with left-side scrotal swelling of 3 years duration, which was initially small but progressively increased to attain the current size which makes his daily activities cumbersome. He had no history of trauma, and he had no history of swelling on the contralateral side or penis. He had no swelling in the groin or any other site. He had no history of diabetes, hypertension, asthma, or any known drug allergy. He had no history of previous surgery. He had a history of river water contact but no history of bloody diarrhea or bloody urine. He had no history of chronic cough, contact with a patient with chronic cough, or known pulmonary tuberculosis patient. He is a farmer and had no history of occupational exposure to chemicals. On examination, his vital signs were within normal limits. He had a clear and resonant chest. There was a huge, 17 × 12 cm firm to hard left-side scrotal swelling all over the left scrotum, and the trans-illumination test was negative. The right side was unremarkable. Otherwise, the rest of the examinations were unremarkable.
On investigation, his complete blood count was normal with no eosinophilia, urinalysis showed no chyluria, proteinuria, or hematuria, and organ function tests were within normal limits. Scrotal ultrasound (US) showed a large echodebrinous left-side scrotal collection measuring 15 × 10 cm having internal dispersed calcifications; bilateral testes appear normal in size, echogenicity, and color Doppler flow, no lymphatic obstruction, or filarial dance sign with the index of likely chronic hematocele. We did not order preoperative X-ray as it would not change our management, but we took an X-ray of the excised tissue and it showed eggshell-like calcified wall . Therefore, with a diagnosis of chronic hematocele with calcification, the patient was kept NPO for 8 hours and operated on under spinal anesthesia and supine position by a urologist and general surgery residents. Intraoperatively, there was 800 ml of non-foul-smelling, turbid fluid within well-formed and calcified tunica vaginalis . There was gritty sound upon opening the tunica vaginalis. Therefore, a left-side hydrocelectomy was done (the fluid sucked and calcified tunica was excised) and the sample was sent for histopathology; histopathologic examination of the sample showed a cyst wall without cyst lining with fibrosis and extensive calcification . Subsequently, the patient was commenced on ceftriaxone 1gm IV twice a day, scrotal elevation, wound care, and analgesics. The patient had unremarkable recovery and was discharged improved after 48 hours of hospital stay with no perioperative complications. On subsequent follow-up at the urology referral clinic, the wound healed well and the patient did not have any other complaints.