In June 2011, a 56-year-old male was referred to our department by head and neck surgeon in order to improve his upper denture retention and stability. The patient was diagnosed with a squamous cell carcinoma of the maxillary gingiva (T4N0M0) in May 2005 and underwent an extended left maxillectomy, an anterior and middle cranial base resection, a left ophthalmectomy, and a flap reconstruction using the rectus abdominis muscle were performed. On physical examination, a recessed deformation on the left side of his face could be seen because of the left ophthalmectomy. The function of the left levator palpebrae muscle was eliminated to the level of a slight elevation by using the frontal muscle. A metal plate was anchored to the inferior wall of orbit. The left ethmoid bone, inferior nasal turbinate, the maxilla, alisphenoid, medial and lateral pterygoid muscle were already excised during the mesh titanium plate reconstruction of the anterior wall from the maxillary orbital region. Intraorally, the left maxilla had been excised from the midline, with the rectus abdominis muscle flap sutured directly to the soft palate. The peripheral mucous membrane around the left upper lip was already scarred, without the oral vestibule, and the flap margin had moved along with the surrounding soft tissue. The 70 × 50 mm flap was sagging from its weight and was in contact with the mandibular molars, reducing the volume of the oral cavity unless dentures were worn. The maxilla was removed from the midline to the maxillary tuberosity, while the mandible was removed from the anterior border of the ramus to the coronoid process. Dead space was eliminated because the abdominal rectus muscle was placed from the anterior cranial base to the oral cavity during reconstruction . No expiratory leakage or food reflux was observed, and the rhinopharyngeal closure was maintained. Prior to performing surgery, there was no tumor recurrence or metastasis. The patient had a mouth opening of 43 mm, which we judged operable and then conducted the flap reduction and elevation under general anesthesia in Dec 2008. Informed consent was obtained from the patient’s parents prior to study initiation, and all procedures were performed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
Surgical reconstruction was performed as follows:An incision was made from the buccal side of the sutured edge (scar) in the abdominal rectus muscle flap . We can conduct a vestibular extension at the same time by incising this position. The adipose tissue was peeled from the buccal side to slightly beyond the skin flap center while maintaining approximately 5 mm thickness. The adipose tissue was reduced using a radio knife (8 g) . When we reduce fat tissue, we must avoid perforating of the skin. The skin was incised directly above the zygomatic bone, with tissue separation (avoiding exposure of the plate) to enable easy visibility of the zygomatic bone. Subsequently, the subcutaneous tissue was peeled from the zygomatic bone to the oral cavity for tunneling. Three mini QUICKANCHOR® (Depuy Mitek Surgical Products, Inc. Raynham, MA, USA) anchors were placed in the zygomatic bone, and anchor sutures were drawn through the subcutaneous tissue to lift the skin flap. A modeling compound was used to shape the margin of the celluloid splint . The advantage of flap suspension using Mitek anchors is the simple operability, less anchor positioning limitation, and easier length adjustment of the thread for suspension, which lead to easier fixation of soft tissue without slackness as well as clinically sufficient strength for fixation of ligament and tissue. On the other hand, less than 4 mm thickness of the cortical bone for suture anchor fixation causes insufficient fixation, therefore, determining placing position on the bone for fixation is necessary. Consequently, due to the versatility, the position that is considered optimal for stronger fixation and more efficient suspension can be selected as the anchor placing position, while the periosteum, corium, and scar tissue that are thought the most suitable for maintaining the strength can be chosen for the suture thread. Regarding the anchor placing position in this case, we determined 3 positions on the zygomatic bone and sutured flap corium taking into consideration a complete maxillectomy had been completed, which resulted in being able to lift the flap outward and upward.
Postoperatively, the color of the skin flap was normal without congestion or necrosis. The celluloid splint was removed 10 days after the surgery with no infection or necrosis observed in the skin flap. We can find only fat, scar tissue, not carcinoma in the reduced fat tissure. At 3 months postoperatively, epithelialization and scarring were observed on the border of the skin flap and buccal mucosa, with no wound opening. Next, a denture that was stabilized to the right residual teeth with a clasp made. This prosthesis had two double Akers cast clasps unilaterally to retain the prosthesis by the four remaining molars. The major connector used anteria paratal plate. The patient was quite satisfied to be able to masticate, form an alimentary bolus, and swallow without any teeth falling out. No re-sagging of the skin flap or wound infection was observed at 3 years postoperatively. Patient follow-up will be continued at our department .