The 66-year old caucasian female patient suffered from end-stage pulmonary fibrosis caused by usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP) first diagnosed in November 2004. According to the guidelines of the International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation, the patient was submitted to double sided lung transplantation in August 2009. Immediate post-operative course was complicated by prolonged respiratory weaning with the necessity of percutaneous tracheotomy. The patient could not be immunized with influenza vaccination due to poor general condition in September and October 2009, the vaccination period for the seasonally expected influenza viruses. In November 2009, the patient was transferred to rehabilitation treatment. During the end of December 2009 and the beginning of January 2010, she complained about persistent cough. Because of aggravation of her general and especially respiratory condition, she was admitted to a local district hospital and, due to respiratory deterioration, subsequent intubation was needed. High-dose corticosteroid therapy was initiated to overcome acute organ rejection. As respiratory insufficiency further deteriorated, she was finally transferred to the intensive care unit of the medical department at the University Medical Center Freiburg.
Nasotracheal secretion was positive for viral influenza A/H1N1 RNA, proved by RT-PCR. Under the working diagnosis of influenza A/H1N1 pneumonia with bacterial superinfection, therapy with meropenem, clarithromycin and oseltamivir was initiated. Because a mutation causing resistance against Oseltamivir was detected.in further PCR work-up, oseltamivir was subsequently switched to zanamivir. Immunosuppressive therapy was continued with prednisolone and mycophenolate-mofetil, while tacrolimus was interrupted due to high serum levels.
Because of acute renal failure and suspected heparin-induced thrombocytopenia type II, continuous venous-venous hemofiltration was initiated. Despite extracorporeal interventional lung assist implantation, sufficient carbon dioxide elimination could not be reached and the patient died due to rapidly progressive respiratory failure four days after the diagnosis of influenza A/H1N1 infection of the lung (timeline of the clinical course see Table ).
After admission to the medical intensive care unit, bronchoscopy was performed to evaluate initial differential diagnoses of acute graft rejection and infectious pneumonia. Bronchial mucosa was edematous and reddened. Mucus was viscous but not extensive in amount. Surgical anastomoses were inconspicuous. No pus or signs of acute bacterial infection could be observed. Bronchioalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid and sputum were sent to microbiological examination.
Chest radiography revealed increasing bilateral diffuse pulmonary infiltrates in both lungs with ground glass opacities. Additionally, bronchiectasis and consolidation in the right lower lobe were noticed .
In sputum and BAL samples, infection with influenza virus A/H1N1 could be verified four days prior to death by real-time RT-PCR . Multiplex-PCR proved to be negative for other bacterial or viral infections. Accordingly, cytomegalovirus PCR, cell culture assays and bacterial and fungal cultures were negative during her last hospitalisation period at the University Medical Center Freiburg.
Thoracic situs with status post double sided lung transplantation was evident with sufficient anastomoses of the transplanted organs. The lungs were consolidated in consistency but patchy discolorization typical for bacterial pneumonic infections were not present. Especially the lower parts of the lungs showed classical microscopic features of AFOP with distinct patchy intraalveolar formation of fibrin balls, focal fibroblast foci and diffuse organizing pneumonia . Hyaline membranes were not detected in any histological specimens. Thus, pure AFOP not associated with other histological patterns of DAD was verified. No signs of graft rejection, bacterial or fungal superinfections or a relapse of UIP were seen.
Molecular analysis of lung tissue revealed positive results for influenza A/H1N1by PCR. There was no detection of any bacterial or fungal infection in any analysed lung specimen, neither by microbiological nor by histological examination.