A 54-year-old female with a history of TOF was admitted to our hospital with complains of exertional dyspnea and chest distress. She underwent surgery for TOF with transannular patching of right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) at the age of 18. Five years ago, she received TPVI, using a P26-25 mm (diameter-length) self-expandable Venus P-valve (Venus Medtech, Hangzhou, China) due to severe pulmonary regurgitation with right heart enlargement. Unfortunately, bioprosthesis-associated IE occurred due to dental caries 6 months after TPVI. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed vegetation attached on the prosthetic valve and blood culture indicated streptococcus viridians. At the end of 6 weeks of intravenous penicillin and gentamycin, her blood cultures sterilized, her vegetation size was reduced, and she achieved prosthesis functional recovery . Then, she received dental caries extraction under antibiotic prophylaxis with intravenous penicillin 80 million units/day for 3 days. During close follow-up, she had not got relapse of IE. However, dysfunctional bioprosthesis was still detected by TTE with thicken leaflet, severe pulmonary regurgitation 3 years later , moderate to severe tricuspid insufficiency and right heart dilation. Considering the relatively low risk of procedural complications, a decision of valve-in-valve TPVI with a self-expandable valve was made.
The procedure was performed with fluoroscopic and TTE guidance under general anesthesia. Bilateral femoral veins were used, and right heart catheterization was first executed. Pulmonary artery pressure was 35/8 mmHg and right ventricle pressure was 50/8 mmHg. Severe pulmonary insufficiency appeared on angiography . After pre-dilation with a 25 mm × 50 mm (diameter × length) balloon (Balt, Montmorency, France), systolic pressure gradient across the bioprosthesis decreased from 15 mmHg to 6 mmHg. Since the annular size of 25.9 mm calculated on computed tomography and three-dimension reconstruction , a P28-25 mm (diameter-length) self-expandable Venus P-valve (Venus Medtech, Hangzhou, China) with 22-F delivery system was planned to be deployed. The process was beset with difficulties in advancing the delivery sheath. The buddy wire technique, which was employed with two Lunderquist wires, was attempted but the delivery system still failed to be advanced and positioned appropriately. Finally, the 14-F Cook sheath (Cook Medical, Bloomington, USA) was advanced over the second Lunderquist wire, which passed through the RVOT and placed in the distal of right pulmonary artery. The 14-F Cook sheath served as modified buddy wire providing extra support and straightening the vessel and the RVOT . Maneuvering the 22-F Venus P delivery system alongside the 14-F Cook sheath aided in the advancement of the delivery system into the proximal end of left pulmonary. Prior to the deployment of the second pulmonary valve, the 14-F Cook sheath was pulled back into inferior vena cava. The new self-expanding valve was then successfully delivered and implanted. Post-dilation with a 25 mm × 50 mm (diameter × length) balloon (Balt, Montmorency, France) was performed to better shape for the stent strut and RVOT. Post-procedure angiography and TTE showed no pulmonary regurgitation (, ; , ). Then pulmonary pressure was raised to 35/18 mmHg.
During hospitalization, the patient was given adequate and prolonged antibiotic prophylaxis (intravenous ceftriaxone 2 g/day and vancomycin 1 g/day for 1 week) to ensure no endocarditis relapse. She was recommended to take oral anticoagulant daily after discharge and reinforced follow-up was proposed to her as before. At 12-month follow-up, she was completely recovered from valve-in-valve TPVI with improved symptoms of heart failure . TTE was obtained and showed a persistently good valve function.