A 51-year-old male patient presented to the Department of Infectious Diseases, Wuhan Union Hospital, on December 9, 2021, complaining of persistent abdominal distension and jaundice of unknown cause for approximately 30 days. He had visited a local hospital and the initial examination revealed liver dysfunction and ascites. However, liver-sparing and symptomatic treatment provided no symptom relief, and he visited the gastrointestinal surgery department of Wuhan Union Hospital for further treatment. During hospitalization, dynamic monitoring of laboratory indicators suggested progressive liver function deterioration. Thus, extensive examinations were performed to explore the possible causes, and revealed elevated tumor markers, while the viral serology (cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, and hepatitis viruses), autoantibody profile, parasite, ceruloplasmin, and alpha-1 antitrypsin were negative .
Furthermore, imaging was completed, and magnetic resonance imaging of the liver revealed liver injury, portal hypertension, ascites, and esophageal and gastric varices . The 68Ga-FAPI PET and 18FDG-PET/ computed tomography (CT) yielded findings suggestive of metastases in bone (skull, ribs, cone, scapula, sacrum, ilium, pubis, and ischium) and lymph nodes (perigastric lymph nodes, retroperitoneal lymph nodes, mesenteric lymph nodes, and left supraclavicular lymph nodes) . Chest CT revealed enlarged lymph nodes in the mediastinum and hilum, considered to be lymphadenitis . Upper endoscopy and colonoscopy were also performed, no apparent signs of cancer . Given that the patient had no indications for surgery and no significant relief of symptoms after treatment, he was transferred to the Infection Diseases department on day 9. Ten years prior, he had been admitted with symmetrical, proximal weakness of the upper and lower extremities. Blood investigations revealed a markedly elevated creatine kinase, and electromyography and muscle biopsy demonstrated myopathy. After excluding other diseases, he had been diagnosed with polymyositis and treated with oral glucocorticoids. The patient reported that over the preceding ten years, he had visited a local hospital, taken medication regularly, and had adequate disease control, but no detailed medical records were available. He denied a history of hepatitis or alcohol consumption. Informed consent was obtained from the patient, and the requirement for ethical approval was waived by the research ethics committee of Wuhan Union Hospital because of the retrospective and anonymous nature of the study.
Laboratory results were consistent with liver failure, and admission values were as follows: thrombocytopenia, hypoalbuminemia, and elevated levels of alanine aminotransferases, aspartate aminotransferase, alkaline phosphatase, total bilirubin, direct bilirubin, international normalized ratio (INR) and a prolonged prothrombin time . Furthermore, laboratory tests revealed elevated immunoglobulin G4 and inflammatory markers, including a high white blood cell count, C-reactive protein (CRP), and procalcitonin (PCT). Metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS) of the peripheral blood detected cytomegalovirus and Aspergillus niger infections. .
Simultaneously, an ultrasound-guided ascitic tap, bone marrow aspiration and trephine (BMAT) were performed to assess for the presence of cancer. The ascitic tap cytology and BMAT histology revealed a metastatic, poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma of pulmonary origin. Moreover, the immunohistochemical profile of the bone marrow trephine was positive for PCK, CK7, TTF1, Napsin A, and Cyclin D1, but negative for CK20, PAX8, CDX2, Villin, Syn, P63, CD3, CD20, and CD30 . Furthermore, ascitic fluid analysis revealed the following: Clear, yellow fluid, a white blood cell count of 399 × 106/L, 80.6% mononuclear cells, 4% multinucleated cells, an adenosine deaminase of 4.0 U/L, lactate dehydrogenase of 74 IU/L, and a serum ascites albumin gradient of 26.3 g/L (serum albumin 31.0 g/L, ascites albumin 4.7 g/L).
Considering the history of polymyositis and the newly discovered tumor, combined with extensive examinations, the primary diagnosis was liver failure, possibly secondary to malignant infiltration by a cancer of unknown primary origin, polymyositis, and/or infection. During hospitalization, the patient was treated with methionine and vitamin B1, hepatocyte growth-promoting factors, magnesium isoglycyrrhizinate, and reduced glutathione, which relieved the hepatitis through its effects on reducing enzymes and protecting hepatocytes. Additionally, the appropriate examinations were completed after consultation with a rheumatologist, and the medication was adjusted to total glucosides of paeony and hydroxychloroquine due to the history of polymyositis. Furthermore, antiviral (ganciclovir), antibacterial (Ceftriaxone Sodium and Tazobactam Sodium) and antifungal (Caspofungin Acetate) therapies were also added in response to the elevated CRP, PCT, and positive mNGS results. Moreover, this patient was administered diuretics, human gamma globulin, a plasma infusion, and albumin supplements to improve his symptoms. Regrettably, the patient refused further examination and treatment and was discharged on Day 31.
We followed-up on the patient one month after discharge and learned that he did not receive further treatment and died within one week of discharge.