A 50-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital for treatment of pancreatitis from our satellite hospital in January 2006. There was no history of either consanguinity or collagen diseases in her family. She had been diagnosed as having RA at the age of 22 years, and had undergone bilateral total hip and bilateral total knee arthroplasty at the ages of 28 and 32 years, respectively. In 1991 she had undergone renal biopsy because of proteinuria, and had been diagnosed as having reactive amyloidosis on the basis of renal biopsy. Her renal function had gradually deteriorated thereafter. Constipation and epigastric discomfort appeared in December 2005, and she was admitted to our satellite hospital because of general fatigue. Laboratory studies revealed a C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 21.9 mg/dL and the amylase (Amy) level (1006 IU/L). Abdominal computed tomogaraphy (CT) revealed swelling of the pancreas head and a pseudopancreatic cyst, and a diagnosis of acute pancreatitis was made. Abdominal CT also revealed that the kidneys were atrophic with a thin renal cortex, but any laterality of the enhancement effect in the cortex was unclear (Figure ). Her general condition, particularly renal function, deteriorated in spite of intensive treatment. She was transferred to our hospital in January 2006. Laboratory studies revealed CRP 11.0 mg/dL and the blood urea nitrogen concentration was 42.0 mg/dL, and the Cr level was 2.2 mg/dL. Urinalysis showed a protein excretion level of 1.0 g/day, but no hematuria. The rheumatoid factor level was 50.2 IU/mL. Creatinine clearance (Ccr) was 12.7 mL/min per 1.73 m2. The levels of trypsin (2112 ng/mL), lipase (130 IU/mL), and DUPAN-2 (440 U/mL) were all elevated. Abdominal CT revealed swelling of the pancreas head and multiple pseudopancreatic cysts and atrophic kidneys. She was started on regular hemodialysis (HD) from mid February. Gradually, HD became difficult to perform because of hypotension, and therefore we switched the patient to continuous hemodiafiltration (CHDF) in March. However, hypotension persisted and she died in early April.
Macroscopic observation at autopsy revealed slightly atrophic bilateral kidneys and a thin bilateral renal cortex. However, the bilateral renal arteries were not obstructed by amyloid deposits. Microscopy revealed reactive AA amyloid deposits in all organs, but mainly in the small arteries. Small-arterial occlusion in the pancreas due to amyloid deposition was evident (Figure ), and amyloid deposits are noted in interlobular arteries, arterioles, globally sclerotic and sclerosing glomeruli, and thickened Bowman’s capsule (Figure ). Renal tissues from autopsy specimens were evaluated for their proportions of amyloid-positive areas. A total of 6 specimens (three tissue blocks from each kidney obtained at autopsy) were evaluated in this study (Figure ). All the specimens were fixed in 10% formalin, embedded in paraffin, and cut into sections 4 μm thick. Sections were considered suitable for quantitative analysis if they contained the full thickness of the renal cortex and medulla, and were cut perpendicularly to the surface. The size of each block was approximately 20 mm × 20 mm. Amyloid-positive areas in the sections were determined by Congo-red staining. One section of whole tissue was photographed in each case. The borders of the amyloid-positive areas in each specimen were traced in each photograph, excluding any tissue-free spaces. The total amyloid-positive area was measured using ImageJ v. 1.47 software , and the percentage area of amyloid per whole-tissue section (%) area of amyloid deposition) was calculated
. First, each of the 6 specimens was divided into 4, and a total of 24 photographs were evaluated. Second, a rectangular area of the kidney measuring 1.3 mm × 5.0 mm with its long axis perpendicular to the kidney surface was also evaluated. All selected slides were evaluated for the total area showing positivity for amyloid. The significance of differences in the mean percent (%) area of amyloid deposition between the right and left sides and among three long-axis levels (upper, middle and lower) were analyzed by two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) at a significance level of p <0.05. Table shows the percent (%) area of amyloid deposited in quadruplicate samples. The area of amyloid deposition in these samples was about 7-11%, and the degree of variability among them seemed to be small. It also shows a comparison of amyloid deposition between the right and left sides and between the long axis samples for quadruplicate determinations; no significant differences were evident, and thus the % area of amyloid deposition throughout the whole kidneys appeared to be uniform in this patient. Table shows the percent (%) area of amyloid deposition in the rectangular samples. The long axis of the rectangle was situated in the renal cortex and the short was the luminal diameter of a 16-gauge needle, which is frequently used for renal biopsy. These samples showed areas of amyloid deposition ranging from about 6% to 10% in the cortex alone, with little apparent inter-sample variability. Table also shows a comparison between the right and left kidneys and between the long-axis rectangular samples. No significant correlation between the long-axis samples was evident. However, the left kidney showed a significantly greater area of amyloid deposition than the right kidney.