A 5-year-old Saudi boy presented with exertional dyspnea that progressed over 6 months to dyspnea and hypoxemia at rest. He is the first-born of his parents who were first cousins; he has a healthy 3.5-year-old sister. His past medical and familial history were uneventful. He had a mild cough that sometimes contained whitish sputum. His weight was decreasing. He had no history of fever, chest pain, environmental exposure to causative agents, or drug use. His development was appropriate for his age. A clinical examination revealed respiratory distress (respiratory rate was 55 per minute, the oxygen saturation was 95% on 5 L/minute face mask oxygen) with mild degree of clubbing of fingers. His body weight and height were less than third centile: body weight 9.85 kg and height 97.5 cm. A chest examination revealed decreased air movements bilaterally with crackles.
His complete blood count, urea and electrolytes, immune work up, human immunodeficiency virology (HIV) serology, thyroid function test, and echocardiography were all within normal range. A chest X-ray showed widespread bilateral air-space disease . Metabolic screening (tandem mass spectrometry, urine gas chromatography-mass spectrometry, serum organic and amino acids) was found to be normal. A chest computed tomographic (CT) scan showed ground-glass opacification and interlobular septal thickening (crazy paving pattern) . Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) appeared milky; it was positive for periodic acid–Schiff (PAS) stain. A molecular genetics study for pulmonary surfactant metabolism dysfunction of seven genes (next-generation sequencing panel for ABCA3, CSF2RA, CSF2RB, SFTPA1, SFTPB, SFTPC, and SFTPD genes) showed no pathogenic mutation; however, a homozygous novel variant c.533G>A (p.Cys178Tyr) variant was detected in the CSF2RA gene. His serum granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) level was high (15.9 pg/ml, normal level <7.9 pg/ml) and GM-CSF autoantibodies were negative.
Our case was diagnosed as having PAP that was likely to be congenital due to CSF2RA gene mutation so therapeutic WLL was performed. The procedure was performed under general anesthesia; he was intubated using an endotracheal tube of size 5.5 mm. Under fiberoptic bronchoscope (size 2.8 mm) direction, a bronchial blocker size 7 French was used to isolate his left lung. A bronchial blocker balloon was inflated and tested for stability and position under direct bronchoscopy observation; no leak was seen upon injecting saline through the catheter. After that, a whole left lung lavage was initiated using body temperature sterile normal saline. We injected 70 mL of normal saline each time, followed by chest physiotherapy and then aspiration. This procedure was repeated for his right lung. Each lung was washed with a total volume of 2 L and 40 mL. The left lung revealed 1968 mL back-aspirate and the right lung revealed 2001 mL as a total output. The fluid aspirate showed initially white milky fluid with time-dependent sedimentation. The fluid showed sequential progressive clearance toward the end of the procedure. He tolerated the procedure very well, apart from a transient drop in saturation to mid-80s, which responded very well to manual Ambu bagging; his fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) was kept at 1.0 throughout the procedure. Other than the transient drop in saturation, there was no major complication. He was transferred to our Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, and extubation was successful after 24 hours. After the first WLL his condition gradually showed improvement (respiratory rate was 30, saturated well on 0.5 to 1 L/minute nasal cannula oxygen 1 week after WLL), and after 11 months he became symptom-free with normal saturation on room air, with marked radiological improvement .
Segregation analysis of the family showed that his parents are heterozygous and his 3.5-year-old sister is homozygous for the same mutation. Of interest, his sister is asymptomatic, with unremarkable physical examination findings (oxygen saturation 100% on room air) with no significant finding on chest X-ray. Currently, she is under regular follow-up and further investigation is postponed because she remains asymptomatic.