A 26-year-old Han Chinese woman presented with a lesion on her left medial tibial plateau. She was an office employee with no athletic history; she denied any injury or symptom before she experienced a sudden sharp pain and instability of the affected knee while going downstairs. Her symptoms did not spontaneously relieve after 2 days of rest so she presented to our hospital. A physical examination revealed a swollen knee joint with Floating patellar test (+), Anterior drawer test (−), Posterior drawer test (−), Lachman test (−), Abduction stress test (−), and Adduction stress test (−). A McMurray sign could not be done accurately due to pain and swelling in her knee from 20° of extension to 120° of flexion. She had no neurological symptoms and no other physical signs were apparent. Of interest, a mistaken diagnosis of a lower insertion avulsion fracture of anterior cruciate ligament could be made at first glance at X-ray and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) .
She was treated with arthroscopy . During the operation, a primary diagnosis of OCD on her medial tibial plateau was indicated by an osteochondral fragment near the lower insertion of her anterior cruciate ligament, and the fragment was removed arthroscopically. Microfracture of the defect area was then performed. Histological examination which was done by a pathologist after the operation supported the positive pathology of OCD.
Postoperatively, weight-bearing was disallowed for the repair of the osteochondral defect where the microfracture was done, whereas quadriceps muscle training, such as straight leg raising, was encouraged. Continuous passive motion was also used for extension and flexion of her knee for 3 weeks after her operation. Three weeks later, rehabilitation began from partial weight-bearing up to total weight-bearing with no effusion of her knee joint. At 3 months of follow-up, she could walk and ride a bicycle freely except for a little pain after lengthy activity, particularly when going upstairs and downstairs. She was asked to avoid competitive activities for at least half a year or even for all her life, but muscle training was necessary; we suggested some helpful sports such as swimming. At 6 months, she was told that she could engage in long walks and even jogging with full knee flexion and extension.