An 85-year-old female patient presented to our emergency department with a fever and lower back pain. She had a medical history of diabetes mellitus, and her hemoglobin A1C was at 6.9 with teneligliptin. Additionally, she had undergone bilateral ovariohysterectomy for peritoneal cancer for 2 years and had received molecularly-targeted therapy with olaparib for the last 4 months.
Upon examination, the patient was alert and oriented. Her body temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and respiratory rate were 37.4 °C, 122/60 mmHg, 80 beats/min, and 16 breaths/min, respectively. There was no abdominal pain or sign of costovertebral angle tenderness. Laboratory results were as follows: an elevated leukocyte count of 9,800 cells/mm3 (normal range: 3,300–8,600), procalcitonin level of 0.18 ng/mL (normal range: ≤0.05), C-reactive protein level of 3.75 mg/dL (normal range: ≤0.04), and slightly elevated serum creatine level of 1.0 mg/dL (normal range: 0.46–0.79). Urinalysis revealed turbid urine with an alkaline pH (8.5), occult blood, white blood cells, and nitrate. Computed tomography revealed dilation of the left renal pelvis with an obstruction of unknown origin and perinephric stranding of the left renal pelvis but no evidence of renal stones . On the second day, two sets of blood and urine cultures obtained on admission revealed gram-negative rods. Ceftriaxone (1 g every 12 h) was administered since acute pyelonephritis was considered the diagnosis. The VITEK-2 GN ID card (bioMerieux, France) resulted in low discrimination between P. hauseri and P. penneri. Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS; MALDI Biotyper ver. 9.0.0.0; Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, MA, USA) showed P. hauseri with a spectral score of 2.22 as the best match and P. vulgaris with a score of 2.09 as the second-best match. Therefore, the genetic investigation by 16 S rRNA gene sequencing using the forward primer 5′-AGAGTTTGATCMTGGCTCAG-3′ and the reverse primer 5′-TACGGYTACCTTGTTACGACTT-3′ was performed to identify the organism. Finally, the pathogen was identified as P. alimentorum with 99.8% homology (1,473 of the 1,476 bases) in the EZBioCloud 16 S database . To confirm that the biochemical properties of the isolate were consistent with those of P. alimentorum, palatinose utilization and indole production were investigated to differentiate the isolate from P. hauseri, P. vulgaris, and P. penneri . The isolate showed positive results for palatinose utilization and indole production, consistent with those of a previous report on P. alimentorum. The GenBank accession number of the 16SrRNA sequences of P. alimentorum isolated from this study is OQ192985. Table 2 shows the antimicrobial susceptibility of the isolated strain determined using the MicroScan WalkAway system with an NM2J panel (Beckman Coulter). The minimum inhibitory concentration was measured according to the Enterobacteriaceae category of the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute M100-S26.
Antimicrobial therapy was changed to cefotiam (1 g every 8 h) based on the antimicrobial susceptibility results . As the patient’s clinical course was good, the antimicrobial therapy was changed to ciprofloxacin (400 mg orally), and she was discharged on day 7 of hospitalization. Antimicrobial therapy was continued for 14 days, and no recurrence was observed.