A 1-year-old boy presented with intermittent hemoptysis during hospitalization in our pediatric intensive care unit. He had history of left pulmonary artery sling, long segment funnel-shaped tracheal stenosis (O-ring with the smallest inner diameter of 2.5 mm), and dextrocardia. Due to frequent lower airway infections and progressive respiratory distress, re-implantation of left pulmonary artery and slide tracheoplasty were done at 9-months-old. His trachea was transected 2.5 cm above carina and was shortened by approximately 1 cm after surgery. His post-operative course was complicated by tracheobronchomalacia and restenosis of distal trachea caused by granulation tissue at anastomotic sites. Balloon dilatation, Holmium laser vaporization and granulation tissue removal were performed five times but with limited effects. The patient experienced four unsuccessful extubation within 2 months.
On post-operative day 81, the child presented with hemosputum, airway obstruction and hypercapnia. Diluted epinephrine was repeatedly administered via endotracheal tube and the bleeding resolved. Laboratory examinations revealed normocytic anemia and a normal coagulation profile. Minimal infiltrates over left lower lung field was seen on chest radiograph. Rigid bronchoscopy performed 8 h later did not find bleeding foci despite some blood clots visible in distal trachea and both main bronchus orifices. Technetium-99 m-labeled red blood cell scan on the same day did not show abnormal radiotracer accumulation in the chest. Another episode of hemoptysis occurred 2 days later. Under guidance of fiberoptic bronchoscopy, endotracheal tube was withdrawn, and a protruding pulsating lesion appeared at anterior wall of lower trachea. Witnessed rupture of the suspected pseudoaneurysm with concomitant massive bleeding occurred during the procedure . Endotracheal tube was placed back immediately for direct compression and bleeding temporarily stopped. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography angiography (CTA) showed poor differentiation of the borders between posterior wall of distal aortic arch and anterior wall of trachea 1.5 cm above carina but no contrast extravasation into airway . Combined the findings of bronchoscopy and CTA, aortotracheal fistula was impressed and the patient was taken to operation theater for urgent repair.
After median sternotomy, the child was put on cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) by cannulation to ascending aorta and right atrium. The patient was cooled down to 18 °C for possible circulatory arrest during aortic arch repair. His proximal aorta was cross clamped and antegrade cardioplegia was given. Deep hypothermic circulatory arrest (DHCA) was initiated with selective antegrade cerebral perfusion (SACP) by advancing the arterial cannula to innominate artery with a flow at 50 ml/min/kg and a right radial artery pressure around 50 mmHg. Near-infrared spectroscopy was used for monitoring bilateral cerebral perfusion. Because of severe adhesion between aortic arch and reconstructed trachea, intra-luminal approach of the fistula with an incision along the aortic arch curvature was tried first. A 2 mm defect was identified on the posterior wall of aortic arch with a thin membranous structure left between arch and trachea. Direct closure of fistula ostium with 6–0 running proline sutures was done. During rewarming, intra-operative bronchoscopy showed much fresh blood in the patient’s airway. He was then cooled down to 18 °C with DHCA with SACP again. After meticulous dissection of aortic arch from trachea and surrounding firm adhesions, a generous autologous pericardial patch was used to cover the posterior wall of aortic arch and to seal the defect. During rewarming, tracheal defect was repaired using another autologous pericardium. No more bleeding was identified by the bronchoscopy. Post-operative course was uneventful. No recurrent bleeding happened, and no significant neurologic deficits noticed at a 4-month follow-up. The patient passed away on 2 months later due to airway obstruction and ventilation failure caused by recurrent refractory tracheal granulation.