A 1-year-old boy was born with a 2 cm × 1.5 cm mass on the right side of his neck. He was admitted to a local hospital for treatment, and the neck CT showed cystic lesions on the superior and inferior aspects of the right clavicle, extending to the mediastinum. The local doctors gave a clinical diagnosis of suspected-lymphangioma according to radiological and clinical information. However, treatment was not administered at that time. Over time, however, he presented shortness of breath owing to a right pleural effusion with the mass gradually enlarging to 4 cm × 5 cm and came to the hospital. Physical examination showed that the mass was soft without specific boundaries, the skin was not red or swollen and there was no ulceration or fluid leakage. The chest wall behind the right clavicle collapsed with the clavicle absent causing the shoulder to droop. Respiratory sounds on the right side were faint whereas the left side was normal. The left femur was swollen and tender. The mobility of the right arm was slightly limited, and the patient found it difficult to walk. There was no significant shortness of the femur, and the arch mobility was normal. Furthermore, an X-ray showed partial osteolysis of the right clavicle with fracture of the left femur. X-rays also showed right pleural effusion with atelectasis on the right side A thoracoscopy was performed and the boy was given closed thoracic drainage via a pleural tube. After this surgery, the tumor shrank significantly. Following this, a femoral biopsy was performed that showed necrotic tissue in the cortical bone and many irregularly shaped capillaries that proliferated within the necrotic tissue. Dilated lymphatic vessels were seen adjacent to the cortex, with fibrous tissue hyperplasia .
Based on these observations, the boy was diagnosed with Gorham Stout syndrome in November 2016. The boy was given sirolimus therapy (Hangzhou Sino-American East China Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., 1 mg/ml) simultaneously with SMZ (Shandong Xinhua Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., 400 mg Sulfamethoxazole & 80 mg Trimethoprim /piece) at an oral dose of 20-30 mg/kg. Additionally, the patient received intramedullary fixation with bone grafting in the left femur. The dose of SMZ was divided in half and given twice a day, 3 days per week to prevent pneumocystis infection. Twenty-six months later, the boy had responded well to treatment. Physical examination showed that the mass had disappeared completely. Although the chest wall behind the right clavicle and shoulder were the same, respiratory sounds on the right side were more distinct than before. The left femur returned to nearly normal. X-rays showed that the pleural effusion was reduced significantly, there were no further lesions in the femur, and the thigh was no longer swollen .
Fortunately, the boy did not experience any complications while taking sirolimus. At present he has recovered well and participated in normal daily activities. His growth and development are the same as that of his peers, and he has been minimally affected by the disease .