A 76-year-old Japanese woman was admitted because of fever and chill. Physical examination revealed percussion tenderness in the right upper quadrant. She had previously been diagnosed as having a large simple hepatic cyst and elevated serum CA19-9 levels. Laboratory examination showed increased serum levels of C-reactive protein (CRP) (14.5 mg/dl; reference: < 0.3 mg/dl) and CA19-9 (170 U/ml; reference: < 37 U/ml), and Escherichia coli were cultured from blood. Enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed a large hepatic cyst with partially enhanced thickened cystic wall . From this and the tenderness to touch in her right upper quadrant, we diagnosed an infected hepatic cyst , and started antibiotic therapy using β-lactamase inhibitors.
In addition, we performed percutaneous treatment of the hepatic cyst by drainage and sclerotherapy using minocycline hydrochloride. Briefly, after local anesthesia of the puncture site with 1% mepivacaine hydrochloride, a 20-cm long, 22-gauge needle was passed into the cyst under real-time ultrasonic guidance with a 3.5 MHz convex transducer. After a pig tail catheter had been inserted into the cyst, the cystic fluid was aspirated. Bacteria, neoplastic cells, and parasites were not detected in the cystic fluid, however, CA19-9 levels were elevated in hepatic cyst fluid (371 U/ml). At 3 days after drainage, her fever and serum CRP level (4.1 mg/dl) were remarkably decreased; this also supported the diagnosis of an infected hepatic cyst. 400 mg of minocycline hydrochloride was dissolved in 50 ml of saline, and this minocycline solution was injected into the cyst using the drainage catheter. The drain was closed, and was opened 24 hours after intracystic instillation of minocycline hydrochloride. To determine the contribution of the hepatic cyst to the CA19-9 levels, we measured serum and cyst fluid CA19-9 levels before, 1 day after and 1 week after intracystic instillation of minocycline hydrochloride. After intracystic instillation, necrotic cells in the cyst were drained, and the cyst totally collapsed after 1 week . Cyst fluid CA19-9 levels increased remarkably after the minocycline instillation, while serum CA19-9 levels decreased .