A 61-year-old female patient, presented for an ocular oncology consultation complaining of reduced visual acuity and central-temporal scotoma for 1 month in her left eye. Visual acuity was 20/20 in the right eye (OD) and 20/125 in left eye (OS). The anterior segment and intraocular pressure were normal in both eyes, as was fundus examination of the OD. Fundus examination of OS revealed a brownish-pigmented, elevated lesion covering the optic nerve and extending to the equatorial region also nasally. There was serous retinal detachment over the lesion and around it . The infrared image showed the shadow of the choroidal tumor obscuring part of the papillomacular bundle and the temporal margin of the optic disc . Optical coherence tomography showed epiretinal membrane and possible tumor mechanically induced retinoschisis . On ultrasonography evaluation, the lesion presented superimposing retinal detachment, acoustic hollowness and had a basal diameter of 13.0 mm and an apical height of 10.4 mm leading to the diagnosis choroidal melanoma . Systemic screening was negative for other primary tumors and metastasis. At this point, the patient was offered I-125 plaque (only available at other oncology centers, mainly private practice ones), external beam radiation therapy (EBRT), and enucleation. Since the patient could not afford I-125 brachytherapy, and declined EBRT due to its known side effects, we offered an alternative compassionate use of intra-arterial chemoreduction with Melphalan followed by Ru-106 plaque to avoid enucleation. After extensive discussion of all potential risks and benefits of these procedures, the patient opted to undergo intra-arterial chemotherapy (IAC) with 7.5 mg of Melphalan after selective catheterization of the ophthalmic artery under local anesthesia.
Three weeks after Melphalan IAC, her visual acuity was 20/200 and there was partial regression of the tumor and overlying retinal detachment, as verified on color fundus photo and optical coherence tomography (OCT) . On infrared reflectance image, there was evident reduction of papillomacular bundle shadowing and OCT showed discrete subfoveal fluid and regression of retinoschisis . On ultrasound evaluation, the largest basal diameter (LBD) was 11.9 mm and thickness was 7.9 mm; cystic changes suggestive of necrosis were also noted. Ru-106 brachytherapy was then performed using a 24-mm notched plaque. Due to tumor thickness and previous IAC, the target dose to the tumor apex was 65 Gy delivered over 82 h. Prior to plaque placement, fine needle aspiration biopsy was performed using binocular indirect ophthalmoscopy to sample the tumor and evaluate cellular viability after IAC. There was limited vitreous hemorrhage over the lesion immediately after the biopsy. Cytology analysis revealed no viable melanocytes; there were only very rare lymphocytes and histiocytes. One week after surgery, the patient presented visual acuity of 20/800 in OS. There was biopsy-related vitreous hemorrhage and an increase of retinal detachment related to radiation treatment. Ten weeks after brachytherapy (13 weeks after IAC), her visual acuity was HM and there was little clearance of the vitreous hemorrhage. On indirect ophthalmoscopy, only the optic nerve and a small portion of the superior peripheral retina could be visualized. On ultrasound evaluation, the LBD was 9.9 mm and thickness was 6.5 mm. There was still an inferior retinal detachment, and the retina seemed more fixed than previous evaluations. Since the tumor thickness was approximately 4 mm smaller (6.5 mm) compared to presentation, we assumed that tumor control had been achieved and we discussed with the patient the possibility of pars plana vitrectomy (PPV) for nonclearing vitreous hemorrhage and possible retinal reattachment during surgery. Patient agreed and three-port 23-gauge PPV was performed and vitreous hemorrhage was aspirated. During surgery, the retinal detachment seemed bullous and no tear was found. For this reason, the peroperative decision was to inject 1.0 mg of triamcinolone acetonide into the vitreous cavity without any retinal manipulation. Six weeks after PPV (20 weeks after IAC), her visual acuity was 20/200 and further reduction of tumor dimensions was observed. The largest basal diameter was 8.9 mm and thickness was 4.9 mm at the patient’s last follow-up 17 weeks after Ru-106 brachytherapy. There was still some subretinal fluid on OCT .