A 24-year-old man in a wheel-chair presented with numbness in all extremities and worsening lower-extremity weakness for approximately 20 days. He had inhaled N2O through an average of approximately 100–200 “whippit” cartridges per day for at least 3 months for recreational purposes. The patient had good dietary intake without alcohol use and did not have a history of smoking or illicit drug use. Neurological examination revealed clear consciousness with fluent speech. No abnormalities were detected in the cranial nerves. However, mild weakness in the upper limbs (grade 4), severe weakness in the lower limbs (grade 3), marked increase in the deep tendon reflexes, impaired joint position and vibration sensation, sensory ataxia, positive bilateral Babinski sign, and positive Romberg and Lhermitte’s signs were observed on neurological examination. Laboratory tests revealed decreased levels of serum red blood cell (RBC) (3.32 × 1012 /L, reference range: 4.30–5.80 × 1012 /L), hemoglobin (Hb) (118.4 g/L, reference range: 130–175 g/L), vitamin B12 (98.2 pmol/L, reference range: 145–637 pmol/L), and folic acid (8.38 nmol/L, reference range: 8.83–60.80 nmol/L). Serum homocysteine (Hcy) was considerably elevated (> 50 μmol/L, reference range: 5.46–16.20 μmol/L), which was indicative of functional vitamin B12 deficiency at the cellular level. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) assessment yielded normal results. The inflammatory, infectious, and immune biomarkers in CSF and serum were unremarkable. Sagittal spinal cord magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed hyperintensities involving the posterior columns from C2 to C6 on T2-weighted images , with an inverted V-sign on axial MRI . Brain and thoracic MRI findings were normal.
The patient was diagnosed with SCD of the spinal cord induced by N2O abuse. Treatment with a high dose of supplementary intramuscular vitamin B12 injections (1.5 mg per day), oral folic acid (15 mg per day), and abstinence from N2O led to a gradual improvement in the patient’s symptoms. One month later, the symptoms of weakness and paresthesia were resolved; the patient could walk unsupported with some residual gait impairment. The serum RBC, Hb, and folic acid levels improved to normal, and the serum vitamin B12 level increased to more than 1476 pmol/L (the maximum measurable value). However, the patient’s serum Hcy remained elevated (19.02 μmol/L). At this time, we observed an interesting phenomenon. The hyperintensities on T2-weighted images had extended, both horizontally and longitudinally, from C1 to T2 , resembling a “ball” on the axial images, despite the improvement in the patient’s clinical symptoms and laboratory values . Importantly, the patient had had no exposure to hormones or N2O. He was discharged with a prescription for vitamin B12 supplements. The patient’s gait had improved, and he experienced only mild paresthesia of the distal limbs during the two-month follow-up. Serum Hcy had improved to normal levels. Moreover, the abnormal signals seen on T2-weighted images had decreased compared to those on the one-month follow-up MRI, but were still more extensive than those seen on the initial MRI . It seemed that a clinical-radiological dissociation had occurred, and conventional MRI findings had consistently lagged behind the clinical and laboratory manifestations.