A 42-year-old female presented to our ophthalmology clinic with sudden-onset painless binocular decreased distance vision. She had received an intramuscular injection of a quadrivalent influenza vaccine (Influvac Tetra; Abbot Biologicals B.V., The Netherlands), approximately 10 days prior. The symptoms started setting in a few days following the vaccination, and she denied any other episodes of blurred vision prior to the recent presentation. The patientŌĆÖs symptom was not accompanied with any ocular pain or discomfort and she also did not experience any pertinent systemic symptoms such as headache, vertigo, nausea, or palpitation. The patient had no previous history of ophthalmic disorder, surgery, or trauma and she had never required corrective spectacles. Her past medical history was significant for hypothyroidism and hypertriglyceridemia, and she had been taking levothyroxine tablets (25 ╬╝g, daily), fenofibrate capsule (100 mg, daily), and fluoxetine capsule (20 mg, twice weekly) without any recent change in dosage or brand of medication.
Upon initial evaluation, her UCVA was 20/200 and 20/100 in the right and the left eye, respectively. Refraction by retinoscopy and autorefractometer revealed ŌłÆ3.00/ŌłÆ1.00 ├Ś 180 in the right and ŌłÆ3.00/ŌłÆ0.50 ├Ś 50 in the left eye, respectively. Visual acuity with correction was 20/25 in both eyes. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was 16 mm Hg and 15 mm Hg in the right and the left eye, respectively. Pupils were symmetric and equally reactive without relative afferent pupillary defect. Periorbital edema, chemosis, or conjunctival congestion were not observed . Anterior segment examination was significant for bilateral shallow anterior chambers and narrow iridocorneal angles (Van Herick grade 1), and no cells or flare was observed. Gonioscopy with Sussman gonio lens showed C(A)20 s (Spaeth grading system). Vitreous humor was clear with no sign of inflammation. Fundus examination was notable for bilateral fine chorioretinal folds radiating from the macula, confirmed by OCT , and bilateral low-lying choroidal effusion in the far periphery of the fundus in 1ŌĆō2 quadrants. Optic discs appeared normal with a cup-to-disc ratio of 0.2 in both eyes. B-scan ultrasound confirmed bilateral shallow choroidal effusion and did not demonstrate any sign of intraocular mass lesion, choroidal or scleral thickening, or T-sign . Ultrasound biomicroscopy of the anterior segment revealed bilateral ciliochoroidal effusion with anterior rotation of the ciliary bodies . Anterior chamber depth, measured by UBM from the epithelial surface, was 2.54 mm and 2.59 mm in the right and the left eyes, respectively. Respective lens thickness was 4.17 mm OD, and 4.12 mm OS.
A diagnosis of acute myopic shift due to ciliochoroidal effusion was made, which was thought to be most likely related to the influenza vaccination. The patient was prescribed 50 mg prednisolone tablets once every morning, betamethasone eye drops 4 times a day, 1% atropine, and 0.5% timolol eye drops twice daily. She returned for a follow-up visit 4 days later with uncorrected visual acuity of 20/50 in both eyes. The refractive error decreased to ŌłÆ1.25/ŌłÆ1.25 ├Ś 8, OD and ŌłÆ1.00/ŌłÆ0.75 ├Ś 17, OS. Anterior chambers were deeper, pupils were dialed, IOPs were 13 mm Hg bilaterally, and macular folds and ciliochoroidal effusions were reduced. She was instructed to continue with the eye drops and prednisolone tablets which were tapered off in 2 weeks. After 2 weeks, her uncorrected visual acuity was 20/20 in both eyes, anterior chambers were deep, angles were completely open, IOPs were 12 mm Hg bilaterally, and complete resolution of ciliochoroidal effusion and macular folds were observed. All medications were discontinued, and no sign of relapse was detected in next follow-up visits. The CARE checklist has been completed by the authors for this case report, attached as online supplementary material (for all online suppl. material, see ).