A 52-year-old Japanese male with no significant past medical history visited our clinic in 2013 for evaluation of a swelling in the left submandibular region, which had increased in size over four years. The patient had not experienced any symptomatic manifestations.
Extraoral examination revealed a 40 × 20 mm mass in his left submandibular region that was elastically hard, movable, painless, and covered with normal skin . Intraoral examination revealed an appropriate salivary flow, and therefore, the patient was not xerostomic. A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a 35 × 23 mm oval swelling in the left submandibular region associated with enlarged submental lymph nodes and superior internal jugular area, in which contrast medium was taken up homogenously . Contrast-enhanced T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated enlarged submandibular and submental lymph nodes and ipsilateral upper internal jugular vein . Additionally, in T2 weighted MRI, they structures were hypointense. Positron emission tomography (PET) revealed abnormal accumulation of fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) in the left submandibular and left upper internal jugular regions. The FDG-standardized uptake value (SUV) max values were 5.09–8.24 for the left submandibular and 2.82–3.19 for the left upper internal jugular area. No clear abnormal accumulation was noted in any area other than the neck region , and laboratory tests revealed no inflammation. Furthermore, IL-2R and LDH values were normal . Based on clinical, imaging, and laboratory findings, the patient was diagnosed with malignant lymphoma. However, the fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) of the swollen lymph node failed to show signs of malignancy. Subsequent biopsy revealed lymphatic follicles with an enlarged and hyperplastic germinal center. Histiocytes, lymphocytes, and plasma cells were scattered between the follicles. Histopathological specimens also revealed a normal shape of the lymphocytic nucleus as well a normal nucleus-cytoplasmic ratio . The specimens were immunoreactive against both CD3 and CD20 antibodies , and were negative for the neoplastic lesion. Although reactive follicular hyperplasia is associated with pathological conditions, such as rheumatic disorders, systemic lupus erythematosus and bacterial lymphadenitis were included as differential diagnoses, as rheumatoid factor (RF), anti-DNA antibody, and C-reactive protein (CRP) values were all within the normal range . However, increased serum IgG4 indicated the possibility of IgG4-related lymphadenopathy. Immunohistochemical staining against IgG and IgG4 revealed a ratio of IgG4/IgG-positive plasma cells of approximately 50 % and > 10 IgG4 cells per high power field, noted in the germinal center . These findings fulfilled the diagnostic criteria issued in 2011 for IgG4-related disease , although the serum level of IL-6 was 20-fold higher than the normal value.
Based on the final diagnosis of IgG4-related cervical lymphadenopathy (type II reactive follicular hyperplasia type), the patient was referred to the Department of Internal Medicine and Connective Tissue Disorders, Kurume University School of Medicine, two months after his initial visit. The patient has been under regular follow-up, and no disease progress or systemic involvement has been noted.