A previously well 65-year-old man with no past medical or smoking history of note presented to our ED with slurring of speech and right-sided weakness that started 1 h prior. Symptoms were noted by the paramedics to have resolved completely enroute in the ambulance but recurred on reaching the ED. On arrival, his blood pressure was 156/127 mmHg and heart rate 106 beats/minute. Neurological examination revealed dysarthria, right cranial nerve VII upper motor neuron palsy, and right upper and lower limb weakness, constituting a National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score of 9. Deficits resolved completely 10 min into consultation only to recur again 5 min later. Cardiac monitoring revealed atrial fibrillation with a rapid ventricular rhythm and varying heart rate from 90 to 144 beats/minute. Cardiorespiratory examination was unremarkable. Brain computed tomography angiogram (CTA) depicted an old lacunar infarct in the left striatocapsular region and mild atherosclerotic disease of the cervical and intracranial major arteries with no proximal large vessel occlusion . The Alberta Stroke Program Early CT Score (ASPECTS) was 10. The patient had a total of five episodes of transient deficits over the same areas within a span of 2 h from his symptom-discovery time but was again symptom-free at the conclusion of the CTA. He was started on intravenous hydration and loaded aspirin 300 mg, clopidogrel 300 mg, and atorvastatin 80 mg. The patient continued to develop recurrences of symptoms post-CTA another five times with each episode lasting less than 10 min. A brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) performed 3 h from initial symptom onset revealed a small acute non-haemorrhagic infarct in the left corona radiata periventricular region with no large vessel occlusion or severe stenosis . The patient was admitted to the Neurology High Dependency Unit for close monitoring with an NIHSS score of 0.
During the patient’s hospitalisation, he was maintained on aggressive intravenous hydration and continued to be free from neurological deficits. Serum total cholesterol and low-density lipoprotein were elevated at 7.3 mmol/L and 5.6 mmol/L respectively. Glycosylated haemoglobin was normal. Blood coagulation studies showed normal prothrombin time, activated partial thromboplastin time, and international normalised ratio. Telemetry monitoring confirmed new-onset atrial fibrillation. Extended electrolytes, free thyroxine, and troponin were unremarkable. Blood pressure remained less than 130/80 mmHg and heart rate less than 90 beats/minute without pharmacological therapy. Dual anti-platelet agents were ceased and replaced with apixaban 5 mg twice a day on day 3 of admission. The patient was discharged without residual deficit on day 5 of admission with apixaban 5 mg twice a day and high dose atorvastatin for 2 weeks followed by 40 mg every morning.