The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the University of Perugia, and a written informed consent was obtained by patient.
A 53-year-old woman was affected by colorectal cancer that was diagnosed through positive fecal occult blood test and colonoscopy with biopsy. The latter showed a polypoid mass of 15 mm with bleeding surface located in the recto-sigmoid junction . Histological examination showed a neuroendocrine neoplasm with positive immunohistochemical staining for synaptophysin, chromogranin (Cg), CD56, cytokeratin AE1/AE3, and Ki67-labelling index of 4–5%. No comorbidity was reported. Physical examination was negative for colorectal or renal disease. Biochemical test, including renal and liver function, and urine analysis were normal too. Staging chest and abdominal CT scan did not show any other lesions except a solid 5 cm mass in the left kidney. The mass appeared exophytic in the upper pole and showed heterogeneous enhancing: the imaging features were consistent with clear RCC . The patient underwent simultaneous robot-assisted rectal resection and renal enucleation using robot da Vinci® Xi (Intuitive Surgical Inc). Under general anesthesia, the patient was first placed in the right lateral decubitus position. A paraumbilical camera port was inserted. Three robotic ports were inserted at the left hypochondriac region along the hemiclavicular line, in the left iliac fossa about 2 cm medially to antero superior iliac spine (ASIS), and in the right iliac fossa about 2 cm medially to ASIS. AirSeal System® trocar was placed in hypogastric region . Renal enucleation was performed without renal ischemia, after isolating the renal artery anyway according our previously published technique: renal artery was isolated, and a vessel loop was passed twice around it and pulled out extracorporeally parallel to the assistant trocar. On demand, the vessel loop could be tightened to obtain a progressive occlusion of the arterial lumen and, consequently, a renal hypoperfusion . For this procedure, we placed the monopolar scissor in the left ASIS trocar, the bipolar forceps in the left hypochondriac region trocar, and the prograsp in the right ASIS trocar used for medialization of the left colon. For low anterior rectal resection, the patient was placed in lithotomy position, and we placed the monopolar scissor in the right ASIS trocar, bipolar forceps in the left ASIS trocar, and prograsp in the left hypochondriac region trocar. The rectal resection was carried out up to lower rectal segment through total meso-rectal excision and nerve sparing technique. The end-to-end anastomosis was carried out according to Knight Griffen technique, and a loop ileostomy was performed in site of the trocar in the right iliac fossa . The specimens were retrieved in an endo-bag through a transverse colpotomy that was closed by robotic intracorporeal suture.