A 32-year-old Iranian male was referred to our hospital owing to psychotic symptoms including delusional jealousy, delusion of reference, and auditory hallucinations. The psychotic symptoms had become apparent about 1 week before his referral, when his family noticed that he sometimes talked to himself and became very hostile toward them. He also suffered from insomnia and irritability and had outbursts of aggressive behavior. There were no symptoms consistent with mania or hypomania, and he did not have any previous episodes of psychotic or mood symptoms. The patient did not report a history of exposure to toxic chemicals, head trauma, seizures, or other medical conditions that could cause psychosis. He was recently diagnosed with mild erectile dysfunction (International Index of Erectile Function score 20) and had been prescribed sildenafil 50 mg as a single dose, no more than once a day, 1 hour before sexual intercourse over the past 2 weeks. He did not use any other medications while using sildenafil. He smoked tobacco for the past 4 years and did not have a history of alcohol or illicit drug abuse. There was no family history of psychiatric disorders. Birth and early development were apparently within normal limits. School achievements were average, and since graduation from high school, the patient has worked in a factory. His family described him as an extroverted, hardworking, and responsible person. On mental status examination, he was alert and oriented to place, time, and person. His physical examination, including a thorough neurological and genitourinary assessment, was unremarkable. All routine blood tests, including complete blood count (CBC), fasting blood glucose, hemoglobin A1c, lipid profile, electrolytes, renal and liver function tests, thyroid function tests, vitamin B12, folic acid, and vitamin D levels, and an electrocardiogram were within normal limits. Tests for syphilis, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and hepatitis B and C as well as toxicology screening were negative .
Magnetic resonance imaging was performed to rule out space-occupying lesions or vascular infarcts. Given his state, the patient was admitted to the psychiatric ward. Sildenafil was discontinued, and oral form of risperidone was prescribed at 4 mg/day. Surprisingly, all of the psychotic symptoms remitted only 1 week after the initiation of risperidone, and subsequently he was discharged after 10 days of hospitalization. On the basis of the clinical presentation, investigations, and the treatment outcome, a provisional diagnosis of sildenafil-induced psychotic disorder according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5) criteria was considered. One month after hospital discharge, the patient reported no psychiatric symptoms and risperidone was tapered off in 2 weeks. Approximately 4 months later, he was brought to clinic by his family because of recurrence of similar psychotic symptoms that occurred after taking sildenafil only once. Risperidone was started again and gradually titrated up to 4 mg/day. The patient recovered completely in 2 weeks. Follow-up visits during the next 12 months revealed no recurrence of the symptoms.