An 18-month-old white baby girl who is tracheostomy and ventilator dependent underwent cartilage graft tracheoplasty and developed the postoperative complication of bilateral chylothorax. Her past medical history is complex and includes choanal atresia, atrioventricular septal defect, complete heart block, congestive heart failure, failure to thrive, tracheobronchomalacia, developmental delay, and hypothyroidism. Her past surgical history is significant for bilateral choanal atresia repair, patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) ligation at age 1 month, partial atrial septal defect/ventricular septal defect (ASD/VSD) closure at age 2 months, subsequent cardiac pacemaker implantation at age 2 months complicated by implant infection requiring explantation at age 3 months. Due to heart failure and tracheobronchomalacia, she underwent tracheostomy at age 3 months with an intraoperative note of continuity of the cervical field with the mediastinal surgical fields. Her pacemaker was replaced at age 4 months and was complicated by left chylothorax, which resolved with chest tube drainage and NPO diet with parenteral nutrition. Other significant procedures include gastrojejunostomy (GJ) tube placement at age 5 months complicated by small bowel perforation requiring open repair.
She was first discharged home after birth at age 9 months with a cuffed tracheostomy tube, ventilator dependent, and gastrostomy tube dependent. During out-patient follow-up, evaluation of her tracheostomy site revealed significant inferior tracheostoma breakdown with difficulty maintaining a seal for adequate airway pressures as well as imminent innominate artery exposure. She was also noted to have significant hearing loss due to chronic otitis media with effusion. Pediatric surgery separately evaluated her gastrostomy tube with leakage noted around the site. Therefore tracheoplasty, bilateral myringotomy and tympanostomy tube insertion, and gastrostomy tube revision were scheduled.
She underwent combined procedures with otolaryngology and pediatric surgery under a single anesthetic. Bilateral myringotomy and tympanostomy, direct laryngoscopy, bronchoscopy, and anterior cartilage graft tracheoplasty were performed by otolaryngology. Pediatric surgery performed gastrocutaneous fistula closure and Broviac catheter placement. During the skin incision for tracheoplasty, an obvious chyle leak was encountered just deep to the skin and 2mm left of the tracheostoma. This was controlled using a figure-of-eight stitch with a 2–0 silk suture. No further chyle leak was detected during the remainder of the case.
Postoperatively she was admitted to the pediatric ICU. On the third postoperative day, she developed worsening hypoxemia and respiratory distress. The ventilator was escalated from home settings of peak inspiratory pressure (PIP) 24cmH2O, positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) 8cmH2O, and fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) 21% to PIP 30cmH2O, PEEP 12cmH2O, and FiO2 45%. A chest X-ray revealed a large right pleural effusion and a smaller left pleural effusion . Given clinical decompensation, the decision was made to drain the effusions. An 8.5 French pigtail drain was inserted in the right pleural space and thoracentesis was performed on the left pleural effusion. A total of 130mL of milky fluid was drained from the right pleural space prior to placement of a chest tube drainage system. A total of 30mL of milky fluid was drained from the left. The left effusion accumulated over the next 24 hours prompting placement of a chest tube on postoperative day 4. Pleural fluid laboratory studies were sent and were diagnostic for a chylous effusion . Other diagnostic considerations included hemothorax, simple effusion secondary to heart failure, or empyema secondary to pneumonia.
The patient proceeded to have significant chest tube output particularly from the right side (>130mL/kg/day). Output was significant enough to cause hemodynamic instability. Four 10ml/kg fluid boluses with either 0.9% normal saline or 5% albumin were administered for hypotension during the first 24 hours post-chest tube placement. Due to continued significant chest tube drainage and subsequent fluid refractory hypotension, vasoactive support was provided with an epinephrine infusion for 3 days. In order to prevent further hemodynamic instability from chest tube losses, ml per ml volume replacement of chest tube output with 5% albumin was started.
She met our institution’s criteria for high-output chylothorax (>20mL/kg/day), and treatment was initiated according to protocol . An NPO diet with parenteral nutrition and octreotide infusion (3mcg/kg/hour) were ordered for 8 days. Following this, the left chylothorax resolved but right chylous output remained high. Therefore, we elected to proceed with thoracic duct ligation. Ligation was performed via right thoracotomy on postoperative day 12. Octreotide was discontinued postoperatively while NPO status with parenteral nutrition was continued for 3 more days. An enteral diet was introduced 5 days post-procedure with no further chyle leak. All chest tubes were subsequently removed and she was discharged home 10 days after thoracic duct ligation. She continued on a medium-chain fatty acid diet for 6 weeks following thoracic duct ligation. She has had no further complications from her chylothorax.