A 67-year-old male daily construction labourer by profession, presented to surgical outpatient department with a subcutaneous nodule in the medial aspect of the right knee joint for 10 years. He had no significant history of any trauma. On examination the nodule was in a subcutaneous location with firm consistency, slightly tender, restricted mobility, not fixed to underlying structures and was measuring 4x3cm .
Laboratory investigations revealed random blood sugar - 452 mg/dL, HbA1c value was 13% (estimated average glucose / eAG – 326 mg/dL) (Normal HbA1c < 5.7%). His hemogram, liver function and renal function tests was within normal limits. Rapid lateral flow assay tests for Human immunodeficiency virus, Hepatitis B, and Hepatitis C were negative. Plain X-ray of knee joint revealed no bony lesion . Ultrasonography of medial aspect of right knee showed two well defined oval anechoic thick-walled lesions measuring 4.5 × 2.6 cm and 4.0 × 2.4 cm in the subcutaneous plane, below knee joint in anteromedial aspect. Colour Doppler shows no significant vascular uptake . A clinical suspicion of lipoma was made and sent for FNAC.
FNAC with Rapid On-Site Evaluation (ROSE) was done using toluidine blue using a 22-gauge needle and 5 ml syringe. Aspirate of 2 ml pus-like material. ROSE of slide revealed the presence of negatively stained acute angle branched hyphae along with inflammatory background . The slides were sent for routine stains.
Cytosmears showed plenty of inflammatory cells comprising of neutrophils, lymphocytes, histocytes, nuclear debris, and eosinophilic bodies / Splendore-Hoeppli phenomenon along with numerous fungal septate hyphae with acute angle branching . The fungal hyphae were positive for Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) stain . Gram stain and Ziehl-Neelsen stain were negative. Cell block sample also revealed similar fungal branching hyphae with PAS positivity .
A diagnosis of inflammatory lesion possibly due to fungal aetiology was given on FNAC & Cell block. The aspirated sample was sent for fungal culture. The fungal culture was done only on Sabouraud’s dextrose agar (SDA) slant and incubated at 37 °C / 25 °C. Growth on tube was noted on 3rd week of incubation. SDA slant showed surface greyish beige to black color and developed clusters of aerial hyphae .
Microscopic findings on Lactophenol cotton blue (LPCB) mount showed young hyphae with brownish appearance and side by side to form thick bundles (fascicles), cylindrical phialides along the hyphae and oblong conidia were present gathering in clusters at end of phialide . Hence a diagnosis of Phaeoacremonium parasiticum was given.
The patient was advised oral itraconazole 100 mg BD for 1 month and currently under follow up with subsidence of the lesion.