A 4-year-old girl was admitted in the pediatrics department for fever and bilateral knee joint pain for 3 days. Suspecting septic arthritis, empirical antibiotics were started. The child was born pre-term and weighed 1600 g with a context of acute fetal distress. She was diagnosed with cerebral palsy, psyco-developmental delay, and epileptogenic disorder put under valproic acid. She was non ambulant with severe spastic paraplegia and incontinence of stool and urine.
Upon physical examination, the patient’s weight was less than the third percentile; she was also pale and has marked anxiety to strangers. She was febrile (38.8°C), had a pulse of 124, blood pressure 100/64 mm Hg, and respiratory rate of 22. Oral examination shows poor dental hygiene but the skin was normal. One day after admission, she developed bilateral knee bruising and swelling with limited active motion range, pain on palpation of distal femur metaphysis. Near complete passive range of motion was noted. There were no abnormal findings on the rest of the musculoskeletal examination.
The biological samples showed the following results: total leukocyte count: 9220, platelets count 440000/μL, hemoglobin: 5 g/dL (microcytic hypochromic anemia), blood sedimentation rate >140 mm/h and a C-reactive protein of 90 mg/dL. A low level of iron was seen with a rate of 7 micro-mole/l (11 to 27 micromole/l). Alkaline phosphatase, calcium, and phosphate levels were normal.
Radiograph of the knee shows signs of osteopenia, an irregular thickened white line at the upper tibial metaphysis, a zone of rarefaction under the same metaphysis, and a periosteal reaction. Furthermore, it showed dislocation of bilateral distal femoral epiphyses. Dense, linear calcification in the distal metaphysis “white line of Frankel” and periosteal separation was noticed .
Ultrasound of both knees showed infiltration and denseness of the soft tissues with detachment of the periosteum. Knee magnetic resonance imaging was performed and interpreted as osteomyelitis of the left distal femur with subperiosteal abscess associated with an articular effusion of the knee joint.
Orthopedic surgeon was consulted for the concern of osteomyelitis. The orthopedic surgeon with the above-mentioned clinical picture mentioned the following differentials in decreasing order of importance -Trivial trauma, Septic arthritis, osteomyelitis. A surgery was quickly considered (because the clinical picture of sepsis was so overwhelming) and the aspiration of the collection by a needle bringing back a gelatinous red fluid After the surgical approach, it was clear that the collection interpreted as abscess was just a subperiosteal hematoma without any sign of infection. Intravenous Oxacillin and Gentamicin were started. Bacterial cultures from the needle aspirate were negative and antibiotics were stopped. The bone biopsy showed signs suggestive of a recent subperiosteal bleeding and abnormality of the collagen matrix, which was suggestive of scurvy.
In the absence of the technical board, the level of Vitamin C was not available. More detailed questioning was made to get an idea about the dietary habits. It showed that the child was fed by his mother only with milk products. The child was placed under an oral supplementation of Vitamin C at a dose of 500 mg per day. His mother was informed about dietary modification. 3 weeks after vitamin C therapy, the child’s pain and the general condition improved.