A 57-year-old woman from Torreon Coahuila was referred in November 2015 for sudden increase in volume of the right fronto-orbital region. The patient reported a contusion in the right frontal region 1 month before and was underwent treatment with metronidazole but not improvement was observed [-].
Relevant antecedents included cardiothoracic surgery at 4 years old to treat an unspecified cyanotic heart condition and in 1992 plastic surgery established the diagnosis of “craniofacial dysostosis” and a fronto-orbital advancement, including osteotomies and bone cranial remodeling with methyl methacrylate.
In January 2016, a magnetic resonance imaging study reported heterogeneous enhancement mass in the bilateral fronto-orbital region [-] Pre-surgical MRI and [-] post-surgical CT scan, control 6 months after surgery, causing significant craniofacial deformation a malignant neoplastic process was suspected. Bone meningioma (an atypical location) , bone metastasis, and monostotic fibrous neoplasm were considered into the differential diagnoses. During screening for a primary tumor, a thoracic abdominal CT scan was performed. In May 2016, a highly vascularized hyperostotic lesion was partially resected. This procedure was aborted as consequence of an important intraoperative hemorrhage. Pathology reported fibroconnective tissue with hemorrhage, fibrin, and unspecified polymorphonuclear inflammatory infiltrate. As the craniofacial bone deformity worsened with bilateral ocular extension, a second partial resection was performed in September 2016. Histopathological findings included a multifocal foreign body-type granulomatous lesion and granulation tissue .
The culture was reported negative, but tissue staining with hematoxylin and eosin revealed bacilli compatible with A.israelii was isolated in the tumor tissue by histopathological study by staining for hematoxylin and eosin . Amoxicillin-clavulanic acid 3 times a day was initially indicated and followed by intramuscular benzathine penicillin’s every 2 weeks for 6 months. At the end of the treatment, infectious remission had been achieved. In 2017, the supraorbital methyl methacrylate bar was surgically removed [ and ]. No recurrence of the deformity was identified in the follow-up visits. In February 2020, 99mTc three-phase bone SPECT/CT scan and 99mTc-UBI 29-41 bone SPECT/CT scan was performed, and a negative infection result was reported [ and ].