A 54-year old female was hospitalized for intermittent and recurrent mild oral mucosal hemorrhage without other bleeding symptoms for almost one month.
Initially, the patient presented no weakness, oliguria, edema, bone pain, etc. Drug abuse, and contact with rodenticide and other toxic agents was denied. Coagulation function was assessed two weeks before admission during her first visit to the Hematology Outpatient Department. Prothrombin time (PT) and activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) were significantly prolonged, and were 20.7 s and 41 s, respectively. Fibrinogen was 1.79 g/L and thrombin time was normal. D dimer and fibrin degradation products were higher than the normal level, and were 6.2 mg/L and 2.29 mg/L, respectively. Considering the prolongation of both PT and APTT, vitamin K1 was administered at 40 to 80 mg/d. Bleeding seemed to initially improve slightly but recurred and became more obvious and frequent. PT and APTT were still longer than normal. The patient also had a cough and expectoration. She was admitted for further investigation and diagnosis.
Past history indicated that the patient was a hepatitis B virus carrier. Two months before admission, she underwent implantation of a permanent pacemaker due to sick sinus syndrome in another hospital. Before and after the operation, routine blood tests and laboratory examinations were normal, and PT was 15.7 s. The patient denied taking any other drugs except atorvastatin calcium after discharge.
The patient denied having personal and family history.
On admission, several oral blood blisters and spontaneous gingival bleeding were noted. No petechiae, ecchymoses or purpura were observed on the skin. Some wet rales were heard on both sides of the lungs. The heart boundary was enlarged. No splenomegaly, hepatomegaly or masses were found in the abdomen.
Laboratory examinations showed that the level of factor Ⅱ, factor Ⅷ and factor Ⅸ were normal, but factor Χ level was 9.8%. PT delay could be corrected once fresh frozen plasma was used. Routine blood tests revealed normal white blood cell (WBC) count, hemoglobin of 10.7 g/L and platelets of 90 × 109/L. Brain natriuretic peptide was 5966 ng/L (normal range < 125 ng/L). Immunoglobulin (Ig)A level was 17.6 g/L, significantly higher than normal (range 1.0-4.2 g/L), while IgG, IgE, and IgM were lower than the normal level. β2 microglobulin was 4.836 mg/L (normal range 0.9-2.0 mg/L). Blood immunofixation electrophoresis verified the existence of monoclonal immunoglobulin, which was IgA-κ type. An M protein peak was shown by serum protein electrophoresis. M protein was 11.26 g/L. Liver function indicated a mild to moderate increase in liver enzymes, including alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, gamma-glutamyl transferase and alkaline phosphatase. Renal function tests showed that creatinine was 67 μmol/L, uric acid was 366.5 μmol/L, and the glomerular filtration rate was 45.9 mL/min.
A low dose computed tomography (CT) scan of the whole body did not find any obvious osteolytic lesions. A CT scan and color Doppler ultrasound both indicated enlargement of the heart, especially both atria. Moderate tricuspid regurgitation, mild mitral regurgitation, widened pulmonary artery diameter, mild pulmonary hypertension, a slightly thicker ventricular septum, and mild pericardial effusion were also noted.
26.11% of plasma cells were detected in bone marrow by flow cytometry, expressing CD38, CD138, CD56 and intracellular immunoglobulin Kappa light chain. The expression of CD38 and CD138 indicated that the abnormal cells were originated from plasma cells. Restricted expression of intracellular immunoglobulin Kappa light chain suggested they were clonal plasma cells. CD56 expression further proved that they were abnormal and neoplastic plasma cells. Bone marrow biopsy also proved the existence of abnormal plasma cells, but Congo red stain was negative.