A 63-year-old male patient with history of hypertension, hyperthyroidism and radioactive iodine exposure, presented to the Emergency Department at JUH in September 2022 as a case of right buccal swelling associated with pain and limitation of mouth opening with two-day duration. Orthopantomograph (OPG) and computed tomography (CT) were ordered and showed three cyst-like lesions. In addition, the CT scan also showed adjacent inflammatory changes and the diagnosis was right buccal space infection related to an infected cystic lesion. The patient was vitally stable and discharged home on oral antibiotics and analgesia. One week later, a cone beam computed tomography (CBCT) were taken to further evaluate the three lesions: the larger one was in the right side and showed unilocular radiolucency measuring 6 × 1 × 2.5 cm, and was associated with the impacted right third molar; the left side contained two lesions, one above the ID canal measuring 1.5 × 0.7 × 1 cm and was associated with the lower left wisdom tooth, and the other one was below the ID canal measuring 1.5 × 0.5 × 1.6 cm and diagnosed as Stafne's bone cyst (SBC), as it was asymptomatic and appeared to housing an accessory part of the submandibular gland .
The multiple cyst-like lesions on the jaw raised the suspicion of GGS, so that a thorough clinical and radiological examination done; in addition to the CT scan and the CBCT, a chest X-ray reported no bifid ribs or calcified falx cerebri. However, multiple facial dermal calcinoses were noticed on the CT scan. In addition, some clinical features were noticed like palmer and planter pits (a, b), and multiple benign dermal cysts, with no features or history of basal cell carcinoma (BCC). Therefore, GGS was then considered and OKC was the provisional diagnosis for the lesions located above the ID canals, which were planned for management under general anesthesia (GA). Perioperatively, aspiration of both cysts showed a straw colored fluid, the left cyst underwent enucleation and extraction of the involved third molar, and the right one underwent incisional biopsy and extraction of the involved third molar tooth and marsupialization by suturing the cystic lining to the oral mucosa. A decompression tube was then inserted and fixed to the adjacent molar tooth. Unexpectingly, the histopathological examination of the specimens of both lesions showed thick lining and revealed multiple fragments of fibrous connective tissue lined by hyperplastic none-keratinized squamous epithelium with focal neutrophilic infiltration. The cyst wall was infiltrated by mixed inflammatory cells composed of neutrophils, lymphocytes and plasma cells, with rare microcalcifications seen in the left cyst. Occasional mucous cells were seen in the lining epithelium of the left cyst. No parakeratosis or keratin flakes were found in both cysts . Therefore, a definitive diagnosis of DC was confirmed.
Eleven months later, the OPG and CBCT showed good bony filling of the lesions with small remaining radiolucency measuring 4.5 × 0.7 × 1.1 cm in the marsupialized lesion, which was then enucleated and the histopathology report again confirmed the diagnosis of DC .