An 80 years old female with previous cervical spine tuberculosis infection, and underwent C5-C6 anterior spinal fusion in 1994, presented with severe cervical kyphosis. She also had comorbidities of dermatomyositis on azathioprine for more than 20 years. She had severe neck pain, and easy fatigue due to difficulties in maintaining a horizontal gaze. She did not have any complaints of hand clumsiness, paresthesia or radicular pain, and had intact hand function. However, examination identified bilateral hand weakness with motor power of 4/5, positive reverse supinator jerks and Hoffman’s sign. Cervical spine x-ray revealed severe kyphotic deformity of 64° from C2-C6 with apex of the deformity at C5. There was a fused C4-C6 with osteoporotic bone. The head was also tilted to the left .
A two-stage procedure involving halo-gravity traction followed by combined anterior and posterior instrumented fusion and multiple posterior column osteotomies was planned for her deformity correction. Since she weighed 110 pounds, maximum traction weight of 45 pounds was planned. Five pounds of traction was added after halo insertion followed by daily gradual increments of two pounds. The patient tolerated traction with no pin loosening nor cranial nerve palsies. At 14 pounds of traction weight, the patient complained of sudden neck pain and a loud cracking sound. X–ray taken immediately with CT scan . A fracture through the previously fused C4 vertebral body was found. There was no neurological compromise but the neck posture markedly improved. A reduction in kyphotic deformity was observed with good horizontal gaze. The kyphotic angle was measured to be 11° from C2-C6. No further traction was applied and she then underwent a combined anterior and posterior in-situ fusion without any osteotomies due to the satisfactory cervical alignment. An anterior cage was placed at C4-C5 with posterior iliac crest autograft. Posterior instrumented fusion was performed from occiput to T3 using an occiput plate with lateral mass screws from C3-C6 and pedicle screws from T1-T3 . The patient was well perioperatively and used a cervical collar for 2 weeks. She was then transferred to a rehabilitation centre on postoperative day 9 and discharged 2 weeks after surgery. At 3-years follow-up, she was symptom-free with solid fusion and maintenance of kyphotic correction and head tilt .