We describe a case report of a 40-year-old man who presented to the ED of a level-one-trauma center in 2016. He first was assigned to the neurological area on the base of suffering from several neurological symptoms. The patient was a normal weighting young man with a reduced general condition. The symptoms were present since two days. He had no additional chronic diseases except for intravenous drug use of heroin about ten years. The last use of heroin in his left groin was about ten days ago. The first examination showed a patient with normal conscious level. He felt “not well” and in the morning of the day he presented at the hospital he also noticed a dry mouth with a numb tongue.
He had a fever about 38,7 °C and suffered from several neurological symptoms, especially from cranial nerve dysfunction like ptosis, dysarthria and dysphagia. He had no paresis or paraesthesia in the upper or lower extremity and the Babinski sign was negative. Furthermore he had a normal blood pressure, no dyspnea or meningism. The clinical examination showed a typical abscess formation from about 10 × 10 cm in the left groin region and a tenderness of palpation of the inguinal lymph node. The first time the patient noticed this formation was ten days ago and he remarked that it has grown and is more painful in the last days.
There were a few differential diagnoses like Myasthenia gravis, including Fishers-disease, Lambert-Eaton syndrome, encephalitis and wound botulism. That’s why we made a CT-scan of the cerebrum and a cerebrospinal fluid examination first. Both of them were without any pathological results. Especially the liquor showed normal high of leukocyte, erythrocyte, protein, lactate and glucose. The examination of the blood serum showed a high CRP (C-reactive-protein) of 10,8 mg/dl but normal leucocytes of 10,8 /nl. All other blood tests were inconspicuous; except the toxic screen for heroin, methadone and paracetamol, which were all positive.
The following CT-scan of the pelvic region showed a typical abscess formation in the subcutaneous and also in the adductor muscular region along with typical inguinal and paraaortal lymphadenopathy. An immediate operation with incision, abscess debridement and insertion of a drainage in general anesthesia was performed.
After the operation we took surveillance on the intensive care unit for one day. The patient showed no further dyspnea, normal blood gas results and no general complications. Complementary we gave a high dose of intravenous Penicillin G (5 M four times a day) for in total nine days. Additionally we gave 2 times trivalent Botulinum antitoxin, which made no complications like allergic reaction or other. The intraoperative taken sample gave the evidence of Clostridium botulinum Serotype B in the culture and it also showed up in the patient’s serum. It was sensitive for metronidazole (minimal inhibitory concentration 4 μg/ml) and penicillin (minimal inhibitory concentration 0,06 μg/ml).
In the following days the cranial nerve dysfunction decreased and the patient left the hospital nine days after admission.
A second presentation, 14 days after the patient’s discharge of the hospital, showed a complete regression from the neurological symptoms and no wound healing problems.