A 76-year-old male patient with a medical history of hypertension but no eye surgery reported distorted vision in the left eye. Best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) at his initial examination was 1.2 (with +1.75 diopter (dpt), cylinder (cyl) -1.25 dpt Ax 110°) in his right eye and 0.6 (with +2.75 dpt, cyl. -1.50 dpt Ax 90°) in his left eye. Using the IOLMaster 500 (Carl Zeiss Meditec AG, Dublin, CA, USA), his axial lengths were determined to be 23.3 and 23.1 mm in his right and left eyes, respectively. Except for mild senile cataracts in the anterior segments and media of both of his eyes, there were no abnormalities found. Intraocular pressures were 13 mmHg on the right and 11 mmHg on the left. Fundus examination showed ERM in the left eye, in addition to bilateral AS. Although spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (OCT; Cirrus HD-OCT, Carl Zeiss Meditec AG) using the high-definition 5-line raster scan protocol (horizontal scan of 6 mm) revealed ERM, CNV was not observed in the macula of his left eye . The patient subsequently underwent 23-gauge three-port pars plana vitrectomy with removal of ERM combined with cataract surgery at The Jikei University, Daisan Hospital. Indocyanine green dye was used to visualize the internal limiting membrane (ILM). The ILM in addition to the ERM were successfully peeled and removed . No retinal hemorrhage was noted during the vitreous surgery , and his left BCVA subsequently improved to 0.8.
Seven weeks after the vitrectomy surgery, an elevated lesion with retinal hemorrhage due to probable CNV was found between the fovea and the optic disc in his left eye , although he had no history of any ocular trauma after the surgery. One week later, his left BCVA decreased to 0.15 and the retinal hemorrhage expanded. Although posterior sub-Tenon injection of triamcinolone acetonide was performed, no visual improvement was seen.
At 12 weeks after the vitrectomy surgery at The Jikei University Hospital, his BCVA was 0.08 in his left eye. Fundus examination revealed a radiating dark brownish line from the optic disc head in his right and left eyes, and there was an elevated subretinal lesion with retinal hemorrhage in his left macula . Although OCT showed no abnormal findings in his right eye , Gass type 2 CNV with macular edema was observed in his left eye . Fluorescein angiography (FA) revealed well-defined (classic) CNV from the early to late phases in the left macula. Using indocyanine green angiography (ICGA), we were able to visualize the CNV from the early to late phases .
Over the next 6 months, a total of 5-time intravitreal injections of the anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) drug, bevacizumab (Avastin, Genentech, San Francisco, CA, USA), were given. His left BCVA remained at 0.1. Fundus examination demonstrated that there was no regression of the CNV , as was confirmed by OCT . The FA images indicated there was a foveal lesion with evidence of classic CNV in the early phase and an extended high fluorescent lesion in the late phase .
Subsequently, we performed standard-fluence photodynamic therapy (PDT: laser fluence set at 50 J/cm2) with full-dose verteporfin (Visudyne; Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland) in combination with an intravitreal ranibizumab (Lucentis, Genentech) (IVR) injection. After this combination treatment, 3 additional IVR treatments were performed. At 4 months after the combination treatment, his BCVA improved to 0.5. There was a marked regression of the CNV size observed in both the fundus . OCT showed significant but incomplete regression of CNV, and persistence of intra-retinal cysts . The FA images revealed that leakage from the CNV noted in the early phases almost completely disappeared by the late phases .
Examination of the skin on the neck showed suggestive of PXE. A skin biopsy was performed from the lesion on the neck. The histological section of the biopsy revealed short and broken elastic fibers with dark staining of calcium deposits by Von Kossa staining in the reticular dermis , convincing a diagnosis of PXE.