A 64-year-old Japanese man became aware of a small subcutaneous nodule in his left axillary region in 2019. The nodule was progressively enlarging; therefore, the patient presented to a dermatologist in 2021. He had no notable medical history or family history of disease. He had also no history of alcohol consumption, no history of smoking, no regular medications. The findings of an incisional biopsy of the nodule confirmed the diagnosis of neuroendocrine carcinoma; therefore, he was referred to our hospital. On palpation, an irregular, hard mass with a measurement of 15 mm × 10 mm was found in the left axilla , but no other abnormalities on physical or neurological examination. Laboratory tests and vital signs also showed no abnormality. Ultrasonography revealed a 15-mm irregular mass in the axilla with enlarged lymph nodes, but the bilateral mammary glands appeared normal. Computed tomography (CT) showed an irregular mass in the left axilla with enlarged axillary lymph nodes . No evidence of distant metastasis was observed. Additionally, fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-positron emission tomography (PET)/CT revealed no significant findings other than the axillary tumor. Therefore, wide radical excision of the axillary tumor and axillary lymph node dissection were performed.
Macroscopically, the sliced surface of the formalin-fixed tissue revealed a yellow-white nodular lesion on the skin and subcutaneous adipose tissue with a measurement of 15 × 14 × 11 mm . Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining showed that the solid tumor was mainly located in the subcutaneous adipose tissue and appeared to invade the skin . The tumor consisted of dense cellular solid nests separated by fibrovascular cores. Cellular uniformity, ovoid nuclei with salt-and-pepper chromatin, and eosinophilic cytoplasm were also observed. The number of cells undergoing mitosis was nine per ten high-power fields . The Ki-67-positive cells increased, with a proliferation index was 20.8% . The tumor phenotypes were strongly positive for CAM 5.2, which is a cytokeratin (CK) marker, and synaptophysin (Syp), which is a neuroendocrine marker, indicating that the tumor was an epithelial neoplasm with neuroendocrine differentiation . The neuroendocrine component comprised more than 90% of the tumor. Additionally, the tumor was positive for estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) , suggesting that it was likely derived from the mammary gland; this was supported by GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA3)-positive staining . Additionally, the tumor was negative for human epidermal growth receptor 2 (HER2). Therefore, these findings indicated that the tumor was a BNET. Three lymph nodes were histologically metastatic; therefore, this patient was diagnosed with the equivalent of pT1N1M0 stage IIA conventional breast carcinoma.
The patient received four courses of Taxotere and cyclophosphamide (TC) chemotherapy (75 mg/m2 docetaxel and 600 mg/m2 cyclophosphamide) every 3 weeks. Endocrine therapy (20 mg/day tamoxifen) and radiotherapy of the left breast and supraclavicular lymph nodes (50 Gy/25 Fr) were started after chemotherapy. One year has passed since the surgery, and there has been no recurrence.