A 32-year-old white female patient (BMI = 24) visited our clinic with complaints of bilateral hip pain for the last 10 years. She had a history of limping since childhood and had undergone bilateral Salter osteotomy at three. She had no other medical history and did not use any medication.
On examination, she had a surgical scar on the lateral side of her left thigh. She had limitations in her right hip internal rotation and had a Trendelenburg gait. Her true lower limb length was 83 cm on the right and 84 cm on the left side, and her apparent lower limb length on the right and the left side was 87 and 90 cm, respectively. The American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) classified her as grade 1.
On a plain pelvic x-ray, there were ground glass lesions on both sides of the proximal femur region . She had severe joint degeneration in both hips. The right and left hip acetabular index were 42.3 and 48.9, respectively. The lateral center edge angle was measured at 6° on the right and 15° on the left side. According to the CT scan, there were lytic lesions in the proximal femur on both sides, but there was no evidence of a pathologic fracture . She had a type 2 Paprosky acetabular bone loss on the right side and a type 1 Paprosky acetabular bone defect on the left side . The lesions in the proximal femur were characterized by a high signal on T1 and a low signal on T2 on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) . On bone scan imaging, mildly increased uptake was observed in the trochanteric and subtrochanteric regions of her right femur. No other abnormal uptake was detected .
After preoperative planning for implant size and radiological factors , simultaneous bilateral THA surgery was scheduled for her . In the operating room, the Smith-Peterson approach was selected. After a thorough curettage of the proximal femoral lesion, bone allograft was used. Finally, cementless THA was performed on both sides using a long-stem femoral component. Although the preoperative assessment indicated that this case was not a typical instance of FD, during the operation, the presence of FD was suspected. To confirm our suspicions, we sent a pathology sample to the laboratory for analysis. Results from the laboratory confirmed that the patient was indeed suffering from FD.
After the procedure, she experienced an uneventful recovery, and her pain subsided significantly on both sides. The pathological evaluation demonstrated fibrodysplasia by an expert musculoskeletal pathologist . After a 12-month follow-up, the patient had acceptable radiological and functional results . She reported a Harris Hip Score (HHS) of 26 preoperatively, improving to 81 a year after the arthroplasty.