We report a case of an 80-year-old woman undergoing a repeat pulmonary vein isolation for persistent atrial fibrillation with an implanted AFR. The AFR was implanted 1 year prior to the procedure for heart failure with preserved ejection fraction as part of the AFR-PRELIEVE trial. The AFR-PRELIEVE trial sought to assess the effects of transcatheter AFR implantation on symptoms and surrogate parameters of heart failure in patients with reduced or preserved left ventricular ejection fraction.
Relevant pre-existing conditions were ischaemic cardiomyopathy, persistent atrial fibrillation, and history of transient ischaemic attack. The first pulmonary vein isolation took place two and a half years prior to the ablation procedure and resulted in sinus rhythms maintenance for 24 months and significant symptom improvement. Relevant medication consisted of a betablocker and oral anticoagulation with Apixaban.
The 12-lead electrocardiography at hospital admission showed atrial fibrillation with normal ventricular response at a heart rate of 85 b.p.m. A preprocedural transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) showed the AFR in an anterosuperior position in the fossa ovalis with sufficient free septal area posterior and inferior to the device , as well as a normal left ventricular ejection fraction and absence of left atrial thrombi. Oral anticoagulation was discontinued the day prior to the procedure. The ablation procedure was performed under sedation using propofol, midazolam, and fentanyl. After obtaining triple femoral venous access (TSX™ Fixed Curve Transseptal Sheath, Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, USA) through the right femoral vein and positioning of a decapolar coronary sinus catheter, a fluoroscopy-guided single transseptal puncture (TSX™ Transseptal Needle, Boston Scientific) infero-posterior to the AFR was performed . Immediately after assuring successful transseptal puncture, a weight-adjusted heparin bolus was administered, with successive boluses every 30 min based on a targeted activated clotting time of >300 s. According to our clinical routine, the ablation catheter (Thermocool Smarttouch SF, CARTO®, Biosense Webster, Irvine, CA, USA) was guided along the wire into the left atrium, omitting the need for a second transseptal puncture. Subsequently, a three-dimensional map (LASSO® 20 mm, Biosense Webster, Irvine, CA, USA) of the left atrium was created (CARTO®, Biosense Webster, Irvine, CA, USA). All pulmonary veins were shown to be isolated, therefore, ablation of complex fractionated atrial electrograms was performed. Since extended catheter ablation only transiently leads to conversion in a left atrial tachycardia, external electrical cardioversion was performed at the end of the procedure. Oral anticoagulation with Apixaban was continued on the same evening.
Fluoroscopy at the end of the procedure as well as transthoracic echocardiography performed on the next day showed an unchanged device position . Significant pericardial effusion was excluded and no other post-procedural complications were observed during the hospital stay.