In 2010, a 63-year-old woman was seen at Hospital de Denia for a BIRADS-5 category nodule in the right breast and enlarged axillary lymph nodes. Core biopsy showed an epithelial tumor formed by round, medium-sized cells with a plasmacytoid morphology in some cases and a spindle shape in others. There was also evidence of lobular cancerization . The cells had central, hyperchromatic, and occasionally displaced nuclei with fine salt-and-pepper chromatin and occasional prominent nucleoli. The cytoplasms were abundant and granular . Morphology suggested breast cancer with neuroendocrine or apocrine differentiation. The immunohistochemical study was positive for cadherin and negative for ER, PR, and HER-2. The Ki67 proliferation index was 10%. Additional studies showed strong cytoplasmic staining for neuroendocrine markers (chromogranin and synaptophysin) and negative results for apocrine markers (androgen receptor and GCDFP-15). A tentative diagnosis of invasive ductal carcinoma with neuroendocrine differentiation was made. On reviewing the patient's clinical history, it was discovered that she had undergone total thyroidectomy for MTC at another hospital (Hospital General de Alicante) in 1989. She had been treated with multiple anticancer drugs, radiation therapy, and iodine brachytherapy. Metastasis to the liver was detected in 2003. The treatment in this case was sandostatin and tamoxifen. In 2007, a computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest and abdomen showed disease progression with enlarged bilateral cervical lymph nodes. She was treated with dacarbazine (DTIC) and oral fluoropyrimidines. Further progression was observed in 2008. The patient was started on sorafenib for compassionate use, but this was changed to sunitinib (also for compassionate use) because she developed hand-foot syndrome.
With this information, we performed another immunohistochemical study, which showed positivity for thyroid transcription factor 1 , carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), and calcitonin . GATA3 stain was negative. These findings were consistent with a diagnosis of breast metastasis from MTC. We had the opportunity to re-examine the post-thyroidectomy biopsy sections from the primary MTC. These showed a nest pattern formed by cells with fine nuclear chromatin and abundant granular cytoplasm that stained positively with CEA and calcitonin.
The imaging studies performed at our hospital (CT scan of the chest and abdomen) showed multiple lesions in the liver and enlarged mediastinal and paratracheal lymph nodes displacing the trachea and esophagus, in addition to enlarged lymph nodes in the right axillary region . The scan also showed diffuse thickening of the skin on the right breast. Clinically, the patient had intermittent dysphagia for liquids and poor and deteriorating general health. She was treated with pazopanib within a compassionate use program. She died in February 2012, 23 years after the initial diagnosis.