A 67-year-old female with a medical history of poorly controlled diabetes mellitus transported to the emergency room with hematemesis and disordered consciousness. She had suffered from nausea and epigastralgia for 2 days. The patient’s general status was shock evidenced by vital signs, and she did not respond to rehydration. Laboratory findings showed blood glucose of 470 mg/dL; arterial blood gas with a pH of 7.2, PCO2 of 25.2 mmHg, HCO3 of 9.9 mEq/L, and PO2 of 169 mmHg with an anion gap of 24.3 mEq/L; and positive urinary ketones and glucose. These findings were consistent with the diagnosis of diabetic ketoacidosis. After intubation, emergency endoscopy revealed black pigmentation in the entire esophageal mucosa . A CT scan revealed the circumferential edematous thickening of the esophageal wall with slight pleural effusion . However, no obvious sign of perforation, such as free air in the mediastinum, was observed. AEN was diagnosed from these findings, and antibiotics, glycemic control, proton pump inhibitor (PPI), and plasmapheresis were started. The patient gradually stabilized and was extubated on day 5. However, she still had a fever, and the chest X-ray revealed the accumulation of pleural effusion. On day 7, esophageal perforation was suspected from the significant increase of the right pleural effusion and free air in the mediastinum on CT scan .
Emergency thoracoscopy was performed in the left semiprone position with differential lung ventilation and artificial pneumothorax. Significant pleural effusion with pus and perforation of the esophagus was observed . We resected the transmural necrotic thoracic esophagus and placed drainage tubes at the anterior side of the thoracic cavity, at the posterior mediastinum, and above the diaphragm. After transitioning the patient to the supine position, the esophagus was resected at the cardia of the stomach and the esophageal hiatus was closed. Then, an enterostomy tube was inserted from the upper jejunum, and the drainage tube was placed at the stump of the stomach. Finally, we constructed an esophagostomy with the residual cervical esophagus in the supraclavicular area. The total duration of the operation was 6 h and 33 min. On the resected specimen, mucosal necrosis was found only on the squamous epithelium, with a perforated area in the middle to lower thoracic esophagus . Pathological findings revealed necrosis of the esophageal mucosa, while no signs of inflammation or ischemia were found on the gastric mucosa of the esophagogastric junction .
The patient recovered generally well, except that the severe stricture of the residual cervical esophagus had developed a month after the operation. The stricture was endoscopically dilated repeatedly. However, the dilation was not successful enough, and 7 months after the initial operation, endoscopic balloon dilation (EBD) was required once a week . Nine months from the first operation, resection of the stricture was performed using cervical esophagectomy accompanied by tracheotomy. Reconstruction was performed with free jejunum interposition between the hypopharynx and gastric tube through the anterior thoracic route . We used the superior thyroid artery and internal jugular vein for feeding artery and drainage vein of the free jejunum . No postoperative complications occurred, and she was transferred to rehabilitation therapy to continue swallowing rehabilitation on the 37th day after the operation. Her enterostomy tube was removed 3 months after the operation; she is now eating well and doing fine after all operations and therapy.