A 58-year-old man with terminal heart failure was admitted to our cardiology department with a non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) and acute cardiac decompensation following vascular surgery.
The patient had a clinical history of acute coronary syndrome and resuscitation. After the mentioned surgical intervention, the patient developed dyspnoea and respiratory insufficiency, suggesting cardiac decompensation. The patient was normotensive without the use of catecholamines, and an electrocardiogram revealed a pre-existing left bundle branch block. In addition, there was an elevated troponin level of 2660 pg/mL (limit > 15 pg/mL), suggesting the possibility of an acute coronary syndrome. An emergency cardiac catheterization revealed high-grade stenosis in the main trunk and proximal left anterior descending (LAD) artery, along with occlusion of the right coronary artery with retrograde perfusion. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed severely impaired left ventricular function [left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) = 12%], with posterior wall akinesia and residual diffuse hypokinesia (see , ). Magnetic resonance imaging showed a transmural scar in the posterior and lateral walls, as well as a partially vital myocardium in the LAD area.
Peripheral artery disease (PAD) was also observed , including a severely calcified aorta and occlusion of the left subclavian artery, left radial artery, and both femoral arteries. The severely calcified ascending aorta prevented on-pump surgery and the option for a central anastomosis. The occluded left subclavian artery did not allow a minimally invasive direct coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) procedure, and the history of advanced chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, obstructive sleep apnoea, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and advanced nicotine dependence classified the risk of surgical revascularization to be high. Therefore, a protected HR-PCI using a mAFP device (Impella 5.0) and the right subclavian artery as a single-access route was chosen.
Under general anaesthesia and upon exposing the right subclavian artery and achieving an activated clotting time of more than 250 s via administration of unfractionated heparin, a 10 mm Vascutek vascular prosthesis was put into place. The Impella 5.0® system (Abiomed, Danvers, MA, USA) was positioned in the left ventricle under transoesophageal echocardiography control. The flow was set and maintained at 3 L/min at level p3 without complications.
After achieving a constant cardiac output of 3 L/min with the Impella, we proceeded to perform the PCI by inserting a pigtail catheter via soft Terumo 6 Fr Glidesheath Slender in the medial third of the vascular prosthesis . In a Xience Pro X (3.5 × 48 and 3.0 × 48 mm), drug-eluting stents were deployed in the left main and proximal LAD coronary (see , ). The subsequent control angiography showed a good primary result, without evidence of residual stenosis or dissection, and with free flow far into the periphery . Following this procedure, we achieved haemostasis of the vascular prosthesis using an angio-seal technique. A 6 Fr angio-seal vascular closure device (ANGIO-SEAL VIP Vascular Closure Device, Terumo International Systems, Somerset, NJ, USA) was deployed over the wire (see , ). This device creates a mechanical seal by sandwiching the vascular prosthesis between a stable bioabsorbable anchor and collagen sponge, without risk of embolism .
The patient was stabilized post-procedure and the weaning of the Impella 5.0 was initiated.
After the successful removal of the device 6 h later, the patient experienced an excellent recovery, with an improved LVEF of 30% and was discharged 10 days later.