A 65-year-old man complained of chest and back pain, with mild pain when standing and walking and obvious pain when turning over in bed. After admission, the physical examination showed that there were no abnormalities in the heart, lung or abdomen, mild kyphosis of the lumbar spine, obvious tenderness at the spinous process of the L1 vertebral body, and no neurological radiation symptoms of the lower limbs. Preoperative MRI of the thoracic and lumbar vertebrae confirmed the diagnosis of fresh compression fracture of the L1 vertebrae . Therefore, he was scheduled for L1 vertebroplasty. During the operation, the diseased vertebral body was located by C-arm fluoroscopy, and 3 ml of bone cement was injected as usual. Then, we immediately stopped the injection. C-arm examination was performed again, and it was found that there was partial leakage of bone cement at the anterior edge of the vertebral body . We carefully observed the patient's vital signs and found no obvious symptoms. Therefore, we cleaned and bandaged the wound and returned to the ward for intensive monitoring. The day after surgery, the patient suddenly developed abdominal pain. Physical examination revealed left upper abdominal deep tenderness. Urgent examination of routine blood, electrolyte and amylase showed leukocyte 11*109/L and blood amylase 122.6 Abdominal Doppler ultrasonography revealed peripancreatic effusion. Abdominal CT showed obvious peripancreatic effusion, increased pancreatic volume with fuzzy edges, and a high-density bone cement shadow in the right anterior L1 vertebra . Three-dimensional reconstruction showed that the cement was located in the diaphragm, thickened and adjacent to the inferior vena cava and abdominal aorta . Given that the patient had no abnormality in preoperative examination and no previous history of pancreatitis and that the pancreas was located behind the peritoneum and in front of lumbar vertebral body 1, we speculated that the thermal effect and corresponding inflammatory reaction of bone cement leaking through the anterior vertebral wall during surgery may directly damage pancreatic tissue and cause acute pancreatitis. The patient was immediately treated with fasting, gastrointestinal decompression, acid inhibition, fluid rehydration, etc. Four days later, the patient's condition improved significantly, and all indexes were normal. At 6 months of follow-up, abdominal CT showed that the pancreas was normal in shape, and the bone cement in the diaphragmatic crura still existed, but the thickening of the diaphragm was significantly reduced .