A 51-year-old Caucasian man was referred to his local hospital with impaired renal function and haemato-proteinuria. He was an ex-smoker and had a background of Graves’ disease and asthma.
His serum creatinine at presentation was 568 μmol/L (6.4 mg/dL), compared to 116 μmol/L (1.3 mg/dL, estimated glomerular filtration rate [eGFR] 61 ml/min/1.73m2) 1 year prior. His CRP was 100 mg/L. Point-of-care urinalysis revealed 3+ blood and 3+ protein. Ultrasound of the renal tract was unremarkable. The patient felt well and denied any current or recent symptoms of systemic illness, specifically denying visible haematuria, dyspnoea, cough, haemoptysis, arthralgia, rash, oral ulceration or peripheral oedema. He reported no change in his urine output. Physical examination was unremarkable. He was clinically euthyroid and was normotensive. He was transferred to the regional renal unit for further investigation.
Further enquiry revealed that his Graves’ disease had been diagnosed 2 years previously and he was positive for antibodies against thyroid peroxidase at that time. He was initially treated with carbimazole but this was changed to PTU soon after due to the development of mood disturbance. He stopped this treatment 3 months prior to admission without seeking medical advice, but rapidly began to feel unwell with lethargy, weight loss, fever and worsening goitre, so propylthiouracil was re-started 2 weeks prior to presentation.
His family history revealed that his grandmother died of renal failure and his mother also suffers from kidney dysfunction. The patient was unable to provide further details regarding this. There was also a family history of autoimmune thyroid disease.
A renal biopsy undertaken the day after admission demonstrated cellular crescents with little or no organisation in 50% of glomeruli, with segmental necrosis and moderate chronic damage (40% tubular atrophy), and widespread lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate, associated with tubulitis. High-dose pulses of intravenous methylprednisolone were administrated for 3 days. His propylthiouracil was stopped and low-dose carbimazole was commenced.
The day after the biopsy, autoimmune serology demonstrated positive titres for anti-GBM (94 IU/mL), p- and c-ANCA (1:80 titre), anti-PR3 (76.9 IU/mL) and anti-MPO (28.8 IU/mL). His serum creatinine was then 448 μmol/L (5.1 mg/dL). Serum protein electrophoresis showed a polyclonal hypergammaglobulinaemia and he had mildly elevated levels of immunoglobulin G (17.77 g/L) and immunoglobulin A (4.08 g/L). In view of the triple-positive immunology, histological confirmation of crescentic glomerulonephritis (GN) and severe renal dysfunction, plasma exchange was performed for eight sessions over consecutive days. At this point his anti-GBM titre had fallen to within the normal range. He also received induction therapy with intravenous cyclophosphamide and oral glucocorticoids. His creatinine improved to 399 μmol/L (4.5 mg/dL) and he was discharged from hospital, receiving two further doses of intravenous cyclophosphamide as an outpatient. Further cyclophosphamide doses were not given because he developed a lower respiratory tract infection. He did not require renal replacement therapy and did not develop evidence of pulmonary haemorrhage.
Immunofluorescence of his renal biopsy demonstrated mesangial positivity for IgA (ranging from 1+ to 3+), C3 (1+) and lambda (ranging from 0 to 2+). IgG, IgM, C1q and kappa staining were negative; specifically, there was no linear IgG staining on the glomerular basement membrane. Electron microscopy also demonstrated paramesangial electron dense deposits and subendothelial deposits associated with endocapillary hypercellularity typical of IgA nephropathy. In view of the lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate, IgG4 staining was subsequently undertaken. This demonstrated > 30 IgG4 positive plasma cells per high power field . Serum IgG4 concentration was not checked during the index admission but was normal on subsequent testing.
His renal function continued to improve and stabilised with a creatinine of 254 μmol/L (2.9 mg/dL, eGFR 23 ml/min/1.73m2) at 10 months after index treatment . His anti-GBM, IgG4 and ANCA titres remain within the normal range 3 months after completing a reducing course of prednisolone and without further immunomodulatory therapy.