An 85-year-old man with a PS4 was admitted to a nursing home. His condition included a fever lasting 2 weeks and oliguria and scrotal pain on the day, which prompted the facility staff to request emergency treatment. The patient was reported to have a medical history of cerebral infarction, heart failure, diabetes, and neurogenic bladder with urethral catheterization. Upon arrival at our hospital, he exhibited a GCS score of 12, and his temperature was 36.5°C. The patient also had a blood pressure of 142/83 mmHg, heart rate of 85 beats/min, respiratory rate of 18 breaths/min, and oxygen saturation of 97% while receiving 0.5% oxygen. Physical examination revealed swelling and tenderness of the scrotum, partial blackening of the scrotal skin , and snow grasping sense to the lower abdomen. Echocardiography showed an EF of 30–40%. Blood tests unveiled the following: 21 600 WBC/μL, 26.85 CRP mg/dL, 7.9 g hemoglobin/dL, 1.7 g albumin/dL, 127 mEq sodium/L, and 5.3 mEq potassium/L, which indicate high inflammatory response, anemia, undernutrition, and electrolyte abnormalities. Urine examination revealed pyuria, and NCCT scan showed widespread aerodermectasia around the right testis to the lower abdomen . Fournier gangrene was diagnosed based on these findings. Systolic blood pressure dropped to the 80s during the test. We informed the patient's daughter regarding the need to perform debridement, intensive care management, and mechanical ventilation, and the difficulty in saving her father with conservative treatment. However, she declined performing invasive procedures including debridement. MEPM, a broad-spectrum antibacterial agent, was administered to treat the infection by anaerobic bacteria.
The clinical course after hospitalization is shown in Figure . After admission, the patient developed a fever of 38.8°C and showed elevated WBC and his consciousness aggravated on the third day. However, from the fourth day, signs of improvement, with a tendency toward the resolution of fever and a decline in WBC, along with the patient's consciousness level, were observed. On the 13th day, the patient experienced swelling of the scrotum and wet skin, but no evident destruction was observed . After consultation with the patient's family, the patient underwent debridement of the scrotum on the 18th day. The procedure revealed a necrotic scrotum and exposure of the right testis . Excision of the necrotic tissue was performed, and the affected area was repeatedly irrigated. Postoperatively observation revealed no fever nor increased inflammatory response, and the patient underwent daily bedside irrigation of the wound and debridement of necrotic tissue. Wound culture revealed the presence of Enterococcus faecium, Enterobacter cloacae, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Supplementary Table ). Because Enterococcus faecium was resistant but in low amounts, oral administration of LVFX was changed from the 28th day. NCCT showed residual aerodermectasia in the lower abdomen. Thus, debridement of the lower abdomen and scrotal closure were performed on the 31st day. The abscess of the lower abdomen was removed, and the organ was repeatedly irrigated. A closed suction drain was installed at the right scrotum, from the lower abdomen through the right inguinal canal, and wound closure was performed. A favorable general condition was observed in the patient postoperatively, which was followed by his transfer to another hospital on the 52nd day. The patient returned to the original facility without major problems 1 month after the transfer.