A 10-year-old male child, an aspiring footballer, presented to our clinic with an insidious onset of right knee pain in October 2022. The pain was intermittent on the lateral aspect of the knee with no association with the level of his physical activity. He later suffered two episodes of knee locking. The first episode occurred in March 2023, lasted 5 minutes, and reduced on its own. There was no history of trauma or twisting injury. The last episode occurred in May 2023. Only this time, the knee stayed locked. Family history was negative for similar episodes of knee pain and locking.
On examination during the first consultation, he only had mild lateral joint line tenderness. There was no effusion, range of motion (ROM) was complete without any audible click. Clinical tests for meniscus tear were negative. Findings were the same when his knee locked for the first time. After the second episode, lateral joint line tenderness was aggravated with painful ROM between 30 and 50 degrees of flexion without effusion.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the right knee was done after the first episode. It revealed a bucket handle tear of the lateral meniscus with displacement in the intercondylar notch and a 10 × 15 mm lesion in the subchondral bone at the center of the lateral femoral condyle with intact articular cartilage ( and ). Surgical treatment was offered, but his parents did not consent. Eventually, he underwent an arthroscopic procedure 2 days after the second episode of knee locking.
The lateral meniscus was morphologically not discoid. The body and a part of the posterior horn were found in the intercondylar notch . There were no adhesions in the intercondylar space. The outer edge of the fragment was rounded and smooth, originating from the anterior and posterior horn . There was a complete meniscocapsular discontinuity in the body of the meniscus and a major part of the posterior meniscus segment, with no meniscus remnant left in the periphery . The meniscus was not reducing back. We progressively incised the medial junction between the subluxated lateral meniscus and its anterior and posterior attachments with the horns of the meniscus in an attempt to mobilize it laterally toward the meniscocapsular junction ( and ). However, it was of no avail. The fragment had to be excised and the patient ended up with a subtotal lateral meniscectomy ( and ).