A 72 year-old man was admitted to the hospital for head injury, facial and left hemithorax contusions. The patient referred to had fainted after coughing; the same symptoms had occurred six and three months earlier. Diverticulosis of the colon was the only disease reported by the patient in his medical history. He denied smoking, drug or alcohol abuse. Physical examination showed dullness to percussion and decreased breath sound in the affected hemithorax. The neurological examination was negative. Blood pressure was 170/80 mmHg, heart rate was 90 beats/minute and rhythmic. Laboratory findings, arterial gas analysis, electrocardiogram, and brain computed tomography were negative.
A chest x-ray revealed fractures of three left ribs plus a large medium-basal opacity on the left hemithorax . Computed tomography (CT) of the thorax confirmed the presence of a well-delineated, homogeneous, solid mass of 11 × 8 cm, extending for about 10 cm on the vertical axis. The mass presented a mild enhancement after contrast injection and calcifications in the basal part. It was close to the chest wall, adjacent to the left pulmonary artery, pulmonary artery trunk, and left ventricle with no signs of infiltration . Bronchoscopy showed an insignificant bleeding from the upper left bronchus. Positron emission tomography (PET) revealed a mild positivity of the lesion . Echocardiogram, Holter ECG monitoring, and carotid Doppler ultrasonography were negative. With suspected diagnosis of SFTP, the patient underwent surgery. Through a left lateral thoracotomy, the neoplasm was carefully isolated, and its origin from the visceral pleura of the pulmonary lingula segment became evident. The adhesions with the phrenic nerve were cut preserving the nerve integrity. The mass excision was performed with clear surgical margins and completed with a wedge resection of the lingula. The postoperative course was uneventful, a good re-expansion of the left lung was obtained, and the patient was discharged on the fifth postoperative day.
Pathological examination showed a 12 × 11, 5 × 6 cm encapsulated tumor mass , whitish in color, with whorled appearance and calcification on cut section . Microscopic examination showed fibroblast-like structures within the collagen . The diagnosis of benign SFTP was confirmed by mmunohistochemical analysis (CD34+, BCL-2+, SMA-, S100-).
After two years of follow-up the patient is in good clinical condition without recurrence of disease or clinical symptoms.