A 57-year-old female patient (height 141 cm and weight 50 kg and American Society of Anaesthesiologists physical status 2 presented with history of 4 years old neglected two-part fracture of neck of the left humerus. The fracture occurred by a trivial trauma while doing normal household activities. The fracture was not managed by an orthopedician and was treated by a general practitioner. The patient was a known case of rheumatoid arthritis and was on Deflazacort on varying doses for the past 10 years. On examination, the arm was deformed with angulation at proximal part, patient was moving the elbow and wrist in a tricky way as the fracture site was mobile and the arm was unstable. The fracture site was painless. The upper limb was supported by an arm sling to counter the heaviness of limb because of bony discontinuity. On the radiograph, there was two-part fracture of the neck of the humerus with thin cortices suggestive of osteoporosis. There was a loss of the medial cortex of the proximal segment of humerus and the distal fragment was resting on the lateral cortex. The distal fragment was placed at the right angle to the proximal fragment . Routine biochemical evaluation including renal, liver, and thyroid function tests was within normal limits. Blood counts, serum electrophoresis, and para-thyroid hormone (PTH) levels were normal. Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) scan was done which showed osteoporosis with a T score of –4.4. Patient was under the treatment of rheumatologist but on an irregular basis. The severely osteoporotic bone raised a possibility of decreased holding capacity for implants and subsequent failure of fracture fixation. Therefore, a decision to primarily manage osteoporosis and to defer fracture fixation was taken. She was started on oral calcium, magnesium, and Vitamin D supplementation. Teriparatide 20 mcg once daily subcutaneous injection was started. Serial radiographs were done at 6 weekly intervals to assess improvement in bone quality. Significant radiological improvement was not noted even after 9 months of teriparatide therapy. She was then administered a dose of Denosumab 60 mg subcutaneously hoping to improve bone quality and was planned for surgery. Pre-operative biochemical and hematological investigations were within normal limits. Pre-anesthetic check-up deemed the patient fit for surgery. The patient was taken for surgery under general anesthesia. With the patient in supine position, a deltopectoral approach was utilized to expose the fracture site. A large amount of fibrous tissue was encountered between the fracture fragments which was meticulously removed. As both the fracture fragments were at the right angle to each other, we encountered difficulty in reducing the fragments. When we tried to reduce the fragments with bone holding clamps, the clamp itself was crushing the bones. It was another difficulty that we encountered during the fracture fixation. Non-vascularized free fibular graft was obtained from the ipsilateral lower limb. The fibula was found to be very thin and was easily split into two halves by scissors. The split fibula was inserted inside the medullary canal and the fracture fragments were reduced over it. A five-hole PHILOS plate was used to fix the fracture fragments. The humeral head appeared too indistinct under fluoroscopic visualization leading to difficulty in estimating screw length while keeping a safe distance from the joint space . A blunt Hohmann retractor was introduced in the joint space through the rotator interval and was used to demarcate the extent of humeral head under fluoroscopy to estimate screw length. While drilling, very minimal resistance was encountered and almost all screws in the humeral head were put without predrilling. As the rotator cuff was intact, we repaired the rotator interval that we incised during surgery and addressed the soft tissue as warranted during closure. Wound was closed in layers and a vacuum suction drain was placed. As the fixation of plate and screw to bone was not satisfactory due to porotic bones, a U-splint was applied to the patient’s limb along with a shoulder immobilizer to provide additional support to prevent implant failure. The post-operative course was uneventful. The post-operative radiograph was satisfactory, only one view of shoulder was possible due to the application of plaster U-splint . A radiograph after 2 weeks of surgery during suture removal showed an un-displaced fracture adjacent to the distal end of the plate . The options of management at this stage were either to revise the surgery with a longer plate or to proceed with a conservative management. After discussing both options with the patient, it was decided to continue with conservative management. In the conservative management, we had the option of functional bracing and U-cast, we preferred to go for U-cast as our experience in this case was different and we preferred to provide better stability of fracture. A follow-up radiograph at 6 weeks showed signs of fracture union and the cast was replaced with a custom-made functional brace. Although 6 weeks of U-cast can lead to joint stiffness, in our case, the prime objective was to achieve union of the fracture. Shoulder and elbow joint mobilization was started. A review radiograph after 12 weeks showed union of the stress fracture at the plate end and visible callus at the primary fracture site . At 9-month postoperatively, en bloc pull-out of the locking plate was noticed in the distal fragment of the fracture . The limb was further immobilized in an arm sling for 4 weeks. At 1 year, the limb was painless, had a sense of improved strength in her arm, and had an acceptable range of shoulder movement .