A woman, 70 years old, with dyspnoea (New York Heart Association scale, NYHA class III), referred for severe aortic regurgitation. At the transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) aortic valve presented with an annulus diameter of 23 mm, a mean gradient of 7 mmHg and a severe AR with a pressure half time (PHT) inferior at 300 msec. The effective regurgitant orifice was 0,3 cm2 and the regurgitant volume was 65 ml. The AR was associated with a left ventricular dilatation with a left ventricle end diastolic volume (LVEDV) of 160 ml, left ventricle end diastolic (LVEDD) and systolic (LVESD) diameters of 57 mm and 41 mm, and a normal ejection fraction (60%). The patient was previously treated for a myocardial infarction with drug eluting stents in the right coronary artery (RCA) and in the circumflex artery, and with another drug eluting stent in RCA for late in-stent restenosis. She had a stenosis of 55% of the left internal carotid artery and severe peripheral vascular disease. Preoperative Chest X-ray and computed tomography (CT) of the thorax confirmed the presence of a PA. In particular, CT showed heavy and diffuse calcifications involving all the aortic annulus and the aortic root and numerous large spots of calcium from the sinotubular junction to the upper portion of the ascending aorta. These findings allowed for a diagnosis of type IB PA.
The patient’s expected operative risk, calculated according to the logistic European System for Cardiac Operative Risk Evaluation (EuroSCORE II), was 2,24%.
We evaluated the available options and decided for an aortic valve replacement (AVR) with a sutureless Perceval valve (LivaNova, Saluggia, Italy) implanted in full sternotomy.
The ascending aorta was cannulated in a restricted safe area, previously identified on CT images, by Seldinger technique (EOPAtm, Medtronic-Inc, Minneapolis-USA), then cardiopulmonary bypass was instituted, and the aorta was clamped in a non-calcified ascending aorta segment. Myocardial protection was obtained with a single dose of warm blood cardioplegia delivered selectively in the two coronary ostia. Aortic valve leaflets were removed, and a Perceval valve (M-size) was implanted without using the 3 guiding sutures, because of huge and totally diffusing calcifications involving the aortic annulus and the aortic root. To correctly position the valve in the native annulus, the surgeon found the solution of carefully measuring the distance between the nadir of each cusp and the aortotomy. Closure of the aortotomy was reinforced with two layers of autologous pericardium. The cardiac arrest time was 45 min, the cardio-pulmonary bypass (CPB) time was 59 min. Intraoperative transoesophageal echocardiographic assessment showed no paravalvular leakages (PVL). The patient was extubated 7 h later in the intensive care unit. The correct position of the valve was confirmed by the postoperative TTE.
In the postoperative period we noticed an atrial fibrillation with left bundle branch block and an asystole of 7 s; those findings lead us to decide to implant a bicameral pacemaker. The patient was discharged on the 7th postoperative day.
At 2 years follow-up the patient was in NYHA class I and TTE showed no PVL , a mean gradient of 11 mmHg, LVEDV, LVESD and LVEDD of 85 ml, 32 mm and 43 mm, and left ventricular ejection fraction was 66%.