A 24-year-old woman was presented to our department with painless jaundice and pruritus for 6 days. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in a local hospital indicated that biliary obstruction at the hepatic hilus and highly suspected hilar cholangiocarcinoma . The patient suffered yellow skin, itching all over the body, dark urine, and light-colored stool. The patient had neither abdominal tenderness nor a palpable mass in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen. The patient had no family history of cancer or hepatobiliary disease. The laboratory examinations showed the following: alanine aminotransferase, 22 IU/L (normal, 7–40 IU/L); Aspartate transaminase, 27 IU/L (normal, 13–35 IU/L); Total bilirubin, 193.1 umol/L (normal, ≤ 23.0 umol/L); Direct bilirubin, 153.5 umol/L (normal, ≤ 7.0 umol/L); Alkaline phosphatase, 231 IU/L (normal, 35–100 IU/L); Gamma-glutamyltransferase, 94 IU/L (normal, 7–45 IU/L). Tumor markers were within normal limits, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), 1.44 ng/mL (normal, 0–5 ng/mL); alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), 1.91 IU/L (normal, 0–5.8 IU/L); carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA-19-9), 20.7 IU/L (normal, 0–27 IU/L); CA-125, 14.6 IU/L (normal, 0–35 IU/L). Abdominal ultrasonography examination showed dilation of the hepatic bile duct . Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed that the intrahepatic bile duct was marked dilated, the tumor was located at the common hepatic duct with a higher density than liver parenchyma in arterial-phase and portal-venous phase .
Subsequently, percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage (PTBD) was performed to reduce jaundice and improve liver function, then the patient was referred for operation with the preoperative diagnosis of Bismuth type II hilar cholangiocarcinoma. At surgery, we detected a nodular mass in the perihilar bile duct without involving other tissues and the tumor completely blocking the bile duct lumen. Intraoperative frozen pathology showed no malignant tumor at the proximal cut end of the right and left hepatic duct and the distal cut end of the common bile duct. Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy with excision of the extrahepatic biliary tree and radical lymphadenectomy were conducted. This procedure was considered curative since intraoperative frozen examination showed that the mass was mid atypia and the resection margin was negative. The jaundice was resolved completely and the patient was discharged 11 days after surgery without postoperative complications. The detailed postoperative pathological and immunohistochemical examination revealed a bile duct NET G1 with a size of 2 × 2 × 0.5 cm, and tumor cells infiltrated the all layers, CD56(+), Syn(+), CgA(+), CK20(−), CK7(−), Ki-67 < 2% . Unexpectedly, a microscopic invasion of the resected right hepatic duct was observed in the final pathological examination. There is currently no criterion for biliary neuroendocrine tumors stage and no guideline for the treatment of biliary neuroendocrine tumors. These results were so complicated and we faced a challenge whether to continue to extend resection and adjuvant chemotherapy. After interdisciplinary discussion, we respected the patient's right to refuse second surgery and adjuvant chemotherapy was recommended. The patient received 3 cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy (Gemcitabine and tegafur-gimeracil-oteracil potassium capsule). The patient was followed up once a year for tumor markers and abdominal MRI. At present, the patient has been followed up for 24 months without recurrence or disease progression .