A 26-year-old female presented with chief complaints of pain over lower abdomen and difficulty in walking for 2 months. The pain was present over symphyseal area, which was insidious in onset, gradually progressive and aggravated with walking. She had a history of intermittent fever associated with loss of appetite but no significant weight loss. She had no gynecological or urogenital complaints.
On examination, there was tenderness over symphyseal region which gets aggravated by attempting pelvic compression and distraction test. There was associated tenderness in the proximal thigh over medial aspect on right side. Examination of bilateral iliac crest, bilateral ischial tuberosity, and bilateral hip joints were normal. There was no lymphadenopathy in the inguinal region and bilateral iliac fossa.
A plain anteroposterior (AP) radiograph of the pelvis with bilateral hip joint showed a lytic area in the symphysis pubis with suspicion of widening of the symphysis pubis . Her erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 90 mm 1st h, qualitative C-reactive protein (CRP) was raised, total leucocyte count (TLC) and other blood parameters were normal.
Plain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of pelvis showed subtle focal cortical erosion in the right pubic bone with signal alteration just lateral to pubic symphysis along with ill-defined T1 hypo and T2 and STIR hyperintense collection within a proximal medial compartment of the right thigh along with surrounding soft tissue edema suggestive of infective etiology in favor of tuberculosis.
Based on clinicoradiological findings and supportive evidence of hematological investigations, she was diagnosed as a case of tubercular infection of the symphysis pubis. She was started on first-line anti-tubercular therapy (ATT) from DOTS Centre along with pelvic binder support. She received four tablets of fixed-dose H/R/Z/E combination containing 75 mg/150 mg/400 mg/275 mg for 2 months and then four tablets of fixed-dose H/R/E combination containing 75 mg/150 mg/275 mg for 4 months. At the end of 6 months, her pain had subsided, tenderness was absent, gait had improved and there was no pain while walking. The ESR and CRP were normal. X-ray pelvis AP view showed sclerosis of the margins . She was advised to continue ATT for 6 more months, which she was not compliant and stopped her ATT after total 6 months of treatment (2HRZE+4HRE) against advice.
Around 7 months after discontinuing ATT intake, she again presented with complaints of pain in symphyseal region with difficulty in walking. Her ESR and CRP were raised. Other hematological investigations including HIV, Blood sugar, TLC, etc. were normal. X-ray pelvis with bilateral hip AP view showed regional osteopenia along with gross bony destruction of symphysis pubis with pubic diastasis . MRI revealed area of destruction and altered marrow edema in bilateral pubic symphysis with adjacent soft tissue component in the anterior pelvis with pubic diastasis . It also showed two sinuses, one present on right side extending from right pubic symphysis into the right upper thigh around obturator muscle and another sinus is seen from the posterior cortex of right pubic symphysis extending from 3 cm and terminating 0.4 cm from vaginal vault.
A fluoroscopic-guided biopsy was done under local anesthesia. The patient was taken supine on a radiolucent table after emptying her bladder. Cleaning and draping were done as per standard sterile protocol. 15 mL of 2% plain lignocaine was infiltrated in skin, subcutaneous tissue, and periosteum over the right side of the symphysis pubis after checking drug sensitivity. A core biopsy needle was used to harvest biopsy from the margin of the right pubic symphysis after confirming its position on the image intensifier. The sample was analyzed by CBNAAT for any drug resistance. There was no drug resistance found in this patient.
The patient was leveled as relapse of pubic symphysis tuberculosis and started on daily ATT (HRZES2+HRZE4+HRE6) regime for 12 months. The patient was followed every 3 months with ESR, liver function test, and kidney function test. On completion of her ATT course at 12 months, her ESR and CRP were normal, X-ray pelvis AP view showed sclerosis of margin of pubic symphysis with diathesis . Her constitution symptoms were absent, and her general physical conditions have improved.
After completion of ATT, she was followed every 3 months with clinical examination, ESR level for 1 year. She remains asymptomatic for 1 year of her follow-up.