A 44-year-old male, Chinese businessman, mainly for multi-joints swelling and pain for more than half a year, was admitted to Department of Nephrology and Rheumatology in our hospital on January 9, 2018. Six months before admission, he presented successively multiple joint arthralgia and mild swelling, mainly involving shoulder joints, the PIP joints of both hands, the second and third of MCP joints of both hands, double wrist joints, with morning stiffness for a few minutes. In the course of the disease, he had no symptoms of dry eyes, blurred vision, mouth ulcer, rash and hair loss, etc. He accepted “three oxygen therapy” in Horqin First Hospital, which made swelling and pain of above joints partially relieved. However, his right shoulder joint pain got worse one week before admission, and he was admitted to our hospital. His previous medical history included progressive hearing loss for several years and microhematuria for one year by a physical examination. His father died of colorectal ulcer. His mother is relatively healthy without hearing loss and obvious kidney diseases, and she never had a urine test. His daughter also had a history of microhematuria found by a medical examination for enrollment one year ago. On physical examination, his vital signs including blood pressure, body temperature, respiration rate and pulse rate were within normal range, and no abnormalities were found in lungs, heart and abdomen. The PIP joints of both hands, the second and third of MCP joints of both hands, and his right shoulder joint had mild tenderness with no obvious swelling.
Laboratory data was as follows: blood routine was normal; urinalysis revealed hematuria (3+) with 100% of deformed red blood cells by phase difference microscopic examination and microalbuminuria (0.101 g/24 h); blood chemistry showed normal function of liver, serum creatinine within normal range (106 μmol/L) and moderately increased level of blood uric acid (526 μmol/L); inflammatory markers including C-reactive protein and ESR were normal; serological studies revealed an elevated level of RF (46.0 IU/ml), a dramatically elevated level of ACPA (>250RU/ml), normal levels of immunoglobulin and complement; ANA and ANCA were negative; serum hepatitis B surface antigen and anti-hepatitis C virus antibody were negative. The X-ray of both hands was normal. There were no abnormalities on chest computed tomography and electrocardiogram. Renal ultrasound showed diffuse changes in double renal parenchyma and double renal multiple cysts with partial cystic wall calcification. The results of hearing test suggested binaural sensorineural deafness, and no abnormalities were found in the eye examination.
The patient with swelling and tenderness of muti-joints over six weeks, double-positive for RF and ACPA, according to 2010 ACR/EULAR classification criteria for RA , was definitely diagnosed with early RA. However, a history of microhematuria could not be completely explained by RA, as microhematuria occurred before RA. To further clarify the cause of hematuria, a renal biopsy was performed on January 18, 2018. Light microscopy showed glomerular minimal change with chronic tubulointerstitial disease, and immunofluorescence microscopy showed mild stainings for IgM(+) and IgA(±), with others negative . Electron microscopy revealed thin GBM (130-200 nm), epithelial foot process segmental fusion, no dense deposit, with edema and lymphocytes infiltration of interstitium . The diagnosis of electron was TBMN with tubular interstitiallesion . Combining with microhematuria, hearing loss and TBMN, we highly suspected that he had a very rare disease for Alport syndrome. Mutational Analysis of Alport syndrome genes (COL4A3, COL4A4 and COL4A5) by Beijing Genomics Institute revealed the mutation in COL4A5 (c.1351 T > C, p.Cys451Arg, hemizygous, missense mutation) encoding α5 of type IV collagen. In silico analyses using Database of Non-synonymous Functional Predictions (dbNSFP) predicted that p.Cys451Arg is functionally “tolerated”(0.07, scores less than 0.05 are classified as “damaging”) by Sorting Intolerant From Tolerant (SIFT), “possibly damaging” (0.603, Polymorphism Phenotyping 2 HumVar), “probably damaging”(0.971, Polymorphism Phenotyping 2 HumDiv), “probably damaging”(0.963, Mutation Taster), and.
“deleterious” by Likelihood Ratio Test. Above results further proved the diagnosis of X-linked Alport syndrome.
The patient has been regularly receiving the treatment of total glucosides of paeony and leflunomide for RA, and Cozaar 50 mg for the protection of kidney so far. During the 10-months follow-up, swelling and tenderness of the joints in this patient had been generally relieved, but there was no obvious improvement in microhematuria and a slight increase in proteinuria.