A 72-year-old man, with a history of urinary retention managed with tamsulosin, presented to his local urologist. Evaluation noted prostate-specific antigen (PSA) values of 1.8 ng/mL, 7.3 ng/mL, 2.7 ng/mL, 2.4 ng/mL, 4.98 ng/mL, and then 0.83 ng/mL. Although elevated PSA values were initially noted, given the downtrend, symptomatic management of urinary retention and nocturnal enuresis was pursued. The digital rectal examination (DRE) was unremarkable with a 30–40-g firm prostate that was normal feeling with no nodules, indurations, or tenderness. Seminal vesicles were not swollen, and no masses were detected. The initial International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS) was noted to be 11, consistent with moderate lower urinary tract symptoms. The post-void residual volume (PVR) was 537 mL. A microscopic urinalysis with culture was performed and returned negative. Given these findings, office cystoscopy was performed and showed moderate lateral prostate enlargement with mild intravesical protrusion and no evidence of bladder cancer.
Given his lower urinary tract symptoms, the patient had a prostatic urethral lift (UroLift or PUL) procedure performed with four implants. This was performed transurethrally, using a cystoscope with prostatic implants that lift and hold the enlarged prostate tissue to decrease obstruction. He was noted to have a marked decrease in his lower urinary tract symptoms with a repeat IPSS resulting at 5, consistent with mild symptoms. PSA values on yearly check afterward were 5.84 ng/mL, 6.9 ng/mL, and 10.9 ng/mL. Total and free PSA were ordered and returned as 6.9 ng/mL and 1.3 ng/mL, respectively, indicating a low risk of prostate cancer. The patient then underwent a right shoulder repair, after which he had increasing lower urinary tract symptoms in terms of frequency, weak stream, and incomplete emptying. He therefore underwent a repeat PUL procedure performed with six implants and was noted to have a significant decrease in the burden of symptoms. The IPSS was noted to be 2.
After 11 months, the PSA value was 12.89 ng/mL. At this point, given the trend in PSA values, a transrectal ultrasound-guided biopsy was performed. Pathology returned as Gleason 5 + 5 = 10 in 1/12 cores (70% of core), 5 + 4 = 9 in 9/12 cores (up to 100% of core), and 4 + 5 = 9 in 2/12 cores (up to 95% of core) (–). All 11 biopsy sites contained grade group 5 disease involving at least 70% of all cores. The PSA density at that time was 0.20 ng/mL/cc. He was then referred to the Holden Comprehensive Cancer Center at the University of Iowa.
Given the high-risk pathologic features, F-18 PyL prostate-specific membrane antigen positron emission tomography scan computed tomography (F-18 PyL PSMA PET/CT) was obtained and demonstrated abnormal focal uptake in the left prostate, as well as a small focus in the midline of the prostate. There was no abnormal uptake of F-18 PyL elsewhere to suggest metastatic disease. Radiology reported widespread osseous lesions without uptake, reported as likely representing osteopoikilosis: “spotted bone” as a result of an inherited autosomal dominant benign osteosclerotic dysplasia of the bones. A subsequent bone scan reported suspected metastatic prostate cancer involving the pelvis, hips, and the midshaft of left femur. However, a CT-guided bone biopsy of the right iliac lesion was performed and was negative for malignancy.
An MRI of the prostate was performed, which showed diffuse T2 hypointensity of the entire prostate and bilateral medial seminal vesicles. Suboptimal diffusion-weighted images and metal artifact precluded the assessment of Prostate Imaging Reporting and Data System (PI-RADS) scoring. Focal extracapsular extension (ECE) was noted in the right posterior lateral mid-peripheral zone, suspicious for neurovascular bundle involvement. There was no lymphadenopathy.
Given the negative bone biopsy findings in conjunction with lack of activity in bone lesions on PyL PSMA PET/CT, the patient was presumed to have localized very high-risk prostate cancer per National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) risk stratification, version 4.2023; however, the possibility of metastatic disease was discussed. After shared decision-making, RARP with pelvic lymph node dissection was planned. Abdominal insufflation was established in the standard fashion using a Veress needle. Upon robotic visual evaluation, the patient was found to have numerous punctate white plaques on the peritoneum and epiploicae of the sigmoid colon . These findings were unusual for prostatectomy and were concerning for peritoneal carcinomatosis. They were biopsied by removing an area of peritoneum, which was sent for a frozen section procedure. The frozen section was reported as carcinoma. Given these findings and the absence of known benefit of prostatectomy in the setting of metastatic disease, radical prostatectomy was aborted, but a bilateral standard pelvic lymph node dissection was performed for diagnostic staging purposes with the borders as follows: external iliac vein superiorly, bladder medially, node of Cloquet distally, and obturator nerve inferiorly. There were no grossly enlarged pelvic lymph nodes identified during the dissection. Two left pelvic lymph nodes and five right pelvic lymph nodes were excised. Final pathology confirmed metastatic prostatic adenocarcinoma in an additional peritoneal sample. Lymph nodes were negative for malignancy; they demonstrated histiocytic inflammation consistent with the patient’s history of prior joint replacements. He was discharged on postoperative day 1.
The patient was discussed at the multidisciplinary tumor board. A subsequent review identified prior CT imaging from years prior without any bone lesions, which ruled out congenital osteopoikilosis and was thus consistent with widespread bone metastatic disease in addition to peritoneal carcinomatosis.
Therefore, for this patient, now diagnosed with high-volume metastatic disease, systemic therapy with androgen deprivation therapy was initiated. Leuprolide, five cycles of docetaxel (with the last cycle held due to hyperglycemia-related acidosis), and abiraterone was initiated per the PEACE-1 trial; no radiotherapy was initiated due to widespread disease and his prior history of significant lower urinary tract symptoms. The pretreatment PSA was 16.20. The patient responded to therapy with PSA values of 1.68 at 1 month, 0.14 at 6 months, and 0.08 at 1 year. He had genetic counseling performed, due to his metastatic prostate cancer; no clinically significant mutations were found using the 52-gene panel from Ambry Genetics Laboratory.
A summary of the patient’s treatment course is outlined in . From his perspective, the initial diagnostic tests performed while having fluctuations in his PSA caused some worry, dissatisfaction, and concern. However, after diagnosis, he was extremely content with his cancer treatment team. He is overall pleased with the marked downtrend in PSA with minimal side effects, i.e., mild fatigue, secondary to his treatment regimen.