A 60-year-old diabetic male presented to our hospital with high-grade fever (38.8°C), cough with mucoid expectoration, and generalized abdominal pain of 1 month duration. He had previously served in the army and was currently a farmer by occupation. He was an ex-smoker and consumed alcohol daily. The physical examination revealed pallor, tachypnoea, crepitations over the right mammary, axillary and interscapular areas, and tender hepatomegaly. His jugular venous pulse was normal and there was no pedal oedema. He was tachycardiac with a heart rate of 110 b.p.m. His respiratory rate was 20 per minute. His blood pressure and oxygen saturation were normal. The cardiac auscultation was also normal. The baseline investigations revealed mild anaemia with haemoglobin of 11.4 g/dL (normal range: 13–16 gm/dL), leucocytosis 15 830 cells/mL (normal range: 4 000–11 000 cells/mL) with neutrophilia 82% (normal value: 40–60%), and erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 64 mm/h (normal range: 0–22 mm/h). Liver function tests revealed elevated alkaline phosphatase 206 IU/L (normal range: 0—40 IU/L) and gamma glutamyl transpeptidase 185 IU/L (normal range: 0–35 IU/L), while the renal parameters were normal. The test for HIV ELISA was negative. The chest X-ray did not reveal any obvious abnormalities. The ultrasound of the abdomen revealed multiple, ill defined, hypoechoic areas in the liver and mild hepatosplenomegaly. The contrast enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen revealed multiple hypodense lesions in the liver and spleen . The CT chest revealed consolidation in the right lower lobe and mediastinal lymphadenopathy along with mild bilateral pleural effusions . In view of disseminated infection with multiple liver and splenic abscesses, possible infective endocarditis was suspected. The transthoracic echocardiogram was suboptimal due to poor echo windows, but there was a suspicion of vegetation on the anterior mitral leaflet. The transoesophageal echocardiogram revealed multiple vegetations on the anterior mitral leaflet . There was trivial mitral regurgitation and the other valves were normal. There was normal biventricular function, with no pericardial effusion. The blood cultures grew B. pseudomallei (identified on Vitek 2 Compact—bioMerieux) . The sensitivity testing and interpretation was done by disk diffusion as per Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute recommendations and found to be sensitive to cotrimoxazole, ceftazidime, aminoglycosides, ciprofloxacin, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and carbapenems. The patient was treated with intravenous ceftazidime. Two weeks into admission, the patient became afebrile; the cough subsided and hence was discharged on intravenous ceftazidime, oral trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and doxycycline. Upon follow-up after 4 weeks, the patient’s symptoms had completely subsided. A repeat transthoracic echocardiogram was done, which showed no evidence of vegetation. He was continued on oral medications for 3 months with doxycycline and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.