A 41-year-old, 65-kg, female smoker (15 pack-year history) patient was admitted for an endoscopic resection of a submucous uterine myoma under general anesthesia. This was the second surgery for the same myoma. Preoperative examination and laboratory test results were normal. Baseline blood pressure and heart rate were 120/70 mmHg and 80 beats per minute, respectively. An intravenous catheter was placed and normal saline was administered. General anesthesia was induced with fentanyl and propofol. The I-gel® laryngeal mask No. 4 was inserted. Anesthesia was maintained with desflurane in 40% of oxygen. The patient was placed in lithotomy position and a hysteroscopy with a bipolar 9-mm resectoscope, utilizing 0.9% saline as the distention/irrigation medium was conducted.
In the 50th minute of the procedure, end-tidal CO2 dropped from 35 to 25 mmHg and pulse oximetry (SpO2) from 100% to 90%. Other vital signals including blood pressure and heart rate were stable. Crackling sounds were heard from the base of the lungs. As a pulmonary oedema was suspected, the volume of irrigated saline was checked. A total of 9000 mL of saline was used and only 4000 mL was collected. The surgery was stopped. At that point the patient was uncovered and a generalized oedema was noticed, with a marked distended abdomen and cervical oedema with tissue tension. The inspired fraction of oxygen was increased to 100% and an arterial blood analysis was performed, which showed pH 7.09, PaCO2 41 mmHg, PO2 70 mmHg, HCO3+ 12.4 mEq/L, Na+ 145 mEq/L, K+ 2.3 mEq/L, Ca2+ 0.76 mEq/L, hemoglobin 5.9 g/dL, O2 sat 89%, and blood glucose level of 50 mg/dL.
Therefore, 100 mL of sodium bicarbonate 8.4% and 20 mg of furosemide were administered. Laryngeal mask was replaced by a tracheal tube to improve oxygenation and ventilation. Using a video laryngoscope C-MAC®, the airway oedema could be observed, especially in the arytenoid region, which restricted the observation of the vocal cords and only let the intubation of a 6.5-mm tracheal tube. The arterial and central lines were put and 10 mEq of potassium chloride, 2 g of calcium chloride, 2 g of magnesium sulfate, and 20 mL of dextrose 30% were administered through the central line. The patient was placed in supine position and surgeons performed a laparoscopy to exclude uterus perforation. There was no uterine rupture, but a prominent oedema of the intestinal loops and a small amount of peritoneal free fluid were observed. A bladder catheter was inserted. The patient`s auricular temperature was 33°C.
The patient was admitted to ICU. Her postoperative chest X-ray showed bilateral pulmonary oedema .
During her ICU stay, the serious electrolyte disturbances (hypokalemia, hypocalcaemia, and hypomagnesaemia) and acidosis were corrected. Hemoglobin increased to 9.3 g/dL (Her pre-procedure hemoglobin level was 11.9 g/dL). There were no coagulation abnormalities. Temperature returned to the normal state. Generalized oedema was resolved with a urine output of 3000 mL in total, which made extubation possible six hours after ICU admission. She received oxygen supplementation for 12 hours with a nasal cannula and was transferred to the general ward approximately 24 hours after ICU admission, where she stayed for another day, after which she was discharged.