We describe the case of a 61-year-old Italian Caucasian woman who did not smoke or drink. Her medical history included hypertension and hypothyroidism after undergoing surgery for thyroid nodulosis, for which she was treated with valsartan, levothyroxine, atenolol and chlorthalidone.
The patient was referred to our Outpatient Clinic for Biological Therapy in the Hospital San Giovanni di Dio in Florence, Italy. In the weeks before referral, her symptoms had worsened, with the appearance of back pain and progressive limitation of mobility. Her history included repeated flares of sciatica, talalgia and trochanteritis. Her modified Schober test result was 15 cm to 18 cm.
An X-ray and a magnetic resonance imaging scan showed sacroiliitis. A diagnosis of spondylarthritis was made. The patient was started on therapy with sulfasalazine 2 g/day and deflazacort 7.5 mg/day for three months, without improvement of her symptoms. In September 2007, because of elevated scores (>30) on both the Bath Ankylosing Spondylitis Functional Index (BASFI) and the Bath Ankylosing Spondylitis Disease Activity Index (BASDAI) scales, the patient was started on biological therapy with adalimumab 40 mg every other week.
After the sixth dose of adalimumab, an injection site reaction occurred after 12 hours, with erythema, edema and itching over a zone 5 cm to 6 cm in diameter. The reaction peaked at 24 to 48 hours and lasted three to four days. Prophylaxis with oral anti-histamines had little efficacy. The clinical efficacy of the drug at that time was satisfactory (BASFI and BASDAI scores both less than 10). We performed prick, intra-dermal and patch tests following the procedure previously described .
A commercial preparation of Humira was used which contains, in 0.8 mL of distilled water, adalimumab 40 mg, which is a concentration of 50 mg/mL; mannitol, 9.6 mg; and polysorbate 80, 0.8 mg. For the prick and patch test and for the intra-dermal test with late reading, we used the undiluted drug (50 mg/mL). For the intra-dermal test at immediate reading, we used a concentration of 5 mg/mL. These concentrations proved to be non-irritating in 10 control subjects never treated with adalimumab .
For the prick test, a reading was taken after 20 minutes; for the intra-dermal test, readings were taken after 15 minutes and 24 hours; and for the patch test, readings were taken after 48 and 72 hours. Prick and intra-dermal tests with adalimumab showed negative results at the immediate reading; however, after 24 hours, an itchy, red papule 7 mm in diameter, surrounded by an erythema of 15 mm, occurred at the site of the intra-dermal test and lasted five days. The patch test with the undiluted drug was negative, as was an intra-dermal test with mannitol (18 mg/mL).
Adalimumab was withheld for two months. In this period, she received leflunomide. The first two doses after the pause yielded an injection site reaction as previously. After the third dose, the patient experienced, after one hour, a systemic reaction that manifested as itching of the palms and soles and angioedema of the tongue and lips. After the following dose, after 30 minutes, a generalized itching occurred, with lip angioedema, dizziness and visual disturbances. Her symptoms resolved with the administration of intravenous corticosteroids and oral anti-histamine, within one hour in the first case and within two hours in the second case. She also reported decreased efficacy after resuming treatment with the drug. It should also be noted that she had stopped oral corticosteroids at that time, but her BASFI and BASDAI values were both >30.
We repeated the skin tests after the systemic reactions, with strong positive results at the immediate reading: The skin-prick test yielded a wheal 6 mm in diameter and a flare of 15 mm, and the intra-dermal test was positive with 5 mm of wheal and 6 mm of flare until the dilution of 0.005 mg/mL, that is, diluted 10,000-fold. The intra-dermal test was negative at the late reading.
An ImmunoCAP, especially harvested by Phadia, Uppsala, Sweden in collaboration with our Laboratory of Immunology and Allergy, was used to assay serum-specific IgE to adalimumab. A commercial Phadia ImmunoCAP was used for the assay of total IgE and specific IgE to common inhalant allergens (Phadiatop).
In vitro tests were not able to demonstrate serum-specific IgE to adalimumab by means of Phadia ImmunoCAP: The result was 0.01 kUA/L. Total IgE was 6.4 kU/L. An atopic status was excluded by history and also by a negative Phadiatop.