An 11-month-old boy born with multiple congenital malformations has never been discharged home. He spent his first three months in neonatal intensive care unit, where he has gone through some interventions, such as Blalock-Taussig procedure for complex cyanotic heart disease, tracheostomy for congenital tracheal stenosis, and gastrostomy to lower bronchoaspiration risk. Since his birth, he required ventilator support and, despite many attempts, he was never weaned. He underwent chest tomography and bronchoscopy, which also diagnosed the left main bronchus stenosis. Besides the heart and airways double lesion, he has other malformations: grade V unilateral vesicoureteral reflux and anal imperforation. He is on antimicrobial prophylaxis and he has a colostomy.
Daily procedures such as tracheostomy aspirations cause much suffering, which is manifested by intense sweating, severe cyanosis, and sometimes the need for urgent cannula replacement. Several arterial punctures were performed for blood analysis and vein punctures for peripheral or central venous accesses. In addition, he had to be treated twice for bronchial hyperreactivity with intravenous beta-2 agonist and ventilation under muscle paralysis. Another life-threatening event was a hypovolemic shock secondary to severe bleeding following an airway dilatation procedure. There were two more episodes of dilation by bronchoscopy and a cardiac catheterization, totalizing six anesthetic procedures.
Meanwhile, his ability to interact socially leaves the health care team amazed. Despite an expected developmental delay due to prolonged hospitalization, he is achieving milestones: clapping hands and sending kisses.
We do not know how much discussion was held regarding the limits of treatment before the performance of each procedure, such as tracheostomy and the first cardiac surgery. Currently, the problematic issue is whether to submit him to definitive cardiac procedure or initiate palliative care. The heart surgery involves technical difficulties for total correction, and it probably will not make ventilator weaning easier. On the other hand, palliative care holds many possibilities and they have never been discussed. Withdrawing life support was never an issue.
The decisions became more difficult in this case because they rely totally on the medical staff. The family has poor emotional bond with the child. Despite the possibility of aid provided by local social service, for transport fees, for example, parents rarely visit him or make phone calls to enquire about the child.