A 79 yr old Caucasian female affected by heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) and chronic kidney disease was admitted to the hospital because of diarrhoea associated with fever and griping abdominal pain that appeared just a few hours after a meal based on pasta with meat sauce. The patient took ciprofloxacin for three days as indicated by the general practitioner before being admitted to our ward. The patient was alert, oriented and afebrile; moderate pain in mesogastrium and hypogastrium after deep palpation was noted during the physical examination. Laboratory investigations revealed an increased WBC count with neutrophilia, raised reactive C protein (CRP) and faecal calprotectin.
The abdominal CT scan performed in the Emergency Department on the day before the admission in our ward showed thickening of all the colic walls with associated hyperdensity of the local adipose tissue and multiple enlarged mesenteric lymph nodes .
The patient was thought to be affected by infective colitis; consequently, clinicians required multiple blood cultures and stool tests before starting empiric antibiotic therapy with ciprofloxacin and metronidazole.
Initially, this therapeutic strategy seemed to be effective; in fact, the patient denied further diarrhoea episodes and the abdominal pain disappeared. Nevertheless, clinicians observed the appearance of a persistent low-grade fever (37.4–37-6 °C) and the blood tests showed an increase of markers of phlogosis, such as RCP (97.59 mg/L), and WBC count (20.69 * 103/μL).
Clinicians decided to repeat abdominal TC scan with contrast medium, which revealed multiple hypodense oval-shaded lesions provided with hyperdense borders during the arterial phase in the liver . The abdominal MRI performed the next day confirmed the presence of these lesions that were hypointense in T1 weighted image and hyperintense in T2 one , which were supposed to be the expression of metastatic disease by the radiologists.
The dosage of neoplastic markers was requested (CA 125, CA 19–9, ferritin, β2-microglobulin, CEA, NSE, α-fetoprotein), finding slightly increased ferritin levels, CA-125 and β2-microglobulin .
The patient underwent multiple colonoscopies that showed four benign adenomatous polyps and excluded the presence of lesions suggestive of neoplasms or IBD; the successive histological exam ruled out microscopic colitis.
Total body TC scan with contrast medium was performed searching for the possible primary neoplasm but resulted negative. Later, 18F-FDG - positron emission tomography (PET) did not show any lesion with altered metabolism, which is a possible finding suggestive of neoplastic disease. PET was preferred to MRI because of its ability to identify lesions with metabolic activity, such as metastases.
Because it was not possible to find any possible cancer with an imaging technique, the next step would have been the biopsy of one of the lesions to characterize them and identify the possible primitive site of the malignancy; unfortunately, the procedure was considered too dangerous for the patient because of the small size of the hepatic lesions and the consequent significant technique difficulty. Meanwhile, clinicians obtained stool tests and blood cultures (BACTEC 9120) results: while the firsts were negative, the second ones resulted positive for Gram-negative bacilli. In agar MacConkey lactose-negative colonies were observed, successive biochemical identification and antibiogram (MICROSCAN Walkaway - DADE Behering) identified Y. enterocolitica sensitive to doxycycline, gentamicin, ceftazidime and cefixime and resistant to amoxicillin/clavulanate and cotrimoxazole.
Consequently, specific antibiotic therapy with cefixime and doxycycline was started, resulting in the fever’s disappearance and the significant reduction of WBC count and RCP after a week .
The patient continued this therapy for one month; abdominal MRI after three weeks and two months showed the initial reduction and the subsequent complete disappearance of the lesions.
Finally, blood culture and stool exam were both negative at two months.
Since microliver abscesses by Y. enterocolitica are strictly associated with haemochromatosis, clinicians excluded this pathology by liver MRI and the percentage of transferrin saturation.