A 64-year-old man with diabetes mellitus who received chemoradiotherapy for small cell lung cancer of right lower lobe of lung 20 years previously underwent right middle and lower lobectomy with chest wall (3rd-to-5th rib) resection and lymph node dissection because of lung squamous cell carcinoma. The chest wall defect was reconstructed by an expanded PTFE sheet. Three months after surgery, the patient was referred our hospital with high fever and consciousness disorder. Laboratory findings showed white blood cell (WBC) count of 12,710/μL and C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 23.68 mg/dL, and chest computed tomography (CT) showed fluid collection in the chest wall around the PTFE sheet (Japan Gore-Tex Inc., Tokyo, Japan) reconstruction . Continuous drainage of the fluid collection in the chest wall and administration of intravenous antibiotics (doripenem hydrate, 1.5 g/day) were initiated as empiric treatment, after which the WBC count and CRP level gradually decreased. Because bacterial culture of the wound revealed a small amount of Streptococcus mitis whereas blood cultures was negative of bacteria, we determined that these therapies would not completely cure the infection around the reconstruction. Furthermore, because we considered the risk of infection spreading into the thoracic cavity by removing the ePTFE sheet, we performed debridement and switched to VAC (3 M Japan Limited, Tokyo, Japan) therapy without removing the PTFE sheet 2 weeks after starting drainage. We changed the VAC system every 2–3 days and de-escaleted to ceftriaxone sodium hydrate (2 g/day) which was revealed by drug susceptibility test based on clinical and laboratory standards institute as minimal inhibitory concentration less than 0.12, whereby the CRP level gradually decreased and the space around the PTFE sheet was observed to decrease on chest CT . Although administration of intravenous antibiotics was terminated 4 weeks after starting VAC therapy, the CRP level did not rise , formation of wound granulation progressed, and the area around the PTFE sheet remained clean . We performed wound closure 6 weeks after starting VAC therapy, the CRP level remained stable, and the patient was discharged home 67 days after hospitalization. The space around the PTFE sheet did not show any renewed increase on chest CT at 4 weeks after wound closure , and a month has passed without no recurrence since the chest CT.