A 41-year-old Caucasian woman was diagnosed with HR+ HER2- breast cancer with bone, pulmonary, and pleural metastases. Treatment with gosereline (GnRH analogue) every 12 weeks, letrozole (2.5mg daily) and ribociclib was initiated simultaneously. Ribociclib 600mg was administered in 4-week cycles (21/7-day schedule). Before initiation of ribociclib the patient had normal liver enzymes and there were no signs of liver metastases on radiological examination. There was no history of chronic liver disease, alcohol or drug abuse and the patient did not take any other medications.
After one cycle of ribociclib a significant reduction of the tumour load was confirmed radiologically. After the second cycle of ribociclib, a relevant elevation of transaminases (AST 252 U/l, ALT 639 U/l, ALP and bilirubin within normal range) was observed with consecutive withdrawal of ribociclib and letrozole. Investigations for acute viral hepatitis (Hepatitis A, B, C, E, HSV1/2, CMV, EBV, VZV, HHV6 and HHV7) and autoimmune liver disease (anti-nuclear antibody, anti-smooth muscle antibody, anti-liver-kidney-microsomal type 1 antibody, level of immunoglobulin IgG, anti-neutrophil antibody, anti-proteinase 3 antibody and anti-myeloperoxidase antibody) were negative or within normal range, respectively. Ultrasound of the liver did not show any abnormalities.
Despite discontinuation of ribociclib, liver enzymes continued to rise . Acute DILI with hepatocellular pattern was suspected and RUCAM score was 7 points supporting a probable causal association of liver injury due to ribociclib therapy. Liver biopsy two weeks after discontinuation of ribociclib showed extensive lobular necrosis accentuated in zone III (30% of liver parenchyma) with mild portal und moderate lobular lymphohistiocytic inflammation. The histology did not show evidence for metastasis or viral hepatitis. In accordance to previous case reports, treatment with prednisone 60mg OD was initiated 14 days after treatment discontinuation (, ). Due to further increase in liver enzymes (peak ALT 2896 U/l, peak AST 875 U/l), onset of jaundice (peak bilirubin 353 µmol/l), coagulopathy (peak INR 1.8), and decrease in serum albumin levels (nadir 28g/l) despite corticosteroid treatment, a second liver biopsy was performed 25 days after ribociclib withdrawal. Results showed a similar result with 30% lobular necrosis accentuated in zone III with numerous ceroid-containing macrophages and surrounded by apoptotic cells, moderate lymphohistiocytic portal and lobular inflammation and mild cholestasis. Moreover, there were signs of endothelialitis and slight siderosis but no evidence for fibrosis . Again, histology suggested no alternative causes for liver injury. Additional investigation with MRI excluded other parenchymal liver and bile duct pathology . Due to the extent of liver necrosis, treatment with N-acetylcysteine according to Prescott et al. was added . Prednisone was tapered after transaminase had peaked. Liver enzymes and bilirubin normalised within 10 weeks after discontinuation of ribociclib. Encephalopathy was not observed at any time during the course of liver injury.
After liver enzyme normalisation, tumour progression led to reintroduction of letrozole which did not affect liver enzymes. Given previous case series described safety of sequential CDK 4/6 inhibitor re-challenge after liver injury due to ribociclib (, , ) and as the oncological response to ribociclib was very good, therapy with palbociclib 125mg OD was added 6 weeks after liver enzyme normalization with close laboratory monitoring. Unfortunately, the patient developed mild liver enzyme elevation (ALT peak 64 U/l, ASAT peak 44 U/l) after only 4 subsequent doses of palbociclib. After discontinuation of palbociclib, liver enzymes normalized. Due to tumour progression, treatment with letrozole and GnRH analogue were reinitiated thereafter. No further hepatopathy was observed under this therapy.
The case was reported to the pharamcovigilance unit of the Swiss national authority for therapeutic products (Swissmedic). Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this case report.