A 35-year-old man arrived at our hospital for a physical examination in November 2018.
The patient had no special past history.
The patient had no special personal and family history.
Normal physical examination without any obvious signs of abnormality.
The HbA1c result of 52.7% was out of the expected detection range . The HbA1c of the patient was remarkably elevated in comparison to the reference range (4.0%-6.4%). Data arising from routine blood analyses are shown in Table . The patient had normal liver function, normal fasting glucose, and no previous history of diabetes. The HbA1c test was performed using the Biorad Variant II Turbo 2.0 automatic glycated Hb analyzer (Biorad, United States); the HbA1c value was abnormally elevated, although the patient had no history of diabetes. Therefore, we suspected that the patient possessed Hb variants that interfered with the results of the HbA1c test.
We attempted to confirm the HbA1c value by using the Arkray HA-8160 automatic glycated Hb analyzer (Arcolai, Japan), which features high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), and the ARCHITECT c4000 system (Abbott, United States), which operates by enzymatic methods. The Arkray HA-8160 system returned no result; the instrument showed that the HbA1c peak did not appear, and there was an abnormal protruding peak on the left of peak A0 . The ARCHITECT c16000 enzyme assay returned a result of 5.4%.
Next, we used the Capillary2FP automated Hb analyzer (Sebia, France) to find the presence of abnormal Hb. Capillary electrophoresis showed no abnormal Hb bands .
In addition, the patient's genomic DNA was extracted using a Genomic DNA Isolation Kit (Kaipu, China) and the HBA1, HBA2, and HBB genes were amplified with specific forward/reverse primers and sequenced on an ABI3500 sequencer. HBA1 forward primer was 5´-CGCGCCAGCCAATGAGC-3´ and HBA1 reverse primer was 5´-ACACACA TGGCTAGAACCTCTCTG-3´. HBA2 forward primer was 5´-GGGCT CCGCGCCAGCCAA-3´ and HBA2 reverse primer was 5´-CAAGGACCTCTCT GCAGCT-3´. HBB forward primer was 5´-TACGGCTGTCATCACTTAG-3´and HBB reverse primer was 5´-GCCACACTGAGTGAGCTGCACT-3´. We extracted a sample of whole blood from the patient and extracted genomic DNA. This was used as a template to amplify the Hb gene. Polymerase chain reaction amplicons were then sequenced. No thalassemia mutation types were found in the sequencing range for α1 and α2. However, the β-globin gene possessed a histidine > tyrosine (CAC >TAC) mutation in the 7th amino acid, C>T . Next, we searched the HbA1c variant library website , which revealed that the Hb genotype was Hb Fukuoka (HBB:c.7C>T). Finally, the patient was confirmed to possess a heterozygous Hb Fukuoka mutation.