A 1-year-old boy accidentally swallowed meperfluthrin. He had no respiratory disease symptoms for the first 3 days. On the fourth day, he developed cough, at a frequency of 4–5 times a day, accompanied by sputum, and no wheezing. No dyspnoea or skin cyanosis was observed. Then the patient is hospitalized for treatment. On physical examination, bilateral pupil diameter was 3 mm and reactive to light. Thickened breathing and sputum sounds could be heard on lung auscultation. Other clinical parameters included respiratory rate of 28 breaths per minute and heart rate of 132 beats per minute; blood pressure was 79/46 mmHg. Initial arterial blood gas analysis indicated pH 7.418, pO2 93.5 mmHg, pCO2 34.7 mmHg, HCO3 22 mmol/L, base excess − 1.5 mmol/L, plasma lactate 1.6 mmol/L. Serum electrolytes, lactate dehydrogenase, creatine phosphokinase, alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, and creatinine level were normal. Routine blood tests were performed, with a normal C-reactive protein (CRP) level; and electroencephalogram showed no abnormality; left ventricular ejection fraction is 66%. Computed tomography (CT) of the lungs showed ground glass shadows, diffuse grid-like shadows, multiple patch-like shadows, thickened pulmonary septa, and uneven brightness in both lungs . Under quiet sleep conditions, lung moisture function was measured using the German Jaeger Pulmonary Function Instrument. The results showed that the tidal volume was 9.2 mL/kg, the respiration rate was 25.7 breaths per min, the inhalation time was 0.88 s, the exhalation time was 1.46 s, and the inhalation-to-exhalation ratio was 0.6. The peak time ratio was 12.2%, and the peak volume ratio was 17.7%. Therefore, moderate-to-severe obstructive ventilatory dysfunction was considered. Lung CT findings indicated pulmonary inflammatory exudation. Lung moisture function test indicated small airway obstruction.
The patient was recommended to perform inhalation of budesonide suspension to reduce small airway inflammatory exudation and atomized inhalation of terbutaline to expand small airway treatment after hospitalization. Budesonide suspension 1 mg and terbutaline nebulized liquid 2.5 mg each time, twice daily. Fever occurred on day 6. Body temperature fluctuated between 37 °C and 40 °C. Pupil size was normal, blood pressure was stable, breathing and pulse were stable, laboratory test blood routine and CRP were normal. There was cough with sputum, and therefore, lung inflammation was considered. On day 10, cough, fever, and lung phlegm disappeared, and lung CT showed improved lesions and shadow area absorption . The child was discharged from the hospital, and home observations were continued.
On day 50, the child had no cough or fever, and the lung CT condition had improved . In lung moisture function measurements, the tidal volume was 9.9 mL/kg, respiratory rate was 27.9 breaths per min, inhalation time was 0.79 s, exhalation time was 1.36 s, and the inhalation-to-exhalation ratio was 0.58. The peak time ratio was 21%, and the peak volume ratio was 24.4%, suggesting moderate-to-severe obstructive ventilatory dysfunction. No symptoms had occurred after 12 months of follow up. The lung function had returned to a normal range for the patient’s age group.