A 47-year-old Chinese man presented to our department of ophthalmology with a 26-month history of left upper eyelid painless swelling and redness. The patient was initially treated with a course of intravenous penicillin, which resulted in temporary regression of the lesion. There had been no similar family history of this appearance to date.
Physical examination revealed that the left lacrimal gland was obviously swelling, which presented with a soft, non-tender and smooth-surfaced. Slit lamp examination was otherwise unremarkable aside from bilateral mild cataract. Laboratory testing revealed a white blood cell count of 9.8 × 10-9/L with 15.91% eosinophils(normal range: 0.05-0.5 × 10-9/L). Serum concentration of immunoglobulin E was elevated at 469.3 IU/ml, and immunoglobulin G4 was 295 mg/dL (normal range less than 135 mg/dL). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination of the orbit showed that the left lacrimal gland was lobulated with a distinct margin and was predominantly isointense on T1-weighted images. Isointense on T2-weighted images and an obvious heterogeneous enhancement on contrast-enhanced MRI images are shown in Figure . The chest radiograph was normal and no cervical lymph nodes were palpable.Next, we advised the patient to be hospitalized and the patient underwent an orbital biopsy. Intraoperative frozen sections were reported as being consistent with a benign tumor. Therefore, a complete resection was undertaken. Perioperatively, it was noted that the mass had a smooth and homogeneous grey appearance. There was no evidence of haemorrhage or cystic change and borders were indistinct. A definite diagnosis of KD was made by histopathology and immunohistochemical examinations of representative resected specimens after surgery. Histopathological examination demonstrated follicular hyperplasia with evidence of reactive germinal centres. Eosinophilic infiltration, involving the interfollicular areas, and proliferation of post capillary venules were observed. These features enabled a diagnosis of KD to be made . Further analysis, including immuohistochemistry, was undertaken, demonstrating positive staining for CK, Vimentin, CD3, CD4, CD20, CD21, CD117, CD5, CD8, CD23, IgG and IgG4 (30 per high-power field) and negative staining for CD10 and CD34 , the ratio of IgG4 to IgG positive cells was about 35%. The pathological diagnosis, which was also the final diagnosis, was KD. However, some ophthalmologists questioned whether the histological and immunohistochemical findings were also had common features with IgG4-related disease, which is a newly recognized fibro-inflammatory condition characterized by tumefactive lesions, a dense lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate rich in IgG4-positive plasma cells, storiform fibrosis, and elevated serum IgG4 concentrations.
The patient was discharged following his surgery and treated with prednisone 25 mg/day for four weeks and then reduce by 5 mg/day every two weeks. His symptoms gradually improved. Serum immunoglobulin E (IgE) levels dropped to 125.9 IU/mL and eosinophil’s decreased to 0.69 × 109/L after 2 months. There was no sign of recurrence in twelve months of regular follow-up.