A 46-year-old Caucasian woman was referred to our endocrinology clinic with a history of thyroxine-resistant hypothyroidism and persistent hypertension. She complained of mild numbness affecting her legs, but denied weakness. Her BP was elevated to 200/100 mmHg, and she was noted to have peripheral oedema in her shins. Blood tests revealed a mild derangement in liver function tests and a raised platelet count. A liver ultrasound confirmed no abnormalities. She was discharged from the clinic on antihypertensives and an increased dose of levothyroxine.
One year later, she was admitted with symptoms and signs of progressive peripheral motor and sensory disturbance. She had noted ascending numbness in both legs and both hands and complained of weakness in her lower legs with associated difficulty in walking.
Her examination revealed a BP of 205/108 mmHg, thickening of the skin over her hands and feet with associated peripheral oedema. There were palpable, soft rubbery lymph nodes in the cervical and submandibular region, and signs of a peripheral motor and sensory disturbance although joint position and vibration senses were well preserved. Ophthalmological examination revealed bilateral papilloedema with no haemorrhages.
Initial tests at presentation confirmed a mild thrombocythaemia, a mildly raised alkaline phosphatase, moderately impaired renal function (creatinine clearance 55 ml/minute) and mild-moderate proteinuria of 0.81 g/24 hours.
Renal ultrasound showed normal sized kidneys, and urine analysis demonstrated 3+ blood, 1+ protein, with dysmorphic red cells on urinary microscopy. Echocardiography revealed moderate left ventricular hypertrophy.
A renal biopsy was undertaken , and revealed a membranoproliferative/mesangiocapillary glomerulonephritis with endocapillary hypercellularity and obliteration or narrowing of many capillary lumens. Three out of 13 glomeruli were obsolete. Electron microscopy showed irregular reduplication of the basement membrane. There was mild hyaline thickening of small arteries and arterioles. Electron microscopy identified marked subendothelial widening with a fine granular material. IgM outlined some of the peripheral lobules and there was very variable and mild deposition of C3, but no IgG, IgA nor C1q deposition.
Computed tomography (CT) scans of the patient's chest and abdomen showed widespread but small lymphadenopathy in the thorax and axilla, and para-aortic area, with splenomegaly. Subsequent cervical lymph node biopsy showed only mild sinus histiocytosis. Trephine bone marrow biopsy revealed histologically normal marrow, with normal lymphocyte subsets on phenotyping. Biopsy of the sural nerve revealed an active neuropathy with prominent inflammatory features. There was evidence of axonal degeneration and demyelination.
A working diagnosis of POEMS syndrome was considered as the patient fulfilled most of the criteria at the time, with the exception of a paraprotein band . In the light of the neuropathy, it was decided to initiate a 5-day course of intravenous immunoglobulins, and low-dose steroids (oral prednisolone 10 mg/day) were also started. Her follow-up was transferred to our hospital.
On initial presentation to us, the patient's BP was elevated (systolic BP >140 mmHg), however, following this, her BP was better controlled with systolic values in the range 110-120 mmHg and diastolic pressures in the range 60-70 mmHg.
On 10 mg of prednisolone daily, her proteinuria initially rose to 1.5 g/24 hours, but settled to approximately 0.7-0.8 g/24 hours, however, her renal function continued to deteriorate . Nerve conduction studies suggested a progression of her neuropathy. At this stage (just under 2 years from presentation with nephropathy), it was decided to add in low-dose mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) (250 mg twice a day) and to double the steroid dose. Since then, her renal function has remained reasonably stable, and proteinuria minimal, despite a steady reduction in prednisolone dose to a maintenance level of 7.5 mg/day.
There was a minor unexpected rise in her serum creatinine 2 years later, which promptly reversed with a transient rise in steroid dose to 20 mg/day. Around this time, she also began to develop increasingly abnormal liver function tests with rising gamma glutamyl transpeptidase (GT), alkaline phosphatase and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) - which prompted a liver biopsy. This only demonstrated nodular degenerative hyperplasia, and interestingly, the abnormal liver tests also partially resolved with the transient increase in steroid dose.
The neuropathy appears to have stabilised, and the patient remains well 6 years after initial presentation, with stable moderate renal impairment, mild proteinuria and stable moderately impaired liver tests.
Recently, using immunofixation, we have demonstrated a monoclonal band of IgA lambda; our patient finally fulfilling the criteria for POEMS syndrome.