A 68-year-old man with an unremarkable medical history had experienced dyspnoea on exertion for 1 month. After c-AVB was found on an electrocardiogram in the outpatient clinic, he was immediately transferred by ambulance to our hospital. The vital signs revealed a blood pressure of 157/83 mmHg and a heart rate of 44 b.p.m. The electrocardiogram showed a sinus rhythm at a rate of 105 b.p.m. with c-AVB and an escape rhythm of 40 b.p.m. in the left bundle branch block configuration . The chest X-ray did not reveal pleural effusion, pulmonary congestion, or cardiac enlargement. The echocardiographic findings did not show any structural abnormality, and the left ventricular function was preserved. Thus, the patient was considered to be a good candidate for a DDD pacemaker, and the decision for permanent pacemaker implantation was made.
The preoperative left subclavian vein angiography showed the persistent left superior vena cava (PLSVC) and the left brachiocephalic vein, which appeared to drain into the right atrium via the superior vena cava (SVC) (Video 1). Via the left subclavian vein approach, pacemaker implantation was performed. However, a guidewire and electrode lead could not be guided into the right ventricle although they seemed to take the brachiocephalic SVC route . The vein angiography was repeated, this time from the level above the right atrium, but the contrast medium did not drain directly into the right atrium (Video 2). Although an attempt to insert the electrode lead through the PLSVC was made, the tortuous nature of the blood vessel prevented the insertion of the electrode lead . Instead, a temporary stimulation electrode was inserted by puncturing the femoral vein. Reconsidering the procedure, contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan was performed, which revealed the absence of the SVC and showed that the bilateral brachiocephalic veins drained into the inferior vena cava by way of the azygos vein . Furthermore, the PLSVC drained into both the right and left atria. Additional transthoracic and oesophageal echocardiography was performed and did not show any other congenital vascular or coronary defects.
We concluded that the transvenous endocardial pacemaker lead implantation was not feasible. Thus, we decided that the LP implantation was the best option for the patient due to its less invasive nature, and we successfully implanted the LP via a femoral vein approach .
The patient has been asymptomatic and after 6 months from implantation, he has never experienced heart failure or other complications such as infection and pacemaker dislodgement. Although the right ventricular (RV) pacing was 99.9%, the patient’s left ventricular ejection fraction was preserved at 54% and the brain natriuretic peptide level remained low (66.7 pg/mL).