A 27-year-old woman with no past medical history was admitted to the emergency department of our hospital with a 7-day history of dysphagia, especially for solid food, and odynophagia. She had no previous history of upper gastrointestinal complaints or any systemic symptoms. Her physical examination was normal as was an abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan. Routine admission laboratory studies were normal and serological tests (ELISA AXSYM Abbott) for anti-cytomegalovirus, anti-Epstein-Barr virus, anti-herpes simplex virus and anti-varicella zoster virus IgG/IgM antibodies excluded primary infection or reactivation. The serology results for EBV were: IgG (+) 125 IU/ml, IgM (−).
The patient underwent esophagoscopy, using an Olympus endoscope and multiple, well circumscribed ulcerations were identified in the upper and middle section of the esophagus. The ulcers were characterized as either shallow or of intermediate depth. A few deep ulcers were also seen. Viral infection was taken into consideration on the basis of the gastrointestinal symptoms and in the absence of any other demonstrable causes such as drug-induced esophagitis. Biopsy specimens were obtained from the identified ulcers and submitted for histopathologic evaluation. Tissue sections were also stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Microscopically, all specimens showed non-specific features of active esophagitis, including ulceration, neutrophilic and eosinophilic inflammation, and a basal cell hyperplasia. No viral inclusions, hyperchromaticity, or atypical mitoses were observed. Using real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) (artus LC PCR, QIAGEN), biopsy and blood specimens were tested for the most and less frequently identified esophageal pathogens (candida, CMV, HSV, EBV). No candida, CMV, HSV or EBV DNA was detected in blood samples. EBV DNA was detected only in tissue samples (1.6 × 103 copies/ml). Therefore, the patient was started on treatment with acyclovir at an oral dosage of 800 mg, five times daily for 5 days, with good resolution of the symptomatology. Follow-up endoscopic examination showed a clear improvement. PCR on biopsy materials was once more performed, but no EBV genome could be detected. Blood samples were also obtained, but no serological evidence of infection was reported. The patient has subsequently remained symptom-free.