A 44-year-old Chinese woman was admitted to our hospital due to liver occupation during physical examination. Her suspected identical twin was a patient with PJS and died of colon cancer. Her other relatives do not suffer from PJS. And the patient had more than 30 years with pigmentation on the lip and intermittent abdominal pain for more than 10 years. Pelvic computed tomography (CT) scans revealed nodular soft tissue tumor in the intestinal lumen of sigmoid colon, about 2.3 × 1.0 cm in size, surrounded by high-density contrast agent, suggesting polyps . Abdominal color ultrasound showed the high echo area in the left lobe of liver with clear boundary and regular shape. Abdominal CT scans revealed a round low-density mass in the left lobe of liver with a size of 3.1 × 2.1 cm and a clear boundary. Abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) indicated mild expansion of the distal bile duct of the lesion in addition to the above mass . Abdominal color ultrasound, CT and MRI prompted suspicion of primary liver tumor.
Grossly, a cystic papillary mass was seen in the hepatic bile duct, and the mass size was 2.1 × 2.8 × 1.7 cm. The distal hepatic bile duct was dilated. Macroscopically, the neoplasm had a clear boundary with the surrounding liver tissue, and did not invade the bile duct wall and surrounding liver tissue . Histology showed the mass was located in the hepatic bile duct. The bile duct wall and surrounding liver tissue were not invaded . The mass presented as complex papillary structures, a small amount of fine fibrovascular cores lined by 2 to 5 layers of cuboidal to columnar cells . And a small amount of mucus could be seen in the lumen. The neoplastic cells were abundant eosinophilic granular cytoplasm, with round or oval nuclei, clear nucleolus and the mitotic figure is rarely seen .
Immunohistochemical examination showed that tumor cells showed diffusely and intensely positive for MUC5AC, MUC6, CD117 , focal and patchy positivity of HepPar-1, multifocal positivity of S100P, MUC1 and negative for LKB1, CK20, MUC2, CDX-2. The Ki-67 proliferating index was 8% . Conclusively, our diagnosis of the hepatic lesion in this patient was “IOPN arising in PJS bile duct.”
Mutations included germline STK11 c.924G > A (p.W308*), exon 8 in 57.39% of 1157 reads, GNAS c.1433G > A (p.R478H), exon 1 in 52.5% of 1784 reads, and EGFR amplification with 3.69 folds in the patient (Results of complete NGS were summarized in Table ) were detected by NGS through TruSight Oncology 500 from Illumina.
The patient underwent hepatic left lateral lobectomy due to liver neoplasm. After 18 months of follow-up by CT and MRI surveillance, no evidence of tumor recurrence or progression was observed.