The patient was a seven-month-old white girl who was the third child of young, healthy and non-consanguineous parents. The family history was unremarkable with regard to congenital defects. The patient was born at 40 weeks of gestational age, by vaginal delivery, with cephalic presentation, weighing 2,560 g (P3-10), measuring 47 cm (P3-10), with head circumference of 34.5 cm (P50-98) and Apgar scores of 2 and 7 at the first and fifth minutes, respectively. Her mother said that she had used misoprostol in the second month of pregnancy, at a single dose of 600 μg (three tablets) orally, with the objective of inducing abortion. She presented abdominal cramps and slight vaginal bleeding soon after taking misoprostol. She also drank alcohol in small amounts and smoked an average of three cigarettes a day throughout the pregnancy. Her glycemia was normal.
The child presented respiratory failure and needed tracheal intubation soon after birth. An imperforate anus was identified at the first evaluation, and colostomy was performed on the first day of life. In addition, genitography revealed an associated rectourethral fistula. Difficulty in nasogastric tube insertion was also noted. Esophageal atresia with a tracheoesophageal fistula was identified from an esophagogram. This was surgically corrected on the second day of life.
At the age of seven months, her body weight was 3,320 g (P < 3), height 58 cm (P < 3) and head circumference 37.5 cm (P < 2). She had anteverted nares and a long philtrum . No facial palsy or involvement of other cranial nerves was observed. Her left hand presented a reduction defect, with absence of the extremities of the second, third and fifth fingers and camptodactyly of the fourth finger . The ipsilateral lower limb presented significant shortening, especially rhizomelic shortening. Her left foot presented a mirror configuration with seven toes and no identifiable hallux (
and ). The right-side limbs were normal. The pelvis was hypoplastic, with hypoplasia of the labia majora. Neurological evaluation identified hypotonia.
A computed tomography scan of the head showed that the lateral ventricles were prominent. Abdominal ultrasound detected right kidney agenesis and left kidney pyelocaliceal duplication. Radiographic evaluation found agenesis of the distal and medial phalanges and hypoplasia of the proximal phalanges of the second and third fingers of the left hand. No phalanges were observed on the fifth finger. Scoliosis and partial sacral agenesis were observed in the spine. On the left side, iliac bone and femur were hypoplastic, the tibia was absent with a duplicated fibula and the foot presented duplicated tarsal bones and seven metatarsals and toes with no hallux (mirror polydactyly of the foot) . Echocardiography demonstrated an atrial septal defect. GTG-banded karyotyping (≥ 550 bands) gave normal results.