A 57-year-old man was admitted to our hospital after displaying symptoms of dysarthria and ataxic gait for 2 days. The patient was prescribed oral metronidazole (400 mg four times a day) and levofloxacin (200 mg twice a day) for 20 days due to nasosinusitis. No other drugs were prescribed or used by the patient in the 20 days before admission to our hospital. He had hypertension, type 2 diabetes, and chronic nephritis, but no history of alcohol abuse. He did not take any other medications, such as chemotherapy or antiepileptic drugs. During diagnosis, neurological examination showed that the upward and outward movements of bilateral eyeballs were limited, and horizontal and vertical nystagmus were observed. The muscular tension of his four limbs was weak, tendon reflex (+), meningeal irritation sign (−), bilateral Babinski sign (+), the deep and superficial sensibility of the limbs were normal, and bilateral finger-nose test and heel-knee-tibia test could not be completed. Laboratory findings showed that Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 58 U/L, serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) was 61 U/L, total protein was 62.86 g/L, γ-glutamyltransferase (GGT) was 107 U/L, uric acid was 157.5 umol/L, glutamic acid dehydrogenase was 8 g/L, sugar level was 6.66 mmol/L, and potassium level was 3.08 mmol/L. Lumbar puncture revealed that the level of protein in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was increased to 893 mg/L, but other CSF test results were normal. The brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), performed 20 days after initiation of metronidazole, showed hyper-intensities in the bilateral cerebellar dentate nuclei, medulla oblongata, midbrain, red nuclei and corpus callosum on T2 FLAIR images. In addition, hyperintense lesions were observed in the corresponding areas of the corpus callosum on DWI images. In the present case, there were no other white matter abnormalities on MRI. .
The offending drug was discontinued immediately, but on the 3rd day of in-hospital stay, he was unable to stand or walk. Also, the patient showed signs of confusion. We administered high-dose of intravenous methylprednisolone pulse therapy (500 mg/day). Meanwhile, 100 mg thiamine was given by muscular injection and 1 mg Vitamin B12 was given by intravenous injection. On the 4th day of his hospital stay and on the 2nd day after receiving glucocorticoids treatment, his dysarthria improved significantly and he was able to walk, albeit with some balance issues. On the 5th day, the dose of glucocorticoids (GCs) was progressively reduced. Half a month later, the patient’s symptoms resolved completely. Follow-up MRI examination showed that almost all lesions disappeared but the splenium of corpus callosum residual had lesions 18 days after initiation of GCs. .