In August 2015, a 46-year-old Caucasian woman referred to our Institution for a metastatic breast cancer. Three years before she had undergone a left quadrantectomy and ipsilateral axillary nodal dissection for a pT1c pN3 M0 infiltrating ductal carcinoma, grade 3, with Estrogen Receptor negative, Progesterone Receptor negative, MIB-1 60%, HER2 immunohistochemistry 3+. Then, she underwent adjuvant chemotherapy with doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide for four cycles followed by four courses of Docetaxel plus Trastuzumab and then Trastuzumab only for one year at standard doses. Thereafter, she started regular follow-up, negative for locoregional and distant recurrence, until July 2015, when an abdomen ultrasound showed multiple hypoechoic nodules in the liver (the largest with a maximum diameter of 22.3 × 20.7 mm), consistent with metastatic lesions. A positron emission tomography (PET) and a contrast-enhanced total body computed tomography (CT) scan confirmed the presence of multiple secondary lesions in the liver and multiple bilateral pulmonary and hilar lymph node metastases. According to the disease stage, biomolecular tumor characteristics, and clinical conditions (ECOG PS 0), in August 2015 she started 1st line therapy with Pertuzumab plus Trastuzumab and Docetaxel every 3 weeks at standard doses. The CT scan after 3 courses of treatment showed a partial response with an almost complete disappearance and cystic transformation of both hepatic and pulmonary neoplastic lesions. Based on the tumor response, treatment was continued with the same regimen up to 6 cycles. In December 2015 the PET and CT restaging showed a radiological complete response .
Hence, she reassumed the same regimen up to 8 courses and then she continued with only dual HER2-blockage for further 4 cycles. However, in April 2016 she started suffering from haze and headache. Brain CT and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scans [Fig. ] revealed the emergence of brain metastatic lesions and leptomeningeal metastases.
Then, in May 2016 she started 2nd line therapy with T-DM1 at 3.6 mg/kg every 3 weeks with concurrent Whole Brain Radiotherapy (WBRT) at total doses of 30 Gy in 10 fractions .
A brain MRI after 3 courses of T-DM1 showed a complete response with a total disappearance of all CNS metastatic lesions and complete resolution of neurological symptoms.
In April 2017, the brain MRI and thoracic-abdomen CT restaging after 14 cycles of T-DM1 confirmed the CNS complete response, with control of extracranial disease. To date, the patient has completed 17 courses of T-DM1 treatment (CNS PFS > 13 months), with no safety and neurological concerns without need of corticosteroid use .