Our patient was a 40-year-old right-handed woman with a previous history of recurrent deep vein thrombosis (DVT), reportedly related to oral contraceptive use and not managed medically. Otherwise, her past medical history was unremarkable for stroke risk factors. She awoke one morning complaining of dizziness and shortly thereafter began to act strangely, including missing a step while walking and getting into a low-impact collision while driving her son to work. She was alert and speaking clearly following this event, and her son suggested that she walk the short distance home. A couple of hours later, the patient was dysarthric and confused. She was subsequently found with evidence of trauma likely due to falls, including contusions on her feet, shin, and face for which she was not able to provide a history. Her initial Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) was documented to be between 8 and 10 by Emergency Medical Services.
Upon arrival at the ED, our patient’s GCS deteriorated to 6 (motor 4, eyes 1, verbal 1) and she was temporarily intubated. Neurological exam was significant for subtle anisocoria with right pupil dilation, but both pupils were equally reactive to light and there was no gaze deviation. Initial medical workup including lumbar puncture and electroencephalography was unremarkable. CT head without contrast showed no acute intracranial abnormalities. A repeat CT head with angiogram performed the same day were also unremarkable. Finally, a brain MRI with angiogram the following day demonstrated evidence of acute infarcts in the bilateral thalami and midbrain with angiographic findings suggestive of occlusion of the right artery of Percheron . Unfortunately, our patient was past the time window for thrombolysis. She was managed conservatively and then admitted to a local rehabilitation centre for post-stroke rehabilitation once medically stable. Investigations for stroke etiology, including coagulopathy screen, ultrasound for DVT, and transthoracic echocardiogram with contrast bubble study for intracardiac shunting, were unremarkable. A thorough vasculitis workup was not performed given the lack of evidence of brain angiitis on imaging or clinical signs of a systemic rheumatologic disease.
She was ultimately transferred to an Acquired Brain Injury (ABI) Rehabilitation Program 59 days following her initial presentation. Her admitting neurological examination revealed slightly reduced left-sided strength in both her upper and lower extremity without other focal neurological deficits. Meanwhile, significant cognitive impairment was identified, specifically involving her memory and executive functioning. Regarding functional status, she was using a wheelchair regularly for safety and cognitive reasons but was physically able to perform transfers and climb stairs with supervision, she was alert but not oriented, she was occasionally incontinent of urine, and she displayed lack of judgement and some impulsiveness. A trial of neurostimulants (amantadine up to 100 mg BID and methylphenidate up to 15 mg BID) aimed at improving her cognition did not lead to any functional benefit.
As an inpatient on the ABI unit, our patient underwent several days of standardized neuropsychological assessment at four months following her initial event. A battery of tests was administered over several sessions, which assessed her intellectual functioning, processing speed, attention, working memory, visuospatial function, memory, and executive functioning. She was noted to have a profound memory deficit, with performance in the lowest percentile on nearly all tests of immediate recall, delayed recall, and recognition (i.e. she was unable to recall or recognize either verbal or visual information after delays of approximately 20 to 30 min). While she tended to perform in the low average to average range on tests of working memory, she could not encode these memories into long-term storage. Moreover, consistent with a severe anterograde and retrograde amnesic syndrome, she self-reported an inability to form any new episodic memories or recall any events which occurred before her stroke, including the inability to recall memories of her childhood. While she also performed poorly on tests of executive function, it was difficult to determine the true extent of these deficits as her ability to perform these tasks and learn from feedback may have been confounded with her memory deficits. Importantly, her relatively intact basic attention, working memory, and social skills made it extremely difficult for those around her to determine the extent of her memory impairments. At 1 year follow-up, the patient’s neuropsychological assessment showed mild improvement in her visual memory functioning, but her other memory scores remained weak and consistent with her previous assessment . Prior recommendations including 24-h supervision, repetition of information, provision of one-step instructions, and gradually increasing physical and mental activity were still being employed by her family with good tolerance of these strategies.