An 84-year-old female patient with a history of osteoporosis presented with pain and
soft-tissue swelling of her right distal femur and with claudication and shortening
deformity of the affected extremity for 6 months before she presented to our
hospital. The patient’s clinical history was inaccurate, but there was no specific
trauma or any known injury. Her activities of daily were initially unaffected. She
first sought help from a traditional bone setter and was diagnosed with osteoporosis
and knee osteoarthritis without any radiographs once symptoms worsened. The patient
was treated conservatively with traditional Chinese plaster and herbal medicine and
referred to a local physical therapy clinic for thermal modalities and therapeutic
exercises. However, she failed to show any improvement despite a period of
conservative treatment. The author examined the patient when she came to our
orthopedic clinic 6 months later and suspected the presence of a possible fracture.
Subsequent radiographic imaging examinations including X-ray and computed tomography
scan revealed the left femoral supracondylar nonunion. Imaging and physical
examination revealed the following challenges: osteoporosis, shortening about 5 cm,
soft-tissue contracture, muscle atrophy, and joint stiffness .
In anticipation of the expected difficulties in reducing the fracture, distracting
the soft tissue contractures and preventing neurovascular complications in this
patient, a 2-stage procedure was planned and discussed with the patient. In the
first stage, the Ilizarov external fixator installation was applied to the patient
in a supine position on the fracture table under epidural anesthesia. Entire injured
extremity was prepared and draped. Then application of the 2 preassembled circular
frames of the femur and tibia was done, which was connected with 3 hinges
distributing equally and flexing centrally around the knee. The femoral frame
consisted of proximal blocs of 2 femoral arches connected together with rods, 1
complete ring proximal to the fracture, and 1 intermediate five-eighths ring between
the fracture and knee. The five-eighths ring was connected to the complete ring with
4 rods, and the concavity of the five-eighths ring was directly behind the thigh.
Then, the proximal arches were connected to the complete ring with 1 oblique support
(an anterolateral rod) and 1 longitudinal support (a lateral rod). One reference
Schanz pin and one wire were used to help frame application on the femur. The Schanz
pin was inserted laterally at the level of the proximal fracture and attached to the
complete ring. The wire was inserted transversely into the level of femoral condyle
and attached to the five-eighths ring. The tibial frame consisted of 1 five-eighths
ring and 1 complete ring, which was connected with 4 rods, and the concavity of the
five-eighths ring was directly behind the leg. One reference Schanz pin and one wire
were used to help frame application on the tibia. The Schanz pin was inserted
anteriorly into the level under the tibial platform and attached to the five-eighths
ring. The wire was inserted transversely into the level of middle tibia and attached
to the complete ring. The 2 frames will center on the thigh and leg, respectively,
and all the different aspects of the femoral and tibial frames should be parallel to
the corresponding aspects of the thigh and leg, respectively. At the same time,
adequate space presenting between the frame and the skin all around should be
verified . When
the hinges were locked, as a motion unit, the Ilizarov fixator could restrict knee
movement and provide greater stability and allow the patient to stand and move
freely with the help of her family. And when the patients lie on her bed, the hinges
were allowed to unlock and the knee to flex 0 to 30°. Gradual distraction at the
fracture site started 3 days postoperatively for 3 weeks until the shortening and
deformity were corrected . In the second stage, the surgery of internal fixation with dual
plating was done at a translucent orthopedic table in supine position and under
combined spinal epidural anesthesia with tourniquet applied whenever feasible and
with a bolster below the affected knee. After standard sterilization and draping in
entire injured extremity and ipsilateral iliac crest, lateral incision was made
beginning at the Gerdy tubercle and extending proximally far enough to facilitate
adjustment of the lateral plate position and the medial plate insertion. Then
minimally stripping of soft tissue necessary for application of the plates, the
debridement of fibrotic and sclerotic areas, and the freshening of the end of the
fracture were done. The subsequent reduction of the fracture was carried out first
with preliminary K-wires followed by cancellous autograft obtained from iliac crest
placed in the fracture site. Afterward, fixation of the lateral column was completed
using locking lateral distal femoral plate and at last, under direct vision with
neurovascular protection: A relatively small reconstructive plate was arranged in
the anteromedial area of distal femur for the medial column using the single
incision with percutaneous screws . Alignment was checked under X-ray image intensification.
Rehabilitation exercises were begun from the first postoperative day for both stages.
During the distraction, the patient could stand and move for a short period with the
help of doctors and nurses or her family and flex her affected knee when lying in
bed everyday. The continuous passive motion machine was used after the second stage
with the flexion slowly increased from 0° to 60°. Then weight bearing was done
gradually based on the clinical and radiological improvements. Bony union was
documented on a radiograph at 3 months after operation . In the follow-up afterward, the
patient stubbornly refused X-ray examination but she had returned to her routine
life without pain and other symptoms at 6 months after operation .