A 71-year-old man (height, 169.4 cm; weight, 80.5 kg) presented with sudden hypoxia, hypotension, and decreased end-tidal carbon dioxide (EtCO2) during laparoscopic left hemi-hepatectomy.
The patient was diagnosed with hepatocellular carcinoma and was admitted to our hospital for laparoscopic left hemi-hepatectomy. Preoperative ECG, chest radiography, and laboratory findings were within the normal range except renal function test results [blood urea nitrogen (BUN): 20.4 mg/dL, creatinine: 1.44 mg/dL, and glomerular filtration rate: (GFR) 48.2 mL/min/1.73 m2]. Preoperative transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed degenerative moderate/severe aortic stenosis [aortic valve peak velocity: 3.2 m/s, peak pressure gradient (PG), 41 mmHg; mean PG, 20 mmHg]. For further evaluation, TEE was performed, and the aortic valve area on three dimensional multiplanar reconstruction planimetry was 1.13 cm2. The biventricular and other valves were normal or had mild degenerative changes.
Glycopyrrolate 0.2 mg was administered as premedication. In the operating room, standard monitoring [ECG, pulse oximetry (SpO2), noninvasive blood pressure, end-tidal CO2 (EtCO2), and esophageal stethoscope temperature], bispectral index (BIS), train of four, pleth variability index (PVI), and urine output monitoring were performed, and the patient’s initial (pre-induction) heart rate (HR), SpO2, systolic blood pressure (SBP), diastolic blood pressure (DBP), EtCO2, and respiratory rate (RR) were 68 beats/min, 99%, 186 mmHg, 89 mmHg, 36 mmHg, and 16 breaths/min, respectively. The vital signs, administered drugs, and arterial blood gas analysis (ABGA) values during surgery are shown in Figure . The operation was performed under general anesthesia. Before induction, arterial catheterization of the left radial artery was performed under local anesthesia for real-time blood pressure monitoring. Anesthesia was induced using propofol (70 mg), remifentanil [4.0 ng/mL; effect-site concentration (Ce), target-controlled infusion (TCI) based on the Minto Model], and atracurium (25 mg). After anesthesia induction, a central line was cautiously placed via the right internal jugular vein. To prevent hypotension, phenylephrine infusion was administered at 0.5 µg/kg/min. Anesthesia was maintained with 4-6 vol% desflurane, and continuous infusion of remifentanil (0.1-4.0 ng/mL). Atracurium (4 µg/kg/min) was infused to induce muscle relaxation during surgery. Volume-controlled ventilation with the following parameters was adopted: tidal volume, 425 mL; respiratory rate, 12-14 breaths/min, inspiratory-to-expiratory time (I:E) ratio 1:2; and FiO2 0.5, without positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP). Intraoperative fluid was restricted to lower central venous pressure (CVP) during surgery, and intermittent boluses of fluid were administered to maintain urine output (0.5 mL/kg/h). When the patient was draped, hydrocortisone (100 mg) was administered via slow intravenous injection. After three trocars were inserted, the patient was placed in the reverse Trendelenburg position with a left tilt, and CO2 was insufflated to a pressure of 17 mmHg. During the surgical procedure, hypotension (SBP/DBP, 90/45 mmHg) was observed despite continuous phenylephrine infusion; therefore, norepinephrine infusion was administered at 0.1-0.2 µg/kg/min and phenylephrine was tapered. After administration of norepinephrine, the patient’s vital signs remained stable. During ligation of the left hepatic vein, the inferior vena cava (IVC) was accidentally torn. The patient’s SpO2 suddenly dropped from 97% to 85%. His blood pressure decreased to 89/40 mmHg (SBP/DBP). The EtCO2 dropped from 30 to 24 mmHg. A “mill-wheel” murmur was auscultated over the precordium.
He had a history of hypertension, diabetes, and stage 3a chronic kidney disease. He was taking aspirin, lercanidipine, gemigliptin, insulin glargine, kalimate (polystyrene sulfonate calcium), and renamezin (spherical adsorptive carbon).
There was no remarkable personal and family history.
The “mill-wheel” murmur was auscultated over precordium at the same time as sudden hypoxia, hypotension, and decrease in EtCO2 (from 30 mmHg to 24 mmHg, Figure ).
When paradoxical CO2 embolism occurred, ABGA was performed and revealed a pH of 7.112, PCO2 of 78.8mmHg, and PO2 of 73.3 mmHg.
Given the clinical signs, we suspected that CO2 gas had entered the injured vessel. However, since the patient also had moderate aortic valve stenosis, TEE was immediately performed for accurate differentiation and diagnosis. TEE revealed that gas bubbles were scattered in the right side of the heart, and a few were detected in the left atrium, left ventricle, and ascending aorta . Intracardiac shunts, such as a patent foramen ovale (PFO) or ventricular septal defect (VSD), were not observed.