A 73 y/o male presented with stage IIA cutaneous melanoma of the left shoulder and underwent surgical resection in 2003. In November 2012, he developed bilateral lung nodules with no other metastatic sites. A right lung biopsy at this time confirmed metastatic melanoma. He initiated therapy with ipilimumab at 3 mg/kg IV every three weeks. After his second treatment dose, he developed an intensely pruritic, papulovesicular rash over his chest, bilateral upper extremities, and back. Prior to this, the patient had no history of skin rashes. He received methylprednisolone (40 mg IV initially, then 20 mg IV 1 month later without topical therapy) with significant pruritus improvement; however, the rash persisted. His outside physician then discontinued ipilimumab in March 2013 because of persistent rash symptoms and transitioned the patient to close observation. Remarkably, his lung nodules remained stable based on CT imaging performed every six months.
In July 2014, we evaluated the patient for progressive lung and liver metastases. He underwent a liver biopsy that confirmed metastatic melanoma with mutations in BRAF G466A and RET W917. Interestingly, he continued to have an extensive, erythematous, papular rash over his chest, arms, and back that was asymptomatic and had persisted since his previous ipilimumab therapy. He had no other oral ulcers or skin lesions. A skin biopsy was performed and histopathologic examination revealed suprabasal acantholysis with associated overlying dyskeratosis, consistent with Grover’s disease . The acantholysis extended to the spinous layer of the epidermis with some keratinocytes retaining partial attachment to one another. In addition, there was a superficial dermal mononuclear inflammatory infiltrate. Immunohistochemical (IHC) studies demonstrated a predominance of CD3+ T-cells with a predominance of CD4+ over CD8+ T-cells . Because anti-PD-1 therapy had not been FDA-approved at the time, he received systemic chemotherapy with disease progression. Considering his BRAF G466A mutation, we subsequently initiated single agent trametinib but his disease again progressed. Both chemotherapy and trametinib were initiated after the patient’s repeat skin biopsy.
Thereafter, we started pembrolizumab at 2 mg/kg IV every three weeks. He tolerated therapy without significant toxicities. His previous rash symptoms remained stable during therapy with pembrolizumab. Unfortunately, after two cycles he continued to have rapid, progressive disease, and we discontinued therapy. Given the previous favorable response with ipilimumab, we re-initiated this therapy, but after one ipilimumab dose, he experienced grade 2 rash exacerbation with an intensely pruritic, papulovescular skin eruption on his upper back. A repeat biopsy confirmed Grover’s disease exacerbation. We started topical steroids and oral antihistamines with minimal symptom improvement. Thereafter, he received one additional ipilimumab dose but transitioned to hospice after demonstrating terminal, progressive disease. A treatment course timeline is included as Fig. .