Here we present a 30 year old female admitted to local hospital complaining of mild general weakness lasting for four months. Full blood count showed severe anaemia of 54 g/l and a mild gastric wall inflammation was seen on gastroscopy. Blood transfusion in therapeutic ward was then performed. Whole body computed tomography (CT) scan discovered 4.7 × 6.2 × 6.5 cm non-homogenic tumour with a cystic component in a left upper abdominal compartment. Tumour had a close contact with an inferior mesenteric vein (IMV) at the long segment, near the entrance to the superior mesenteric vein (SMV) (Type A/B) without overgrowing any another surrounding organ. Gastrointestinal stromal tumour (GIST) was suspected . Patient was transferred to our cancer institute and after multidisciplinary team discussion she was elected for a surgery – removal of the GIST of the jejunum. The patient had no previous medical history of other diseases, surgeries or allergies. Her initial blood test showed haemoglobin of 74.6 g/l, so additional blood transfusion was performed.
On laparotomy the tumour involving the first loop of the small intestine (30 cm from the Treitz ligament), a part of uncinated process of the pancreas, IMV and inferior mesenteric artery (IMA) was found. Enlarged small intestine lymph nodes were also seen. Resection of 50 cm of small intestine with the tumour was performed. Two layer end-to-end entero-entero anastomosis was performed and enteral feeding tube was inserted below the anastomosis. Early postoperative course was uneventful. On postoperative day (POD) five the blood appeared through the drains – emergency surgery was initiated. Massive bleeding from superior mesenteric artery (SMA) was found and the arterial defect was sutured. The cyanotic small intestines were noticed and a partial occlusion of SMA was suspected. Aorto-mesenteric shunt using saphenous vein was performed and the small intestine regained its blood supply. Two days later anastomotic leak was suspected – bile from the drain was noticed. Anastomosis was resected and two layer side-to-side duodenojejunal anastomosis was performed. By then, the pathology report revealed a high grade G3 peripheral/primitive neuroectodermal tumour (PNET)/atypical Ewing sarcoma which expansion to the pancreas . R1 resection (at the uncinated process of the pancreas) was confirmed (pT4N1, LVI ).
An ulcerated tumour in small intestine wall was composed of solid sheets of small blue cells with irregular nuclear contours and prominent nucleoli. Differential diagnosis included poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, neuroendocrine carcinoma, melanoma, lymphoma, gastrointestinal clear cell sarcoma, synovial sarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, epithelioid angiosarcoma, epithelioid sarcoma and germ cell tumour. Immunohistochemical tests were performed and tumour demonstrated diffuse positivity for CD99, ERG, CD56 and focal positivity for Synaptophysin, PanCK, Cam5.2. Tumour was consistently negative for LCA, SMA, Desmin, S100, HMB45, TLE1, Chromogranin A, CDX2, TTF1, PAX8, CK7, CK19, CD31, SALL4, Glucagon, Somatostatin, Gastrin and Serotonin. There was no INI1 loss. Diffuse CD99, ERG, CD56, focal PanCK, Cam5.2 and Synaptophysin immune positivity are characteristic for Ewing sarcoma family of tumours. EWSR1 (22q12) break-apart FISH test and PCR test for EWSR1-ERG, EWSR1-ETV1, EWSR1-FLI1, EWSR1-FEV, EWSR1-ETV4 translocations were performed. Unfortunately, there was no evidence of EWRS1 gene rearrangements by both FISH and PCR EWSR1 methods. Despite this fact there was no evidence of any other tumour and final diagnosis was high grade G3 peripheral/primitive neuroectodermal tumour (PNET)/atypical Ewing’s sarcoma, possibly with a rare translocation.
Eleven days after the third surgery bleeding recurred – bleeding from the aorto-mesenteric shunt was found. It was sutured along its wall and intraoperative ultrasound showed reduced diameter of the shunt, and recanalized SMA. During postoperative period due to progressing bile leakage, bile ducts were catheterized trans-hepatically. Nine days later intraabdominal bleeding recurred. Bleeding from the aorta at the shunt area was found and sutured. Small intestine on the other hand showed total necrosis with multiple perforations. The changes were incompatible with life. Nonetheless 48 h later, patient vital signs improved and the condition stabilized. Therefore, during the next surgery necrotised small intestine was removed while closing both ends of the intestines at the demarcation lines and gastrostomy was made for the drainage of the gastric content. During the next few weeks bleeding recurred and multiple (> 50) liver metastases were found. Bleeding was controlled but the patient died because of rapid dissemination of the disease.