The patient was a castrated male American Shorthair cat, approximately 14 years old, weighing 3.4 kg. The cat had chronic kidney disease (CKD) for at least 2 years and was classified as International Renal Interest Society stage 3 approximately 1 month prior. The cat was treated with the prostacyclin analogue beraprost sodium (Rapros; Toray Industries) at a dose of 55 μg q12h PO and fluid replacement therapy (60 ml of lactated Ringer’s solution) every other day. The patient was prescribed oral diazepam (diazepam tablets TOWA; Towa Pharma International Holdings) at a dose of 0.147 mg/kg as needed to stimulate its appetite. On day 1, the patient was admitted to the hospital for intermittent lethargy, wobbling for a month and a generalised seizure 3 days before admission. Physical examination revealed a body condition score of 2/5, with mild dehydration. Blood examinations were conducted using a Dimension EXL 200 (Siemens) and a ProCyte Dx analyser (IDEXX Laboratories). The results are presented in and . The cat was hypoglycaemic, with findings consistent with renal failure (blood urea nitrogen [BUN] >140 mg/dl; creatinine [CRE] 6.17 mg/dl). Non-regenerative anaemia (haematocrit [HCT] 24%; haemoglobin [HGB] 7.4 g/dl) was also detected. The patient’s blood glucose level was 64 mg/dl. Thoracic radiography and abdominal ultrasonography revealed no significant abnormalities except for bilateral renal atrophy. Based on the results of these clinical tests, daily fluid therapy and an injection of darbepoetin alpha (5.0 μg IM, Nesp Injection Plastic Syringe; Kyowa Kirin Frontier) were administered to improve the clinical signs of CKD.
The patient revisited the hospital on days 6 and 8. Although the levels of HGB, HCT, BUN and CRE improved, clinical signs, such as lethargy and wobbling, did not improve. The blood glucose level was 49 mg/dl on day 8, and the insulin level was 1.78 ng/ml (reference interval [RI] 0.27–0.69 ng/ml; Fuji Film Vet Systems). The amended insulin:glucose ratio (AIGR) was 24.5. The RI for AIGR has not been established for cats, but a cut-off level for dogs (<30.0) has been applied to prior cat cases, albeit without documentation. Furthermore, the actual value ideally would be established by each reference laboratory. Taken together, insulinoma was suspected in this case. Frequent feeding for over five times/day and prednisolone at a dose of 0.67 mg/kg were started on day 8. Although the blood glucose level initially increased (81 mg/dl on day 10), the hypoglycaemia progressively became more severe several weeks later. Although prednisolone was increased to a dose of 1.34 mg/kg/day, the blood glucose level was 24 mg/dl, and the fructosamine level was approximately the lower limit of normal at 177 µmol/l (RI 172–349; Fuji Film Vet Systems). On day 33, an isoechoic nodular mass measuring 6.2 × 6.6 mm was observed in the pancreatic body .
After informed consent was obtained from the owner, diazoxide (diazoxide capsule ‘OP’; OrphanPacific) was additionally prescribed at a dose of 5.2 mg/kg q12h, which is known as a starting dose for dogs and ferrets. After starting diazoxide medication, the cat’s activity improved, and neurological abnormalities, such as wobbling and seizures, completely disappeared. Hypoglycaemia also improved. On day 45, 13 days after the start of diazoxide treatment, the blood glucose level was 103 mg/dl. On days 51–93, which were 19–61 days later, the blood glucose level was in the range of 73–105 mg/dl. The fructosamine level increased to 230 μmol/l on day 65. Subsequently, the blood glucose and fructosamine levels gradually decreased but were still maintained at over 50 mg/dl and 200 μmol/l, respectively, until day 170.
Several adverse events were observed during diazoxide treatment. The patient continued to experience intermittent vomiting once every 2–3 days. Non-regenerative anaemia (HCT 18% and HGB 7.0 g/dl) was apparent 19 days after starting diazoxide treatment, whereas the respective values had been 32.3% and 11.6 g/dl before treatment. Anaemia was controlled by a subcutaneous injection of darbepoetin alpha. Loss of appetite and anorexia related to diazoxide administration were not observed.
Weight loss persisted, and dehydration occurred intermittently throughout the observation period. Blood CRE concentrations gradually increased, and oliguria/anuria developed on day 190. The cat died on day 193, which was 161 days after the start of diazoxide administration. A pathological autopsy revealed one visible nodule and several small nodules in the pancreatic body. Immunohistochemistry of the pancreatic nodules showed staining for chromogranin A and insulin, indicating insulinoma as the definitive diagnosis. Renal atrophy, sclerosis of the glomeruli, severe fibrosis of the medulla and cortex, and infiltration of inflammatory cells were observed in both kidneys.