The reported patient, a 51-year old woman with biopsy proven primary billiary cirrhosis, was diagnosed in 2000. The only complications present after determining the primary diagnosis were: mild pancytopenia, esophageal varices, portal gastro- and duodenopathy, and splenomegaly. She successfully underwent orthotopic liver transplantation (LT) at the end of January 2016, followed by standard immunosuppressive treatment with mycophenolate mofetil (Cell-cept 500 mg) and corticosteroid treatment (methylprednison 8 mg/day). Due to laboratory signs of early graft rejection (8 days after LT), she was admitted to emergency unit care. After subsequent modification of her previous therapy to continual treatment with tacrolimus (Prograf 5 mg, CZE) (10 mg/day), an improvement in liver function was achieved. Two weeks after the transplant and 7 days of tacrolimus treatment, she developed symptoms of disorientation and confusion. Osmotic demyelination syndrome (ODS) as a consequence of liver transplantation was also considered in the differential diagnosis; however the onset of clinical presentation after LT was delayed as in typical cases. Nevertheless, no supportive signs for this diagnosis were found (e.g. hypo/hypernatremia before LT, relevant peri/post-operative fluctuation of serum sodium/potassium and/or osmotic imbalances) . No surgery related risk factors supportive for ODS (massive bleeding or higher intraoperative fluid intake) were noted either . Thus, metabolic as well as endocrine dysfunctions were ruled out as the major cause of this condition.
Psychiatric examination was performed pointing to brain dysfunction. The administration of tiapride, thiamine and piracetam was initiated with no resulting benefits. A noncontrast CT brain scan was performed to exclude the structural pathology of the brain with negative result. Because of progressive worsening of consciousness and the development of tremor, neurologists were consulted. In addition to mental disturbances, signs of severe, symmetric Parkinsonism were present - with resting tremor of the chin and all four limbs (MDS-UPDRS III- 4), brady/hypokinesia (MDS-UPDRS III - 3) and rigidity (MDS-UPDRS III –1) revealed by neurological examination. Furthermore, clinical signs of severe postural instability (MDS-UPDRS III -4) were observed. No pyramidal signs or impairment of other systems (oculomotoric, bulbar, cerebellar) were revealed by neurologic assessment. A brain MRI was performed that revealed subtle hyperintensities in T2- sequences in basal ganglia bilaterally without the abnormalities found in the diffusion weighted images (DWI sequences) in the MRI . Thus, in regard to the chronological course of clinical symptoms related to liver transplantation and subsequent immunosuppressive treatment, we suggested the onset of Parkinsonism was due to tacrolimus-induced encephalopathy. The administration of amantadine, levetiracetam (1000 mg/day) and clonazepam (initial dose 1.5 mg/day) was initiated, with a satisfactory reduction of tremor; and with a positive effect on rigidity and hypokinesia. The tacrolimus blood concentration was above normal levels (21.7 ng/ml, normal value < 20 ng/ml) - the dose was therefore reduced (8 mg/day) and 3 days later, tacrolimus was changed to less toxic sirolimus (Rapamune 1 mg, GBR) according to standard treatment options. One week after the treatment modification and 2 weeks after the first onset of parkinsonian signs, the patient’s tremor and brady/hypokinesia markedly improved (MDS-UPDRS III- 1 and MDS-UPDRS III- 1). No clinically detectable sign of rigidity was found after treatment modification either. Furthermore, no cognitive impairment was observed. Only a mild degree of rest tremor (MDS-UPDRS III- 1) was present in this patient at the time of discharge from the hospital. Due to further improvement of extrapyramidal symptoms, neurological medication was reduced gradually in 3- month follow-up period checks. No clinical deterioration or worsening of the condition was observed during this period. The current treatment includes administration of sirolimus (4 mg/day) with concomitant use of methylprednisolone (2 mg/day) and mycophenolate mofetil (500 mg/day). The sirolimus blood concentration achieved the therapeutic range and no relevant adverse events were observed. No additional treatment of neurological or psychiatric symptoms was needed.
Improvement of clinical symptomatology after tacrolimus discontinuation supports the drug-induced etiology of this neurological condition. It was the subsequent reasoning for not conducting a wide spectrum of differential diagnosing. Subject consent was obtained in agreement with the Declaration of Helsinki and an informed consent from the patient is available.