A 30-year-old man presented to our Trauma unit with penetrating abdominal trauma. He had no known background medical or surgical history. Of note were two gunshot wounds - one thoracoabdominal in the 8th intercostal space on the right and a second wound over the right buttock. He came in haemodynamically unstable with a blood pressure of 60/40 mmHg pulse of 100 beats per minute. He was resuscitated according to the ATLS® principles of Primary and Secondary survey. The arterial blood gas showed severe metabolic acidosis. Fluid resuscitation and massive transfusion protocol were initiated per standard of care. The patient was taken to theatre for an emergency damage control laparotomy by the Trauma surgeon and a senior trauma registrar (resident).
Haemoperitoneum, gross faecal contamination and multiple hollow viscus injuries were confirmed at laparotomy. Bleeding from the bowel mesentery and the bowel ends was controlled first, without any overt bowel blood supply changes. Minor contusion of the second part of the duodenum (AAST Grade I) was noted at laparotomy, requiring no intervention . Extensive caecal and transverse colon injuries (AAST Grade V), not amenable to repair, were noted. A right hemicolectomy was performed with a GIA stapler resulting in the typical ‘clip-and drop’ of the bowel ends . The patient was transfused four units of packed red blood cells, four fresh frozen plasma units, and one mega unit of platelets intra-operatively. The abdomen was left open with a temporary vacuum-assisted abdominal closure, with a plan to return to theatre for definitive surgery.
He was transferred postoperatively to the trauma intensive care unit (ICU) for continued resuscitation and close monitoring. Given gross contamination, broad-spectrum antibiotics were continued in ICU. He still required vasoactive support to maintain acceptable mean arterial pressures. His acidosis corrected within 24 h of his ICU admission, although he still had features of Systematic Inflammatory Response Syndrome (SIRS) as evidenced by ongoing pyrexia and persistent tachycardia. A planned relook laparotomy was performed on day 2. The abdomen was noted to be clean at relook. The transverse colon stump was intact, all the remaining bowel was viable, and an end ileostomy was fashioned.
Day 3 post-operation, he developed an acute kidney injury and mild hypoglycaemia attributed to possible systemic sepsis. His antibiotics were escalated to a carbapenem as per the trauma unit protocol. A septic workup (blood cultures, Chest X-rays etc.) was done, including a 1,3 Beta D glucan assay (Fungitell®). The BDG result was significantly raised (500 pg/ml), highly suggestive of invasive fungal sepsis. As per our local micro-biogram, he was started on an antifungal cover using Fluconazole at 800 mg daily. He showed good clinical improvement and was successfully weaned off a ventilator and extubated on day 5 post-operation.
Previously well-perfused ileostomy became necrotic on Day 7 post-operation. At this stage, the patient had been off vasoactive medication for more than 5 days. A relook on demand was performed in theatre. Multiple segments of patchy necrosis and ischaemia starting 160 cm from the duodenal jejunal flexure (a, b) were discovered. No surgical, mechanical explanation or complications could be elicited for the cause of bowel ischaemia. This finding was unusual and surprised the surgical team. Small bowel resection of necrotic bowel was done, and specimens sent off for histology. Unfortunately, in our setting, the frozen section is not available after hours. The necrosis was associated with features of early perforation in some regions.
The pathology report confirmed a diagnosis of mucormycosis on the segment of resected small bowel that was submitted for histopathological examination. Serosal fibrinopurulent exudate and a site of perforation were identified macroscopically and features of haemorrhagic infarction. Haemotoxylin and eosin (H&E) sections were representative of small bowel wherein transmural necrosis, perforation and acute serositis were confirmed. Large areas of mucosal necrosis containing fungal hyphae were present . The hyphae were large, non-septate, lacked parallel walls and demonstrated acute angle branching, including 90-degree angle branching, morphologically consistent with mucormycosis. Transmural invasion by the hyphae with extensive angioinvasion was also demonstrated .
At this stage, we had histological evidence of mucormycosis. This was despite negative screening for common associated medical conditions in this patient. Workup for Diabetes mellitus, Tuberculosis, Human immune deficiency virus and hypertension were all negative. There were no immunosuppressive medications identified in the history provided or administered during his stay with us before this development. The patient continued to have a turbulent course and required a further two relooks. He demised despite additional antimicrobial support and escalating antifungal therapy to include Amphotericin B therapy. Low dose physiological intravenous steroids were introduced for refractory hypotension towards the end.