A 40-year-old unconscious female patient was presented to the Emergency Department with a history of central chest discomfort and dyspnea for four days. She did not have any notable risk factors such as immobilization, pregnancy, limb swelling (confirmed negative deep venous thrombosis), hormone replacement therapy, cancer, and previous COVID-19 infection. She has taken COVID-19 vaccine on July 30, 2021 (first dose) and August 29, 2021 (second dose). Her COVID-19 status was negative during admission. She had no hypertension, diabetes mellitus, or other chronic diseases and was not taking any medications before.
On clinical evaluation, she was pale and cyanosed. Her Glasgow Coma Scale was 3, hypoxic and the blood pressure couldn't be recorded. Immediate Advanced Cardiac Life Support (ACLS) was started and two cycles of cardiopulmonary resuscitation were given along with endotracheal intubation. There was a return of spontaneous circulation and the patient was shifted to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) and intravenous vasopressors were given for maintaining blood pressure along with IV fluids. On diagnostic evaluation, electrocardiography (ECG) revealed sinus rhythm and right bundle branch block with right ventricular strain pattern as shown in .
The ECG changes were confirmed by bedside echocardiography which revealed right ventricular chamber dilatation along with free wall hypokinesia of dilated right ventricle. Initial diagnosis of acute massive pulmonary thromboembolism (PTE) was suspected and there was a moderate risk score of PTE calculated from Well's score. Subcutaneous Enoxaparin 60 mg was given immediately after confirming the d-Dimer which was 14 μg per milliliter. There was the presence of gross hematuria 2 h following Enoxaparin which resolved spontaneously. Computed Tomography Pulmonary Angiogram (CTPA) showed filling defects in the bilateral main pulmonary artery, and its segmental branches along with subsegmental atelectasis of the posterior segment of the right upper lobe of the lung as shown in . Hence the final diagnosis was confirmed as acute massive pulmonary thromboembolism and planned for intravenous thrombolysis. Enhanced CT was not performed in other parts of the body than the chest.
It was chosen to administer an unusually low dose of thrombolytics to the patient since she experienced hematuria as a result of bleeding issues. Hence, to attempt medical thrombolysis, low dose alteplase 50 mg intravenous was used, followed by unfractionated heparin and six-hourly aPTT monitoring with a target of 60–90 seconds. After 12 hours post thrombolysis with Alteplase, her vasopressors were discontinued. She had improved GCS and arterial blood gas oxygenation with good urine output the next day. As her clinical condition improved over another four days, she was extubated. The patient was shifted to the general medicine ward for further observation the next day. She was clinically asymptomatic the following days and then finally discharged on the tenth day with oral Rivaroxaban.
On follow-up after a week, she had no symptoms and the echocardiography was normal. She was continued on oral rivaroxaban. After six months, CTPA was repeated which showed a normal caliber of the bilateral main pulmonary artery with no filling defect in the segmental and subsegmental branches . Thrombophilia profiles were sent including Protein C, Protein S, Factor V Leiden, Antithrombin III, APLA, and Homocysteine Levels which were normal. Hence, the anticoagulant was stopped. The patient is on regular follow-up and has no symptoms.