An 80-year-old woman presented to our hospital with the chief complaints of difficulty in raising her right upper limb, progressive dyskinesia, and gait disorder. She had been experiencing neck pain for approximately 2 years and numbness in her extremities for roughly a year before her visit, both of which had progressed remarkably prior to presentation. She could manage to walk unassisted for less than 100 m.
Regarding limb strength, muscle weakness (manual muscle testing [MMT] score: 3) was observed in the entire right upper limb. Her strength in the remaining limbs was normal. Hypesthesia was noted throughout the upper and lower limbs. Her deep tendon reflexes were increased bilaterally in all limbs, with positive Hoffman’s and Wartenberg’s signs. Her preoperative Japanese Orthopaedic Association (JOA) score was 8.5 points. Radiographs and cervical contrast CT revealed osteolytic lesions in C3–7. A mass was seen to extend into the spinal canal from within the vertebrae, compressing the cervical spinal cord from the right side. The mass was stained in the early contrast phase and showed an internal low-density area . MRI detected a mass with the same signal profile as bone from within the C3–7 vertebrae to outside of the vertebral bodies, and the cervical spinal cord was compressed from the right side at the same levels . Blood tests disclosed no thrombocytopenia, anemia, or coagulation abnormalities. Her inflammatory response was normal. Blood cultures and various tumor markers were negative. A percutaneous vertebral biopsy showed culture negativity and no neoplastic lesions. We ultimately performed posterior decompression and fixation of C2-T1 with tumor reduction to improve her cervical myelopathy symptoms .
In histopathological analysis, the resected specimen exhibited various and complex proliferating patterns of vasoforming cells in low-magnification images, with most areas showing a combination of solid and vasodilated proliferating patterns . In solid areas, numerous vascular cavities had been formed by atypical cells, including epithelioid cells with infrequent mitosis . In the periphery, irregular nodules had infiltrated into the adjacent muscular and fatty-fibrous tissue . The nodules had a slit-like structure with spindle cells . Several nodules contained epithelioid cell proliferation that clearly showed ERG , CD31, and CD34, but not D2–40, immunopositivity, which were surrounded by cells positive for the pericytic markers myo1B , CD146, and SMA. The proliferating cells were negative for markers of epithelioid hemangioendothelioma, including CAMTA1, TFE3, and FOSB (data not shown). The Ki-67 labelling index was calculated as approximately 16.1% (109/678) in areas with solid components and dilated capillaries and 10.6% (83/783) in areas containing slit-like blood vessels in the solid components. The above histopathological features were compatible with a combination of low-grade angiosarcoma and kaposiform hemangioendothelioma (KHE)-like tumor. Considering the morphological and immunohistochemical findings, the patient was diagnosed as having CHE consisting of low-grade angiosarcoma-like and KHE-like components.
Postoperatively, we commenced radiation therapy (50 Gy/25 Fr). At 21 months after surgery, her right upper extremity muscle strength had improved (MMT score: 5), she had no motor or sensory deficits in her extremities, and was able to walk steadily. Her JOA score improved to 17 points, with no signs recurrence in imaging findings .