A 38-year-old male, a heavy smoker, was admitted to our department, because of fever (38.4°C), weakness, arthralgias, non-pitting edema of the lower extremities and chest discomfort for the previous two weeks. The arthralgias were partially responsive to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). The patient also reported skin eruptions on his elbows and lower extremities that had appeared six months previously. His past medical history was unremarkable.
On physical examination, sharply demarcated erythematous plaques covered by silvery white scales were observed on the right elbow and the lower extremities below the knees . The patient's ankles were painful and edematous. On palpation, firm and painless subcutaneous nodules could be found on the occipital part of the scalp. The rest of the physical examination was unremarkable.
Basic laboratory tests were normal except for an increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate (57 mm/h) and C-reactive protein (45.2 mg/l). Further investigations, which included serum complement analysis, rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibodies, antineutrophilic cytoplasmatic antibodies, immunoglobulin levels, and serological tests for hepatitis A, B and C and human immunodeficiency virus, disclosed no apparent pathologies. PPD skin test was negative. Neither arterial blood gases nor pulmonary function tests showed significant abnormalities. Radiographic examination, using x-ray and high resolution computed tomography of the chest, revealed bilateral hilar and right paratracheal lymphadenopathy with small nodules along the bronchovascular bundles. Fiber-optic bronchoscopy and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) were performed. BAL fluid analysis revealed lymphocytosis (35%) with an increased CD4+/CD8+ ratio (4.2). Microbiological and cytological examinations were negative. Transbronchial lung biopsies were non-diagnostic.
A labial biopsy and biopsies from the cutaneous lesions were also obtained. The labial biopsy demonstrated the presence of small epithelioid (sarcoid form) granulomas , while the skin biopsies were typical of psoriasis . Immunohistochemical analysis of tissue samples with periodic acid-Schiff staining was negative. We concluded that the patient suffered from two separate clinical entities: pulmonary sarcoidosis and psoriasis vulgaris.
The articular manifestations responded partially to NSAIDs. Consequently, a short course of 30 mg prednisone daily and topical therapy to manage the psoriatic lesions were applied. This resulted in a significant clinical improvement. Three months after his discharge the patient remains asymptomatic.