A 90-year-old woman presented with a left leg injury after a fall from standing. She has a background of osteoarthritis and osteoporosis and normally mobilized with a walking stick. On examination, her soft tissues were very friable, and there was a 10 cm full-thickness laceration over the fracture site. The radiograph showed a displaced medial condyle, Schatzker Type 4 fracture with 15 mm displacement, condylar widening of 12 mm, articular step-off of 6 mm, and varus malalignment of 7°.
The options for treatment of this Gustilo Grade III open fracture were considered. Plaster cast would not allow for easy wound management or weight- bearing and risks nonunion, pressure sores, and venous thromboembolism/chest sepsis. Plate fixation in osteoporotic bone risks early failure, and again nonweight-bearing was deemed too risky to the patient’s general health. Circular external fixation is challenging for the very elderly. Primary stemmed arthroplasty was discounted due to the open wound and the tibial tuberosity fragment. An arthrodesis nail was considered the best option to allow minimally invasive stabilization, soft tissue management, and immediate full weight-bearing postoperatively.
The patient was positioned supine on a pelvic traction table, and the wound was washed and debrided. After freehand reduction, a long hip to ankle anterograde intramedullary nail was inserted from the greater trochanter through the knee to just proximal to the ankle, with the knee joint fixed in 10° flexion. The femoral- tibial mechanical axis was restored to within 5° of the unaffected limb and closed primarily. The skin edges were preserved and skin flaps repaired with steristrips.
By day 3 postoperatively, the patient was able to weight bear on the affected leg with assistance of a Zimmer frame and one physiotherapist. After 2 weeks, she was discharged to a rehabilitation center.
At 4-month follow-up, the soft tissue had healed and the fracture had united . The patient was able to mobilize comfortably.
The intention was to remove the nail at 6 months after the index procedure, to restore knee motion; however, the patient was satisfied with the outcome and has declined further surgery.