A 37-year-old female presented with hypokalemia following routine tests during follow-up after abdominal surgery (subsequent to the rupture of the diaphragm) 3 years before the final diagnosis. She had no history of any diseases and no specific diagnostic or therapeutic management except for high potassium intake in the first year after the detection of hypokalemia. She had muscle cramps and weakness, along with hypokalemia.
After a year, she was referred to a nephrologist because her weakness progressed, and she developed polyuria, nocturia, and a headache. She was admitted several times due to severe hypokalemia and weakness. During this period, she received the following medications to control hypokalemia: Intravenous potassium chloride and various oral medications, including spironolactone up to a maximum of 500 mg per day (discontinued due to menstrual disorders); eplerenone 100 mg twice daily; potassium chloride 600 mg tablets up to 5 doses per day. Within all outpatient and inpatient visits, the blood pressure was normal .
The family history of hypertension was negative. There was a history of diabetes mellitus in her mother, sister, and two brothers. There was a history of proteinuria in her mother (possibly diabetic nephropathy).
Two years later, following a urinary tract infection (UTI), she was admitted to the hospital. A computed tomography scan was ordered to rule out complicated pyelonephritis. Incidentally, a homogenous, well-defined mass of 21 × 17 mm and Hounsfield Unit (HU) = - 10 was detected in the left adrenal . In an approach to the adrenal mass, PAC and PRA were requested after the treatment of hypokalemia . It is worth mentioning that it was very difficult to discontinue eplerenone. The test was carried out while taking eplerenone. Considering the possible interference of eplerenone with the results of the aldosterone/renin ratio (ARR) -potassium-sparing diuretics increase the level of renin and then cause a false negative of ARR- therefore, the suppression of renin level along with the strongly positive ARR level in our patient (41.6 ng/dL/ng/mL/h) was considered a positive test, and no confirmatory tests were ordered. Accompanied by a history of hypokalemia and a well-defined adrenal mass, it was interpreted as a confirmed aldosterone-producing adenoma. Taken all together, we decided to recommend laparoscopic surgery.
Ultimately, laparoscopic surgery was performed, and a left adrenalectomy was done. The pathology report revealed adrenal adenoma. At the postoperative visit, hypokalemia was resolved without any medication, and blood pressure was 100/70 mmHg. In several visits after surgery, the average blood pressure of the patient was 95/60 mmHg, and potassium levels were still within the normal range without any medical treatment, even after 3 years.