The patient (female, aged 31 years, height 165 cm, weight 65 kg, Han nationality) presented with sudden fever on the 1st day after a C-section, and the highest temperature was recorded at 39.7 ℃.
The patient was admitted to the hospital for delivery at 38+2 wk of pregnancy on November 17, 2021. Since the lower segment of the uterus was thin and the fetus was full-term, scar uterine rupture could occur during vaginal delivery. Therefore, after excluding surgical contraindications, the patient underwent a C-section under spinal anesthesia on November 19, 2021. During the surgery, abnormal proliferation of varicose blood vessels was found in the lower segment of the uterus, and dense adhesion was noted in the bladder. After decomposing a part of the adhesion, a baby boy (Apgar 10/10) was successfully delivered. Once the umbilical cord was cut, the patient was prophylactically administered cefoxitin 2 g to prevent post-surgical infections. The placenta and fetal membrane were delivered completely, and the postoperative bleeding was 300 mL. The patient was given misoprostol 0.4 mg anal plug and ergometrine maleate 0.2 mg intramuscular injection post-surgery to strengthen uterine contractions, and she was started on 80 mg of sodium kalo sulfonate intravenous drip to stop the bleeding.
The patient was a healthy female with no significant ailments reported in her medical history. There was no history of dyslipidemia, hypertension, diabetes or other diseases. The patient reported regular menstruation in the past, married at an appropriate age, and the spouse was healthy. Her pregnancy history was 1-0-3-1. The patient had previously given birth to a son by C-section in 2015.
The patient reported no family history of inherited diseases or premature coronary heart disease.
The highest body temperature was recorded to be 37.7 ℃ on day 1 post-surgery.
The following were the laboratory examination results after the C-section: White blood cell (WBC), 15.97 × 109/L; neutrophil count (NEUT), 84.7%; and C-reactive protein (CRP), 93.96 mg/L. Blood culture suggested the presence of G. vaginalis in anaerobic bottles (left and right sides).
The patient did not have an imaging examination.