A 20-year-old Japanese woman with a 4-month history of severe lower back pain was referred to our out-patient department. She had no history of fever, trauma, weight loss, or previous infection.
Radiographic analysis showed collapse of the left side of the L3 vertebral body and swelling of the iliopsoas muscle. Spinal computed tomography (CT) revealed an osteolytic lesion involving the L3 vertebral body and surrounding soft tissue, causing vertebral body collapse . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of her lumbar spine showed the tumor extending toward the left side of the paravertebral soft tissue and into the left pedicle (Enneking SIII) . Pathological and immunohistochemical analyses of a needle biopsy specimen showed a GCT with multinucleate giant cells surrounded by neoplastic stromal cells . A phase 2 trial showed no adverse effects or complications of denosumab, so she was prescribed six cycles of monthly subcutaneous injections of 120-mg denosumab . Lumbar CT during denosumab treatment showed that the tumor included a paravertebral lesion with progressive calcification .
Following denosumab treatment, she underwent two-stage (anteroposterior) L3 TES. Stage 1 utilized a posterior approach for resecting the posterior vertebral component; the total operation took 5 hours 16 minutes and the total bleeding was 1520 ml. Stage 2 utilized an anterior retroperitoneal approach for resecting the anterior vertebral component followed by intervertebral cage insertion; the total operation took 6 hours 43 minutes, and the total bleeding was 2320 ml . The day before the second-stage operation, preoperative angiography and segmental artery embolization from L3 to L4 were performed to reduce intraoperative bleeding. The vertebral body was removed completely after the discectomies, and the bilateral psoas muscle was released from the L3 vertebral body . There were no complications during or after the surgery. She was discharged on the seventh postoperative day, ambulatory and without neurological deficits. Two years after surgery, she has not experienced GCT recurrence or implant failure.