An 80-year-old female patient, independent daily activities, presented at the emergency department with a 3 weeks progressive intensity left thigh pain. The patient denied recent trauma. She also denied anorexia, weight loss, or asthenia. She had a history of total left hip arthroplasty 15 years ago due to hip osteoarthritis. Immediately after the arthroplasty, the patient reported that a swelling in the anterolateral thigh with no symptoms associated.
At presentation, she was apyretic. She had edema of the anterolateral region of the left thigh root and flushing of the lateral hip region, without fistulas or wounds. On palpation, she had heat and pain. Range of motion was normal.
Conventional pelvic X-ray revealed the presence of a soft-tissue shadow in the left proximal femur region and signs of total hip arthroplasty (THA) polyethylene wear. The acetabular and femoral components presented without signs of osteolysis or detachment.
Analytically, the blood count presented valueswithin the normal range and a C-reactive protein (CRP)value of 13.67 mg/dl.
At this stage, the hypothesis of periprosthetic infection was the most likely, considering the clinical and analytical findings. However, to clarify left anterolateral thigh swelling, a soft-tissue ultrasound was requested.
Ultrasound revealed a well-defined solid nodular lesion of regular contours suggestive of foreign body in the anterior region of the left thigh root and a liquid collection in the lateral region of the hip. After these ultrasound findings, the accidental gossypiboma diagnosis was suggested. Following, a left hip CT scan (-) was requested for better pre-operative characterization of the nodular lesion and the liquid collection.
The patient was programmed for total hip prosthesis extraction, surgical debridement, and mass excision.
A posterolateral approach was used. After removal of the hip prosthesis components, a well-defined, solid, capsulated 250 g, 12 cm × 8cm larger diameter lesion located in the anterior region of the left thigh root was identified intraoperatively (-). It was also observed a periprosthetic purulent-like fluid.
The anatomopathological study revealed that the removed surgical specimen had characteristics coincident with foreign body granuloma and the presence of elastic tissue inside. The microbiological examination was negative. Postoperatively, the patient underwent 4 weeks of empirical intravenous antibiotic therapy, followed by 2 weeks of empirical oral antibiotic therapy. No perioperative complications were observed. During the follow-up, the patient revealed inflammatory signs resolution of the anterolateral thigh and lateral hip, and blood test with CRP normalization. The second stage replacement arthroplasty was performed 8 months after the extraction of the prosthesis without complications. After 1 year of follow-up, she presented without pain and an independent walking ability. The Harris Hip Score recorded was 84 points at the date of the last follow-up.