A 55-year-old woman with a 12-year history of exposure to marine grade paints containing 30% aluminium presented to the emergency room in 2014 with a history of progressively worsening dementia, cerebellar ataxia, and abnormal movement disorders. These involuntary movement disorders were characterized by polyminimyoclonus with dystonic posturing of the left hand, intention tremor of the right hand, tremor of the head and bilateral blepharospasm, dysdiadochokinesia and impaired finger tapping bilaterally, and dysmetria with spastic ataxic gait and ample sustentation base . Several distractibility maneuvers were performed on the patient such as multitasks interference of the movements using abrupt auditory and tactile stimuli in various regions of the body and presentation of different images at the same time. There was no change in the amplitude, duration, cessation or increase of the abnormal movements observed or in their patterns. Lack of entrainment of the tremor was also noted using the clinical method in which the clinician sits opposite the patient and perform a tremor examination looking for tremor at rest, on posture and during action. The patient was placed in the position in which there were the most tremors, with the arms out in front. The least affected limb (left upper limb) was moved slightly away from the other and the patient was asked to focus on it. The patient was asked to tap with her left thumb and forefinger at different rhythmical frequencies (faster and slower) set by the clinician. We assessed the changes in the amplitude, duration, cessation or increase of the tremor of the right hand.
There was an insidious progression of the syndrome over ten years after an acute occupational exposure to paint vapors in 2004, which led to an acute chemical pneumonitis that required mechanical ventilatory support for 5 days. Investigations in 2004 revealed a very high level of serum aluminium at 1,320 µg/L (reference values 0 to 9 µg/L). The patient recovered from that event and resumed working as a cleaner in the same yacht paint company after 2 weeks of sick leave. No further medical interventions or warning was given to the patient despite her hyperaluminemia. She was unaware on the accumulative chronic exposure to neurotoxins or the need to use personal protective equipment to reduce exposure to paint vapors. Neither skin nor respiratory protection was provided. Notification of risks and a workplace chemical risk assessment were not conducted. The patient had no history of previous trauma, medical, surgical or neurological condition and had no history of use of recreational drugs, alcohol, or medication. Further history demonstrated no evidence of seizures, incontinence, orthostatic hypotension, visual or hearing loss. There was no family history of neurological diseases. On admission in 2014, the patient scored 5/30 on the Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) test with significant impairment in abstract, reasoning, drawing, and writing. The written tasks associated with the MMSE test were also impaired by the involuntary movement disorders of both hands. She was alert, oriented to time person and place with a Glasgow coma scale of 15/15. She had normal vital signs with a body mass index (BMI) of 30 kg/m2. Ophthalmological examination was normal. There was no nystagmus or dysarthria. Muscle power was 3/5 in all limbs using the Medical Research Council scale. There was hyperreflexia in both lower limbs, and proprioception and vibration loss in upper limbs. The Romberg’s sign was positive. There was no clinical evidence of parkinsonism. The rest of the physical examination was unremarkable. As her condition was chronic, she was discharged for outpatient investigations. She was declared disabled for further work in 2014.
Extensive medical investigations and follow up were conducted for 6 years since 2014 ruling out most of the differential diagnoses .
Blood tests revealed microcytic anemia with normal iron studies, vitamin B12 and folate blood levels. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis was normal. The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test of the CSF for multiple infectious diseases was negative . A scalp electroencephalogram (EEG) and an electromyography/nerve conduction studies were normal. Additional formal neuropsychological testing was unavailable. MRI scan in 2014 showed likely mild cerebral and cerebellar atrophy, with sparing of the corpus callosum, brainstem and cervical-medullary junction. There was non-enhancing bilateral increased signal intensity on T1-weighted, T2-weighted or T2-weighted Fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images in the periventricular regions, basal ganglia and internal/external capsules to suggest chemical toxicity, and no areas of restricted diffusion were identified to suggest ischemia/infarction . The cervical, thoracic, and lumbosacral spine MRI scans were normal. Brain magnetic angiography (MRA) was also normal. Based on these neurological manifestations and natural history, movement disorder phenomenology, extensive investigations ruling out differentials, persistent hyperaluminemia, and workplace chemical exposure analysis, the patient was diagnosed with encephalopathy and movement disorders caused by the chronic exposure to multiple mixed paints containing high grade aluminium. On admission in 2014, the serum level of aluminium was high at 1,391 µg/L with a MMSE score of 5/30. The patient had chelation therapy with 1 gram of EDTA powder given sublingual twice daily for 30 days. This therapy was repeated 3 times between the years 2014 and 2015 using the protocol previously described. The patient demonstrated a gradual improvement of the motor dysfunction and decreased aluminemia to 879 µg/L with improvement in the MMSE score to 12/30 after treatment. Progressive improvement of her cognition, memory, and motor dysfunction throughout the year 2015 to 2019 was documented. At three and four years follow up, we noted an exponential fall of aluminemia at 615 and 426 µg/L and MMSE scores improved to 15/30 and 20/30 respectively. By the year 2020, a MMSE test scored 28/30, serum aluminium level dropped to 212 µg/L accompanied by complete resolution of tremor of the hands, polyminimyoclonus and dystonic posturing of the left hand, tremor of the head, and blepharospasm, with significant improvement in finger tapping impairment, dysdiadochokinesia, dysmetria, ataxic gait and motor weakness , without subsequent relapse up to the time of writing. summarizes the timeline of events in relation to serum aluminium levels and the MMSE scores plotted against time. The patient has not received any therapy other than chelation with EDTA, to date of writing.