Herein, we present a case of 37-years-old Saudi female suffering from SCD. She visited King Fahad University Hospital with the complaint of lower back pain and bilateral shoulder pain which initiated one day prior to her visit to hospital. Patient had a medical history of recurrent ER visits and admissions due to painful crises. Within two days of admission to the hospital, she started to show signs of confusion and her consciousness level dropped. However, there was no need of intubation. At this stage, patient was referred to the neurology and ICU teams for further care. It was found on assessment that the patient was not cooperative, Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) was found to be 10/15 (E3, V3, M4) with asymmetrical spontaneous movement of lower extremities. CT / CTA reports were normal and lumbar puncture showed normal CSF parameters. Initial neurological examination showed grossly intact cranial nerves, hypotonic left lower limb, and normal tone on the opposite side. Power of the upper limbs was symmetrical at least 2/5, at least 1/5 on the left lower limb and at least 2/5 on the right lower limb. Reflexes were +2 all over except for left lower limb at +3. With respect to planters, there was equivocal response of the left and flexor response on the right side. Sensory, coordination and gait could not be assessed.
With this normal CSF and CT reports, it was thought that patient suffered from cerebral fat embolization, as all her symptoms were preceded by back and shoulder pain for which exchange transfusion was conducted. Her past medical history included bilateral hip replacement 1 year ago secondary to avascular necrosis for which she was admitted to surgical ICU as post-surgery care. Her treatment was as follows: Phlebotomy of 500 ml of blood followed by giving 500 ml 0.9 normal saline and 10 ml calcium gluconate 10% in 50 ml 0.9 normal saline. Then two packs of packed RBC's were transfused, each over 3 hours. Finally, 20 mg of furosemide were administered intravenously. After 4 days, the patient showed significant improvement in her consciousness level with no focal neurological deficit. However, there was psychomotor slowness in long term follow-up. MRI brain showed starfield appearance and incidental aneurysm in supraclinoid portion of right ICA . Neurological examination after exchange transfusion showed GCS 15/15 and normal cognition but slow to respond. Other findings were as follows:- cranial nerves: intact; motor: normal tone, full power and symmetrical reflexes +2; planters: flexor response bilaterally; sensory: intact pin-prick. Coordination and gait were intact.
Values of other routine parameters like CBC, LFT and KFT have been provided as supplementary information. Echocardiogram showed no cardiac shunt. HPV B19 was not requested.