A 26 year old otherwise healthy, G1P0 female at 13 weeks gestation was admitted to medical intensive care unit after she experienced cardiac arrest at home. She had reported shortness of breath earlier that day and then collapsed. During initial paramedic evaluation, she was pulseless and found to be in pulse less electrical activity (PEA). She was successfully resuscitated with return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) in approximately 7 min and was brought to the hospital. Emergency department (ED) evaluation revealed the patient to be nonresponsive, and she was immediately intubated. Her exam was remarkable for cold and cyanotic extremities, without palpable distal pulses but strong femoral pulse. Shortly after her arrival to ED, the patient became pulse less again needing resuscitation and ROSC on 2 occasions.
Initial blood work was remarkable for severe metabolic acidosis (HCO3 of 10) and elevated troponin I (2.77 ng/ml, normal range 0–0.34 ng/ml). EKG showed right bundle branch block while bedside 2 D echocardiogram demonstrated right heart strain pattern. Bedside ultrasound (USG) showed no significant free fluid with live intrauterine gestation. Bilateral lower extremity compression venous dopplers of the entire venous system were negative for any evidence of deep venous thrombosis. She underwent computerized tomography (CT) of the chest which revealed a nearly occlusive thrombus in the bilateral lower lobar arteries extending into the segmental arteries . The main pulmonary arterial trunk was noted to be enlarged with evidence of right heart strain . Head CT scan was negative for any acute intracranial abnormalities. She was administered intravenous tissue plasminogen activator (TPA) (50 mg after ROSC the second time) in the ED with improvement in her hemodynamics. Hypothermia protocol was concurrently initiated. She was subsequently transferred to medical intensive care unit on unfractionated heparin (UFH), bicarbonate and norepinephrine drips. The patient was extubated two days following and was gradually weaned off blood pressure support. UFH drip was titrated based on aPTT and 6 days later she was transitioned to LMWH (dalteparin 10,000 units subcutaneously once daily in view of her insurance issues). She had aggressive supportive care and after a 2 week hospital stay, she was discharged to rehabilitation facility on Dalteparin. A month later dalteparin was changed to enoxaparin 55 mg (1 mg/kg) s/q twice daily (monitored with anti Xa levels).
At approximately 20 week’s gestation, the patient had a fetal ultrasound that revealed singleton gestation with massive hydrops, fetal contractures and ventriculomegaly/hydranencephaly. It was presumed that these findings were secondary to early hypoxic injury and she was counseled about poor prognosis. During her 25th week gestation, the patient noted worsening abdominal pain with associated headaches, lightheadedness and weakness. She had elevated blood pressures and was suspected to have mirror syndrome. Enoxaparin was discontinued 24 h prior to the planned procedure with initiation of UFH drip. The patient underwent elective induction of labor with palliative care services. The infant died shortly after delivery. The patient experienced increased vaginal bleeding secondary to retained products of conception and underwent dilatation and curettage with achievement of hemostasis. Enoxaparin at previous dosage (55 mg s/q twice daily) was restarted 24 h after the delivery without any major or untoward complication. Platelet count and anti-Xa levels were checked while the patient was on enoxaparin. Anti-Xa levels were in therapeutic range (0.8–1, goal 0.6–1.0 IU/ml) and platelet counts remained within normal limits.
In order to identify the cause of her VTE the patient had further work up including thrombophilia testing and CT chest, abdomen/pelvis. Thrombophilia testing revealed the patient to be wild type for Factor V and Prothrombin gene. Protein C and S antigen levels were normal. Antithrombin activity was initially low (71, normal range 75–125 % ACT) at the time of initial VTE but subsequently normalized (107). Antiphospholipid antibody testing including lupus anticoagulant, anti-cardiolipin antibodies and beta 2 glycoprotein I antibodies was negative. CT chest, abdomen and pelvis showed constellation of imaging findings compatible with heterotaxy syndrome. These included left-sided superior vena cava (SVC) draining into the left coronary sinus, hemiazygous vein drains into left SVC, absent azygous vein, absent (interrupted) inferior vena cava (IVC) below the hepatic IVC with persistent left IVC which drains into left coronary sinus, polysplenia, bilateral left lung and benign hepatic hemangioma .
The patient completed 6 month duration of anticoagulation with LMWH and was subsequently placed on ASA 81 mg. Prior to discontinuation of anticoagulation therapy the patient had CT pulmonary angiogram which showed normal diameter of the main pulmonary artery without any evidence of acute or chronic pulmonary emboli. She is currently stable on low dose ASA and is into her third year after the VTE without any recurrence. She has had no further pregnancies.