A 50-year-old woman with previous resection of the small intestine due to a stenosing CD disease, receiving treatment with infliximab, presented in the Emergency Room complaining of dyspnea, orthopnea, and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea.
In 2016, the patient presented with diarrhea with 10 liquid bowel movements/day associated with abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and weight loss of 25 kg over 6 mo. Physical examination revealed a 10-cm mass in the mesogastric region. Colonoscopy showed ulcerated stenosis of the ileocecal regions and the anatomopathological examination was consistent with nonspecific colitis with mild inflammatory activity. Abdominal ultrasound showed a segmental inflammatory process in the small intestine. Small bowel follow-through and computed tomography enterography showed irregularities in the mucosa consistent with ulcerations in the small intestine, stenosis and dilation in the terminal ileum, and thickening of the intestinal wall with hypervascularity of the mesentery and vascular dilatation (comb sign). Based on these clinical findings, a suspicion of small bowel CD was raised. The patient opted for an exploratory laparotomy in 2018, in which thickening of the terminal ileum was observed, and an ileocolectomy (70 cm) with ileus-ascending-anastomosis was performed . Anatomopathological evaluation showed the presence of extensive longitudinal ulcerations, marked fibrosis of the submucosa, muscular hypertrophy, and subserous lymphoid accumulations, suggesting chronic inflammation and consistent with fibro-stenosing CD. Due to extensive resection of the small intestine and presence of residual lesions, combined treatment with infliximab (5 mg/kg) and azathioprine (2 mg/kg/d) was chosen. Colonoscopy performed 6 mo after initiation of the treatment showed four erosions in the ileocolonic anastomosis and one ulcer in the neo-terminal ileum (Rutgeerts score i2). Due to the endoscopic observed activity, the dose of infliximab was increased to 10 mg/kg. Infliximab and anti-infliximab antibody trough levels were not available. Thirty days after infliximab dose optimization, the patient complained of dyspnea, orthopnea, and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea. She reported the onset of mild symptoms with progressive worsening since the introduction of infliximab.
The patient presented a medical history of diabetes and arterial hypertension was treated with glibenclamide, losartan, and hydrochlorothiazide.
There was no family history.
On physical examination, the patient presented with tachypnea (26 rpm), tachycardia (116 bpm), jugular venous distension, right hypochondrial pain, hepatomegaly (3 cm), and lower limb edema.
Chest radiography showed an increase in the cardiac area. Electrocardiogram findings included sinus rhythm, signs of left atrial overload, and alteration of diffuse repolarization with strain pattern of V4-V6. Echocardiography revealed biventricular dysfunction, moderate HF, and an ejection fraction of 36%. Coronary angiography was performed, and coronary artery disease was ruled out.