This case report is based on a boy who was 13 years and 3 months old he was diagnosed with spastic quadriplegia CP. His mother reported of his sedentary preference and inability to walk for long periods, especially outdoors and on inclined surfaces.
When diagnosed, the patient was classified as having Gross Motor Function Classification System (GMFCS) level II. He could walk without assistive equipment by employing a unique knee-gait pattern, and exhibited skills in traversing curbs, uneven surfaces, and barriers. Additionally, he could independently ascend and descend steps within his two-story home with one hand holding the rail.
The participant was born at full term with no other medical complications. He had mild jaundice, which is a common condition in many newborns. However, eventually, the participant's mother observed gross motor developmental deficits, including milestones, such as rolling, compared to his older siblings. Accordingly, the mother sought the expertise of a pediatrician at the hospital.
In 2009, he was referred to our hospital for various medical assessments. In mid-2010, he was officially diagnosed with spastic quadriplegia CP, which mainly explained his motor development impairments. He began his physiotherapy in 2009, following his mother's concerns about gross motor delay. Physiotherapy was conducted on a bi-monthly basis by a pediatric physiotherapist. Physiotherapy aims to provide motor training and home program strategies to effectively target the specific requirements and challenges of the participants.
Prior to VBT, his mother observed an increase in sedentary behavior and his son’s difficulties in long-distance walking, especially during outdoor activities and on inclined surfaces. These concerns were the primary motivating factors behind the pursuit of novel strategies to enhance his physical capabilities and overall well-being.
The patient had no family history of CP or other remarkable neurological conditions as claimed by the mother.
A comprehensive literature review was conducted before selecting assessments for the clinical decision-making process. Muscle strength with respect to body function was assessed using a handheld dynamometer. additionally, general motor ability is evaluated using the Gross Motor Function Measure (GMFM)-88. The 6-min walk test (6 MWT) was used to assess walking capacity, whereas the Pediatric QoL (PedsQL) tool in Malay was used to determine the QoL. Physical examination was performed twice, at baseline and after 4 weeks of VBT.
Muscle strength: Muscle strength was tested using a micro Force Evaluation and Testing 2 (microFET®2) handheld dynamometer (Hogan Health Industries Inc., United States), a small portable device held by the examiner, and placed against the participant’s limit during maximal isometric contraction. According to Goudriaan et al, a knee extension interclass correlation (ICC) value of 0.95 for children with CP indicated that the handheld dynamometer was highly reliable.
According to Neumann, a pathology that affects the strength, control, or extensibility of hip muscles can significantly disrupt the fluidity of many routine movements involving both functional and recreational activities. Thus, in our assessment, we focused on the hip abductor, hip extensor, and knee extensor muscles. The test was conducted in a maneuver with an ICC validated by Yazici et al (ICC = 0.938-0.986), wherein the examiner was in a stable position, providing maximal ability to resist force by the participant, running at a slow count of four upon maximal muscle contraction. Testing was performed in the following manual muscle testing positions: Prone lying (hip extensor), side lying (hip abductor), and high sitting (knee extensor). Figure shows muscle strength measurements using the MicroFET®2 handheld dynamometer.
Gross motor ability: According to the Center of Childhood Disability Research, the GMFM is a standardized observational instrument designed and validated to measure changes in gross motor function over time in children and adolescents with CP, with most items having specific descriptors for each score. The GMFM-88 has been used to assess the gross motor ability of persons with CP. In our assessments, domains D (standing) and E (walking, running, and jumping) from the GMFM-88 were used to suit our participant category, which, in this case, GMFCS level II, possesses the ability to stand and walk. The items were administered according to the GMFM manual.
Walking capacity: The 6 MWT is a submaximal exercise test that involves walking for 6 min. ICC 0.98 was validated in the CP population by Thompson et al. The 6 MWT was used to determine the participants walking capacity. The test was administered according to the standard protocol, implementing every instruction in accordance with the guidelines of the American Thoracic Society.
QoL: To explore the QoL, we chose a PedsQL parent’s proxy questionnaire consisting of a 5-point Likert Scale ranging from 0 to 4, covering four multidimensional functions, namely, physical, emotional, social, and school. Adapting to the local culture, the PedsQL questionnaire was translated into Malay to ease the patient’s career comprehension. The questionnaire has been validated with Cronbach’s α with a range (0.7–0.98) and factor correlation values ranging from 0.1 to 0.57.
The laboratory examinations are not applicable.
The imaging examinations is not applicable.