We present the case of a previously healthy 38-year-old Caucasian woman who presented to our hospital's emergency department with a six-day history of severe sharp and burning right heel and foot pain with inability to bear weight. She had no antecedent trauma or systemic symptoms. The pain was referred distally along the medial and lateral plantar aspect of her foot into the toes, with exacerbation at night and with ambulation.
A physical examination revealed a warm localised swelling around her medial malleolus with no overlying erythema. Her ankle movements were normal but her subtalar joint movement was painful and restricted. A neurological examination confirmed altered sensation over the plantar surface of her foot and toes. Tinel's sign was also noted to be absent along the course of her posterior tibial nerve.
Our patient's inflammatory markers were raised (white cell count at 12.2 × 109cells/L [neutrophils = 11.0] C-reactive protein at 194 and erythrocyte sedimentation rate at 59), while her autoimmune antibody titres and blood cultures were found to be normal. Initial plain radiographs were unremarkable , while a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of her hindfoot demonstrated an increased calcaneal signal intensity on the T2/STIR-weighted images, with a tense effusion of the subtalar joint . Bone scanning confirmed the presence of isolated increased uptake of radioisotope in the calcaneus on blood pool and delayed phases .
In view of the radiological and clinical evidence available, early exploration of the tarsal tunnel was performed via a posteromedial approach. The operative findings were of widespread oedema adjacent to the medial wall of the calcaneus extending into the proximal end of the tarsal tunnel. The posterior tibial nerve itself was noted to be erythematous and swollen. Following decompression of the tarsal canal, a core needle bone biopsy of the body of the calcaneus was performed. Postoperatively, our patient's pain improved and her neurological symptoms resolved within 24 hours. Intraoperative bone biopsy microbiology grew Staphylococcus aureus sensitive to vancomycin. She was subsequently treated for 12 weeks with a combination of oral and intravenous antibiotics and made a full recovery with normal inflammatory markers at six months postoperatively. When she was followed up after four years, she was noted to have remained asymptomatic with no indication of recurrence of the disease.