A 76-year-old man was diagnosed with prostate cancer following PSA screening. He had no past history of neurological or hematological disorders. He had undergone acute myocardial infarction managed by coronary stenting and aspirin therapy, and had an olopatadine allergy. A written informed consent to report this case was obtained from the patient. His baseline PSA level was 40.31 ng/mL, and he had a locally advanced disease by a digital rectal examination, but no node metastasis by CT. Isotope bone scanning revealed multiple bone metastases, and dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging strongly suggested seminal vesicle involvement. Octant prostate biopsy revealed a Gleason score of 5 + 4 disease in all eight biopsy cores.
He was treated with a gonadotropin-releasing hormone antagonist degarelix and antiandrogen bicalutamide . The nadir serum PSA level was 0.06 ng/mL; the period from the primary treatment to the PSA nadir was about 4 months, and PSA levels were elevated 12 months after first-line ADT. The bone-modifying agent denosumab was used 4 months after first-line ADT for 18 months, and stopped due to a diagnosis of osteonecrosis in the jaw. Second-line flutamide therapy was withdrawn after 2 months because of liver dysfunction. Laboratory data were checked every 2 months, and no blood/bone marrow toxicity or severe adverse events were observed .
Subsequently, he received 160 mg of enzalutamide daily as a third-line therapy. Before the induction of enzalutamide, the platelet count was within the normal range (29.5 × 104/μL). However, 13 days after starting enzalutamide therapy, it declined markedly (1.9 × 104/μL). Normal laboratory findings on the coagulation and fibrinolytic systems and other blood and biochemical analyses suggested thrombocytopenia possibly induced by enzalutamide . Enzalutamide was withdrawn immediately and the patient was hospitalized. Platelet count decreased further to 1.0 × 104/μL 3 days after enzalutamide withdrawal, and gradually increased thereafter without bleeding events or platelet transfusion. Nine days after discontinuation of enzalutamide, his platelet count was increased to 7.0 × 104/μL, and he was discharged the next day.
Aspirin therapy also discontinued at the diagnosis of thrombocytopenia, was resumed 7 days after discharge with the confirmation of no bleeding symptoms or disorder in coagulation and fibrinolytic systems. His platelet count recovered to the baseline level (28.8 × 104/μL) 30 days after enzalutamide withdrawal, and enzalutamide therapy was restarted at a reduced dose of 80 mg daily . After restarting enzalutamide, thrombocytopenia did not recur. Due to the persistence of osteonecrosis in the jaw, with possible infections, we did not select chemotherapy or steroid therapy, and enzalutamide was gradually increased to 160 mg daily with PSA levels subsequently decreasing. However, 81 days after restarting enzalutamide, he had a seizure. No significant findings from the brain CT scan and laboratory data suggested that the seizure was an adverse event associated with enzalutamide.
Thereafter, he received estramustine and ethinylestradiol therapies, but both treatments were withdrawn due to drug-induced skin eruptions. He remains alive with palliative treatment, and no additional seizures or neurological disorders occurred for 24 months after the second withdrawal of enzalutamide.