A 21 year-old, healthy, white female presented to our comprehensive breast health services facility with multiple bilateral breast lesions that were presumed to represent multiple bilateral fibroadenomas. She reported having previously undergone a surgical excision procedure of a fibroadenoma of each of her breasts at a local community hospital at a time of approximately three years prior to her current presentation.
Prior to her current presentation at our facility, the patient was evaluated at an out-of-state university medical center and was noted to have multiple ultrasound lesions within both of her breasts. Due to the multiplicity of the bilateral breast lesions and the complexity of her particular case, the breast surgeon at that out-of-state university medical facility told the patient and her family that her "only realistic option" was for bilateral nipple-sparing mastectomies and expander-to-implant reconstruction.
Upon her presentation to our facility, the patient reported that she had noticed an enlarging mass of her central right breast over the last two years and two smaller palpable masses of her left breast. On clinical breast examination, she had medium-sized breasts (36-C cup size). She had an old surgical scar extending from the 8 to 10 o'clock axis of the periareolar aspect of her right breast and similar surgical scar extending from the 10 to 12 o'clock axis of the periareolar aspect of her left breast. Most remarkably, she was noted to have a 10 cm × 7 cm × 5 cm clinically palpable mass encompassing her entire right breast and an overlying 1.5 cm clinically palpable mass in the in the 3 o'clock axis of the periareolar aspect of her right breast. Two palpable masses were also noted in her left breast, clinically measuring 3 cm in size in the 3 to 4 o'clock axis of the mid-breast field and 2 cm in size in the subareolar region. No axillary, supraclavicular, or cervical adenopathy was noted. The patient also reported being on hormonal contraception for the past five years. For the last 18 months, she was maintained on a combination transdermal contraception product containing norelgestromin (6 mg) and ethinyl estradiol (0.75 mg).
Bilateral breast imaging was performed with both bilateral whole-breast ultrasound and bilateral breast MRI. Ultimately, a total of 16 separate breast lesions were identified on both ultrasound and MRI, consisting of eight lesions documented in each breast .
As a result of the radical and body-altering surgical intervention recommendations for bilateral nipple-sparing mastectomies and expander-to-implant reconstruction that were made by the breast surgeon at an out-of-state university medical center, as well as due to her enlarging bilateral breast masses, both the patient and her parents were highly anxious and concerned. Both the patient and her parents desperately desired an alternative therapeutic approach to deal with her multiple bilateral breast lesions and that could accomplish the same goal of complete removal of all detectable lesions while drastically minimizing the degree of surgical invasiveness and maximizing the cosmetic outcome.
A total of 11 separate 8-gauge vacuum-assisted excision procedures, using the previously described breast biopsy system [-], were performed to a total of 14 different ultrasound lesions during seven separate sessions over a ten and one-half month period of time . The technique used for all 11 of the ultrasound-guided 8-gauge vacuum-assisted excision procedures performed in this current report has been previously described and reported by the present author . Real-time ultrasound guidance was performed using the Philips HDI 5000 SonoCT system (Philips Medical Systems Andover, Massachusetts), with a variable frequency transducer L12-5 (range 4.75 to 10.0 MHz). After local anesthetic was administered to the proposed 8-gauge vacuum-assisted excision site, a 5 mm skin incision was made with a #11 blade. Then, under real-time ultrasound guidance, the 8-gauge vacuum-assisted device was passed through the 5 mm skin incision and positioned just beneath the ultrasound lesion and multiple 8-gauge cores were consecutively harvested while sequentially rotating the 8-gauge vacuum-assisted device over an array spanning approximately 180 degrees. Ongoing ultrasound assessment of the progression of lesion excision and final verification of presumed complete lesion excision was performed in real-time in both the longitudinal and transverse planes to the long axis of the 8-gauge device. After completion of core acquisition, the 8-gauge device was removed and a 14-gauge Cormark™ rigid microclip device (Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Inc., Cincinnati, Ohio) was inserted through the same breast parenchymal track under real-time ultrasound guidance for placement of a microclip into the excision cavity . A single microclip was placed at the site of each ultrasound-guided 8-gauge vacuum-assisted excision procedures, except for that of the ultrasound-guided 8-gauge vacuum-assisted excision procedure for lesions 11 and 12, in which case two adjacent microclips were placed. Thereafter, as a standard and to assure adequate hemostasis, manual compression to the breast was performed for approximately ten minutes. No peri-procedural bleeding complications occurred. Finally, the 5 mm incision site was reapproximated with standard adhesive skin closure strips.
A histopathologic diagnosis of fibroadenoma and/or fibroadenomatous changes was confirmed from all 11 of the ultrasound-guided 8-gauge vacuum-assisted excision procedures performed.
The patient's hormonal contraception was discontinued after her third ultrasound-guided 8-gauge vacuum-assisted excision session. A resultant decrease in lesion size was noted in lesion number 9, 13, and 14 on repeat diagnostic ultrasound performed at a later time but prior to the time of the last three ultrasound-guided 8-gauge vacuum-assisted excision sessions (session number 5, 6, and 7) for lesion number 13, 14, and 9, respectively . This effect appeared to be directly related to the discontinuation of her hormonal contraception . This ultimately allowed for successful complete ultrasound-guided 8-gauge vacuum-assisted excision of the two lesions (lesion number 9 and 14) that were previously deemed as too large for consideration of attempted ultrasound-guided 8-gauge vacuum-assisted excision.
Between the fourth and fifth ultrasound-guided 8-gauge vacuum-assisted excision sessions, the patient was taken to the operating room and underwent surgical excision of two right breast lesions. This consisted of a giant fibroadenoma encompassing her entire central right breast (lesion number 1, Table ) that measured 10.5 × 8.0 × 5.5 cm in size on gross pathologic evaluation, as well as an additional fibroadenoma in the 3 o'clock axis of the periareolar aspect of her right breast (lesion number 2, Table ) that measured 1.5 × 1.2 × 0.9 cm in size on gross pathologic evaluation and which was located in close proximity along the superficial lateral aspect of the giant fibroadenoma. As is shown in Figure , for the surgical excision of these two right breast lesions, the patient's right breast was approached through a 10 cm inframammary incision. Through this inframammary incision, the entire right breast parenchymal tissue plate was elevated off of the underlying right pectoralis major muscle and the giant fibroadenoma was delivered out through the posterior breast tissue plate by incising the very thin rim of posteriorly compressed breast parenchyma lying just beneath the giant fibroadenoma. In this manner, the giant fibroadenoma and the second closely-adjacent smaller fibroadenoma were removed without placing any incisions upon the face of the right breast and without incising though any breast parenchyma other than the thin rim of posteriorly compressed breast parenchyma lying beneath the giant fibroadenoma. This particular surgical approach was instrumental to maximizing the cosmetic outcome.
Approximately 18 months after the first ultrasound-guided 8-gauge vacuum-assisted excision procedure and approximately 8 month after the last ultrasound-guided 8-gauge vacuum-assisted excision procedure, the patient returned for interval follow-up and underwent bilateral digital mammography and bilateral whole breast ultrasound. Bilateral digital mammography showed multiple clips within both breasts marking the areas of the 11 separate ultrasound-guided 8-gauge vacuum-assisted excision procedures that were performed during seven separate ultrasound-guided 8-gauge vacuum-assisted excision sessions. Bilateral whole breast ultrasound showed no residual ultrasound lesions at any of the sites of the 11 separate ultrasound-guided 8-gauge vacuum-assisted excision procedures and no residual ultrasound lesions at the sites of the two surgically excised right breast fibroadenomas. Likewise, bilateral whole breast ultrasound showed no new apparent ultrasound lesions elsewhere in either breast.