A 32-year-old married male hand worker presented to the Rheumatology clinic as consultation from the Dental clinic, Damascus University, with a two-year history of frequent recurring oral aphthae. No considerable family history nor psychosocial history has been reported by the patient. He was on topical steroid-triamcinolone acetonide 0.1%, colchicine 1mg daily for four weeks. Following several follow-up visits, the ulcers healed. After six months, the patient presented with recurrent aphthous ulcers on the tongue and inner cheeks for four days.
On examination, a pale oval floor with erythematous margins was found. He was placed on topical triamcinolone acetonide twice daily for seven days, Prednisolone 10mg daily for seven days followed by 5 mg for the next five days, and tetracycline mouth washes four times daily for seven days. The patient responded well with the healing of the ulcers after the steroid therapy. However, just after two weeks, there was a recurrence of the oral aphthous ulcers with erosions, genitalial lesions, and blurred vision with the red left eye (, ).
According to the ophthalmology consultation, acute anterior uveitis was seen. Our patient was placed on 75mg/OP/day (1mg/kg) Prednisone for seven days, tapering down gradually by 5 mg after every seven days; continue the topical triamcinolone acetonide. There was magnificent healing of the ulcers and erosions, uveitis, and genital ulcers after two weeks of treatment. Again, after four weeks, there was a relapse with manifestations of sore throat, genitalia ulcerations, redness, left eye pain and poor vision, and associated abdominal pain. Based on these findings, the diagnosis of Behcet's syndrome was made according to the ACR criteria. To avoid the side effects of using systemic steroids, the patient was placed on Dapsone 25 mg twice daily for one week and continued with the topical triamcinolone acetonide. The patient was also referred to the ophthalmology clinic, where he was managed for uveitis. Complete resolution of all clinical manifestations happened, with no recurrence within six months of several visits.