A 61-year-old man was referred to the Department of Ophthalmology at the Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, in August 2018, and reported a 6-month history of vision loss in the left eye. He denied any history of surgery or trauma in the left eye. His best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/20 in the right eye and suspicious light perception (LP) with faulty light projection in the left eye. His intraocular pressures were 15 mmHg OD and 16 mmHg OS. Slit-lamp examination revealed edema and severe vascular congestion of the supratemporal conjunctiva and sclera, together with slight corneal edema, prominent keratic precipitates (KP), anterior chamber (AC) flare, a few inflammatory cells (++) in the AC, severe posterior synechia, and posterior capsule opacification in the left eye . Severe vitreous opacity resulting in a blurred fundus was also observed . Ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) showed a mass in the superior-temporal part of the ciliary body area of the left eye, with adjacent sclera and conjunctiva involvement . B-scan ultrasonography of the left eye revealed a highly reflective ciliary body mass accompanied by severe vitreous opacity and adjoining exudative retinal detachment in the left eye . Except for a mild lens opacity, no significant findings were observed in the right eye. Brain and orbit magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an intraocular mass in the ciliary body area. The lesion appeared isointense or slightly hyperintense on T1-weighted image (T1WI), and hypointense on T2-weighted image (T2WI). Contrast-enhanced scanning showed a progressive enhancement of the lesion. Ciliary body melanoma or schwannoma could not be excluded based solely on the MRI findings. MRI findings also revealed an abnormal signal suggestive of retinal detachment in the left eye . The helper T-cell type 1 (Th 1)/ Th 2/Th 17 cytokine profile (IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL- 10, TNF-α, IFN-γ and IL-17A) in the aqueous humor of the left eye was also assessed and revealed a bursting increase of proinflammatory IL-6 (6969 pg/ml) level and slight to moderate increases of IL-4 (5.8 pg/ml), IL-10 (24.3 pg/ml), TNF-α (10.9 pg/ml) and IL-17A (29.1 pg/ml). A complete blood count (CBC) and urine and stool routine tests were unremarkable. Kidney and liver function, coagulation function, and antibodies against HIV, HBV, and syphilis also revealed normal results. A clinical diagnosis of an intraocular tumor, presumably ciliary body melanoma or schwannoma, with adjoining exudative retinal detachment (ERD) in the left eye was made.
The patient refused any other auxiliary examinations for financial reasons. Based on the information gathered from the slit-lamp examination, indirect binocular ophthalmoscopy, cytokine levels in the aqueous humor and the multimodal imaging mentioned above, a possible malignancy cannot be excluded. A joint physician-patient decision of enucleation of the left eyeball was made. The eyeball specimen was sent to the ocular pathology laboratory for histopathological analysis. Upon gross examination, a mass measuring (8 × 8 × 10 mm) was observed in the ciliary body area. Adjoining the ciliary body mass, ERD was noted. Microscopic examination revealed infiltration of plasmacytes, lymphocytes, neutrophils, and histocytes with proliferation of myofibroblasts. Immunohistochemical staining showed that the plasmacytes were positive for IgG and approximately 40% of these cells were positive for IgG4 . Staining for Vimentin, Kappa, Lambda and CD68 was positive. CD3, SMA, LCA, CD20, and CD38 staining was focal or scattered positive. CK, EMA, S100, SOX- 10, HMB45, Melan-A, CD30, and ALKp80 staining were negative, and Ki67 staining showed 10% positivity . Based on these histopathological findings, the patient was diagnosed with probable IgG4-ROD. Ideally, serum IgG4 levels should be evaluated to make a more precise diagnosis according to the diagnostic criteria for IgG4-ROD . Moreover, given the high rate of extra-ophthalmic involvement, systemic examination and imaging (head, neck, chest, abdomen, and pelvis) are strongly recommended to identify other potential sites of involvement. However, the patient refused further systemic workup due to financial reasons.
Four months later, the patient was referred to our clinic, complaining of eye pain and vision decline in the right eye and headache for 1 month, his BCVA was 12/20 in the right eye, and his intraocular pressure was 11 mmHg OD. Slit-lamp examination of the right eye revealed similar changes to the left eye 4 months ago. Prominent KP, slight AC flares, and moderate vitreous opacity were also observed in the right eye. Fundus examination revealed a gray-white mass located on the supratemporal peripheral fundus. The details of the mass could not be evaluated fully because of the moderate vitreous opacity. No other significant retinal abnormalities were observed on indirect binocular ophthalmoscopy. B-ultrasonography suggested a mass with high acoustic reflectivity in the supratemporal peripheral fundus. UBM showed a mass in the superior-temporal part of the ciliary body measuring 7.7 mm × 2.4 mm, with a subconjuntival lesion . Brain and orbital MRI revealed lesions with abnormal signals located in the eyelid, peri-orbital tissue, supratemporal part of the wall of the eyeball, ciliary body area, and lacrimal gland of the right eye. The lesions also appeared isointense or slightly hyperintense on T1WI, hypointense on T2WI, and were enhanced on contrast-enhanced scan . No other related findings in the brain were observed on the MRI scans. Th 1/Th 2/Th 17 cytokine (IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, TNF-α, IFN-γ, and IL-17A) analysis in the aqueous humor of the right eye was assessed and revealed similar changes to the left eye 4 months ago, with a bursting increase of IL-6 (5773.61 pg/ml). An extensive work-up excluded infectious (including tuberculosis), rheumatic, inflammatory, and neoplastic causes. Both serum and aqueous humor IgG4 levels were within the normal ranges. MRI scan of the sacroiliac joint and the adjacent tissue, cervical and abdominal ultrasonography, and lung CT scanning showed no related abnormalities. Based on the findings and the medical history of the left eye, a clinical diagnosis of probable IgG4-ROD of the right eye was proposed.
The patient was treated with 500 mg intravenous methylprednisolone for the first 7 days, followed by oral methylprednisolone (50 mg/day). Peribulbar injections of 5 mg dexamethasone once and prednisolone acetate (1%, Pred Forte) every 2 hours while awake were also administered to the right eye. The mass and intraocular inflammation gradually attenuated in the follow-ups by serial monitoring using slit lamp photography, UBM, B-ultrasonography, wide-angle fundus photography , and aqueous humor Th 1/Th 2/Th 17 cytokine levels . Notably, as the oral and topical steroids were tapered, prominent bulbar conjunctival swelling was observed in the lesion location 40 days after treatment (the dosage of oral steroid was 30 mg/day). UBM showed gradual accumulation of subconjunctival fluid, which explained the bulbar conjunctival swelling, while the mass size gradually decreased . Aqueous humor cytokine analysis showed IL-6 levels were down-regulated to 1021.85 pg/ml at 9 days post-treatment (the dosage of oral steroid was 50 mg/day), and then rose gradually to 2981.5 pg/ml at 40 days post-treatment (the dosage of oral steroid was 30 mg/day), in accordance with the gradual subconjunctival fluid accumulation. Continuous corticosteroid treatment yielded prominent improvement, with gradual absorption of the subconjunctival fluid and shrinkage of the mass. At 11 weeks post-treatment, the dose of oral steroid was reduced to 5 mg/d as a maintenance dose. After nearly 3 months of corticosteroid treatment, all symptoms of the right eye resolved and remained stable at the following time points . IL-4, IL-10, TNF-α, and IL-17A levels were readjusted to normal and IL-6 level decreased to nearly normal (20.72 pg/ml). BCVA of the right eye was 16/20.