Our patient is a 42-year-old woman who initially presented with a small palpable mass on her right breast with accompanying burning pain. She stated that it had been growing rapidly over 6 to 8 weeks. She also reported night sweats, back pain, headaches, depression, anxiety, and memory loss. In particular, her respiratory review of the systems was negative and she had no smoking history. The patient has a history of hypertension, depression, intramural uterine leiomyoma, and a left breast fibroadenoma removed 20 years ago. In particular, her family history of cancer includes her daughter (leukemia) and her maternal aunt (colon cancer). Her father’s medical history is unknown. An initial physical exam showed swelling of the right breast. Palpation demonstrated an 8 cm mass in the right upper outer and lower outer quadrants and a walnut-sized mass in the right axillary tail. No tenderness, skin d’orange appearance, nipple discharge, or supraclavicular lymphadenopathy were documented.
The further imaging was promptly completed. A diagnostic mammogram with ultrasound of the right breast showed an irregular hypoechoic mass of 2.9 x 2.1 x 1.9 cm in the position of 10:00 of the right breast, which was highly suggestive of malignancy. An ultrasound of the right axilla showed an abnormally enlarged lymph node (LN) measuring 2.8 x 1.9 x 1.5 cm with an abnormal cortical thickness of 1 cm. This was noted to be highly concerning for a metastatic LN. An ultrasound-guided biopsy of the right breast mass and the right axillary LN was performed. The specimen of the right breast mass showed invasive high-grade neuroendocrine carcinoma of the breast with extensive necrosis. The LN was positive for metastatic carcinoma. By immunohistochemistry, breast markers were ER negative, PR negative and HER2neu equivocal and not amplified by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). It is noteworthy that BRCA1 and BRCA2 were wild-type. Testing for germline mutations in 83 genes associated with genetic disorders was performed. Only one likely pathogenic variant was identified in the EGFR gene: c.2369 C>T {p. Thr790Met}. This mutation was heterozygous. Somatic alterations were checked using an assay that interrogates 324 genes and introns of 36 genes involved in rearrangements. Somatic alterations frequently observed in malignancies and variants of unknown significance were discovered (see ). The tumor was Microsatellite stable, and Mutational Burden was 3 Muts/Mb. Tumor-infiltrating Immune Cell score was 10%, and Tumor Cell score was 0%. Tumor characteristics included that it was GATA-3 negative, CK7 patchy positivity with many cells showing a “dot-pattern” of staining, GCDFP-15 negative, Mammaglobin patchy moderately strong positivity in malignant cells with majority of cells negative, Synaptophysin positive, Chromogranin rare strong positivity in malignant infiltrate with “dot-pattern”, TTF-1 scattered positive cells, and CK20 negative. The patient declined testing of family members, primarily due to a history of Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia in her child and fear of stigmatization.
Magnetic resonance imaging further characterized the previously biopsied right 10:00 breast lesion as irregular and lobulated with central areas of necrosis and heterogeneous enhancement predominantly in the periphery. The mass was measured 3 x 2.8 x 2.6 cm without skin invasion. Another mass was observed at 9:00 in the right breast, measuring 6 mm in greatest dimension and 2.7 cm away from the mass at 10:00. The previously biopsied right axillary LN was measured as 3.7 x 2.7 x 2.7 cm. There was also an 11 mm round LN with a near complete loss of normal fatty hilum superficial to the biopsy-proven metastatic LN in the axillary tail. At least six additional level I right axillary LNs were highly suspicious of metastatic LNs. Also, there was an abnormally enlarged level II LN, measuring 1.6 cm, that was suspicious for a metastatic LN. Three adjacent level II LNs were not enlarged, but did look suspicious relative to their left-sided counterparts. No internal mammary or level III lymphadenopathy was observed. A PET-CT showed abnormally increased FDG activity within the lateral aspect of the right breast and right axilla, but no other sites.
The patient’s diagnosis was high-grade neuroendocrine carcinoma of the right breast (cT3 cN1-2 M0), clinical prognostic stage IIIC. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy consisting of four cycles of doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide followed by 12 cycles of paclitaxel and carboplatin was started. Carboplatin was discontinued after ten cycles due to neuropathy, which is managed with gabapentin. Once the chemotherapy regimen was completed, the patient’s breast mass was significantly decreased in size. The patient then underwent a right mastectomy with dissection of the right LNs, which showed residual ypT1aN1a. She developed lymphedema after surgery, but received treatment in the lymphedema clinic. A postoperative CTA-Chest showed multiple sub-centimeter indeterminate pulmonary nodules. She completed 25 adjuvant radiation fractions to the right chest wall and LN and developed grade 2 radiation dermatitis, which improved with treatment. The metastatic study completed after radiation showed no change in previously known sub-centimeter lung nodules. The patient then completed 8 cycles of adjuvant oral capecitabine. CT of chest/abdomen/pelvis done immediately after adjuvant chemotherapy revealed no change in lung nodules and no evidence of metastatic disease. CT of chest/abdomen/pelvis, brain MRI, and bone scan 7 months after adjuvant chemotherapy revealed no evidence of metastatic disease and stable appearance of chest (see ). The patient remains clinically disease free as of the last follow-up.