The patient was a 66-year-old female on maintenance haemodialysis with a history of lupus nephritis, hypertension and post-menopausal osteoporosis. She had no previous lines or central vascular devices. She had been maintained on haemodialysis via a left internal jugular tunnelled cuffed catheter that had been in situ for five years due to patient preference. She was clinically well when she presented for deceased donor kidney transplantation.
The patient underwent kidney transplantation with immediate graft function and without medical or surgical complications. On day 5 postoperatively, the line was planned for routine removal, and attempted at the bedside with local anaesthesia infiltration. Following uncomplicated dissection of the cuff, tension on the catheter resulted in a choking sensation of the patient together with evident ipsilateral movement of the midline structures including the trachea. Further attempts at the bedside, and later in theatre by vascular and cardiothoracic surgeons had the same result. A CT venogram was performed demonstrating a contracted superior vena cava around the vascular catheter as it passed into the right atrium . An initial attempt by interventional radiology with dissection of the tract using blunt forceps and fluoroscopy was abandoned after fluoroscopy again revealed tracheal displacement and discomfort with attempted traction. Laser sheath removal was considered but was unsuitable due to the excessive size of the patient’s haemodialysis catheter (7 mm; maximal line diameter for available laser systems was 5 mm).
Following multidisciplinary team discussion between vascular, cardiothoracic and interventional radiology teams, a decision was made to undertake a second fluoroscopic technique using the Hong technique . A guidewire was passed down into the IVC from a lumen of the central venous catheter and a 6 mm balloon dilatation was undertaken sequentially from the distal to proximal component of the line . Following this, the line was able to be removed safely . The patient suffered no complications and was discharged home on day 8 post transplantation.
Coronal CT scan imaging demonstrating the course of the haemodialysis catheter entering the left internal jugular vein posterior to the sternocleidomastoid, through the brachiocephalic vein and through a contracted superior vena cava with suspected fibrotic tethering as the likely cause of incarceration (A). Fluoroscopic IR images of 6 mm sequential balloon dilation via an intraluminal guidewire (Hong Technique), intending to disrupt fibrotic tethering and treat central venous stenosis (B). Post-operative chest x-ray demonstrating successful removal of the line without complications (C).