This case report presents a 39-year-old woman with a history of long-term zolpidem abuse and subsequent withdrawal symptoms. The patient was referred to an addiction treatment center by her family and friends during the first 24 h after she stopped taking zolpidem due to seizure-like withdrawal symptoms, which included body tremors, nystagmus, stress, anxiety, hot flashes, and sweaty palms. Additionally, the patient reported experiencing seizures, low self-confidence, feeling of worthlessness, and headaches since 2011 whenever she was off the medication.
The patient’s first exposure to zolpidem occurred 12 years ago after she visited a psychiatrist due to anxiety, hand and jaw tremors, nystagmus, and fainting after short conversations following family problems and arguments. The psychiatrist prescribed 5 mg per night of zolpidem, along with sodium-valproate and alprazolam. Within a year, the patient’s psychiatrist increased the dose of zolpidem to 10 mg per night. However, the patient stops using the rest of the drugs but continued to take zolpidem in excess due to the feeling of peace, carelessness, forgetfulness of stress and problems, feeling of disconnection from the world, and lack of feelings of loneliness. Subsequently, the patient increased her own consumption of zolpidem citing euphoria, happiness, and decreased interest in other issues and relationships.
The patient was slowly increasing the dose of zolpidem, but in 2016, she increased her zolpidem consumption to 300 tablets of 10 mg of zolpidem at once every day and slept for 45 min but reported enjoying the pleasure of sleep during this short sleep duration. The patient used 3,000 mg of zolpidem during the day (mostly during the night), obtained through multiple illegal centers and using fake prescriptions. In Iran, zolpidem must be obtained using a medical doctor’s prescription. The patient abused zolpidem at night and about half an hour after consumption fell asleep for about 45 min. This sleep was highly refreshing, and the patient reported feeling good afterwards. However, she mentioned that she experienced imbalance and blurred vision after waking up. Following her marriage in 2016, the patient reduced her zolpidem consumption to 1,500 mg per day but increased the usage of zolpidem again to 5,000 mg per day after 1 year due to the deterioration of her married life. After divorce in 2019, the patient increased her consumption to 6,000 mg/day (600 tablets per day), which interfered with her ability to work and communication with others. She reported experiencing symptoms such as depression, irritability, anxiety, decreased appetite, and amnesia as well as imbalance 1 h after taking zolpidem. The patient abused this large amount of zolpidem during the day and night in multiple divided doses by consuming large amounts of tablets using spoon or her hand and water; however, she did not mention crushing of the tablets. In some situations, her sister and her niece helped her to peel the pills. The patient’s appetite became worse after abusing this number of pills, and she did not eat food hours before and after consuming the pills. She often used tea and sugar loafs instead of food. Because of the low food intake, she had to go to the clinics to receive serum injections. She mentioned that she could eat this large number of pills because they were tasteless and caused no gastrointestinal adverse effects like nausea, vomiting, or abdominal pain.
The patient attempted to quit zolpidem once in 2022 and was able to abstain for 3 months with the help of admission to a psychiatric ward. During these 3 months without zolpidem, her sleep improved, and her social interactions became relatively normal. However, she ultimately abused zolpidem again and increased her zolpidem consumption to 6,000 mg/day. She started to abuse zolpidem again because she was unemployed and memories of her divorce were bothering her. She later increased the zolpidem abuse to 6,000 mg/day before reducing it again to 4,000 mg/day due to financial constraints. In the last few months of taking zolpidem, the patient unsuccessfully attempted to replace it with opium. After 2 years of being unable to work, the patient was forced to quit taking zolpidem because she had depleted her savings. One day after discontinuing zolpidem, she presented to an addiction treatment center with the help of her friends and family due to experiencing withdrawal symptoms such as body tremors, hot flashes, nystagmus, and sweaty palms.
Upon admission, despite severe and long-term zolpidem consumption, the patient had no other medical issues, such as liver or kidney damage; zolpidem was discontinued, and the patient underwent detoxification with diazepam (20 mg three times a day). The patient experienced seizure like symptoms such as nystagmus and flushing only for the first 2 days. The detoxification medication was changed to clonazepam (41 mg per day in two divided doses) along with escitalopram, quetiapine, and sodium-valproate. Finally, the patient’s condition stabilized with 41 mg of clonazepam. We tapered clonazepam with a taper rate of 10–25% every 3–4 days depending on the patient’s tolerance, and after about 60 days clonazepam was discontinued. Since then, it has been 2 months, and her general condition has improved with the replacement therapy of other drugs. During the detoxification period, her sleeping habits improved, and she sleeps for almost 4 h. Her appetite also became better after zolpidem. Her communication with her family and friends has also improved, and during her hospitalization, her memory has improved.