Due to asymptomatic gastro-esophageal reflux disease with Long Segment Barrett’s esophagus C9M13 according to Prague Classification, a 64-year-old patient underwent repetitive esophagogastroduodenoscopy.
In 2020, biopsy of the distal esophagus 34 cm from row of teeth revealed invasive moderately differentiated (G2) adenocarcinoma. Moreover, erythema and atrophy of the gastric mucosa were detected. However, the patient had no disease-specific complaints when he first presented to our department. Oral intake of standard western-diet was unrestricted and body weight was constant at a BMI of 29.1 kg/m².
In 2012, the 57-year-old man was diagnosed with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) of the stomach in the course of endoscopic treatment of gastric bleeding (2a according to the Forrest Classification of gastrointestinal bleedings). Although there was no detection of Helicobacter pylori, eradication therapy was performed. Endosonography proved localization at the posterior gastric wall without infiltration of neighboring tissues, whereas computed tomography (CT) scan and bone marrow biopsy were without evidence of disease equivalent to stage IE according to the Ann Arbor staging system. Following four courses of rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin hydrochloride (hydroxydaunorubicin), vincristine sulfate (Oncovin), and prednisone (R-CHOP) with curative intention percutaneous normofractionated radiotherapy of the stomach with a total of 39.6 Gray (Gy) in 20 fractions weekly was performed as consolidating therapy. Both systemic and radiation therapy were well tolerated. Due to herpes zoster of the left thorax antiviral therapy with aciclovir was introduced.
The patient had a history of herniated vertebral disc, struma nodosa, chronic-venous insufficiency and endoscopic resection of a low-grade adenoma of the sigmoid colon and regularly took metformin, thyroxine and sitagliptin for type 2 diabetes mellitus and hypothyroidism respectively. Hepatic and renal function were not impaired. Follow-up examinations up to five years were without any peculiarities or evidence of tumor recurrence. The patient had skipped drinking and smoking after intake of 60 pack-years.
Family history was unremarkable and not related to the present case.
The patient was in a normal general state without any evidence of disease or restriction of normal activities.
Preoperative blood examinations were unremarkable. Tumor markers CEA, CA19-9 and CA72-4 were within reference range.
Whereas CT scan showed no signs of distant metastases or involvement of locoregional lymph nodes, endosonography described uT1 (sm2) uN+ according to TNM classification of malignant tumors, 8th edition. Positron emission tomography-CT was performed for further clarification, which ruled out involvement of locoregional lymph nodes.
Surgery for esophageal cancer and gastric tube necrosis: Surgery was performed in minimally invasive technique of Ivor Lewis esophagectomy. Access to the abdominal cavity and capnoperitoneum was established with the help of a Veress needle. An optic trocar was introduced under vision with a 30° camera (KARL STORZ SE & Co. KG, Tuttlingen, Germany). The abdominal cavity was inspected to rule out injuries during access and also peritoneal or hepatic metastases. Then, gastric mobilization was performed with an electrosurgical vessel sealer, left gastric artery was clipped whereas the right gastric artery as well as the right gastroepiploic arcade were preserved. Complete D2-lymphadenectomy was performed followed by stapled gastric tube formation of approximately 5 cm in diameter. Esophagectomy including mediastinal lymphadenectomy was operated thoracoscopically with four right-sided intercostal trocars. The resection was completed with formation of a stapled circular end-to-side-esophagogastrostomy.
Emergency thoracotomy was necessary for resection of the necrotic gastric tube, hemithyroidectomy and creation of the salivary glandula. A jejunal feeding tube was inserted after laparotomy. Continuous intestinal passage was reconstructed by colonic interposition. Following laparotomy, the transverse colon was prepared for retrosternal pull-up and formation of an end-to-end esophagocolostomy and an end-to-side colojejunostomy. A side-to-side ascendodescendostomy was created.
Endoscopy and endoscopic negative-pressure therapy: Endoscopy was performed with a standard gastroscope with 9.8-mm outer caliber and 3.2-mm working channel (PENTAX Medical, Tokyo, Japan). A thin open-pore film wrapped around a drain (Medicoplast, Illingen, Germany) and fixed with a suture was constructed prior to endoscopically controlled insertion and positioning of the device. Negative pressure of -125 mmHg was established with the use of a vacuum therapy system (KCI medical, Wiesbaden, Germany).