A 42-year-old man presented with a rapidly enlarging mass in his right axilla and was diagnosed with myxofibrosarcoma. In the 6 years leading up to this surgery, he had undergone a total of four surgeries, three chemotherapies which included doxorubicin hydrochloride, Ifosfamide, vincristine sulfate, cyclophosphamide and etoposide, and two radiation therapies due to repeated local recurrences. The patient ultimately underwent right arm amputation and a concomitant resection of the right third to fifth ribs. The chest wall was reconstructed using a Gore-Tex patch. Despite achieving R0 in the most recent surgery, local recurrence was discovered upon physical examination 3 months later. The computed tomography and the magnetic resonance imaging of the chest revealed a 21 × 19 × 6.7 cm right chest wall mass contiguous from previous resection margin , for which distant metastasis had been ruled out. En bloc tumor and chest wall resection was performed with the patient in the right lateral position under the single-lung ventilation. The latissimus dorsi muscle and almost the entire length of the third through ninth ribs except for the fourth rib, as well as those intercostal muscles with 3 cm margins from the tumor, were resected through the marginal skin incision. The chest wall now had a defect of almost the entire length of ribs 3–9, which was approximately 30 × 40 cm . We used a titanium plate because of the need for three-dimensional formability to prevent flail chest and intrapleural volume loss. The longest length of the plate was 18 cm; thus, it was impossible to reconstruct the entire length of the rib. Therefore, the plate was used only for the fourth rib; using this as a bridge, the Gore-Tex patch can be reconstructed into an arch shape. The defect was covered with the Gore-Tex patch, with tension fixed to the edges of the chest wall. The Gore-Tex patch was sewn to the plate and second rib after plate fixation to recreate an arched thoracic cavity . The anterolateral femoral skin flap using suprascapular artery and internal jugular vein was transposed to cover the skin defect . A chest tube was inserted into the thoracic cavity, and a drain was placed between the plate and flap. The patient was extubated the day after surgery. No flail chest was encountered postoperatively. To prevent infection related to the titanium plate, the drain on the plate was removed on the seventh postoperative day after the persistent fluid dried up . Thirty days postoperatively, the patient did not require oxygen upon discharge . After discharge, he returned to his normal daily life, although respiratory function tests could not be performedand, and he was doing well with no respiratory dysfunction and no local recurrence. No chemotherapy was administered after surgery. However, the patient died of distant metastasis 1 year postoperatively.