A 37-year-old pregnant woman (first trimester) with a reported history of among others anorexia nervosa, diabetes mellitus type 1, and renal–pancreas transplant in 2015 (diabetic nephropathy). Moreover, she had a history of recurrent atrioventricular nodal reentry tachycardia (AVNRT) without structural heart disease since 2012, with no effect of modified Valsalva manoeuvre (MVM) or carotid sinus massage (CSM). She was using verapamil as a pill-in-the-pocket and declined a catheter ablation.
She was admitted to the internal medicine ward due to hyperemesis gravidarum and possible tacrolimus intoxication. The cardiology department was consulted due to a symptomatic narrow complex tachycardia with possible haemodynamic instability. At primary assessment, the patient had a lowered level of consciousness (Glasgow Coma Scale: E3M5V4) and reported general malaise, chest pain, dyspnoea, and heavy palpitations. Vital signs at presentation were notable with a regular tachycardia of 150 b.p.m. and a blood pressure of 80/50 mmHg, which improved to 100/60 mmHg after saline infusion. Respiratory examination was normal. Further physical examination demonstrated bilateral, pulsatile, bulging jugular veins consistent with the classical ‘Frog Sign’. Electrocardiogram (EKG) showed a narrow complex tachycardia most suspicious for recurrent typical form of AVNRT . Biochemically, the patient had a normal haemoglobin level (7.6 mmol/L; normal range 7.5–10.0 mmol/L) and slightly low potassium level (3.7 mmol/L; normal range 3.8–5.2 mmol/L). The renal and thyroid functions were normal, and inflammation parameters were low.
According to the ESC guideline, we primarily performed MVM and CSM that were both unsuccessful. The patient refused any kind of pharmacological medication that might be harmful to the foetus.
Due to unsuccessful attempts of MVM and CSM and refusal of pharmacological agents, we performed the ‘facial ice immersion technique’ . Under continuous rhythm monitoring and informed consent, her face was lowered in a bowl of ice water. Within mere seconds post-immersion, the tachyarrhythmia converted to a normal sinus rhythm . The patient regained full consciousness and reported no more complaints. After a brief period of monitoring at the emergency cardiac care unit, she returned to the internal medicine ward and was scheduled for outpatient cardiac follow-up.
During follow-up at the outpatient clinic, the patient reported several episodes of paroxysmal tachyarrhythmias. These events were self-limiting, except for one time, when the tachyarrhythmia was terminated by application of CSM (performed by her partner). We performed an echocardiography that showed no structural abnormalities, and EKG showed normal sinus rhythm. The patient declined a catheter ablation due to her current pregnancy. She preferred to postpone this procedure until the postpartum period.
Shortly after the outpatient consult, the patient was re-admitted due to hyperemesis gravidarum (at 16 weeks pregnancy). Once more, the cardiology department was consulted due to a narrow complex tachycardia most suspicious for recurrent typical AVNRT. We performed MVM and CSM that were both unsuccessful. Again, the patient refused any kind of medication that might potentially be harmful for the foetus. Therefore, we applied the ‘facial ice immersion technique’ after which the tachycardia converted to a normal sinus rhythm within mere minutes. The patient was instructed in case of recurrent episodes and will be scheduled for catheter ablation postpartum.