A 24-year-old right-handed Arab man, working as a computer engineer, presented with a painful mass on his right wrist that had appeared 2 years ago. The mass had slowly grown over the past 2 years and the pain had increased over time. It started affecting the range of motion of his right wrist, specifically during flexion, but without a significant effect on the range of motion of his fingers. He described experiencing a tingling sensation at the tip of the second and third fingers of his right hand. The mass started to affect his daily activity, especially at work while using a keyboard for long periods. He had no history of trauma to his right hand or of any chronic medical illnesses.
He initially visited a local clinic, where he was diagnosed as having a lipoma-like tumor on his right forearm. He was referred to our hospital for further evaluation. On examination, we noted an ill-defined firm fusiform mass along the volar aspect of his distal forearm, approximately 3-cm proximal to his wrist joint. The mass was approximately 2 × 3 × 3 in volume and was not pulsatile. It became more prominent during flexion of the wrist . Moreover, there was no focal tenderness or changes in the skin covering the mass.
Simple radiography of his forearm performed initially revealed no bony abnormalities. Ultrasonography showed a superficial soft tissue mass at the level of the subcutaneous plane. It was isoechoic to the muscles of the forearm . The mass was clearly observed in Doppler imaging and did not show any cystic changes or abnormal vascularity .
Magnetic resonance imaging of his right forearm was performed. T1-weighted images and T2-weighted images in the axial, sagittal, and coronal positions revealed signal intensities of the mass similar to those of the adjacent muscles . Thinning of the superficial fascia and subcutaneous fat was also observed.
The mass was located medial to the tendon of the flexor carpi radialis and in the region of the tendon of palmaris longus. The muscle appeared tendinous in the upper (proximal) portion and muscular in its lower (distal) portion. The sagittal plane images showed the longitudinal fusiform extent of the mass, which reached the upper margin of the flexor retinaculum at its distal extent .
The mass was located close to the median nerve, as observed in the axial images. We diagnosed our patient as having reversed PLM. We detected marked hypertrophy of the belly of the muscle extending almost up to its point of attachment with the flexor retinaculum and restricted movement of its tendon over the flexor retinaculum. In addition, the median nerve near the wrist joint was being compressed. The pressure on the median nerve was the most probable cause of the wrist pain experienced by our patient.
We planned to treat our patient conservatively. A systemic anti-inflammatory medication and a wrist splint was the first line of treatment with regular follow-up. Furthermore, we referred him to a physiotherapy department to start stretching exercises. During his follow-up visits, he was able to tolerate pain. One year later, he eventually regained full function of his right hand, and it no longer affected his daily activities.