A 28-year-old immunocompetent woman presented with a 2-year history of lactose intolerance and dyspepsia which had been worsening in the last 6 months. Blood exams and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level were within normal limits. Laboratory tests ruled out celiac disease as well as other autoimmune diseases. No hepatosplenomegaly and lymphadenopathy were present. By upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, the esophagus showed normal caliber and morphology and the overlying mucosa was unremarkable. A mild incontinence of the cardia was observed. The stomach was normally distensible and mainly the gastric body mucosa appeared mildly hyperemic and edematous . The pylorus was symmetric; the bulb as well as the second duodenal portion were unremarkable.
Microscopically, the lamina propria showed a subtle, non-destructive and monotonous lymphoid infiltrate composed of small lymphocytes , focally invading the glandular epithelium and realizing rare lymphoepithelial lesions (LELs). Few eosinophils and plasma cells were admixed. The lymphoid cells were diffusely positive for T-cell markers such as CD3, CD4 , CD5 and CD7 and negative for CD20, CD8, CD56, CD103, PD1, CD30, ALK1, CD10, BCL6, perforin, TIA-1 and Granzyme B. In situ hybridization for Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-encoded RNA (EBER) was negative. The Ki67 proliferative fraction was low (5%). PCR-based T-cell receptor (TCR) clonality testing was performed and, according to EuroClonality/BIOMED-2 guidelines, clonal T-cell receptor γ (TCRγ) rearrangement was reported. The case was interpreted as ITLPD. Bone marrow biopsy showed a subtle and mild, interstitial lymphoid infiltrate with a mixed immunohistochemical phenotype. However, molecular testing identified an identical TCRγ rearrangement. Colonoscopy was negative. Multiple biopsies from small intestine and colon were taken. Immunohistochemistry and molecular analysis ruled out the presence of disease in small and large bowel. Computerized tomography (CT) scan and positron emission tomography (PET) scan were negative. Prednisone (50 mg daily) was administered for 2 months. GI biopsies performed 12 months after the initial diagnosis, confirmed a stable and persistent disease limited to the gastric mucosa. Due to lack of symptoms, the steroid therapy was stopped and a wait and see policy adopted.