A 66-year-old man presented to the emergency department of University Hospital in Seoul, South Korea, complaining of severe, constant pain and bruising over the right flank for the previous 2 weeks. He had fallen, striking his right flank on the edge of the metal wastebasket approximately 4 weeks prior to presentation. At that time, he had a light abrasion on the right flank, but he did not receive any special treatment. He had a history of cardiovascular disease and poorly controlled type 2 diabetes mellitus over the past 40 years.
On admission, the patient's mental status was alert. His vital signs were stable except for his temperature, which was 37.7°C. Physical examination revealed intense pain on palpation, crepitus, swelling, and bruising over the right side of the abdominal wall, extending into the shoulder. No traces of the original wound remained. There were no other abnormal findings on physical examination. Laboratory tests revealed the following: white blood cell count, 8,000/mm3 with 74% neutrophils (normal, 4,500-11,000/mm3 with 40-75% neutrophils); hematocrit, 52.5% (normal, 38-52%); hemoglobin, 18.1 g/dL (normal, 13-17 g/dL); platelet count, 125,000/mm3 (normal, 150,000-400,000/mm3); and C-reactive protein, 256.43 mg/L (normal, 0-3 mg/L). Computed tomography scans of the chest and abdomen revealed soft tissue edema and stranding with gas in the chest and abdominal wall . They did not show any abscesses in any other organs. After cultures of two blood draws and a sample obtained by direct needle aspiration were performed, treatment with cefazolin (2 g every 8 h, intravenously [i.v.]) and clindamycin (300 mg every 6 h, i.v.) was started. On hospital day 2, clindamycin was discontinued and cefazolin was changed to ceftriaxone (2 g every 24 h, i.v.) with the preliminary report of Gram-negative bacilli in the culture of the aspirated specimen. Because the patient did not show signs of systemic toxicity, elective operative drainage and debridement was performed on hospital day 3. Intraoperative findings included a foul-smelling brownish-gray exudate and subcutaneous emphysema tracking along the superficial and deep fascia from the right shoulder to the groin. On hospital day 5, the initial blood cultures were negative. The aerobic and anaerobic cultures of the needle-aspiration specimen and the necrotic tissue obtained during the operation were positive only for R. planticola, on hospital day 3 and 5 respectively, as determined biochemically by using the Vitek2 automated identification system (bioMérieux, Marcy l'Etoile, France; 95% probability). It demonstrated mucoid colony in both blood agar and MacConkey agar. The identity of the isolate was further confirmed using 16S rRNA sequencing . Comparative sequence analysis showed a 100% identity with the sequence corresponding to the 16S rRNA gene of R. planticola ATCC 33531. Antibiotic susceptibility results were obtained using a Vitek2 AST-131 kit (bioMérieux) according to Clinical Laboratory Standards Institute methods. The isolate was found to be intermediate only to ampicillin and susceptible to the following antibiotics: amikacin, amoxicillin/clavulanic acid, aztreonam, cefepime, cefotaxime, cefoxitin, ceftazidime, cephalothin, gentamicin, imipenem, meropenem, piperacillin/tazobactam, tobramycin, levofloxacin, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, and tigecycline. The isolates did not reveal extended-spectrum β-lactamase production.
The patient required repetitive surgical debridements, and the wound was left open because of copious amounts of tissue fluid discharge (50-150 mL daily). Despite conversion to a negative culture on hospital day 16, ceftriaxone was changed to levofloxacin (500 mg every 24 h, i.v.) because the amount of discharge did not decrease. The patient's condition was complicated by Clostridium difficile-associated colitis on hospital day 28. Consequently, levofloxacin was discontinued, and the patient received tigecycline (initial loading dose of 100 mg, followed by 50 mg every 12 h, i.v.) for the coverage of both R. planticola and C. difficile. Over the course of 6 weeks of antibiotic therapy combined with five surgical debridements, the patient demonstrated obvious clinical improvement of both the colitis and the necrotizing fasciitis. Wound closure was performed on hospital day 37. After the 14-day administration of tigecycline, the patient had completed the treatment and was discharged without oral antibiotics. At outpatient follow-up, 4 weeks after discharge, the surgical wound was completely healed without any evidence of necrosis. The patient reported the resolution of symptoms related to the necrotizing fasciitis of the chest and abdominal wall.