A 67-year-old female was referred to our centre for atypical chest pain of mechanical characteristics. She had no previous medical history, and she was an ex-smoker. Blood pressure on the clinic was 130/67 mmHg and heart rate was 70 b.p.m. Physical examination revealed a 3/6 holosystolic murmur in the precordium. The electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm (SR), normal QRS duration, and no ST-segment or T wave abnormalities. Routine blood tests were normal. A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed surprisingly a dilated RCA arising from the right sinus of Valsalva and an aneurysmal left main artery (LMA) arising from the dilated PA (Video 1). Doppler colour imaging showed diastolic flow in the RCA filing the left coronary arteries via epicardial collaterals (Video 2). Biventricular ejection fraction was normal. The mitral valve was myxomatous with no papillary muscle abnormalities and mild to moderate regurgitation. A cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) showed mildly dilated LV with normal ejection fraction (LVEF: 60%). Late gadolinium enhancement sequences demonstrated very subtle mid-wall myocardial fibrosis at the basal septum, with no areas of myocardial infarction . The pulmonary to systemic blood flow ratio (Qp:Qs ratio) was 1.8.
A cardiac multidetector computed tomography confirmed the anomalous origin of the LMA from the PA. The RCA was arising from the aorta running a normal course. The RCA was markedly dilated throughout its extent with large collaterals across the anterior right ventricle free wall and septum terminating to the LCA system. The coronary arteries were free of atherosclerosis or other congenital anomalies . Exercise stress echocardiography showed no regional wall motion abnormalities and no deterioration in the degree of mitral regurgitation at peak stress. Exercise stress myocardial perfusion scintigraphy showed no perfusion defect. A 24-h electrocardiogram tape showed SR with no arrhythmic events.
Although surgical correction is the recommended treatment of ALCAPA, medical treatment was decided for our patient. The decision was based on patient’s desire. A beta-blocker and aspirin were commenced. The patient has been followed for 7 years, and she remains asymptomatic from a cardiovascular perspective with good exercise capacity. The exercise echocardiogram was repeated 2 years ago and was still negative for ischaemia.