A previously fit and well 51-year-old female was referred to our renal team on 27th May 2021 with a presumed acute kidney injury (creatinine of 484 umol/L). She had never had her renal function checked previously. This was on a background of a one-month history of feeling non-specifically unwell. She gave a history of weight loss (6 kg), fatigue, nausea and a metallic taste. She was on no regular medications and denied taking any over-the-counter or alternative medicines. She denied any illicit drug use. She had received her first dose of the Oxford-AstraZeneca vaccine on 23rd March 2021 and her second dose on 20th May 2021. Her physical examination was unremarkable. Specifically, she had no signs or symptoms of uveitis although a formal ophthalmological examination was not sought.
Her blood pressure at presentation was 145/81. Her urinalysis showed 1+ protein and was positive for blood. The urine protein:creatinine ratio was 50 mg/mmol. Her CRP was 77, albumin 34 g/l and eosinophils were within the normal range at 0.16 10*9/L. Her acute renal screen was unremarkable; ANCA and Anti-nuclear antibody (ANA) were negative and her complement screen showed a mildly raised C3 of 1.89 g/L. She underwent a renal biopsy the following day that showed a total of 19 glomeruli, none were sclerosed. The glomeruli appeared normal to light microscopy. The tubulointerstitial compartment contained a dense inflammatory infiltrate including many eosinophils . There was widespread acute tubular injury with tubulitis, but no established or longstanding atrophy. Only one small artery was seen and it appeared normal. Immunofluorescence staining was negative for Immunoglobulin G (IgG), Immunoglobulin A (IgA), Immunoglobulin M (IgM), C3, C1q, kappa and lambda. A diagnosis was made of an acute tubulointerstitial nephritis.
She was commenced on 40 mg of oral prednisolone which is the standard starting dose in our local renal unit. Her renal function continued to deteriorate for 3 days to a maximum creatinine of 626 umol/L before starting to improve. She did not require renal replacement therapy at any time.
Her renal function continued to improve on a 3-month weaning course of oral prednisolone, which was stopped at the end of August 2021. Her creatinine improved to 104 umol/L on 16th September 2021 and her latest creatinine was 78 on 17th March 2022.