A 43-year-old obese, Caucasian man with a past history of insomnia, bipolar disorder and chronic headache presented with multiple episodes of seizures; all were induced by laughter. He had had several mild seizures in the month prior to admission, induced by laughter when he was watching comedy shows on the television. Each episode lasted approximately five to 10 seconds. In each instance, he started laughing, then his arms started shaking and he felt like ‘his consciousness was being vacuumed away’. He denied any history of tongue bite, bowel or bladder incontinence. He had had a variable number of seizure episodes; five times a day on average, based upon the length and intensity of the comedy shows. There was no family history of seizure disorder in his first-degree relatives. A physical examination revealed an alert, awake obese man with stable vital signs including blood pressure of 123/67mm Hg and a regular heart rate of 75 per minute. His respiratory and cardiovascular examinations were within normal limits. A neurological examination revealed intact cranial nerves, normal motor, sensory and cerebellar functions with no focal neurological deficits.
All of his electrolytes including sodium, magnesium, and calcium were within normal range. Glucose was also within normal range. His sleep-deprived electroencephalography (EEG) was normal and a brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan revealed an arachnoid cyst measuring 4.2 × 2.1cm in the anterior right middle cranial fossa. He was then admitted for a two-day video EEG monitoring, which revealed several bursts of generalized high-amplitude spike and wave activity with frontotemporal predominance, associated with staring episodes, rolling up of the eyes, unresponsiveness to questions and tonic-clonic activities for five to 10 seconds, provoked by ‘deep belly’ laughing. He reported complete lack of awareness during those episodes.
All those manifestations were initially considered to be due to bipolar disorder and he had been maintained on valproic acid and topiramate for his chronic headaches, but this did not seem to be controlling his symptoms. Other differentials included drug-induced seizures, mainly secondary to valproic acid, which was unlikely as the drug levels were normal. In addition, the patient continued to have seizure episodes even during the period of time he was off valproic acid. Conversion disorder was also considered but a two-day video EEG did reveal high-amplitude spikes. Another diagnosis considered was increased intracranial pressure secondary to the arachnoid cyst, leading to compression of the right temporal lobe, triggering temporal lobe epilepsy. However, the video EEG did not display any discrete temporal lobe activities and his ventricles were normal sized on both computed tomography and MRI imaging of his brain. He never had seizure activities without the context of laughter. Thus, it was felt much less likely that the patient displayed an epileptic seizure with laughter being one of the provoking factors.
He was then placed on carbamazepine. After this treatment, he had two episodes of mild staring but no frank seizures or immobilization.
His seizures have remained well controlled on this regimen for more than a year.