A 46 year old female patient presented with pain in her left leg and progressive numbness. She has no history of valvular heart disease, atrial fibrillation, hypercoagulable disorder, peripheral vascular disease or claudication. Due to absent pedal pulse an emergency Computed Tomography Angiography (CTA) was initiated with diagnosis of an acute ischemia of the left leg (Rutherford 2 B) with a 2 cm thrombus distal of the aortic bifurcation . Emergency operation via left inguinal access and additional Szilagyi access with embolectomy, selective thrombembolectomy and patch plasty on the tibioperoneal trunk and local lysis was performed. As part of a further diagnostic examination, a thoracic CT scan has been performed revealing a pediculated-floating 2 cm thrombus in the aortic arch (zone 0, Fig. ). The remaining aorta was free from atherosclerosis or aneurysmal disease. Postoperative transthoracic echocardiography was without pathological findings.
Four days after the initial operation thrombus excision via a minimally invasive access way (partial upper sternotomy) was performed. Basic operative steps were as follows: Limited skin incision (8 cm) followed by left sided L-shaped partial upper sternotomy beginning from jugulum diverted to 4th intercostal space. Direct arterial cannulation via right axillary artery and venous cannulation through the right atrium. After initiation of the extracorporeal circulation, selective unilateral antegrade cerebral perfusion was established in mild (30–32 °C) systemic hypothermia under control of brain tissue oxygen saturation with near-infrared spectroscopy (INVOS). Longitudinal incision of the distal ascending aorta, direct visualization and excision of the 2 cm thrombus and a smaller 3 mm thrombus in the small curvature has been performed. The aortic wall showed no local dissection, hematoma or atherosclerotic changes. Direct closure of the aortotomy has been performed using 4/0 Prolene. Duration of isolated antegrade cerebral perfusion was 8 min, extracorporeal circulation time counted 36 min in total. Patients postoperative course was uneventful. Thus intensive care unit and hospital stay counted 36 h and 13 days respectively. After careful consideration within the multidisciplinary team of the operating surgeons and hematologist an antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and additional anticoagulation with phenprocoumon was established postoperatively.
Histological evaluation of the mass demonstrated thrombotic material without evidence of infection or malignancy.
After 20 days of cardiac rehabilitation, a tumor screening via positron emission tomography (PET) scan was negative. Long-term electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring showed no atrial fibrillation or any other pathologic finding. The patient was referred for hematology consultation with negative results for congenital or acquired thrombophilia. Paraproteins were excluded, there were no Janus-Kinase-2 (JAK-2) mutations. Antithrombin and functional Protein C were normal. During therapy with phenprocoumon, Protein S was lower so that hereditary Protein S deficiency cannot be fully excluded. Oral anticoagulants are continued while Aspirin was stopped due to a resistance. In the clinical follow up the patient presented in a good clinical condition. CT scan 1 year postoperative showed no further embolic events or remaining embolic material in the aorta.