A 19-year-old Korean man presented to department of orthodontics, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital with chief complaints of chewing disability, midfacial depression, and mandibular prognathism. He had no psychosocial history.
As previous medical history, he was diagnosed as bilateral retinoblastoma at 1 month of birth, and had undergone enucleation of the right eye and external beam radiotherapy of the left eye 100 days after birth. He had no hereditary or family history of retinoblastoma. At regular follow-up over 9 years, there was no evidence of recurrence. However, he subsequently received cancer therapy for the secondary nasopharyngeal cancer, with no involvement in other parts, at the age of 11 years in other hospital.
Extraoral examination and cephalometric radiograph analysis demonstrated skeletal class III with significant sagittal, transverse, and vertical growth deficiency of the maxilla and midface [Sella–nasion–A point angle (SNA), 75.8°; A point–nasion–B point angle (ANB), −16.2°; Table and Figs. and ]. Intraoral examination revealed angle class III malocclusion, severe anterior and posterior crossbite, and posterior openbite. Panoramic radiograph showed multiple missing upper permanent teeth (incisors, right premolars, and second molars), impaction of the lower right second and third molars, prolonged retention of the primary teeth (central incisors and right canine), and root rest of the upper right primary molar. There was also vertical and horizontal alveolar bone atrophy in the edentulous area of the maxilla .
The treatment objective was to restore impaired functions and improve esthetics of the jaw and dentition by orthodontic treatment combined with orthognathic surgery, prosthetic treatment, and additional plastic surgery .
The impacted lower right second and third molars were extracted. Initiation: presurgical orthodontic treatment was performed for dental decompensation and tooth alignment. The space for dental implants between the right maxillary canine and second premolar was regained by extraction of the right primary canine and primary molar root rest. At 7 months, to correct severe skeletal discrepancies between the maxilla and mandible, orthognathic surgery was performed with maxillary advancement by Le Fort I osteotomy (right, 6 mm; left, 4 mm) and mandibular setback by sagittal split ramus osteotomy (right, 12 mm; left, 15 mm) . Intermaxillary fixation was performed with elastics and miniscrew implants for 2 weeks. At 8 months (postoperative 1 month), postsurgical orthodontic treatment was initiated to stabilize the occlusion and correct the mandibular occlusal plane. Despite skeletal and dental improvement in the sagittal and vertical dimensions, posterior openbite remained because of the insufficient alveolar bone height in the maxillary posterior area. At 40 months (postoperative 33 months), bilateral posterior maxillary segmental osteotomy (PMSO) with right posterior horizontal ridge augmentation using NovaBone (NovaBone Products, Alachua, FL) was additionally performed to increase the vertical height of the posterior alveolar ridge . At 43 months (postoperative 36 months), additional reconstructive surgery was performed by a plastic surgeon according to the patient’s demand. Depressed zygomatic arch and right enophthalmos were improved by bilateral zygoma elevation with calvarial bone graft followed by fat graft from abdomen . Examination of visual acuity test and exophthalmometry before plastic surgery were also carried out. At 60 months, orthodontic appliances were removed at the end of the surgical–orthodontic treatment. For prosthetic works, from 57 to 70 months, zirconia crowns for the upper right/left first molars and left premolars were placed by a prosthodontist to resolve the remaining posterior openbite and to complete the occlusion. Three implants (CMI, Neobiotech, Seoul, South Korea) were placed with bone augmentation in the maxillary left/ right canines (width, 3.5 mm; length, 8.5 mm/10 mm), and right second premolar areas (width, 4.0 mm; length, 10 mm) to replace the multiple missing teeth. A zirconia fixed partial denture was placed between the right canine and premolar implants, and a zirconia crown was placed at the left canine implant. Finally, zirconia crowns on the primary central incisors were set for missing maxillary central incisors. Facial esthetics and functions were favorably enhanced with the improvement of occlusion and skeletal discrepancy. Skeletally, maxillary deficiency and mandibular prognathism were resolved (SNA, 81.1°; ANB, −0.4°; Table ). Dentally, appropriate overjet (3.3 mm) and overbite (2 mm) were achieved. The occlusal relationship was improved following the rehabilitation of maxillary dentition by prosthetic work . (8) At the 2-year follow-up, the skeletal and dental relationships and implant prosthetics were well maintained .