A captive, 450 kg, 24-year-old female polar bear, “Becky,” was noted to be listless, have decreased ambulation, and experiencing particular difficulty with hind leg function . She was fed daily with fresh fish and was normally active and easily approached her food. Prior to the neurosurgery team's involvement, the staff noted that she was listless, losing weight, and having difficulty bearing weight on her hind legs. On arrival of the surgical team, she was noted to be critically ill and unable to ambulate even a few feet to feed. Thoracolumbar disease was suspected based on gait limitations, although there were no signs of urinary or bowel problems. At this time, she had received two rounds of steroid therapy with no improvement in her symptoms.
Ketamine anesthesia was administered via pneumatic tranquilizer dart to the subcutaneous or intramuscular space. Dosing was adjusted to sedation response after an interval of 10–15 min. Becky was then transported to the zoo infirmary for myelography. A spinal injection of 80 ml of Isovue contrast material (Bracco Diagnostic Inc., Milan, Italy) via an 18-gauge, 6.5-inch discogram needle at the L7–S1 interspinous level demonstrated significant spinal stenosis at L5/6 on lateral X-ray . During the procedure, the spinal needle was advanced slowly until cerebrospinal fluid egress was noted and it was felt that contrast material could be safely injected into the subdural space without injuring the spinal cord.
Fur at the surgical site was clipped and the wound was prepared and draped in usual sterile fashion . A large, midline incision was made over the L3/L4/L5/L6/L7/S1 region . Electrocautery was used to divide the dorsal spinous fascia and the spinal muscular attachments from the lamina. A total laminectomy from L3/L4/L5/L6/L7/S1 was performed using rongeurs, a high-speed pneumatic drill, and multiple-sized punch instruments. It was noted that the spinous processes and lamina were significantly thicker and stronger than typically encountered in human patients, and the ligaments and joint capsules, although identified in a similar fashion at the surgical site, were tougher and more durable. Larger instruments were used due to the depth of the subcutaneous dissection as well as the size of the bony elements in the bear's anatomy. A large amount of ligamentum hypertrophy was removed and central decompression was achieved. The wound was further inspected, irrigated, and closed in multilayer fashion. The lumbodorsal fascia and subcutaneous tissue were closed tightly with interrupted 0-0 Vicryl (Ethicon Inc., Somerville, NJ, USA). The skin was closed with absorbable sutures to prevent requirement of anesthetization for suture removal. Becky tolerated the procedure well with no evident complications.
Becky was returned to her environment and emerged from anesthesia successfully. Over the course of the next week, she returned to ambulation with apparent full strength and started to eat, behave more normally, and gain weight .