A 62-year-old male was admitted to the hospital due to the discovery of a mass in his right eye 1 mo prior with no history of eye disease.
The patient had a medical history of blurred vision and red eyes.
A previous left nephrectomy with the diagnosis of ccRCC [World Health Organisation/International Society of Urological Pathology (WHO/ISUP) nuclear grading was not mentioned].
The patient denied any family medical history.
The visual acuity of the left eye was 0.6 and that of the right eye was 0.4. The conjunctiva of the right eye was slightly congested, and the vessels of the nasal conjunctiva were tortuous and dilated. The cornea was clear. A keratic precipitate was visible behind the cornea and a red mass with a diameter of approximately 5 mm was visible at 2-5 o’clock in the front of the cornea. The depth of the anterior chamber was moderate. The iris texture was not clear and was partially posterior synechiae. The pupil was round, but slow to light reflex. Pigment was seen in the precrystalline capsule. There was no obvious abnormality in the left eye except the phacoscotasmus. The intraocular pressure was 14 mmHg in the left eye and 21 mmHg in the right eye.
Complete blood counts, aspartate aminotransferase, alkaline phosphatase, bilirubin, serum electrolytes, creatinine, and urea were all within normal ranges.
B-scan ultrasonography revealed that the central depth of the anterior chamber was approximately 3.14 mm and a well-bounded high-density lesion could be seen at the corner of the anterior chamber at 3-4 o’clock . Chest CT showed a lobulated uneven enhanced mass at the anterior basal segment of the lower lobe of the right lung, with clear boundaries and small streaks at the margin, indicating the high possibility of malignancy. Abdominal CT showed that the left kidney was absent and there was no obvious mass in the right kidney.
The mass was received in several small pieces with a total diameter of 1 cm. Histologically, normal iris tissue could be seen around the tumor . There was no fibrous envelope separation between the tumor and iris tissue. The tumor cells were large, cube-shaped, and in a solid nest-like arrangement. The cytoplasm was clear because it contained a lot of glycogen and lipids. The nuclei were round or ovate, and the nucleoli were visible (hematoxylin and eosin staining, 400 ×) . There were abundant capillaries in the mesenchyme. Tumor cells were immunoreactive for cytokeratin pan , vimentin, paired box gene 8 , cluster of differentiation 10 (CD10) , and carbonic anhydrase IX, but were negative for cytokeratin 7, CD117, CK20, and thyroid transcription factor-1. The Ki-67 proliferation index was 10%.