A 49 year old Caucasian woman with a ductal carcinoma of the right breast (pT2N1, ER+, PgR+, HER2+ IIC, Ki 67 70 %), after external quadrantectomy, received sequential adjuvant treatment of adriamycin and cyclophosphamide for four cycles, as well as four cycles of docetaxel and trastuzumab, and radiation on the residual mammary gland. This was then followed by 14 additional treatments with trastuzumab every 3 weeks as monotherapy. The patient did not suffer any co-morbidities and was not taking any other medications during treatment. The cytotoxic treatment was well tolerated; however, 10 days after the 12th dose of trastuzumab in monotherapy the patient complained of burning and watery eyes, a sensation of a foreign body in both eyes, although mainly in the right eye, and impaired vision. These sensations were not due to mechanical trauma to the eyes.
Conjunctival congestion with perikeratic hyperemia and light perilimbal conjunctival edema with corneal marginal infiltrates accompanied by epithelial defects were observed in both eyes . No further ocular alteration was seen. Polymerase chain reaction testing for herpes simplex virus was negative, and cultures of conjunctival secretion were sterile. Complete serum immunology balance, as well screening for autoantibodies, was negative.
Topical therapy with steroid and antibiotics was started and the right eye was bandaged. Despite initial improvement, the patient’s symptoms worsened after the 13th dose of trastuzumab. As such, we hypothesized a link between HER2 pathway inhibition in the cornea and the ocular side effects. Among the possible strategies to prevent the drug effects on the HER2 pathway in the corneal epithelium, maintenance of sustained activation by administration of a topical serum ligand seemed was proposed as the best solution. Therefore, the 14th administration of trastuzumab was delayed by 1 week, and a sample of peripheral blood was collected. The possibility that a significant concentration of trastuzumab was present in the serum is unlikely due its half-life of 2–12 days. Serum was separated by centrifugation under sterile conditions and stored without dilution at −20 °C. Seven days before the 14th administration of trastuzumab, three drops of serum in each eye was instilled twice per day. Epithelial healing was observed shortly after the onset of treatment with autologous serum, and marginal infiltrates disappeared after 7 days, leaving no haze or scar . Trastuzumab therapy was restarted without relapse of any of the ocular symptoms. Administration of topical autologous serum was continued in conjunction with trastuzumab for the duration of the patient’s treatment. As a result, no further corneal or ocular disease was observed in post-therapy follow-up.