A 50 year old man presented to our outpatient department with a three month history of an altered consistency in his right testicular prosthesis. There was no history of trauma, pain or systemic upset. Scrotal examination revealed a palpable left testicular prosthesis and an irregular soft mass was noted in right hemiscrotum. The overlying skin was normal and no regional adenopathy was evident.
His past history was remarkable for a right testicular teratoma seventeen years earlier treated by radical orchidectomy and adjuvant chemotherapy (Belomycin, Etoposide and Carboplatin). Twelve months following this he underwent retroperitoneal lymph node dissection for residual adenopathy. Four years later he represented with a second testicular tumour in his left testis which was treated with radical orchidectomy. Histology revealed malignant teratoma which was again treated with adjuvant chemotherapy. Following his second radical orchidectomy he opted for bilateral testicular prosthesis insertion in 1996 with concomitant testosterone replacement therapy. Follow up since insertion had been unremarkable.
Preliminary laboratory investigations revealed normal full blood count, renal profile, erythrocyte sedimentation rate and tumour markers. Scrotal ultrasonography revealed a normal contralateral left testicular prosthesis and a ruptured right prosthesis with reverberation artefact described as a "stepladder" pattern on sonographic findings typically found in breast prosthesis rupture . Following discussion with the patient, and in view of his asymptomatic state it was decided to leave the prosthesis in situ and adopt a conservative management strategy with biannual outpatient review.
Rupture remains an infrequent occurrence . It is accepted that the longer the time interval between initial native testis removal and placement of a prosthesis the greater the incidence of complication . John et al have previously documented a twelve year interval between placement and rupture in a patient who required exploration and prosthesis removal . In this case the patient had noticed no difficulties with his bilateral implants up to thirteen years post insertion. Hage et al in 1999 described cases of unilateral testicular implant rupture in a selected series of patients who had undergone transgender surgery with concomitant neoscrotal formation and bilateral implants. All of these patients had a history of trauma or suspected intraoperative puncture and all underwent exploration of the affected area .