A 62-year-old female with no illnesses in the past and who ran marathons in her 30s started experiencing difficulty in breathing during exercise since her 60s. Previous electrocardiograms obtained in her 40s showed some abnormalities, which were unknown to us. On admission to our hospital, an electrocardiogram obtained during the treadmill test revealed a complete left bundle branch block. Echocardiography showed an enlarged RCA (10 mm) and a vessel with blood flow into the pulmonary artery (PA). Left ventricular ejection fraction was 60% and mild mitral regurgitation was noted. Coronary computed tomography (CT) revealed that the LCA arose from the dorsal side of the PA and that both the coronary arteries were markedly dilated and tortuous. On performing cardiac catheterization, the contrast medium was observed to flow from the RCA into the PA via the LCA; the pulmonary/systemic blood flow ratio was 1.4 and pulmonary artery pressure (systolic/diastolic/mean) was 39/19/28 mmHg. Adenosine-loading myocardial scintigraphy revealed ischemia in the left anterior descending branch.
Subsequently, surgery was performed using median sternotomy. A cardiopulmonary bypass was established from the superior and inferior vena cava to the ascending aorta. The patient was then cooled to 32 °C. The PA was longitudinally incised, following which the ostium of the LCA was located. Cardiac arrest was induced using an antegrade injection of the cardioplegic solution from the ascending aorta. Following injection, the surgeon occluded the retrograde flow in the LCA with his index finger to prevent leakage of cardioplegic solution from the RCA. A 6-mm Gelsoft™ Plus (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) was anastomosed end-to-end using a 5–0 Polypropylene suture at the ostium of the LCA in the PA. A small hole was then made in the PA by incising the aortic side. Subsequently, the anastomosed vascular prosthesis was then passed through the hole in the PA wall. The PA wall and protruding part of the vascular prosthesis were sutured using a 5–0 Polypropylene suture. Thereafter, the vascular prosthesis was anastomosed end-to-side to the ascending aorta using a 4–0 Polypropylene suture. After de-clamping of the ascending aorta, the PA incision was closed [Figs. and ]. The surgery was terminated after assessing the cardiac function as good.
Postoperative hemodynamics, including blood pressure and cardiac output were stable and no ischemic change was observed. After resuming meals postoperatively, the patient was administered oral aspirin (100 mg) and warfarin (till the prothrombin time-international normalized ratio became around 1.5). Postoperative echocardiography showed no inflow from the coronary artery into the PA, and no jet suggestive of supravalvular pulmonary artery stenosis due to the implanted vascular prosthesis was observed. Coronary CT confirmed the patency of the vascular prosthesis. Subsequently, the patient was transferred to another hospital for rehabilitation on the 10th postoperative day.
Coronary CT obtained after 2 postoperative years showed a patent graft that was anastomosed to the coronary artery [Fig. ]; moreover, no stenosis of the PA was observed at echocardiography [Fig. ]. The patient did not admit symptoms and did not need any re-intervention for 2 years.