On March 6, 2020, a 34-year-old Colombian man, from Buga, Valle del Cauca, with class II-obesity was admitted to the emergency department of the Hospital San Jose de Buga, a mid-complexity private institution that historically serves to public health network of Valle del Cauca, for a low-grade fever, chills, fatigue, cough, clear-sputum production, myalgia, arthralgia, rhinitis, adynamia, and weakness. He had become ill on February 29, 2020, a total of 4 days after he had flown to Cali from Madrid, Spain, on March 2, 2020, where he was living since January 7, 2020. He began self-medication with acetaminophen on March 3, 2020. After his arrival at the Cali airport, he travelled by car to Buga, where he stayed until admission to our hospital. He denied contact in Spain with people presenting respiratory symptoms. At the hospital, he was strictly isolated. His close contacts were investigated by the public health authorities and were ruled out.
When the patient arrived, he was alert; heart rate was 82 bpm, blood pressure was 110/60 mm Hg, respiratory rate was 18 breaths/min, the temperature was 36.0 °C. Physical examination revealed no alterations, and the saturation of peripheral oxygen was 97%. His body mass index was 36.42 kg/m2. Laboratory findings included mild leukopenia (2.85 × 109 cells/L [reference 3.7–10.1 × 109 cells/L]), absolute lymphopenia (0.762 × 109 cells/L [reference 1.09–2.99 × 109 cells/L]), low monocytes count (0.150 × 109 cells/L [reference 0.3–0.9 × 109 cells/L]), mild erythrocytosis (4.81 × 106 cells/L [reference 4.06–4.69 × 109 cells/μL]), moderate thrombocytopenia (92.7 × 109 cells/L [reference 150.0–450.0 × 109 cells/μL]), and increased C-reactive protein (88.05 mg/L [reference 0–5 mg/L]) . At the moment, considering that Valle del Cauca is in an epidemic situation of dengue, this arbovirosis was suspected. Dengue IgM- and IgG-antibodies and non-structural protein 1 (NS1) dengue protein through enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) (93.9% sensitivity, 97.4% specificity) were negative. A peripheral blood smear showed no alterations, except for thrombocytopenia and leukopenia, large platelets and platelets clotting. An initial hemoculture, on the second day of admission, grew only Staphylococcus auricularis, with two others taken the same day the grew no organisms. Staphylococcus auricularis was considered contamination/colonization.
Screenings for common infectious diseases, including those in the FilmArray® Respiratory Panel, multiplex PCR, which was performed on admission day, were all negative . Although that, and due to the persistence of fever and respiratory symptoms, community-acquired pneumonia was suspected. Treatment with ampicillin/sulbactam (intravenous 3 g q4h) and clarithromycin (intravenous 500 mg q12h) was initiated.
Chest radiographs obtained on admission showed peripheral ground-glass opacities in mid- and lower-third of the thorax . Chest computed tomography on admission showed peripheral ground-glass opacities with partial occupation and also complete consolidation in mid- and lower-third of the thorax . We treated the patient with oxygen inhalation, antibiotics, and nutritional support. Blood gas analysis the second day of hospitalization showed that PCO2 was 31.3 mm Hg (reference 33–40 mm Hg), PO2 was 62.4 mm Hg (reference 70–80 mm Hg), pH was 7.42 (reference 7.36–7.44), HCO3 was 19.9 (reference 21–27 mmol/L), base excess − 3.4 (reference − 3 to + 3 mmol/L), and SO2 was 92%, showing a compensated respiratory alkalosis . The patient remains stable with no signs of respiratory distress, a saturation of peripheral oxygen was 94%, room air, but with a temperature of 38.4 °C and cephalea, both solved with acetaminophen. At the second day patient also received oseltamivir (orally 75 mg q12h).
At the third day, the lung sounds were decreased at the bases, with a saturation of peripheral oxygen of 95%. His platelet counts improved (107 × 109 cells/μL) . His respiratory alkalosis improved partially .
Real-time reverse-transcription PCR (rRT-PCR) analysis of the patient’s nasopharyngeal swab specimen indicated SARS-CoV-2 infection on the third day of admission. The test was performed at the Virology Reference Laboratory of the National Institute of Health, Bogotá, Colombia, as recommended by the WHO guidelines, following the protocol Charité, Berlin, Germany . The laboratory confirmed the negative results for Influenza A and B by rRT-PCR. Sequencing of the strain from the patient was not performed.
At the fourth day, it was decided to add chloroquine, phosphate, to the treatment (orally 300 mg, base, q12h) per 10 days plus continuing oseltamivir and antibiotics. At the physical examination he remains stable, with normal respiratory sounds, but continuing with febrile episodes, treated with acetaminophen. His thrombocytopenia continues to improve, and his coagulation times are normal, also his alanine and aspartate aminotransferases, gamma-glutamyltransferase, and albumin .
At the fifth day, his platelet counts are almost normal , remaining with fever, cough, and leukopenia (including lymphopenia), with no requirements of supplemental oxygen. Lungs physical examination remains normal. The patient presented symptoms of anxiety and trazodone (orally 50 mg) was initiated, improving the next day. His arterial blood gases partially improved .
At the sixth day, the platelet counts became normal . He presented mild dyspnea during walking to the bathroom. His respiratory conditions, besides that, remains stable. His cough has also improved. A chest computed tomography on this day showed peripheral ground-glass opacities with partial occupation improving, the reversed halo sign is observed, with decreasing in the size of the consolidations . A psychologist assessed him, recommending preventing education for his return to home with family.
At the seventh day his clinical condition had improved, with no fever, no dyspnea, no thrombocytopenia, with normal arterial-blood gases and improvement of the C-reactive protein levels, but remaining with leukopenia and lymphopenia .
At the eighth day the leukopenia improved , remaining with fever (completing 72 h afebrile), with a heart rate of 90 bpm, blood pressure was 120/80 mm Hg, respiratory rate was 20 breaths/min, the temperature was 36.2 ℃. Physical examination revealed no alterations, and the saturation of peripheral oxygen was 94%. At this day, chloroquine and oseltamivir were discontinued after completed 5 days of treatment.
At ninth day, the leukocyte counts became normal, with no other significant clinical findings, except for a mild elevation of the C-reactive protein . His clinical condition significantly improved. There is no fever nor cough. A control sample for rRT-PCR for SARS-CoV-2 took this day was negative. The patient is discharged this day. He will remain isolated at home for 14 days at a separated room, with no contact with relatives and proper room ventilation, use of face mask, and instructions for regular hand washing, among other measures, and under close medical follow up. Nine days after he was discharged, he remains in good condition, no additional symptoms, and considered successfully recovered.