A 25-year-old female presented with progressive fatigue, dyspnoea, myalgias, and arthralgias. She had a history of iron deficiency anaemia secondary to menorrhagia, for which she follows in a haematology clinic. Sickle cell anaemia and beta thalassemia were previously ruled out via haemoglobin electrophoresis, and her baseline haemoglobin ranged between 9.0 and 11.0 g/dL (normal range 12.0–16.0 g/dL).
On admission, she was afebrile with a blood pressure of 131/93 mmHg, a heart rate of 123 b.p.m., and an O2 saturation of 100% on room air. Labs on admission revealed non-haemolytic anaemia with a haemoglobin level of 7.1 g/dL (normal range of 80.0–99.0 fL), which increased to 10.6 g/dL following transfusions of packed red blood cells (pRBCs). A total of 5 U of pRBCs were administered throughout her hospitalization to maintain a goal HgB of 7.0 g/dL. Her kidney and liver function tests were normal. The faecal occult blood test was positive in the emergency department (ED); however, since there were no signs of overt bleeding, clinical suspicion for gastrointestinal bleed was low. The electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed sinus tachycardia with right axis deviation . She was admitted to the hospital for anaemia requiring a transfusion. A computed tomography angiogram of the chest ruled out pulmonary embolism; however, it revealed significant right heart strain. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed an ejection fraction of 55%, severe PH (70 mmHg), and dilated right ventricle and atrium ( and ).
On Day 4, the patient decompensated into cardiogenic shock due to RHF. Norepinephrine was initiated at a rate of 5 μg/min, and she was transferred to the medical intensive care unit. Shortly afterward, the patient experienced two episodes of cardiac arrest with pulseless electrical activity but return of spontaneous circulation was achieved on both occasions. Swan-Ganz catheter measurement on Day 5 confirmed pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) of 13 mmHg, pulmonary arterial pressure (PAP) of 63/43/48 mmHg, central venous pressure (CVP) of 21 mmHg, cardiac output (CO) of 2.2 L/min, cardiac index (CI) of 1.6 L/min/m2, and systemic vascular resistance was 1673 dynes-s/cm5. These readings are consistent with PH and RHF, which resulted in reduced preload to left ventricle, leading to low CO and cardiogenic shock. On that same day, the blood lactate level was elevated to 8.6 mmol/L (normal range 0.6–1.4 mmol/L), creatinine was elevated to 1.7 mg/dL (normal range 0.50–0.90 mg/dL) from a normal baseline, and liver function tests revealed elevated AST of 136 U/L (normal range 11–39 U/L) and ALT of 71 U/L (normal range 11–35 U/L) from a normal baseline. The cortisol level was checked and did not indicate adrenal insufficiency. Notably, a TTE completed four months prior to this admission was normal . Cardiac inotropes were initiated, with dobutamine up to 5 μg/kg/min and milrinone at 0.125 μg/kg/min. Upon further investigation into the patient’s medical history, she previously presented to the ED with gingival swelling, bleeding, and a petechial rash. Further questioning revealed that she followed a severely restricted diet lacking fruits and vegetables. This realization led to the discovery of severe vitamin C deficiency of <0.1 mg/dL (normal range 0.4–2.0 mg/dL).
The patient was initiated on intravenous vitamin C repletion with 2 g daily and gradually showed improvement, leading to the removal of vasopressors and inotropes. On Day 14 during treatment with inhaled nitric oxide, Swan-Ganz catheter readings revealed a CVP of 12 mmHg, mean PAP of 39 mmHg, PCWP of 19 mmHg, CO of 4.6 L/min, CI of 2.8 L/min/m2, and PVR of 4.3 WU. A repeat TTE conducted on Day 23 revealed the resolution of right ventricular dilation with complete resolution of RHF and PH . Additionally, a repeat Swan-Ganz measurement on Day 23 showed a PCWP of 9 mmHg, PAP of 36/9 mmHg, and CVP of 7 mmHg. A repeat ECG demonstrated the resolution of right axis deviation (, panel B). The patient was stabilized and safely discharged with plans for outpatient cardiology follow-up. She was discharged on oral vitamin C 1000 mg daily.