The subject was a 45-year-old male with history of diabetes mellitus type 2 and FSHD type 1 (with clinical severity score of 2 and nine D4Z4 repeats) who first noticed symptoms at age 19, when he did 200 pull-ups as part of the Air Force Academy and thereafter lost the ability to do further pull ups. He also noticed lordosis while walking and attributed that to injury on an obstacle course. At the age 35, he realized that he could no longer set as a semi-pro volleyball player. At the age 39, after prolonged biking for a triathlon, he could no longer walk downstairs as he had problems stopping his forward progress. He then noticed that his arms got worse. He denied facial weakness but stated that his face gets tired and has been told that he never smiles. He denied problems with sucking on a straw or whistling. On exam, he demonstrated strong eyelid and lip closure, and cheek puff. Tongue and sternocleidomastoids were strong. His appendicular strength was intact, with the patient able to do deep knee bend but having a hard time walking on toes and heels. As part of the Seattle Wellstone study, an MRI showed STIR positivity in his left medial gastrocnemius and a biopsy of that muscle showed a chronic myopathy with severe myofiber size variability, necrosis, and increased endomysial inflammation ; also present was perivascular inflammation .
After informed consent was obtained, the patient was treated for 3 months with an immunosuppressive regimen of tacrolimus (2.5–3 mg twice per day for goal trough 4 ng/dL) and prednisone (40 mg per day for the first month, 20 mg per day for the second month, and then 10 mg per day for the third month). Quantitative strength exam, functional outcome measures, and muscle MRI were performed at baseline, week 6, and week 12.
All MRI examinations were performed on a 3 T Philips Ingenia scanner. Sequences were acquired using flexible array coils to cover the pelvis down to the ankles in multiple stations (more to cover anatomy with thinner slices) with the following parameters in the axial acquisition plane: T1-weighted DIXON (Fast Field Echo [FFE] readout, four anatomical blocks [stations]: TE=1.35/2.58 ms, TR=shortest [example 4.12 ms], field-of-view [FOV] phase=300, FOV read=max, matrix=448 × 272, in-plane resolution=1.6 × 1.6 mm [thigh], 1.1 × 1.1 mm [calf], slice thickness=3 mm), STIR (three stations: TE=42 ms, TR=5277 ms, FOV phase=410, FOV read=max, matrix=448 × 260, in-plane resolution=1.1 × 1.1 mm, slice thickness=9 mm, IR delay=220 ms), and T2-weighted DIXON (three stations: TE=97/97 ms [phase difference], TR=5570 ms, FOV phase=410, FOV read=max, matrix=448 × 272, in-plane resolution=1.1 × 1.1 mm, slice thickness=9 mm). Total exam time was approximately 40 min equating to ~ 4 min per sequence (four stations T1 and three for STIR and T2 DIXON).
MRI data were imported into Slicer (, ) for processing. The algorithm developed creates a registered image set across the different image types. When you select a pixel within a region, for example a fatty replaced muscle compartment, across the registered images you get back a vector of voxel values, one value for each registered image at that spatial location. Since voxel values depend on the tissue type and on the MRI signal sequence, voxels with similar value vectors are likely to represent the same tissue type. The steps to select model classes and generate hard classified images is described in more detail below. Images underwent preprocessing steps: 1) stitching to join the separate series into a contiguous volume, 2) interpolation of all series to the highest resolution data (T1 DIXON), and 3) separate series intensity normalization and inhomogeneity correction. Next, data were exported for segmentation in MATLAB (Mathworks, Natick MA), with the time-points concatenated into a common block and then seeds were selected in the sum exams for the four primary classes of interest (fat, muscle, STIR+, bone). From these samples, gold-standard voxel value vectors were generated and the images classified by voxel vector similarity (least squared vector difference). To ensure that bone and sub-cutaneous fat were not included in volume measurements, both classes were expanded (digital dilation) by 5 and 4 pixels respectively. This has the practical result of removing the subcutaneous fat ring and ensuring that the bone mask is liberal enough to ensure that it is not being incorporated into muscle measures. As a last step, since bladder and vasculature appear as STIR bright features, these were removed the final segmentations by a rater blinded to time-point. This vector classification approach yielded excellent overlap between the multi-modality images for major tissue classes of interest (fat, muscle [normal-appearing], and STIR+ regions) as can be seen in Fig. . Summary volumes were computed for evaluating change with treatment.
There was no reversal of the abnormal STIR signal elevations seen at baseline by visual evaluation or by the volumes derived. Numerically, there was a slight increase in the fraction of muscle with STIR positivity from 0.02 at baseline to 0.03 at week 12 . Data were expressed STIR/total at each time-point to account for weight changes. The stability of this biomarker and its potential to increase over the time-course can be seen in Fig. , with arrows demarcating areas of STIR+ features seen across the thigh and calf. Fat fraction assessed in bilateral legs showed no increase between baseline and at the end of the treatment period (12 weeks) with fat fraction at 0.27.
Quantitative strength examination of the lower extremity by quantitative myometry showed mild decrease in bilateral knee flexion and ankle dorsiflexion strength . Functional outcome measures showed no clinically significant changes .
The patient lost 9 kg during the study from a baseline weight of 104 kg. He reported no significant side-effect of the medications. Labs showed persistent hyperglycemia with hemoglobin A1c 6.6% at baseline and 8.8% at week 12. Tacrolimus trough levels were consistently therapeutic between 7.8 and 10.7 ng/mL. Renal function, potassium, magnesium, and phosphate levels were unaffected throughout the study.