A 45 years old Saudi male was admitted because of symptoms of Intestinal obstruction started 6 days prior to presentation. He presented with constipation and vomiting. He also noticed that his abdomen was getting distended for the past four months. His past medical history was not significant. On examination, his vital signs were stable, his abdomen was very distended and tympanic, but not tender. Strikingly he had a gigantic right middle finger . The left hand was amputated because of the massive size which was too heavy to lift. The whole left arm was hypertrophied and he also had a large diffuse lipoma occupying his left chest wall. His face was elongated and he had mild slanting eyes. The speech was very coherent and he maintained good mentation with Glasgow score of 15 all the time. There was no obvious abnormality in the lower limbs and no evidence of any dermatological changes. Though not married, he was fully independent, engaged in a full time job, running a business with 300 employees under his care, and he drove his own car. His blood investigations showed a white count of 13.2, Hb of 12.1 gm/dl, platelets of 252,000 per micro l. His PT, PTT and INR were within the normal range, however his sodium was 107 meq/dl, and his Cl was 75 meq/dl and his potassium was 3.6 meq/dl. Rest of his blood test showed normal liver function and normal renal function. Computer Tomographic scan of his abdomen confirmed diagnosis of small bowel obstruction. He was admitted for conservative treatment initially, however in the next 24 h he became unwell and his abdomen became more tender, more distended with guarding in the upper right quadrant. His plain XR of his abdomen confirmed small bowel obstruction and the patient was taken to the operating theatre where an exploratory laparotomy was done. The findings were hugely dilated small bowel forming a volvulus which was twisted 180 degrees around its elongated mesentery, the caecum and the appendix were found in left upper quadrant. The point of twist was just 8 cm distal to the ileocecal junction. There was also a small perforation right at twisting point.
Resection of the twisted bowel was done due to its dusky colour and lack of motility and shine, and opening the specimen revealed numerous intraluminal lipomas (, ). With end to end anastomosis was done, 170 cm were removed of ileum, and over 200 cm of small bowel was left intact. Patient was admitted in the Intensive care unit where he spent a stormy 40 days, during which time he was taken back to the operating theatre and a second look was done, where an anastomotic leak was discovered. The anastomosis was taken down and an ileostomy and a mucus fistula was created. This was reversed five months later, prior to his discharge mainly because of his severe weight loss from the continuous loss from the stoma, which could not be compensated by his naso-gastric feed, and partly because of the local complication of the stoma. During his hospital stay he developed few grand mal fits which were controlled using Keppran and valproic acid. His brain CT revealed pontine demylination, which most likely were due to a rapid correction of his hyponatraemia.