A 79-year-old female, who had undergone Bentall with a stentless valve (23 mm Freestyle Aortic Root Bioprosthesis, Medtronic, Dublin, Ireland) in a full-root fashion and accidental coronary artery bypass grafting for annuloaortic ectasia 22 years earlier, presented with dyspnea upon exertion and orthopnea at night. Subsequently, she was referred to our hospital for further evaluation and treatment of heart failure based on a highly inactive N-terminal fragment of pro B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) level of 2614 pg/mL (normal < 450 pg for adults 75 years or older) and mild pulmonary congestion found on chest radiography. On the transthoracic echocardiography (TTE), the family physician noted a severe aortic insufficiency (AI) associated with an adhesion of structures to the valve leaflets, which appeared to be vegetation and destruction of the prosthetic valve leaflets . The patient had bronchial asthma under medical control and had undergone several surgeries other than cardiac surgery, such as ablation for arterial fibrillation, cholecystectomy, appendectomy, total hysterectomy for uterine cancer, and endoscopic submucosal dissection for early stage gastric cancer. She had been hospitalized for PVE three times in approximately 15 years. During an outpatient visit 1 month prior to admission, the patient did not report any shortness of breath or fever. The BNP level was 36.1 pg/mL (normal, < 100 pg/mL), and routine TTE revealed no vegetation or signs of AI.
Upon admission, the patient appeared underweight (height: 147.5 cm, weight: 36.6 kg, body mass index: 16.8 kg/m2) and exhibited general fatigue, but was afebrile. During physical examination, a loud, grade 4/6 diastolic murmur in the second intercostal space without crackles was identified on auscultation. Initial laboratory results revealed a hemoglobin level of 12.3 g/dL, white blood cell count of 3,300 /µL, a slightly elevated C-reactive protein of 0.47 mg/dL (normal, < 0.30 mg/dL), a prolonged prothrombin time-international normalized ratio of 3.1 for warfarin taken for atrial fibrillation and an elevated BNP level of 501 pg/mL. The blood culture results were negative. Chest radiography revealed mild bilateral pulmonary edema with cardiomegaly (CTR 58.9%). TTE revealed severe AI with left cusp prolapse and a reduced ejection fraction of 45%. Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) revealed prolapse of the thickened left cusp with an oval structure of approximately 11 × 5 mm . No abnormalities were observed in the mitral or tricuspid valves. Evidence of infection was absent; however, the oval shape could not be definitively excluded as vegetation, given the patient's history of three instances of PVE. Therefore, the patient was tentatively diagnosed with stage III bioprosthetic valve dysfunction with severe valve morphology deterioration due to structural valve deterioration (SVD) with healed IE, according to the Valve Academic Research Consortium-3 . The patient initially refused surgical treatment despite presenting with stage II bioprosthetic valve failure, but consented to surgical treatment after medical therapy. After initial treatment with additional diuretics (furosemide intravenous injection and tolvaptan were prescribed), contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed that the right coronary artery (RCA) and saphenous vein graft to left anterior descending artery (SVG–LAD) bypass graft were patent, but saphenous vein graft to obtuse marginal artery bypass graft was occluded, indicating that the left coronary artery was perfused only by SVG–LAD bypass. The oval structure observed in the TEE could not be identified. Regarding the measurement of the stentless valve, the inflow diameter was 20.7 × 23.8 mm (area: 383 mm2), the outflow diameter was 27.1 × 29.6 mm (area: 648 mm2) and the sinus of Valsalva was 37.3 mm in left coronary sinus, 38.0 mm in right coronary sinus, 35.9 mm in non-coronary sinus, respectively, without pseudoaneurysm. The right coronary orifice height was 24.1 mm, and the proximal anastomosis of the SVG–LAD bypass height was 40 mm from the basal plane. The patient’s calculated operative risk was high according to the Society of Thoracic Surgeons Predicted Risk of Mortality (12.7%), and the clinical frailty scale was grade 3 . In the initial discussion with the heart team, some participants deemed TAV-in-SAV suitable for SVD with healed IE, whereas others advocated revision despite the high surgical risk, citing concerns about PVE and recurrent infections. Hence, the potential of TAV-in-SAV was discussed again after investigating the patients’ PVE episodes.
The patient timeline for previous PVE treatment and TEE inspection is shown in Fig. and Additional file : Video 2. Seven years after the cardiac surgery, the patient experienced an initial episode of PVE with fever, toothache, and sore throat. TTE and TEE revealed vegetation in the left cusp leaflet of the stentless valve, and Campylobacter fetus was detected in two sets of blood cultures, leading to a diagnosis of PVE according to the modified Duke’s diagnostic criteria . Vancomycin hydrochloride and gentamicin sulfate were initiated as empirical antibiotics, transitioning to ampicillin sodium and gentamicin, respectively, once the causative organism was identified. The symptoms quickly subsided after antibiotic administration, with trivial AI, prompt disappearance of the vegetation, and no evidence of embolization. The patient was cured after 7 weeks of antibiotic therapy and discharged on an oral amoxicillin hydrate regimen. The second PVE diagnosis occurred 2 months after discharge (1 month after amoxicillin hydrate discontinuation), again presenting with fever and slight vegetation in the left leaflet valve. Blood cultures drawn during the hospital stay were negative. Although the causative organism could not be identified, the patient was treated for 5 weeks with imipenem/cilastatin sodium and gentamicin, which treats Campylobacter fetus, the causative organism of the previous PVE, and has a broad spectrum. Following treatment with amoxicillin, the vegetation disappeared, which was considered completely cured, and the patient was discharged from the hospital. There was no recurrence of the PVE over the next 11 years; however, fever and vegetation were detected on the right cusp. Enterococcus faecalis was identified in the blood culture and a third PVE was diagnosed. The patient had an acute cerebral infarction viewed on magnetic resonance imaging and was determined to have a class IIa indication for early revision surgery. The patient refused surgery and was discharged after 5 weeks of antibiotic therapy (ampicillin sodium); however, the vegetation disappeared, the blood culture was negative, the infection resolved, and there was no evidence of AI. For two and a half years, there was no recurrence of PVE, and no AI was observed in the annual TTE. The patient subsequently developed AI with sudden symptoms of heart failure.
Upon thorough examination of the patient’s history of PVE and considering the TEE and CT findings, we diagnosed the patient with healed IE. Given the potential benefits, we opted for TAVI-in-SAV over revision surgery despite little concern about PVE relapse in light of the patient’s present condition and preferences.
We selected a balloon-expandable transcatheter heart valve (THV) (Sapien3, Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA) because of its implantability as a stentless valve . TAV-in-SAV was performed using the right transfemoral approach under general anesthesia with TEE insertion. A pigtail catheter for angiography was inserted through the left femoral artery and positioned in the right coronary cusp. Subsequently, angiography was used to confirm the nadir of the stentless valve leaflets. During rapid pacing, a 23-mm Sapien3 valve was deployed. The center marker of the valve was shifted from the nadir line by one marker towards the left ventricular side to anchor it to the Dacron sewing cuff. TEE immediately after deployment showed a mild paravalvular leak (PVL); therefore, a post-dilatation balloon was inflated to the same pressure. The PVL was reduced to a trace, and the operation was completed within 1 h without complications, such as stroke, vascular injury, or conduction disturbance.
The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged 12 days after TAVR after gaining the same activity level as before surgery through rehabilitation. No antibiotics were administered during hospitalization, except 3 g/day cefazolin sodium, which was administered immediately before and 2 days after surgery as standard antibiotic prophylaxis. Six months postoperatively, the patient suffered a cerebral hemorrhage without disability caused by a prolonged prothrombin time-international normalized ratio. Despite requiring rehospitalization, the patient is currently doing well. At the 1-year postoperative outpatient follow-up, there were no chief complaints or signs of infection, the BNP level decreased to 105 pg/mL, and TTE showed no elevated pressure gradient or abnormal change in the valve (ejection fraction, 55%; mean transvalvular gradient, 9 mmHg; effective orifice area, 1.97 cm2; PVL, trace).