An 86-year-old Caucasian woman with previous history of coronary disease was admitted to the emergency department with a 10-day history of prostration, general malaise, anorexia, and persistent vomiting. She was hemodynamically unstable with a blood pressure of 53/42 mmHg, heart rate of 120 beats/min, respiratory rate of 23 breaths/min, and no fever. Crystalloid fluid resuscitation was effective in achieving hemodynamic stability. Physical examination showed that she was confused and disoriented, with clinical signs of poor peripheral perfusion and dehydration. Her abdomen was distended, with epigastric pain and tenderness, but no guarding or rebound. She had a reducible umbilical hernia with no signs of strangulation (2 cm defect). Breast examination revealed nipple inversion and a 7 cm diameter hard mass in the left breast which was fixed to the underlying tissues, and associated left axillary adenopathy.
She was diagnosed with GOO. At this time, we considered that her GOO might be due to malignancy such as primary gastric cancer or secondary breast cancer, or a benign condition such as peptic ulcer disease.
Laboratory testing showed normocytic normochromic anemia with hemoglobin 10.5 × 10 g/L (10.5 g/dL), leukocytosis with white cell count 11.2 × 109/L (95.2% neutrophils), renal impairment with creatinine 176.79 μmol/L (2.0 mg/dL) and blood urea nitrogen 55.69 mmol/L (156 mg/dL), C-reactive protein 49.2 mg/L, sodium 149 mmol/L, potassium 3.4 mmol/L, and chloride 113 mmol/L. Her other results were unremarkable.
Plain abdominal X-ray did not show any significant changes. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed possible pneumobilia, but the gallbladder was not identified and there was no dilation of the common bile duct. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) with oral contrast showed pneumobilia, a cholecystoduodenal fistula associated with gallstone impaction in the duodenal bulb, and gastric distension . CT also revealed increased density of the mesenteric fat adjacent to the descending colon. No intra-abdominal free fluid, extraluminal air, colonic wall thickening, or fluid collections were observed. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy was performed as a minimally invasive therapeutic approach, but attempted endoscopic extraction of the gallstone using a basket and mechanical lithotripsy was unsuccessful because the large gallstone caused total obstruction .
When the patient was stabilized at 6 days after admission, she underwent surgery. At laparotomy, a 2.5 × 3.5 cm cholesterol gallstone was found in the duodenal bulb. No other gallstones were found. There was no previous history of gallstone disease. Unexpectedly, there was also an inflammatory mass involving the sigmoid colon with abscess formation and purulent peritonitis, compatible with stage III (Hinchey classification) acute diverticulits . We performed anterior gastrotomy in the antrum, extracted the gallstone by milking, and closed the gastrotomy using a double row of sutures . We then performed a Hartmann’s procedure.
The patient was stable after surgery, but she removed her nasogastric tube on the first postoperative day, with subsequent vomiting and aspiration. She developed aspiration pneumonia. Her clinical condition worsened, and she died of aspiration pneumonia on the fourth postoperative day.
Histopathological examination of the resected colon specimen confirmed diverticulitis. Histopathological examination of a left breast core biopsy specimen revealed invasive ductal carcinoma.