A 24-year-old man was scheduled for EC-TCPC, tricuspid valve resection, right ventricle suture, ASD creation, and RVAD weaning for fulminant cardiomyopathy with a BiVAD (HM3 and extracorporeal RVAD).
Figure shows the patient’s clinical progression up to the surgery. Preoperative electrocardiography showed ventricular tachycardia with a heart rate of 300 beats/min. Preoperative echocardiography showed a left ventricular dimension in diastole of 40 mm, severely reduced left and right ventricular contraction, and trivial aortic valve regurgitation after aortic valve plasty. Supplemental Table shows the RVAD weaning test results. Although the cardiac index was maintained after withdrawal of the RVAD, EC-TCPC surgery was scheduled to prevent the left ventricular narrowing and sucking-down events caused by right ventricular enlargement due to the HM3. In addition, there was concern that introducing a Fontan circulation into the biventricular space would cause right ventricular enlargement due to blood flow from the coronary sinus and small cardiac veins if only pulmonary artery blockade and ASD creation were performed. Therefore, we decided to perform right heart stenosis and tricuspid valve closure.
Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was established, a cardioplegic solution was injected simultaneously with aortic cross-clamping, and a right atrial incision was made. The right ventricle was sutured from the inside, and tricuspid valve resection was performed. ASD creation was performed, and the right atrium was closed. The superior vena cava (SVC) and inferior vena cava (IVC) with an epicardial conduit were sutured to the pulmonary artery. Figure shows the operative field findings before weaning from CPB.
Before weaning from CPB, we noted bilateral pleural effusions, which were aspirated by the surgeon; we also administered 20 ppm of nitric oxide (NO) to the patient to lower the pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) and subsequently the central venous pressure (CVP). However, we administered neither catecholamines nor phosphodiesterase III inhibitors. After weaning from CPB, we confirmed by transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) that the ventricular septum was not deviated to the left and was not compressing the left ventricle due to the right heart suture . We also confirmed by TEE that the inflow cannula of the HM3 had no obvious positional abnormalities and no accelerated blood flow . There was no obvious stenosis at the anastomosis between the SVC, IVC, and pulmonary artery. The patient stopped receiving NO and was extubated 5 h postoperatively, and he was discharged from the intensive care unit 5 days postoperatively.
Table shows the patient’s perioperative parameters and vital signs. At 2 months postoperatively, the patient was able to walk in the hospital room.