A 63-years-old male with hypertension, diabetes mellitus was referred for incidental diagnosis of Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm (AAA) after Ultrasoundoppler (US), performed for abdominal pain. The angio-CT scan confirmed the presence of AAA with maximum diameter of 6.5 cm. At admission, his physical examination revealed regular heart rate of 80 beats/min, blood pressure of 140/70 mm Hg and temperature of 36.8 °C. At history, he referred a story of lumbar pain by herniated disk.
The patient was considered fit for conventional endovascular approach and under local anesthesia was performed an endovascular aortic aneurysms repair (EVAR) with release of Gore Endoprosthesis 28 mm (W.L. Gore and Associates, Inc., Flagstaff, Ariz) without intraoperative visualization of endoleak at final angiography check. The patient was discharged on the 3rd postoperative day. The 2 months CT-angiography showed a type 2 endoleak fed from inferior mesenteric artery (AMI) without changes of diameters in Aneurysm Sac . At 6 months followup, CT-Angiography showed a worsening of T2EL with growth of AAA greater of 0.5 cm and increase of chronic lumbar pain . Thus, in light of these findings we chose to perform a second Endovascular procedure.
Under local anesthesia, a right femoral access was gained and a 5Fx25cm sheath placed. The sheath tip was placed a few centimeters below the end of the iliac endograft. The 0.014” Command wire (Abbott Vascular, Park, Illinois) was passed between iliac Endoprosthesis right leg and arterial wall due to enter aneurysm sac. To allow the transition of 5F Ber catheter (Cordis, Miami, FL), we performed a pre-dilatation with Amphirion deep balloon 2 × 40 mm (Medtronic, Inc., Minneapolis, MN, US). Endoleakogram by 5 Fr Ber confirmed T2EL and a 0.018 microcatheter (Rebar18; Medtronic, Inc., Minneapolis, MN, US) was advanced coaxially under fluoroscopic visualization near to origins of IMA . Subsequently through the 0.018 microcatheter, two Concerto Helix Detachable Coil System (16 mm × 40 cm - the first and 14 mm × 30 cm - the second) (Medtronic, Inc., Minneapolis, MN, US) were released inside the aneurysm sac to fill the type 2 endoleak. The control angiography confirmed the type 2 endoleak sealing after coil embolization . At 6 h from the intervention the lumbar pain was reduced; the patient was discharged on the 3rd postoperative day.
The 6 months CT-angiography, after last procedure, showed complete type 2 endoleak sealing without changes of AAA . The 12 months Colordoppler Ultrasound showed a lack of growth in AAA.