The patient was a 28 year old Asian Indian female of non-consanguineous parents who presented with a 3 year history of non-bloody diarrhea with abdominal cramping. Past medical history was significant for hepatitis A. She denied alcohol or tobacco use, had no chronic medical conditions, was not on any medications including gut irritants such as aspirin/non-steroidials and did not have a history of travel prior to onset of symptoms. Her last travel was to India one year prior to presentation, but she did not report any alleviation or exacerbation of her symptos with the travel/dietary/environmental change. She weighed 81 pounds at presentation. Stool cultures were negative for pathogens. Basic labs, including the erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein were normal, but liver function tests (LFTs) were elevated . Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed hepatic hypodensities and mesenteric adenopathy. Serology was negative for anti-nuclear (ANA) and anti-smooth muscle antibodies as well as antibodies for cytosolic anti-neutrophil cytoplasm (cANCA), liver-kidney microsomes, liver cytosolic and soluble liver-pancreas antigen. However, pANCA was positive (titer: > 1:20) and she had hyper-gammaglobulinemia (IgG: 2358 (630-1580 mg/dl), IgA: 578 (100-400 mg/dl), IgM: 134 (37-247 mg/dl). Serum ceruloplasmin was normal, and serology for hepatitis B and C were negative. Serum B12, folate and hematocrit were normal.
Histologic examination of intestinal mucosa demonstrated chronic inflammation with duodenal intraepithelial cell lymphocytosis (IEL) . Celiac disease and tropical sprue were therefore considered based on the clinical features and IEL. However, tissue transglutaminase (TTG) IgA was normal (5.3, reference: < 7.0 AU), as were anti-enterocyte antibodies (only IgA tested) (both measured by enzyme linked immuno-absorbant assay of serum). Indirect immunofluorescence on human intestinal tissue samples was not performed. The patient refused liver biopsy, but permitted CT guided biopsies of the enlarged retroperitoneal and periportal nodes; histologic analysis only demonstrated normal stroma. She was diagnosed with auto-immune hepatitis (AIH) based on her revised original International AIH group score of 12 (indicating probable AIH by criteria).
Over the next 21 months, she continued to have diarrhea despite dietary exclusion therapy, and elevated LFTs . Because serum folate and B12 remained withing normal limits for the duration of her care, she was not treated with these agents. She did develop a mild iron deficiency anemia, but never required blood transfusions. Endoscopy 15 months after presentation demonstrated progression with grossly friable duodenal mucosa. There was marked IEL with a CD8+ T-cell subset without evidence of enteropathy type T-cell lymphoma . Flow cytometry revealed a nearly 100% T-cell preponderance, the majority of which were a polyclonal αβ T-cell receptor (TCR)+ CD8+ CD7- subset . Clonality was assessed by polymerase chain reaction of TCR chains. The minority of IELs were CD4+ and CD8+ CD7+ subsets; there were normal numbers of intra-epithelial γδ T-cells and rare B-cells (CD20+). Biopsies samples from the stomach and esophagus were normal, as was colonoscopy. There was no evidence of reduced numbers or abnormal morphology of epithelial or goblet cells.
Because of the marked IEL without laboratory or histologic evidence of celiac disease, she was treated with Ciprofloxicin® and Metronidazole® for potential bowel overgrowth and/or tropical sprue. However, six months of antibiotic therapy did not result in clinical or histologic improvement . Although refractory celiac disease is possible in this scenario, but the lack of elevated intra-epithelial γδ T-cells, normal TTG IgA, and her negative HLA-DQ2/DQ9 genotype make this unlikely. A diagnosis of an immune mediated enteropathy was therefore considered based on the lack of clinical or histologic response to dietary and antibiotic therapy, and the lack of celiac disease serologic markers. Prednisone (60 mg) daily was started.
Steroid therapy resulted in marked improvement with symptom resolution accompanied by a 20 lb weight gain. She remained in clinical remission 4 weeks after therapy when repeat Endoscopy demonstrated persistent IEL, but a reduction in the CD8+CD7- fraction to 41% of total CD3+ cells . Histologically, regions with normal villi were now interspersed with abnormal regions . Her LFTs remained elevated despite the clinical remission and histologic improvement. The patient decided against maintenance therapy with prednisone or azathioprine because she wanted to get pregnant.