The patient, a 66-year-old man, developed acute-onset pain in the left abdomen but the symptom abated in a few days. A week later, the patient was carried to a nearby medical centre due to the recurrence of excruciating pain with serious diarrhoea. He was in shock with a base excess of −5.4. Palpation of the abdomen demonstrated strong muscular defence indicating panperitonitis. Emergency enhanced computed tomography revealed a total occlusion of the SMA trunk, significant dilatation of the intestine, and infarctions in the right kidney and spleen . Electrocardiography showed continuous AF . Echocardiography manifested 35 mm of the left atrial diameter, 44/78 mL of the left ventricular end-systolic/diastolic volume, and 44% of the left ventricular ejection fraction computed by the modified Simpson’s method. No valvular regurgitation was observed except for mild one via the tricuspid valve. Acute thromboembolic occlusion of the SMA caused by persistent non-valvular AF was diagnosed although no clots remained in the LAA. An emergency total intestinal resection from the jejunum to ileum and right hemicolectomy was performed, because the small intestine was entirely necrotic from the Treitz’ ligament and multiple intestinal perforations were observed. The patient received central venous port placement for treatment with hyperalimentation. Because the patient had a CHA2DS2-Vasc score of 4 (previous thromboembolism, age >65 years, and renal dysfunction) warfarin was tentatively administered, but the international normalized ratio did not exceed 0.9. Moreover, the patient often complained of AF symptoms, but cardioversion was ineffective in maintaining the sinus rhythm.
The patient was referred to us for thoracoscopic surgery for LAA management and rhythm control and underwent the operation 3 months after the bowel resection. Under general anaesthesia via a double-lumen endotracheal tube that allows for a hemipulmonary collapse, the patients were placed in the supine position. Intraoperative transoesophageal echocardiography confirmed that clots in the LAA, which could cause a procedure-related thromboembolism, were absent . Thoracoscopic procedures were completed through four ports in each side (, Video S1). Pulmonary vein isolation was conducted using radiofrequency bipolar epicardial coagulators (Isolator Synergy Clamps and Isolator Transpolar Pen, Atricure, USA) as recommended in the expert consensus guideline for reliable safety and transmurality, and the LAA was closed with an automatic, cut-and-staple device (ECHELON FLEX™ Powered ENDOPATH® Stapler 60, ETHICON, USA). Surgery started from the left side to close the LAA and isolate the left PVs and, and moved to the right side to isolate the right PVs. Intraoperative transoesophageal echocardiography confirmed a flat closure of the LAA . The operation was uneventfully completed in 55 min.
After surgery, heparin was administered for 2 weeks to maintain the activated clotting time at around 150 s, then was discontinued. At postoperative Month 1, enhanced computed tomography showed no clot formation in the left atrium. At present, the patient has complained of no thromboembolic or arrhythmic symptoms for 6 months after surgery despite not being on any anticoagulant or anti-arrhythmic medication, and electrocardiographic monitoring demonstrated a stable sinus rhythm for 48 h at postoperative Months 3 and 6. Echocardiography at postoperative Month 6 demonstrated a cardiac function improved from the preoperative one: 30 mm of the left atrial diameter, 23/74 ml of the left ventricular end-systolic/diastolic volume, and 69% of the left ventricular ejection fraction.