A 25-year-old formerly healthy Hindu man, living in the Netherlands from birth, was admitted to our Intensive Care Unit (ICU) after abdominal surgery in a hospital outside our region. The patient presented in that hospital one day before operation with fever and moderate abdominal complaints. One week before, he became ill with fever, sore throat and red-yellow macular discoloration on his extremities and thorax. The week before, his girlfriend, an employee of a kindergarten, had similar symptoms, but she recovered. After a few days, his fever and sore throat disappeared, but then he developed a second phase of fever, accompanied by nausea, vomitus (once), dark coloured urine and a single passage of watery, possibly discoloured, stool.
At presentation in the hospital, the patient had fever (40°C) and tachycardia (150/minute). On clinical examination, the patient had diffuse abdominal tenderness. Skin lesions had resolved. Laboratory examination revealed signs of inflammation (C-reactive protein (C-RP), 294 mg/litre; white blood cells (WBC), 3.8 × 109/litre; 50% rods) and cholestasis (total bilirubin, 100 μmol/litre; conjugate bilirubin, 63 μmol/litre; alkaline phosphatase (AF), 168 U/litre and gamma glutamyl transferase (γGT), 241 U/litre). Ultrasound and computed tomography (CT) scan of his abdomen showed no abnormalities, especially no signs of cholecystitis or cholangitis (including the absence of cholecysto- and choledocholithiasis). Laparotomy was performed because of progressive abdominal complaints in combination with shock, and revealed a biliary peritonitis due to a pinpoint perforation of the base of the cystic duct. Gallbladder and common bile duct were free of stones, but the cystic duct looked inflamed and necrotic. Peritoneal lavage and cholecystectomy were performed. Postoperative course was complicated by severe septic shock with MOF including ARDS, ARF and DIC. In cultures of blood taken on admission, a beta-haemolytic streptococcus group A was isolated.
The patient was transported to our ICU with refractory hypotension despite high-dosage noradrenalin, pulmonary insufficiency requiring high-pressure ventilation (positive end expiratory pressure (PEEP), 20 mmH2O; FiO2 70%) and oliguria. Clinical and laboratory parameters at admission to our ICU are shown in Table . Chest X-ray showed bilateral patchy infiltrates without cardiac enlargement. The patient was diagnosed as suffering from StrepTSS with MOF complicated by spontaneous perforation of the cystic duct and biliary peritonitis.
Treatment consisted of our standard pre-emptive antibiotics for abdominal sepsis (cefotaxime 1 g four times daily, initially combined with ciprofloxacin and metronidazol) in combination with corticosteroids and immunoglobulin (30 g intravenous immunoglobulin daily for 5 consecutive days). After blood cultures were positive for streptococcus group A, ciprofloxacin and metronidazol were stopped. Supportive therapy consisted of mechanical ventilation (initially in the prone position), fluid resuscitation in combination with inodilators (enoximone), vasodilators (nitroglycerin) and vasoconstrictors (high-dose dopamine and a short period of noradrenalin), selenium and selective decontamination of the digestive tract. Cefotaxime was continued because the patient's condition and inflammatory markers improved. On day 5, he was successfully weaned from mechanical ventilation. At this time, his platelet count had recovered and renal function was improving. Renal replacement therapy was not necessary. After 7 days of treatment in our ICU, he returned to a hospital in his home region. His close relatives were advised to take a prophylactic macrolide for 5 days. Pathologic examination of the gallbladder showed acute inflammation without bacteria and without stones.