A 65-year-old male presented to the urology department for gross hematuria and lower urinary tract infection symptoms. Medical history included stented ischemic heart disease, gout, hyperlipidemia, polymyalgia rheumatica ( February 2021), facial paralysis, appendectomy, high blood pressure, left total hip prosthesis, costal fracture and colon polyp resection. The patient had no history of active TB nor risk factor for TB acquisition. His treatment consisted of low dose aspirin 80 mg, telmisartan 80 mg, allopurinol 100 mg, tamsulosine 0,4 mg, atorvastatin 40 mg, methylprednisolone 20 mg and methotrexate 2,5 mg, a day. Immunosuppressive therapy for his polymyalgia rheumatica was started 3 months earlier. MRI showed bladder polyps and a Prostate Imaging–Reporting and Data System (PIRADS) IV lesions. Transurethral resection of the tumor (TURT) and prostate biopsies were performed in May 2021. The prostate biopsies were negative and the TURT showed a non-invasive high-grade urothelial carcinoma. BCG instillations were started in June 2021, weekly, for a total of 6 doses. Dosage and frequency of BCG, strain TICE, 0,4–1,6 × 107 CFU/ml in 50 ml, instillations were done as per protocol (OncoTICE® (MSD, Belgium). OncoTICE® is a lyophilized preparation containing attenuated Mycobacterium bovis bacilli, prepared from a culture of Calmette-Guérin bacilli . After 6 instillation of OncoTice®, the patient presented with fatigue, fever and gross hematuria. An ultrasound showed no bladder nor kidneys abnormalities. Urine analysis showed pyuria, hematuria but no bacteria. An empiric ten-day course of ciprofloxacine was prescribed with an improvement of the signs and symptoms (07/2021). Urine culture turned back negative. Gonorrhea/chlamydia NAAT testing was not performed as the patient was sexually inactive. Two weeks after treatment completion, his condition worsened with a swollen and painful right epididymis. He had persistent weakness and night sweats without fever. Laboratory exam showed c-reactive protein of 40 mg/l (Normal range < 10 mg/l) without elevated leukocytes. A diagnosis of right epididymitis was made on clinical basis. The patient was started on levofloxacin for 7 days without significant improvement. The patient was then referred to an Infectious Diseases specialist’s consultation for further investigations (08/2021). An ultrasound (08/2021) confirmed the right-sided epididymitis without testicular involvement. Urine samples (100 ml on three consecutive days) and semen were sent for mycobacterial culture. Direct examination for Acid-fast Bacilli (AFB) was negative. Empiric anti-tuberculous treatment was initiated with INH 300 mg QD, rifampicin 600 mg QD and ethambutol 1200 mg QD. Four weeks later, urine and semen cultures came back positive for Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex. A Whole Genome Sequencing identified Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex, strain Mycobacterium bovis BCG, spoligotype 482 - Bovis1_Bcg. There was no mutation associated to resistance for isoniazid, rifampicin, ethambutol, fluoroquinolone, neither for other first line or second line anti TB drugs. The identified resistance mutations pncA His57Asp for pyrazinamide and cycA Gly122Ser for cycloserin are typical for the vaccinal strain of M. bovis BCG. General status and symptoms improved one week after anti-BCG treatment initiation. There was no clinical sign of hip prosthesis infection. As PSA rose, prostatic biopsies were performed showing a granulomatous prostatitis with extensive necrosis without signs of malignancy (12/2021) . Those biopsies were not examined for AFB nor cultured for MTBc. Concomitant urine cultures (3 samples, 12/2021) remained negative for mycobacteria. A control cystoscopy came back negative. The total duration of tuberculosis treatment was nine months. Two years later (09/2023) the patient is doing well with a normal urine analysis and normal appearance of the bladder on cystoscopy.