A 76-year-old Caucasian man with a 24-year history of myocardial infarction, coronary artery bypass graft and a permanent dual-chamber pacemaker (PM, Guidant INSIGNIA I Ultra®) was admitted to our centre with a two-day history of progressive dyspnea. Our exam findings were consistent with right and left heart failure. 2D transthoracic echocardiography (TTE, Siemens Acuson Sequoia 512) with a 2.5 to 3.5 MHz ultrasound transducer revealed an enlarged right ventricle (RV), a systolic pulmonary artery pressure of 46 mmHg calculated by tricuspid regurgitation, and a reduced left ventricular ejection fraction of 20 percent.
Pharmacotherapy with loop diuretics led at first to a symptomatic benefit but was then followed by acute onset of dyspnea with pain in his lower limbs; D-Dimer were elevated to 2222 ng/ml. Our clinical suspicion of a deep venous thrombosis (DVT) was confirmed by venous limb sonography. Pulmonary embolism (PE) was immediately ruled out by computed tomography (CT). The electrocardiogram revealed an atrial flutter with a ventricular rate of 150 per minute; a possible pathomechanism for his symptoms. For the preparation of an external cardioversion, another 2D TTE was performed, demonstrating an echogenic worm-like mass with a length of 10 cm in the right atrium (RA) (see Figure and additional file [Movie 1]); it was also seen in the 2D TEE using a 5-MHz multiplane imaging transducer (see Figure and additional file [Movie 2]). We immediately administered systemic heparin therapy. The atrial flutter converted spontaneously to sinus rhythm.
A surgical thrombectomy was judged to be inappropriate for our patient due to his stable hemodynamic conditions and the high surgical risks posed by his advanced age and his previous cardiac surgery and left ventricular dysfunction. However, due to the poor image quality it remained unclear as to whether the thrombus was trapped between the atrial and ventricular lead of the PM or if it was originating from one of them. 3D visualization of the thrombus demonstrated that the mass was not attached to the RA or RV leads but trapped between them (see Figure and additional file [Movie 3]). Three days later, 2D TTE and 3D TEE demonstrated the worm-like formation to be smaller; after one week, 2D TTE and 3D TEE showed a resolution of the right heart (RH) thrombus. Overlapping with the heparin therapy, we initiated oral anticoagulant therapy and continued with an International Normalized Ratio (INR) 2.0 - 3.0. He had an uneventful recovery and follow-up period.