The proband was a 12-year-old boy, the second child of four born to a consanguineous couple from Pakistan, who was referred to the Genetics clinic by the neuropediatrician who had been following him for intellectual disability. His past medical history included global developmental delay (he started gait and speech at age 4 years), visual impairment with night blindness since age 6 years and overweight since age 3–4 years. His perinatal history was unremarkable except for postaxial polydactyly of both hands and feet. The extra digits of the hands had been removed and surgery on the feet was planned due to pain and walking difficulties. On clinical examination his height was 145.5 cm (− 0.6 SD), weight 64 kg (1.6 SD), head circumference 50.3 (− 2.1 SD) and body mass index 30.23 kg/m2 (4.2 SD on World Health Organization charts), indicating overweight and microcephaly. He had nystagmus, brachydactyly, broad hands and feet, small penis and no pubertal changes. Examination of his fundus showed the features of retinitis pigmentosa and neurophysiological exams found bilateral absence of visual potentials and retinal responses. A renal evaluation showed normally functioning kidneys and no anomalies on ultrasound scan. Altogether the clinical data led to a diagnosis of BBS. Blood samples for molecular genetic testing were collected upon written informed consent using protocols approved by an institutional review board in compliance with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki.
Blood samples were obtained from the affected individual and from his unaffected parents. DNA was isolated from 2 ml of blood using the DNA Blood Mini kit (QIAGEN, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s specifications. Clinical exome sequencing and further genetics analysis are described in Additional file .
The sequencing of 4572 genes led to identified a homozygous pathogenic variant in the BBS9 gene (ENSG00000122507): c.702 + 1del . Segregation analysis revealed that both parents were heterozygous carriers for the variant .
The HSF tool showed that the score of the c.702 + 1del variant (mutant score 18.44) was significantly decreased as compared to the wild-type (score 80.69). We therefore suspected that the altered sequence may break the original splice site which is predicted to be a donor splicing variant, and consequently affect pre-mRNA processing. These results prompted us to evaluate the impact of the variant at the RNA level in order to elucidate a possible effect on splicing.
Reverse transcription (RT) PCR reactions were performed after cDNA synthesis with a random hexamer-primer based kit (Transcriptor First Strand cDNA synthesis, Roche) using a primer pair spanning exons 6–8 of the BBS9 gene expected to amplify a 245-bp fragment . The size of RT-PCR products was established by microfluidic LabChip technology (Perkin Elmer, USA), and direct Sanger sequencing of the products was performed using standard procedures . Besides the expected 245-bp PCR product, a smaller fragment of 157-bp, with an 88-bp deletion, was amplified in both parents of the proband (heterozygous carriers). The affected individual only showed the smaller fragment (homozygous for the deletion; Fig. d). Sequencing of the smaller fragment to elucidate the nature of the missing sequence revealed a transcript lacking the whole exon 7 . Additionally, detailed sequence analysis shows that such deletion results in a frameshift alteration leading to an introduction of a premature stop codon. Subsequent in silico analysis [, ] showed that the c.702 + 1del variant leads to a truncated protein of 210 amino acids, in comparison to the wild-type protein of 887 amino acids (UnitProt: Q3SYG4; Fig. ). The truncated protein has a partial deletion of the PHTB1_N domain and a total deletion of the PHTB1_C domain, as determined by three-dimensional modelling .
Mapping the positions of the pathogenic variants reported in the BBS9 gene revealed a non-uniform distribution. Most nucleotide changes lead to nonsense variants (34%, 13/38) and about 29% (11/38) of all variants occur at intron–exon boundaries and affect splicing donor or acceptor sites [, –].