A 48 years old female patient was admitted to our institution because of the difficulties in swallowing food and the swelling of the tongue. The otorhinolaryngology exam showed bluish, localized, approximately 35 × 25 mm big swelling on the upper side of tongue, with vessels shining through the glossal mucosa. The lesion was localised on the right side of the tongue in the middle part. The radix of the tongue was free. After the biopsy the histological examination of the tissue was performed and cavernous haemangioma was diagnosed.
Contrast enhanced MRI with time resolved imaging of contrast kinetics sequence (TRICKS) was performed, so that the best method of treatment could be selected (, and ). The maxillofacial surgeon planed a surgery, so we were asked to perform a preoperative intra-arterial embolization. Because of the superficial localization of the lesion, we chose a direct puncture as the most appropriate approach.
The procedure was performed under general anaesthesia. This provided us the complete analgesia and prevention of tongue movement during the puncture and the injection of the ethanol and the contrast media.
We performed parenchimography of the lesion using several projections to reach an optimal view of the lesion and to evaluate the potential extravasation of contrast from haemangioma (, ). This enabled us a more controlled injection of ethanol and gave us a possibility to avoid the reflux to the venous side. For the puncture we used 10 to 12 G needle (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan). After the puncture the proper position of the needle was verified with a continuous reflux of blood. Then the cannula was flushed with a 5% glucose solution. Under fluoroscopy control 96% alcohol diluted with Lipiodol (ratio 1:5) was injected. The cannula was removed and next puncture was performed. All together we performed six punctures and injected approximately 6 ml of ethanol. There were no technical complications during the procedure . No major bleeding was observed after the procedure. After the procedure the patient received analgetics and antioedematous therapy. After the sclerotization the planed surgery was abandoned. Control MRI examinations 6 and 12 months after the procedure showed only a small remnant of haemangioma and no signs of a larger relapse .