A 63-year old male was referred to orthopedic outpatient clinic at our institute with a large lump on the right forearm region. The lump initially appeared 28 years ago and had re-appeared for three times after three times removal. The latest removal was 7 years before admitted to our center and the latest recurrence was in the next 2 years. The patient was only complaining about mild discomfort and difficulty in wearing clothes. The non-tender lump was increasing in size slowly from the size of quail eggs with well-defined border around the wrist until it occupied the whole flexor compartment of the right forearm. The right forearm circumference was 20 cm compared to 7 cm on the contralateral . There was neither neurological deficit nor signs of compartment syndrome distal to the lump.
The laboratory markers showed no abnormality except for high blood glucose since the patient has diabetes mellitus since the past 11 years. He also had a hyperlipidemia with increase of both total and LDL cholesterol level.
Patient underwent radiograph assessment with plain x ray which suggest lipomatous mass and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) which concluded a prominent lipomatous mass on intermuscular region with possible benign lesion or low-grade malignancy . On the Clinico-Pathological Conference (CPC), this more likely to be benign lipomatous lesion and was decided to undergo surgical exploration, marginal excision and biopsy.
Surgical exploration was therefore performed under general anesthesia and with the application of a hemostatic tourniquet. A lazy-S design was made approximately one cm lateral to the antecubital fossa and extended distally until distal wrist crease. The incision started on the ulnar-volar side on the distal forearm where the initial mass appeared and where it most superficially located under the skin. After skin incision and entering the subcutaneous plane on the wrist region, there was a lipoma-like lesion which continued sub-muscularly underneath the FDS muscle. Blunt dissection through muscle fiber confirmed a deep-seated lipoma lying over the Flexor Pollicis Longus (FPL) muscle. Running through the lipoma was a shiny cord-like structure, which was identified as the median nerve. The mass was carefully dissected off the median n. until releasing the transverse carpal ligament to ensure that the nerve was left intact. The mass was found to compress the surroundings; however, it was relatively easy to remove due to the pseudo-capsule and the intermuscular location .
The 15 × 8 × 5.5 cms mass was sent for histopathological analysis. The mass was well-vascularized as observed that there were big vessels that gave blood supply to the mass and these vessels infiltrated the mass especially at the superior pole, where it gave a yellow-red appearance on that region. The mass consistency was generally rubbery with a firmer consistency at the superior pole. .
Histopathological analysis suggested a lipomatous tumor, low grade, most suitable with well-differentiated liposarcoma (WDL)-lipoma like subtype .
During routine follow-up in the outpatient clinic at one and three months, the wound had healed well and there were no neurological deficit, functional impairment or recurrence of the lump observed. At one-year follow-up the scar healed nicely without recurrence of the mass .