A 32-year-old multipara at 41 weeks of pregnancy was admitted to our hospital. Childbirth commenced naturally, and the patient delivered a baby weighing 3150 g. She sustained a first-degree perineal laceration but no vaginal laceration. A rectal examination 2 hours after delivery revealed no hematomas, and the patient reported no anal swelling. On the first postpartum day, routine pelvic floor ultrasound examination revealed a slightly hypoechoic mass near the posterior wall of the vagina, which was about 8.32 × 5.41 cm in size by abdominal ultrasonography and 8.92 × 5.71 cm in size by vaginal ultrasonography . It was diagnosed as a vaginal hematoma.
Because the hematoma was large and located deep in the vaginal wall, exposing and surgically removing it was difficult. At 2 days postpartum, the vital signs were stable, and we speculated that the patient had no active bleeding. However, her hemoglobin level dropped to 79 g/L, so she received a transfusion of 1.5 u red blood cells and 200 mL fresh frozen plasma. After discussion and comprehensive evaluation, we performed conservative treatment. If the hematoma increased in size, it may compress the rectum and bladder, resulting in urination difficulties and anal distension. Thus, promoting hematoma absorption is critical.
After considering the previous success of using urokinase to promote the absorption of hematoma in neurosurgery, as well as the patient’s risk for infection and the long absorption time of the hematoma, urokinase was injected into the hematoma under ultrasound on the fourth day postpartum.
The hematoma was examined again before the operation, and its size was about 7.62 × 6.79 cm . Under the guidance of real-time ultrasound, a puncture needle was inserted into the lesion, and a small amount of pooled blood was obtained, which further confirmed our diagnosis of vaginal hematoma. Then, 100,000 units of urokinase with 50 mL normal saline were repeatedly infused into the hematoma, with 20 mL of urokinase retained.
After 8 days, the patient received the second treatment. The hematoma was measured again, and its size was about 7.06 × 6.77 cm . This time, we withdrew 135 mL of pooled blood. Then, urokinase was infused into the hematoma, with 20 mL retained.
After 7 days, the patient received a third urokinase treatment. The size of hematoma had shrunk to 6.61 × 5.27 cm . As performed previously, 180 mL of pooled blood was aspirated, and 20 mL urokinase was retained in the hematoma.
Five days after the third treatment, we performed another ultrasound examination. The length of the hematoma had shrunk significantly to 4.09 cm . Thus, we stopped the treatment and allowed the hematoma to be absorbed. On examination at 42 days postpartum, the hematoma had dramatically disappeared .