A 76-year-old man transferred from the local hospital complained of chest pain after trauma for 3 mo that had been aggravated for half a month.
He had a history of a motor vehicle collision 3 mo prior to this admission. Continuous mild chest pain since he had been injured. After positive treatment in our hospital, he was transferred to the local hospital for rehabilitation treatment. Half a month ago, without obvious inducement, his chest pain was transiently aggravated, radiated to the back and was accompanied by chest tightness, which lasted approximately 20 min but resolved on its own. This emergency did not attract the attention of clinicians, and the clinicians did not pursue further diagnostics and treatments. Then, the same symptoms occurred again 5 d before admission. The local hospital performed thoracic aorta computed tomography angiography (CTA) and found that the CTA suggested a pseudoaneurysm in the initial descending segment of the aortic arch. For further treatment, the man was transferred to our hospital.
The patient had been diagnosed with diabetes for 2 years and hyperlipidemia for 10 years before this admission. Three months ago, he underwent partial resection of the small intestine and CT-guided screw fixation of the left sacroiliac joint after the trauma.
He had a smoking history of 40 years, he smoked approximately 10 cigarettes a day, and he quit smoking more than 10 years prior to admission. He denied a history of alcohol consumption and any relevant family history.
He had a blood pressure of 161/75 mmHg, with a pulse rate of 79 beats per minute (bpm). He had clear lungs and normal heart sounds. Abdominal tenderness and rebound tenderness were not detected. All peripheral pulses were present, and no carotid or subclavian bruit was observed.
The laboratory results showed normal routine laboratory parameters and normal blood biochemistry, and the patient’s troponin T (TnT), troponin I (TnI), myocardial enzymes, thrombin time (TT), prothrombin time (PT), activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), fibrinogen (FIB), thromboela-stogram (TEG), tumor abnormal protein (TAP), C-reactive protein (CRP), and procalcitonin (PCT) were all normal. An ECG suggested sinus bradycardia, and the patient’s heart rate was 57 beats per minute.
When thoracic and abdominal aorta CTA were used to evaluate the pseudoaneurysm in the initial descending segment of the aortic arch, a dissecting aneurysm of the right external iliac artery was unexpectedly found.
The former thoracic and abdominal aorta CTA images showed sagittal and transverse views of the traumatic aortic isthmus pseudoaneurysm. On the sagittal view , bulging of the anterior wall of the aortic isthmus was observed. The base was approximately 1.1 cm wide, and the protruding height was approximately 1.5 cm. In the transverse view , the lumen of the aorta, the crevasse, and the false lumen of this dissection vessel were observed.
The latter thoracic and abdominal aorta CTA images showed sagittal and coronal views of the dissecting aneurysm of the right external iliac artery, and a double-lumen structure was observed.