A previously healthy 41-year-old male was evaluated in our Neurological Department due to subacute dysphagia evolving over 5 days. The patient also complained of dizziness, hoarseness and pain on the right shoulder, radiating to the neck, a week after COVID-19 mRNA-vaccination (Pfizer-BioNTech BNT162b2), which he received in his right arm. The next few days, he developed right hearing loss and right facial weakness. Neurological examination revealed mild hoarseness, right facial paresthesia, a mild right peripheral facial palsy and hypoactive gag reflex, other CN was intact. No other focal signs were detected, including normal motor, sensory and cerebral function, normal deep tendon reflexes, normal gait and no long tract signs.
Otolaryngological examination diagnosed a right vocal cord paralysis. A chest and neck CT scan showed thickening of the right vocal cord and a swollen right supraclavicular lymph node (LN) . An audiogram depicted right severe high-frequency (HF) mixed hearing impairment and left HF sensorineural hearing impairment.
Later on, the patient started complaining of vertical diplopia, mainly downwards and to the left side, indicative of a right IVth nerve palsy, with no other new neurological focal signs. A brain Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed enhancement in the right auditory canal, which involved the VIIth and VIIIth CNs . Fast Imaging Employing Steady-state Acquisition FIESTA-sequence MRI did not depict involvement of other CNs or other pathology. The lumbar puncture revealed increased protein (691 mg/l) and normal glucose (3.4 mmcl/l) concentrations and CSF leukocytosis (63 cells/ml). Cytopathology of the CSF showed two different types of complete B-cell rearrangement with low intensity polyclonal background without evidence of atypical or tumor cells. CSF immune-electrophoresis did not detect intrathecal oligoclonal antibodies. Routine blood tests and an extensive panel of autoantibodies (including ANA, ANCA, and anti-gangliosides) were within normal ranges. Tumor markers and a paraneoplastic antibodies panel (in serum and CSF) were negative. Polymerase chain reaction for Herpes simplex virus (1 and 2), Human herpesvirus (HHV) 3, HHV-6, Enterovirus, JC virus and Cytomegalovirus were negative. Cryptococcal antigen and direct acid fast bacilli staining in of the CSF, nasopharyngeal swab for COVID19, serology for Human immunodeficiency virus and Syphilis were also negative. A total body CT ruled out systemic neoplasia. The titers of anti-COVID19 spike protein antibodies were high (IgG: 441 AU/ML; pos. > 50 AU/ML).
After ruling out all the above causes, our working hypothesis was that of an immune mediated multiple cranial polyneuropathy and a 5-day course of intravenous methylprednisolone at 1000 mg/day was administered. Under this treatment, a gradual significant improvement was observed in all symptoms and findings. A follow up audiogram showed significant improvement and a neck ultrasound revealed resolution of the swollen LN.