A 51-year-old woman presented with melena and presyncope. She had noticed that her stools were black 5 days earlier, with gradual onset of malaise. She felt light-headed the night before and noted dark blood in her stools 1 h before her presentation to the emergency room. She denied any abdominal pain or vomiting.
She had a history of invasive ductal carcinoma (estrogen receptor (ER)-positive, progesterone receptor (PgR)-positive, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-negative, Ki-67 index: 10.6%) of the left breast measuring over 5 cm, with multiple bone metastases to the spine, sternum, and left ileum, diagnosed 3 years prior. Treatment with leuprorelin acetate, tamoxifen, and denosumab was started. Leuprorelin acetate was replaced with letrozole after 18 months of stable disease, when right pleural effusion and carcinomatous lymphangiosis were noted. Disease progression was again observed 12 months later, leading to commencement of chemotherapy with paclitaxel. While partial response was initially achieved, a splenic lesion suspicious of metastasis had recently appeared. No metastases to lymph nodes, lung, liver, or the contralateral breast were noted.
Other medical history was only remarkable for surgical resection of a benign tumor of the left breast 10 years ago, which was believed to be unrelated to her breast cancer. She had no history of alcohol use, smoking. She also denied recent ingestion of raw foods, overseas travel, or sick contacts. Family history was unremarkable, with no history of cancer in any blood relatives. Screening esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) conducted in the previous year was completely normal, with no signs of atrophic gastritis, ulcers, or tumors.
Hypotension, tachycardia, and severe anemia (hemoglobin level of 4.6 g/dL) were noted upon presentation. Physical examination of the abdomen was unremarkable. Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) had increased from 4.3 to 7.9 ng/mL (reference range: 0–5 ng/mL) and carbohydrate hydrogen 15–3 had increased from 142 to 174 U/mL (reference range: 0–30 U/mL) over a span of 2 months. Computed tomography (CT) with contrast revealed no significant interval change, although non-specific thickening of the pylorus was noted . There were no clear signs of gastrointestinal bleeding or enlarged lymph nodes.
Emergent EGD revealed focal, circumferential thickening of the pylorus. Slight ulceration with a visible vessel in the six o’clock position of the pyloric ring was noted. Bleeding was observed on contact with the endoscope, and hemostasis was achieved with hemoclips. Follow-up EGD after discharge revealed enlargement of the focal, circumferential thickening of the pylorus . Slight ulceration was observed, but no mucosal or vascular irregularities suggestive of malignancy were readily apparent on narrow-band imaging (NBI) . The pylorus was stenotic, barely allowing the endoscope to pass through. Numerous blanched, slightly depressed or nodular lesions were also observed throughout the gastric fundus and corpus . NBI revealed erosions with slight vascular irregularities surrounded by gastric mucosa with regular but enlarged pits .
Pathological evaluation of the biopsies surprisingly revealed two different types of adenocarcinoma . Both displayed small clusters of atypical cells with increased chromatin condensation consistent with poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. On immunohistochemistry, only biopsies from the pylorus was positive for cytokeratin 20, CDX2, and MUC5AC. The biopsies from the corpus were immunohistochemically similar to the breast biopsy, staining positive for ER and PgR as well as gross cystic disease fluid protein-15 (GCFDF15), GATA binding protein 3 (GATA3), and mammaglobin. The patient was diagnosed with simultaneous primary gastric adenocarcinoma and gastric metastases from breast cancer.
Surgery to resect only the primary gastric cancer was planned, as the interdisciplinary cancer board determined that gastric cancer would have a larger prognostic impact than breast cancer. Laparoscopy-assisted distal gastrectomy with Billroth-II anastomosis was performed. Small lumps were observed on the serosal side of the stomach, but no clear signs of peritoneal metastases were noted. Distal gastrectomy was completed with some difficulty, due to severe fibrosis surrounding the pyloric tumor.
Macroscopic examination of the surgical specimen revealed a 35 × 20 × 15 mm lesion in the antrum, with small nodules throughout the remainder of the resected specimen. Hematoxylin and eosin stains of the antral mass revealed poorly differentiated malignant cells reaching the subserosa. All other areas were also occupied by diffuse proliferation of poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma cells, mainly located in the submucosal to subserosal layers but with sparse invasion of the mucosa as well as the serosa. There was a sharp contrast in immunohistochemical stains of the mass and nodules, which were consistent with the preoperative biopsies of the pylorus and corpus, respectively. While surgical margins for the primary gastric adenocarcinoma were negative, both oral and anal margins were positive for breast cancer cells. All resected lymph nodes contained breast cancer metastases. Interestingly, a collision tumor between gastric cancer metastasis and breast cancer metastasis was confirmed in one of the lymph nodes . The entire specimen was negative for Helicobacter pylori infection.
The post-operative course was uneventful. The patient’s breast cancer continued to progress rapidly despite chemotherapy with adriamycin and cyclophosphamide, followed by eribulin mesylate. She opted for palliative care fourth months later and died soon thereafter. Due to the unfavorable clinical course, genetic testing could not be proposed.