The patient referred to our hospital was a 48-year-old Caucasian female who (as a former health care professional) noticed ongoing painless tongue dysfunction for about 6 months. On hospital admission, physical examination revealed deviation of the tongue to the left and ipsilateral atrophy as the typical feature of left-sided hypoglossal nerve palsy . There were no other clinical signs and symptoms, neither on neurological nor on maxillofacial examination. Past medical history included hypothyroidism and a fibroadenoma of the left breast. Maxillofacial trauma has not occurred and neither orotracheal intubation, previous regional surgery nor any interventional procedures have been performed prior to the onset of the symptoms.
Based on the initial neurological examination, an MRI of the neurocranium was performed. MRI imaging revealed an inhomogeneous, partly cystic, irregular, contrast-affinity lesion in the clivus with erosion of the cortical bone and incipient growth into the prepontine cistern, outside of brain parenchyma, suspected of a chordoma (A,B). This was confirmed in cranial computed tomography in the bone window. No evidence of pathologies in the brainstem and in the cisternal course of the hypoglossal nerve up to the entrance into the hypoglossal canal were found. It was therefore not possible to determine any spatial relationship between the chordoma and the brainstem or the cisternal course of the hypoglossal nerve (A,B). Thus, the chordoma could not be considered as the cause of palsy of the 12th cranial nerve.
Consequently, in addition to the MRI of the neurocranium, an ultrasound examination was performed to clarify the morphological status of the hypoglossal nerve in its extracranial course. In the ultrasound scan (A,B) was identified as a well-defined, rather homogeneous ovoid tumor measuring 14 × 7 × 6 mm along the path of the hypoglossal nerve, protruding into the submandibular space but clearly demarcated from the submandibular gland. Color flow mapping could not depict any vascular hilus structure but showed small vessels at the surface of the lesion. The nodal status of the neck was negative.
The ultrasound examination was explanatory for a peripheral hypoglossal nerve lesion, further examinations were not necessary.
The mass was excised by a submandibular approach. Consistent to the preoperative ultrasonographic findings the lesion showed prominent superficial vessels (A). The dissection finally exposed a yellowish tumor which appeared as a fusiforme swelling of the nerve, measuring about 15 mm. Since the tumor could not be separated from the nerve fascicles, complete surgical excision was performed (B), followed by a simultaneous end to end anastomosis of the hypoglossal nerve. The postoperative clinical course was uneventful with partial recovery of the motoric function. There was no recurrence in the 20 months of follow up.
Histopathologic analysis showed a well-defined lesion consisting of clusters of polygonal cells with small nuclei and a characteristic granular eosinophilic cytoplasm. The HE morphology was suggestive of a granular cell tumor (GCT). Immunohistochemistry confirmed cytoplasmic granules to be strongly positive for S-100, typical for a GCT. The architecture of the hypoglossal nerve was completely disrupted, the nerve fascicles were split up. High-power magnification revealed diffuse infiltration of the nerve fascicles by S-100 positive granular cells (A–D).
A few weeks later the pathologic mass in the clivus area was treated by a transnasal—transsphenoidal resection followed by subsequent proton irradiation. The histological analysis confirmed a clivus chordoma.