A 51-year-old African man was referred from a private facility with a two-month history of painless scrotal swelling and a one-week history of headache, drowsiness, incoherent speech, altered sensorium and low-grade pyrexia. He had no history of cough, breathlessness, weight loss, trauma or urethral discharge. He was known to have hypertension of two years' duration. An examination revealed marked enlargement of the left hemiscrotum, and the right hemiscrotum was also mildly enlarged. The testes were firm to hard in consistency, but there was no associated tenderness. Neurological examination revealed bilateral sixth and seventh cranial nerve palsies that were worse on the right side, impaired upward gaze and dysdiadochokinesia. His other systems were essentially normal. A clinical impression of a left testicular tumor with right-sided sympathetic orchiopathy and intracranial metastases was made. The patient's hematological and biomedical parameters were essentially normal, except for a raised erythrocyte sedimentation rate (52 mm/h). However, other complementary diagnostic tools such as serum lactic acid dehydrogenase (LCD) and β-human chorionic gonadotropin that are usually used in such patients are not routinely available in our hospital.
A scrotal ultrasound showed bilaterally enlarged testes, worse on the left, with a volume of 43.5 mL and 99.7 mL on the right and left, respectively. They showed a heterogeneous echo pattern but appeared predominantly hypoechoic in nature. The left testis, in addition, showed multiple hypoechoic masses with scattered punctate calcifications . Doppler interrogation of both testes revealed an essentially moderate blood flow. There was no peritesticular fluid collection. An abdominal ultrasound and chest radiograph showed no abnormality. However, an abdominal CT scan, which is necessary for proper staging, was not performed because of cost constraints on the part of the patient, as our health system operates an out-of-pocket payment system. An ultrasound impression of a left testicular tumor with microlithiasis was suggested.
Contrast-enhanced cranial CT images showed multiple widespread punctate enhancing foci, with some showing ring enhancement and minimal perilesional edema . The lesions involved both parietal lobes and extended to the vertex. An impression of multiple intracranial metastatic deposits, possibly from the known testicular tumor, was made.
The patient had undergone radical left orchidectomy and was administered intravenous ceftriaxone postoperatively. He was scheduled for radiotherapy while awaiting the histopathology report of the testicular specimen. His clinical condition nonetheless deteriorated, as he developed right-sided hemiparesis and lost consciousness on the third postoperative day. Following a histopathologic diagnosis of chronic granulomatous disease from tuberculosis , he was placed on antituberculous therapy (ATT), including rifampicin (600 mg/daily), isoniazid (INH) 300 mg/daily, ethambutol (1.2 g/daily) and pyrazinamide (1.5 g/daily). He also received pyridoxine (vitamin B6) 25 mg/daily, which is routinely given along with isoniazid. His symptoms abated, and he subsequently had sustained clinical progress with improved mental status and was discharged two weeks post-ATT for follow-up in the outpatient clinic. One week following discharge from our hospital, he developed a paradoxical response , with depressed level of consciousness, seizures and subsequent loss of consciousness. He was readmitted and managed with mannitol for six days as well as carbamazepine while continuing ATT. He regained consciousness and improved clinically. A cranial MRI scan obtained two weeks afterward showed a large T2 hyperintense area in the left temporal and frontal lobes with perilesional edema and multiple punctate enhancing hyperintense lesions in the periventricular regions and at the gray-white matter junction in both cerebral hemispheres consistent with tuberculomas . He achieved significant clinical improvement on ATT and was followed up at the outpatient clinic. A six-month follow-up MRI scan showed only a solitary ring-enhancing mass in the left frontoparietal region with complete resolution of all other lesions and perilesional edema . He had no complaints, and there were no observable neurological deficits.