A 47-year-old man visited our hospital for regular brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) follow-up after surgery to treat primary intracranial malignant melanoma (PIMM) 21 years ago.
All symptoms were denied, and clinical examination findings were negative. The regular brain MRI in July 2021 showed a mixed iso-/hyperdense mass in the right cerebellopontine angle (CPA) measuring 34 mm × 21 mm with a clear margin, so the recurrence of the melanoma was regarded as highly possible again. No melanoma was found on the skin or eyeball. Surgical treatment with gross-total resection (GTR) was arranged on August 12, 2021, which was the third operation.
In June 2000, the patient suffered from dizziness and gait disturbance. Brain MRI revealed a lesion in the right cerebellum, and surgical treatment was applied. Melanoma was diagnosed by histopathology examination. The patient received three cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy with dacarbazine 400 mg (d1-5), vindesine 4 mg (d1, d5), cisplatin 30 mg (d1-5), and interferon 3 µm subcutaneously 3 times a week. However, the tumor relapsed locally 4 mo after the operation . The patient received a second surgical treatment in October 2000. Histopathology examination revealed melanoma . After the two operations, it was considered that melanoma was not sensitive to radiotherapy and chemotherapy. To prolong his survival period and improve his quality of life, our team used the experimental treatment of Newcastle disease virus (NDV)-modified tumor vaccine through subcutaneous injection twice. Additionally, the patient received interferon (3 µm subcutaneously 2 times a week) and β-elemene (500 mg QD for 14 d each month) for the first 6 mo, followed by maintenance treatment of interferon and β-elemene every 3 to 4 mo, resulting in a total treatment course of 43 mo up to November 2004. He had undergone regular follow-up, and his condition had been healthy, including tumor-free survival during these 21 years.
The patient had no specific personal or family history.
The patient had no neurological symptoms. No melanoma was found on the skin or eyeball.
No specific findings of routine blood tests, blood biochemistry, or immune indices were noted.
The regular brain MRI in July 2021 showed a mixed iso-/hyperdense mass in the right cerebellopontine angle (CPA) measuring 34 mm × 21 mm with a clear margin , so the recurrence of the melanoma was regarded as highly possible again.