A 61-year-old Malay female presented to the emergency department with a 6 day history of bilateral lower limb weakness and numbness. This was associated with frequent carpopedal spasms of the hands and feet that had gradually worsened to the point where she was unable to use her hands, due to the severe muscle spasms on the day of admission. She had recently presented to a private center with a complaint of acute back pain. Thoracolumbar radiography showed evidence of L2 wedge fracture. She denied any history of a recent fall; hence, a diagnosis of fragility fracture was made and subcutaneous (SC) denosumab 60 mg was administered a week prior to her current presentation. She had history of gastric bypass surgery 20 years ago and bilateral total knee replacements in June 2021. She claimed that routine blood investigations during those admissions did not reveal any abnormalities. However, she had not had any bone mineral density (BMD) measurements done. Apart from that she does not have any other medical or surgical illness. As for her gynecological history, she had two full-term pregnancies with two live births and no miscarriages in the past. She attained menopause at the age of 50 years old and remained healthy. She is a full-time housewife and does not smoke, nor does she drink alcohol. There was no significant family history related to bone diseases.
On examination, her vital signs were stable with a pulse rate of 63 beats per minute, blood pressure of 123/57 mmHg, and temperature of 37.2 °C. Her height was 165 cm, with a weight of 80 kg and body mass index of 29.5 kg/m2. Chvostek and Trousseau signs were positive. Cardiovascular, respiratory, neurological, and gastrointestinal examinations were all unremarkable.
Initial laboratory investigations are presented in Table .
An electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed a prolonged QT interval. She received a bolus of 10 mL of 10% calcium gluconate twice in the emergency department, and was admitted to the ward for close monitoring with subsequent continuous intravenous calcium infusion. In view of her low 25-OH vitamin D level, she was initiated on a loading dose of 50,000 IU cholecalciferol weekly for 8 weeks. Apart from that, she also received a total of four 10 mL courses of 10% calcium gluconate boluses and three courses of continuous calcium gluconate infusion over 12–23 hours (total of 25 vials of 10 mL of 10% calcium gluconate). However, despite a loading dose of cholecalciferol, multiple courses of boluses, and infusions of calcium gluconate, her serum calcium hovered around only 1.8 mmol/L. After 8 days of repeated courses of intravenous calcium gluconate infusions, high doses of calcitriol 1.5 μg twice daily, and 1 g calcium carbonate three times daily, her serum calcium stabilized at approximately 2.0 mmol/L. Her medications on discharge included calcitriol 1.5 μg twice daily, calcium carbonate 1 g three times daily, and cholecalciferol of 50,000 IU weekly.
The medications were only able to be reduced after 3 months to calcium carbonate 1 g twice daily and cholecalciferol of 1000 IU daily. This was able to be reduced further, and her calcium supplements were ceased after 6 months of treatment with continuation of cholecalciferol 1000 IU/day. At this point of time, her symptoms had completely resolved, and her serum calcium level remained stable at 2.36 mmol/L. Figure demonstrates the delayed normalization of the serum calcium over the weeks after her presentation.