A 33-year-old Egyptian female with a 4-week history of fever, abdominal pain, malaise, and progressive fatigue was referred for hospital admission after being discovered to have pancytopenia. She had a 5-year history of SLE and antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) featuring arthritis, oral ulcers, leukopenia, positive antinuclear antibodies (ANA), Anti-double stranded DNA (Anti-dsDNA), recurrent venous thromboembolism (VTE), miscarriages, and antiphospholipid antibodies, confirming the diagnosis of SLE (ACR 5/11 and SLICC 5/13) with APS [, ]. She had no previous history of skin rash, For the previous 8 months, she had been taking hydroxychloroquine (400 mg/day), prednisolone (7.5 mg/day), and warfarin (5 mg/day). Upon admission, she was febrile with a maximum temperature of 38.6 °C, pulse was 107 beats per minute, and she had otherwise normal vital signs. She had a height of 175 cm and weighed 80 kg. Physical examination revealed an enlarged liver of 3 cm and a spleen of 4 cm palpable below the costal margin, while examination of the respiratory system, nervous system, and precordium was normal. Laboratory studies showed pancytopenia, reticulocytosis, hyponatremia, liver dysfunction, and proteinuria. Further workup showed that she had marked elevated d-dimer, ferritin, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and triglycerides, prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), decreased complement levels (C3), and elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), with positive direct antiglobulin (Coombs) test. A 24-hour urine protein test demonstrated proteinuria in the subnephrotic range (0.54 g/24 hours). Abdominal ultrasonography confirmed hepatosplenomegaly, while chest X-ray and echocardiography were normal. The SLE Disease Activity Index (SLEDAI) score was 11, indicating a moderate flare.
Our differential diagnosis was taken into consideration: MAS, SLE flare-up, viral infection, sepsis, leukemia, and lymphoma. The diagnosis, however, was difficult in part owing to strong similarities between MAS, SLE flare, and sepsis. Repeated blood, urine cultures, and viral panels for SARS-CoV-2, hepatitis B and C viruses, Epstein–Barr virus, herpes simplex virus, coxsackievirus, cytomegalovirus, human immunodeficiency virus, and parvovirus B19 were all shown to be negative. Renal biopsy was considered. However, due to the patient’s severe thrombocytopenia, it was postponed.
Based on the laboratory and clinical findings in accordance with the HLH diagnostic criteria, a diagnosis of MAS secondary to SLE flare was made. Intravenous methylprednisolone (mPSL) 1 g/day for 3 days followed by oral prednisone 60 mg daily and IVIG 2 g/kg over 5 days was started. Subsequently, oral cyclosporine 300 mg daily was started. The fever, abdominal pain, malaise, and fatigue were partially resolved while her counts were a little improved 7 days after starting treatment. Hence, we decided to switch from oral prednisolone to intravenous DSP 9 mg/day. Within 4 days, the platelet, white blood cell (WBC) counts, hemoglobin, inflammatory indices, LDH, and ferritin levels all eventually returned to normal .
Afterward, following the late acceptance of her husband, a bone marrow biopsy was performed 7 days after starting the treatment with mPSL, which showed focal evidence of hemophagocytosis . The patient was discharged without symptoms, with monthly follow-up of complete blood count, LDH, ferritin, 24-hour urine protein, anti-dsDNA antibody, and complement levels. Oral prednisone was gradually tapered to 20 mg daily, and oral cyclosporine of 300 mg daily was continued. One year after treatment, the patient remains symptom-free without any potential adverse effects of the adherent medications, and the patient-reported outcome shows patient satisfaction.