A 48 year old male with a past medical history of pituitary abnormality with central diabetes insipidus and hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism for eight years treated with desmopressin (DDAVP) and testosterone. He presented with shortness of breath, exertional dyspnea, and a four month history of weight loss and drenching night sweats. Computed tomography scan of the chest revealed a large mediastinal mass, and positron emission topography-computed tomography (PET/CT) scan demonstrated extensive, 2-[18F] fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose (FDG)-avid mediastinal and abdominal lymphadenopathy. A subsequent mediastinal lymph node biopsy showed Burkitt lymphoma with t(8;14), and a staging bone marrow was negative for lymphoma. Burkitt lymphoma was staged as IVB. The patient received four cycles of R-CODOX/M/IVAC (Rituximab, Cyclophosphamide, Oncovin [Vincristine], Doxorubicin, Ifosfamide, Vepesid [etoposide], and Ara-C [Cytarabine] with methotrexate held due to pleural effusions and ifosfamide deleted in cycles 2 and 4 due to neurotoxicity. He also received involved field radiotherapy of 40 Gy in 20 fractions to residual mediastinal/subcarinal/pleural disease. During this time he was diagnosed with central hypothyroidism and began treatment with levothyroxine.
After completing the chemotherapeutic regimen, the patient experienced waxing and waning pain in the lower back and knees as well as bilateral leg weakness. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the knee showed infiltrative lesions within the distal femoral metaphysis/diaphysis and proximal tibial diaphysis; however, PET/CT scan was negative for PET-avid bone disease. A bone biopsy was suboptimal with nonspecific findings. Bilateral iliac crest biopsies revealed mildly hypercellular bone marrow with a small non-paratrabecular lymphohistiocytic aggregate. Over the next six months he showed progressive failure to thrive with new onset dysphagia. Neurologic and endocrine evaluations remained negative. MRI scans of the thoracic and lumbar spines showed progressive bone disease and extensive lung and pleural disease. The patient underwent bone marrow and pleural/lung biopsies.
The bone marrow biopsy showed normocellular bone marrow with preserved trilineage hematopoiesis and a few variably-sized, atypical histiocytic aggregates . The histiocytes were epithelioid to spindled in appearance with a subset of foamy histiocytes. A rare multinucleated histiocyte was noted. The histiocytes were positive for CD68, CD163, factor XIIIa, and BRAFV600E (clone VE1) and negative for CD1a, CD21, and CD23. There was no evidence of Burkitt lymphoma.
The pleural/lung lesion biopsy contained a small amount of tissue with a nonspecific fibrohistiocytic infiltrate. Genomic DNA was extracted and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed for exon 15 of BRAF gene. The product was analyzed by pyrosequencing for mutations in codons 600 and 601 of BRAF with an analytic sensitivity of 5% for mutated allele. The BRAF p.V600E mutation (c.1799 T > A) was detected.
The histologic findings in combination with histiocyte phenotype, presence of BRAF mutation, and clinical and radiologic data supported a diagnosis of ECD.