A 31-year-old man with progressive weight gain and fatigue for 10 years was admitted to hospital. He had developed edema of his hands and face and back pain during the previous two years. Physical examination revealed a typical cushingoid appearance including a plethoric moon face, truncal and centripetal obesity and abdominal cutaneous striae . His blood pressure on admission was 160/90 mmHg.
Laboratory investigations revealed leukocytosis and normal serum electrolytes and normal fasting and post-prandial glucose levels. Cushing's syndrome was suspected, and further endocrinological tests were performed to determine the etiology. Diurnal variation of plasma cortisol was not observed. The plasma cortisol level was not suppressed by 1 mg overnight or by 8 mg of standard dexamethasone. Plasma adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) level was markedly suppressed (less than 10 pg/ml). Plasma free T3, free T4, thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), and urinary catecholamine levels were all within normal limits. There were no increases in the plasma concentrations of parathormone, calcitonin, testosterone, dehydroepiandrosterone sulphate, androstenedione or 24-hour urinary calcium excretion .
Chest X-ray was normal. Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) scanning demonstrated osteopenia at the femur head (T score, -2.46). T scores of the trochanter, Ward's triangle, L3, and L4 were -2.54, -4.07, -4.42 and -3.36, respectively, compatible with osteoporosis. Computed tomography of the abdomen revealed a 7 cm × 5 cm mass in the right adrenal gland. The patient underwent surgery for a right adrenalectomy. The pathologic diagnosis was adrenal oncocytic neoplasm with uncertain malignant potential according to the criteria proposed by Bisceglia et al. . The Weiss score of the tumor was 2 (diffuse architecture and capsular invasion), compatible with a benign neoplasm.
The tumor measured 7 cm at its greatest dimension, weighed 105 g and was surrounded by an intact capsule. The tumor was composed of polygonal oncocytes with granular, eosinophilic cytoplasm . The tumor cells were arranged in a diffuse pattern. The mitotic rate was 1 per 50 high-power fields. There were no atypical mitotic figures and no necrosis. Capsular invasion was identified in one focus. Inhibin and pancytokeratin were focally positive . The tumor was immunoreactive for synaptophysin and negative for p53 .
From these findings, the final diagnosis for this patient with Cushing's syndrome was of a functioning adrenocortical oncocytic neoplasm.
The Cushing's syndrome improved gradually after the surgery. The patient is still alive with no metastases and is receiving glucocorticoid replacement therapy 1 year after the surgery. His blood pressure and electrolyte levels remain normal.