A 21-year-old unrestrained Caucasian man, involved in a motor vehicle collision, was ejected after multiple rollovers and was found lying on the ground. His initial vital signs in the field were stable and he was awake and conversing. He was brought to the Emergency Room (ER) by ambulance at 2:30 a.m. His injuries included an open femur fracture, lower limb lacerations and blunt chest trauma.
While he was being assessed, he required 2L of crystalloids and two units of packed red blood cell (PRBC) transfusion to maintain his blood pressure. The focused assessment with sonography for trauma was negative and the first chest radiograph was unremarkable. After he was intubated in the ER for respiratory distress, a whole body computed tomography scan was performed. This examination revealed multiple vertebral fractures (T5 to T8) and a large hemothorax on the right side for which a chest tube was placed. After draining 800mL of blood, the drainage stabilized. The patient’s arterial blood pressure was maintained at 120/75mmHg without vasopressor support, but he was anuric. He was then brought to the ICU at 3:45 a.m. for close observation and continuous resuscitation. One hour later, he became hypotensive (systolic blood pressure <90mmHg) and tachycardic (heart rate >110 beats per minute), which coincided with the rapid drainage of 1.5L of frank blood from his chest tube. He was transferred to the OR for emergent thoracotomy.
The source of the bleeding was the posterior mediastinum in the area of the vertebral fractures. The bleeding was still active and had breached the pleural cavity. To allow for operative access, the anesthetist placed a right bronchial blocker to deflate the right lung. Paravertebral and intercostal vessels were then controlled. The severe bleeding and ongoing coagulopathy necessitated the transfusion of 24 units of PRBCs, 12 units of frozen plasma and 19 units of cryoprecipitate. He was also given recombinant Factor VIIa (7.2mg). Mixed respiratory and metabolic acidosis ensued. Inotropes and vasopressors (epinephrine and norepinephrine), intravenous bicarbonate and calcium gluconate were administered due to hemodynamic instability.
Because of intolerance to single-lung ventilation, the bronchial blocker was removed on two occasions. After the second pullback of the bronchial blocker, the patient became difficult to ventilate, with high airway pressures and low tidal volume. The patient was hypoxemic with a partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood (PaO2) of 54mmHg while on 100% oxygen . His central venous pressure (CVP) rose above 30mmHg. He was paralyzed, open lung ventilation was applied (PEEP = 15cm of water (H2O), ratio of inspiratory to expiratory time = 1), and a chest tube was placed on the left side. Due to increasing airway pressures and the high volume of fluid resuscitation administered, poor extrapulmonary compliance due to abdominal compartment syndrome was suspected. A decompressive laparotomy was performed, which led to partial improvement.
When the patient was transferred back to the ICU after 3.5 hours in the OR, his hypoxemia had worsened with a persistent oxygen saturation of <50%. The chest radiograph showed bilateral lung infiltrates, with extensive airspace disease on the right lung . Multiple recruitment maneuvers were done. For each maneuver, the ventilator was set to pressure support mode with the pressure support level at 0cmH2O and the pressure alarm and apnea alarms were adjusted to 50cmH2O and 60 seconds respectively. The PEEP was then increased to 40cmH2O for 40 seconds while maintaining the inspired fraction of oxygen at 1.0. After each maneuver, PEEP was decreased to various levels down to 15cmH2O and ultimately left at 15cmH2O due to progressive desaturation and hemodynamic instability at higher levels. Given the inability to prone the patient due to extreme hemodynamic instability and the presence of multiple chest tubes, inhaled nitric oxide (up to 60 parts per million) was started, but without improvement in oxygenation. A bedside transthoracic echo showed right ventricular dilatation while the patient was on inotropes and vasopressors. In addition, the patient remained anuric despite prescription of diuretics.
The ICU team next decided to ventilate the patient with HFOV (Sensormedics 3100B, CareFusion, San Diego, USA). The initial settings were: fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) 100%, bias flow, 40L/minute; frequency, 4Hz (given the extreme acidosis); inspiration time, 33%; pressure amplitude of oscillation 83cmH2O, and mean airway pressure 38cmH2O (5cm H2O above mean airway pressure on CV). After 45 minutes, the PaO2 had reached 75mmHg and CVP dropped to 18mmHg. Two hours later, the FiO2 was titrated down to 50% and the epinephrine infusion was discontinued with maintenance of norepinephrine. Within a few hours, continuous veno-venous hemodialysis was started due to persistent anuria and hyperkalemia.
The next day, the patient still met criteria for ARDS, but his oxygenation had stabilized and radiographic improvement was visible at 48 hours . The patient was switched to CV 96 hours later. In the meantime, he developed rhabdomyolysis and elevated liver enzymes and required renal replacement therapy for 13 days; he also had two episodes of sepsis. He was weaned from the ventilator after 41 days, transferred to the ward after 51 days and discharged from the hospital 93 days after his injury.