Patient 1 (see Figs. and and Table ), the proband, was a 3-year and 7-month-old boy. He was admitted because of growth retardation for 3 years and rapid weight gain for more than 2 years. Since the age of 8 months, he has been stunted, with a low height standard deviation (SD) score from − 1.25 SD to − 2.04 SD. His weight increased rapidly after the age of 2 years. During the age of 2–3 years, his weight gain varied regularly, with 1–2 weeks of rapid gain followed by 2–4 weeks of slower gain. After the age of 3 years, his weight increased continuously, from − 0.24 SD to + 4.89 SD (weight-to-height standard score), and he had hirsutism, a moon face and acne, fatigue, reduced physical capacity and decreased cognitive ability. In an external hospital, he was diagnosed with adrenal insufficiency because of the significantly decreased serum cortisol and ACTH and given hydrocortisone (HC) 7.5 mg (9.38 mg/m2/d). During the 2-month HC treatment, the above symptoms were further aggravated.
As the first child of nonconsanguineous parents, he was born at 38 + 5 weeks of gestation via vaginal delivery, and his birth weight was 3.3 kg. He had suffered from oral Candida infections and pneumonia. No abnormalities in the history of birth, feeding, psychomotor development, operations or vaccinations were reported. The patient had two younger brothers. The elder younger brother is patient 2. The other brother died of an intracranial haemorrhage at the age of 1 week without manifestations similar to his siblings. His mother had a spontaneous miscarriage at the first trimester of her second pregnancy (see Fig. ).
Physical examination: Height, 92.4 cm (− 2.04 SD); weight, 20 kg (weight-to-height standard score + 4.89 SD); body mass index (BMI), 23.43 kg/m2 (> 97th percentile (P97th) =17.6); and blood pressure (BP), 90–133/49–87 mmHg (83.3% systolic blood pressure (SBP) > P95th, 56.3% diastolic blood pressure (DBP) > P95th). He was expressionless. He showed symptoms of Cushing’s syndrome, such as central obesity, a full moon and flushed, ruddy face, acne, a buffalo hump, and hirsutism (Ferriman-Gallwey score: 12) without striae or axillary hair. He had bilateral knee valgus with 5 cm of ankle spacing. He had normal male external genitalia, with Tanner stage 1. There were no abnormalities of the heart, lung, abdomen, muscle strength, or muscle tension.
Laboratory examination: The results of complete blood count, routine urine, routine faecal, liver and kidney function, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), neuron-specific enolase (NSE), human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG), atrial natriuretic peptide and thyroid function analyses were normal. High-density lipoprotein cholesterol was 0.94 mmol/L. The levels of IGF-1 and IGFBP3 were 291 ng/ml (78.2 ± 31.2 ng/ml) and 3.9 μg/ml (1.99 ± 0.5 μg/ml), respectively. The glucose tolerance test result was normal. Before the usage of HC, 8 AM cortisol and ACTH were 2.0–4.28 μg/dl (reference range 5–23 μg/dl) and 9.04–19.78 pg/ml (10–80 pg/ml), respectively. The levels of androstenedione (AD), dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEAS), testosterone (T), progesterone (P) and 17-hydroxyprogesterone (17-OH-P) were lower than normal. The levels of renin activity, angiotensin II and aldosterone were normal. After the withdrawal of HC, the levels of serum 8 AM cortisol and ACTH and 24-hour urinary free cortisol (UFC) were undetectable. His parents’ serum 8 AM ACTH and cortisol levels were normal. No abnormalities were found on electrocardiography (ECG) or ultrasonography of the heart, liver, gallbladder, pancreas, spleen, urinary system, adrenal gland, retroperitoneum, abdominal aorta, renal artery, or carotid artery. No abnormality was found in the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and pituitary. The whole-genome sequencing found no pathogenic or possibly pathogenic mutations and no copy number variations or chromosome abnormalities related to the clinical manifestations of the patient. No pathogenic gene mutations related to the phenotype were found in the patient’s mitochondrial genome.
Diagnosis, Treatment and follow-up: The patient stopped taking HC immediately and avoided contact with any form of glucocorticoid. He was given diet and exercise management and antihypertension treatments. After the 1-month follow-up, the patient’s weight still increased rapidly, and his hypertension, hirsutism, acne and fatigue did not improve. The 8 AM cortisol and ACTH and 24-hour UFC levels were still lower than normal. He was diagnosed as PGGH according to excessive glucocorticoid manifestations and the low serum cortisol and ACTH. After discussion with pharmaceutical experts, oral treatment with mifepristone 25 mg once a day (1.2 mg/kg/d) was started. After 2.5 months of mifepristone treatment, the patient’s height increased 2.2 cm, and his activity, exercise capacity, acne and hirsutism significantly improved,.but no obvious change in BP was observed. Due to continued weight gain and physical capacity problems, mifepristone was given orally at a dosage of 25 mg twice a day. After 5 months of mifepristone treatment, his weight and BMI began to decrease, accompanied by good growth (5.7 cm/5 months). His acne disappeared, and his hirsutism improved. He was full of energy, similar to a healthy boy. His parents were satisfied with the current treatment effect.