A 19-year-old male, who complained of floaters in both eyes with decreased vision for 4 days. Ocular examination: the best corrected visual acuity (logarithm of minimal angle of resolution chart) of the right eye and the left eye were 1.1 and 0.9 (logMAR), respectively. In both eyes, inflammatory cells can be seen suspended within the vitreous, multiple yellow/white lesions can be seen near the macula, and retinal neuroepithelial detachment. The optic disc of the left eye was swollen and the edges of the optic disc were blurred. Fundus fluorescence angiography (FFA) examination (Spectralis; Heidelberg Engineering Inc., Germany): the right eye showed late venous placoid hypofluorescence in the posterior pole, and the late image showed hyperfluorescence consistent with placoid lesions and visible subretinal dye aggregation; the left eye showed posterior placoid hypofluorescence in the posterior pole corresponding to hyperfluorescence in the late image, subfoveal dye aggregation and fluorescein leakage from the optic disc. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) examination (Zeiss Model 5000, Oberkochen, Germany): showed retinal detachment in both eyes as well as intraretinal fluid accumulation located in the outer retina. Diagnosis: APMPPE in both eyes. Oral prednisone anti-inflammatory treatment was given, and visual acuity improved to 0.1 (logMAR) in both eyes after 1 week. OCT showed absorption of subretinal fluid of both eyes, and some hyperreflective signals were seen in the outer retina layer. Thereafter, the patient was followed up regularly for an additional 28 months. During the follow-up, FFA and OCT revealed extensive and progressive pigment epithelial atrophy in both eyes, and abnormal retinal vascular perfusion in the right eye due to persistent retinal vasculitis. Although the patient's binocular visual acuity remained at 0.1 (logMAR).
We followed this young male patient with bilateral exudative retinal detachment with APMPPE for a long time and observed the changing retinal and choroidal features by multimodal imaging. FFA of the patient at the early of onset showed late venous manifestations of multiple placoid hypofluorescent areas in the posterior pole, and late images showed hyperfluorescence consistent with placoid lesions with subretinal dye aggregation and lesions as far as the equatorial retina. Due to optic discitis in the left eye, resulting in optic disc staining , localized retinal capillary dilation in the temporal periphery of the right eye, with fluorescence staining of small vessel walls; over time, the lesions continued to progress and were widely distributed, with lesions visible at different times in images of the same period . The fundus photography (AFC-330; Nidek, Japan) showed that progressed from limited yellow/white lesions in the acute phase to yellow/white lesions coexistence with pigment proliferation, and widespread distribution of lesions and pigmentation over time . Changes in fundus autofluorescence (FAF) were shown to lag behind the placoid APMPPE lesions seen on clinical examination during follow-up and were less numerous. As disease activity diminished, the same areas showed enhanced autofluorescence, with low autofluorescence persisting within the lesion and at the lesion margin. Over time, the high autofluorescence within the lesion and surrounding areas became more discrete, with decreased fluorescence intensity and increased areas of low autofluorescence . OCT showed fluid accumulating between the neurosensory retina and RPE of this case, at the onset. After glucocorticoid treatment, the subfoveal fluid accumulation was resorbed, and some hyperreflective signals were visible in the outer retina layer, suggesting the presence of inflammatory deposits. With the absorption of inflammatory deposits, the outer retinal strips were interrupted, the outer nuclear layer was thinned, the outer plexiform layer seemed to be directly connected to the outer membrane and RPE layer, and the myoid band, ellipsoid band and photoreceptor outer segments were missing. With the prolongation of the disease, the outer retinal structures were further reorganized and normalized, the outer nuclear layer gradually regained its normal hyporeflectivity, the ellipsoidal body band at the fovea was partially reappearing with the outer segmental membrane disc light band, and the connection with the RPE was undergoing reorganization .