A previously healthy 8-year-old boy was admitted to the hospital presenting with a high fever of 39.4 °C, an erythematous rash over the face and extremities, and decreased oral intake for one day. He had a history of a cold from COVID-19 infection 1 month ago and he never received the COVID-19 vaccination. On the third day of fever, he developed right cervical lymphadenopathy, conjunctival injection in both eyes, and a sore throat. He was admitted due to persistent high fever and poor intake at a private health care facility and was managed with symptomatic treatment. On the next day, he developed hypotension (84/56 mmHg) and respiratory failure (respiratory rate of 42 breaths/min and Spo2 of 85%). The patient received fluid boluses and endotracheal tube intubation. Then he was transferred to the pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) at our hospital.
On admission, the patient was fully oriented, but restless. He exhibited tachypnea (RR 30–32/min). The mechanical ventilator settings were assisted control ventilation, pressure control mode, FiO2 100%, pressure control of 30 cmH2O, respiratory rate of 22 times/min, and positive end-expiratory pressure of 9 cmH2O. After using the ventilator, an arterial blood gas study revealed a pH of 7.348, PO2 of 57 mmHg, PCO2 of 39.5 mmHg, HCO3−of 21.1 mmol/L, and lactate of 3.5 mmol/L. Chest radiograph showed patchy consolidation with an internal air bronchogram at the right lung with cardiomegaly . Echocardiogram was performed and showed a prominence of the left anterior descending coronary artery; cross-sectional diameter of 4.3 mm with z score of 1.27 and perivascular brightness, decreased left ventricular (LV) function, and mild mitral valve insufficiency with an ejection fraction (EF) of 40%. There was no coronary aneurysm.
Laboratory studies showed no leukocytosis (white blood cell count: 6.07 *109/L), and the white blood cell differential count showed 82.6% neutrophils and 14.5% lymphocytes. There were elevated blood levels for C-reactive protein (206.2 mg/L) and procalcitonin (17 ng/mL). Moreover, multiple clinical indexes exceeded the normal range, including alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, lactate dehydrogenase, and creatinine. Other laboratory results and trends are shown in Table . A nasopharyngeal swab sample tested for SARS-CoV-2 by real-time PCR was negative, but his serology tested positive for SARS-CoV-2-specific anti-SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid. Serum troponin T and troponin-I levels and N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) were elevated, indicating cardiac ischemia or injury.
A diagnosis of MIS-C was made based on the above clinical features and paraclinical testing results. The patient remained hemodynamically unstable with features of shock and cardiac failure. Gentle fluid boluses with 0.9%NSS 10 ml/kg, broad-spectrum antibiotic (meropenem), norepinephrine (0.1 mcg/kg/min), and epinephrine (0.05 mcg/kg/min) were given.
Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG; 1 g/kg/day) and methylprednisolone (2 mg/kg/day) were started. A chest computed tomography (CT) was performed which showed consolidation and ground-glass opacities of the right lung without evidence of pulmonary embolism . Flexible bronchoscopy was performed and showed serous secretion with normal airway mucosa. Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) was obtained. BALF cell populations were total of WBC 486 cells/mm3 (mononuclear cells 12%, neutrophils 88%), RBC 600 cells/mm3, and no bacterial growth in BALF’s culture.
His fever had subsided dramatically after 4 h of treatment, and vasopressors could be discontinued after 12 h of treatment. IVIG was given for 2 days and aspirin was started. Methylprednisolone was given and tapered off in 2 weeks. Right lung patchy opacities were resolved with chest imaging on hospital day 3 . Two sets of blood culture were negative. After 5 days of PICU admission, the patient was successfully liberated from a mechanical ventilator. LV dysfunction was reevaluated by an echocardiogram which revealed normal LV function without mitral valve insufficiency with an EF of 65%. On discharge, chest imaging was within normal limits. He was discharged home on day 8.