A 64-year-old woman had been experiencing frequent chest distress and shortness of breath during moderate activity. She underwent two surgeries to remove breast cancer and received corresponding radiation and chemotherapy treatments 10 years ago, as well as suffered from hypertension for nearly a decade.
In February 2014, she repeated episodes of tarry stools accompanied by palpitations, chest tightness, and dizziness without any apparent inciting factors. Gastroduodenoscopy and colonoscopy did not locate any bleeding lesions, while subsequent capsule endoscopy and double balloon enteroscopy identified hemorrhage and multiple haemangiomas in the jejunum respectively at local hospitals .
Nevertheless, there was minimal hemostatic effect following endoscopic argon plasma coagulation and conventional medication. She then had to receive a transfusion of several units of blood, during which her hemoglobin fluctuated between 74 and 124 g/L (normal 110–150 g/L). Several months later, as she required repeated transfusions due to her persistent hemorrhage, an exploratory laparotomy was performed to resect several suspicious lesions in her small intestine for further diagnosis and treatment. The relevant histological examination showed chronic mucosal inflammation with multiple erosions, which was consistent with a haemangioma. Thus, thalidomide (25 mg/d) was prescribed to prevent postoperative neoangiogenesis, and her GIB consequently ceased for some time.
In May 2017, the patient received an emergency coronary angiography because of fainting during exercise. The coronary angiography revealed a diffuse stenosis of 60% in the middle right coronary artery but no other critical lesions. Interestingly, probably limited by the expertise of the local hospital, the echocardiogram report only mentioned mild AS and aortic regurgitation. The patient started having melena again after the procedure, which was likely related to the dual antiplatelet therapy before coronary angiography. However, the GIB was difficult to be completely controlled by conventional medications, such as proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) and octreotide.
Subsequently, the patient was referred to our department due to worsening exertional dyspnoea, thoracalgia, and orthostatic hypotension. Her clinical signs of AS and systemic congestion were obvious, the laboratory tests were unremarkable other than a Hb level of 76 g/L and an NT-proBNP level of 392 (normal < 125) pg/mL. The transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) results showed severe tricuspid calcified AS, the mean and peak transvalvular pressure gradients were 48 and 84 mmHg, respectively; the aortic valve area was 0.80 cm2; and there were no signs of obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) .
After comprehensively understanding the overall condition of the patient through the Heart Team and taking into full consideration her own wishes, the patient ultimately underwent TAVI with a VENUS-A 26 prosthetic aortic valve (Venus Medtech (Hangzhou) Inc.) with no paravalvular leak occurred after the procedure in August 2018. Interestingly, arteriovenous malformations are difficult to detect via superior mesenteric artery angiography, and there was still a 60% stenosis in the mid-segment of the right coronary artery through coronary angiography before TAVI. The patient’s peak aortic valve pressure gradient decreased rapidly from 88 mmHg to less than 5 mmHg postoperatively, and she did not develop enterorrhagia or major bleeding during the perioperative period . For postoperative anti-thrombotic therapy, clopidogrel monotherapy was taken lifelong accompanied by dabigatran for 6 months.
At the 2-year follow-up, the TTE results confirmed a well-seated prosthesis with a peak transvalvular pressure gradient of 12 mmHg and an aortic valve area of 4.11 cm2, but there was an isolated left ventricular outflow tract obstruction (LVOTO) present, which was not accompanied by a systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve or HCM . She did not suffer any further significant hemorrhagic or ischaemic events or symptoms secondary to the triad of AS.