A 36-year-old man, without any structural heart disease, was referred to our hospital due to frequent episodes of palpitations and syncope. The 12-lead ECG during sinus rhythm showed right bundle branch block morphology, ST segment elevation with saddle back configuration in lead V2, and normal QTc interval. After admission, episodes of sustained atrial flutter were detected. During electrophysiology study, a sustained typical atrial flutter was induced. The study also revealed a prolonged corrected sinus node recovery time (1300 msec). A bidirectional block was created across the cavotricuspid isthmus following linear irrigated radiofrequency (RF) ablation. Drug challenge test with intravenous procainamide resulted in cove-shaped ST segment elevation in the right precordial leads followed by emergence of premature ventricular complex (PVC) bigeminy with left bundle branch block (LBBB) morphology, inferior axis, and QRS transition at V4 . The presence of late potentials was detected by signal-averaged ECG. Patient refused implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) implantation at that time.
One year later, he was admitted again due to exacerbation of the palpitation and recurrence of syncope. On admission, sinus bradycardia (35 beat/min) was detected in ECG. In this admission, a dual-chamber ICD was implanted (Protecta DR, Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA). ICD was programmed with a single VF detection zone (200 beat/min) and a VT monitoring zone (150 beat/min. During follow-up, patient received frequent episodes of appropriate shocks due to reverse VF. In addition, frequent episodes of slower VT at the range of monitoring zone were detected. Unfortunately, quinidine was not available in our country at that period; therefore, we decided to try ablation of suspicious arrhythmogenic substrates. Patient was brought to the catheterization room for the electrophysiological study (EPS). During EPS patient developed hemodynamic stable monomorphic sustained VT with LBBB pattern and inferior axis (cycle length 460 milliseconds) similar to morphology of the PVCs induced during procainamide test. Right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) endocardially mapped and earliest activation signal (90 msec) achieved at posterior aspect of the RVOT septum . RF energy application at that site terminated the tachycardia and no tachycardia was inducible . During two-year follow-up, he had no episodes of ICD therapy and remained symptom-free with any antiarrhythmic drug.