A 50-year-old male with a mass and pain at the right fossa iliaca for 3 mo.
Half a year ago, the patient again palpated a mass at the right fossa iliaca. About 3 mo ago, the patient felt tingling from the right fossa iliaca mass, and this was accompanied by radiation pain in the anterior side of the right thigh. No nausea and vomiting, abdominal pain, bloating, obvious weight loss, and other discomforts were reported.
There was no history of chronic diseases such as coronary heart disease, hypertension, and diabetes. About 20 years ago, the right fossa iliaca mass was found in the health examination (about 4 cm × 4 cm), and a resection operation in the local hospital was performed (specifically unknown).
The patient presented with cafe-au-lait spots on the body and subcutaneous nodules; at the right fossa iliaca a bulge was seen, touching a lump (10 cm × 6 cm, hard, unclear boundary, poor mobility, local tenderness). The anterior side of the right thigh felt weaker than the contralateral side; in the right groin there was a swollen lymph node (hard, clear border, good mobility, local tenderness.
With a suspicion of malignancy, fine-needle-aspiration biopsy was performed. The right abdominal mass aspiration biopsy revealed a spindle cell malignancy . Immunohistochemistry revealed S-100 (small +), CD34 (+++), desmin (individual +), SMA (-), Ki67 (20%+), pan-cytokeratin (-), NF (-), CK-L (-), myogenin (-), and myogenic differentiation 1 (-) and was combined with hematoxylin & eosin staining. This case is a spindle cell sarcoma with limited puncture tissue, and it was recommended after tumor removal to perform pathology for tumor differentiation. In cases of neurological tumors, they tend to be malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors. Genetic testing and NF1 gene analysis found a pathogenic variant in exon 32 (p. Q1395Hfs). Also, a fusion in the ROS1 gene was detected (p. TJP1 exon8); TMB-L, MSS, and PD-L1 were negative .
Chest-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed soft tissue masses in the subpleural and horizontal fissures of the right middle lobe of the right lung. Multiple soft tissue nodules were seen under the chest wall on both sides, and neurofibromatosis was considered in combination with medical history. The mediastinum and the main bronchus were moved to the right. There was pleural thickening of the right upper lobe with localized atelectasis. Abdominal pelvic magnetic resonance (MR) revealed a solid cystic mass in the right abdomen and right hip, and multiple small nodules in the abdominal wall, considering neurofibromatosis. Positron emission tomography (PET)/CT is shown in Figure . In the right fossa iliaca there was a large soft tissue mass shadow , the size was about 11.1 cm × 9.3 cm × 17.5 cm, and fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) metabolism increased. The upper part of the mass showed a non-uniform cystic change, and the radioactive uptake of the cystic area was relatively reduced. The right iliacus was involved; the soft tissue mass in front of the right gluteus maximus was about 8.9 cm × 5.1 cm in size, and FDG metabolism was increased; the pleura in the right middle lobe showed multiple adjacent fusiforms . FDG metabolism increased at the marginal site; multiple nodules were seen in the skin of whole body, and FDG metabolism was not increased. Combined with medical history, skin neurofibromatosis may be considered, and hypermetabolic lesions may be considered malignant transformation.