A 33-year-old Black male with no significant past medical history presented to the ED for evaluation of intermittent, right-sided facial droop and blurred vision. Symptoms were intermittent, lasting approximately 15 minutes at a time, and onset one hour prior to arrival while sitting in a chair. He had a total of three episodes prior to coming into the ED. He had a mild left frontal headache described as dull and non-radiating, with associated lightheadedness, confusion, and palpitations. There were no modifying or alleviating factors. The headache occurred shortly after he noticed a right-sided facial droop in a mirror. His symptoms had completely resolved at the time of initial evaluation.
His right upper extremity was in a splint because of an injury to his wrist sustained 12 days prior after falling off an electric scooter. He denied current arm pain. He denied hitting his head or loss of consciousness during the scooter accident. He denied neck or back pain but stated he may have “whipped” his neck back and forth during the fall. He was not on blood thinners. He denied weakness or numbness/tingling in his arms or legs. Vitals signs were stable with a temperature of 37° Celsius, blood pressure of 128/67 millimeters of mercury, heart rate of 58 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 20 breaths per minute, and an oxygen saturation of 97% on room air. Initial physical examination demonstrated no neurological deficits.
There was no Marfanoid habitus, or evidence of Horner’s syndrome or cranial nerve palsies. He had no dysmetria, and he ambulated normally without ataxia. The motor strength of his right upper extremity was difficult to fully assess as he had a splint in place, but he had 5/5 motor strength in his proximal and distal upper and lower extremities bilaterally. His sensation to light touch appeared intact in all extremities. Other than a splint to his right upper extremity, there was no evidence of trauma on examination.
An electrocardiogram revealed normal sinus rhythm without abnormalities. Laboratory work including a complete blood count, basic metabolic panel, and troponin were all within normal limits. Neuroimaging was performed and he had a normal computed tomography (CT) of his head without contrast. The CT angiogram (CTA) of the neck demonstrated significant stenosis extending distal to the left carotid bulb to near the skull base with a carotid string sign ( and ), consistent with ICAD. A carotid string sign is produced by a stenotic, diminished, weak antegrade flow of contrast material in the internal carotid artery.
He developed very subtle right-sided facial droop, lightheadedness, and a left frontal headache after imaging was performed. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain demonstrated multiple foci of acute infarct involving the left hemisphere .
Vascular surgery and neurology were consulted. He was admitted to the telemetry unit of the hospital. Intravenous heparin and oral rosuvastatin were started inpatient. His symptoms resolved completely, and he had an unremarkable hospital stay. He had a normal transthoracic echocardiogram with bubble study performed inpatient. He was discharged two days later on rosuvastatin and apixaban. He was asymptomatic at a six-month phone call follow-up and had normal appearance of the left internal carotid artery on imaging one year later.