A 67-year-old man presented to our department with a swelling in the upper abdomen for half a year. His surgical history included RARP for prostate cancer in 2017. He had been medicated with a few anti-anxiety drugs for depressive anxiety disorder. Physical examination revealed a tennis ball-sized irreducible subcutaneous mass on the previous RARP incision scar, where the specimen was removed from the upper abdominal midline. Blood tests, including blood cell counts, liver enzymes, renal function, and HbA1c, were within the respective reference ranges. Abdominal computed tomography showed the presence of an epigastric incisional hernia 4 cm long and 3.7 cm wide . We decided to perform an eTEP repair.
The patient was placed in the supine position with his arms tucked at the sides under general anesthesia. Figure shows the port placement in this case. We made a 2-cm skin incision at the port 1 position and identified the anterior rectus sheath, then incised it sharply. We used balloon dissector to develop the left retrorectus space after splitting the rectus abdominis muscle, inserted a 12-mm trocar, and performed pneumoperitoneum at 10 mmHg. Two 5-mm trocars were inserted at port 2 and port 3 positions under the endoscopic view.
Above the level of the hernia defect, the medial portion of the left posterior rectus sheath was incised from the cephalad in the caudal direction and crossing to the preperitoneal space under the white line to the right posterior rectus sheath. The medial portion of the right posterior rectus sheath was incised and a 12-mm trocar was inserted at the port 4 position after sufficient dissection in the right retrorectus space. Retrorectus dissection was performed in the caudal direction, incising bilateral posterior rectus sheaths to the hernia defect .
When the hernia sac was sharply dissected, we found very mild adhesions between the hernia sac and omental tissue . Careful adhesiolysis was performed while confirming that there were no adhesions between the hernia sac and intestine. Bilateral retrorectus dissection was performed caudal to the arcuate line. After development of sufficient preperitoneal and bilateral retrorectus spaces, abdominal defect was closed by 0 non-absorbable barbed suture, and defect of the peritoneum was closed by 2–0 absorbable suture. Finally, a 20-cm-long and 15-cm-wide self-gripping mesh was placed in the retrorectus space with no fixation . The operating time was 211 min, and the amount of bleeding was 5 g.
There were no postoperative complications and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 2. Postoperative pain was well controlled with prophylactic oral analgesics for 5 days after surgery. No hernia recurrences occurred after 9 months of follow-up .