The case was a 33-year-old female, with no history of smoking, previous medical or family history of malignant disease. She visited the previous hospital with one-month history of worsening cough and dyspnea. Chest X-ray and Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed left pleural tumors with a large amount of pleural effusion .The tumor was limited to the left thoracic cavity, she underwent the diagnostic thoracoscopy to obtain tumor tissue from the parietal pleura sufficient for further analysis. Pathological diagnosis in the previous hospital was squamous cell carcinoma of the pleura. She received six cycles of cisplatin plus gemcitabine therapy. The best response of the chemotherapy was stable disease. After progression, she visited to our institution to be received further treatment. She received TS-1 monotherapy (100 mg/body) as second-line treatment. However her disease progressed rapidly with worsening chest pain and dyspnea, and she died 10 months after diagnosis.
Upon histological review of the submitted biopsy slide, the tumor was composed of sheets of poorly differentiated cells with some streaming pattern. The stroma was neither myxoid nor hyalinized, and rhabdoid cells were absent. Immunohistochemically (IHC) staining revealed that the tumor cells were diffusely positive for cytokeratin (CK) 5/6, p40, desmocollin 3, claudin 4, and MOC31, whereas they were negative for WT1, D2-40, S100 protein, GFAP, CD34, c-kit, NUT, and calponin. The results confirmed the diagnosis of non-keratinizing squamous cell carcinoma. An additional IHC unexpectedly revealed the complete lack of SMARCB1 expression . Given the lack of radiological evidence of tumor involvement of the lung, mediastinum, and head and neck, the disease was clinically considered primary to the pleura.
We analyzed hotspot mutations from the formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues, using the Ion AmpliSeq™ Cancer Hotspot Panel v2 that targeting “mutation-hotspot region” in 50 most common oncogenes. The sequence result showed copy number loss of SMARCB1 gene in this tumor . And another next-generation sequencing assay (Agilent SureSelect NCC oncopanel) revealed no other common oncogene mutations, such as epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation, anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK), RET or ROS1 rearrangements.