A 16-year-old Caucasian male presented to the emergency department with 3-day history of fatigue, fever, nausea, and diffuse myalgia. He also reported dyspnea and two episodes of hemoptysis, and on examination was found to be tachypneic, and tachycardic with pyrexia and transcutaneous oxygen saturation of 88% in room air, yet without signs of hemodynamic instability. There were bilateral crackles on pulmonary auscultation and diffuse pain on abdominal palpation without rebound or rigidity. The rest of the clinical examination was unremarkable. The chest radiography showed bilateral alveolar interstitial syndrome . Laboratory studies on admission showed leukocytosis (8905/μl), thrombopenia (96,000/µl), and lymphopenia (398/μl), with mildly impaired coagulation parameters, including APTT of 27.3 s (normal range: 20–30 s), INR of 1.10 (normal range: < 1.10), PTT of 89% (normal range: 75–100%), and fibrinogen of 535 mg/dl (normal range: 200–400 mg/dl). A computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest showed bilateral consolidation with diffuse alveolar damage . The patient was admitted, and antibiotic treatment was initiated with intravenous ceftriaxone.
Within hours of hospital admission, the patient deteriorated and developed acute respiratory failure, requiring transfer to the intensive care unit for additional support, initially with supplemental high flow oxygen administration, but subsequently necessitating intubation and ventilation for persistent hypoxemia. Owing to refractory severe acute respiratory distress syndrome with PaO2/FiO2 ratio of 47, he was rapidly cannulated for venous–venous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (vvECMO). Airway pressure release ventilation was used to ensure lung-protective ventilation, but examination by fibroscopy showed a pulmonary hemorrhage, requiring a massive transfusion with guidance by rotational thromboelastometry. A second chest scan showed a clear increase of pulmonary intraparenchymal lesions with complete involvement of both lungs .
Owing to persistent cannulation site bleeding with recurrence of diffuse alveolar hemorrhage, aggravating the patient’s refractory severe acute respiratory distress syndrome, he was transferred to a university hospital for further management. He was also noted to have worsening coagulation dysfunction with fibrinogen at 153 mg/dl, d-dimer at 20563 ng/ml, INR of 1.19, APTT of 31.7 s, and platelet counts further decreasing to 25,000/μl. The patient developed jaundice with conjugated bilirubinemia of 6.7 mg/dl. There was no acute renal injury. Systemic anticoagulation to maintain circuit patency was stopped after 1 day. Overall, the persistent disseminated intravascular coagulation with severe hypofibrinogenemia (nadir at 79 mg/dl) was associated with rotational thromboelastometry results, justifying massive transfusions. Over a period of 7 days, the patient received 2 units of packed red blood cells, 2 units of platelets, 77 g of fibrinogen, 3 units of fresh frozen plasma, and 2800 UI of prothrombin–proconvertin–Stuart factor.
In-depth investigations were performed upon admission, including a comprehensive panel of microbial serologies and PCRs and vasculitis screens. All results came back negative. Serologies were repeated on day 10 of admission, and antibodies were detected against Leptospira with micro-agglutination assay at titer of 1:1600. Antibiotic treatment with intravenous ceftriaxone was continued, completing a course of 10 days. Despite the absence of anticoagulation, the ECMO transmembrane pressure remained stable. The patient showed clinical improvement with normalization of laboratory parameters, and was progressively weaned off ECMO. He was decannulated on day 12 and extubated on day 18, upon which he was transferred back to his local hospital and made a full recovery.