A 6-year-old spayed female Ragdoll presented to the referral hospital for evaluation of a 4-day history of acute onset retching and anorexia. The cat had been previously diagnosed with idiopathic hypercalcaemia which was being medically managed with weekly oral administration of 10 mg/kg alendronate (Bova Compounding Pharmacy). The cat had been previously reported to intermittently vomit after administration of alendronate. The development of retching and anorexia were noted to occur the day after the administration of alendronate.
On presentation, the cat was bright, alert and responsive. The cat was witnessed to cough with a terminal retch. As the cat was aggressive in nature, a detailed physical examination could not be performed. The cat was sedated with an intramuscular injection of 10 mg/kg tiletamine and zolazepam (Zoletil; Virbac) to facilitate handling. Physical examination under sedation was unremarkable. A complete blood count, serum biochemistry, electrolytes and venous blood gas analysis were performed. This showed a neutropenia (2.27 ×109/l; reference interval [RI] 2.3–10.29 ×109/l) and a hypophosphotaemia (0.69 mmol/l; RI 1–2.42 mmol/l). The rest of the analysis was within normal limits. Serum ionised calcium was normal.
Abdominal ultrasound identified a focal segment of the small intestine that was dilated with fluid. This was suspected to be secondary to gastrointestinal ileus. Orthogonal two-view thoracic radiographs identified an alveolar lung pattern in the right cranial ventral lung lobes . An echocardiogram was performed to assess for underlying cardiomyopathy causing cardiogenic pulmonary oedema as a possible explanation for the alveolar lung pattern. The echocardiogram was unremarkable.
Further diagnostics such as bronchoscopy and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) were recommended to the owner but declined. In light of the history of vomiting, coughing and the right cranial ventral alveolar lung pattern, aspiration pneumonia was suspected. The cat was hospitalised and empirical treatment of aspiration pneumonia was commenced. The cat was treated with 22 mg/kg amoxicillin intravenously (IV) q8h. During this time, the coughing resolved. However, exaggerated swallowing was observed and 0.02 mg/kg buprenorphine (Temvet; Troy) IV q8h was also commenced owing to concerns for oesophageal injury secondary to alendronate administration. The cat was hospitalised for 3 days and, during this time, remained hyporexic. The cat was discharged at the owner’s request on the fourth day. A single subcutaneous injection of 8 mg/kg cefovecin (Convenia; Zoetis) was administered prior to discharge.
The cat re-presented 4 days after discharge owing to progressive coughing, persistent anorexia and intermittent neck extension with open-mouth breathing. Repeat physical examination was unremarkable. Bronchoscopy and BAL were performed under general anaesthesia. Bronchoscopy identified a flesh-coloured mass that was occluding approximately 75% of tracheal lumen . This was removed via bronchoscopy-guided traction using paediatric biopsy forceps. Grossly, the mass was smooth, tubular and uniform, and measured approximately 10cm in length. The mass had occluded 75% of the tracheal lumen for the entire 10 cm. A blind BAL was also performed by advancing a 1.7 mm washing catheter through the lumen of the endotracheal tube until resistance was felt. Five millilitres of 0.9% sterile saline were instilled into catheter and then gently aspirated back out of the airways. The catheter was subsequently removed from the endotracheal tube after the saline was retrieved.
Histopathology of the intraluminal mass revealed a mesh of fibrin containing pockets of haemorrhage with occasional small aggregates of neutrophils, rare hair fragments and keratin . Both tissue culture of the intraluminal mass and fluid culture from the BAL yielded a growth of Pseudomonas aeruginosa that was resistant to tetracyclines, penicillins and cephalosporins but sensitive to fluroquinolones. The cat was started on 5 mg/kg pradofloxacin (Veraflox; Bayer) once daily for 4 weeks.
The cat’s respiratory signs immediately improved following the removal of the tracheal pseudomembrane, with complete resolution of clinical signs following extubation. The cat made an excellent recovery with resolution of the coughing, retching, open-mouth breathing and anorexia. The cat was discharged the following day. Follow-up was performed at the referral hospital 4 weeks after discharge, where thoracic radiographs were offered to assess the resolution of the pneumonia, but this was declined by the owner. At the time of writing (3 months after diagnosis), the cat had no persistent or recurrence of any clinical signs.