A 57-year-old woman with a medical history of Grave's disease and breast infiltrating ductal carcinoma, which was treated with a radical mastectomy, was brought to the emergency department by ambulance within 50 minutes after unconsciousness found by family. She had attempted suicide by ingesting estimated 400 ml of nian-nian-chun (Chinese brand name for glyphosate surfactant) but her family did not known the exact time of ingestion. This product contains 41% glyphosate isopropylamine and 15% polyoxyethyleneamine. On admission, the patient was in a state of drowsy consciousness, had a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of E1V1M2, and was diaphoretic, incontinent, and vomiting. Her vital signs on admission to the emergency department were as follows: blood pressure, 120/70 mm Hg; pulse, 87 beats/min; respiration, 22 breaths/min; and temperature, 35°C. Physical examination showed an injected throat, oral ulcers, blood-tinged saliva, crackles on chest auscultation, cold extremities, and unremarkable findings concerning the head, neck, heart, genital organs, and rectum. Serum benzodiazepine, alcohol and organophosphate and urinary paraquet concentrations were examined to excluded other drugs related unconsciousness. The results of laboratory studies at emergency department were as follows: non-fasting plasma glucose, 156 mg/dL; creatinine, 1.2 mg/dL; leukocytes, 11600/μl; segmented neutrophils, 74.4%; and potassium, 5.6 mEq/L. Gastric irrigation was performed after ingestion for one hour, but no obvious herbicide was detected. The patient regained consciousness (GCS: E3V5M6) in 30 minutes at emergency department, but shock and respiratory failure developed in 5 hours after admission to the hospital. A blood gas analysis before endotracheal intubation showed mixed metabolic and respiratory acidosis (pH: 7.223; PCO2: 30.8 mm Hg; HCO3: 12.8 mmol/L; BE: – 12.9 mmol/L). She was transferred to the intensive care unit, mechanically ventilated, and treated according to the critical care principle. The hyperkalemia was corrected with insulin/glucose infusion and kayexalate ingestion. The serum level of potassium decreased to 3.4 mEq/L on the second day of admission. The acidemia was corrected by intermittent sodium bicarbonate infusion . However, refractory shock persisted despite the administration of fluids, dopamine, vasopressin, epinephrine, and norepinephrine. A low ratio of FiO2 to PaO2 and bilateral lung infiltration developed. Non-sustained ventricular tachycardia developed on the third day of admission. Amiodarone was loaded with 150 mg. There was no more ventricular arrhythmia but pulseless electric activity was noted. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was performed for 30 minutes but there was no spontaneous pulse. The patient died 3 days after being admitted to the hospital.