We report a case of A 29-year-old woman living in a rural area and working as a farmer, with no significant pathological history. She was presented to our hospital for right hip pain. A physical examination revealed a right hip pain at mobilisation, with a normal range of motion. Plain X-rays and a Computed tomography of the right hip showed a lytic bone lesion well limited at the level of the upper metaphysis of the right femur without periosteal reaction or a weakening of the cortex .
The diagnosis of the unicameral bone cyst was retained based on the radiological aspect.
A gamma nail osteosynthesis was performed to prevent the risk of fractures. The surgery had an immediate simple operative sequence, but the patient didn't present to the late follow-up.
Five years later, she was admitted to our hospital for a recurrence of the right hip pain and tumefaction, which is progressively getting worse and restricting the daily activity. The physical examination revealed a tumefaction at the level of the femoral greater trochanter. The right hip joint was painful and stiff. The scar was good, and there were no signs of inflammation of the superficial skin. Conventional radiology showed extensive lysis of the right trochanteric region and the femoral neck. And the loosening of osteosynthesis material .
Computed tomography (CT) revealed a bone loss in the trochanteric region, cystic lesion of the peri-trochanteric soft tissue, calcified in some places and with an outline delineating it from the surrounding muscles . Findings were compatible with a hydatid cyst.
So, we decided to remove the osteosynthesis material and make a bone biopsy.
The biopsy brought membranous elements of white-pearly colour, and microscopic histopathological examinations confirmed the diagnosis of a hydatid cyst.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed to evaluate the local extension. It showed multiple cystic lesions. These cystic lesions were extending from the upper 1/3 of the femoral diaphysis to the epiphysis, and it doesn’t cross the joint space. In the soft parts, the lesions spread to the minimus and medius gluteus muscles .
Careful clinical examination, chest X-rays and an abdominal ultrasound scan revealed no other lesions.
Under general anaesthesia, a senior surgeon carefully isolated the entire cyst from the surrounding muscles and excised it with 12 cm of the proximal femur. The excision was made, leaving a wide chirurgical margin, and a reconstruction by a mega prosthesis of the right hip was performed .
Postoperative recovery was remarkably uneventful, and she was able to walk with crutches. Three months later, she was walking without help. Her only problem was a 2 cm limb shortening well correct by an orthopaedic sole. she was satisfied and resumed normal daily activity without discomfort. And, there had been no recurrence three years after the cyst was removed .