An 84-year-old man with a past medical history of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation on Rivaroxaban, chronic pancytopenia, coronary artery disease status post remote percutaneous coronary intervention, asymptomatic dilated ascending aorta (5.0 cm in diameter, followed serially, stable for 8 years), essential hypertension and hypothyroidism was admitted for general malaise, lightheadedness, and dizziness. The last dose of Rivaroxaban was 72 h prior to presentation as the patient underwent upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy 24 h prior to presentation, for evaluation of chronic anaemia, which revealed non-obstructive schatzki’s ring, mild diverticulosis, three small polyps in ascending colon which were resected with follow-up pathology showing tubular adenoma, and non-bleeding internal haemorrhoids. The patient was not taking any medications known to interact with Rivaroxaban. Upon presentation to the emergency department, the patient was noted to be hypotensive with a narrow pulse pressure and blood pressure of 80/60 mmHg and tachycardic with a heart rate over 110 b.p.m. On exam, patient was intermittently somnolent with evidence of jugular venous distension, distant heart sounds, prolonged capillary refill, and cool extremities. The platelet count on arrival was 219 × 109/L (150–450 × 109/L). There was no significant troponin elevation. Electrocardiogram revealed atrial fibrillation with a rate of 87 and T-wave inversions in the inferolateral leads without associated electrical alternans . Chest radiograph showed a right pleural effusion with an enlarged cardiac silhouette increased in size from a previous radiograph . Following inadequate response to 2.5 L of isotonic crystalloid, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit and started on high doses of multiple vasopressors. He was noted to have an elevated lactate of 4.3 mmol/L (0.4–2.0 mmol/L), creatinine of 0.225 mmol/L (0.0530–0.1149 mmol/L), aspartate transaminase (AST) of 1499 U/L (0–41 U/L), alanine transaminase (ALT) of 1813 U/L (0–40 U/L), and international normalized ratio (INR) of 3.7 (0.9–1.2) concerning for renal and hepatic hypoperfusion. Bedside echocardiogram was performed which revealed a large global pericardial effusion with a maximal depth of 30 mm with respiratory collapse of the right ventricle consistent with cardiac tamponade physiology (Video 1). Due to worsening hypoxia and haemodynamic instability, the patient underwent immediate INR reversal with prothrombin complex concentrate and then urgent pericardiocentesis via subxiphoid approach, while on non-invasive positive pressure ventilation, which yielded 1.5 L of grossly bloody fluid . A pericardial drain was inserted to prevent further fluid accumulation. Repeat INR was 2.2 (0.9–1.2). Post-procedure echocardiogram revealed resolution of tamponade physiology with newly reduced ejection fraction of 35% and severe mitral regurgitation (Video 2). The patient’s oxygenation and haemodynamic parameters improved following the procedure and he was successfully discharged without further complications. The patient was discharged without anticoagulation due to concern for significant bleeding risk and potential for recurrent haemorrhagic pericardial effusion.
Notably, 10 days prior, patient had presented to the hospital with atypical chest pain. Diagnostic workup including troponins, electrocardiogram, and echocardiogram was unremarkable. Computed tomography (CT) angiogram of chest, abdomen, and pelvis was obtained to assess the aorta, which revealed no acute pathology but did note the presence of retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy . The patient was discharged as the chest pain was deemed to be pleuritic in nature, of non-cardiac aetiology and resolved spontaneously. Given subsequent presentation for hemopericardium, there was concern for underlying malignant effusion, but cytology of the pericardial fluid revealed no evidence of malignant cells. Bone marrow biopsy revealed no overt dysplasia, only normal cellularity with trilineage haematopoiesis. Flow cytometry and chromosome studies of marrow were also unremarkable. A retroperitoneal lymph node biopsy was not performed as the lymph nodes were not deemed pathological by size criteria and were too small to be biopsied per interventional radiology. Haematology recommended long-term follow-up with repeat imaging. Follow-up CT with contrast of chest, abdomen and pelvis 4 months later demonstrated no progression of lymphadenopathy or ascending aorta dilation. Evaluation by two independent haematologists at major quaternary centres including a repeat reading of the bone marrow biopsy, found no evidence of malignancy, recommending observation and active surveillance.