A 39-year old male presented with a two-year history of spontaneous, intermittent, non-traumatic left hip pain. Symptoms were worsening at night, with no irradiation to the leg, fever, or other associated signs/symptoms. Pain was initially reported as mild, then it worsened and became unresponsive to non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, especially salicylates. At first outpatient examination, diffuse tenderness of the hip was noted, with pain not changing with movement. No palpable swelling or decrease of muscular tone was observed. Hip range of motion was preserved, with negative flexion, abduction and external rotation (FABER) test. No neurological signs were found and Laségue maneuver was negative on both sides.
The patient underwent pelvis and left hip plain radiography, which was unremarkable. Clinical suspicion of OO was raised and the patient underwent CT examination. It revealed the synchronous presence of an intracortical radiolucent nidus (7 mm) with central hyperdensity and mild sclerosis of the adjacent bone, located in the anterosuperior portion of the left femoral neck. A second lytic lesion (8 mm) with similar features was also seen, surrounded by denser sclerosis, located along the anterior column of the acetabulum. A diagnosis of multicentric OO was made . Thus, the patient was treated using RFA in a single session. He well tolerated the procedure without complications. Biopsy performed before RFA confirmed the radiological diagnosis of OOs. After treatment, hip pain decreased but did not disappear, actually recurring a few months after treatment. Thus, the patient underwent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which showed a smaller lesion (5 mm), along the posterior column of the acetabulum, with imaging features consistent with OO and associated to bone marrow oedema. This finding was was overlooked on the previous CT examination . Biopsy yielded a diagnosis of OO, which was treated using RFA with disappearance of symptoms . Thus, based on the occurrence of two OOs in different part of the same bone and in different bones, a diagnosis of multicentric and multifocal OO was reached. Nevertheless, after 18 months, the patient experienced pain recurrence with the same clinical features as before. Thus, he underwent MRI and CT showing OO recurrence on the posterior column of the acetabulum . The lesion was biopsied and successfully re-treated with RFA . Biopsy and pathologic examination yielded again a diagnosis of OO. At present, at 8-month follow-up, the patient is still asymptomatic.