A 37-year-old never-smoker woman was referred to our Unit in May 2018 after the diagnosis of a stage IIIB (cT3 cN2 according to Tumor-node-metastasis (TNM), VIII edition) adenocarcinoma of the left lung. The patient had no comorbidities, her performance status (PS) was 0 according to Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG), and she had no family history of cancer. After our institutional multidisciplinary discussion, the patient underwent neoadjuvant chemotherapy with carboplatin area under the curve (AUC) 2 and paclitaxel at 50 mg/sm with concurrent radiotherapy of the left lung (64 Gy in 32 fractions) and subsequent lobectomy of the left upper lobe, with final diagnosis of adenocarcinoma ypT1b N2, EGFR and ALK wild type, and Programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) (tumor proportion score) of 60%. In June 2019, during follow-up, multiple nodules of the thoracic wall, pleural nodes, and pleural effusion were detected; a liquid biopsy was performed, excluding the presence of EGFR mutations. Afterward, the patient started a treatment with cisplatin at 75 mg/sm and pemetrexed at 500 mg/sm for four cycles, followed by pemetrexed maintenance, with partial response of disease. In February 2021, a volumetric increase of the pleural nodes and effusion was detected at the radiological examination. Thus, the patient underwent thoracoscopy with rebiopsy of the pleural nodes, confirming the presence of adenocarcinoma metastasis; no alterations of EGFR, ALK, or ROS1 were detected. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) extended to other molecular target was not performed because of insufficient material. From April to July 2021, the patient was treated with pembrolizumab at 200 mg, achieving a disease progression in lymph nodes and pleural nodes. Subsequently, the patient underwent a third-line chemotherapy with gemcitabine at 1000 mg/sm. During the treatment, the patient referred the appearance of palpatory nodules of the left breast; she underwent a biopsy of the breast nodules in December 2021 with confirmation of lung adenocarcinoma metastasis. Because of the progressive disease, a FoundationOne panel of NGS analysis of the tissue was performed, and a RET fusion (KIF5B-RET) was detected. The patient was asymptomatic and in good clinical conditions (PS ECOG 0). In January 2022, a treatment with selpercatinib at 160 mg bis in die (BID) was started. Selpercatinib was initially administered in class C not negotiated, until its approval by the AIFA for national health system reimbursement. The patient underwent partial response of disease at the first radiological assessment . Detailed timeline of treatments administered is depicted in .
Starting from June 2022, the patient referred abdominal pain of G1 with worsening to G2 in September 2022, associated with nausea of G2, bilious vomiting of up to G3, and weight loss of G1. At physical examination, no abnormal abdominal findings were observed. Because of the weight loss with a resulting weight of less than 50 kg, selpercatinib dose was adapted to 120 mg BID. The subsequent computed tomography (CT) scan documented the presence of important bowel wall thickening, free ascitic fluid, mesenteric congestion, and stranding . No increased in number or size of mesenteric lymph nodes was detected. To better understand the gastrointestinal symptoms of the patient and to exclude the presence of disease progression in small bowel, an anterograde enteroscopy extended to jejunum with multiple biopsies was performed. At the final histology report, a type 1 (according to Marsh modified classification) lymphocytic duodenitis with sub-mucosal edema was diagnosed; in particular, an increased number of intraepithelial lymphocytes T CD3+ and CD8+ were found in the mucosa of duodenum and jejunum .
Suspecting gastrointestinal toxicity due to selpercatinib, the treatment was temporary interrupted. The patient underwent complete resolution of bilious vomiting and nausea after 2 days and abdominal pain after 15 days; 3 days later, selpercatinib was re-administered at first level reduction dose of 80 mg BID. No recurrence of gastrointestinal AEs was referred by the patient after 120 days from the resume of treatment.
At the CT scan performed after 4 months, the patient had complete resolution of the bowel wall thickening, free ascitic fluid, mesenteric congestion, and stranding previously observed .
This case has been reported to the Italian pharmacovigilance system with the code RNF 909925.