A 25-year-old unmarried man with a college degree who worked as a graphic designer was referred and admitted to the inpatient ward for a chief complaint of “alternative episodes of the lowering and elevation mood for 10 years, overdosage use of zolpidem for two years.”
The patient had a history of psychiatric diseases. Eleven years prior to admission, after experiencing sadness, low energy, hopelessness, and insomnia for half a year, he was diagnosed with depressive disorder in a local hospital. The patient was treated with 20 mg of fluoxetine per day and 10 mg of zolpidem every night. Depression and insomnia were gradually alleviated in 1 year. He reported that he had taken the same drugs and dosage for another 6 years, but symptoms fluctuated during this time. Seven years prior to admission, at the beginning of college, he experienced an episode of elevated mood characterized by the feeling of being in a good condition, increased ability, and high energy levels, and he remained busy for a long time. Five years prior to admission, during the third year of college, when he experienced stress regarding his studies and problems in a closed relationship, he experienced another depressive episode characterized by sadness, loss of interest, low energy, hopelessness, and insomnia for half a year. During this episode, he continued to take the same drugs as those he was first prescribed. When the condition gradually improved, he stopped taking zolpidem and fluoxetine. Four years prior to admission, during the fourth year of college, he experienced a second episode of elevated mood characterized by the feeling of increased energy levels and ability and increased interest and participation in many activities. This period of elevated mood lasted for nearly one and a half years, during which he had driven 20,000 km to travel around the United States. He denied taking drugs during this episode. Two years prior to admission, when he began his first job as a graphic designer, another depressive episode characterized by sadness, loss of interest, low energy, hopelessness, and insomnia started. He reported that he felt similarly to how he felt during the episode 11 years ago. He resumed taking zolpidem 10 mg per night and fluoxetine 20 mg per day. Sometimes he took another 10 mg of zolpidem on his own for a better hypnotic effect. Five months before visiting, his work got busier and his stress levels increased, and he found that taking zolpidem could make him feel relaxed. Thus, the patient took additional zolpidem before bedtime until he relaxed. In total, he took a maximum of 80 mg of zolpidem once or twice weekly, with an average of 30 mg every night. His family members observed that he performed some abnormal and dangerous behaviors after taking an overdose of zolpidem at night, including cheerfulness, talkativeness, frequent movement, excessive eating, and dangerous driving behaviors associated with several traffic accidents. To prevent similar dangerous behaviors and improve sleep and mood, his father brought him to the hospital for help. To improve the possibility of successful drug withdrawal for a patient with comorbid bipolar disorder, insomnia, and long-term zolpidem dependence who repeatedly performed high-risk behaviors and had a higher possibility of severe withdrawal reactions once the drug was stopped, the patient was hospitalized in the psychiatric inpatient ward in the West China Hospital of Sichuan University.
In addition, he had a history of alcohol abuse and cigarette smoking, but he reported that he had given up alcohol and smoking 4 years prior to admission. He admitted that he occasionally used marijuana and nitrous oxide during college, but he denied any use of those drugs for at least 1 year, which was confirmed by his father. He also denied any recent use of alcohol and other sedative-hypnotic drugs, which was confirmed by his father. He had no family history of mental illness.
On admission, the patient was 176 cm tall and 86 kg in weight, and his vital signs were in the normal range. Physical and neurological examinations revealed no notable abnormalities. ECG, electroencephalogram (EEG), chest CT, and brain MRI yielded normal findings. Laboratory tests revealed alanine aminotransferase levels of 62 IU/L, aspartate aminotransferase levels of 30 IU/L, creatinine levels of 65 μmol/L, and an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) of 128.54 ml/min/1.73 m2. The complete blood count (CBC), electrolyte levels, cortisol levels, adrenotropin levels, and thyroid function were in the normal range. The blood concentration of lithium carbonate was 0.055 mmol/L on the seventh day.
According to the 10th revision of the International Classification of Diseases (ICD-10), he was diagnosed with “Harmful use of sedative or hypnotic drugs; bipolar affective disorder, current episode moderate depressive.” The treatment strategies used for zolpidem withdrawal followed the protocols used in previous case reports (, , –, –, , ). The treatment for comorbid bipolar disorder followed the guidelines for the management of bipolar disorder .
After zolpidem cessation, a series of symptoms appeared gradually during hospitalization. Zolpidem use was terminated the first night, and the patient described obvious rebound insomnia, influenza-like symptoms (manifested as distension of the head, swelling of eyes, and muscle soreness), anxiety symptoms (manifested as muscle tension and muscle tremors) accompanied by strong craving. He was treated with clonazepam (1 mg every night), lithium carbonate (250 mg twice daily), and quetiapine (100 mg every night). On the third day, rebound insomnia became serious, and he could not sleep until 4:00 a.m. Influenza-like symptoms and anxiety symptoms (manifested as pounding heart, irritability, tension, and muscle tremors) persisted during each attack. The attacks lasted for approximately 20 min from onset to symptom relief. The clonazepam dosage was increased to 2 mg per night, and the lithium carbonate dosage was increased to 250 mg three times daily. On the fifth day, skin paresthesia (manifested as numbness and tingling sensations, chills and heat sensations, and biting and formication in bones) appeared and worsened in the following days. The possibility of skin paresthesia that may be caused by quetiapine was considered. This drug was replaced with 2.5 mg olanzapine every night. On the sixth day, he experienced typical influenza-like symptoms, such as lacrimation, rhinorrhea, drooling, nausea, and emesis. The duration of each attack increased to more than 30 min from onset to relief. On the eighth to tenth days, the symptoms of some attacks appeared in the following order: first, anxiety symptoms; then, a mixture of skin paresthesias and influenza-like symptoms; then, loss of consciousness, staring, limb jerking, and twitching that lasted approximately 2 min; then, hallucination and urinary incontinence followed the relief of limb twitching and return to consciousness. The patient drew what he saw after symptom relief. The symptoms of loss of consciousness, staring, limb jerking, twitching that lasted for 2 min, and urinary incontinence were considered to be the onset of tonic-clonic-type seizures. However, the EEG was not obtained during the attack. Similar tonic-clonic-type seizures occurred on average once a day during this stage. Craving was also readily reported during this stage. The duration from the onset of anxiety symptoms to the relief of tonic-clonic-type seizures and subsequent urinary incontinence and hallucination lasted not more than 40 min. Tonic-clonic-type seizures were considered one of the withdrawal symptoms, and diazepam was prepared as necessary. He was given 5 mg olanzapine in total to control the hallucinations. On the 12th day, the occurrence of tonic-clonic-type seizures, hallucinations, and cravings decreased. The duration of each symptomatic attack from onset to relief was reduced to approximately 10 min. After 12 days of hospitalization, only the anxiety symptoms (manifested as palpitations and worry) and skin paresthesia (manifested as tingling and formication) appeared occasionally. The duration of each symptomatic attack was reduced to no more than 5 min. Propranolol (10 mg three times daily) was added to the regimen to relieve palpitations. On the 14th day, most of the withdrawal symptoms were relieved except anxiety. The patient was discharged after 15 days. The details of the symptom changes over time are shown in , and the drug treatment plan is shown in .
After discharge, the patient was followed up in the outpatient department. Three months after discharge, the lithium carbonate dosage was reduced to 250 mg three times daily, the clonazepam dosage was 1 mg every night, and the olanzapine and propranolol dosages were not changed. In the fourth month after discharge, he experienced several anxiety attacks characterized by nervousness, sweating, and trembling that lasted approximately 10 min with spontaneous remission. There were no anxiety attacks reported in the fifth month of follow-up. The olanzapine, propranolol, and clonazepam dosages were reduced gradually. He did not report any skin paresthesia, seizure, or hallucination after discharge. He was sleepless and anxious occasionally, but he could cope with it, and he never took zolpidem again. Finally, 12 months after discharge, he took 250 mg of lithium carbonate twice daily and 0.25 mg of clonazepam every night. He reported that his life and work were normal. This finding confirms that the chronological symptoms observed during hospitalization were most likely caused by zolpidem withdrawal.