A 75 year old female patient with breast cancer was admitted to our hospital for surgical treatment. Her preoperative staging workup with an abdominal ultrasound, revealed a heterogeneous solid lesion of the left adrenal gland. Clinical examination and laboratory tests, including adrenal hormonal levels (plasma renin 7,40 pg/ml, plasma aldosterone 12,7 ng/dl, plasma adrenaline 27 pg/ml, plasma noradrenaline 243 pg/ml, 24 h urine metanephrine excretion 169 μg/24 h), were normal. Abdominal CT scan showed a well-defined, heterogeneous, retroperitoneal mass with speckled calcifications that measured 8 cm and was located on the left adrenal gland. After bolus IV injection of contrast medium the tumor showed irregular enhancement. On subsequent MRI, the tumor demonstrated hyperintensity on both T1- and T2-weighted images with fat component and irregular peripheral enhancement . Malignancy could not be excluded due to the non-specific radiological features, therefore surgical resection was mandatory.
During the same operation, the patient underwent a left adrenalectomy through a left subcostal incision followed by modified radical left mastectomy. Her postoperative course was uneventful and she was discharged five days later.
On gross examination, the adrenal tumor appeared as a red tan mass measuring 8 cm × 6 cm × 4 cm. Focal red-purple hemorrhagic and cystic areas were present, along with diffuse calcifications. Normal adrenal gland parenchyma was noted on the surface of the mass .
Microscopically, dilated, blood filled vascular spaces were observed. The spaces were lined by a single layer of thin endothelial cells with collagenous walls . Interestingly, areas of extramedullar hemopoiesis were also seen .
The histological diagnosis was that of an adrenal cavernous hemangioma with coexistence of extramedullar hemopoiesis and no signs of malignancy.
The pathology report on the breast specimen showed a grade II infiltrating tubular adenocarcinoma, measuring 5 cm in greatest diameter. None of the 13 excised lymph nodes had signs of malignancy.