A 79-year-old male patient was referred to our hospital for radical treatment of organ-confined prostate cancer. The initial prostate-specific antigen (PSA) was 10.5 ng/mL, cT2aN0M0, Gleason score 3 + 4 = 7. He had a history of hemorrhoid surgery, but did not have an anal stenosis, defecation problems, and cardiovascular diseases. And he was not taking any medication. We planned LDR brachytherapy combined with 6 months of androgen deprivation therapy (ADT). After 3 months of neoadjuvant ADT, LDR brachytherapy was performed and 10 mL of hydrogel spacer was properly injected between the prostate and the rectum and outside the rectal serosa , causing no acute complications during hospitalization. The prescribed radiation dose was 145 Gy and V100prostate (the percentage of the prostate volume receiving 100% of the prescribed dose) was 99.24%; however, V100rectum (the rectal volume receiving 100% of the prescribed dose) was 0.00 mL due to the spacer separating the rectum and the prostate by 11 mm .
Two months after the LDR brachytherapy, the patient visited our hospital with constipation and melena, without fever. Constipation lasted for 2 weeks before the visit but did not improve with laxatives. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography indicated suspicious proctitis, and colonoscopy was performed for a definitive diagnosis . Colonoscopy revealed some localized longitudinal rectal ulcers, without the point of hemorrhage .
The stool culture upon hospitalization showed positive for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli, and C-reactive protein was high at 10.57 mg/dL and the serum procalcitonin was low at 0.06 ng/mL, excluding infectious disease as a diagnosis. We finally diagnosed him as IP based on clinical courses and examinations.
He was hospitalized and treated conservatively with fasting, and cefmetazole was administered to prevent secondary infection. Endoscopy was performed again 2 weeks after hospitalization, which revealed ulcer improvement . The histopathological findings of rectal biopsy indicated active ulcer with necrotic tissue and negative for malignancy. The length of fasting, antimicrobial agent administration, and hospitalization were 8 days, 10 days, and 19 days, respectively. The PSA level at the second hospitalization was below sensitivity, indicating a well-controlled prostate cancer.