A 77-year-old man came to the emergency department with complaints of a 1-day history of abdominal pain and abdominal distension.
His family history about gastrointestinal disorder was non-specific. His past-medical history including non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) medication was non-specific.
The initial blood pressure was 160/70 mmHg, heart rate was 86/min, respiratory rate was 20/min, and body temperature was 36.9 °C at admission. Initial laboratory findings revealed slight elevation of leucocytes and hemoglobin at 11.9 g/dL.
The bowel sounds were silent. Physical examination revealed tenderness in the periumbilical area with rebound tenderness and guarding.
Abdominal computed tomography revealed ileus with edematous small bowel loops, mild ascites, non-specific mass lesions, and focal free air in the right upper quadrant .
The results led us to consider peritonitis due to small bowel perforation. The surgical procedure was indicated and emergency exploration was performed thereafter.
Laparotomy revealed multiple small bowel tiny perforations in the ileum. The perforation sites were in the form of very small holes and measured about 0.1 ~ 0.2 cm in size. Interestingly, all the perforation sites were located in the mesenteric border in the small bowel .
The serosa surface in the entire small bowel had small multiple yellowish tiny discolored lesions near the mesenteric border in the small bowel .
These discolored lesions in the resected bowel and both proximal and distal remnant bowel were equal to luminal ulcer locations in the inner surface. Serosal discolored tiny oval-shaped lesions from Treitz ligament to ileocecal valve were considered as luminal ulcers.
About 78 cm of the ileum including perforation site was resected.
However, remnant small bowel had multiple small ulcers in the mesenteric border.
The longitudinally cut surface of the resected small bowel revealed the presence of friable mucosa, and multiple tiny ulcers .
Despite the presence of multiple mucosal ulcers in small bowel including proximal and distal small bowel, we should aim to preserve small bowel with ulcer considering postoperative short bowel syndrome, old age, and poor general status. Primary end-to end stapled anastomosis of proximal and distal small bowel was performed.
Microscopically, mucosal ulcers in resected small bowel demonstrated transmural inflammation, no granuloma, and no lymphoid aggregates.. Fibrosis or fat wrapping was not seen. The ulcers were oval-shaped with varying depths. Deep ulcers reached the serosa and formed transmural perforation without granuloma.
The grossly small bowel ulcers and histologic features were consistent with a diagnosis of ICUE with panenteritis and perforation.
After surgery, the patient’s course was uneventful until postoperative day 4. However, on day 5, intermittent hematochezia, melena, and greenish diarrhea developed repeatedly without hemodynamic instability. Blood transfusion, fluid infusion, and intravenous administration of coagulant were performed.
Despite these conservative treatments, the patient’s general condition gradually aggravated due to recurrent hematochezia and poor nutritional status. Unfortunately, the patient died of multiple organ failure on post-operative day 14.