A 49-year-old man was admitted to the hospital with ongoing diarrhea in December 2018. The patient underwent colonoscopy and then a biopsy was taken from colon tissue. Endoscopic results showed that a polypoid lesion(1.5×2CM) was observed 6 cm from the anal verge and a cauliflower-like mass with a crisp texture and easy bleeding was observed 18 cm from the anal verge. The pathological examination of the specimen demonstrated moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma in the sigmoid colon and tubulovillous adenocarcinoma with high-grade intraepithelial neoplasia in the rectum. According to abdominal plain computed tomography (CT) scans, there are multiple round low-density shadows with unclear boundaries within the liver parenchyma. Contrast-enhanced CT scans showed that the enhancement degree of lesions in the arterial phase was similar to that of adjacent liver parenchyma, whereas the enhancement degree of lesions in the venous phase and portal phase was lower than that of the liver parenchyma. Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with colorectal cancer with liver metastases. Previously, he had grade 2 hypertension and there was no similar patient in his family. After a comprehensive evaluation, the rectal cancer resection (Dixon surgery) and colostomy were performed and postoperative pathological examination revealed moderately differentiated colorectal adenocarcinoma (pT4bN2M1 stage IVc) . According to the results of the molecular pathological examination, mutated KRAS (condon12/13 mutation in exon 2) was found. The tumor microenvironment (TME) of the patient was MSS.
From two weeks after the operation, the patient received four cycles of chemotherapy with XELOX (oxaliplatin 130mg/m2and capecitabine1000mg/m2) every three weeks. Re-examination of MRI suggested that the liver was slightly enlarged with multiple nodules. Besides, the blood routine test indicated that red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets all decreased and myelosuppression caused by chemotherapy was considered. Due to the increase in tumor indexes, the regimen was adjusted to XELOX plus bevacizumab (5mg/Kg) in March 2019 for a total of three cycles. Re-examination of CT showed that the intrahepatic metastases were smaller than before. But unfortunately, multiple small nodules could be observed in the lungs. According to the imaging findings and patient history, we considered it as multiple metastases in the lungs. One month after the operation, a para-stomal hernia was found in the patient, but after conservative treatment, the posterior hernia sac gradually enlarged, and more mesentery entered the abdominal wall through the fistula to form a fistula hernia. Obvious expansion and effusion could be found in the intestinal canal, stomach lumen and esophagus, and there were multiple gas-liquid planes, so intestinal obstruction was considered. In October 2019, the patient underwent para-stomal hernia repair, sigmoidostomy repair and ileostomy, and peritoneal nodules biopsy was performed at the same time. Postoperative pathology showed metastatic adenomas in the right umbilical fold ligament, left iliac fossa and pelvic. According to the results of chemotherapy and clinical manifestations, we believed that the patient was not tolerant to oxaliplatin, so we decided to change the chemotherapy regimen instead of XELOX.
The molecular typing of the patient was UGT1A1 (+). Because irinotecan was effective in the patients with UGT1A1 positive, we replaced the chemotherapy regimen with FORFIRI (irinotecan 200mg/m2, calcium folinate 100mg/m2 and 5-fluorouracil 400mg/m2) and bevacizumab(5mg/Kg) for 12 cycles from October 2019 to December 2020. In the course of this chemotherapy, the patients were resistant to chemotherapeutic drugs and few adverse reactions happened. The re-examination of CT showed that the size and number of bilateral pulmonary nodules were the same as before. Unfortunately, the low-density shadows within the liver increased and enlarged. In December 2020, the result of PET-CT suggested that the tumor at the anastomotic recurred with multiple metastases.
Combined with the pathological stage and the wishes of the family, We gave the patient palliative treatment. According to the CSCO guidelines, we chose to use nivolumab plus regorafenib as the third-line chemotherapy drug for this patient. After treatment with nivolumab, the effect was better, and the CEA value decreased gradually. So far, the patient underwent 2 operations and 28 times of chemotherapy .
After the 28th chemotherapy, the patient came to the ophthalmology clinic of our hospital because of photophobia and tearing in both eyes with decreased vision. The patient was admitted for further evaluation, and a retrospective history revealed that on the fourth day after the completion of the fourth course of nivolumab plus regorafenib, the patient developed photophobia, tearing, and increased white secretions in both eyes. Besides, the patient had significant visual impairment: Vod:0.3(corrected:0.4), Vos:0.5, IOP of the right eye: 16mmHg, IOP of the left eye: 17mmHg.The anterior chamber of both eyes had normal depth and clear aqueous humor. Slit-lamp examination and anterior segment photography showed evident ulceration in both eyes, and fluorescent(FL) showed lamellar corneal epithelial staining and a positive seidel test . Combined with other examination results, this patient was diagnosed with corneal ulceration in both eyes and admitted to the ophthalmology ward. Considering that the patient still needed to treat colon cancer, he was transferred back to the general surgical ward.
Then we diagnosed the cause of corneal ulceration. First of all, since infectious keratitis is one of the most common causes of corneal ulceration, we gave priority to judging whether the patient had infectious keratitis. Corneal scraping samples in both eyes were taken for microbiological examination, such as Gram staining, bacterial culture and fungal culture, and the results were all negative. In addition, the symptoms of the patients were not significantly improved after empirical anti-infective treatment.
During the treatment, the patient self-reported dry mouth, joint pains and low tear secretion, SchirmerI = 0mm/5min. Quantitative autoantibody testing was performed on this patient after consultation with a rheumatology specialist. All the test reports were negative, and the quantitative results were far less than the reference values.
Next, we ruled out the possibility of neurotrophic keratitis. The patient received symptomatic treatment, including neurotrophic treatment, repair promotion, and anti-infective treatment. However, the effect was not evident after the use of artificial tears, Diquafosol Sodium Eye Drops, Recombinant Bovine Basic Fibroblast Growth Factor Eye Gel and Eye Drops, and Levofloxacin Eye Drops.
Therefore, we highly suspected that the cause of the corneal ulceration of this patient was the immune-related adverse reactions of the PD-1 monoclonal antibody. Based on the previous medication, glucocorticoids and autologous serum were used as a diagnostic treatment, which achieved a good effect. Due to adverse ocular reactions, we temporarily suspended chemotherapy for this patient. One month later, the re-examination showed that the eye condition of the patient recovered well, so the fifth cycle of chemotherapy with nivolumab and regorafenib. However, after the chemotherapy, the patient’s ocular symptoms were significantly aggravated (VOD: 0.075, VOS: 0.0125), and the anterior chambers of both eyes disappeared. The slit-lamp examination and photography of the anterior eye segment showed ulceration in both eyes, and the seidel test was positive. In-vivo histology of the cornea suggested that the patient developed corneal ulceration with perforation . After excluding the relevant surgical contraindications, the surgery was performed: the patient underwent multi-layered amniotic membrane filling in the left eye, and multi-layered amniotic membrane filling, anterior chamber paracentesis as well as peripheral iridectomy in the right eye. There was continuous use of Tobramycin and Dexamethasone Eye Drop postoperatively. The postoperative re-examination revealed the eutopic AM, the transparent remaining cornea, FL (–), and keratic precipitate (–) in both eyes. Because of severe corneal ulceration after re-administration of nivolumab, we believed that nivolumab was responsible for the patient’s immune-related keratitis.