A 25-year-old woman, suffered a car accident, without a safety belt. She was initially managed in a trauma center. The initial examination revealed bilateral lower limbs amputations, left femoral shaft fracture, left pneumothorax of 30% associated with massive pulmonary contusion , scalp wound, C4, C5, left ulna, and right clavicle fractures. She underwent surgery for right supracondylar and left transtibial lower limb amputation. The left femoral shaft fracture was stabilized with an external fixator .
During the postoperative care she developed catastrophic pulmonary failure, with a poor response to prone and high-frequency oscillatory ventilation. Due to this scenario she was transferred to our institution on Veno-Venous ECMO (cannulated in the referral hospital).
She developed an infectious focus on both lower limb stumps (Pseudomona aeruginosa and Proteus mirabilis). Antibiotic treatment was started with Ceftazidime, Tobramycin, and Linezolid. Hemodynamics remained stable. Stumps were managed with surgical debridement, improving skin coverage using Vacuum-Assisted Closure (VAC) system.
The only definitive treatment for her critical condition to eradicate the cutaneous focus necessitated removing the infected pins. As a multidisciplinary team we decided to perform a definitive osteosynthesis with an antegrade centromedular femoral nail (Smith & Nephew Tan®) whilst under ECMO . Anesthesia was based on intravenous drugs as the transfer of volatile anesthetics via ECMO oxygenators is severely limited. Hemodynamic stability was maintained with transfusion (RBC 2 U) and crystalloids. The internal transport of ECMO patients is a routine procedure, as these patients usually need imaging studies or surgical procedures. During surgery the anticoagulation was set to a Partial Thromboplastin Time (PTT) of 45 s, with heparin inflow between 10 and 15 U/kg/h. Tranexamic acid was used during surgery at a 15 mg/kg dose. Two days postoperatively she develops an acute 8% hematocrit fall, receiving two red blood cell units and five cryoprecipitated units. After transfusion hemodynamics was stable without evidence of active bleeding.
The patient recovered well with improving her gasometrics and respiratory condition. The surgical wounds did not develop any complications, and some small hematomas resolved without active management. Surgery was performed on day 15 under ECMO, and the ECMO was used for a total of 22 days. On the seventh day postoperative the ECMO was discontinued and the patient was returned to her hospital to continue rehabilitation. At 16 months, she is almost recovered, and full fracture healing was achieved, with no complication of the implants.