A never-smoker 81-year-old man, with history of nonischemic heart disease, benign prostatic hyperplasia, and dyslipidemia, presented with dyschromic chest and abdomen skin lesions. In October 2022, a computed tomography (CT) scan revealed thickening in the retrohilar and paramediastinal regions of the lower right lobe, bilateral pleural effusion, carcinomatous lymphangitis, axillary, mediastinal, and retroperitoneal lymphadenopathies, and a solid pancreatic lesion with infiltration of the spleen and left adrenal gland.
At baseline, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status was 2, requiring continuous oxygen therapy. Physical examination results revealed dyschromic macules on the chest and right shoulder. A biopsy of the skin lesions was performed with the evidence of an enteric-pattern adenocarcinoma. Immunohistochemistry results revealed a strong positive staining for CK20, CDX2, CK7, and villin, with TTF1-negative staining (—lower panel). On the basis of immunohistochemical profile, a gastroscopy and a colonoscopy were performed, both of which reported negative results. A comprehensive molecular profiling using next-generation sequencing was performed, revealing the presence of BRAF p.V600E (rs113488022; variant allele frequency: 15%) and CTNNB1 S45F (rs121913409; variant allele frequency: 15%) mutations.
In November 2022, the patient initiated targeted therapy with dabrafenib (200 mg/d) and trametinib (1.5 mg/d) (—upper panel). At the first follow-up, after 3 weeks of treatment, there was an objective reduction of the skin lesions on the chest and abdomen. The patient experienced only G2 rash as a side effect. The clinical conditions gradually improved, without oxygen therapy. After approximately 3 months of treatment, a reevaluation CT scan revealed reduction in size of all known disease sites, with the complete resolution of the skin lesions, confirmed by a subsequent biopsy that resulted negative for cancer cells (—upper panel).
Nevertheless, at the restaging, approximately 6 months after the initiation of treatment, the CT scan revealed a multisite disease progression, along with the onset of novel skin lesions in the chest, but Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status remained stable. Consequently, considering overall clinical condition, age, and patient and family wishes, he was addressed to best supportive care. The patient died in August 2023.