A 35-year-old Chinese woman presented to the Emergency Department (ED) after a fall 12 hours previously and with an inability to move her left limbs since then. She complained of feeling pain and numbness in her arms for the past month, as well as progressive weakness in her legs. She had never been pregnant, had no significant past medical or surgical history, nor was she on any medications such as oral contraceptive pills. There was no family history of early onset cerebral vascular accident. She denied the use of alcohol, tobacco products or recreational drugs. On physical examination, she was conscious and irritable, her heart rate was 88 beats per minute (bpm), blood pressure (BP) was recorded as 140/90mmHg upon ED presentation. She had no fever or respiratory distress. She was unable to open her right eye and had a right-sided preferred gaze with slight right-sided facial droop. There was obvious left-sided hemiparesis with a positive Babinski sign, and the skin of her left side felt cold. The radial pulse was weak on both sides. The rest of her neurological, systemic, and general physical examinations was unremarkable.
Her laboratory test results showed white blood cells (WBCs) of 13.9x109/L, hemoglobin (Hb) of 70.2g/L, and platelets (PLTs) of 288x109/L. Her basic metabolic panel was unremarkable. Her coagulation test was only significant for elevated D-dimer of 1.08mg/L, which subsequently dropped to 0.96mg/L on the third day of her hospital stay, with partial thromboplastin time (PT) and activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) both within normal limits. The lipid panel showed slightly elevated cholesterol of 5.83mmol/L (2.85 to 5.2mmol/L), triglyceride of 1.79mmol/l (0.5 to 1.7mmol/L) and lipoprotein A of 373 (0 to 300). Her inflammatory biomarkers such as C-reactive protein (CRP) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) were both elevated, with 26.0mg/L (0 to 8.0mmol/L) and 25mm/h (0 to 20mm/h) respectively. Rapid plasma reagin (RPR)/treponema pallidum particle agglutination (TPPA) tests were negative. Autoantibody tests showed positive for antinuclear antibody only, with a titer of 1:100, while the antiphosphlipid antibody test was negative. Her blood glucose, liver and renal functions were all normal. Her electrocardiogram (EKG) and transthoracic echocardiogram were both negative. A cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan showed acute ischemic infarction of the area supplied by the right middle cerebral artery , which was proven to be occluded by later cerebral computed tomographic angiography (CTA) . Thoracic and abdominal CTA was negative . A Doppler sonogram of the vessels in the neck, upper and lower limbs was unable to find both axillary arteries or the left subclavian artery. It did show decreased blood flow in the arteries of her right arm, with a narrowed right subclavian artery. The arteries distal to the brachial artery were visible on both sides, with a greater blood flow on the left. Subsequent digital subtraction angiography (DSA) confirmed the incomplete occlusion of her right subclavian artery and narrowing of her right internal carotid artery .
The diagnosis of Takayasu arteritis type I was made according to the revised Ishikawa diagnostic criteria and the angiographic classification of Takayasu arteritis put forward at the Takayasu Conference 1994 . Subsequently, the recommended treatment of methylprednisolone was started with an initial dose of 40mg per day. As the antinuclear antibody test was positive, autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) could not be excluded, which in the light of the existing thrombosis, could be related to a hypercoagulation state. Thus a small dose of low-molecular-weight heprin (LMWH) was started along with the steroid.
Twenty days after admission, the clinical condition of the patient was stable, and she was subsequently discharged.