A 12-year-old female had been bedridden for the past 2 months due to low back pain; however, her neurological examination was normal. X-rays revealed a lumbar spine deformity characterized by L2-L4 vertebral lysis [ and ]. The MR also showed a significant T2 hyperintensity both anteriorly and posteriorly within these three vertebrae, and “spot lesions” in the clivus, ilium, and T4 vertebra. In addition, the CT/myelo-CT demonstrated dilated cysts within the L2-L4 posterior elements [-]. Notably, the hematological work-up was negative.
She underwent a percutaneous vertebral biopsy twice that proved inconclusive. An open biopsy finally confirmed the diagnosis of GSD. A spinopelvic fusion was performed from T5 to T12 through the L5/S2 levels using anchors to the pelvis and S2 alar/iliac screws (i.e., supplemented with a four-rod cobalt chrome construct and cross-links) [-]. Posterior bone grafting included corticocancellous bone chips and her father’s posterior iliac crest graft (i.e., after major human leukocyte antigen [HLA] compatibility was demonstrated). The postoperative course was uneventful and she was neurologically normal within 2 postoperative months.
The open biopsy confirmed the classical findings of GSD that included lymphatic and vascular tissue in the bone with multiple dilated sinusoids, hemorrhagic changes, mononuclear/lymphocytic infiltration, fibrous tissue, and dead bone. In addition, the fluid aspirate showed chyle-like fluid. Further, the D2–40 immunohistochemistry was positive.
Adjunctive postoperative medical management included the administration of calcium, Vitamin D supplementation, the “off-label” use of calcitonin nasal spray for 2 months, teriparatide injections (20 units/day) for 6 months, yearly zoledronic therapy (4 mg infusion, after 2 months), and sirolimus therapy (1 mg twice a day with blood levels monitoring introduced at 3 postoperative months by the nephrologists).
Four years postoperatively, she continues to demonstrate no disease progression and is ambulatory. She stopped sirolimus after 3 postoperative years but has continued oral bisphosphonates. Both the CT and MR studies continue to confirm remission of GSD; the CT scan shows bony bridging/ fusion/stability, while the MRI demonstrates no new vertebral bony reformation [-]. Quality of life was assessed by Musculoskeletal Tumor Society Score at 30.