A 57-year-old male patient presented to our Ear, Nose and Throat (ENT) clinic with the chief complaint of anosmia and 2-years history of bilateral nasal obstruction which was reportedly worse on the right side, and was associated with non-specific moderate headache. There was no history of epistaxis, rhinorrhea, recurrent sinusitis, or any neurological complaints. He is a non-smoker. The patient's past medical history was only significant for Type 2 diabetes, controlled with oral medications. Previously he has had no surgeries and no history of any allergies.
ENT examination was unremarkable except for mild non obstructing deviated nasal septum to the right. Nasoendoscopy revealed a mass originating from the roof of the nasal cavity, bilaterally, overlying the olfactory epithelial mucosal surface; the surface of the mass was irregular. Due to nonavailability of the standardized smell testing (University of Pennsylvania Smell Identification Test) at our institution, we were unable to perform such specific testing. Therefore, we used nonirritating substances like grounded coffee, vanilla, and lemon, which stimulate only the olfactory nerve, without causing irritation and stimulation of the trigeminal nerve, as a rudimentary means to test the patient's smell function. The patient was instructed to sniff separately from each nostril while blocking the other nostril, during this time the patient's eyes were kept closed. He couldn't identify the coffee bilaterally and anosmia was confirmed.
Routine laboratory investigations were within normal range. Computed Tomography (CT) scan of the nose and paranasal sinuses was carried out which showed bilateral well circumscribed homogenous soft tissue mass at the olfactory recess and polypoid mucosal thickening bilaterally in the maxillary sinuses that was obstructing and dilating the related osteomeatal complexes. The imaging also showed marked polypoid mucosal thickening of ethmoid air cells, sphenoid sinuses and nasal cavities. Also seen was rarefaction of the ethmoidal bony labyrinth and obstruction of the bilateral spheno-ethmoidal recesses as well as an S shaped nasal septum . The patient was started on topical nasal steroid spray and oral prednisolone; however, the symptoms persisted warranting further investigation of the olfactory mass. The mass was biopsied in the outpatient clinic under topical anesthesia as the mass was well clearly visualized, and was easily accessible with a 45°; the patient was cooperative as well. The histopathology result was inconclusive. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with contrast was ordered which revealed a bilateral olfactory recess expansive soft tissue pathology extending to the skull base with no intra-cranial extension, showing intermediate signal intensity on T1 and T2 and post contrast enhancement, which was suggestive of nasal roof mass lesion. These findings were suggestive of olfactory neuroblastoma. The case was discussed in the multidisciplinary team (MDT) meeting, and in view of the inconclusive biopsy report and worrisome radiological findings suggestive of olfactory neuroblastoma, it was unanimously decided to subject the patient to excision biopsy rather than a simple biopsy, under general anesthesia. Subsequently the patient underwent functional endoscopic sinus surgery (FESS) and excisional biopsy of the bilateral cribriform plate mass.
The procedure was performed under general anesthesia. Nasal endoscopy revealed a bilateral nasal roof mass at the superior part of the septum and lateral nasal wall, originating from the cribriform plate. The mass was excised from the cribriform plate by making an incision around it. The incision extended 1 cm from the mass to the lateral border of the superior septum and the lateral wall. Although the nasal septum was intact yet a superior septectomy was performed to facilitate en bloc resection of the mass, leaving the cribriform and lateral and medial walls as bare bone. In addition, bilateral FESS, for all four sinuses with removal of the nasal polyps and septoplasty was carried out. Postoperative period was uneventful. Histopathologic examination of the bilateral masses revealed Sinonasal type respiratory epithelium exhibiting submucosal edema, chronic inflammatory cell infiltrate and thickening of the basal layer. These findings are typically seen in cases of sinonasal polyposis; however, prominent crypting of surface mucosa with pseudoglandular formation isn't a typical feature of sinonasal polyps . A diagnosis of sinonasal polyps with REAH was thus rendered by a subspecialized Head and Neck pathologist.
The patient was followed up in the clinic with serial nasoendoscopy, his nasal obstruction improved gradually; however, he did not regain his sense of smell. The patient is under our follow up for more than two years, his nasal breathing is good, and there is no recurrence of sinusitis ± polyposis. The patient, however, continues to have anosmia. Overall, he is satisfied with his current health status with regards to the nasal disease and our intervention.