A 60-year-old Iranian woman presented to our hospital with pain and swelling in her right arm following a minor fall. Our initial physical examination revealed her to be in a good general condition. She was normotensive, with a pulse rate of 92 beats/minute. Her other laboratory values were as follows: body temperature 37°C, hemoglobin 12.2 g/dL, leukocytes 22 cells/mm3, platelets 200 U/L, sodium 141 mEq/L, potassium 4 mEq/L, glucose 11.6 mmol/L, blood urea nitrogen 15.1 mmol/L, and creatinine 250 mmol/L. A plain X-ray showed a pathologic fracture in the mid-shaft of her right humerus and a large, ill-defined soft tissue mass . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a huge lobulated mass destroying the shaft of the humerus and displacing the surrounding soft tissue. The mass was bright on serial T2-weighted MRI scans and dark on serial T1-weighted MRI scans, with marked enhancement after a gadolinium injection . Four years ago she had been treated for a sacrococcygeal chordoma with surgical resection and post-operative radiotherapy. A local tumor recurrence developed after one year and required additional surgical procedures. A histological examination of the biopsy from the humeral lesion showed a lobulated mass composed of cuboidal to polygonal cells with eccentric nuclei, clear to eosinophilic cytoplasm, and pools of extracellular mucin (arrow in Figure ). Typically, few tumor cells have a "physaliferous" (bubble-bearing) appearance. On the basis of these findings, we considered differential diagnoses such as myxoid chondrosarcoma, myxoid liposarcoma, primary mixed tumor of the bone, metastasizing pleomorphic adenoma of the salivary gland, metastatic renal cell carcinoma (RCC), or metastatic carcinoma with intra-cytoplasmic mucin from the colon or lung [,]. Most metastatic carcinomas have more of the cytological features of malignancy than chordomas do. The tumor cells stained positive for AE1/3 , ethidium monoazide (EMA), S100, and vimentin. Although both chordomas and chondrosarcomas stain with S100 protein, myxoid chondrosarcomas do not stain with keratin and EMA. Additional immunochemistry was performed for CD10, the results of which were negative in this case and usually expressed in RCC. Abdominal and pelvic ultrasonography and computed tomography (CT) of her chest and abdomen were normal. On the basis of this evidence and our review of the original histology following her previous chordoma excision (which was histologically identical to the humeral lesion), a diagnosis of metastatic chordoma was confirmed. She refused any active treatment.