A 42-year-old African man was referred to our institution from another country with a large scrotal tumor first noted five years prior to his presentation to our institution. The mass had grown slowly over the years, with ulceration associated with foul-smelling discharge noted with time, along with seepage of urine from multiple fistuli in the growing scrotal mass . He had been diagnosed with HIV, and ARV therapy had been started two years prior to the development of the scrotal mass. He also had the wasting syndrome, an AIDS-defining diagnosis. He had been unable to walk for three years prior to his visit to our institution. He had been married, but was separated from his wife upon developing the scrotal tumor.
The patient's physical examination revealed that he was emaciated. He had a large scrotal mass that extended laterally into both thighs, superiorly into the supra-pubic region and posteriorly to the anal verge. His hips had a fixed flexion and abduction deformity.
His hemoglobin was 7.4 g/dL, and his CD4 lymphocyte count was 150 cells/mm3. During surgery, the tumor was found to have extended laterally into the adductor musculature bi-laterally, requiring their inclusion in the excision. The deep margins included the rectus muscle fascia, pubis, pelvic diaphragm, and rectum . A small part of the bulbous urethra was excised with the tumor. The excised tumor weighed 1800 g and was reported on the basis of a histological examination to be a giant condyloma acuminatum.
A pedicled left anterolateral thigh flap was used to create a neo-scrotum as well as to cover the resulting thigh defects . Negative pressure therapy was used to exclude the surgical wounds from fecal matter as well as to assist in draining the extensive surgical field. The patient recovered and was discharged to home with a urinary (urethral) catheter.
One month after discharge from the hospital, his wounds were healed, except for a tiny wound in the suture line of his neo-scrotum. His catheter accidentally fell off, and he was noted to be leaking urine through the wound previously noted. A supra-pubic cystostomy was performed and a catheter was placed, and the perineal urine leak was noted to have stopped a few weeks later. Six months post-operatively, some tumor recurrence was noted and discussions of chemotherapy were held but were not implemented because of the potentially complex interaction between the chemotherapy, ARVs, and the patient's precarious physical status.