A 63-year-old man presented at our nephrologic outpatient clinic with progressive bilateral leg edema and foamy urine, which he had experienced for 1 month. He was hospitalized for alcoholic pancreatitis in 1999 but not regularly followed up by our hospital after discharge.
Physical examination of the patient revealed a blood pressure of 150/85 mmHg, blood temperature of 36.5 °C, and pulse rate of 78 beats/minute; the grading scale for pitting edema was 3+. The laboratory results were as follows: blood urea nitrogen, 26 mg/dL; serum creatinine, 1.8 mg/dL; albumin, 3.1 g/dL; hemoglobin, 12.4 g/dL and platelets, 212 × 103 / uL. Urinalysis revealed 2+ occult blood, 3+ protein, and 5-7 red blood cells/high power field; the 24-h protein excretion was 5.7 g/day. Serum immunoglobulin (Ig) and serum complement tests yielded high IgM (498 mg/dL), low C3 and IgG (73 and 688 mg/dL, respectively), and normal IgA and C4 levels. Serum and urine immunofixation electrophoresis showed a monoclonal IgM-bearing kappa light chain. The urinary Bence Jones protein was negative. The rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibody, cryoglobulin, and other autoantibodies were negative. Serum antibodies against HIV, hepatitis B and C were all negative. A bone marrow biopsy revealed hypocellularity with normal maturation of myeloid series, and less than 5 % of the cells had positive immunohistochemical staining of CD138/syndecan-1 plasma cells.
Renal sonography showed that both kidneys were enlarged. Chest and abdominal computerized tomography ruled out organomegaly and lymphadenopathy. A whole body bone X-ray revealed no lytic bone lesions.
Light microscopy of the renal biopsy revealed nodular segmental glomerulosclerosis with mesangial cell proliferation and mesangial matrix expansion in 9 of the 11 glomeruli; the other 2 glomeruli are global scleroses. In addition, focal segmental double-contoured capillary walls were observed, and mild tubular atrophy, interstitial fibrosis, and mononuclear cell infiltration were found . Congo red staining was negative.
We performed immunofluorescence studies, observing a strong positive staining for IgM with a diffuse, global, granular, and capillary pattern ; positive staining for IgG with a diffuse, granular, and mesangial pattern ; and positive staining for C3 with a diffuse, segmental, and granular pattern in the mesangium and along the capillary wall . Immunohistochemistry of the light chains revealed κ positive along the capillary wall. Electron microscopy showed podocyte foot process effacement and microvillus transformation. Electron-dense materials were deposited in the subendothelial area and limited intracapillary monoclonal deposits were observed . Irregular accumulations of randomly arranged nonbranching fibrils, approximately 15 nm in diameter, were found in the glomerular mesangium . These findings confirmed the diagnosis of FGN with membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis in nonmalignant IgM monoclonal gammopathy.
The patient was treated initially with diuretics, angiotensin receptor blockers, 0.5 mg/kg of prednisolone per day, and 1.5 mg/kg of cyclophosphamide per day. Because steroid-induced diabetes occurred, we halved the steroid dose within the first 3 months. After 6 months, serum creatinine levels were maintained at 1.8 mg/dL and the 24-h protein excretion decreased to 1.8 g/day. 1 year later, the patient experienced herpes zoster; therefore, we discontinued cyclophosphamide treatment. However, the patient progressed to stage 4 chronic kidney disease the second year after diagnosis and advanced to end-stage renal disease (ESRD) without dialysis the third year after diagnosis.