A 65-year-old male was referred to our institution for the second stage reconstruction of a chronic PJI of his left TKA. The patient owned and actively worked on a cattle ranch in Southern California. His past medical history included atrial fibrillation, gastroesophageal reflux disease, and a history of renal cell cancer that was successfully treated. He underwent primary left TKA in September 2016 for non-inflammatory gonarthrosis [-]. He had an uneventful recovery and returned to his ranch duties 3 months post-operatively. Six months post-operatively, he developed insidious onset pain, warmth and swelling in his left TKA. Suspicious for PJI, the patient underwent aspiration by his treating surgeon. His cultures were negative. He remained symptomatic with waxing and waning symptoms, but he still was able to perform ranch duties. Over a two-year period, he underwent multiple aspirations and evaluations that included tertiary care consultations, but his diagnosis remained elusive. Serum sedimentation rate and C reactive protein were elevated throughout this time. Comprehensive testing for autoimmune disease and for a neoplastic process were negative. Over the two years he lost 40 pounds.
In August 2018, (2 years post-operatively), Lactococcus garvieae was isolated from a knee aspiration culture. The positive culture was appraised as a contaminant, and antimicrobial therapy was not initiated. In April 2019, a left knee aspiration was performed in a consultation exam with additional analysis that included next generation microbial DNA sequencing. L. garvieae was identified on culture, and confirmed with next generation DNA analysis. The patient underwent a diagnostic arthroscopic synovial biopsy in June 2019. Preoperative radiographs are shown in -c. During this procedure, numerous (>600) 4-10 mm sized rice bodies were encountered and removed . Synovial biopsies and fluid culture were sent to a national reference laboratory, which identified one organism: L. garvieae. Subsequently, the patient underwent resection of his left TKA in July 2019 with placement of a Prostalac spacer (PROSThesis with Antibiotic Loaded Acrylic Cement). He was treated with IV ceftriaxone, and referred to our institution for continuation of care.
At the patient’s first visit at our center, 2 weeks post-operative, he reported feeling better. His undulating fevers, nighttime chills, and knee pain resolved. He presented weight-bearing as tolerated on his Prostalac implant (-), with his knee in a controlled motion brace. Knee range measured 0-75. The Prostalac implant was stable. Neurologic exam to his extremities was normal. There was chronic venous stasis swelling in the lower 2/3’s of each leg which was his baseline exam. There were palpable foot pulses in each leg.
The patient was monitored with serial exams and laboratory testing for inflammatory biomarkers. He was treated with 6 weeks of IV ceftriaxone, followed by an additional 4 weeks of oral ampicillin. His Prostalac implants remained stable [Figs. -]. After 4 weeks free of antibiotics, the patient had two serial knee aspirations with all samples sent for culture, Synovasure® (CD Diagnostics, Baltimore, USA), alpha defensin and next generation DNA microbial sequencing (MicroGenDX, Lubbock, USA). All aspiration studies were negative, and his serum inflammatory markers were all within normal limits.
Four months after his resection arthroplasty, his knee was reimplanted. His knee was reconstructed with a constrained revision prosthesis [-]. He was discharged home on post-operative day four with a 2-week course of oral ampicillin. His hospital admission course was uneventful. His six intraoperative culture specimens were all negative at final report. At his most recent clinic visit, now 2 years post-operatively, he was doing well. He reports no pain from his left knee, and walks with a normal stride and cadence without assistive devices. His left knee range is 0-122° with no extensor lag. Radiographs reveal stable implant fixation with good mechanical alignment [-]. He has returned to work as a rancher, although he refrains from some of the more physical manual labor at our recommendation.