A 33-year-old male presented with severe neck pain and bilateral upper-extremity numbness 14 days after a car accident. Within a week, his neck pain increased and became associated with bilateral upper-extremity numbness. The CT of the cervical spine revealed an atypical C2 fracture with anteroinferior displacement and a small fracture of the anteroinferior C3 vertebral body; the fracture line passed obliquely through the C2 vertebral body, resembling a Type 3 odontoid fracture. Additional fractures of the pars interarticularis on the right side and the superior facet on the left side were observed, resulting in bilateral encroachment on the foramina transversaria . CT angiogram ruled out a vascular injury. When preoperative traction of up to 10 kg failed to reduce the fracture, surgical reduction/fusion was scheduled.
Using a right-sided transcervical approach, the fracture level was radiographically confirmed. Under X-ray control, a small chisel was introduced between the displaced fragment and the C2 vertebral body to break down adhesions. The surfaces of the body fracture were curetted to prepare for fusion . The patient was then placed in prone position and through a limited midline exposure of C2, a K-wire was drilled into the pedicles across the fracture line and into the mobile fragment on both sides. Cannulated lag screws were passed over the K-wires, which compressed the fractured fragment with bicortical purchase . At the end of the procedure, stability of the construct was confirmed as there was no motion during flexion or extension maneuvers.
A semi-rigid collar was placed for 2 weeks’ duration. Two months later, upper limb numbness had significantly improved, and the patient had no neck pain, with full range of motion. Radiographs confirmed continued stability of the fusion construct . By 8 postoperative months, the patient had no residual neurological deficit, full range of motion, and dynamic X-rays and the CT confirmed stability with fusion across all fracture lines .