We present the case of a 90-year-old Japanese man with simultaneous bilateral asymmetric hip fracture. As per his medical history, the patient had chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and was hospitalized in the internal medicine department, had dementia and was admitted to the psychiatric department, and had cerebral contusion and symptomatic epilepsy and was hospitalized for neurosurgery. Before admission, he was able to walk with a walker. He complained of dyspnea at midnight and, therefore, visited a nearby doctor. Acute exacerbation of COPD was suspected, and he was referred to the emergency department of our institution. After admission, he was unable to walk. On the eighth day of hospitalization, he was referred to our orthopedic surgery department for hip pain and was found to have fractures of both hips. X-ray findings showed left femoral neck fracture, left greater trochanteric fracture, and right femoral trochanteric fracture .
Computed tomography (CT) results showed bone osteosclerosis at the margin of the femoral head indicating that the left femoral neck fracture was an old fracture, while the left greater trochanteric and right trochanteric fractures were fresh fractures .
He was surgically treated through open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) with an intramedullary nail on the right and hemiarthroplasty on the left performed during the same surgical sessions on the 12th day of hospitalization. First, ORIF of the right femur with an intramedullary nail on a traction table was performed. The first surgical operation time was 44 min. Then, the patient was moved from the traction bed to a regular surgical bed, and left hemiarthroplasty was performed for the left femoral neck fracture in supine position. A cementless hemiarthroplasty was carried out through the direct anterior approach . Intraoperative findings showed absence of hematoma in the left hip joint, suggesting an old femoral neck fracture. The second surgical operation time was 1 hour 41 minutes. The preoperative hemoglobin level was 10.5 g/dL, postoperative hemoglobin level was 9.1 g/dL, and intraoperative bleeding was 200 mL; therefore, blood transfusion was not performed. The patient started physical therapy on the first postoperative day. He was able to transfer to a wheelchair and was discharged 41 days after admission. Thirteen months after the operation, he visited our outpatient clinic and X-ray examination revealed no loosening of the left hemiarthroplasty and heterotopic ossification of the left hip joint; bone fusion was observed in the right trochanteric fracture .