The patient was an 89-year-old woman. She had educational background with high school graduation. She had no medical history except for hypertension, and no family history of neuropsychiatric illness. She had helped for her son’s home business; however, she gradually seemed to lose her energy with hearing loss and muscle weakness. She began to complain her oral cenesthopathy, which is a feeling of filament structures in her mouth, and visited another hospital at the age of 88. She developed progressive cognitive decline with decreasing Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score from 26 to 22 in half of a year, and become depressive. She was treated with mirtazapine up to 22.5 mg/day for her depressive symptoms; however, her complaint had changed to delusional parasitosis, which is a belief of filaria infection in her nose and eyes, and her parkinsonism, such as resting tremor, muscle rigidity and bradykinesia, had developed. She admitted to our department for the purpose of examination and treatment for her cognitive impairment, delusion and parkinsonism. Her MMSE score was 22, which lost some points on orientation (− 1), serial-7 (− 3), three-stage command (− 1), delayed recall (− 2), and copy of double pentagon (− 1). The score of Geriatric depression scale was 8, and that of the United Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale part 3 was 45. The results of blood test were normal, and an electroencephalogram was unremarkable. In her brain images, a brain magnetic resonance imaging scan showed mild atrophy of prefrontal cortex and bilateral hippocampus, and a single photon emission computed tomography showed reducing cerebral blood flow in bilateral thalamus, in addition to the parts of bilateral prefrontal, temporal, occipital lobe and parietal association area. Furthermore, 123iodine-metaidobenzylguandine myocardial uptake was reduced. Considering all the results of examinations, she was diagnosed as probable DLB. She was treated with donepezil up to 10 mg/day for a month; however, she continued to complain “Insects and snakes enter my body from my anus and deprive my nutrition”. For her depressive symptoms, aripiprazole augmentation with mirtazapine was performed, and her parasitosis delusion was disappeared keeping dose of mirtazapine 22.5 mg/day and aripiprazole 3 mg/day for a month. After that, she developed aspiration pneumonia, and her delusional parasitosis was exacerbated along with discontinuation of aripiprazole and mirtazapine. Finally, she was treated with a combination of donepezil 5 mg/day and aripiprazole 1.5 mg/day for a month, and her parasite delusion was disappeared.