A 16-year-old male patient came to the hospital complaining of shortness of breath in 1 month, worsening two weeks before admission. Complaints get worse if the patient is in a supine position or with strenuous activities. The patient also complained of chest pain, nausea, dizziness, and fatigue. The patient has no fever, no history of prolonged cough, and no coughing up blood. Because of his complaint, the patient came to the nearest hospital for four days. The patient underwent echocardiography examination which revealed a myxoma extending from the right atrium to the right ventricle. He was then transferred to our hospital for further management. A repeat echocardiography was conducted at our hospital, which confirmed these findings, showing a mass filling the right atrium and right ventricle seen at PA with minimal pericardial effusion at the anterior and posterior .
The patient's vital signs findings include tachycardia (heart rate 120 beats per minute), tachypnea (respiratory rate of 34 breaths per minute), and hypoxemia (oxygen saturation of 78 % on room air). There were no abnormalities on the physical examination and no pathological murmurs in areas of valve auscultation. Laboratory examination may show non-specific changes such as increased hemoglobin, hematocrit, leukocytosis, thrombocytopenia, hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, and hypocalcemia. Liver function tests showed an increase in SGOT and SGPT. Blood gas analysis revealed increased blood pH and decreased pO2, pCO2, HCO3, and base excess.
Chest computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a solid mass in the superoanterior mediastinum, which appeared to be attached to the brachiocephalic trunk, ascending aorta, right pulmonary artery, compressing and constricting the superior vena cava, and expanding and infiltrating the right atrium, suspected lymphoma .
Because of the unstable hemodynamics, the patient underwent the removal of the tumor. Following median sternotomy, anterior mediastinal tumor tissue appears to fill the entire anterior mediastinal space. The tumor was found to have invaded the innominate vein and caused extensive adhesions. The tumor was excised, the injured innominate vein was ligated, and the tumor was successfully evacuated. The pericardium is opened, and the heart appears normal in size and pericardial fluid was also within normal limits. We performed aortic cross clamp and antegrade cardioplegia to stop the heartbeat temporarily. A Myxoma mass was seen in the right atrium, originating at the roof of the SVC, and myxoma evacuation was performed . The cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) time was 107 min. On the histopathologic examination, polymorphic nuclei were found at the tumor cells. The schiller-Duval body was seen, which is pathognomonic for yolk sac tumors . A histopathological study confirmed the diagnosis of a mixed germ cell tumor (seminoma, yolk sac, and mature teratoma) at the right atrial and mediastinum.