A 50-year-old woman with confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection was admitted to a peripheral hospital three weeks prior to admission to our hospital. Because of deterioration of respiratory function, the patient had to be intubated and mechanically ventilated. A CT-scan was performed at this stage revealing spacious areas of ground glass opacities including consolidation and air bronchogram . As the patient’s situation worsened, she was transferred to the University Hospital Innsbruck, a tertiary medical center, for evaluation of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) therapy.
Evaluation of the pulmonary state revealed a moderate, SARS-CoV-2-associated ARDS (paO2/FiO2 ratio of 124) according to Berlin definition . Initially, pressure-controlled ventilation (PCV) was applied with an Evita® Infinity® V500 respirator (Dräger, Lübeck, Germany) with a peak inspiratory pressure (Ppeak) of 27 cm H2O, a positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 12 cm H2O, an inspiration to expiration ratio (I:E-ratio) of 1:1, and a respiratory rate of 21 /min, resulting in a tidal volume of 5.8 ml/kg predicted body weight (PBW) and a compliance of 24 ml/cm H2O.
In accordance with ELSO guidelines , ECMO therapy was declined. Prone position improved the paO2/FiO2 ratio to 130–150 and was performed for the next 16 h. After this period compliance worsened again in supine position and invasiveness of ventilation had to be increased (Ppeak 28 cm H2O, PEEP 10 cm H2O, respiratory rate of 25 /min, calculated mechanical power (MP) of 16.9 J/min). Nevertheless, oxygenation was still compromised with a paO2 of 78.2 mmHg (10.4 kPa) at an FiO2 of 0.6 (paO2/FiO2 ratio of 130).
In an attempt to reduce the invasiveness of ventilation and its deleterious effects on lung tissue flow-controlled ventilation (FCV) was initiated with the Evone® respirator (Ventinova Medical B.V., Eindhoven, The Netherlands). This mode of ventilation can be applied via any conventional endotracheal tube and establishes a continuous, constant flow during inspiration as well as expiration, which is monitored and controlled by direct intratracheal pressure measurement. First, identical PCV pressure settings were adopted to FCV with a Ppeak of 28 cm H2O, a PEEP of 10 cm H2O, an I:E-ratio of 1:1 and the flow set to 12 l/min, otherwise deep sedation (Richmond Agitation-Sedation Scale of -4) was continued with midazolam 0.4–0.5 mg/kg/h, morphine 0.4 mg/kg/h and esketamine 2.1 mg/kg/h without the use of neuromuscular blocking agents.
The continuous, constant flow in FCV creates a continuous, stable pressure drop throughout inspiration and expiration from the set and measured tracheal pressure to the alveolar space and vice versa, as there is no pause during the ventilation cycle . As a flow of gas only occurs if a pressure gradient exists, this gradient can be calculated if the flow and the resistance of the system are known. This relationship is based upon Ohm’s law, where the pressure drop (ΔP) equals the flow multiplicated by the resistance (R) of the system. Translated to the described patient, a pressure drop of 2.3 cm H2O between the trachea and the alveolar space can be calculated (ΔP = x R; flow = 12 l/min = 0.2 l/s; resistance = 11.6 cm H2O/l/s). During inspiration when gas flow is directed to the alveolar space this fact reduced alveolar Ppeak by 2.3 cm H2O (from 28 to 25.7 cm H2O), whereas during expiration when flow changes direction, PEEP was increased by 2.3 cm H2O (from 10 to 12.3 cm H2O). Therefore, driving pressure was reduced by 4.6 cm H2O compared to PCV (from 18 cm H2O to 13.4 cm H2O; Fig. b). In PCV however, airway pressure is presumed to be equal to alveolar pressure due to a zero flow phase at the end of inspiration as well as expiration, which should result in an equilibrium pressure phase.
After 30 min, blood gas analysis revealed an improvement of oxygenation resulting in a paO2 of 110 mmHg (14.7 kPa) (paO2/FiO2 ratio of 183; Fig. c). In order to decrease invasiveness, ventilation settings were then adjusted to dynamic lung mechanics with compliance-guided PEEP and peak pressure settings as follows:
First, PEEP level was determined by an incremental (or decremental) PEEP titration, which represents the point of the highest tidal volume or consecutive dynamic compliance at a fixed driving pressure. Subsequently, driving pressure was stepwise increased, as long as tidal volume showed an overproportional increase based on measured dynamic compliance. This strategy allows for a precise determination of the (so-called) lower and upper inflection point during ventilation and leads to an almost linear relationship of pressure and volume during the ventilation cycle within the individual limits of dynamic lung mechanics . Finally, gas flow was set to achieve a paCO2 level < 60 mmHg (8.0 kPa).
Calculation of alveolar pressure according to Ohm’s law revealed a Ppeak of 21 cm H2O and a PEEP of 9 cm H2O, thus a driving pressure of 12 cm H2O, resulting in a compliance of 27 ml/cm H2O and a calculated MP of 8.6 J/min with individualized ventilation settings. Thirty minutes after compliance-guided adjustment paO2/FiO2 ratio was 140 .
Re-evaluation of lung mechanics after two hours allowed for a further reduction of Ppeak to 20 cm H2O and a PEEP of 7 cm H2O resulting in a MP of 7.7 J/min. However, during a period of four hours after initial assessment of the patient’s lung mechanics, the compliance worsened, and subsequently tidal volume decreased from 5.3 to 4.7 ml/kg PBW with a decline of paO2 to 67.6 mmHg (9.0 kPa) at an FiO2 of 0.65 (paO2/FiO2 ratio of 104).
Ventilation of the patient was then continued with PCV at significantly increased pressure settings (Ppeak 28 cm H2O, PEEP 10 cm H2O, respiratory rate 25 /min, MP 17.3 J/min) and the patient was put in prone position. In the further course ongoing invasive ventilation led to ECMO therapy and unfortunately the patient died two months later due to therapy refractory B-cell depletion and no ability to form antibodies against SARS-CoV-2.