A 26-year-old male carpenter presented to our hospital with low-grade fever, cough, expectoration, and stethalgia for one month. Several days later, his symptoms were aggravating then he was initially admitted to a local hospital where he was diagnosed with pneumonia and empirically treated with cephalosporins. On laboratory investigations, total white blood cell count (WBC) was 17.19 × 109/L with 74.1% neutrophils. His temperature fluctuated between 37.0 and 38.4 ℃. Serial chest X-rays showed pneumonia in the right upper and lower lobe of lung and left lower lobe of lung. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest demonstrated inflammation of both lungs, but the patient lost the exact report.
Four days later, antibiotic therapy was changed to vancomycin and sulperazone due to sputum culture reported the growth of Gram-positive cocci. A week after the treatment changed, a reexamination of thoracic CT showed patchy consolidation in both lungs with pulmonary cavitation formation . Therefore, he came to our hospital for further treatment. The patient had a 2-year history of type 2 diabetes and no history of hypertension, coronary heart disease, tuberculosis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, or chronic bronchitis. He did not take oral anti-diabetic drugs regularly and did not monitor blood glucose.
His glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) was 12.3%, creatinine and blood urea nitrogen were normal. Furthermore, the third thoracic CT shows multiple cavitary lesions in both lungs. Considering the patient’s CT images show a trend of gradual progress, we gave him a bronchoscopy. Bronchoscopy revealed sticky purulent secretions in the left and right main bronchus, in each segment bronchus, especially in the left upper anterior lobe, the left lingual lobe, the left medial basal segment of the lower lobe, and the left dorsal segment of the lower lobe. Bacterial culture showed no growth of pathogenic bacteria. The outcome of Ziehl–Neelsen staining was negative. Histopathology showed the disappearance of the alveolar structure, fibroplasia, and necrosis. Periodic acid–Schiff (PAS) staining of the tissue presented broad, thin-walled, and aseptate fungal hyphae as well as right-angled hyphal branches . The samples were inoculated on Sabouraud dextrose agar (SDA) media under 30 ℃ and white colonies appeared after 5 days. The fungus was then subcultured on potato dextrose agar (PDA) plates. Light microscope examination showed that nodal rhizoids branched a pair of brownish sporangiophores and sporangiospores were hyaline, angular, and broadly ellipsoidal .
For further identification, the ITS regions were sequenced with primer ITS1 and primer ITS4. The sequence of the isolate aligned with 99% similarity to multiple sequences (e.g., Accession Number KM103772.1) of Rhizopus microsporus available in GenBank database. Temperature tests revealed that the isolate grew well at 37 ℃, 40 ℃ and 45 ℃, but did not grow at 50 ℃. Antifungal susceptibility was performed in accordance with the CLSI M38-A guidelines .
The samples were inoculated on SDA media. The isolate was sensitive to posaconazole and amphotericin B, with resistance to fluconazole and itraconazole. Taking the drug antifungal susceptibility into consideration, the patient was supervised to the following regimen: posaconazole oral suspension (400 mg twice a day, along with a high-fat diet), ambroxol (30 mg, three times a day), repaglinide (1 mg, three times a day) combined with low-sugar, high-fiber diets. After approximately 6 months of treatment with posaconazole oral suspension, the patient was well and asymptomatic, and the lesions completely resolved .