An 83-year-old man with exertional angina for 6 months was referred to our hospital. Coronary angiography revealed a three-vessel disease, which included severe stenosis from the proximal to the mid portion of the right coronary artery (RCA), a chronic total occlusion (CTO) in the mid portion of the left anterior descending artery (LAD), and diffuse stenosis from the proximal to the mid portion of the left circumflex artery (LCX) . The conus branch provided collaterals to LAD, and the atrial circumflex branch provided collaterals to the distal RCA. We decided to perform PCI because the patient refused coronary artery bypass grafting. First, we performed PCI on RCA and LCX, which was divided into two procedures .
After 1 month, we performed PCI to address CTO in LAD . After the Gaia 2nd guidewire successfully passed CTO, we attempted predilation at 22 atm with both a 2.0-and 2.25-mm balloon ; however, the lesion could not be completely expanded. Therefore, we performed rotational atherectomy using the 1.75-mm RotaLink™ (Boston Scientific) . The slow flow phenomenon was observed after the burr passed across the lesion. We concerned about the risk for the burr sizing up; thus, we performed additional dilation using a 2.25-mm high-pressure balloon followed by the deployment of two Promus Premier™ stents . Additional postdilation with a 2.5-mm non-compliant balloon at 22 atm was applied to the underexpanded stent in the mid portion of LAD ; however, this failed to achieve complete expansion of the stent .
The follow-up coronary angiogram after 6 months revealed ISR within the underexpanded stent. We performed balloon angioplasty using a 2.5-mm high-pressure balloon, however, it was not possible to sufficiently expand the stent.
After 5 months, the follow-up coronary angiogram revealed ISR ; this involved coronary ischemia, indicated by an FFR of 0.64. Thus, we performed PCI on the refractory ISR. Because the dilation of the lesion was considered impossible, we decided to simultaneously ablate both the stent and the heavily calcified lesion using rotational atherectomy. An 8-Fr sheath was inserted thorough the femoral artery, and the left coronary artery was engaged with an 8-Fr JR 4.0 guide catheter (Boston Scientific). A SION blue™ wire was advanced into the distal LAD. OCT (FastView™, Terumo Corporation) revealed circumferential heavy calcification around the underexpanded stent. Although a 2.0-mm RotaLink™ was gradually advanced to the lesion at 150,000 rpm , the burr became entrapped within the underexpanded stent, and we ended up pulling out the drive shaft of the Rotablator™. We continued to ablate with the burr that was reduced in size from 2.0 to 1.75 mm, and the rotating speed was increased from 150,000 to 200,000 rpm . The rotating speed of the 1.75-mm burr unexpectedly decreased at the small proximal portion of the underexpanded stent. After several ablations, the 1.75-mm burr finally passed through the lesion. We changed to a new 2.0-mm burr and continued to ablate the lesion . Although this 2.0-mm burr again became entrapped within the underexpanded stent, it was easily removed by pulling out the drive shaft of the Rotablator™. After the burr passed through the lesion, fluoroscopy and OCT demonstrated that the metallic component of the underexpanded stent had completely disappeared (see Additional file ). Furthermore, OCT revealed that the stent turned inward . Finding it difficult to use an additional burr because of its cost, we dilated the lesion using a 3.0-mm cutting balloon™ (Boston Scientific) at 24 atm and a 2.5-mm Hiryu™ balloon (Terumo) at 30 atm; however, this did not enable the heavily calcified lesion to completely expand. We then additionally dilated the lesion using a 3.0-mm drug-coated balloon. Final angiography showed an acceptable result , and FFR had improved to 0.81, indicating the release of the myocardial ischemia.