A 46-year-old man presented with fever, headache, and suboccipital pseudo meningocele formation at the emergency department. He had a recent history of a ruptured right vertebral artery aneurysm, which was managed with suboccipital craniotomy, C1 laminectomy, and Hunterian ligation of the right vertebral artery. On examination, he was drowsy, confused, and able to follow simple commands. He was febrile, with nuchal rigidity and a positive Brudzinski’s sign, and had a tense pseudo meningocele in the suboccipital area. Cranial computed tomography (CT) showed hydrocephalus and suboccipital extracalvarial fluid collection. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cultures were positive for Staphylococcus aureus. Antibiotics were started, and a lumbar drain was inserted, with improvement in the patient’s sensorium and regression of the pseudo meningocele. However, repeat CSF culture showed growth of Klebsiella sp., so the lumbar drain was removed, and a left frontal EVD was inserted to facilitate intraventricular antibiotic treatment. The correct placement in the left frontal horn was confirmed with a postoperative CT scan .
The patient received a 3-week regimen of intraventricular antibiotic treatment in addition to intravenous antibiotics. The patient also developed hospital-acquired pneumonia and nosocomial sepsis. During this time, he had episodes of agitation, causing him to move his head frequently. In the interim, the EVD fulcrum was raised progressively to determine if the patient could be weaned off the EVD. However, the CSF output decreased markedly, prompting a repeat cranial CT scan that showed that the ventricular size had decreased and that the tip of the EVD was in the cisterna magna [ c-f]. The patient did not develop any new neurologic deficits but was still agitated and restless. While the neurosurgical team was deciding on the best course of action, the EVD was accidentally pulled out. Again, the patient did not exhibit any new neurologic deficits, and a post-EVD removal scan showed no increase in ventricular size and no hematoma along the intracranial tract of the EVD [ and h]. The patient was closely monitored and was eventually discharged after completing antibiotic treatment. On follow-up at the outpatient clinic, he was awake, oriented, following commands consistently, and ambulating with assistance. Written consent was obtained from the patient himself.