We present the case of an 82-year-old Caucasian man with a history of coronary artery disease. He was the driver of a vehicle involved in an accident in which two cars collided while travelling at 80 to 100km/hour. He was conscious immediately after the car crash and his Glasgow Coma Scale was 15. On arrival at the Accident and Emergency Department (EA) he complained of neck and chest pain but was hemodynamically stable. Trauma computerized tomography (CT) revealed an unstable fracture of the second cervical vertebrae, dislocated rib fractures III-VII on the right side, dislocated rib fractures I-VII on the left side and a fractured sternum. There was also left-sided hemothorax with extravasation of the contrast medium . Trauma CT did not reveal any abdominal organ injuries. Soon after the trauma CT had been performed, the patient suddenly became pulseless. An endotracheal tube was inserted and left sided thoracotomy was performed in the EA. A large pool of blood was encountered in the left thoracic cavity. The blood was evacuated and open cardiac massage initiated. A pulse was restored and the patient was transferred to the operating theater (OR).
During surgery, it became obvious that there was continuous arterial bleeding from several ICAs at the level of ribs V-VII on the left side of the thoracic cavity. The bleeding source was determined to be close to the aortic origin of these arteries. First, several hemostatic options were attempted but there was no success using sutures, hemostatic clips, electrocautery and tissue glue and bleeding continued unabated despite several attempts with these techniques. Finally, hemostasis was achieved by using a surgical swab which was rolled tight and inserted over the assumed bleeding site next to the descending aorta. Three sutures were pulled through the posterior thoracic wall from inside to outside. Sutures were then applied around the surgical swab and pulled to the back of the patient and then tied. These sutures compressed the surgical swab around the bleeding sites and the compression succeeded in stopping the bleeding . Thoracotomy was closed and a halo vest was set to stabilize the fracture of the second cervical vertebrae.
He was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) but soon his hemoglobin value dropped and his abdomen became swollen. He was taken back to the OR and laparotomy was performed. Rupture and bleeding from the mesentery of the transverse colon were detected. Transverse colectomy and transverse colostomy were undertaken. The patient was treated in the ICU during the following days. There was no further post-operative bleeding from the thoracic or abdominal cavities and he was hemodynamically stable. However, he remained unconscious. Repeated head CT revealed the presence of traumatic intracerebral hemorrhage. He died on the fourth post-operative day due to this head injury.