We report the case of a Caucasian male patient aged 34 without an irrelevant past medical history that presented with unexplained weight loss. Imaging studies revealed the presence of a left renal mass of 10 × 12 cm . The patient underwent a left radical nephrectomy and the pathology was consistent with an EAML with poor prognosis features (size > 7 cm, vascular and renal sinus invasion, necrosis, and severe atypia). Immunohistochemical profile revealed diffuse and intense expression of HMB-45 and Melan A , along with expression of smooth muscle actin and CD68 (KP-1, Ventana), and negativity for CD-31, CEA, CK-pan, desmin, EMA, Ki-67, myogenin and S-100. After nephrectomy the patient did not receive adjuvant therapy and started follow up in urology clinics. Seven months after primary surgery the patient developed 3 liver metastases (two in segment VIII of 6 cm and 1.5 cm, respectively, and one in segment IV of 2 cm). All these lesions were completely resected through a right partial hepatectomy with extension to segment IV through a split in situ technique. Again, adjuvant therapy was not administered. Five months later a new single metastasis developed in the first lumbar vertebrae, and was managed through a total L1 corpectomy. Six months after the spine surgery liver recurrence was observed, surgical resection was incomplete leaving positive margins and within 12 weeks a new liver lesion of 1.7 cm was detected. A new surgical attempt was considered not feasible and after reviewing the scarce existing literature, it was decided to start systemic treatment with sirolimus 6 mg/day . After starting sirolimus treatment the patient presented a very unusual and favorable response (complete response after 13 months of treatment; Fig. ). Tolerance was excellent with grade 1 intermittent diarrhea and acne along with grade 1 hypophosphatemia. At the time of publication, after 36 months of treatment and about five years of the initial diagnosis, the patient remains free of disease and with an excellent performance status. Genetic testing was performed and ruled out TSC (no TSC1 or TSC2 germline mutations detected).
Targeted NGS of MTOR, TSC1 and TSC2 genes was performed on DNA extracted from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded primary tumor and hepatic metastasis, and the patient’s peripheral blood (TruSeq Custom Amplicon Low Input; Illumina). Primary tumor failed NGS due to poor DNA quality, however, the liver metastasis and the blood were successfully sequenced by NGS, with a mean coverage of 184× and 1643×, respectively, and single nucleotide variants and indels were identified. One TSC2 variant resulting in a premature stop codon (c.2739dup; p.K914*) was found in heterozygosity in the metastasis while it was absent in blood . Sanger sequencing validated this finding, and detected the TSC2 mutation also in the primary tumor . IHC revealed absence of TSC2 expression in the liver metastasis , in agreement with inactivation of TSC2. Phospho-ribosomal protein S6 staining was positive in the primary tumor and liver metastasis , indicating activation of the mTOR pathway in the patient’s tumors.