Fever, progressive disturbance in consciousness.
The patient was a 64-year-old man. He was transported by ambulance with urinary retention and pyrexia of > 38 °C that persisted for several days as well as progressive disturbance in consciousness.
He did not have regular health checkups and there was no significant medical history. He had an uncertain history of chickenpox in childhood and no history of varicella vaccination. He tested negative for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and had no history of bone marrow transplantation or other known conditions associated with immunosuppression.
He had consumed 540 mL of Japanese sake (60 g of alcohol) and smoked 20 cigarettes per day since the age of 20 years.
The patient’s body temperature was 37.2 °C, blood pressure was 182/107 mmHg, heart rate was 106 beats/min and regular, and his respiratory rate was 21 breaths/min; and SpO2 of 99% in room air. Neurological examination showed a Glasgow Coma Scale score of E4V3M5, pupils equal in size (3 mm/3 mm), round, and reactive to light (+/+), positive nuchal rigidity, and negative Kernig’s sign. The tendon reflexes were markedly increased, predominantly in the lower extremities, with a positive Babinski sign bilaterally. There was no obvious quadriplegia.
Skin findings included four isolated and sporadic blisters with red papules and a red halo in the right anterior/Lateral chest, right lumbar region, and left scapular region .
We detected infected giant cells using the Tzanck test and degenerated epidermal cells with intranuclear inclusion bodies and ballooning degeneration on skin biopsy of blisters in the right chest ; these findings were consistent with VZV infection.
Mild increase in blood glucose levels (174 mg/dL) and HbA1c level (6.8%) suggestive of diabetes were noted. No increase in inflammatory response was observed (White blood cell count 5800 cells/µL, C-reactive protein 0.15 mg/L). There was no evidence of impaired humoral immunity with a negative HIV antibody test. Serum VZV antibody titers were 75.9 (+) for VZV immunoglobulin G (IgG) (EIA) and 0.49 (−) for VZV immunoglobulin M (IgM) (EIA), which is a pattern indicative of a previous infection. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed marked pleocytosis with mononuclear predominance, with no decrease in the CSF/serum glucose ratio (0.64). The CSF tested positive for VZV-DNA with 1.4×106 copies/mL.
For symptoms associated with frontal lobe disorders such as altered personality and talkativeness that occurred after admission, the patient underwent plain head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) on hospital day 3 . Diffusion-weighted imaging revealed hyperintensities in the bilateral frontal lobes. Although not evident immediately after admission, paraplegia became apparent after private room isolation was discontinued and rehabilitation was started. Decreased thermal nociception and urinary retention and rectal disturbances were also noted.
Contrast-enhanced thoracolumbar MRI performed on hospital day 14 showed diffuse enhancement of the meninges at Th9 to L5 with lumbar predominance and no enhancement of the cord itself. Concurrent myelitis was diagnosed based on the diagnostic criteria proposed by the Transverse Myelitis Consortium Working Group although contrast-enhanced MRI of the thoracolumbar spine showed no clear enhancement of the spinal cord.