A 59-year-old male visited our department for the treatment of ischuria. He had a history of surgery for an imperforate anus in childhood, following multiple ileus operations. A digital rectal examination of the prostate revealed a stony-hard with an irregular surface. Ultrasonography showed an enlarged prostate (estimated volume; 83 cm3), and the serum PSA level was 0.74 ng/mL. CT revealed a mucus-enriched prostate tumor with slight contrast at the edge . PET-CT showed the accumulation of FDG at the same site . MRI revealed a prostate tumor with fluid retention, suggesting the possibility of invasion of the bladder and rectum . We suspected the possibility of bladder infiltration on cystoscopy but not of rectal infiltration on colonoscopy. No radiographic metastasis was noted (cT3aN0M0).
Transrectal prostate biopsies showed adenocarcinoma of unknown primary origin. We planned to perform a total cystoprostatectomy. However, we decided to perform RARP based on the intraoperative findings. There was a severe desmoplastic reaction between prostate and rectum. Although the rectal muscle was visually intact, an ileostomy was performed by the gastroenterological surgeon.
Total surgical time was 8 h and 49 min with a blood loss of 315 mL. Histological examination revealed adenocarcinoma originating in the prostatic urethra . The tumor produced a rich accumulation of mucus and the urethral mucosa was invaded by adenocarcinoma cells . Tumor cells formed glands with characteristics histologically similar to those of colorectal adenocarcinoma . PSA-negative MPUAP was diagnosed by immunohistochemistry (pT3bN0M0, Fig. ). After surgery, the patient experienced no complication other than controllable urinary incontinence, and was discharged 18 days after surgery. Lung metastasis was noted 3 months postoperatively. Concerning treatment of metastases, we consulted with gastroenterological doctor and anticancer chemotherapy (capecitabine plus oxaliplatin [XELOX]) was selected according to the adenocarcinoma (colon cancer) regimen. Due to lung metastasis progression (growth of lung metastatic lesions) after 6 months, we administered capecitabine plus bevacizumab as second-line chemotherapy. However, local recurrence appeared in the pelvis 3 months later. Subsequently, we performed total pelvic exenteration and stable disease was followed by 2 months without de novo metastatic lesion.