This is a 40-day-old male infant with up-to-date vaccination status, no medical and family history of illness, or surgery; received at Fann's pediatric emergency room, for a febrile convulsion. The initial general examination found a temperature of 38.2 °C, a weight of 4500 g, a height of 60 cm, a BMI at 25.51Kg/m2, a head circumference at 42 cm, a heart rate at 150 Bpm and a frequency respiratory at 37 cpm. The remainder of the examination found an anterior fontanel that was slightly strained and a neck that is soft on examination. The full blood count performed initially was normal, the C-Reactive protein was 32.20 mg/l. The procalcitonin assay showed a slightly elevated level at 2.41 mg/ml (normal less than 0.5 mg/ml). The chest x-ray was normal. A complement of the etiological assessment was carried out including a ventricular puncture of the CSF with cytochemical and bacteriological analysis. Then was put on medical treatment. Two days after the puncture, the child had developed a sudden alteration of consciousness during hospitalization. Neurological examination revealed a Blantyre coma score of 3/5, pupils of normal sizes not very reactive to lights stimulation, he had a mobilization of the 4 limbs to the stimulation which was easier on the right, the reflexes were present and normal. The rest of the exam was normal. The brain scan performed showed a right subdural parieto-temporal hematoma associated with a right fronto-temporo-parietal parenchymal hypodensity with mass effect on neighboring cerebral structures (a). The infant was immediately taken to intensive care unit. An indication of evacuation of the hematoma was asked and performed on the same day after obtaining a signed informed consent of his parents. The time between the last clinical presentation and the surgical intervention was 3 h. The infant, under general anesthesia and nasotracheal intubation, was covered and placed in the supine position. He was operated on by an assistant clinical chief neurosurgeon. He underwent a decompressive craniectomy with evacuation of the hematoma and duroplasty without conservation of the flap. Intraoperatively, he received a blood transfusion. The postoperative period was marked by a slight delay in waking up. On examination, the child was hemodynamically and respiratory stable, the Blantyre score was 4/5, the pupils was intermediate and reactive. The early control CT scan showed sequelae right hemispherical ischemia, a cerebral herniation associated with an intraparenchymal hematoma (b). Clinical improvement was obtained later and the infant was discharged after 3 weeks of hospitalization with regular follow-up. At 4 months of follow-up, the neurological examination found a good Blantyre score of 5/5, the pupils were reactive, he spontaneously mobilized his 4 limbs. Examination of the cephalic extremity found a scar on the area of decompressive craniectomy (c). The control cerebral CT scan showed right hemispherical sequelae ischemia without mass effect, a cerebral herniation and a ventricular dilation . After 4 months of follow-up, the parents expressed their satisfaction with the care of their child.