A 31-year-old woman was referred to our emergency department with a shortness of breath. Mother of 3 children, she is in her 32nd week of pregnancy. At the beginning of the current pregnancy, swelling of the cervix appeared the size of which gradually increased, for which no consultation or diagnostic test was performed.
In fact, the symptoms began 7 days before admission. The patient had an increasingly aggravating dyspnea, first on exertion, then at rest, with notion of orthopnea, evolving into a context of apyrexia, which required an urgent consultation in our hospital.
On examination she was found to be severely dyspneic, an inspiratory stridor was audible, her respiratory rate was 40 breaths/min, her heart rate was 120 beats per minute, her blood pressure was normal (120–82 mmhg), and her Spo2 was 87% on room air. Inspection and cervical palpation revealed a large goiter. It was homogeneous without palpable nodules. A compression of the trachea by goiter was suspected. Given the patient’s gradual onset of dyspnea and anxiety, she was admitted to the observation room after oxygenation intranasally. Thoracic surgeons and gynecologists have been informed. Shortly after, the patient showed signs of respiratory struggle and her conscience began to deteriorate. During pulmonary auscultation, ventilation in both lungs was reduced. A diagnosis of acute respiratory obstruction secondary to enlarged goiter was very likely. An alert was triggered and she was immediately transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU).
In the ICU, after monitoring, an arterial gasometry was performed. The intubation equipment and induction drugs were ready. Arterial gasometry has revealed the following values (Pao2 = 58 mmHg; Paco2 = 81 mmHg; PH = 7, 09; Sao2 = 86%). The patient begins to show signs of respiratory exhaustion with bradypnea, progressing rapidly to respiratory arrest. The heart rate began to drop and blood pressure dropped to 79–35 mmhg. The decision was made to intubate the patient using rapid sequence induction. The patient was preoxygenated quickly without ventilation and induced. Etomidate was administered at a dose of 0.3 mg / kg followed by succinylcholine at the dose of 1.5 mg / kg. Sellick maneuver was not possible because of goiter compression. The intubation was attempted by the direct laryngoscopy and showed a central grade 1 view of the larynx (based on Cormack and Lehane classification). Intubation was performed using an intubation stylet and a lubricant gel. A size 6.5 cuffed polyvinyl chloride endotracheal armed tube (ETT) was passed after feeling a weak resistance. Correct positioning of the (ETT) was confirmed by pulmonary auscultation. After manual ventilation, respiratory distress was relieved and the hemodynamic state stabilized.
A cerebral and thoracic computed tomography (CT) scan were performed and revealed a parenchymal nidus secondary to pneumonitis by inhalation and a large goiter plunging into the upper mediastinal orifice, 2 cm below the thoracic orifice, heterogeneous, measuring 71x44x100 mm, including an intrathoracic portion of the trachea and repressing the vascular structures which remain permeable . The thyroid function tests were within normal range, with thyroid stimuling hormon (TSH) = 0,27μUI/ml, free triiodothyronine (FT3) = 5,6 pmol/l and free thyroxine (FT4) = 11 pmo/l. An obstetric ultrasound performed found a viable fetus and a positive cardiac activity. A thyroidectomiy was decided 48 h later, after preparation by corticotherapy (dexamethasone at 12 mg per day for two days), to accelerate fetal lung maturation.
As expected, the patient was admitted into the operating room after 48 h . The thyroid gland was found to extend in the intrathoracic part of trachea, causing severe concentric constriction of the airway. Vascular structures were slightly repressed. The removal was completed successfully by a combination of traction and blunt dissection. A total thyroidectomy was performed . Tracheomalacia was suspected because of the dysmorphic shape of the intrathoracic trachea in combination with the slightly softer tracheal cartilage on palpation after goiter resection. No intraoperative tracheostomy was necessary and the surgery was completed. Prior to reversal of residual neuromuscular blockage and after careful aspiration of the oropharynx, the tube balloon was deflated. No leaks were observed, and the diagnosis of tracheomalacia was almost confirmed. It was decided to leave the endotracheal tube in situ for 24 h. She was transferred back to the ICU where an extubation was attempted the next day and ended without incident. After a stay in the thoracic surgery department, the patient was discharged from the hospital on the 5th postoperative day without any complications. The pathology showed multinodular goiter with areas of atypical hyperplasia without no sign of malignancy, it mesured 13x9x5,5 cm. Patient was treated with levothyroxin sodium tablets 75mcg/day. Four weeks later, the patient gave birth to a healthy new born with no significant abnormalities.