A 54-year-old woman was initially diagnosed with advanced ovarian serous adenocarcinoma at stage IIIc and had debulking surgery in September 2015. Immunohistochemical staining of the tumor tissue showed positive for CK7(+), CA125(+), WT-1(+), EMA(+), CAM5.2 (+), ER(+), PR(+++), calretinin (partial +), p53(+++), Ki67(60%), CD34(blood vessel +), and negative for Her2, CK20, CA19-9, vimentin, CEA, and HBME-1. The same pathological features were also seen in the staining of left fallopian tube. The patient received firstline combined chemotherapy with paclitaxel plus cisplatin for eight cycles and then second line with gemcitabine plus oxaliplatin for four cycles. Stable disease (SD) was achieved until August 2017 when MRI found new lesions in her liver. Then, liposomal doxorubicin plus nedaplatin was administrated for six cycles. In March 2018, an elevation of CA125 along with the enlargement of the liver lesion occurred and apatinib (250 mg per day, po) was given. CA125 dropped down after treatment and she was in SD for 8 months. In October 2018, CA125 was elevated. The patient asked for immunotherapy. By confirming, there were two measurable nodules in the liver by MRI , no metastatic lesions were found in the lung and pelvic area . Four mismatch repair proteins (MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 and PMS2) were normally expressed and microsatellite was stable . Nineteen common genes related with tumorigenesis were also found no mutations . However, MSLN(+++84%) staining was strong in her tumor tissue , thus the patient was accepted to enroll in the clinical trial of αPD-1-mesoCAR-T cell therapy. The patient signed the informed consent before starting apheresis. The first infusion of CAR-T was initiated in December 2018 and the second one in January 2019. All authors discussed procedures, and interpreted the results and proved the manuscript.
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were collected from the whole blood using a blood cell separator COM.TEC (Fresenius Kabi) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. For the preparation of CAR-T cells, PBMCs were further isolated by Ficoll gradient centrifugation and washed with PBS and suspended in electroporation buffer. Recombinant pNB328-mesoCAR and pNB328-PD1-antibody plasmids were added to the buffer for electroporation. Then, cells were placed in culture medium with MSLN antigen (5 µg/mL) and anti-CD28 (5 µg/mL) and recombinant human IL-2 (200 U/mL) in an incubator at 37°C with 5% CO2 for 3 days. After that, the activated cells were continued culturing in the presence of 100 U/mL IL-2 for 14 days. At end of the culture, some of the CAR-T cells were taken for quality control , other cells were collected by centrifugation and suspended again with the cryoprotectant containing 10% dextrn-40, 5% dimethyl sulfoxide, 5% human serum albumin. The suspended cells were aliquoted to 40 mL in the Cryotore bag (Origen Biomedical) placing in the controlled rate CryoMed Freezers 7451 (Thermo Scientific) and then stored in the vapor and liquid phases of liquid nitrogen. At the time of infusion, the frozen bag was transferred to a small liquid nitrogen tank delivering to the hospital. Before infusion, the frozen bag was immediately put into water bath at 37°C and shaken constantly until the cells were completely thawed. The total cells for infusion were taken from the bag according to the bodyweight of the patient and injected into 50 mL of 0.9% NaCl for intravenous drip.
This study was approved by the institutional review board of Shanghai Tenth People’s Hospital (IRB No. SHSY-IEC-4.0/18-09/02) and registered at clinical trial.gov. The patient was the first one enrolled in this study in August, 2018 meeting with inclusion criteria, such as failure of multiline chemotherapy, measurable lesions, positive MSLN staining, and so on. Analysis of her tumor tissue had strong MSLN expression (84%), CD3 positive (46%) infiltrating lymphocytes, but PD-L1 expression was relatively weak about 9% , By fluorescent multiplex staining, CD3/PD-1 double staining showed an average 0.09% positive, CD8/PD-1 double staining was average 0.13% positive . These results indicate that the TME is an infiltrated type. We hypothesized that treatment combining with PD-1 antibody and mesoCAR-T cells would have an effect.
In this study, the patient received αPD-1-mesoCAR-T cells through intravenous drip on day 0 and day 26 . No lymphodepleting chemotherapy was given before CAR-T cell infusion. The copy number of CAR in the peripheral blood was detected by qPCR as described previously. In , the copy number of the CAR-T product was 25.4 copies/μg DNA showing at day 0. After the first infusion, it was 85.5 copies/μg DNA at day 5, and reached peak level (198 copies/μg DNA) after the second infusion . At day 31, it went down to 46.1 copies/μg DNA. PD-1 antibodies secreted by the CAR-T cells were detected by ELISA. PD-1 antigen proteins were purchased from Abcam (ab174035) and coated on the plate according to the regular protocol. The level of PD-1 antibody was also elevated after infusion and maintained at a constant level, supporting that the αPD-1-mesoCAR-T cells can expand in the body .
The plasma levels of cytokines including IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, tumor necrosis factor (TNF-α) and interferon (IFN-γ) were measured with flow fluorometry during the CAR-T therapy using cytokine detection kit purchased (Saiji Biological Technology). shows that IL-6 increased at day 8 after the first infusion and had two peaks during the second infusion. A high level of IL-6 reflected the activity and proliferation of the CAR-T cells but did not cause severe cytokine releasing syndrome in this patient. Except for IL-6, other cytokines showed a slight increase from day 3 to day 29 of infusion and remained at low levels throughout the study. IFN-γ increased significantly at day 5 after the first infusion and went graduatly donw and kept at higher levels in the period of the treatment. The second infusion had slightly an increase of IFN-γ. Meanwhile, TNF-α, IL-2 and IL-4 had the similar patterns as that of IFN-γ.
Flow cytometry was conducted in the analysis of immune cells before and after the treatment of CAR-T therapy. Total number of leukocytes did not change much after the treatment , while lymphocyte subsets had changed. CD8+ T cells increased to 522 and 612 cells/µl (month 1 and month 3) compared with 352 cells/µl before the treatment, while CD4+ T cells decreased to 512 and 522 cells/µl (month 1 and month 3) compared with 800 cells/µl before the CAR-T therapy . The results suggest that the CAR-T cells may be helpful for enhancing the CD8+ T cell activity.
The adverse events (AEs) were evaluated according to the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (V.5.0). The patient had grade 1 hypertension and fatigue. Other symptoms such as fever, chills, vomiting, and muscle soreness were not observed.
Quantification of segmented lesions was performed using automatic software calculation of selected measurements with long axis by the Multi-Modality Tumor Tracking (Shinefly, Digital China Health, China). The MRI showed that liver lesions shrank after treatment . The diameter of nodule 1 reduced from 51.9 mm to 39.1 mm, while nodule 2 from 19.4 mm to undetectable . Partial response (PR) was achieved according to Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors V.1.1. The patient had progression-free survival (PFS) for 5 months and survived for 17 months. As shown in A, slight decline of CA125 was observed after the first infusion of CAR-T cells. Although it rose again after the second infusion, it did not exceed the level prior to the first CAR-T therapy. After the end of 3 months observation, the patient began to receive other therapies.