An otherwise healthy 16-month-old non-Hispanic White male with no past medical or psychiatric history presented to the emergency room with 2 days of abdominal pain and emesis. Family history was only positive for constipation in the patient’s father. The patient lived at home with his parents and sister and had no financial, language, or cultural challenges. Upon admission, the patient’s physical exam was within normal limits and, particularly, his abdomen was soft, nondistended, nontender to palpation with no masses. He was diagnosed with intussusception, which was successfully reduced by radiology via water-soluble contrast enema. The following day, he had persistent symptoms and was taken for repeat contrast enema to evaluate for recurrent intussusception. The contrast enema was negative for recurrence, and a computed tomography (CT) scan was obtained for further evaluation. CT scan did not demonstrate intussusception, but raised concern for small bowel obstruction with compromised bowel. At this time, the patient’s physical exam continued to be within normal limits, but he subjectively appeared uncomfortable with increased fussiness and agitation. Given the patient’s history, there was concern for recurrent intussusception requiring operative reduction. The patient underwent operative exploration and was found to have an intussusception in his terminal ileum. This was manually reduced but noted to have necrotic small bowel which was resected with a primary, end-to-end anastomosis, and an appendectomy was performed. The pathology report postoperatively described the specimen as being from the small intestine with ischemic necrosis along with an intraluminal fibrin and fragments of necrotic bowel mucosa.
The patient’s course was complicated by an anastomotic leak along with three small bowel perforations on hospital day 6 requiring an exploratory laparotomy with abdominal washout, small bowel resections, and temporary abdominal closure. Pathology showed segments of small intestine with patchy ischemic necrosis, serositis, and numerous transmural defects. He was taken back 2 days later for end ileostomy with mucous fistula creation. Total small bowel resected was 20–30 cm.
During his postoperative course, the patient was initially treated with IV ceftriaxone and metronidazole followed by ceftazidime and metronidazole. He was placed on total parenteral nutrition (TPN) on hospital day 9 and had return of bowel function on hospital day 10. By hospital day 19, antibiotics and TPN were stopped and he was advanced to a regular diet. On hospital day 20, he developed two episodes of nonbilious emesis and high ileostomy output at 50–60 mL per kilogram (kg) per day. At this time, the patient continued to have a normal abdominal exam. His ostomy was pink, patent, and productive. The patient received replacement fluids, and stool cultures were collected. Ileostomy output remained high despite interventions which included loperamide, modifying feeds, and correcting electrolyte abnormalities. During this time, the patient was otherwise asymptomatic, tolerating a diet, and had normal labs and physical exam. Stool cultures resulted on hospital day 24 and were negative except for a large growth of MRSA. The patient was diagnosed with MRSA enterocolitis and started on 13 mg/kg oral vancomycin three times daily. The patient tolerated this well, and his ostomy output normalized by hospital day 27. The patient was discharged home in good condition on hospital day 29.
A summary of the patient’s postoperative clinical course is as follows. He was seen by a gastrointestinal rehabilitation specialist 3 weeks after discharge, and no complications were noted. He was later seen in clinic by his pediatric surgeon 5 weeks after discharge with no complications and was deemed ready for ileostomy reversal. He underwent ileostomy reversal 12 weeks after discharge and is currently doing well now at his postoperative visit 5 months after his initial surgery.
Timeline of case progression: