A 39-year-old Japanese woman was referred to our hospital with severe hypotony in her left eye on November 22, 2013. She had previously undergone trabeculectomy with MMC for secondary glaucoma in July 1999. The best-corrected visual acuity was 10/20 and the intraocular pressure (IOP) was 3 mm Hg. Slit-lamp examination showed an ischemic and ruptured bleb, excessive bleb leakage, and an extremely shallow AC. Fundus examination showed a choroidal detachment. The hypotony was attributed to excessive bleb leakage.
We again observed the leaking bleb by slit-lamp examination. A large scleral defect, which probably represented the corneoscleral block excision made during the initial surgery, was vaguely visible, suggesting that the scleral flap was almost melted. The bleb leak appeared to occur through a direct filtration mechanism. Therefore, common conservative techniques for leaking blebs were considered to be inadequate, and surgical revision was performed promptly. The procedure and the results are described below .
After the avascular bleb tissue and the melted scleral flap had been removed, a scleral fistula was observed. A viscoelastic was injected through the paracentesis to deepen the AC to facilitate the following procedures. Thick fibrotic Tenon's tissue was carefully separated in a sheet of membrane for use as the autologous Tenon's graft. The graft was cut to the desired size to cover the scleral defect and sutured tightly to the sclera with 10-0 nylon sutures. The viscoelastic was removed, and the AC was deepened after irrigation with balanced salt solution. No aqueous leakage through the graft was observed. To promote conjunctival re-epithelialization, a layer of amniotic membrane was applied to cover the largely exposed sclera in the current case. Subconjunctival injection of betamethasone and tobramycin was administered at the end of the surgery.
Two weeks postoperatively, the surgical site was totally re-epithelialized with no aqueous leakage using the Seidel test. Three months postoperatively, vascularization into the surgical site was observed. The visual acuity was 20/20 and the IOP remained within normal levels without recurrent bleb leaks.