A 12-year-old girl was referred to our clinic with diagnosis of anorexia. She refused to eat during the last months and was obviously underweight (weight 31 kg, height 145 cm, body mass index (BMI) =14.7 kg/cm2). She had no palpitation, syncope or any other cardiac complains. On admission, laboratory investigations revealed a normal complete blood count, electrolytes, sedimentation rate, liver and kidney function tests, amylase, cholesterol and thyroid-stimulating hormone. The follicle-stimulating hormone, luteinizing hormone and oestradiol were in normal levels for this age. To find the cause of underweighting, gastro-duodeno-oesophagoscopy and brain computer tomography (CT)-scan were performed. No abnormalities were found. Malabsorption syndrome characterized by anorexia, weight loss, and steatorrhoea was excluded. Anorexia nervosa was diagnosed by psychologist in an initial report, but it was called atypical, because does not clearly met common types of this pathology: restrictive or self-induced vomiting were not recorded. Commonly, restricting food intake may include excessive exercise, which was not reported in this case.
Twelve-lead resting electrocardiography revealed sinus rhythm with slight prolongation of PR interval (220 ms) . The echocardiography revealed normal structure of the heart. The 40-h ambulatory electrocardiography (ECG) monitoring showed more than 70 episodes of 2:1 AV block and high degree (up to 7:1) of AV block with no escape rhythm [ventricular pauses up to 6 s ]. Interestingly, all these episodes were recorded during the day-time and did not associate with syncope or dizziness. No AV nodal conduction abnormality was recorded during sleeping. Dual chamber pacemaker (PM) was successfully implanted after patient informed consent. 24-h ambulatory ECG monitoring showed ventricular pacing during day-time . The patient was under the follow-up during 6 months. According to PM follow-up cumulative percent of ventricular pacing was 6%. She started to eat normally just after implantation, and 5 kg weight gain was recorded after month. She was completely active, did well in math school, no any kind of physical or laboratory disorder were revealed, no eating disorder recorded during 6 months. She has been under the control in paediatric and cardiac clinics, no any structural changes reported at 6th month, weight 42 kg, height 148 cm, BMI =19.2 kg/cm2, which was categorized as normal weight. Parents’ consent form was presented.