An 11-year old hispanic girl presented with a rapidly enlarging and painful mass in both breasts. She had no family history of breast disease or breast and ovarian cancer. A physical examination showed large solid lumps with a well-circumscribed border in both breasts measuring 8 cm and 5 cm in the right and left breast, respectively .
An ultrasound examination was performed showing many solid oval-shaped nodules, well-defined margins, and a homogenous hypoechoic mass like a fibroadenoma. No cystic collections were appreciated within the nodules and the lesions were mildly vascularized at a color-Doppler evaluation. There was no acoustic shadowing, bilaterally, and no sonographic sign of adjacent tissue invasion. There was no axillary lymphadenopathy. The ultrasound findings were not considered suspicious for malignancy; the diagnosis was oriented to a benign etiology such as fibroadenoma, PASH, or hamartoma.
Taking into account our patient’s age, clinical presentation, and tumor size, a multidisciplinary team recommended multiple wide surgical excisions not to be followed by adjuvant therapy. Wide excisions of her breasts were performed for complete removal of the nodules. During surgery, both her breasts were found to be studded with nodules of varying sizes with little normal breast tissue. The final pathologic diagnosis was bilateral mammary nodular PASH with some juvenile fibroadenoma.
In order to study tissue with a light microscope, the specimen was fixed in formalin (10%), cut into sections of 5 μm and then stained with hematoxylin-eosin. A histopathological examination of the lesion showed anastomosing slit-like pseudovascular spaces in PASH nodules. The external surfaces of the PASH nodules showed a well-demarcated, rubbery-firm, tan-brown appearance . At histology , a fibroadenoma was observed with some focal aspects of PASH made of complex interconnected slit-like channels lined by spindle cells in collagenous stroma . There was no evidence of atypia, mitosis, or pleomorphism.
At her 3-year follow-up, she was asymptomatic with no evidence of recurrence. She was submitted to routine follow-ups in view of local recurrence. She was followed-up with clinical and ultrasound examinations.