We have read the Helsinki Declaration and have followed the guidelines in this investigation.
A 28 years old woman with a painless carious wisdom tooth in her right mandible attended a dental clinic. A general dentist visited her and Orthopantomography (OPG) radiographs were taken. Accidently a multilocular radiolucent lesion was observed in her right mandible, so she was referred to an oral and maxillofacial surgeon in Isfahan school of dentistry. Intraoral examination showed no specific intra-oral sign except a mild sensitivity in the area. There was no pain or swelling. The general head and neck examination, the lymph nodes, and the oral mucosa were normal. She had no history of medical problems. We performed cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT). On CBCT examination , a multilocular lesion with well-defined cortical borders and the scalloped view was observed adjacent to the first, second, and third molar. The size of the lesion was 12 × 15 × 30 mm and it had been manipulated to the inter-radicular regions of molar teeth. The lesion led to the destruction of lamina dura of adjacent teeth, resorption of the lingual plate of alveolar bone, and displacement of inferior tooth canal towards down. Multiple radiopaque regions of compact bone were observed in the buccal and lingual surface of the lesion, attached to the bone cortex. The third and second molars had advanced decay, respectively. Dental plaque and gingivitis were observed. According to the clinical and radiographic findings, radicular cyst of 3rd molar, Odontogenic keratocyst (OKC), Mural ameloblastoma, Calcifying odontogenic cyst (COC), and dentigerous cyst were considered as the differential diagnosis. The wisdom tooth was extracted and the lesion completely excised under sedation. The excisional specimen arrived for pathological examination as multiple soft tissue fragments measuring up to 10 × 15 × 25 mm in brown cream color. Histopathologic examination . They revealed proliferation of eosinophilic granular cell sheets, in which islands or narrow cords of odontogenic epithelium and multinuclear giant cells were scattered. Dystrophic calcification centers were also seen in some areas. There was no evidence of malignancy in the lesion; therefore no additional treatment was performed. Due to the findings, the diagnosis of (GCOT) was made. The patient was followed and after 3 months the lesion site was undergoing a healing process and after 6-months shrinkage of the lesion was observed . No recurrence had happened.