A 24-year-old man was admitted to our facility for IR. The patient had a history of percutaneous kidney biopsy under real-time ultrasound guidance using a cutting needle at 15 years of age. Macroscopic hematuria started shortly after biopsy, but ceased within a couple of days without development of significant anemia. The size of a subcapsular hematoma (up to 38 mm long by 7 mm wide), which occurs in most renal biopsies, also decreased over time. Thus, common complications such as gross hematuria and subcapsular hematoma occurred, but were settled within days of the biopsy. Based on our institutional protocol, the patient was discharged 7 days after biopsy. However, immediate rehospitalization was required on the day of discharge due to abrupt onset of severe left flank pain. Gross hematuria reemerged and was intermittently observed for several days, resulting in hypotension (94/58 mmHg), a significant decrease of blood hemoglobin (14.2 to 10.7 g/dl), and acute dysuria. Embolization via IR was considered as an emergency therapy to stop bleeding, but gross hematuria eventually disappeared within days with intravenous injection of hemostatic agents such as carbazochrome sodium sulfonate and tranexamic acid, in addition to bed rest. It was noteworthy that color-coded Doppler US detected AVF as a mosaic signal in the lower pole of the left kidney , which was the puncture site of the biopsy. However, in terms of size, this lesion was morphologically undetectable, even by dynamic contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) . After disappearance of gross hematuria, the patient was free from renal AVF-related manifestations, including abdominal pain, hypertension, and renal impairment. Thus, it was determined that IR was not required at this time.
IgA nephropathy was diagnosed based on the findings of renal biopsy. The patient was hospitalized again six months later to receive steroid pulse therapy followed by tonsillectomy for this glomerulopathy. A striking improvement in urinary abnormalities was gradually achieved, with urinary protein reduced from 4.2 to 0.2 g/day and red blood cells decreased to a level of 5 cells per high-power field in sediment. Ultrasound examination was performed again, but growth of renal AVF was not evident in this period. Following the combination therapy, the patient regularly visited our hospital and took 300 mg dipyridamole and 6 mg candesartan orally each day. The angiotensin II receptor antagonist was prescribed as a renoprotective agent, rather than for a depressor effect. Blood pressure (125/75 mmHg), blood hemoglobin, and serum creatinine remained normal in this period and for over eight years.
Despite the uneventful course, at the age of 24 the patient underwent abdominal ultrasound because of a slight elevation of serum alanine aminotransferase (up to 36 U/l), which had been noted approximately one year earlier. Unexpectedly, a mass lesion was found in the left kidney, whereas there were few morphological abnormalities in the liver. Dynamic contrast-enhanced CT subsequently delineated a gourd-shaped mass (26 × 22 and 12 × 11 mm) in the left kidney and marked dilatation of the left renal vein . Three-dimensional CT and maximum intensity projection CT clearly revealed that this lesion directly led to the renal artery and vein, suggesting that the renal AVF had grown subclinically to a giant size over many years and had resulted in marked dilatation of the venous system. Therefore, IR was required to prevent further growth of the fistula and manifestation of symptoms.
Transcatheter embolization of high-flow left renal AVF was performed using detachable coils by radiologists. The fistula was solidly packed with 7 Coil 400 Standard Complex® coils (Penumbra, Inc., Alameda, CA, USA) and 22 Presidio® coils (Codman, Inc., Raynham, MA, USA) under digital subtraction angiography. As shown in Fig. , the high-flow fistula was successfully blocked out, with conservation of renal blood flow. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 3 without adverse events. A follow-up test by contrast-enhanced MRI at about 3 months after IR showed maintained discontinuation of blood flow to the AVF , indicating the success of the treatment.