A 75-year-old-woman with a history of Type 2 diabetes, hypertension, dyslipidaemia, and hypothyroidism was being followed up by the dermatology team for spontaneous chronic urticaria resistant to oral antihistamines, which was controlled with four weekly subcutaneous omalizumab 300 mg (Urticaria Activity Score Over 7 Days of 5).
Thirty minutes after the 11th administration of omalizumab, the patient complained of oppressive chest pain, lasting 30 min, without radiation, and no other associated symptomatology. On physical examination, she was hypertensive with blood pressure of 190/80 mmHg and heart rate of 70 b.p.m. Cardiac auscultation revealed presence of S1, S2, and S4 with no murmurs noted and lung auscultation was normal. The rest of the physical examination was unremarkable, namely with no other signs of heart failure, angioedema, or cutaneous lesions.
An electrocardiogram (EKG) was performed, showing a left anterior fascicular block de novo, besides the complete right bundle branch block already present. The 30-min EKG evolved with deep inversion of the V2–V6 T wave and loss of R waves in these leads . Laboratory tests showed troponin T values of 535 ng/dL (normal <14 ng/dL), creatine kinase-muscle/brain (CK-MB) of 248 U/L (normal <192 ng/dL), and C-reactive protein of 4.9 mg/dL (normal <0.5 mg/dL), without other significant changes.
A transthoracic echocardiogram was remarkable for akinesia of all the medial and apical segments of the left ventricle with apical ballooning, sparing the base of each wall, causing a reduced ejection fraction of 30%. The patient was administered loading doses of aspirin and clopidogrel and underwent coronary angiography, which excluded significant coronary artery disease. Ventriculography showed the existence of extensive mid-apical akinesia and basal hyperkinesia and confirmed the diagnosis of TS .
The patient was admitted to the cardiology ward for monitoring. Bisoprolol and ramipril were started at low dose and uptitrated.
The hospitalization was uneventful, with normalization of troponin, CK-MB levels, and inflammatory markers at Day 8. Repeat transthoracic echocardiography showed a global left ventricular ejection fraction of 56% at time of discharge. Serum and urinary catecholamines were not increased. Myocardial scintigraphy identified a decreased myocardial 123I-meta-iodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) uptake in the lateral, inferolateral and apical walls, suggesting cardiac adrenergic nervous dysfunction . A low late heart-to-mediastinum ratio and a high washout rate were documented, a pattern usually observed in MIBG imaging in TS. The patient was discharged with bisoprolol 5 mg and ramipril 2.5 mg in addition to the previous medications. Omalizumab was discontinued.
The patient was evaluated 1 month after hospital discharge and the cardiac MRI performed at this time was normal (namely without alterations of the segmental contractility and a left ventricular ejection fraction of 66%), demonstrating the transient behaviour and complete resolution of this pathology.
Urticaria symptoms remained well controlled with oral antihistamines, after omalizumab withdrawal.