A 61-year-old Caucasian male patient was admitted to our nephrology department on March 2016 for acute kidney injury (serum creatinine (SCr) 1.6 mg/dL, compared with 0.9 mg/dL one month before). He was diagnosed in 2009 with benign polyclonal gammopathy and in 2012 with persistent double positivity for aPL without clinical manifestations (IgM anticardiolipin antibodies (aCL) in a titer of 43.6 MPL/mL, and positive lupus anticoagulant—confirmed by mixing studies and demonstration of phospholipid dependence), with overlap syndrome (primary biliary cirrhosis-autoimmune hepatitis), with acquired factor VIII deficiency due to inhibitory antibodies, and with severe aortic stenosis. Surgery for valvular heart disease was declined by the surgical team because of coagulopathy. He developed pancytopenia associated with a positive Coombs test, low C3 and C4 complement fractions, and positivity for cryoglobulins in 2014, with rapid resolution of blood abnormalities after a short course of steroids. Aortic valve replacement with a biologic valve was performed in 2015 with correction of blood level of factor VIII using steroids prior to surgery. His family medical history is relevant for a diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis in his mother.
Prior to the admittance in our clinic, he was evaluated in an internal medicine department for low back pain with inguinal extension and self-limited gross hematuria. Raised SCr was noticed for the first time together with intense positivity for double stranded DNA (dsDNA) at a titer of 225 U/L. The patient was diagnosed with SLE, hydroxychloroquine 200 mg BID was initiated, and he was referred to our clinic.
At admittance, the clinical exam was unremarkable. Progressing renal dysfunction (SCr 1.9 mg/dL), raised uric acid (10.2 mg/dL), and inflammatory syndrome (erythrocytes sedimentation ratio 64 mm/h, C-reactive protein 42.5 mg/L, with normal serum fibrinogen level) were identified. Urinalysis showed numerous urate crystals and no dysmorphic red blood cells or cellular casts; proteinuria was 324 mg/day. The abdominal ultrasound showed grade I left hydronephrosis and the Doppler exam revealed normal kidneys’ vascularization. The non-enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan identified multiple bilateral kidney stones, but no ureteral calculi. Allopurinol 150 mg/day was initiated. A kidney biopsy was considered, but we decided to postpone it because of hydronephrosis.
The patient came back after one month with short periods (2–3 min) of diplopia during the past week and worsening of renal dysfunction (SCr 2.3 mg/dL) and of proteinuria (800 mg/day), with bland urine sediment, newly developed thrombocytopenia (79,000/mL), and mild normocytic normochromic anemia (hemoglobin 11.8 g/dL). A head CT scan showed small low dense areas in the frontal and parietal white matter, suggesting a possible involvement of small blood vessels. Activity of the coagulation factor VIII was 20%, so a short course of intravenous methylprednisolone 250 mg/day for 6 days (continued with oral methylprednisolone 64 mg/day) was started followed by a percutaneous biopsy of the left kidney. With steroids, kidney function improved (SCr 1.27 mg/dL at discharge).
Although kidney dysfunction was a recent diagnosis, light microscopy showed global glomerular sclerosis of three out of the five glomeruli analyzed, together with moderate interstitial fibrosis and rare areas with infiltration of lymphocytes .
An important finding was the presence of an arteriole with luminal shrinkage and endothelial edema, which are lesions highly suggestive of endotheliosis , together with the presence of multiple thrombi in the lumen of arterioles, the hallmark of renal TMA .
Electron microscopy confirmed intravascular thrombosis, with cellular fragments and acellular, fibrinous material inside the arteriolar lumens . The immunofluorescence was negative .
The final pathological diagnosis was aPL-associated nephropathy.
The patient came back after three weeks with further degradation of kidney function (SCr 3.1 mg/dL) and signs of microangiopathic hemolytic anemia (peripheral blood smear showing erythrocytes’ fragmentation). Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) was ruled out (normal Willebrand factor-cleaving protease—ADAMTS13 activity in the plasma). We performed a genetic testing for major histocompatibility class genes, which showed a high risk profile for several autoimmune diseases .
A diagnosis of probable CAPS diagnosis was established, as all four diagnostic criteria were met, but with only two organs affected (aPL-associated nephropathy and cerebral microangiopathy). Because we confirmed the presence of small vessel occlusion through kidney biopsy, we did not perform other pathological examination. The patient received anticoagulation with subcutaneous low molecular weight heparin-LMWH (dalteparin 5000 IU daily), intravenous methylprednisolone 250 mg for four days, followed by oral methylprednisolone 0.5 mg/kg/day. Five plasma exchange (PLEX) sessions every other day were performed, followed by two Rituximab infusions of 500 mg seven days apart. At discharge, SCr was 1.3 mg/dL, with no hemolysis. Treatment was continued with oral methylprednisolone with gradual tapering over the next six months, as well as hydroxychloroquine, dalteparin (we choose not to switch to oral antivitamin K (AVK) owing to acquired factor VIII deficiency), together with anti-osteoporosis treatment with Denosumab and alpha vitamin D. Complete CD19+ B cell depletion was obtained one month after Rituximab. The aCL titer progressively decreased, with negative results after five months. Kidney function remained normal during the follow-up of 40 months. Eighteen months after rituximab administration, we observed the repopulation of CD19+ B cells, followed by positivity of aCL two months apart, but without signs of hemolysis. Then, 500 mg of Rituximab was administered with complete CD19+ B cell depletion and aCL negativity. Regarding LA, it remained positive during the whole follow-up. The treatment was well tolerated, without any side effects.