A 75-year-old man received first-line nivolumab (treatment dose, 360 mg every 3 weeks) plus ipilimumab (1 mg/kg intravenously every 6 weeks), combination therapy with anti-programmed cell death 1 (anti-PD-1) antibody, and cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated antigen 4 (CTLA-4) antibody for malignant pleural mesothelioma. His comorbidities included an artificial anus due to perforation of the sigmoid colon and slight proteinuria (urine dipstick test: 30 mg/dl). He did not have any red blood cells, white blood cells, or casts in his urine. His serum albumin, serum creatinine, and hemoglobin A1c values were 3.7 g/dl, 0.82 mg/dl, and 6.0%. He had a history of smoking from 20 to 60 years old. He did not normally take regular medication, but had been taking loxoprofen sodium (60 mg, three times daily), tramadol hydrochloride (37.5 mg, four times daily), and acetaminophen (325 mg, four times daily) for two months for pain caused by the tumor. After the first dose of ICIs (13 days after the initial treatment), he suddenly presented with leg edema, massive proteinuria (19.85 g/day), urinary glucose (0.344 g/day), and hypoalbuminemia (2.0 g/dl). His blood pressure at presentation was 97/48 mmHg. Based on these results, the patient was diagnosed with nephrotic syndrome.
The administration of loxoprofen sodium was discontinued, and a kidney biopsy was performed, and light microscopy revealed 11 glomeruli without focal sclerosis, an increase in the mesangial matrix, or cellularity . The renal interstitium exhibited mild fibrosis , mild leukocytic infiltration, and slight tubulitis, accompanied by medial hypertrophy and fibroblastic intimal thickening in the interlobular and arcuate arteries. An immunofluorescence analysis yielded negative results. Electron microscopy revealed fusion of nearly all podocyte foot processes without any electron-dense deposits . Overall, the biopsy specimens indicated minimal change disease (MCD) with mild atherosclerosis and acute interstitial nephritis (AIN).
Nivolumab and ipilimumab therapy were stopped, and treatment with corticosteroids (prednisone, 1 mg/kg) was initiated. However, diuretic medicines did not work well, resulting in the need for hemodialysis initiation, and excess fluid was removed. His urinary protein and glucose levels gradually decreased with continued treatment and prednisone was tapered. Hemodialysis was discontinued because his urine output gradually increased 35 days after initiating hemodialysis.
Since discharge, his serum creatinine and urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio was 1.06 mg/dl and 1.06 g/gCr. The patient has continued to attend outpatient visits in good spirits, and prednisone tapering is ongoing . Regarding the malignant pleural mesothelioma, the patient will be monitored to see if it grows, without re-administration of ICIs. If it grows, other chemotherapy will be administered.