A 57-year-old Chinese woman presenting with untreated chest tightness, shortness of breath, and fatigue for 5 years and with dyspnea for 10 d was admitted to the China-Japan Union Hospital of Jilin University.
She had no precordial pain, orthopnea, or palpitation. She had no joint pain, dental ulcers, or rash.
Forty years previously she had received an intravenous blood transfusion for a right ovariectomy. Sixteen years previously she was diagnosed with hepatitis C, nephrotic syndrome, and hypertension, but did not receive standard treatment. Five years previously she developed mild PH with pulmonary arterial pressure of 54 mmHg measured by transthoracic echocardiography, which was not treated further. Three years previously she developed severe myopathy. She was diagnosed with polymyositis and administered methylprednisolone 40 mg once a day (QD) and cyclophosphamide 50 mg QD. She lapsed into intermittent coma due to hyperemic ammonia however, thus cyclophosphamide was discontinued, and methylprednisolone 20 mg QD was initiated and has been maintained to date.
She had no family history of genetically related diseases, but her daughter had hepatitis C and had been treated with interferon.
Physical examination revealed no fever, heart rate 70 bpm, blood pressure 140/90 mmHg, O2 saturation 94% on room air, second heart sound accentuation, and moderate edema in both lower limbs.
Primary laboratory data on admission are shown in Table . The 6-min walking distance was 100 m.
Muscle biopsy showed striated muscle atrophy with inflammatory cell infiltration . Electrocardiography indicated a normal sinus rhythm . Transthoracic echocardiography showed enlargement of the left atrium (43.7 × 45.2 × 60.0), right atrium (59.8 × 39.4), and right ventricle (49.3), normal left ventricular ejection fraction (71.3%), elevated pulmonary artery pressure (61 mmHg), and reduced diastolic function . Chest computed tomography (CT) depicted pulmonary arterial hypertension, right atrium and right ventricle enlargement, and no parenchymal lung disease . Pulmonary ventilation/perfusion scanning indicated no evidence of typical signs of thromboembolic disease . Abdominal CT suggested normal liver size with a hepato-renal shunt and a spleno-renal shunt . Right heart catheterization showed that mPAP was 55.33, pulmonary artery wedge pressure (PAWP) was 24, and pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) was 5.13 Woods units (WU) .