A 38-year-old woman with refractory angina, elevated body mass index (40 kg/m2), hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, type 2 diabetes, ex-smoker (20 pack years) and strong family history of premature coronary and peripheral artery disease was referred. Previous stress perfusion cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at her local referring hospital had raised the suspicion of apical HCM as it had shown concentric LVH with patchy late gadolinium enhancement in the apical segments and perfusion defects in the apical septum and apical inferior wall. Subsequently, she had undergone percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) to her right coronary artery (RCA) and left anterior descending (LAD) artery (see timeline).
Her other medical history included polycystic ovarian syndrome, idiopathic episodes of anaphylaxis, obstructive sleep apnoea and deep vein thrombosis.
She suffered life-limiting symptoms of chest pain occurring two to five times a day [Canadian Cardiovascular Society (CCS) Class 3] which was responsive to sublingual glyceryl trinitrate. Her symptoms continued despite uptitration to maximally tolerated doses of guideline-directed anti-anginal drug therapy, with associated poor quality of life. Physical examination was unremarkable.
Up to date coronary angiography revealed patent stents and no flow-limiting epicardial disease by Angio-quantitative flow ratio [0.97 (LAD) and 0.98 (RCA)] . Repeat cardiac MRI confirmed normal left ventricular (LV) systolic function without regional wall motion abnormality and mid-apical LV hypertrophy (maximum LV wall thickness 15 mm) consistent with apical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) . There was no systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve or LV outflow tract obstruction.
A Rubidium-82 PET stress perfusion scan showed normal regional wall motion and rest perfusion. There was significant antero-apical stunning with profound inducible perfusion abnormality in the antero-apical region. The ischaemic burden was quantified at 16% of the total myocardium.
At Heart Team discussion, coronary microvascular dysfunction (CMD) secondary to apical HCM was considered as the mechanism of ischaemia. CSR implantation was recommended given her refractory symptoms, poor quality of life and left-sided myocardial ischaemia. This was performed via a 9Fr sheath placed in the right internal jugular vein under ultrasound guidance. Mean right atrial pressure was 9 mmHg. Coronary sinus dimensions were appropriate for CSR implantation which was delivered to the appropriate target and inflated to 4 atmospheres with an excellent angiographic result and no immediate complications . She was discharged the same day on ticagrelor for 6 months and lifelong aspirin.
At 6-month follow-up, she reported a significant reduction in anginal frequency, now occurring two times per week (CCS Class 1). Her quality of life as measured by the Seattle Angina Questionnaire (SAQ) had also markedly improved [+14 points (42.4%)]. A repeat Rubidium-82 PET perfusion scan showed a significant improvement in the apex and all apical segments at stress which was completely normalized at rest . The ischaemic burden was <5% although there was residual apical akinesia on stress. Quantitative analysis of myocardial perfusion showed significant improvements across all coronary artery territories with greatest improvements in MPR observed in the most ischaemic myocardial segments at baseline . At 1-year follow-up, she was no longer limited in her daily activities and was able to exercise to a greater extent (CCS class 1; quality of life score of 47 on SAQ).