Herein, we describe an 81-year-old male with concomitant metastatic melanoma and pcALCL whose disease progressed on nivolumab and who then developed Kaposi’s varicelliform eruption following one cycle of T-VEC.
The patient had a complicated past medical history including coronary artery disease, treated with a coronary artery bypass graft, cerebral vascular accident following a left knee arthroplasty with residual partial aphasia, and a low-grade CD5+ B-cell lymphoproliferative disease, presenting as a large pleural effusion, which was put in a complete remission following 6 cycles of bendamustine and rituximab (R-Benda) . Nearly two and a half years following completion of R-Benda, the patient developed ulcerative plaques on his chin, scalp, lip, right inner canthus and penile foreskin . A skin biopsy was obtained and was consistent with an anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)-negative, CD4+ CD30+, PD-1−, primary cutaneous anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL). In addition to highlighting the cutaneous plaques of ALCL, a staging positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) scan demonstrated a 2.7 × 1.5 cm fludeoxyglucose (FDG) avid right axillary lymph node. A core needle biopsy of the lymph node demonstrated melanoma. Five of 10 lymph nodes were positive for melanoma upon a right axillary lymphadenectomy.
A subsequent dermatological evaluation revealed a new 1 cm red/bluish nodule on the right forearm. Surgical excision of the lesion confirmed a 4.7 mm thick, nodular, BRAF wild-type melanoma. Concurrent with the diagnostic work up for his melanoma, the patient underwent targeted radiotherapy to the cutaneous ALCL lesions with excellent response. Following excisions of the right forearm and right axillary melanoma, a re-staging PET-CT demonstrated no additional areas concerning for metastatic melanoma.
The patient was then started on nivolumab for his resected, but high-risk, melanoma. At the time of nivolumab initiation, the patient had pink ulcerative, but improving, plaques of ALCL on his right tragus, chin, left preauricular skin and penile foreskin. He also had faint scaly plaques, without ulceration of the bilateral peri-ocular skin. On cycle 2 day 8 of nivolumab he developed new ulcerative plaques on his upper lip, left upper arm and left pre-auricular skin and worsening scale and erythema of his face that were consistent with progressing ALCL. Two new lesions consistent with melanoma recurrence were also noted on the right wrist at the site of the previous melanoma excision. Due to apparent worsening of his ALCL on nivolumab, the decision was made to treat concurrently with radiotherapy and brentuximab. Given the early time point, the appearance of new melanoma nodules were not considered to be a nivolumab failure, and he was continued on therapy.
On cycle 3 day 1 of nivolumab, the patient was given an initial dose of brentuximab vedotin. He also received external beam radiotherapy to his upper lip, left ear and left upper arm. On cycle 3 day 11, the patient was admitted for clostridium difficile-toxin positive colitis, which improved with oral vancomycin. A restaging PET-CT during cycle 3 demonstrated multiple new pulmonary nodules concerning for metastatic melanoma. On cycle 3 day 20, the patient was admitted again secondary to worsening fatigue and a concern for cellulitis surrounding a radiotherapy-treated ALCL lesion of his left upper arm. The patient was treated with antibiotics and improved. During this admission, new ulcerative plaques were noted on the scalp concerning for progression of the ALCL and cutaneous lesions of metastatic melanoma were identified on the right arm and right chest.
Due to worsening disease and declining performance status, the patient’s treatment options were limited. Ipilimumab was deemed inappropriate due to the recent clostridium difficile infection and worsening fatigue. There was also concern that his pcALCL was being exacerbated by ICB and that treatment with brentuximab may have accelerated the melanoma. Thus, after discussing the risks and benefits, the decision was made to discontinue brentuximab and treat the in-transit lesions of melanoma with talimogene laherparepvec concurrently with nivolumab. On cycle 4 day 1 of nivolumab, the patient was treated with 1.7 mL of 1 million plaque-forming-units/mL to three melanoma lesions on the right forearm and two on the right chest. At that visit, the patient was noted to have worsening erythema and scale of his upper extremities, upper chest and face. This was thought to be multifactorial, with asteatosis cutis a prominent feature, as well as either an ICB-related dermatitis or worsening pcALCL. On cycle 4 day 3, the patient presented to clinic febrile (temperature 103.0 F), fatigued and was noted to have a leukocytosis (21,200 white blood cells per microliter). He was subsequently hospitalized for 4 days and the presentation was attributed to an AE of T-VEC. During the admission, the patient had a skin biopsy of the worsening erythema and scale on his face , which demonstrated features consistent with pcALCL.
In anticipation of a second cycle of T-VEC, the patient returned to clinic on cycle 4 day 22. On examination, a diffuse eruption of eroded papules was noted on his bilateral upper extremities, chest, flank and back . A few intact vesicles were visible on the right forearm. The lesions were notably asymmetrical in distribution, with the highest density occurring on the right upper arm and right chest. The patient was afebrile and reported mild pruritus of the eruption, which he reported began a few days previously. A Tzanck smear was performed from one of the intact vesicles. Multinucleated giant cells with cytopathic changes were noted . Due to concern for Kaposi’s varicelliform eruption (KVE), the patient was started on intravenous (IV) acyclovir. A direct fluorescence antibody test performed on a vesicle confirmed HSV1 infection. A skin biopsy demonstrated epidermal ulceration with acute inflammation and viral cytopathic effects. HSV I/II-specific immunoperoxidase stain was positive, while a specific immunostain for VZV was negative. HSV viremia was not detected by polymerase chain reaction. He was given 48 hours of IV acyclovir and when the vesicles had completely crusted over, he was discharged on a 14-day course of oral valacyclovir. He experienced a complete resolution of his KVE; however, due to his progressing melanoma, ALCL and declining performance status, the patient was transitioned to hospice care.