Here, we are presenting a rare case of a 11-year-old boy referred to our Department of Pediatric and Preventive Dentistry with the chief complaint of pain and swelling on the lower left back tooth region from the past 20 days . Swelling was initially small in size gradually progressed to present size and associated with extraoral draining sinus for which he consulted a private dental clinic. Although he was under medication for past 1 week, there was no reduction in the size of the swelling . His medical history revealed multiple fractures sustained during routine handling with difficulty in walking. His birth and neonatal period were uneventful. Family history revealed a positive finding of the same illness in his elder sibling. On examination, child was sick looking, pale, dyspneic, with rhizomelic dwarfism, and relative macrocephaly with frontal bossing. There was bilateral bowing of lower limbs with varus deformity and flexion deformity of the thumb. Patient profile was concave with typical triangular faces with fragile skin . He had white sclera with narrow thoracic cage. Abdomen was protuberant with marked kyphosis. Patient had undergone surgery for impaired vision and hearing was normal. There was marked scoliosis with convexity toward left. Asymmetry was seen on the left side of the face with palpable submandibular lymph nodes, which was mobile and tender on palpation. On inspection, a solitary diffuse swelling was present on the left side of the face measuring 2 × 3 cm, extending from the corner of the mouth to middle third of the mandible anteroposteriorly, and from ala-tragal line to the base of the mandible superior-inferiorly, associated with draining sinus. The swelling was soft in consistency, fluctuant, mild-tender on palpation, and there was a localized rise in temperature. On intraoral examination, swelling present in relation to 75 extending from attached gingiva up to buccal vestibule . Deep dentinal caries was present in relation to mandibular left primary second molar which was tender on percussion and presented with vestibular tenderness and obliteration. The intraoral lesion was rubbery and fluctuant on palpation. Tooth present was 15 53 12 11 21 22 25 84 42 41 31 32 75. Dental caries with respect to 11, 21, 15 and 25, caries with pulp exposure with respect to 75, 84. Intraoral periapical radiograph and orthopantomograph and cone-beam computed tomography were taken , and finally, diagnosis has arrived as dentoalveolar abscess with respect to 75 associated with extraoral draining sinus and pathological fracture of body of mandible on the left side. Investigation with hemogram revealed microcytic hypochromic anemia with relative lymphocytosis, echocardiography showed mild pulmonic regurgitation renal function test, and electrolytes were normal. Reduced Serum calcium level. Alkaline phosphatase was significantly raised, bilateral pneumonitic patches and haziness with lack of air spaces seen in chest X-ray. Hip X-ray revealed protrusion acetabulum. X-ray of the extremities showed thinned cortices ( and ). X-ray spine shows platyspondyly. Owing to his physician's high index of suspicion, a diagnosis of OI-III was pursued, which is the non-lethal form of the disease.
Calcium and vitamin D therapy was initiated, and an in-depth discussion regarding bisphosphonates was pursued. Advised oral prophylaxis and oral hygiene instructions, lesion sterilization and tissue repair were done in relation to 75, pulp therapy with respect to 84, and restoration in relation to 15, 11, 21, and 25 were done. Tablet Augmentin 375 mg, Soframycin ointment, and tablet Metrogyl–200 mg were prescribed for 5 days. Patient was recalled after 3 days, 10 days, 15 days, 1 month, 3 months, and 4 months. Clinically healing extraoral sinus was noticed, and intraorally the findings were satisfactory and erupting 43 was noted .