A 31-year-old pregnant woman—with no family history of congenital heart disease—had been referred to our centre because of foetal aortic valve stenosis, first detected at 18 + 0 weeks of gestation. Maternal transabdominal foetal ultrasound imaging at 28 + 4 weeks of gestation now revealed severe foetal aortic valve stenosis with a poorly contracting dilated left ventricle, severe mitral valve regurgitation, and local endocardial fibroelastosis. Severe mitral regurgitation most likely results from papillary muscle ischaemia. In foetuses with severe aortic valve stenosis, the mitral valve apparatus is most often the first area affected by the development of endocardial fibroelastosis. The mitral valve inflow was still biphasic and the regurgitant velocity exceeded 4 m. The maximum systolic flow velocity across the thickened aortic valve was 2 m/s. The flow across the oval foramen was left to right and inside the aortic arch retrogradely.
In order to salvage the function of the left ventricle, percutaneous ultrasound-guided foetal balloon valvuloplasty was attempted at 29 + 4 weeks of gestation under general maternofoetal anaesthesia. At that time, the function of the left ventricle had deteriorated further as the mitral valve flow integral exhibited now mostly an a-wave filling. As a technical obstacle to the procedure, the foetus had been consistently observed lying in a dorsoanterior cephalic position. Therefore, the left ventricle pointed posteriorly and could not be accessed by the conventional percutaneous ultrasound-guided approach.
In order to achieve the desired foetal position with the least maternal procedural trauma, foetoscopic assistance was employed: three 11 Fr catheter sheaths were percutaneously placed along the left flank of the foetus into the amniotic cavity . In order to improve foetal visualization, the amniotic cavity was then insufflated with carbon dioxide. Following these manoeuvers, using a foetoscope and two graspers introduced through the trocars, the foetus was rotated in dorsoposterior position and the upper extremities postured along the foetal sides .
After successful foetoscopic foetal posturing , the insufflation gas was removed and an 18 gauge needle percutaneously advanced into the foetal left ventricle and placed underneath the obstructed aortic valve by maternal transabdominal foetal echocardiographic guidance . Successful foetal balloon valvuloplasty was then achieved via the needle shaft employing a 3.5 mm—coronary angioplasty catheter . Mother and foetus tolerated the procedure well and complications were not observed. At the end of the procedure, all interventional materials were removed and the maternal skin incisions closed with single stitches. In the days after foetal balloon valvuloplasty marked improvement of flow across the aortic valve and an increase in flow velocity from 1.75 m/s prior to the intervention to more than 3 m/s after the intervention were documented .
In our case, a semi-compliant balloon with an inflated diameter of 3.5 mm was used that fit through the shaft on an 18 gauge needle. As a result, the inflated diameter of the balloon in this 29 + 4 weeks old foetus was smaller than the aortic annulus (4.5 mm—z = +0.1). Whereas decompression and improved function of the left ventricle were observed for about 2 weeks, with further foetal growth, the fixed stenosis became more and more effective again. This was the main reason, why the foetus already was delivered in the third week after prenatal intervention and scheduled for postnatal re-valvuloplasty on the second day of life with a 5 mm balloon. At the time of resubmission of this report, the infant has undergone stent insertions in the ductus arteriosus and atrial septum, as well as insertion of flow occluders into both pulmonary branches. By these interventions, the foetal circulation can be maintained and blood flow into the pulmonary arteries be reduced. In addition, two more aortic valvuloplasties were carried out. Using these measures, left ventricular function improved over time. Unfortunately, the baby died at 6 months of age from Escherichia coli septicaemia most likely from a long-standing central venous line after another cardiac surgery addressing its mitral valve regurgitation and branch pulmonary artery obstruction.
The percutaneous ultrasound-guided and foetoscopy-assisted procedure had been performed following parental informed consent and in accordance with the ethical standards for human experimentation established by the Declaration of Helsinki.