A 42-year-old male presented to the emergency department with crampy abdominal pain and bloody diarrhoea lasting 2 days, on a background of an 18-year history of UC. He reported multiple episodes of loose stools and fresh bleeding per rectum with one episode of vomiting. Regular medications included oral mesalazine 3 g once daily since diagnosis and subcutaneous adalimumab 40 mg bi-monthly for the 6 months prior. He initially attributed his symptoms to a ‘flare’ of UC, as a consequence of increased alcohol consumption of 70 units per week for the preceding 3 weeks. He did however note that this episode of abdominal pain was the most severe experienced to date. On physical examination, he was apyrexic, and haemodynamically stable. His abdomen was soft and non-tender. Bowel sounds were auscultated and normal. Laboratory findings were significant for leucocytosis of 20.5 × 109/L and neutrophilia of 18.3 × 109/L. C-reactive protein levels were 46 mg/L and haemoglobin was 14.8 g/gL. A colonoscopy was performed showing proctitis with spontaneous bleeding involving the distal 3–4 cm of the rectum. On visualisation of the left colon, the mucosa appeared normal. Upon inspecting the proximal transverse colon, a globular intraluminal mass was present . At endoscopy, the performing gastroenterologist suspected a haemangioma or Meckel’s diverticulum that had intussuscepted. Dual contrast computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis demonstrated a 12-cm fluid-filled ileocolic intussusception at the hepatic flexure with no definitive lead point . There were no radiological findings concerning neoplastic pathology. Admitting surgeons reported this non-obstructing intussusception was unlikely to resolve through conservative management, so this patient proceeded to urgent exploratory laparotomy. At laparotomy, the intussusception was noted extending from the ileocecal region to the hepatic flexure. When the intussusception was reduced, the lead point was a grossly abnormal, dilated, inflamed appendix. Right hemicolectomy and ileocecal anastomosis was successfully performed. Histology reported 8.6 × 2.2 cm, low-grade appendiceal mucinous neoplasm (LAMN) involving the entire length of the appendix, histopathological stage TisN0 (American Joint Committee on Cancer 8th edition) . Twenty-three lymph nodes resected were negative for metastatic disease. The patient’s clinical condition improved between days 1–5 postoperatively and was discharged home day 11 postoperatively with maintenance therapeutics held on discharge. At 12 weeks of follow-up this patient required reintroduction of mesalazine followed by adalimumab at up due to relapse of his UC.