A 58-year-old female presented to New England Eye Center in June 2017 with decreased vision in her left eye of approximately 2 weeks duration. Her past ophthalmic history was significant for a retrobulbar migraine in her left eye. On presentation, her best-corrected visual acuity was 20/20 in the right eye, which stayed consistent throughout her follow-up visits, and 20/40 in the left eye. Funduscopic exam of the affected eye revealed a 5.8 mm in diameter, yellow-colored choroidal mass located superior and temporal to the macula, as shown in Fig. a. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) and ultrasound of the corresponding site revealed subretinal fluid associated with a 2.47 mm choroidal lesion with medium internal reflectivity . Fundus autofluorescence of the lesion also revealed a hyper-autofluorescent choroidal mass with a surrounding pocket of subretinal fluid . Imaging of the right eye was within normal limits.
Her medical history was significant for stage IIIA T3 N1 M0, ER positive, progesterone receptor (PR) positive, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) negative, well-differentiated invasive ductal carcinoma of the right breast. A tumor measuring 6 cm was first diagnosed by screening mammogram 16 years prior to ocular presentation, in May 2001. She subsequently underwent a modified radical mastectomy of the right breast with sentinel and axillary lymph node dissection in June 2001. Surgical margins were free of the tumor. One sentinel lymph node and three additional lymph nodes, with a total of 4 out of 12 lymph nodes, were positive for metastases. One lymph node showed extra-nodal extension. Consequently, localized radiation to the chest wall and supraclavicular region was completed, followed by 6 cycles of adjuvant CAF (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, 5-flourouracil) chemotherapy. She was treated with Tamoxifen 10 mg twice daily for 5 years following the completion of adjuvant chemoradiotherapy.
In January 2012, a surveillance CT scan of the chest revealed a 2.0 cm right upper lobe mass with hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy. Biopsy during mediastinoscopy confirmed metastatic adenocarcinoma consistent with breast carcinoma as the primary site, and displayed ER+, PR+, HER2− expressivity. Accordingly, the patient then completed nearly 3 years of anti-estrogen therapy with the aromatase inhibitor letrozole 2.5 mg daily.
Letrozole was discontinued due to recurrence of the disease in the right knee. As treatment for this metastasis, the patient underwent radical resection of the right distal femur and reconstruction with a prosthesis. The tumor was diffusely ER+, and the patient was started on anti-estrogen therapy with another aromatase inhibitor, exemestane 25 mg daily. 10 months later it was discontinued due to disease progression when a core biopsy of one of the inguinal lymph nodes revealed metastatic breast adenocarcinoma with ER 90%, PR 0%, and HER2 2+. The patient was then started on anti-estrogen therapy with the aromatase inhibitor fulvestrant in conjunction with the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor palbociclib for suspected resistance to ER endocrine therapy.
In early 2017, new lytic vertebral and left pelvic metastatic lesions were detected. The patient subsequently underwent radiation therapy to the T11-L1 region, left hip, and adjacent pelvis. She was restarted on exemestane, with the mTOR kinase inhibitor everolimus. This therapy was discontinued after 2–3 weeks due to profound weakness, nausea, and emesis. Bone scan showed a progression of osseous dissemination.
By June 2017, she had extensive osseous and lymph node dissemination. She was restarted on fulvestrant in combination with the receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B (RANK) ligand and osteoclast inhibitor denosumab. It was at this time that she was diagnosed with the left choroidal mass and referred for an ophthalmology consult. The patient was advised by oncology to discontinue fulvestrant due to disease progression, and was started on the mitotic inhibitor vinorelbine 25 mg/m2 IV weekly for 2–3 weeks as tolerated.
Regarding the newly diagnosed choroidal mass, after careful consideration of radiation therapy for more definitive treatment versus photodynamic therapy (PDT) or laser to treat the subretinal fluid, a conservative approach was adopted with a 1-month follow-up to assess for possible regression of the lesion in conjunction with the initiation of vinorelbine. In July 2017, visual acuity of the left eye improved to 20/30 and funduscopic exam and color fundus photo revealed a slightly regressed choroidal mass, at 4.75 mm, with a reduction in subretinal fluid. The OCT scan showed decreased subretinal fluid with the choroidal mass size stable at 2.47 mm. With a possible future consideration of external beam radiotherapy (EBR) or photodynamic therapy, the patient was closely monitored for an increase in choroidal mass size and surrounding exudate in the event of a waning effect of vinorelbine.
During her last follow-up in September 2017, visual acuity of the left eye improved to 20/20. Funduscopic exam and color fundus photo revealed a regressed yellow-colored, temporally located choroidal mass . OCT demonstrated resolution of the subretinal fluid with a stable mass size of 2.47 mm seen on ultrasound . The patient continued treatment with vinorelbine and denosumab for ER+, PR−, stage IV metastatic breast carcinoma and had completed 6 cycles of vinorelbine. A conservative approach was continued with a plan for frequent follow-up.