A 71-year-old gentleman with a history of degenerative left hip osteoarthritis status post left hip arthroplasty 2 months prior presented for evaluation due to several weeks of a worsening back and left leg pain, and new urinary retention with overflow incontinence. Physical exam was notable for pain-limited weakness of the left leg in all muscle groups (4+/5 strength on manual muscle testing) and decreased sensation to light touch from the anterolateral thigh down to the dorsum of the left foot and toe in an L4 dermatomal distribution. As shown in , lumbar MRI demonstrated severe thecal sac stenosis at L3-L4 secondary to bilateral, left greater than right juxtafacet cysts causing compression of the cauda equina nerve roots. A non-contrast computed tomographic (CT) scan showed severe L3-L4 stenosis and lumbar flexion/extension films showed no instability. After discussion of various treatment options, the patient agreed to undergo direct removal of the JFCs with placement of the Coflex® device for dynamic stabilization to avoid a single-level instrumented fusion while attempting to minimize the risk of cyst recurrence. Surgery was performed three days after initial clinic presentation.
Decompression of the thecal sac at L3-4 was accomplished via partial inferior L3 and superior L4 laminectomies and mesial facetectomies via a standard midline approach in the usual fashion . The juxtafacet cysts were seen bilaterally and completely excised using microsurgical techniques by the senior author. After decompression, a Coflex® (Paradigm Spine, LCC, New York, NY) implant was placed between the remaining L3 and L4 lamina and spinous processes and the tissues were closed in the usual fashion. Total estimated blood loss was approximately 35cc. Juxtafacet cysts were confirmed on pathology. Postoperatively, the patient had immediate improvement in his left leg pain and no complications. The patient was transferred to inpatient rehabilitation on post-operative day 1. At 1-year follow-up the patient continues with complete resolution of his left leg pain and urinary symptoms. demonstrates post-operative standing films and 6-month post-operative CT.