An 11-year-old Sri Lankan girl presented with a 2-day history of fever, headache, vomiting, and altered level of consciousness. She had been experiencing polyuria and polydipsia during the past 2 weeks. There was no history of chronic headaches, visual disturbances, respiratory symptoms, or abdominal symptoms. She was not known to be diabetic. An examination revealed an unwell-looking febrile girl. Her height was 140 cm (25th centile) and her weight was 25 kg (3rd centile). There was no evidence of neck stiffness or positive Kernig’s sign. Following admission she developed generalized tonic–clonic seizures which required intubation and ventilation. Random blood glucose and electrolyte panel including sodium, potassium, calcium, and magnesium were normal. She was empirically started on antibiotics administered intravenously for possible meningitis. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed gross hydrocephalus with suprasellar mass most likely due to craniopharyngioma . A ventriculoperitoneal shunt was inserted and she was started on 3 % hypertonic saline to reduce intracranial pressure. Her basal serum sodium levels were 140 mmol/l and she was commenced on a dose of 5 ml/kg 8 hourly, aiming to increase her sodium levels to 160 to 170 mmol/l. Her serum electrolytes were monitored 8 hourly. Her sodium levels rose to 163 mmol/l after the first 24 hours. It was decided to repeat another dose of 3 % hypertonic saline. However, during the latter part of the day she became polyuric and dehydrated. Her blood pressure was 80/60 and pulse rate was 130 beats per minute. She was hydrated with boluses of normal saline and commenced on hydrocortisone replacement administered intravenously. As her blood pressure failed to stabilize she was started on inotropic support with noradrenaline and dobutamine infusions. Her serum sodium levels were 226 mmol/l and further doses of 3 % hypertonic saline were stopped immediately. Other biochemical investigations were as follows: serum potassium 3.8 mmol/l (3.5 to 5.0 mmol/l), blood urea 8.1 mmol/l (2.5 to 8.0 mmol/l), serum creatinine 76 μmol/l (70 to 120 μmol/l), random blood glucose 8.5 mmol/l, serum ionized calcium 1.12 mmol/l (1.05 to 1.3 mmol/l), and serum magnesium 0.8 mmol/l (0.75 to 0.95 mmol/l). Her measured serum osmolality was 470 mOsm/kg with a urine osmolality of 280 mOsm/kg. There was no discrepancy between measured and calculated serum osmolalities. Her urine spot sodium was elevated at 116 mmol/l. A urine spot sodium of >100 mmol/l can be seen in hypernatremia following ingestion of salt or infusion of 3 % hypertonic saline. Considering the clinical and biochemical factors, hypernatremia in our patient can be attributed to infusion of 3 % hypertonic saline in the background of cranial diabetes insipidus.
As we considered a sodium level of 226 mmol/l not compatible with life it was decided to correct her sodium levels rapidly. She was treated with an immediate dose of desmopressin 400 micrograms administered orally and hydrated with 5 % dextrose administered intravenously and clear water via nasogastric feeding at a rate of 190 ml/hour to replace the fluid deficit of 7 liters over 36 hours. Her polyuria settled and her serum sodium levels dropped to 160 mmol/l on the following day. However, her cardiac status became unstable and a 12-lead ECG showed diffuse prolongation of QT intervals, ST depressions in leads V1 to V2, ST elevation in V3, and VT in V4 to V5 . An urgent echocardiogram was planned but she developed VT and went into cardiac arrest. In spite of defibrillation and subsequent resuscitation she died.