A visually asymptomatic 10-year-old boy presented with an inferonasal visual field defect in the left eye . He had no significant medical history other than his mother’s gestational diabetes. His family history was unremarkable for any ocular diseases and his parents showed a normal fundus on examination. His best-corrected visual acuities were 20/20 in both eyes (OU). Pupils were equal, round, and reactive to light without relative afferent pupillary defect. He had normal color vision OU. Detailed fundoscopic examination revealed segmental pallor of the left optic disc, thinning of the superotemporal rim, a relative superior entrance of the central retinal artery and superior peripapillary scleral halo . Fluorescein angiography showed patchy filling delays in the corresponding disc area but no other retinal vascular abnormality was found . SD OCT (Spectralis OCT, Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) using segmentation analysis showed sectoral absence of the ganglion cell layer (GCL) and retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) in the superotemporal quadrant of the retina . Additionally, marked thinning of the inner plexiform layer (IPL), inner nuclear layer (INL) and outer plexiform layer (OPL) were detected . Decreased P100 amplitude in the left eye was observed on visual evoked potential (VEP). OCTA (Spectralis OCT-A, Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) revealed attenuated superficial and intermediate/deep capillary plexuses . The main branches in corresponding well-demarcated lesions were preserved. Consequently, his segmental optic disc pallor and inner retinal hypoplasia were presumed to be caused by an incidental BRAO. To evaluate risk factors for retinal arterial occlusion, laboratory investigations were performed including complete blood count with erythrocyte sedimentation rate, serum lipids, metabolic panel, liver and renal function tests, which were all normal. A thrombophilia screening revealed that homocysteine, protein C, protein S, factor V Leiden assay, antithrombin III, prothrombin time, fibrinogen, lipoprotein A and complement levels were normal. Rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibodies, lupus anticoagulant, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, antiphospholipid antibodies, and anticardiolipin antibodies were absent with no evidence of vasculitis. Cardiovascular work-up including echocardiography showed no abnormalities and systolic/diastolic blood pressure were within normal limits.