A 34 year old Saudi male was diagnosed to have LCH in Damascus, Syria in March 1999. He presented with 6 months history of an occipital mass causing bony destruction and bilateral cervical lymphadenopathy. After receiving 8 cycles of cylophosphomide, vinblastine and prednisone, he had regression of the occipital mass and disappearance of the cervical lymph nodes. Five months later, the patient presented to the medical oncologists at King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre (KFSH&RC) in Riyadh with progression of his disease in the form of extensive bony involvement. After receiving 2 courses of vinblastine and prednisone in addition to radiotherapy to skull, right parotid, right femur and pelvis, the disease became under control. In February 2002, the patient developed nodular lung lesions and cervical as well as inguinal lymphadenopathy. After confirming relapse of LCH, he received 8 more cycles of prednisone and etoposide, following which the second complete remission (CR) was achieved. On 29/7/2003; the patient had a localized relapse of his LCH as he presented with a new lesion behind the right ear which subsided after receiving 4 cycles of etoposide and prednisone. On 6/1/2004, this lesion increased in size so 2 more cycles of etoposide and prednisone were administered, following which the lesion disappeared. On 27/7/2004, the patient was found to have the third relapse as a new mass appeared in the right external auditory meatus that disappeared after receiving localized radiotherapy. On 6/9/2004, the patient presented with a localized relapse in the form of a tiny swelling involving the right frontal skull bone. An accidental blunt trauma caused rupture of the lesion which healed with scars. On 28/2/2005; the patient was admitted to the leukemia unit at KFSH&RC with low grade pyrexia and anemic symptoms for 2 weeks. Physical examination revealed: pallor, tiny inguinal lymphadenopathy and 2 small dark fleshy lesions, one on the forehead and one in the groin. The chest was clear and cardiovascular examination revealed no murmurs or added heart sounds. There was no abdominal tenderness or palpable organomegaly and neurological examination revealed no abnormality. Full blood count (FBC) showed: WBC: 16.3 × 109/L, Hb: 54 g/L and PLT: 40 × 109/L. Blood film revealed 21% blast cells and dysplastic changes. Bone marrow biopsy (BMB) showed a cellular marrow with 85% myeloblasts without any cytogenetic abnormablity. The renal and hepatic profiles were all within normal limits. After establishing the diagnoses of: therapy-related myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) transforming into acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) and minimal residual LCH, the patient was commenced on an ICE induction course of chemotherapy composed of idarubicin, cytosine arabinoside and etoposide. Following this treatment, the patient achieved the first CR of his acute leukemia (AL). Meanwhile, an HLA identical sibling donor for allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) was identified. On admission to the HSCT unit on 23/4/2005, the patient was asymptomatic and his physical examination revealed no new abnormality. Blood counts, renal and hepatic profiles were all within normal limits. A pre-allograft BMB showed no evidence of leukemia. The patient received a conditioning protocol composed of busulphan and cyclophosphamide. He was given fluconozole, acyclovir and bactrim as infection prophylaxis and methtrexate and cyclosporine as graft versus host disease (GVHD) prophylaxis. On 3/5/2005; the patient received his allograft without any complication. In the early post-HSCT period, the patient developed grade I mucositis treated with intravenous (IV) morphine infusion and one febrile neutropenic episode treated empirically with IV cefepime. No cytomegalovirus infection, acute GVHD, venoocclusive disease of the liver or hemorhagic cystitis were encountered. The patient engrafted his leucocytes on day +19 HSCT and his platelets on day +12 HSCT. After having a successful allograft, the patient was discharged on day +25 HSCT on cyclosporine, zantac and prophylactic antimicrobials. Thereafter, the patient had regular follow up at the HSCT out patient clinic. One year post-HSCT; he developed chronic GVHD of skin, nails, mouth, eyes and liver. Initially he was treated with prednisone 1 mg/kg/day but as his chronic GVHD became reactivated 5 months later, mycophenolate mofetil and extracorporal photophoresis were given. After achieving a good response to the measures taken, the immunosuppressive therapy was gradually tapered. Then the patient continued to have his regular follow up at the HSCT clinic and no new complication was encountered.