A 56-year-old Caucasian man presented to cardiology clinic with several months of
fatigue, reduced exercise tolerance, palpitations, atypical chest pain, and lower
extremity oedema.
He had a history of hypertension, well-controlled diabetes mellitus type 2,
dyslipidaemia, obesity, and prior 15-pack year tobacco use. Additionally, he had
progressive muscle weakness and a family history of genetically confirmed DM2 due to
ZFN9 mutation in his brother and daughter. Based on his symptoms and family history,
he had an electromyogram that was consistent with myotonic dystrophy, but he did not
have genetic testing performed due to the cost. He had no history of significant
alcohol or illicit substance use, malignancy, HIV, family history of cardiomyopathy
or premature coronary disease, or personal history of cardiovascular disease
including myocardial infarction or myocarditis.
Medications at that time included the following: lisinopril (10 mg daily),
ezetimibe (statin intolerance), insulin, and metformin.
Physical exam showed normal vital signs, no jugular venous distention, clear lungs,
regular heart rate and rhythm without murmurs, presence of peripheral oedema, and
mild proximal muscle weakness.
Laboratory testing revealed an elevated creatine kinase of 495 U/L (ref range
30–300 U/L), elevated N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide of
384 pg/mL (ref range 0–125 pg/mL), but normal Troponin I.
Other labs including electrolytes, renal and liver function, and complete blood
count were normal. An electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated normal sinus rhythm with
inverted T waves in V4 and flat T waves in V5–6 . A 72-h
ambulatory cardiac monitor recorded sinus rhythm with short runs of non-sustained
ventricular tachycardia but no atrioventricular conduction issues. Given his history
of DM2, suspicion for heart failure, atypical chest pain, and coronary artery
disease (CAD) risk factors, we pursued a cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging
with contrast and regadenoson stress to assess for function, scar, and perfusion.
Cardiac magnetic resonance revealed a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of
28%, global hypokinesis, and a severely enlarged (6.9 cm) LV cavity
(; Videos 1 and 2). Regadenoson stress perfusion imaging showed no
ischaemia. Late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) imaging showed mid-myocardial
enhancement in the basal and mid-septal and lateral segments with a total scar
burden of 12% (, red arrows).
This was consistent with non-ischaemic scar seen in muscular dystrophies, and other
causes of non-ischaemic systolic heart failure including alcohol, toxic, viral, and
chemotherapy-induced cardiomyopathy were excluded based on history.
Our investigations demonstrated severe LV dysfunction and LGE pattern consistent with
DM2 associated cardiomyopathy. We initiated goal-directed medical therapy for heart
failure including lisinopril, metoprolol succinate, and spironolactone with
titration to maximally tolerated doses. After 1 year, his LVEF remained
<35% and he received a primary prevention implantable
cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD). Now 3 years later, his LVEF has not decreased, his
scar burden on CMR has not increased, and his symptoms have improved. Additionally,
we have changed lisinopril to sacubitril-valsartan and also added dapagliflozin
based on current heart failure guidelines.