A 61-year-old female was diagnosed in December 2018 with Philadelphia chromosome-positive acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. Her past medical history was significant for hypertension and type 2 diabetes mellitus for more than 10 years. At the moment of diagnosis, the total white blood cell count was 31 × 109/L (WBC) with peripheral blood smear showing 47% blasts, haemoglobin 7.4 g/dL, and 100 × 109/L platelets count (PLT). The bone marrow smears showed hypercellularity with more than 90% blast cells. The flow cytometry revealed 75% blast cells compatible with common B cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. The cytogenetic and fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis have identified the translocation t (9;22)(q34;q11)(Philadelphia chromosome). The molecular analysis was positive for BCR-ABL fusion gene (p210 isoform), and the BCR-ABL/ABL ratio was 31.55%. The patient received treatment according to GRAAPH2005 protocol with Imatinib 600 mg/day. The patient achieved complete morphological remission after the induction, with a molecular response BCR-ABL/ABL ratio of 0.12% IS.
The 6 months follow-up assessment showed a deep molecular response (molecular analysis ratio BCR-ABL/ABL: 0.0086% -MR4.0 log IS). The cytogenetic analysis 46,XX [20] was consistent with a complete cytogenetic response, and the bone marrow aspiration showed trilineage dysplasia. Her treatment was continued with the same regimen.
On day eight after consolidation therapy with cycle 3 (Methotrexate 1 g/m2 at day 1, Cytarabine 500 mg/m2 BID at day 2 and day 3), a severe aplasia developed (0.76 × 109/L WBC, 0 × 109/L absolute neutrophil count (ANC), 7 × 109/L PLT), and she became febrile with a mild cough and a small area of right perihilar infiltration on chest X-rays , despite prophylactic treatment with levofloxacin. Sputum culture and peripheral blood cultures were performed, and the patient was started on empirical broad-spectrum antibiotics (piperacillin-tazobactam, amikacin) and fluconazole.
Over the next 2 days, the respiratory status worsened, and the patient developed severe cough and hemoptysis, dyspnea and an increased in the oxygen demand. Considering the worsening clinical status, the risk of multidrug-resistant (MDR) germs infection, as well as severe bone marrow aplasia with multiple hospitalizations, the antibiotic treatment was escalated to meropenem, linezolid, amikacin, and fluconazole was switched to voriconazole. The patient received platelets and subcutaneous granulocyte colony-stimulating factor treatment.
Four days after the onset of fever (11 days after chemotherapy), the patient was admitted to ICU for type I respiratory failure and pulmonary haemorrhage. On ICU admission, the patient was conscious and oriented, very dyspneic and tachypneic with a respiratory rate of 38/min, and a SpO278% on 12 l per minute (lpm) O2 on facial mask, and bilateral auscultatory pulmonary crackles. The blood pressure was 200/120 mmHg, and the heart rate was 100 beats per minute, sinus rhythm. There were no signs of peripheral hypoperfusion. The temperature was 37.3o Celsius. The arterial blood gases revealed a pH 7.39, PaO264 mmHg, PaCO2 30 mmHg, lactate 1.5 mmol/L. The antibiotic cover was broadened with the addition of colistin. After 2 h on high flow nasal oxygen (FiO2 1, flow 50 lpm) and in the absence of clinical improvement (persistent respiratory effort), mechanical ventilation (6 ml/kg, positive end-expiratory pressure titrated at 12 cm H2O, plateau pressure 28 cm H2O), sedation, and continuous muscle paralysis were initiated. One-hour post intubation, the PaO2/FiO2 ratio was to 52, on 100% O2. The decision to initiate ventilation in prone position for 18 h was made at this point, with poor respiratory responsiveness (PaO2/FiO2 ratio 114). The chest X-rays at this moment is shown in Fig. . The acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) diagnosis was established. Within the next 24 h in the ICU (day 12 after chemotherapy), the patient recovered from aplasia (10.14 × 109/L WBC, 8.36 × 109/L ANC, 103 × 109/L PLT). The neuromuscular blockade was discontinued after 48 h.
The clinical state and blood results prior to ICU admission are summarized in Fig. .
The sputum culture was positive for Stenotrophomonas maltophilia (cultured on day 9 after chemotherapy, 2 days before the ICU admission). Therefore, the antibiotic treatment has been de-escalated to colistin (4.5 MIU, BID, after initial bolus dose of 9 MIU) and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (800 mg/160 mg, QID). After other 2 days, the antibiogram showed a germ susceptible to trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX), intermediary susceptible to levofloxacin, and resistant to all beta-lactams and aminoglycosides (no determined MIC available). The antibiotic treatment has been further de-escalated the next day to TMP/SMX only for a total duration of 7 days. Unfortunately, the laboratory was logistically unable to test the susceptibility to colistin at this point. All blood cultures were reported negative during the hospital stay.
The respiratory improvement allowed for a bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage, 3 days after ICU admission, which showed a non-haemorrhagic mucosa, and numerous blood clots. The cytologic examination was very rich in red blood cells with some macrophages, rare lymphocytes and neutrophils. Respiratory cultures from the bronchoalveolar lavage were negative.
The clinical course was marked by a failed extubation at day 11 of ICU, explained by ICU-induced neuromyopathy and ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP) with MDR Pseudomonas aeruginosa susceptible only to colistin (MIC 2), and resistant to carbapenems and other antibiotics. Treatment with IV and nebulized colistin was introduced for a total duration of 2 weeks. The respiratory status progressively improved, allowing the successful extubation on day 20 in ICU. The chest X-rays post extubation is shown in Fig. .
The patient was transferred to the haematology ward after 26 days of ICU stay and 37 days after chemotherapy. The patient was discharged home soon after, on family request, and her clinical condition and respiratory function were excellent at 10 months follow up.