A 69-year-old female with a past medical history of coronary artery disease, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and polymyalgia rheumatica presented with a one-month history of increasing abdominal pain associated with weakness, fatigue, weight loss, and loss of appetite. She had no known history of malignancy nor was she exposed to asbestos in the past.
Laboratory findings revealed a WBC count of 25.8 (reference range: 3.5-12.0 x 109/L) with absolute neutrophil and monocyte counts of 23.05 (reference range: 3000-5800 x 106/L) and 1.67 (reference range: 300-500 x 106/L), a hemoglobin level of 7.7 (reference range for females: 120-160 g/L) with an MCV of 78 (reference range: 76-100 fL), an RDW of 20.7 (reference range: 11.5-14.3%), a platelet count of 729 (reference range: 150-400 x 109/L), a globulin level of 5.3 (reference range: 1.5 - 3.9 g/dL), and a globulin/albumin ratio of 0.4 (reference range: 1.0 - 1.8 ratio).
Computed Tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis showed a soft tissue mass of 9.5 x 8.5 x 7 cm within the right paracolic gutter, abutting the inferior hepatic margin, the lateral abdominal wall, and effacing the descending colon with an extensive solid component and low attenuation, possibly representing necrosis .
Additional findings included a left adnexal cystic mass measuring 8.5 x 6.7 cm without calcifications or a discrete solid wall component. The finding of a left adnexal mass prompted the measurement of serum CA-125, which was within normal limits. The patient underwent a colonoscopy which did not show any intrinsic involvement of the colon.
Ultrasound guided biopsy of the mass suggested a poorly differentiated hepatocellular carcinoma.
A preoperative PET scan showed increased uptake in the mass only, with no evidence of uptake in the left adnexal mass or any other area.
The patient then underwent surgical debulking of the mass for therapeutic purposes and further characterization of the tumor in the form of a laparoscopic assisted wedge resection of segment 6 of liver, right colectomy, and an abdominal wall resection with a partial omentectomy after confirming the absence of metastatic disease on laparoscopy. Gross examination revealed a 9 x 8.0 x 6.0 cm tan-pink, soft, centrally necrotic tumor within the left lobe of the liver, abutting the overlying liver capsule, extending through the capsule into the attached abdominal wall, resulting in retraction of the abdominal wall, and extending into the adjacent omental fat. The tumor also appeared to retract and abut the right colon without grossly extending into the bowel wall .
Microscopically, the tumor was comprised of three components, one component consisting of sheets of pleomorphic polygonal (epithelioid) cells with occasional intracytoplasmic vacuoles intimately associated with fascicles of pleomorphic spindled cells which formed the second component, with interspersed large areas of geographic necrosis. The third component was focal, consisting of cells with eccentrically located nuclei, intranuclear cytoplasmic inclusions, and an abundant amount of glassy, eosinophilic cytoplasm, consistent with rhabdoid cells. The tumor appeared to arise from the surface of the liver and focally invaded the liver and invaded abdominal wall musculature, omental fat, and adventitia of the ascending colon .
A battery of immunohistochemical markers was performed on viable sections of the tumor. The tumor showed diffuse and strong positivity in all three components for calretinin, CK 5/6, AE1/AE3, D2-40, CD10, CK5D3, vimentin, and focally EMA, which was supportive of a mesothelial phenotype . CEA, MOC31, Ber-EP4, HMWCK, and CK19 were all negative, excluding an epithelial phenotype. Markers of hepatocellular differentiation (albumin mRNA by in-situ hybridization, immunohistochemical stains for Arginase and Hep-Par1) were all negative. INI nuclear staining was retained in the rhabdoid areas. RCC, WT-1, PAX-8, S100, HMB45, Desmin, Myogenin, Inhibin, ERG, FLI-1, CD34, and STAT6 were also negative, lending support to a mesothelial phenotype and ruling out a metastatic tumor.
Given this constellation of findings, a diagnosis of localized biphasic malignant peritoneal mesothelioma with rhabdoid features was appropriate. The abdominal wall margin was extensively positive by more than 2 cm. The liver and colonic margins were negative. Over the course of six months, the patient completed three cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy with cisplatin and pemetrexed. Follow-up CT scan showed disease recurrence and progression with multiple liver and peritoneal metastases, as well as a soft tissue mass at the site of ileocolonic anastomosis. The patient additionally received 2 doses of pembrolizumab but had a significant decline in performance status and, due to poor prognosis, was transitioned to hospice.