We report a case of a 22-year-old Para1Live1 Asian woman of Punjabi ethnicity. The patient presented to our institution with a history of progressively increasing painless vaginal mass along with blood-stained vaginal discharge for the last 6 months and dyspareunia (pain during intercourse) for the last 5 months that had worsened with time. Although her menstrual cycles were regular with normal duration and amount, she had intermenstrual spotting on and off. She had experienced a full-term normal vaginal delivery at home 8 months earlier with the assistance of an untrained birth attendant (dai) and had delivered a normal healthy baby girl. Her history revealed that she had an unduly prolonged second stage of labor and was given aggressive fundal pressure due to inadequate bearing-down efforts and had collapsed after delivery but was managed conservatively by a village health practitioner. She was a homemaker, did not consume alcohol, and was a nonsmoker. Due to familial responsibilities, the patient did not seek help at a tertiary center until 8 months later, when she reported to our institution. Her past medical and family history was unremarkable. She had no history of any treatment in the past. Upon admission to our institute, the patient was conscious and well oriented to time, place, and person. Her general examination revealed that she was thin with moderate pallor. Her blood pressure was 110/70 mmHg; her pulse rate was 94 beats/minute; and she was afebrile to touch. Her systemic examination did not reveal any abnormality. Her abdominal examination was unremarkable. Local examination revealed a 5-cm × 4-cm congested globular mass with smooth margins that bled upon manipulation. Upon vaginal examination, a round, convex mass was palpated, originating from the cervix and reaching into the vagina, as shown in Fig. . A thinned-out cervical rim could be felt around the mass, forming a firm constriction ring, and uterine sound could not be passed around the mass. The uterine fundus was not appreciated. The uterus could not be felt by per rectal examination. With the patient’s history and clinical findings, a tentative diagnosis of chronic uterine inversion was made, keeping other differential diagnosis possibilities (submucous fibroid, uterine polyp) in mind, and ultrasonography (USG) was suggested. USG revealed an inverted uterus with the fundus of the uterus within the vagina. She was diagnosed with long-standing neglected chronic uterine inversion with delayed presentation. Laboratory investigations revealed hemoglobin of 8g/dl. Her other hematological and biochemical test results were normal. She was planned for elective surgery under the cover of culture-sensitive broad-spectrum antibiotics (injection linezolid 1.2 g twice daily, injection gentamicin 80 mg twice daily, and injection metronidazole 500 mg thrice daily for 2 days) and after transfusing 2 units of packed red cells.
Initially, under the effect of anesthesia, manual repositioning was attempted with no success. Laparotomy was then performed, which displayed a typical flower vase appearance with fundal cupping of the uterus with inward pulling of tubes and ovaries, as shown in Fig. , thus confirming the diagnosis of chronic uterine inversion. The incision on the posterior uterine wall at the site of the constriction ring and gentle pulling on round ligaments resulted in immediate repositioning of the uterus (Haultain’s approach), as shown in Figs. and . Her postoperative period was uneventful, and she was discharged in satisfactory condition after 3 days on oral antibiotics .
At her follow-up visit at 6 weeks, the patient was symptom-free, and her local examination of genitalia revealed no abnormality. A USG report revealed normal position of the uterus. In later follow-up visits at 3 and 6 months, the patient reported normal menstruation and normal sexual activity.