A 3-year-old female patient was born to nonconsanguineous parents, a healthy mother and a father with macrocephaly, by cesarean section without complication. Birth weight was 4500 gr (> 97th percentile) and birth length was 62 cm (> 97th percentile). Prenatal echography was indicative of macrosomia. In the past, the mother had four pregnancies with two different partners. In the first one, a healthy male was born (half-brother of the patient) and the second pregnancy was interrupted due to a large cystic hygroma in the fetal cranial base. The other two pregnancies were with the father of the patient but one of them was a miscarriage in the third semester with no clear cause. The patient did not crawl, presented sitting posture at four months and walked at 18 months of age.
At 3 years old, physical examination revealed normal psychomotor development for the patient’s age but presented a delay in verbal communication. The only behavioral abnormality referred to by the mother was the rising of arms in response to stimuli of joy and exaltation. Additional features noticed were macrocephaly (head circumference of 53.5 cm, > 99th percentile); an umbilical hernia, which was surgically corrected at 2 years of age; a defect of less than 1 cm in the abdominal wall; hypotonia and several dysmorphic features such as prominent forehead and occiput, thin and upturned eyebrows, posteriorly rotated ears, flat nasal bridge, low hanging columella, thin upper lip, downturned corners of mouth and breast hypertelorism. Hands and feet were normal. Weight was 18.5 kg (percentile 73) and length was 106 cm (percentile 81). Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of the brain, electromyography (EMG), echocardiogram and abdominal ultrasound were normal.
Conventional chromosome analysis (karyotype) revealed 46, XX and therefore a Microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization (array-CGH) was performed. A 5.9 Mb deletion was found in the distal or subtelomeric region of the long arm of one of the chromosomes 2, comprising the genomic position 236869919 to 242782258, located in the 2q37.2 and 2q37.3 sub-bands , allowing the diagnosis of chromosome 2q37 deletion syndrome (OMIM: 600430). Nearly 60 coding-protein genes are annotated in the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) database in the deleted region found in the patient. However, only 48 genes are annotated in the OMIM database, from which, 11 genes are associated with different pathologies . Currently, the patient attends kindergarten and the mother reported a major improvement in verbal communication as she grows.