A 23-year-old woman was brought to the psychiatric department by her mother because of a change in behavior that appeared four weeks before the submission. At submission day (sixth week of sibutramine treatment at the recommended dosage of 10 mg/day), she presented elevated and expansive mood, increased energy and explosive reactions, was talkative and reported racing thoughts. Her mother stated that daughter had not slept for the past 4 weeks but felt rested, and stayed up all night cleaning the house. Daughter speech was rapid and loud, and it was hard to interrupt her. Mother said that daughter was out of home overnight on two occasions in the past month, being picked up by police for public alcohol drinking. It was behavior very unlikely her usual self. The patient stated that she just wanted to get out of the house to visit her friends and meet new interesting people. Following sibutramine withdrawal and introduction of valproic acid (2000 mg/day), the patient experienced a remission of manic episode in approximately 2 weeks.
Six weeks later, she was admitted to the psychiatric department again with complaints of a depressed mood, loss of interest and pleasure, and marked psychomotor retardation. She said that for more than the past 2 weeks she often stayed in bed all day because of fatigue and lack of motivation. She felt guilty about the irresponsibility and excesses of the previous manic episode. She could not sleep and woke up early morning, stopped eating and bathing, her ability to think and concentrate diminished markedly. Before the manic episode, there was no significant past medical, psychiatric or substance abuse history. The results of the patient’s physical and neurological examination, laboratory tests (including function of thyroid, liver and kidney), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of her brain, and ECG did not reveal any significant abnormalities. She had a positive family history for depression in her grandmother and bipolar disorder in her aunt. She was diagnosed as having a bipolar disorder, most recent episode depressed. In the psychiatric department, valproic acid treatment was maintained at the dose of 1500 mg/day, and sertraline 100 mg/day was started, with good results. In view of significant improvement, the patient was discharged after one month of hospitalization. There were no symptoms of mood disorder during 1 year of follow-up.