A young male aged 16 years (body weight, 46 kg; height, 164 cm; BMI 17.1; ethnicity, Chinese) was admitted to the Department of Gastroenterology at our hospital for recurrent abdominal pain, diarrhea, and intermittent fever lasting 4 months. This patient had a surgical history of anal fistula. His family had no significant history of infectious disease, cancer, cardiovascular disease or autoimmune dysfunction. His conjunctiva and nail bed appeared pale, and the spleen was palpable at 3 cm below the costal margin. Detailed blood tests were performed during the whole medical period, as shown in Table . Anemia, hypoferritinemia, hypoalbuminemia, and positive serological results (IgG for Epstein‒Barr virus) were found. An abdominal CT scan showed significant thickening and edema of the ileocecocolic wall, luminal stenosis at the distal colon and celiac lymphadenectasis. A colonoscopy revealed inflammatory colitis with erosions, aphthae and longitudinal ulcers. In addition, ileocolic biopsy indicated a large amount of lymphocytic, neutrophilic granulocytic and plasmacytic infiltration, crypt abscesses and epithelial granulomas. The patient was diagnosed with Crohn’s disease on the basis of endoscopic and histological findings . Anemia and fever were relieved by nutritional supplementation therapy and anti-infective drugs. Shortly thereafter, infliximab was administered as an alternative treatment for Crohn’s disease because of intolerance to corticosteroids and aminosalicylic acid. The cardiac assessment was conducted prior to the administration of biologics. Myocardiac biomarkers were normal and chest X-ray showed his heart shadow size was normal range at baseline. The patient had no limitations in general activities and did not exhibit symptoms such as palpitations, dyspnea, or angina. These findings were consistent with the guidelines for treating inflammatory bowel disease with anti-TNF agents. However, the patient’s clinical condition did not markedly improve after 7 cycles of biologics (4 doses of infliximab replaced by adalimumab) over 11 months. The patient had intermittent episodes of severe diarrhea, of which the occurrence ranged from 5 to 20–30 times per day. Subsequently, anemia, difficulty eating and diarrhea worsened when the patient decided to discontinue biologics due to the high cost. Although he was fed continuous enteral nutrition through a gastrojejunal tube, dramatic weight loss was observed over 17 months (weight, from 46 to 33 kg; BMI, from 17.1 to 11.1).
Regretfully, this patient was readmitted to the Department of Gastroenterology for severe diarrhea accompanied by aggravating edema of the bilateral lower limbs and exertional and resting dyspnea. Moreover, he had numbness and weakness in his limbs and intermittent low-grade fever for 3 months. Auxiliary examinations were performed, and a marked increase in NT pro-BNP (18,604 ng/ml), slight elevation of troponin T (0.058 µg/L) and small multiple cavity effusion were observed. Furthermore, cardiac dilatation was found by chest X-ray , and the same conclusion was verified by echocardiography, which revealed biventricular enlargement (LVd, 57 mm; RVd, 25 mm), prominent systolic dysfunction (EF, 31%) and moderate regurgitation of the mitral and tricuspid valves. Therefore, this patient was diagnosed with acute heart failure and transferred to our department.
In our department, the patient was slightly tachycardic (108 beats per minute) and hypotensive (90/48 mmHg). The other specialized examinations were performed. Twelve-lead electrocardiograms were compared between the initial and subsequent recordings, which showed augmentation of voltage in the QRS waves. The hemodynamic condition was acquired noninvasively by USCOM 1 A (Uscom Ltd, Sydney). The stroke volume index was 61 ml/m2, cardiac output was 7.1 L/min, cardiac index was 5.3 L/min/m2 and peripheral vascular resistance was 960 dyn ⋅ s− 1 ⋅ cm− 5, which indicated an abnormal physiological status of high output and low resistance. The patient and his family agreed to participate in a comprehensive genetic investigation. However, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging was not performed due to the patient’s critical condition. Large doses of loop diuretics, recombinant human brain natriuretic peptide, norepinephrine, and levosimendan were administered in turn. Not surprisingly, it was confirmed that the plasma vitamin B1 concentration was 2.108 ng/ml below the normal range, but no other soluble vitamin was affected by long-term malnutrition. Hence, this patient was soon injected intramuscularly with thiamine hydrochloride (300 mg per day). Unfortunately, the patient died after 4 days due to respiratory and circulatory failure caused by persistent high-grade fever and convulsions.
Ten days after his death, his next-generation sequencing (NGS) results revealed a new mutation: c.1259_1262 delACAG (p.D420Vfs*21) in exon 6 of the XIAP gene. This mutation was predicted to be probably damaging by REVEL. According to the above evidence and the standards and guidelines of ACMG, this novel mutation was considered likely pathogenic. In addition, Sanger sequencing confirmed the presence of this mutation in the patient, the patient’s mother and younger sister, while it was not detected in the patient’s father. The family pedigree analysis is shown in Fig. .The clinical phenotypes of the patient’s relatives were normal.