A 52-year-old Asian man was referred to our department for further examination of his retroperitoneal tumor in April 2016. He had received hemodialysis due to grade 5 chronic kidney disease resulting from membranous nephropathy. His previous physician performed CT because the patient had lost 20 kg over the past 3 years, and CT revealed a left retroperitoneal mass. He had no remarkable physical findings. Laboratory data showed almost normal values, except for an elevated serum creatine level (4.31 mg/dL). A serum hormonal examination showed slight elevation in aldosterone as follows: cortisol 6.2 μg/dL, aldosterone 410 pg/mL, adrenaline 19 pg/mL, noradrenaline 53 pg/mL, and dopamine 12 pg/mL. Tumor markers showed slight elevation of CEA, SCC, NSE, and IL-2 receptor as follows: CEA 5.7 ng/mL, AFP 7 ng/mL, CA125 27 U/mL, SCC 3.7 ng/mL, NSE 23.4 ng/mL, and IL-2 receptor 663.1 U/mL.
CT showed a retroperitoneal mass of 4.3 cm in diameter in April 2016. Because of the patient's low renal function, enhanced CT was not performed. Gd-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging showed low intensity on T1-weighted imaging (T1WI) and high intensity on T2WI . Positron-emission tomography (PET)-CT showed no uptake in the mass . These imaging findings indicated no evidence of malignancy, so routine follow-up was planned. The tumor grew to nearly 6.0 cm in November 2016. After starting hemodialysis, enhanced CT suggested hemangioma due to the high degree of enhancement in the tumor at an early phase with an irregular cystic lesion . Preoperative imaging findings, a hormonal examination, and the tumor marker levels suggested hemangioma. Due to the tumor's growth and induction of hemodialysis, we decided to perform tumor resection . If the patient had not already started hemodialysis, adrenalectomy might have been an option .
The patient underwent retroperitoneal tumor and renal resection and was discharged seven days postoperatively. The resected tumor was solid and dark blown in color, measuring 50 × 37 × 30 mm in size . Histologically, it consisted of small vessels covered with monostromatic endothelium, which was positive for CD34 immunohistochemically. Some vessels were rather large and dilated. No atypia or mitosis was noted in endothelial cells . Adrenal cortices were seen around the tumor, so the final diagnosis was adrenal hemangioma. The patient was free from recurrence seven months postoperatively.