A 67-year-old Caucasian man with a history of non-pathological myopia underwent uneventful surgery for macular pucker with epiretinal membrane (ERM) peeling in his left eye. Three months later, he underwent the same surgical procedure using the same retrobulbar anesthesia in his right eye. Preoperative best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 0.5 (− 1.25 sphere − 0.75 cylinder at axis 50) in the right eye and 0.75 (− 3.25 sphere − 1.75 cylinder at axis 95) in the left eye. Both eyes were pseudophakic at the time of macular pucker diagnosis and underwent the same procedure 3 months apart. The patient underwent surgery under monitored anesthesia care with a retrobulbar block using a 25-gauge (G), 38-mm Atkinson needle containing 5 ml of a 1:1 mixture of 2% Xylocaine containing adrenaline (1:200,000) and Bupivacaine 5 mg/ml. Both eyes were operated by the same experienced surgeon. In both cases the retrobulbar anesthesia was administered by the same experienced ophthalmologist and the same drug combination was used.
Preoperative review of the patient’s medical history showed that the patient was under observation due to a myocardial infarction that he had about 5 years previously. He also was undere rheumatological observation for ankylosing spondylitis. His treatment at the time of surgery consisted of acetylsalicylic acid 75 mg once daily and atorvastatin 40 mg once daily. No other health problems were reported. The patient denied any allergies. The patient’s social history was negative for smoking, alcohol abuse, recreational drug use, and travel abroad. The patient was a doctor who had been worked in the hospital as a clinician for about 30 years. His mother suffered from migraines and died of a heart attack at the age of 70 years. At the age of 69 years, his maternal grandfather suffered a stroke. The patient did not know anything about his father’s side of the family, but there was no other family history of stroke or vascular illness.
Three 25G trocars were placed through a self-sealing sclerotomy construction. Central and peripheral pars plana vitrectomy (PPV) was performed. Preexisting posterior vitreous detachment (PVD) induction was verified. Brilliant Blue G containing dye (ILM-BLUE®; D.O.R.C., Zuidland, the Netherlands) aided visualization of the internal limiting membrane (ILM) and allowed for both ERM and ILM peeling up to the vascular arcades. Peripheral indentation allowed for retinal lesion verification. No breaks were found. BSS intraocular irrigating solution was left in the vitreous chamber. The sclerotomies were self-sealing and no sutures were needed. At the conclusion of the procedure, about 0.2 mg of subconjunctival gentamycin was administered. No gas bubble was instilled, there were no episodes of hypotension during the surgery, and postoperatively the patient did not sleep in the prone position.
The left eye had a regular postoperative course . On postoperative day 1 the patient was seen by a junior ophthalmologist, and the visual acuity (VA) in the right eye was hand motion. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was 14 mmHg. There was a trace afferent pupillary defect by reverse in the right eye. The posterior segment examination showed retinal whitening in the macula and a cherry-red spot .
The retina was attached. There was no proptosis or orbital fullness. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) demonstrated inner retinal thickening and hyperreflectivity . Fluorescein angiography demonstrated delayed arterial and venous perfusion (not shown).
No further systemic evaluation was performed, the patient was observed and was not referred to a stroke center by the junior ophthalmologist. No blood tests were carried out. No blood pressure, pulse nor temperature was recorded. The patient was not treated with anterior chamber paracentesis, timolol-dorzolamide and brimonidine drops, or 500 mg oral acetazolamide at the first day postoperative control. The patient was alert, attentive, and oriented. Speech was clear and fluent. Cranial nerve assessment, reflexes, sensory perception, coordination, and gait were all normal. No signs of cerebrovascular event were reported.
At 3 months after surgery, the patient felt his central scotoma had improved, and the BCVA had remained stable at 0.05 (− 0.75 to 1.0 axis 60). The anatomical signs of acute ischemia had resolved, and the macular region resulted in atrophic changes with disappearance of the physiological foveal depression .
At 4 months after surgery, OCT angiography documented a right eye capillary dropout predominantly in the deep capillary plexus