A 62 year-old Caucasian male presented with a seven-day history of painless jaundice with no other accompanying symptoms. His past medical history was remarkable for high blood pressure, hypercholesterolemia, coronary artery disease, tuberculosis, abdominal aortic aneurysm and benign essential tremor. At admission, physical examination revealed unremarkable findings aside from jaundice. Imaging tests showed a hilar-hepatobilliary mass consistent with the diagnosis of adenocarcinoma of the extrahepatic bile ducts (extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma). On February 2003, the patient underwent a percutaneous biliary internal decompression followed by a laparotomy and curative resection of the tumour by cephalic duodenopancreatectomy. The resection was performed successfully and histological examination revealed an adenocarcinoma of the extrahepatic bile duct with no lymph node involvement and clear microscopic margins (pT2 pN0 as per AJCC classification). The patient did not receive any adjuvant therapy and his follow up consisted on CT scans, blood work, and physical exams every six months. Two years after the initial surgery, the patient complained of a four-month insidious and progressive abdominal pain localized in the right upper abdominal area along with a weight loss of around eight kilograms. Physical exam was unremarkable and abdominal imaging studies (including ultrasound and CT scan) reported only post-surgical changes with no evidence of recurrence. Blood work was notable for an elevated CA 19-9 at 880 Ku/L (normal range 0-39) with no other abnormalities. A liver MRI and PET-CT revealed a long string through the diaphragm, chest, and abdominal wall that extended from the surgical bed, with an intense glucose uptake at a standard uptake value of 7 . With the diagnosis of isolated recurrence in the chest wall of a previously resected cholangiocarcinoma, the patient underwent a new surgical intervention consisting of an en-bloc resection of segment VII of the liver, part of the diaphragm and the whole 11th right rib.
Pathology analysis revealed a tumour implant through the drainage course where the Redon tube was placed in the first liver procedure . No tumour was observed in the liver parenchyma and surgical margins were free of malignant cells.
After the successful resection of this unusual recurrence, the patient received six courses of adjuvant chemotherapy (gemcitabine and oxaliplatin) with good tolerance. On December 2007, twelve months after finishing adjuvant treatment, the patient presented again with abdominal pain, fever, and hypotension. A mass in the right upper quadrant was palpated on physical exam and imaging studies revealed the presence of a 10 cm lesion involving the chest wall, liver, and lung. Puncture of the mass confirmed the presence of adenocarcinoma as well as a purulent collection complicating this lesion. In spite of multi-antibiotic treatment and drainage of the collection, the patient died on January 10th 2008 due to refractory septic shock.