Clinical presentation
A 31-year-old female with a past medical history of bipolar disorder, morbid obesity with a body mass index (BMI) > 40 kg/m2, and cholecystectomy presented to the hospital for a week-long history of abrupt onset progressive bilateral lower extremity weakness. The progressive weakness was accompanied by ascending numbness, consequent falls, and difficulty in ambulation. Pertinent history included a GI illness four weeks prior involving protracted nausea, vomiting, and bloody diarrhea following a hiking trip. The patient had persistent abdominal and lower extremity cramping, nausea, and vomiting, as well as decreased oral tolerance, which caused a 40-lb weight loss over three months.
Diagnostics and findings
On initial neurologic evaluation, the patient had unremarkable vital signs of a heart rate of 91 beats per minute, a respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute, a blood pressure of 128/88 mmHg, an oxygen saturation of 99% on room air, and a temperature of 98.2°F. Initial labs revealed hypokalemia and macrocytic anemia .
The initial physical exam demonstrated intact cranial nerves, 4/5 bilateral lower extremity muscle strength, and generalized areflexia with a 3+ right patellar reflex. An unusual possible contralateral left bicep to right patellar reflex was also noted, where testing the reflex at the left bicep would induce a reflex-like reaction at the right patella. The patient had 5/5 strength in bilateral dorsiflexion, plantar flexion, shoulder abduction, wrist extension and flexion, and an intact sensation of temperature and proprioception throughout. The patient had intact sensations of temperature, light touch, and proprioception throughout and had right leg drift on examination. To assess the etiology of the patient's weakness, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with and without contrast of the neuroaxis was performed. MRI of the brain and thoracic cord were performed first; MRI of the brain revealed no significant abnormalities, and MRI of the lumbar spine found posterior protrusions at the L3-4 to L5-S1 levels with mild to moderate left L5-S1 neural foraminal narrowing .
CSF studies on hospital day two, nine days after the onset of weakness, were unremarkable, showing normal glucose, protein, and cell count. MRI of the cervical spine with and without contrast and nerve conduction studies were also ordered. On hospital day three, the patient exhibited dysmetria and dysdiadochokinesia of the bilateral upper extremities. A cervical spine MRI with and without contrast was performed the following day and revealed no abnormalities . Right patellar hyperreflexia was noted. CSF on hospital day 11 was unchanged with unremarkable findings , while the physical exam showed progressing bilateral lower extremity weakness of 2/5 motor strength, 4/5 proximal upper extremity motor strength, and hypoesthesia. At this point, electrodiagnostic studies were conducted and revealed findings consistent with demyelination . There was a reduced amplitude of the left fibular motor nerve (1.7 mV), right fibular motor nerve (1.0 MV), left median motor nerve (4.0 mV), right median motor nerve (2.3 mV), right tibial motor nerve (0.5 mV), left median sensory nerve (7.2 µV), and left ulnar sensory nerve (7.8 µV). The left tibial motor nerve and the left radial sensory nerve showed no response. There was decreased conduction velocity of the left median motor nerve (Elbow-Wrist 49 m/s), left ulnar motor nerve (Above Elbow-Below Elbow 45 m/s), right median sensory nerve (Wrist- 2nd Digit 31 m/s), right sural sensory nerve (Calf- Lateral Malleolus 32 m/s), and right ulnar sensory nerve (Wrist- 5th Digit 31 m/s). There was prolonged distal peak latency of the right radial sensory nerve (3.8 ms), right sural sensory nerve (4.4 ms), and right ulnar sensory nerve (4.5 ms). With these findings, treatment for GBS was initiated.
Treatment and outcome
The patient was treated with IVIG 0.4mg/kg/day for five days with simultaneous physical therapy during admission and a plan for acute rehab on discharge. At discharge, the patient reported subjective strength improvement, which correlated with objective physical exam findings.
Before treatment, the patient had 2/5 bilateral lower extremity strength and 3/5 bilateral upper extremity strength with diffuse hyporeflexia and intact sensation of temperature and proprioception throughout. After five days of IVIG treatment, there was improved 3/5 right lower extremity strength and 4/5 left lower extremity strength, but persisting diffuse hyporeflexia.