We report the case of a 65-year-old female with HFpEF for rheumatic heart disease since 2003. She was independent for activities of daily living, who did not have known toxic habits, and was allergic to digoxin, atenolol, and fentanyl. She presented several cardiovascular risk factors—hypertension, dyslipidaemia, and obesity. She was first studied by a cardiologist in 2003 due to rheumatic heart disease, which led to cardiac surgery in 2003, undergoing the implantation of an aortic-valve mechanical prosthesis and a mitral-valve mechanical prosthesis. From 2014, she suffered from numerous episodes of permanent atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular response. Heart rate could not be controlled despite the use of high doses of beta blockers and, eventually, an AV node ablation and a single chamber pacemaker implantation were undergone . In 2018, she had numerous admissions at the emergency services because of congestive HF.
Physical examination revealed a discrete holosystolic murmur best heard at the lower left sternal border and signs of pulmonary congestion and peripheral oedema.
The left ventricular ejection fraction was preserver (>50%) with no changes in follow-up and normal function of the two previous prostheses. However, severe tricuspid valve regurgitation due to the interposition of the pacemaker lead and concomitant severe pulmonary hypertension were evident (, and ).
Given the appearance of severe valvular heart disease with the patient being very symptomatic and with multiple admissions, we began the study to find the best treatment option. Coronary angiography was performed to rule out the presence of coronary artery disease and to study the severity and aetiology of the pulmonary hypertension. Right heart catheterization indicated moderate precapillary and moderate postcapillary pulmonary hypertension. After discussing her case at the heart-team meeting and an optimization of the patient’s condition, a porcine tricuspid valvular tricuspid bioprosthesis was implanted in January 2020, which was performed without significant complications.
Subsequently, the patient began close follow-up by our advanced HF unit, with optimization of treatment and health education regarding lifestyle modification and flexible diuretic regimen. During follow-up, the patient required recurrent readjustments of the medical treatment by the HF nurse specialist and the cardiologist. Within this year, the patient had to be continuously assisted due to persistence and worsening of her symptoms despite optimization of her treatment and had to be repeatedly admitted for HF decompensation.
Given this situation of multiple decompensations, the possibility of implanting a pulmonary arterial pressure monitoring device—CardioMEMS®—was considered, with the aim of optimizing patient follow-up and treatment in an attempt to reduce decompensations and admissions for HF, because we had no more possibilities for medical treatment or device optimization. The case was presented in session with a multidisciplinary heart team (clinical cardiologists, haemodynamic cardiologists, cardiac surgeons, and anaesthetists), approving the procedure, which was carried out in October 2020 without incidents ( and , , and ).
The CardioMEMS® device is a wireless device that is implanted percutaneously in the pulmonary artery (PA). Using a pillow-shaped electronic console, the patient transmits PA pressure (PAP) readings to a secure online database, which can be accessed by the managing cardiologist. In our case, the procedure was performed via the right femoral vein using a 12F sheath and a double Proglide® system was used to close it. Subsequently, the patient was enrolled in an education programme to successfully perform daily measurements at home.
Since the implantation of the CardioMEMS®, our patient was monitored by weekly reports which were carefully reviewed by the HF team. If the treating cardiologist detected a trend of increasing PAPs, the patient was contacted and asked to come to the clinic for a visit, or her medication was directly adjusted via telephone (e.g. by increasing the dose of diuretics or making a change in any other HF treatment). In some cases, management included simple dietary advice and salt restriction following dietary indiscretions. Indeed, we perceived a significant improvement in compliance with lifestyle modification and prescribed medication changes in this patient, as a result of her awareness of being closely monitored .