A 49-year-old gentleman presented to clinic with recurrent episodes of fever of up to 101 °F (38.3 C) for the 5 days. He also reported worsening dyspnea and chest heaviness on minimal exertion for the last five days. There was no history of orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea or syncope. He had history of hypertension and benign prostatic hyperplasia. He had been recently hospitalized and treated for streptococcal meningo-encephalitis and had been discharged 6 days before this clinic visit. Drug history included amlodipine 5 mg once a day, paracetamol and intravenous antibiotics (ceftriaxone and vancomycin in meningitic doses) which he was taking for the last 9 days. On arrival, patient had blood pressure of 135/70 mmHg, heart rate of 80 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 19 breaths per minute and oxygen saturation of 95% on room air. On examination, pulse was regular and there was no neurological deficit or signs of heart failure. Precordial examination revealed a systolic and diastolic murmur along left sternal border. ECG was done that showed no significant abnormalities. He was therefore hospitalized for further work up.
Laboratory investigation revealed a hemoglobin of 11.6 g/dl, white cell count of 11.7 × 10^9, creatinine of 0.8 mg/dl (cutoff 1.3), Sodium of 134 mmol/L (cutoff 136), Potassium of 4.2 mmol/L, bicarbonate of 21.4 mmol/L (cutoff 21), C-reactive protein of 81 mg/L (0–10), and Nasopharyngeal COVID-19 test was negative. Blood cultures were sent. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) was done which showed normal left ventricular ejection fraction, bicuspid aortic valve with mild aortic stenosis, and small multiple echogenic densities were noted above the aortic valve, suggestive of vegetations. An echo-free space was noted in the mitral-aortic intervalvular fibrosa (MAIVF), consistent with abscess . It also showed continuous color flow jet with possibility of fistula formation . Transesophageal echo (TEE) was planned, and cardiothoracic surgery team was consulted, but the patient declined further workup and left against medical advice. After one day, he again presented with worsening shortness of breath and was re-hospitalized and planned for surgery after transesophageal echo (TEE). He had heart of 101 beats per minute, blood pressure was 105/65, respiratory rate of 26 breaths per minute and saturation of 84% on room air. He was managed with intravenous furosemide and noninvasive ventilation. So pre-operative TEE was deferred due to his worsening clinical condition. This patient had one positive pathologic criteria, and one major and 3 minor clinical criteria were also positive that supported the diagnosis of a definite infective endocarditis.
He was taken to the operating room (OR) for the surgery with a plan for intraoperative transesophageal study. TEE was done intraoperatively which confirmed the prior TTE findings of ruptured abscess with fistula formation between aorta and left atrium . Bicuspid aortic valve with mild aortic stenosis, mild aortic regurgitation and severe, eccentric mitral regurgitation . He underwent dual valve replacement (aortic valve 23 mm mechanical & mitral 29 mm mechanical), and aortic repair was also done. Intraoperative findings were abscess between aortic and mitral valve with wide fistula between left coronary sinus and left atrium due to ruptured abscess.
Post-operatively, he was shifted to cardiac intensive care unit. Ionotropic support (i.e., norepinephrine and vasopressin) was gradually tapered off, and he was successfully extubated on third post-operative day. Intravenous antibiotics (Meropenem and Vancomycin) and anti-coagulation (warfarin) were continued. Post-operatively, his ECG showed first-degree AV block with underlying left bundle branch block . Hence, Holter monitoring was done which showed no high degree AV block. Patient was later shifted from surgical intensive care unit to high dependency unit and then, later to ward setup. Subsequent ECG showed no left bundle branch block and reduction in PR interval was also observed as compared to previous ECG . His final blood cultures were reported negative. He was eventually discharged after 18 days of hospital stay with complete recovery. On follow-up in clinic after 2 weeks, his symptoms had improved significantly with no recurrence of fever.
DIAGNOSIS: Aortic wall tissue (container 1): Vessel wall tissue showing marked fibrosis, fibrin and loss of architecture. Negative for granulomatous inflammation and malignancy.
Aortic valve tissue (container 2): Endocardium lined fibromyxoid tissue from the heart valves showing areas of myxoid change, endocardial erosion with lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate, neutrophils, necrosis, fibrinous exudate and hemosiderin laden macrophages compatible with clinical history of infective endocarditis with abscess formation. Negative for granuloma and malignancy.