The patient is an 82-year-old White female with a history of high blood pressure, hyperlipidemia, hypothyroidism, and dyspepsia; she had previously undergone a cholecystectomy because of gallstones (50 years ago) and a hysterectomy because of cancer (40 years ago). Her medications included metoprolol (50 mg once daily), simvastatin (10 mg once daily), levothyroxine (150 μg once daily) and omeprazole (20 mg once daily). She was evaluated at our tertiary hepatopancreatobiliary center because of an asymptomatic double-duct sign. Further assessment with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) concluded a diagnosis of periampullary malignancy. Laboratory work was unremarkable, including bilirubin levels, international normalized ratio (INR), and albumin levels. After a multidisciplinary conference, the patient was accepted for pancreatoduodenectomy.
A pylorus-preserving pancreatoduodenectomy and lymphadenectomy was performed through a midline incision. The patient was reconstructed with a pancreatojejunostomy, hepaticojejunostomy, and gastrojejunostomy on a single jejunal loop. Two BLAKE (silicone) drains were introduced, one behind the hepaticojejunostomy and one behind the pancreatojejunostomy. According to the operation report, there were no significant perioperative events.
Postoperative days (POD) 1–5 were uneventful. Both drains (peak amylase levels 20 and 60 U/L) were successfully removed. On POD 7, an increased C-reactive protein (CRP) of 270 mg/L was observed. Computed tomography (CT) of the lungs and abdomen revealed peribronchial infiltrates and a small pool of free fluid in the upper right quadrant of the abdomen. The clinical condition was unremarkable, and the patient was started on intravenous antibiotics, piperacillin and tazobactam. On POD 10, a repeat CT was performed showing a large gastric retention and findings consistent with insufficient hepaticojejunostomy . The gastric retention was treated with a nasogastric tube, and the patient was started on parenteral nutrition. An ultrasound-guided percutaneous intraabdominal pigtail drain was established. The drain discharge was bilious to the naked eye, and the bilirubin level was 320 μmol/L. Discharge levels reached 1000 mL/day, and on POD 12 a percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography (PTC)-guided 8-French (Fr) pigtail drain was advanced through the anastomosis to deviate the leak from the abdomen.
On POD 26, the patient presented blood in both drains and bloody stools. Endoscopy of the gastrojejunostomy (the hepaticojejunostomy could not be visualized because the reconstruction was made on a long Roux loop) and a CT angiography could not localize any evidence of bleeding. The patient was hemodynamically stable, and there was only discrete evidence of bleeding on the hemoglobin curve, presently 89 g/L (98 g/L on the day before and had been stable at approximately 100 g/L without transfusions during the entire preceding postoperative period). Two units of erythrocytes were administered, and on the next day the hemoglobin level was 107 g/L. On POD 28, the patient had a new episode of bleeding in both drains and multiple bloody stools. A repeat endoscopy and CT angiography were both unremarkable. Besides discrete pallor and tiredness, the patient was still in good clinical condition with stable vitals; hemoglobin level was 86 g/L, and after one erythrocyte transfusion it was 93 g/L. Because of continuous bleeding but no identified source, an empiric suspicion of intraabdominal bleeding was raised, and a conventional selective angiography was performed on the next day, revealing a contrast leakage from the gastroduodenal artery (GDA) stump , which was coiled successfully . The biliary drain had to be changed because it was completely obliterated by blood clots. The clinical conclusion was that of a grade B hemorrhage, and that the blood from the GDA stump had traveled through the insufficient hepaticojejunostomy into the biliary tree and small intestine, causing the presence of blood in both drains and bloody stools . During the next couple of days, the intraabdominal drain was removed, and the patient was discharged with the biliary drain in situ on POD 45. Her hemoglobin level was 93 g/L, and inflammatory parameters and liver function tests were unremarkable.
On POD 75, she was evaluated in the outpatient clinic and the biliary drain could be removed after having been closed for 10 days.
The pathology report revealed an ampullary adenocarcinoma. Adjuvant chemotherapy was not advised because of low tumor stage (pT1bN0R0), highly differentiated intestinal histology, and the time elapsed since the primary surgery and the associated postoperative morbidity.