A 69-year-old man with pain on urination visited a physician. The patient had no contributory illnesses except hypertension. Urethritis was diagnosed and treated with an antibiotic agent, but it recurred and swelling of the scrotum over the perineum developed. The patient was referred to our department and admitted for further examination and treatment. His general condition was fair, and no high fever developed. Swelling of the scrotum over the perineal region was noted; the perineal skin was disintegrated and there was a purulent discharge. The scrotal skin was partially necrotized, but no tumorous changes were seen. The prostatic findings were normal.
Blood and chemistry test results on admission were within normal ranges, except for a mild elevation in C-reactive protein. A urinary sediment examination showed a mild degree of pyuria, but no bacteria were observed. Enhanced computed tomography found ulceration accompanied by gas in the scrotum over the perineal region. The cavernous portion was lightly stained in the early phase, and a region with a lower concentration than the surrounding area was noted in the late phase . The patient was diagnosed with an epididymitis-induced scrotal and perineal abscess. A skin incision was made in the abscess region; and discharge of pus, wound irrigation, and Cx with ampicillin sodium were performed. The local findings improved and the perineal wound was sutured. After 3 weeks, the patient re-visited due to urinary incontinence from the perineal suture wound. Endoscopic examination showed rude tissues protruded into the urethral lumen, and causing urethral stricture. Posterior urethral stricture and urethrocutaneous fistula were diagnosed and percutaneous cystostomy was performed. Urine cytology was negative. One week later, a purulent discharge from the suture wound and external urethral meatus was observed. Re-infection was diagnosed and wound opening, pus drainage, and Cx with levofloxacin were performed. On enhanced computed tomography 2 months after the first examination , discharge of pus from a deep region was insufficient and resection of morbid granulation was considered necessary . The infected tissue in the perineal region was resected under general anesthesia. Morbid granulation and scarring reached from the cavernous portion to the urethral mucosal surface. It was not possible to entirely resect the infected tissue. On pathological examination, proliferation of cornified atypical cells was observed and he was diagnosed as squamous cell carcinoma. No finding of metastasis was noted on careful examination, including enhanced computed tomography. The tumor in the perineal region rapidly grew thereafter . Urethral tumor resection and pelvic lymph node dissection were performed based on the diagnosis of primary urethral cancer. Being continuous to the mass in the perineal region, the penis was entirely hardened excluding the glans. The tumor was en bloc excised including the entire urethra. The pubis was strongly adhered, suggesting invasion. The bilateral external iliac lymph nodes and obturator lymph node were dissected. Tumor size in the cross-section of the excised specimen was 11 × 5.5 cm. On microscopy, atypical squamous cells with a cornification tendency were present, and the tumor was diagnosed as squamous cell carcinoma . The stump was positive, and all lymph nodes were negative. Since the resected stump was positive, 54 Gy irradiation was applied to the pelvic and perineal regions. However, lung metastasis and local recurrence occurred. Cx (3 weeks schedule; paclitaxel 175 mg/m2 Day 1, ifosfamide 1200 mg/m2 Days 1–3, cisplatin 25 mg/m2 Days 1–3) was administered, but his general condition gradually worsened, and he died 17 months after radical surgery.