A 61-year-old woman with rheumatoid arthritis and degenerative lumbar disc disease with previous anterior–posterior lumbar fusion underwent open posterior instrumented fusion with bilateral open L2 vertebroplasty elsewhere. Following surgery, a routine postoperative X-ray demonstrated an intracardiac lobulated, hyperdense mass . On further evaluation by non-gated chest CT, the diagnosis of bone cement embolization was confirmed by multiple radio-dense masses in both pulmonary artery branches and the RV . A transthoracic echocardiogram revealed a small pericardial effusion with an echodense mass measuring 2.0 × 0.9 cm along the ventricular aspect of the tricuspid valve with moderate tricuspid regurgitation. The mass was entangled in the tricuspid chordae and tethered to the ventricular septum. The atrial septum was intact. Given that she was asymptomatic, hospital discharge with close outpatient follow-up was pursued. Discharge medications included apixaban, presumably initiated to prevent thrombosis. One-month post-discharge, she presented to our institution with acute chest pain and dyspnoea. A subsequent gated cardiac CT angiogram showed three distinct cardiopulmonary emboli. One of the cement fragments had perforated the inferior wall of the RV close to the base of the posterior tricuspid valve leaflet with a moderate circumferential pericardial effusion . Coronary angiogram performed pre-operatively demonstrated this sharp, spear-like fragment was in close proximity to the distal right coronary artery.
Operative extraction of multiple cement emboli was pursued. Intra-operative TEE showed a large cement fragment across the tricuspid valve and mild regurgitation . After a median sternotomy and pericardiotomy, 500 mL of frank blood was evacuated from the pericardial sac. A cement fragment perforating the inferior aspect of the RV was visualized near the distal right coronary artery. This fragment had resulted in partial laceration of the inferior vena cava. Cardiopulmonary bypass was established with ascending aortic and bicaval venous cannulation. An oblique right atriotomy was made and the cement mass adjacent to the tricuspid valve as well as the fragment perforating the RV wall was removed . Rupture of one of the tricuspid valve chordae was identified. This was corrected with interrupted polypropylene sutures and an annuloplasty ring (26 mm Carbomedics) was placed. A cement fragment was also removed from the left pulmonary artery. The fragment in the right pulmonary artery was unable to be located and retrieved. Postoperative TEE showed trivial tricuspid regurgitation after repair. The patient had an uneventful postoperative course and was discharged on postoperative Day 5.