A 57-year-old Chinese female patient was admitted with slight right-upper-quadrant pain for 2 months, and she did not recall any episode of severe pain. She had a long history of headache but had not visited any neurologist. She was afebrile, without positive Murphy’s sign or any other acute syndrome. Lab tests showed normal complete blood count, coagulation, tumor marker, and liver function results. Specifically, the levels of CA19–9, CA125, and CEA were 21.83 U/mL (normal reference range < 27 U/mL), 9.11 U/mL (normal < 35 U/mL), and 1.28 ng/mL (normal < 5 ng/mL), respectively. Initial ultrasound evaluation indicated hyperechoic structure inside the gallbladder and thickened gallbladder wall . An enhanced CT scan showed irregular presentations of an enlarged gallbladder (10.0 cm × 4.6 cm × 4.3 cm), with a rough and thickened gallbladder wall and median-density lesions inside the gallbladder . Notably, there was also a fusion of multiple lesions forming a thick, high-density layer attached to the inner wall. Further MRI showed a high T1-weighted and a low T2-weighted smooth-edged signal on the inner surface . A flocculent lesion with mixed-density signal was confirmed by MRI. Further gadopentetate dimeglumine (Gd-DTPA) contrasted scan showed signal enhancement of the gallbladder wall, and diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) analysis demonstrated a significantly high signal with smooth edge inside the gallbladder.
The patient denied further PET-CT examination. The multidisciplinary board could not rule out the possibility of gallbladder malignancy based on the current clinical data, especially considering the rare and atypical imaging presentations. Therefore, an open en-bloc resection of gallbladder and partial liver segments IVb and V were performed to completely remove the suspected lesions. The gallbladder appeared to have high tension and smooth surface. The gross dissection of the enlarged gallbladder showed an interesting presentation inside. From the outside to inside layer by layer, there was a slightly rough gallbladder wall, a solid mixture of clot and gallbladder sludge, and a central jelly-like clot . Even though a careful inspection and further pathological examination of the gallbladder wall did not reveal any sign of active bleeding, the final pathological result was hemorrhagic cholecystitis, but not gallbladder cancer.
Additional postoperative investigation on the cause of hemorrhagic cholecystitis revealed a neglected medication history. The patient had been frequently using headache powders for the past 6 years to control headache by herself without having melena. The headache powder she used was an over-the-counter (OTC) pain reliever with the brand name “A Ga Fen San”. Each dose contains 230 mg aspirin, 125 mg paracetamol, and 30 mg caffeine - mainly NSAIDs that could significantly increase the risk of bleeding. The patient stated that “A Ga Fen San” could be easily purchased online without any prescription. No medical advice or caution note had been given to her before or during the oral administration of this drug. She was not aware that “A Ga Fen San” should be counted into the current medications list, due to the fact that this brand name is similar to some herbal health products.
The patient recovered well from surgery with no postoperative complication, and was referred to a neurologist for treatment of headache. We advised her to cease self-administrated NSAIDs.