A 70-year-old man (60 kg, 170 cm) was diagnosed with a large thoracogastric airway fistula after esophagectomy. Two months earlier, he underwent esophagus tumor resection and cervical esophagogastric anastomosis via the three incisions of thoracoscopy through the right chest, abdomen, and left neck for moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma. After surgery, he developed repeated expectoration and coughing after eating. The use of a bronchoscope and gastroscope confirmed a large fistula (3.5 cm × 1.7 cm) 5 cm below the glottis, and its inferior margin was 2.5 cm above the carina . Preoperative PaO2 was 101.8 mmHg breathing room air. A chest radiograph revealed a right pneumothorax, bilateral lung infection, and basal pleural effusion. After administration of antibiotics, gastrostomy feeds, and total parenteral nutrition for a month, he was planned for a repair of the fistula and pectoralis major myocutaneous flap transposition under the right posterolateral thoracotomy approach and a thoracoscope-assisted one.
Computed tomography showed the fistula with upper and lower edges at 5 cm and 2.5 cm away from the glottis and the carina . The left and right main bronchus length was 5 and 3 cm. After consultation with surgeons, we decided to intubate a 6.5 extended Parker Flex-Tip Tube (total length 34 cm, Wellead®; Well Lead Medical Co., Ltd., Guangzhou, China) into the left main bronchus and a 9Fr bronchial blocker (Wellead®; Well Lead Medical Co., Ltd.) to occlude the right main bronchus . Intraoperative monitoring included electrocardiography, capnography, blood oxygen saturation, and invasive blood pressure. Cardiopulmonary bypass was on standby in case oxygenation could not be maintained during the operation.
The patient spontaneously breathed in the operation room, was given supplemental oxygen, and inhaled 2% lidocaine via a high-flow nasal cannula (HFNC, 20–35 L min−1, Fisher&Paykel Healthcare). Under suitable sedation using dexmedetomidine (4 μg/kg/h for 15 min) and sufentanil (5 μg), topical oral cavity and posterior pharynx anesthesia were achieved with a 2.4% lidocaine spray, glottis anesthesia with 2% lidocaine via an epidural catheter through the working channel of a video-flexible intubation scope (VFIS), and subglottic with 2% lidocaine (2 ml) via a cricothyroid membrane puncture injection. Following satisfactory topical anesthesia, a cuffed 6.5 extended Parker Flex-Tip Tube was guided into the left main bronchus under the VFIS with a background infusion of 50 mg propofol. After isolating left lung ventilation and correcting the cuff position with VFIS examination and auscultation, general anesthesia was induced and maintained with propofol, sevoflurane, remifentanil, and vecuronium. An additional 10 cm extension limb (7.5# single-lumen tube, Wellead®; Well Lead Medical Co., Ltd., cut short into 10 cm) was used for connecting the circuit and the endotracheal tube . Then, 9Fr BB was passed through the glottis under a video laryngoscope. The balloon was placed toward the anterior tracheal wall and turned right after passing through the glottis. The BB position was evaluated by VFIS observation and auscultation under jet ventilation (pressure: 10–15 PSI, frequency: 12 times per minute, at the head-low position, and the balloon deflated). One-lung ventilation was initiated at a fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) of 1.0 with volume control ventilation (tidal volume 360–420 ml, respiratory rate 12/min, peak inspiratory pressure 30 cm H2O, I:E 1:1.5). After establishing the airway, a central venous catheter was placed through the right internal jugular vein .
The operation was performed in the left lateral position. During surgery, jet ventilation under the left lateral decubitus position with head down after airway clearance was performed to verify air leakage in the right lung. PaO2 was between 139 and 291 mmHg throughout the operation, while ETCO2 was between 36 and 53 mmHg. The value of SPO2 remained above 95% throughout the operation. The operation lasted for 6 h. The right lung was expanded via jet ventilation when the repairs were completed. After full-airway clearance and BB removal, the endotracheal tube was withdrawn to the trachea. The cuff was placed above the anastomosis and below the glottis under the guidance of a VFIS. Blood gas analysis showed a PaO2 of 282 mmHg. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit uneventfully. A 12-h postoperative bedside chest radiograph showed no significant gastrointestinal inflation .