A 70-year-old African American male presented to the emergency room after acute onset of right facial weakness and dysarthria for five hours. Demographic data is available in Table . On further questioning, he had non-fluctuating, progressive ptosis for approximately 10 years, as well as worsening dysphagia for liquids and solids over the previous several months. There was a family history of bilateral ptosis in his father and paternal grandfather. Detailed examination demonstrated symmetrical and bilaterally reactive pupils, severe bilateral ptosis and ophthalmoplegia , with complete vertical gaze palsy and severely limited horizontal eye movements, and right-sided facial weakness involving the orbicularis oculi and oris. Convergence was impaired. Palatal elevation and swallowing were impaired. There was a complete vertical gaze palsy. There was no muscle weakness in the upper or lower limbs. Deep tendon reflexes were normal aside from absent ankle jerks. The patient denied pain.
Based on acuity of symptoms, an acute stroke was considered. A brain CT scan was obtained in the emergency department and was negative for hemorrhage. A brain MRI the following day revealed an acute ischemic stroke in the right dorsal pons at the level of the seventh cranial nerve nucleus and tract . The patient presented out of the thrombolysis window, so the ischemic stroke was managed with secondary prevention measures. Initial relevant lab work revealed elevated creatine kinase (CK) to 6,080 U/L (decreased to 477 U/L over a week), borderline high low-density lipoprotein (LDL) (131 mg/dL), and normal hemoglobin A1c (5.6%).
A nerve conduction study, in conjunction with absent ankle reflexes, suggested a possible length-dependent sensory axonal neuropathy . The compound muscle action potentials (CMAPs) were single-peaked. Repetitive nerve stimulation of the left facial nerve (recorded at nasalis) and left spinal accessory nerve (recorded at trapezius) did not show any decrement of the CMAP amplitudes. Neither oral pyridostigmine nor an ice pack test resulted in improvement of oculobulbar symptoms. Serum antibodies against acetylcholine receptors and muscle specific tyrosine kinase were negative.
Needle electromyography (EMG) showed fibrillation potentials and positive waves in all muscles tested in the right upper and lower limb and thoracic paraspinals; motor unit action potentials were overall normal and motor unit recruitment was normal in all muscles except the right deltoid, which was myopathic. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed normal white blood cell count and protein levels and negative cytology. The following tests were negative or normal: CT scan of chest/abdomen/pelvis, serum and urine protein immunoelectrophoresis and immunofixation, and serum and CSF lactate and angiotensin converting enzyme levels. The patient declined a muscle biopsy.
Based on the suspicion of a mitochondrial disorder and the absence of a viable tissue biopsy for biochemical and histochemical analysis, genetic testing was completed in the blood. Whole-exome sequencing (WES), as opposed to multi-gene panel or targeted next-generation sequencing approaches, was pursued given its emergence as a preferred and more effective diagnostic tool for suspected mitochondrial disease and other mimic neuromuscular disorders such as congenital myasthenias [–]. The success of WES compared to other approaches stems from the significant genetic and clinical heterogeneity of mitochondrial disorders and of neuromuscular disorders that can have overlapping clinical features .
WES demonstrated a variant (c.1510G > A (p.Ala504Thr) in the PEO1/TWNK (C10ORF2, NM_021830.4/5) gene, which encodes a mitochondrial protein known as “twinkle,” a DNA helicase involved in maintaining mtDNA . The p.Ala504Thr substitution is likely deleterious using several in-silico pathogenicity prediction tools: Sorting Intolerant From Tolerant (SIFT) , PolyPhen2 , Align Gradient Validation Gradient Deviation (GVGD) , and Rare Exome Variant Ensemble Learner (REVEL) . As such, this mutation represents a novel mutation associated with CPEO.
After the patient was discharged from the hospital, he was lost to follow-up; and genetic testing could not be completed on any of the patient’s affected family members as they were deceased.