A 6-year-old boy had a history of gingival overgrowth, which had been present since the boy’s first tooth erupted at 6 months of age. The painless overgrowth of the gingiva progressed slowly causing no discomfort up to the age of 6 years, when the esthetic appearance also became intolerable. No other complaints were noted. The child was systemically healthy and was the only child of two healthy non-consanguineous parents. Similar findings or a history of such findings were not identified in either the parents or their relatives.
Oral cavity examination showed severe gingival enlargement involving both the mandibular and maxillary arches and was particularly prominent over the anterior regions . The patient’s gingivae seemed to have slight redness and mild edema, with absence of normal stippling. The oral hygiene was poor due to the formation of pseudopockets containing large amounts of dental plaque and a small amount of calculus. As a result, the marginal gingiva was slightly inflamed. Apart from gingival enlargement, other mucosal lesions such as submucosal deposits or thickening, were not observed. Radiographical examination revealed no periodontal bone destruction.
The routine hematological and biochemical test results were unremarkable and initial phase therapy was administered. The gingival enlargement was not alleviated after the gingival inflammation was controlled. Gingivectomy was performed, and the wound healing was uneventful. Tissue specimens obtained during gingivectomy were sent for histopathologic examination. Hematoxylin–eosin (HE) staining revealed a hyperplastic epithelium, mild inflammatory cell infiltration, proliferation of the capillary layer, and an increase in the amount of fibrous tissue . This result did not indicate a definitive diagnosis. Meanwhile, recurrence of gingival enlargement occurred 1 week after the gingivectomy. Since this child presented with gingival enlargement as the only clinical manifestation and showed no other systemic involvement, the diagnosis proved difficult. Hence, genetic tests were performed.
Trio whole exome sequencing (WES) of DNA isolated from peripheral blood was performed at the Chigene Translational Medicine Research Center Co. Ltd. (Beijing, China). Detailed methods of genetic tests are provided in the supplementary information (Additional file ). Genetic analysis revealed compound heterozygous mutations of ANTXR2 in this patient: c.524G > A (p.Cys175Tyr) in exon 6 and loss of exons 1 and 2. The patient’s father had a heterozygous ANTXR2 mutation, loss of exons 1 and 2, and his mother had a heterozygous ANTXR2 mutation, c.524G > A . The mutation in exon 6 of ANTXR2 was further verified via Sanger sequencing, and the loss of exons 1 and 2 in ANTXR2 was further verified by quantifying the copies of exons 1 and 2 via quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction assays .
Genetic analysis confirmed the diagnosis of HFS. Therefore, further physical, radiographic, and histopathologic examinations were performed after a literature review. No skin lesions or joint contractures were observed. Skeletal radiography showed no abnormalities of the bilateral distal humeri, radii, ulnae, carpal bones, metacarpals, distal femurs, tibiae, fibulae, metatarsi, and phalanges. The gingival-specimen sections were stained with periodic acid Schiff (PAS) and Congo red. Deposits of an amorphous, homogeneous, and PAS-positive hyaline substance were found in the lamina propria and perivascular spaces . The hyaline substance could not be stained with Congo red.
Based on the clinical presentation and genetic analysis results, the child was diagnosed with HFS of grade 1. A treatment plan, including regular periodontal debridement, oral hygiene motivation, and gingivectomy when necessary was proposed. As HFS is a progressive disease, and manifestations tend to be additive over time, the child was referred to a pediatrician for regular follow-up considering the possibility of systemic involvement in the future.