On 5 November 2019, a 64-year-old male Chinese patient was admitted to Peking Union Medical College Hospital for a liver tumor found by ultrasound during physical examination, without positive symptoms. The patient had a history of hepatitis B virus infection for 29 years. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a 6-cm tumor in the right liver. The liver function test was normal. Among the serum tumor markers, cancer antigen 19–9 (CA19-9) was 103.9 U/ml (normal range was < 34 U/ml), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) was 7.1 ng/ml (normal range was < 5 ng/ml), and alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) was 12.5 ng/ml (normal range was < 20 ng/ml). The patient was not a candidate for surgical intervention because PET-CT showed bilobar disease with innumerable liver lesions and metastatic lymph nodes. After tumor biopsy, pathological diagnosis confirmed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, with positive immunohistochemical (IHC) staining for CK7( +), CK19 (partly +), HER2 (3 +), and MUC1( −) . The status of PD-L1 was negative counted by combined positive score (CPS). Next-generation sequencing (NGS) verified the amplification of the HER2 gene, and the copy number variation of HER2 was 102. The tumor mutational burden was 3.6 Muts/Mb, and microsatellite instability was stable microsatellites tested by polymerase chain reaction. Finally, the patient was diagnosed with poorly differentiated ICC with multiple lymph node metastases (including in the hilar lymph nodes, posterior pancreatic head, para-aortic lymph nodes, and right cardiac-diaphragmatic angle) harboring HER2 amplification (cT2N1M0, stage 3b).
Platinum-based chemotherapy was recommended. Because the patient was worried about the adverse events of chemotherapy, he received pyrotinib (administered orally each day at a dose of 400 mg per day) and tegafur (administered orally each day at a dose of 40 mg per day). However, after 6 months of treatment, PET-CT showed enlargement of the primary lesions and metastatic lymph nodes, with the appearance of bone metastasis in the lumbar spine and pubis, and the disease was evaluated by the PERCIST to have progressed. The progression-free survival with first-line treatment was 6 months. The patient developed grade 3 adverse reactions, including skin rash, hypertension, and increased bilirubin concentration, but no grades 4 or 5 adverse reactions were observed.
After a discussion with the patient and his family, second-line pyrotinib (administered orally each day at a dose of 80 mg per day) and lenvatinib (administered orally each day at a dose of 12 mg per day) in combination with pembrolizumab (administered 2 mg/kg as an intravenous infusion over 30 min every 3 weeks) were used. After 2 months, the lesions in the liver were found to have increased in size on MRI , but the tumor marker levels decreased. The multidisciplinary team including the surgery, internal medicine oncology, and radiology departments reevaluated the efficacy of treatment. Pseudo-progression was suspected based on the performance improvement and decrease in tumor markers, so the patients continued with the treatment. Four months later, PET-CT showed that the primary lesions had shrunk, accompanied by CA19-9 and CEA reductions (CA19-9 levels decreased from 185 to 57.3 U/mL, the CEA level decreased from 8.1 to 2.6 ng/mL), and the efficacy was evaluated as a partial response (PR). In June 2020, lenvatinib was reduced to 8 mg per day because of increased bilirubin levels. The PET-CT evaluation in May 2021 revealed PR. However, the PET-CT on November 2021 showed that the patient developed subclavian lymph node metastasis. The progression-free survival with second-line treatment was 17 months. After using the three drugs, the patient developed grade 3 adverse reactions, including fatigue, irregular bowel movement, skin rash, hypertension, and increased bilirubin concentration, but no grades 4 or 5 adverse reactions were observed.
For the third line of therapy, lenvatinib (administered orally each day at a dose of 12 mg per day) and pembrolizumab (administered 2 mg/kg as an intravenous infusion over 30 min every 3 weeks) in combination with bevacizumab (15 mg/kg intravenously every 3 weeks) were used. The recent evaluation by PET-CT in May 2022 showed stable disease (SD). The progression-free survival with third-line treatment is 6 months thus far. After using the three drugs, the patient developed grade 3 adverse reactions, including fatigue, irregular bowel movement, skin rash, and proteinuria, but no 4 or 5 adverse reactions were observed. The changes of images and tumor makers during the treatemnt for this patient were summarized in Figs. and . Written informed consent to publish the case details was obtained from the patient.