A 13-year-old right-handed male, with no pertinent medical history or prior history of an elbow injury, presented to primary care physician three days after the patient was tackled while playing football and heard a “pop” following hyperextension of his left elbow. He immediately suffered from elbow pain, swelling, and was unable to continue playing. Orthogonal X-ray views of the elbow were obtained, and no evidence for a fracture was appreciated. An elbow sling was recommended with referral to non-operative sports medicine physician for assessment of ligamentous injury of the elbow. Five days after injury, the non-operative sports physician noted moderate swelling at the elbow accompanied by tenderness on palpation at the medial and posterior aspect. Passive range of motion was within normal limits, but painful with the elbow in full flexion. Active range of motion was also within normal limits inflexion but limited to 170° in extension. The patient had 4 of 5 strength on active extension of the elbow and a positive moving valgus stress test. The neurovascular exam was unremarkable. Ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) arthrogram were ordered. One week after injury, ultrasound showed a near complete, partial-thickness, obliquely-oriented tear of the triceps tendon with a bony avulsion-type fracture, approximately 3.0 cm retracted. A portion of the medial aspect of the tendon was still intact. Suspicions of UCL tear from physical exam were confirmed by the MR arthrogram (, , ), which showed a complete tear of the anterior band of the UCL from its humeral attachment. Finally, the MR arthrogram provided further evidence of a high-grade, near complete tear of the triceps tendon with complete avulsion of the lateral and long head portions of the tendon from the olecranon. The patient was referred to be seen by the senior author, an operative sports surgeon,3 weeks after sustaining the injury. Physical examination was notable for palpable tendon gap at the distal triceps insertion, weakness in active extension of the elbow, and extension lag of approximately 15°. There was approximately 15° of valgus laxity with stress testing in slight flexion. Recommendation was made to surgically repair the triceps tendon. Risks and benefits of non-operative and operative treatment were presented to the patient and family. The decision was made to proceed with refixation of the triceps tendon. Since the patient was not a throwing athlete, the UCL was to be treated non operatively with immobilization.