A 63-year-old Asian male presented to ophthalmology clinic with complaint of central blurry vision of the left eye. Past medical history revealed well-controlled type II diabetes mellitus and no past ocular history. Best-corrected visual acuity in both eyes was 20/20, however, the patient reported blurry vision in the left eye. Pupillary responses, confrontational visual field testing, and intraocular pressure were normal.
Initial slit-lamp examination was unremarkable. On detailed funduscopy of the left eye, a non-pigmented choroidal lesion was noted superior to the macula [Figure 1a] with subretinal fluid extending from the tumor into the subfoveal space [Figures 1b & 2a]. Fundus examination of the right eye was normal. Autofluorescence imaging of the left eye showed hyperfluorescence with a mixed or speckled pattern overlying the subretinal lesion [Figure 1b]. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) highlighted an abnormal foveal contour with subretinal fluid in the affected eye [Figure 2a]. B-scan ultrasound on the same visit demonstrated a 6.6 6.1 2.1 mm lesion in the left eye with heterogenous echogenicity [Figure 2b]. Screening computed tomography of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis highlighted a large 5.0 4.3 cm spiculated mass with central necrosis encasing the pulmonary vessels in the right upper lobe of the lung [Figure 3b]. In addition to the mass, enlarged lower paratracheal lymph nodes, lesions on the L4 spinous process, T1 vertebral body, and left adrenal nodule were noted and suspect of metastases.
Histological examination from fine needle aspiration of the lung mass and right lower paratracheal lymph node highlighted atypical cells and adenocarcinoma, respectively. Subsequent positive immunohistochemical staining with NapsinA, TTF- 1, BER-EP4, CK7, and Ki67 confirmed a malignancy of pulmonary origin. Positron emission tomography with Fluorodeoxyglucose (PET-FDG) revealed a right upper lobe pulmonary mass with extension into the right suprahilar region [Figure 3a], right paratracheal and mediastinal lymph node metastases, a 14-mm adrenal nodule, as well as T1 vertebral body, posterior iliac, and left acetabular bony metastases. MRI findings demonstrated a 4-mm enhancement in the left superior frontal gyrus suspect of brain metastases without significant mass effect. Due to the patient's “never- smoking” status, chances of finding a targetable driver mutation were high, and therefore, initiation of chemotherapy was withheld until sequencing was complete. Patient was then started on denosumab 120 mg every four weeks.
Two months after presentation, further ophthalmic work-up revealed gravitated subretinal fluid and decreased acuity of the affected eye (20/60). B-scan ultrasound highlighted an enlarged growth at 10.5 9.4 2.8 mm, with OCT showing worsening subfoveal fluid. Next-generation sequencing of the malignancy showed an EGFR pathogenic mutation variant. Patient subsequently began osimertinib 80 mg daily and denied targeted radiation therapy.
One month later, the patient's pin-hole acuity improved to 20/40, with color fundus photography showing an amelanotic choroidal lesion with subretinal fluid that had not grown, B-scan ultrasound showed a smaller mass (8.2 8.1 1.1 mm), and OCT revealed a flat lesion with decreasing subretinal fluid. A brain MRI highlighted resolution of the left frontal enhancement, while CT scans demonstrated interval decreases of lesions in the right upper lobe of the lung and some bony metastases, though Lesions in the T4 vertebral body and left acetabulum were unchanged.
Patient also exhibited a new 8-mm enhancement of the right hepatic lobe, not seen in earlier imaging. Intravenous chemotherapy was withheld as the interval change was markedly improved with osimertinib therapy alone.
Approximately nine months after diagnosis and daily treatment with oral osimertinib, patient was seen with resolving visual symptoms. Visual acuity of the left eye was correctable to 20/30. Fundus examination and B-scan ultrasound showed a grossly flat retina with no detectable mass and resolved subretinal fluid. OCT also demonstrated similar results. Most recent CT scan showed improved interval changes in the right lung mass and paratracheal lymph nodes, as well as a sclerotic
appearance of the bony metastases and hypoattenuation of the previously noted liver enhancement.