An 80-year-old male admitted to our hospital due to occasional resting chest discomfort. He had undergone percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) for non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction with bare metal stent implantation to the proximal right coronary artery (RCA). Eight months after the first procedure, he underwent elective PCI of the proximal and medial left anterior descending artery (LAD) with sirolimus-eluting stent (SES) ( and ). During the same procedure, in-stent restenosis (ISR) was verified in the RCA and SES was placed ( and ). He remained asymptomatic for 14 years until this time.
He also had a medical history of distal cholangiocarcinoma and had undergone pancreatoduodenectomy 2 months before. His physical function declined significantly after the surgery.
On examination, his blood pressure was 122/79 mmHg, with a regular pulse rate of 85 b.p.m. A grade 2 diastolic murmur was present on auscultation. High-sensitivity troponin I was within normal range, and N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide was 412 pg/mL. The electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm without ST-T segment abnormality. Transthoracic echocardiography showed left ventricular inferior wall hypokinesis with preserved ejection fraction and moderate aortic regurgitation. Coronary computed tomography angiography revealed coronary aneurysms and stent fractures in the RCA and LAD . The aneurysm sizes of the RCA and LAD were 7 × 8 and 7 × 10 mm, respectively. Stress perfusion single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) demonstrated severe ischaemia at the anterior wall. Coronary angiography showed coronary aneurysms and stent fractures in the RCA and LAD where SES was implanted ( and ). Moreover, ISRs were observed in the LAD. Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) revealed that the aneurysms were true aneurysm morphology . The patient was at high risk for cardiac surgery and the coronary aneurysms were not suitable for percutaneous interventions. After heart team discussion and consultation with the patient and his family, we planned treatment with drug-coated balloons (DCBs).
We performed PCI via the left radial artery using a 6 Fr guiding catheter. Initial angiography is shown in . After placing the guide wire, IVUS revealed that the guide wire was passing outside the stents in two places . Thus, rewiring using a double-lumen microcatheter with another guide wire was performed . Finally, IVUS imaging confirmed that the guide wire passed entirely inside the stents. The ISR lesions were dilated with a 3 mm high-pressure balloon and 3 mm DCB dilation was subsequently performed. The final angiogram showed thrombolysis in myocardial infarction grade 3 flow without significant stenosis . The patient was discharged after the procedure without any complications. His symptoms were relieved, and SPECT also showed improvement in ischaemia. His clinical course was uneventful and coronary computed tomography angiography after 1 year showed no change in the size of coronary artery aneurysms.