A 57 year old male had previously undergone a left total knee arthroplasty in 1999 for osteoarthritis. He acquired a late deep peri-prosthetic infection with a multi-resistant Staphylococcus epidermidis. The organism was sensitive to vancomycin and rifampicin. A two stage revision was undertaken after clinical signs of infection had resolved and blood parameters had normalized. Intra-operative gram stain was negative for microorganisms and frozen section of deep tissue was less than five polymorphs per high power field [-].
A cemented S-ROM prosthesis was implanted using a coronal tibial osteotomy and a lateral release for exposure [,].
The primary surgeon followed all the guidelines as described in the instructional booklet for the S-ROM implant. A cemented SROM modular tibial plate plus tibial sleeve and an uncemented 15 x 100 mm press fit tibial stem extension was inserted. The femoral side comprised of a cemented Noiles rotating hinge component, a cemented 46 mm S-ROM femoral sleeve which was matched with an uncemented 17 x 150 mm press fit femoral extension. The implant reconstruction was completed using a 12 mm small SROM Noiles rotating hinge polyethylene and axle inserted from the medial side. The patella was not resurfaced secondary to marked bone deficiency.
Long term antibiotics were prescribed and follow up at regular intervals for the next eight months revealed that all of the patient’s blood parameters; erthrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP) and white cell count (WCC) were within normal limits. Radiographically the knee was unremarkable. The patient carried out normal activities of daily living. The patient presented three years following the second stage of revision after reportedly falling on a wet floor six weeks previously. Prior to the fall, the patient did not require any analgesia and reported normal function with activities of daily living and clinically had a range of motion from zero to one hundred and five degrees. After the fall, the patient’s function became increasingly impaired and required crutches for assisted ambulation, which was limited to less than fifty meters. He was required to climb stairs one at a time with a railing and required assisted transfers. Clinically, his height was 173.5 cm and weight 140 kilograms, exhibited an antalgic gait, a well healed surgical scar, an effusion and tenderness around the pes anserinus. The knee had a range of motion of zero to one hundred degrees and quadriceps power was grade four.
Radiographically, there was a broken tibial wire, osteolysis and pedestal formation around both the femoral and distal tibial stem extensions. The prosthesis was bent at the proximal tibial sleeve and stem junction. The ESR and CRP were 17 and 16.7, respectively. A bone scan showed moderate uptake around the prosthesis, especially the proximal medial tibia and the patella. Labelled white cell scan exhibited stress remodelling and synovitis but was not consistent with infection . There was no catastrophic bone loss around the failed modular junction as it is known that revision modular femoral components can fail if the modular junction is unprotected/unsupported.
The prosthesis was considered loose with mechanical failure. Due to the morbid obesity of the patient, he was referred for laparoscopic gastric banding to facilitate weight loss prior to his revision total knee arthroplasty. Once his weight had decreased to approximately 120 kilograms the revision knee procedure was undertaken. Increasing morbid obesity, and with body mass index (BMI) increasing over the years, bariatric surgery has been well proven in the past few years in treating obesity.
Exposure was through the previous incision and once again a coronal tibial tubercle osteotomy was undertaken. The pseudo capsule sample of frozen section revealed less than five white cells per high power field, excluding active infection. There was marked metallosis with loosening of both the femoral and tibial components at the cement-bone interface. At implant removal it was noted that the femoral and tibial components at the modular metaphyseal sleeve-stem junction were fractured.
Extensive debridement was carried out on both the tibial and femoral sides. The host bone was deficient with Engh type 3 defects in both the distal femur and proximal tibia [--]. The uncontained defects were reconstructed using anatomic specific structural and morcellised impaction allograft. Another S-ROM modular revision stemmed implant was cemented into position .