An 80-year-old Arabian female presented to our hospital with a 2–month history of swelling over the right eyebrow, pain, proptosis of the right eye and diplopia . Physical examination revealed a 2 cm ill-defined painful mass over the right eyebrow. The patient complains of double vision looking to the left. Computed tomography (CT) of the right orbit demonstrated an ill-defined, homogeneous, contrast-enhancing mass attached to the medial rectus. As a space-occupying orbital lesion, a lymphoma or a sarcoma was suspected. As a result, a biopsy was performed. On microscopic examination, the tumour was composed of interlacing bundles of spindle cells with anisokaryosis and hyperchromatic nuclei . Some mitotic figures were observed. Immunohistochemical study was not possible because neoplastic material has been exhausted. The conclusion was malignant spindle cells tumour, most consistently to sarcoma or sarcomatoid carcinoma. No lymph node or distant metastases were found. Subsequently, total exenteration of the right orbit was performed under general anaesthesia. Dilute adrenaline was injected to lessen bleeding generally abundant in this type of excision. Periosteum was incised right around the orbital rim and separated from the bone passing back towards the orbital apex. The eyeball, eyelids, appendages of the eye and periosteum were removed. Surgical specimen was addressed for pathological examination. At gross examination, the tumour appeared ill-defined, whitish and firm. It measured 4/2.5/1.5 cm. It was attached to the sclera without infiltration into eyeball. It infiltrated the upper eyelid . Microscopic examination revealed spindle cells forming disorganized fascicles. They have an irregular nucleus with vesicular chromatin and an eosinophilic cytoplasm. The mitotic index was 18 per 10 high-power fields. Adipose tissue and striated muscle infiltration was observed . Immunohistochemical panel used for initial work up of this high grade spindle cell neoplasm was desmin, smooth muscle actin (SMA), pancytokeratin AE1/AE3, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), S100 protein and CD34. This panel served to rule out first leiomyosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, sarcomatoid carcinoma and spindle cell melanoma. It revealed diffuse positive staining for pancytokeratin AE1/AE3, EMA and SMA and focal positivity for S100 protein . The lesion was immunonegative for desmin and CD34 . As pancytokeratin AE1/AE3, EMA, SMA and S100 protein staining was positive, we completed by second panel. It showed h-cladesmon, Melan-A and HMB-45 negative staining. These pathological and immunohistochemical findings suggested the diagnoses of myoepithelioma, epithelial myoepithelial carcinoma and myoepithelial carcinoma. Myoepithelioma was excluded because the tumour borders were infiltrative. Epithelial myoepithelial carcinoma is by definition composed of a biphasic arrangement of inner luminal ductal cells and outer myoepitheliaI cells. However, the tumour did not show bi-layered duct-like structures. The most appropriate diagnosis was myoepithelial carcinoma. The tumour was extending to upper and posterior surgical margins. Radiotherapy was then indicated. The patient was lost to follow-up until she developed local tumour progression 3 months after removal. The patient was again lost to follow-up and therefore did not receive any other treatment in our hospital.