In August 2006, a 40-year old female patient was examined for swelling in the lateral side of the right upper arm. Upon resection, the patient was diagnosed with myxofibrosarcoma. A second resection was performed to achieve tumour-free margins and plastic surgery was performed two times on the damaged area for cosmetic purposes.
Screening for metastatic disease by computer tomography (CT) showed no pulmonary, bone or hepatic metastases, however a lesion (36 × 23 mm diameter), classified as a benign tumour by CT criteria, was detected adjacent to the left adrenal gland. A control CT scan in December 2006 revealed that this lesion had increased in size. Biopsy of the periadrenal tumour indicated a possible mesenchymal tumour, however malignancy was not confirmed.
In addition, suspect bilateral mammary lesions were also diagnosed. Histological examination of biopsies taken from both breast tumours, revealed invasive ductal carcinomas on both sides.
Because of an unfavourable breast-tumour-relation, neo-adjuvant chemotherapy was applied. After four cycles of an anthracycline-containing regimen, restaging revealed no significant change in the breast tumours, however progression of the periadrenal mass which extended in diameter to 67 × 49 mm, was identified by CT scan. Firstly, a bilateral breast-conserving tumour extirpation in combination with bilateral axillary lymphonodectomy was performed. Both carcinomas were positive for oestrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) expression in the majority of tumour cells, and also overexpressed the human epidermal growth factor receptor (HER2/neu) . There were no relevant histological signs of regression 3 months following neo-adjuvant chemotherapy.
The periadrenal tumour was subsequently resected. Histological diagnosis revealed a poorly differentiated, pleomorphic, periadrenal liposarcoma. The lipogenic nature of tumour was confirmed by immunohistochemical detection of the S100 protein in the tumour cells. Adjuvant chemotherapy with taxanes was recommended following consultation with an interdisciplinary tumour board, because of the nodal positive breast cancer. Post-operative radiation of the periadrenal region due to RX resection of the periadrenal liposarcoma was also scheduled upon completion of the chemotherapy. Treatment with Trastuzumab and endocrine treatment was included according to the receptor status of the bilateral breast cancers. Moreover, radiation therapy after bilateral breast conserving therapy and radiation of the right upper arm was planned.
Family history revealed a paternal uncle who died at 22 years from a malignancy in the splenic region. No further information regarding this tumour was available. Additionally, the paternal grandfather was diagnosed with leukaemia at 70 years. The maternal grandmother died from colorectal cancer diagnosed at 51 years. Criteria for Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome according to Eeles and the updated Chompret criteria were met . Genetic analysis of TP53 was performed by sequencing genomic DNA isolated from peripheral blood leukocytes of our patient. A pathogenic, heterozygous germline mutation (p.Arg282Trp) was identified. Neither parent was shown to be a carrier of this mutation. Paternity was confirmed by using 15 high polymorphic Short-Tandem-Repeats. Taken together, these data indicate that the TP53 mutation in the patient occurred de novo, although a germline mosaicism in one of the parents cannot be excluded. We examined tissue from a different germ layer to identify possible somatic mosaicism in the patient. Analysis of DNA from the oral mucosa revealed the same heterozygous TP53 mutation identified in the leucocytes. Thus, although we cannot rule out somatic mosaicism, this was very unlikely. Predictive testing was performed in the 44 year-old sibling and in both daughters (aged 21 and 18 years) of the patient. All three female subjects were not carriers of the mutation. Analyses of BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in the index patient did not reveal any pathological findings.
After confirmation of LFS by molecular analysis, the decision of an interdisciplinary consulting panel was to restrict the planned radiotherapy to the location with the highest priority. This decision was based on the suspected radiosensitivity of individuals harbouring a deleterious mutation in TP53. Thus, radiation was scheduled for the periadrenal region with postoperative RX, however the initially intended radiotherapy of both breasts, as well as of the right upper arm was cancelled.
The patient was offered secondary, bilateral prophylactic mastectomy, to reduce the risk of recurrent breast cancer. Due to the risk of new primary tumours at other sites, the patient refused this option and opted for a close, post-treatment observation regimen. The surveillance program was adjusted to her elevated risk for other primary malignancies and secondary malignancies after radiotherapy. Biannual ultrasound examination of the breast, annual magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the breast, and mammography at larger intervals were recommended. Abdominal ultrasound and MRI were predominantly used to monitor the sites of sarcomas.
In June 2008, multiple nodular lesions were detected close to the left kidney by control MRI, inside and adjacent to the former irradiation region. The optimal response to several lines of treatment with chemotherapy was stable disease. A radical resection of the tumour mass was performed in June 2009. Histological analysis confirmed a recurrent, but well-differentiated liposarcoma. The short interval to radiation therapy of the left periadrenal region indicated resistance of the disease to radiation therapy.
In June 2010, MRI of the abdomen revealed local recurrence. As of February 2012, the patient has been under long-term treatment with trabectedine at a Karnofsky Index of 80%. No distant metastasis, new primaries or recurrences at other sites have since been identified.