This 28-year-old female presented to the emergency department (ED) after a witnessed tonic-clonic seizure, which was terminated by 10 mg of buccal midazolam. Prior to the seizure, she had been unwell for 4 days with a cough and a high-grade pyrexia reported as 38.5°C.
The patient has a background of PCD, an extremely rare condition that causes lactic acidosis and seizures. Her baseline lactate level is around 4 mmol/L (0.4–0.8 mmol/L), and her last seizures were in 2013 and in 1997. She was not on regular anti-epileptic medication. In addition, she was known to suffer from generalized hypotonia and learning difficulties. In 1998, she underwent an atrial thrombectomy related to central line sepsis with Candida albicans species.
On presentation to the ED, her observations were RR-16, HR 72, Saturations 96%, BP 130/72, temperature 37.2°C. Initial physical examination of the cardiovascular, respiratory, and gastrointestinal systems revealed no abnormalities. Blood tests on admission showed no evidence of infection, but a blood gas revealed an acidaemia and hyperlactataemia: pH 7.11 (7.35–7.45), Lactate 11.5 mmol/L (0.4–0.8 mmol/L), BE −20.8 mmol/L (−2 − 3mmol/L) and HCO3− 8.5 mmol/L (22.0–29.0 mmol/L).
A deficiency of pyruvate decarboxylase results in decreased production of glucose and a reduction in energy production from the mitochondria. Incomplete respiration also results in the accumulation of inorganic acids, which causes metabolic acidosis. Therefore, when the body is under stress (e.g. an underlying infection) patients with PCD are unable to meet their energy demands.
After seeking specialist advice, the patient was treated with 2 mL/kg/h of 10% dextrose to meet her energy demands as patients with PCD often have a decreased glucose production.
The metabolic acidosis was managed with 10 mL of oral sodium bicarbonate 8.4% three times a day. Despite optimal ward-based management, she was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) due to her abnormal biochemistry. On ICU, her metabolic acidosis was managed with intravenous 1.26% sodium bicarbonate infusions until her acidosis and base excess had resolved.
On Day 2 in ICU, the patient-reported abdominal pain associated with tachycardia and hypotension. Her computed tomography (CT) abdomen demonstrated no acute intra-abdominal pathology but showed bilateral basal peripheral ground-glass opacification in the lungs; appearances suspicious for SARS-CoV-19 pneumonitis. In addition to the nasopharyngeal swab for RT–PCR detection of SARS-CoV-19 sent on admission, a repeat swab was sent, but both were negative. However, due to a high clinical suspicion with the typical CT changes of bilateral basal peripheral ground-glass opacification, she was treated as having SARS-CoV-19 pneumonitis and was started on 6 mg dexamethasone for 10 days.
A troponin done at the time of haemodynamic instability was raised at 791 ng/L (0–10 ng/L) (6 ng/L on admission). As well as this, a transthoracic echocardiogram showed a severely impaired LV systolic function with RWMAs detected in the mid, distal, and apical regions; and an LV ejection fraction reported as 25–30% . Her electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus rhythm with right axis deviation, poor R wave progression, QTc prolongation (470 ms), and T-wave inversion in the precordial leads, leads I and aVL . Her previous echocardiogram and ECG performed in 2019 had both been normal. She was started on heart failure treatment consisting of beta-blockade, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition as well as dual antiplatelet therapy. Anticoagulation with treatment dose low molecular weight heparin was started based on the history of previous cardiac thrombus and severe hypokinesis on the echocardiogram. In view of the echocardiogram findings, dynamic troponin, and ECG changes she was kept on dual antiplatelet therapy until further investigations were performed.
Four days after the initial rise in troponin, there was a significant clinical and biochemical improvement, with a reduction of the troponin to 60 ng/L (0–10 ng/L), hence she was stepped down to a general medical ward. She was due to have a cardiac MRI to further investigate the cause of her cardiac dysfunction, but she did not tolerate this procedure. However, a repeat echocardiogram performed 7 days after her initial troponin rise showed a completely normal cardiac function with no RWMAs . Following this, she was discharged the next day.
The patient was followed up in clinic at 2 and 6 months. On both occasions, she did not suffer from any chest pain, shortness of breath, dizziness, or any further seizures. She also had an echocardiogram that showed normal LV cavity size and LVEF of 60–65% visually.