A 57-year-old man presented to his general practitioner with symptoms of cough and progressive shortness of breath. He was previously well other than longstanding treated hypertension and he had no significant family history. On further questioning he also described night sweats and unexplained weight loss.
He was referred to the local chest clinic where salient findings on examination included oedema of the extremities, dilated chest wall veins and palpable cervical lymphadenopathy. Examination of the cardiovascular, respiratory and abdominal systems was otherwise unremarkable. Blood tests performed recently had shown elevated ferritin and C reactive protein with otherwise normal haematology and biochemistry results.
A chest x-ray performed one month previously at the onset of symptoms was normal. A repeat chest x-ray now showed bilateral pleural effusions and extensive reticulonodular shadowing [Figure ]. Urgent ultrasound guided biopsy of the neck masses was performed along with CT of the chest, abdomen and pelvis.
Ultrasound examination of the neck confirmed bilateral enlarged lymph nodes in the supraclavicular, and lower and midjugular regions with thrombosis of the right internal jugular vein. Needle biopsy of the lymph nodes was performed.
CT demonstrated lymphadenopathy affecting the cervical, mediastinal and hilar regions and thrombosis of both jugular veins with extensive collateral circulation. Throughout both lungs there was extensive septal thickening typical of lymphangitis carcinomatosa as well as nodular areas suggestive of pulmonary metastases and moderate bilateral pleural effusions [Figure ]. Within the abdomen, a 9 × 13 cm mass containing central necrosis was present arising from the lower pole of the right kidney and associated with extensive retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy [Figure ].
Appearances were those of a renal cell carcinoma (Clinical TNM Stage T3N2M1) with lymphangitis carcinomatosa as part of extensive lymphatic spread. The initial needle biopsy of the cervical lymphadenopathy was inconclusive but a further excision biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Oral steroids and analgesia were commenced but unfortunately the patient passed away within two weeks of the diagnosis.