A 75-year-old male underwent surgeries for ascending colon cancer and liver metastasis in the previous 8 and 6 years, respectively. Thereafter, the patient remained recurrence-free. He was then followed-up regularly by a gastrointestinal surgeon. No other underlying diseases such as hypertension and diabetes were observed; no regular medications were taken. Follow-up computed tomography (CT) 3 months prior to hospitalization revealed ascites and multiple peritoneal seeding. Transgastric biopsy of the peritoneal nodules was performed using endoscopic ultrasound-guided puncture aspiration. Immunostaining was negative for colon cancer metastasis, and unknown primary cancer was diagnosed. During pre-treatment assessment, his laboratory workup revealed chronic renal dysfunction equivalent to chronic kidney disease (CKD) G3bA1 (serum creatinine [sCr] level 1.3–1.6 mg/dL) without abnormal urinalysis results. Therefore, cisplatin was avoided in favor of tegafur/gimerasil/oterasil (S-1) plus oxaliplatin (SOX regimen) as the anticancer regimen of choice. To account for renal dysfunction, both S-1 and oxaliplatin were administered at reduced doses (80 mg/day of S-1 instead of the normal dose at 120 mg/day and 100 mg/m2 of oxaliplatin instead of 130 mg/m2). Three weeks after the first SOX infusion, the second dose was scheduled. The sCr level at that time rose to 3.17 mg/dL, and acute kidney injury (AKI) was diagnosed. Therefore, the second dose of SOX was not administered. Two weeks later, renal dysfunction progressed and the patient was urgently hospitalized. Prominent edema was observed in both lower legs. The patient had abdominal distention due to ascites accumulation, but no abdominal symptoms. There were no other abnormalities in physical examination. Blood tests showed a normal white blood cell count (7100/µL), low hemoglobin level (7.8 g/dL), and normal platelet count (160,000/µL). Schistocytes were not found in peripheral blood smear; sCr level progressed to 5.02 mg/dL. C-reactive protein level was elevated (19.7 mg/dL) and remained persistently high (10–20 mg/dL). Lactate dehydrogenase level was also elevated (740 U/L). Result of infectious workup was negative, therefore, high C-reactive protein level was considered. Antineutrophil cytoplasmic, anti-nuclear, and anti-glomerular basement membrane antibodies were absent. Von Willebrand factor-cleaving protease (ADAMS13) level was normal. Urine N-acetyl-β-D-glucosaminidase levels were slightly high (570 µg/L, reference value < 289 µg/L), while N-acetylglucosaminidase level was mildly elevated (82.6 IU/L, reference value 0.7–11.2 IU/L). Urine microscopy findings revealed granular casts and glomerular hematuria was absent. Urinary protein excretion was approximately 1 g/day. The drug-induced lymphocyte stimulation test (DLST) was positive for oxaliplatin and negative for S-1. Ascitic fluid was confirmed by CT scan, which showed no renal atrophy, postrenal acute renal injury, and an intravesical pressure of 5 mmHg (normal value 5–7 mmHg), negating abdominal compartment syndrome. Drug-induced renal dysfunction was suspected; however, as renal dysfunction did not improve after drug withdrawal, methylprednisolone (mPSL) pulse therapy (500 mg/dose daily for 3 days) was initiated on day 3 of hospitalization, based on the belief that immunological mechanisms were involved. After the 3-day course, mPSL was changed to prednisolone (PSL) 50 mg/day (0.8 mg/kg/day). Renal biopsy was performed on the day 8 of hospitalization.
Thirty-five glomeruli were collected, of which 5 had global sclerosis. A mild increase in mesangium substrate was observed in several glomeruli; no other abnormal findings were observed in the other glomeruli . The tubules showed diffuse degenerative findings, including severe atrophy, obscuration of the print border, and flattening of the epithelium . Lymphocyte infiltration in the interstitium and tubules was unremarkable and interstitial fibrosis was mild . Vasculitis or thrombus formation was not observed. In the glomeruli, the IgG, IgA, C1q, and C3 assays showed negative results, implying a lack of glomerular involvement.
Pathologically, the findings indicated acute tubular necrosis. Considering the pathological findings and DLST results, a diagnosis of acute tubular injury due to oxaliplatin was made. Renal function continued to deteriorate with a sCr of 7.77 mg/dl on day 11 of admission. The patient was oliguric, had prominent generalized edema, and was started on hemodialysis. Thereafter, the patient did not show any improvement in renal dysfunction and was placed on maintenance hemodialysis. PSL was tapered and terminated.