A 47-year-old woman referred to our center with a history of gradually worsening symptoms of headache, diplopia, and left-sided ptosis (eyelid drooping) for 1 year ago that has progressed intensely during the past 4 months.
Magnetic resonance imagining that performed in another center revealed a localized midbrain lesion and referred to our center 9 months after her initial symptoms.
The neurological examination revealed left eye hypotropia and ptosis. The medial and upward gaze of the left eye was impaired and deviated slightly out and down in the primary position . The pupil was unreactive and mildly dilated compare to the right eye. The rest of the physical examinations showed no significant findings.
Multiplanar images at different MRI sequences with and without intravenous contrast showed small spherical tumor (10 × 5 × 5 mm) abutting anterolateral of the left cerebral peduncle. The tumor appeared isointense on T1-weighted images, hyperintense on T2-weighted images. Imaging confirmed a gadolinium-enhanced mass with no dural attachment, suggesting for Schwannoma .
After general anesthesia, lateral subfrontal craniotomy was performed. Dura opened on curly Lina Fashion. The carotid artery was found. By opening the liliequist membrane, the posterior communicating artery was followed to the interpeduncular fossa. Firm dark pink global tumor with a compressive effect on the mesencephalic area appeared. The third nerve ran into the tumor . Attempts to separate the tumor from the nerve were seemingly impossible because the tumor was adhesive and appeared to be rising from the oculomotor nerve. Complete paralysis of the third nerve on preoperative examinations indicated neural, and tumor fibers had been intertwined. Therefore, the surgeon considered the complete resection of the tumor as the best option for the patient and the tumor, together with the involved part of the oculomotor nerve, was resected .
The histopathological study of the 10 × 5 × 4 mm dark pink mass revealed round to oval centrally located nuclei with dispersed chromatin and eosinophilic cytoplasmic. Lobules of the tumor are separated from each other with collagen sheets and contained whorls and psammoma bodies. Necrosis was not a feature. The final diagnosis was meningothelial meningioma (WHO Grade I).
On postoperative examination, all preoperative signs were found as complete paralysis of the left oculomotor nerve without slight responses and reflexes, which was expected due to the tumor and nerve resection. At a 6-month follow-up, she continued to have diplopia and eyelid drooping. In the brain MRI finding, there was no evidence of recurrence during 1 year follow-up.