In December 2009, a 24-year-old female patient was admitted to the hospital with complaints of “right hip pain and limited mobility for over a year following a fall.” The patient experienced right hip pain after a fall that occurred more than a year ago. The pain experienced limited movement. After resting, the pain was slightly relieved, and she was able to walk.
According to the provided information, the patient had a 10-year history of multiple untreated skeletal abnormalities, which included double hip varus deformity, flexion contracture, and adduction deformity of the right hip and bilateral knee valgus deformity. Multiple cystic areas of bone densification and ground glass density in both the lower limb long bones and skull, thinning of the bone cortex and deformation of the bilateral femoral shaft and cervical trunk angle were discovered via x-ray on admission . Additionally, the patient had multiple skin pigmentations at birth and was diagnosed with a facial bone deformity at the age of 14. However, she had normal menstruation and secondary sexual characteristics and delivered a child naturally at the age of 24.
The patient also had abnormal blood biochemistry findings, with markedly increased levels of serum alkaline phosphatase (670 IU/L, normal value: 40–160 IU/L) and osteocalcin (219.6 ng/ml, normal value: 11–43 ng/ml). However, her serum calcium concentration was within the reference range, and other endocrine indices were not abnormal .
The diagnosis considered based on these findings is McCune–Albright syndrome (MAS), a rare genetic disorder characterized by the presence of fibrous dysplasia, endocrine abnormalities, and cafe-au-lait spots on the skin. In this case, the patient had skeletal abnormalities consistent with fibrous dysplasia, as well as elevated levels of alkaline phosphatase and osteocalcin.
The patient received 5 mg of zoledronic acid through intravenous infusion four times between 2009 and 2013, along with oral calcium supplementation. Total hip replacement (THA) was performed on the right side in July 2010. Postoperative hip radiographs were examined . The alkaline phosphatase and osteocalcin levels were 538 IU/L and 192.5 ng/ml, respectively. In December 2013, the patient underwent orthopedic surgery and a right supracondylar osteotomy . Upon admission, the alkaline phosphatase and osteocalcin levels were 403 IU/L and 246.30 ng/ml, respectively. In May 2015, the patient sustained a left femoral shaft fracture due to a fall and underwent internal fixation with plates and screws . Based on postoperative histopathology, fibrous dysplasia was ultimately diagnosed. In December 2015, the right femoral plate was removed to prevent stress concentration and subsequent fracture in the femoral shaft. Although the patient had no significant complications during the follow-up period, she was treated for submaxillary infection and mandibular osteonecrosis at another hospital in 2017 and 2018 . The difficult road to recovery of this patient was shown in the .