A 24-year-old Caucasian woman with a medical history of depression and no medication use presented with recurrent syncope during sexual activity. There was no family history of sudden death. Immediately after achieving orgasm during sexual intercourse she became tachypneuic and her whole body was shaking. Subsequently, she lost consciousness. Her partner noticed an absent pulse and started mouth-to-mouth resuscitation. She regained consciousness within minutes, and she was transferred to our Cardiology unit by the emergency services. She had experienced a similar episode several months earlier during orgasm. Physical examination revealed no abnormalities. Baseline 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed a wide based T-wave with a prolonged QTc-interval of 507 ms (corrected QTc according to the Framingham formula; Figure ). Laboratory investigations of our patient revealed a sodium level of 141 mmol/L (normal range 135-145 mmol/L), a potassium level of 3.7 mmol/L (normal range 3.5–5 mmol/L), and a calcium level of 2.22 mmol/L with a normal albumin level. A chest X-ray was completely normal. Bicycle exercise testing revealed exercise dependent prolonging of the PQ-interval. Also, her family underwent ECG testing. Her father’s ECG showed also an abnormally LQT-interval, but he never experienced a cardiac event (syncope or cardiac arrest).
During visiting hours in the hospital our patient again became tachypneuic, dizzy and was unresponsive for a few seconds. Runs of TdP were recorded simultaneously on telemetry as shown in Figure . This episode was similar to the previous episode during sexual intercourse. The patient was treated with magnesium intravenously after which sinus rhythm returned. Also an oral beta-blocker (metoprolol 100 mg once daily) was started. Subsequently, she was treated with a dual chamber pacemaker defibrillator (DDD-ICD). Genetic testing (Sanger sequencing) revealed a novel mutation (c.361del) in the KCNH2 gene. This mutation leads to a change in the reading frame at codon Ala121 and the introduction of a premature stop codon (p.[Ala121Leufs*12]). The KCNH2 gene is located on chromosome 7q36 encoding the alpha-subunit of the delayed rectifier potassium (K+) channel current (Ikr). Ikr is one of the major determinants of phase 3 repolarization of the cardiac action potential in ventricular cardiomyocytes.
One month after presentation the patient was doing very well as assessed in the outpatient clinic. She performed an outpatient cardiac rehabilitation program after discharge. Goal of this programme was to restore her quality of life and to maintain functional capacity. Components of the rehabilitation program include patient assessment, physical activity counselling, exercise training, and psychosocial management. Both the metoprolol and the implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) were well tolerated during daily life. In addition, an ECG was performed (during treatment with a beta-blocker) in the outpatient clinic as shown in Figure . This ECG showed an atrial paced rhythm with a QTc-interval of 444 ms. The patient has remained free of syncope at 8 months of follow-up. ICD follow-up showed 56% atrial pacing and no ventricular pacing at 8 months of follow-up. No premature ventricular contractions or ventricular tachyarrhythmias were recorded. Also, no ventricular therapy was observed.