The patient is a 67-year-old Caucasian man who presented to the Breast Clinic in August 2008 with a six-month history of a painful right nipple and one episode of clear nipple discharge. His problem had not resolved with use of a topical ointment prescribed by his general practitioner and he was admitted to the Breast ward of our hospital in September 2008 for further investigations.
The patient's past medical history includes 30 years of lymphomatoid papulosis, a chronic papulonodular dermatological condition, which has been controlled with long-term methotrexate treatment and folic acid supplementation. There was no report that the control of this had been particularly poor recently, however the patient had several previous recorded flare ups (1992, 2000, 2004, 2006) requiring clinic appointments and adjustment of medication (mainly methotrexate).The patient has also suffered from essential hypertension, atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter since 1990 for which he takes bendrofluamethiazide and digoxin respectively. In addition, the patient was diagnosed with mixed cellularity Hodgkin's lymphoma nine years ago (1999) and successfully treated with six cycles of combination chemotherapy (ABVD: doxorubicin, bleomycin, vincristine and dacarbazine), being in remission to date. The lymphoma was discovered on palpation of two left sided inguinal nodes, one right sided inguinal node, palpable lumps in the left upper thigh, left lower quadrant of the abdomen and the right hypochondrium. A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy, bilateral inguinal lymphadenoapathy and nodes present in the both iliac chains. The patient received no radiotherapy for this disease or for any other reason. Moreover, the patient has been extensively investigated for ongoing neurological symptoms that include paraesthesia of hands and left foot and some gait imbalance but the aetiology remains unexplained to date. The only positive family history is of a sister who died aged 68 from an unknown cancer.
On examination, the right nipple appeared inflamed, mildly erythematous and thickened with tenderness on palpation. The erythema, inflammation and thickening did not extend further than the nipple-areolar region. There was no obvious nipple inversion, masses, ulceration or active nipple discharge and no axillary or supraclavicular lymphadenopathy were palpable. Notably, faded scattered, pale pink, papules were visible across the upper chest, upper back and lower abdomen.
The patient had a mammogram, which was normal, and he proceeded to have a punch biopsy. The result of this confirmed Paget's disease of nipple and the patient was scheduled for a right mastectomy and sentinel node biopsy.
The mastectomy was uneventful and he recovered well post-operatively . Histopathology confirmed Paget's disease of the right nipple with no evidence of underlying invasive ductal carcinoma, ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast tissue or lymph node invasion.