A retired 76 year-old Caucasian man, BMI 27, in July 2017 was referred to OUR INSTITUTION with a 2-year history of persistent abdominal pain, resistant to analgesics (Paracetamol and Ketoprofen), irregular bowel habits and rectorrhagia. He reported a 1-year history of iron-deficiency anemia (≈7 g/dl), treated with blood transfusions and investigated with upper and lower endoscopy. The patient had a medical history significant for type 2 diabetes mellitus, treated with Metformin, and small cell carcinoma of the bladder, treated with radical cystectomy and orthotopic ileal neobladder, radiotherapy was not performed. In 2003 he was diagnosed an incisional hernia and underwent open prosthetic repair with a composite mesh (Composix™ E/X Mesh, Bard) implanted in intraperitoneal position.
At admission to our Unit, a physical exam showed a well-healed midline laparotomy incision with no evidence of hernia. As completion to previous endoscopic procedures, a CT scan was performed showing entero-enteric fistulae and migration of prosthesis into adherent intestinal loops (, ). Informed consent had been previously given by the patient who was treated by a high volume experienced surgeon. The patients underwent laparotomy and a large mass of about 25 cm of diameter, consisting of adherent ileal loops, was found . Prosthetic material penetrating the bowel was detected, resulting in a natural by-pass between the intestinal loops, which explained the absence of canalization-related symptoms. A dual intestinal resection was performed. An inflammatory process involving the rectus muscles made the abdominal wall repair very challenging. A 30 × 30 cm absorbable mesh (Vycril®-Ethicon) was used to reconstruct the posterior fascia of the rectus muscles. A transversus abdominis release (TAR) could not be used due to the critical conditions of the posterior components of the abdominal wall.
According to VHWG grade III, an appropriately shaped, not cross-linked, 20 × 30 cm biological implant (SurgiMend®, Integra LifeScience) was positioned in the retromuscular site. A Prevena™ Incisional System (KCI) was used to protect the skin and removed after 6 days. A small dehiscence of the lower third of the surgical wound was found and treated with V.A.C.® Therapy (KCI) for one week, and then with advanced wound care. The patient was discharged on the 23rd postoperative day. The 3-month clinical examination showed the surgical wound well healed. After 9 months the patient is still in good health, with complete resolution of previous anemia.