A 10-year-old Caucasian girl, weighing 45 kg, underwent an endoscopic transnasal craniotomy to remove an adamantinomatous craniopharyngioma. After the apparently uneventful operation, the patient developed postoperative encephalitis, obstructive hydrocephalus, intracranial hypertension and became comatose. A ventriculoperitoneal shunt was placed to limit intracranial hypertension. The patient awoke from the coma with flaccid quadriplegia, likely due to tonsillar herniation. Since she had no spontaneous breathing activity, a tracheostomy was performed, and she was ventilated with volume controlled ventilation.
Two months thereafter, the patient was transferred to our pediatric ICU to continue the treatment and evaluate the possibility of pursuing a respiratory weaning.
Compliance of the respiratory system (0.8 ml/cmH2O/kg), PaO2-to-FiO2 ratio (490 mmHg) and a negligible alveolar dead space fraction were measured. Once mechanical support was reduced, spontaneous inspiratory efforts were observed. A maximal negative inspiratory force (NIF) of − 20 cmH2O (Servo-I ventilator, Maquet, Solna, Sweden) was recorded. In addition, a NAVA nasogastric tube (Maquet Critical Care AB, Solna, Sweden) was positioned to measure EAdi signal and to start NAVA ventilation, with the aim of improving patient-ventilator synchrony. The correct placement of the NAVA probe was carefully checked using the positioning window of the ventilator and the ECG signals .
At a preliminary evaluation, the patient appeared poorly adapted to NAVA, even in the presence of a very high NAVA gain (5 cmH2O/μV) and a sensitive neural trigger (0.3 μV). The recorded EAdi signal, despite showing a phasic activity, had a very low amplitude.
On the contrary, she appeared well synchronized and adequately supported on PSV. We therefore decided to perform two brief (15 min) “breathing trials” to compare PSV with NAVA, in order to understand the possible clinical implications of these observations. The following ventilatory settings were applied:Pressure support ventilation with pressure support of 8 cmH2O, flow trigger sensitivity set at 4 and expiratory trigger set at 25% of peak inspiratory flow. Neurally-adjusted ventilatory assistance with NAVA gain of 5 cmH2O/μV and neural inspiratory trigger of 0.3 μV. Of note, during NAVA, inspiratory assist can also be triggered by a pneumatic signal in case of failure of the neural trigger.
A constant positive end-expiratory pressure of 4 cmH2O and fraction of inspired oxygen of 0.21 were applied throughout the clinical test. We recorded ventilatory variables (tidal volume, respiratory rate, mean airway pressure, end tidal carbon dioxide, pulse oximetry), EAdi and heart rate at 3 min intervals during both phases. A blood gas analysis of central venous blood and non-invasive blood pressure were measured at the beginning and at the end of each 15-min trial.
Table summarizes the observed results. On PSV, the patient presented stable tidal volumes, respiratory rates, minute ventilation, end-tidal and venous CO2 levels. On the contrary, when switched to NAVA, an immediate drop in tidal volume with consequent marked reduction in minute ventilation was observed. Thereafter, the patient increased the respiratory rate from 15 to 24 breaths per minute, leading to an increase in total minute ventilation, despite the reduced tidal volume. Nevertheless, end-tidal CO2 progressively increased from 49 to 55 mmHg with a corresponding increase in venous CO2 from 52 to 57 mmHg. Peripheral arterial oxygen saturation, as measured with pulse oximetry, did not change. The amplitude of the EAdi signal remained very low during both phases and it did not change significantly with the ventilation mode. Of note, during NAVA, the majority of breaths were initiated by the secondary source, i.e. by the pneumatic trigger, as the EAdi signal was frequently not able to trigger inspiration. Clinically, while the patient was well adapted to PSV, on NAVA her breathing pattern became irregular. She showed clear signs of increased work of breathing and distress, such as nasal flaring and suprasternal-intercostal retractions, mild tachycardia and hypertension.
An electromyographic study was performed and the presence of a sensory-motor polyneuropathy compatible with critical illness polyneuropathy was documented. The muscles of the head and neck showed less involvement. An involvement of the diaphragm and of the trapezius was documented, while other accessory muscles, such as the sternocleidomastoid and the intercostal muscles showed a preserved activity.
A magnetic resonance imaging of the brain and spinal cord revealed the presence of a lesion of the posterolateral region of the high spinal cord, compatible with the previous infective process and/or hypertensive damage.
One month thereafter, the patient was transferred to a long-term rehabilitation center. While the upper limbs recovered some muscular strength, she was still completely ventilator-dependent 6 months after discharge from our pediatric ICU. EAdi measurements were not repeated.