A 57 year-old black African female farmer was referred to our centre for the management of a suppurating ulcer and swelling of the left hand of two weeks duration. This started following a trivial needle prick on the left palm during laundry which became swollen and pustular after one week. It was associated with pains, throbbing in nature and relieved by hand elevation. The hand was incised at home resulting in a suppurating ulcer on the palmer surface that increased in size to involve the dorsum and forearm. The patient initially sought medical attention from a traditional practitioner who managed the lesion as whitlow. She later presented at a health centre and was referred to Saint Elizabeth Catholic General Hospital Shisong.
She had a 7 year history of type 2 diabetes mellitus and was on metformin and glibenclamide but was non-compliant to treatment. She did not smoke cigarette or drink alcoholic beverages. She had no history of hypertension or impaired renal function. She reported loss of sight of the left eye following an eye surgery indicated for correction of striate keratopathy and glaucoma 2 years prior to presentation and numbness of the extremities of 6 months duration.
Physical examination revealed an ill-looking woman, febrile (temperature = 38.3 °C) with pale conjunctivae. Her left hand was swollen, warm, fluctuant and ulcerated with foul smelling copious discharge. There was progressive cellulitis and wet gangrene up to the mid forearm . Sensations were reduced on both extremities.
Investigations conducted included a random blood glucose of 33.3 mmol/l (measured upon admission), urine analysis that showed no ketone bodies, full blood count that revealed a leukocytosis of 15.5 × 103/µl with neutrophil predominance of 12.4 × 103/µl (81%) and moderate microcytic hypochromic anaemia with hemoglobin level of 7.8 g/dl. Serum electrolytes were within their normal ranges, blood urea nitrogen was 102.8 mg/dl and creatinine was 5.0 mg/dl giving a urea/ creatinine ratio of 20.6. A wound swab and culture isolated Enterobacter spp. which was sensitive to ciprofloxacin, gentamycin, ceftriaxone and chloramphenicol.
A diagnosis of Lawal Group III left diabetic hand syndrome was made.
After counselling and consent, aggressive surgical debridement was done under local anaesthesia. Other modalities of management included parenteral antibiotics (ceftriaxone 1 g 12 h and metronidazole 500 mg 8 h), tight glycaemic control (using sliding-scale soluble insulin), analgesics (parenteral paracetamol 1 g 8 h) and fluids. The wet gangrene of the hand and forearm progressed despite aggressive antibiotics, repeated debridement and drainage. The patients’ condition worsened by the installation of septic shock that was addressed with timely intravenous hydrocortisone (100 mg IV bolus) and epinephrine (1 mg IV bolus). After resuscitation, the left hand was amputated. Postoperative evolution was marked by swinging pyrexia and alteration in the level of consciousness and blood culture was requested. She eventually went into coma and died on the 7th day following surgery from overwhelming sepsis.