A 10-year old male presented to an urgent care center following 24 hours of non-bloody diarrhea and abdominal pain. He was diagnosed with viral gastroenteritis and oral rehydration was recommended. On day 5 of illness, his symptoms improved, but by day 8, he developed increasing listlessness and lethargy. By day 9 of illness, the patient developed non-bloody, non-bilious emesis and was re-evaluated at the urgent care center. He was again diagnosed with viral gastroenteritis although laboratory studies were obtained prior to discharge. The parents were notified on day 12 of illness that these studies were significantly abnormal. The patient was brought to the local emergency room and admitted to the Pediatric ICU for further management.
Upon arrival, the patient was lethargic and confused. His vital signs demonstrated tachycardia and hypertension. His pupils were round, equal and reactive to light bilaterally. He had bloody crusting at nares bilaterally. His respiratory, cardiac, abdominal, and musculoskeletal exams were normal. His skin exam demonstrated jaundice and bruising on his legs. Despite difficulty focusing and communicating, he did have purposeful movements with painful stimuli and bilateral ankle clonus. Laboratory studies confirmed a hemoglobin of 4.5 g/dl and a platelet count of 86 K/ul. His basic metabolic panel revealed a sodium of 124 mg/dl, a potassium of 6.0 mg/dl, a bicarbonate of 13 mg/dl, a blood urea nitrogen of 329 mg/dl, and a creatinine of 21.8 mg/dl (Figure ). Additional labs included a LDH of 4067 IU/L and a PTT of 27 seconds. A chest radiograph was obtained and was remarkable for pulmonary edema.
Following platelet and packed red blood cell tranfusions because of the potential for bleeding, a temporary external jugular hemodialysis catheter was placed and hemodialysis was initiated. A renal ultrasound was normal. A percutaneous renal biopsy was performed on hospital day 3 to confirm the diagnosis and to examine the degree of chronicity because of the severity of acute kidney injury. Results from the biopsy demonstrated the presence of a thrombotic microangiopathy on hospital day 4 (Figures and
). Because of the severity of his illness and concern for atypical causes of HUS, therapeutic plasma exchange (TPE) was initiated on hospital day four. Laboratory studies at that time revealed a normal complement C3 level, a normal complement C4 level, and a negative anti-neutrophil antibody titer. ADAMTS 13 activity was also normal at 40%. Once stool was available on hospital day 6, a sample was obtained for bacterial culture and to assess for Shiga-like toxin using enzyme-linked immunoabsorbent assay simultaneously. After 48 hours, stool culture demonstrated no bacterial growth including no evidence of Escherchia coli O157:H7 on Sorbitol-MacConkey. Genetic studies for mutations in complement system regulatory proteins were also obtained. He was extubated on day 6. The patient was maintained on daily TPE for five sessions and transitioned to alternate day TPE on hospital day 9 with stabilization of his renal function and hematologic studies (Figure ). Hemodialysis was discontinued on hospital day 10 (Figure ). The patient was discharged on hospital day 12 and continued to receive alternate day TPE as an outpatient (Figure ). Laboratory studies at discharge included a BUN of 26 mg/dl, serum creatinine of 1.71 mg/dl, hemoglobin on 7.1 g/dl, platelets of 170 k/L, and a LDH of 262 IU/L. Following discharge, a stool sample was positive for E. coli Shiga like toxin based on enzyme immunoassay. Based on this result, the frequency of TPE was decreased and ultimately discontinued on day 50 following his diagnosis. His laboratory studies remained normal upon discontinuation of TPE. However, results from genetic testing obtained while hospitalized returned 3 months following his illness revealed mutations in regulatory components of the alternative complement pathway including a heterozygous missense mutation in complement Factor H (Gln950His) as well as a homozygous deletion in complement factor H-related genes, CFHR1 and CFHR3. Autoantibody to Factor H was negative.
Despite discontinuation of therapy and his initial renal dysfunction, the patient continued to maintain normal electrolytes, normal hematologic studies, normal renal function, normal blood pressure, and a normal urinalysis. Therefore, TPE was not restarted. A year following his initial diagnosis he has not had any recurrence of his disease, and laboratory studies are remarkable for a serum creatinine of 0.47 mg/dl, platelets of 381 K/uL, and LDH of 182 IU/L.