A 36-year-old male presented with a 10-day history of fever up to 39.7 °C, productive cough with hemoptysis, fatigue and myalgias. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing of a nasopharyngeal sample confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection, and the patient was admitted to the Infectious Disease Unit of the University Hospital of Ioannina, Greece.
On admission, the patient was febrile (body temperature 38.5 °C) but hemodynamically stable (blood pressure 113/72 mmHg). Analysis of arterial blood gases showed hypoxia (oxygen saturation; SpO2: 88%, partial pressure of oxygen; PO2: 59.3 mmHg) while breathing room air. He was put on supplemental oxygen (nasal cannula 4 L/min, FiO2 = 36%). An electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed normal sinus rhythm (heart rate 92/min). Body mass index was 35.3 kg/m2. Laboratory tests are shown in . A chest x-ray showed bilateral middle and lower zone consolidation opacities peripherally distributed. A chest CT scan revealed lung abnormalities compatible with severe coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), including “crazy paving” and ground-glass opacities bilaterally, mainly of the lower lobes, occupying 50–75% of the lung parenchyma.
The patient was treated according to protocol with antibiotic therapy (ceftriaxone 2 g qd and vibramycin 100 mg bid), dexamethasone 6 mg qd, remdesivir (a loading dose 200 mg on day 1 followed by 100 mg qd), and low molecular weight heparin for thromboprophylaxis (enoxaparin 60 mg bid).
On hospital day 3, there was evidence of asymptomatic sinus bradycardia (39 bpm) . The patient remained hemodynamically stable (blood pressure 121/70 mmHg), afebrile, while PO2 was 89 mmHg on oxygen supplementation (FiO2 = 36%).
Physical examination was unrevealing while extensive laboratory evaluation and echocardiogram was not indicative of secondary causes of sinus bradycardia, such as myocardial ischemia, myocarditis, thyroid dysfunction, electrolyte disorders or massive pulmonary embolism. Sinus bradycardia was deemed to be related with remdesivir treatment, which was accordingly discontinued. Heart rate gradually restored to normal. On hospital day 12, the patient required no supplemental oxygen and an ECG showed sinus rhythm with a heart rate of 58/min .