A 27-year-old Caucasian woman with a past medical history of solitary pelvic kidney and recurrent urinary tract infections (UTI) presented for her scheduled robotic-assisted pyelolithotomy. Nine weeks prior to the procedure, she had presented to the emergency department (ED) with unrelenting left flank pain and nausea without fever or lower urinary tract symptoms. She noted that she had had repeat infections over the last few years requiring antibiotics, but never had a complete workup owing to a lack of insurance. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis showed an enlarged solitary left pelvic kidney with severe hydronephrosis, perinephric stranding, and multiple large stones in the renal pelvis measuring up to 2.7 cm . She underwent urgent percutaneous nephrostomy (PCN) tube placement with no complications. Urine culture at that time was negative. She was discharged on a 10-day prophylactic regimen of trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole. After obtaining indigent care funding, she was seen in clinic where a percutaneous nephrolithotomy was discussed; however, given her unique anatomy, she was scheduled for a robotic-assisted pyelolithotomy.
Two weeks prior to her scheduled robotic-assisted pyelolithotomy, she returned to the ED for fever, chills, left lower quadrant abdominal pain, and bleeding from her nephrostomy bag. She was noted to be febrile at 38.7 °C and tachycardic up to 119 beats per minute. Her voided urinalysis was positive for nitrites and various inflammatory markers, concerning for a urinary tract infection. A CT of the abdomen and pelvis at that time demonstrated scattered multifocal patchy hypoattenuation throughout the renal cortex suggestive of cortical scarring and/or infection. She was admitted with a diagnosis of acute pyelonephritis and was treated with empiric intravenous ceftriaxone. Final urine cultures noted pan-sensitive Serratia marcescens and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. She was discharged on a 7-day regimen of cefpodoxime. No subsequent eradication cultures were obtained.
Eight days after her discharge, she underwent a robotic-assisted pyelolithotomy without complications. At the conclusion of the case, the patient had only a double-J ureteral stent and her PCN was removed. On her second postoperative day, the patient was tolerating a regular diet, ambulating, and passing flatus. She reported mild suprapubic abdominal pain. We noted she was tachycardic in the low 100s but otherwise afebrile and hemodynamically stable. This was initially attributed to pain. She was subsequently started on piperacillin and tazobactam after her intraoperative urine culture returned positive for P. aeruginosa later that day.
On her third postoperative day, the patient remained hemodynamically stable and continued to meet postoperative milestones, including passing flatus, but she had persistent tachycardia in the 130s. An electrocardiogram noted only sinus tachycardia. Her abdominal examination remained unchanged and benign. The sensitivity of the intraoperative urine culture returned highly susceptible to fluoroquinolones, and we transitioned her to oral ciprofloxacin. On the fourth postoperative day, she continued to have tachycardia now as high as 180s and began exhibiting abdominal distension. She also reported multiple frequent watery bowel movements. She continued to exhibit intermittent hypotension despite administration of intravenous fluids. Orthostatic vitals were negative. Lab work now revealed mild leukocytosis at 14,000 with a left shift. A CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis showed dilation of the large bowel and partial enhancement of the wall of the colon, suggestive of colitis . Cardiology was consulted owing to the profound tachycardia, which they attributed to sepsis.
The patient was transferred to surgical intensive care unit (ICU). Though she had no prior history of C. difficile infections, her recent fluoroquinolone use, CT findings, and overall clinical presentation were strongly suggestive of sepsis secondary to C. difficile colitis; thus, a C. difficile stool toxin test was conducted. Aside from a possible C. difficile infection, early concerns arose that the patient may have had an incompletely treated UTI or an infected intraabdominal fluid collection. As a result, ciprofloxacin was stopped and ertapenem was started. Additionally, a regimen of oral and rectal vancomycin was initiated. Despite these measures, the patient continued to have tachycardia with rising leukocytosis and intermittent fever. On postoperative day 6, her C. difficile toxin returned positive and she was started on additional intravenous metronidazole. While in the ICU, she was managed by an interdisciplinary team led by surgical intensivists, including infectious disease, internal medicine, cardiology, general surgery, and nutrition.
On postoperative day 8, repeat abdominopelvic imaging showed worsening of her diffuse colonic dilation with diffuse mucosal enhancement and mural thickening. Fidaxomicin was added to the antibiotic regimen, and the oral vancomycin dosage was increased. Her abdominal examination continued to show distension and mild tenderness to palpation in all quadrants. On postoperative day 12, she remained largely unchanged and a repeated CT abdomen and pelvis showed a distension of the entire colon measuring up to 8 cm at the transverse colon with bowel wall edema. This was consistent with toxic megacolon . On the following day, the patient underwent an exploratory laparotomy with a subtotal colectomy and ileostomy creation. Two days after the surgery, the patient was extubated and remained hospitalized for a postoperative management complicated by malnutrition, bilateral pleural effusions, and persistent tachycardia. She was discharged 3 weeks after her colectomy to a rehabilitation facility. Her ureteral stent placed at the time of surgery was removed at her hospital follow-up with urology. She is currently awaiting a reversal of her ileostomy by colorectal surgery.