Cough with expectoration.
The patient was a 47-year-old Chinese female, had developed a cough with expectoration, producing small volumes of mainly white and sticky phlegm, over the 17 mo prior to diagnosis. Outpatient examination showed a 6-min walk distance within normal range. Pulmonary function tests showed an FEV1/FVC of 70.73% (84.48% of the predicted FEV1% value of 103.55%), indicating mild obstructive pulmonary ventilation dysfunction. The patient was given routine treatment. Recently, cough and expectoration gradually become worse and she experienced shortness of breath after an event.
The patient denied any history of past disease, allergy, or exposure to smoke or dust for herself or her parents.
The patient denied any history of past disease, allergy, or exposure to smoke or dust for herself or her parents.
Physical examination only showed rhonchi in both lungs, while other examination parameters were normal.
Maximum white and red blood cell counts were 7.58 × 109/L and 4.28 × 1012/L, respectively; neutrophil count was 58%; lymphocyte count was 33%; maximum platelet count was of 349 × 109/L; erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 43 mm/h; patient was anti-Ro52-positive; and mean IgG4 level was 136 mg/L (normal range: 80-1400 mg/L). Other pertinent blood workups (including renal and hepatic parameters, albumin-to-globulin ratio, and levels of C-reactive protein, creatinine kinase, rheumatoid factor, anti-CCP, anti-ENA (including anti-SSA and anti-SSB), MPO, PR3, p-ANCA, and c-ANCA) reported normal values. Arterial blood pH was 7.415; PO2 was 87.1 mmHg; PCO2 was 32.5 mmHg; and oxygen saturation was 97.3%. Basal salivary flow rate was 0.2 mL/min, reaching 0.5 mL/min after stimulation. The tear film break-up times were 7 s (left) and 10 s (right). Hearing test showed high-frequency hearing loss in the left ear. Upon review of lung function, the forced expiratory volume in 1 s/forced vital capacity (FEV1/FVC) of 38.8% accounted for 47.6% of the expected FEV1% value of 42.6% . The detailed data of the two lung function tests were compared in Table . The airway provocation test was negative, and the bronchial dilation test did not effectively dilate the airway. The Modified Medical Research Council dyspnea scale score was 2.
A chest X-ray showed that the texture of both lungs was increased . Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed thickening of the tracheal wall; bilateral bronchial narrowing in the expiratory phase, compared to the inspiratory phase, was further detected during dynamic breathing. Bronchoscopy revealed that the tracheal cartilage rings were blurred and the tracheal mucosa was swollen. 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/CT (18F-FDG PET/CT) revealed that the walls of the trachea, the left and right main bronchi, and the lobar and segmental bronchi were evenly thickened and exhibited mild to moderate increases in metabolic activity (SUVmax = 2.91). No abnormal FDG uptake was detected in the paranasal sinuses, nasal cavity, ears, eyes, auricles, or ribs. Biopsy of the lower lip’s salivary gland tissue exhibited partial ductal dilatation and acinar and periductal infiltration of numerous lymphocytes (> 50 in a focal lesion region).