A 28-year-old female presented with scoliosis for 28 years and was admitted to the hospital from March 2019 to August 2019.
The patient was a 28-year-old female who presented with scoliosis for 28 years from birth. An attempt was made to install the external fixation with braces to the patient, but the effect was poor. In recent 4 years, the patient suffered from lower back pain progressively.
The patient had a free previous medical history.
The patient denied any personal history of alcohol and cigarette consumption. Her family history has nothing notable.
Physical examination showed that the patient did not have obvious weakness, hypotonia, laxity, or contractures of the extremity joint. The mobility of wrist joints, metacarpophalangeal joints, distal interphalangeal joints and metatarsophalangeal joints was normal, and there was no abnormal skin mass. With the exception of superficial sensation abnormity tested by a safety pin, at the proximal lateral front of the left thigh, the rest parts sensation is normal, and the muscle strength of the limbs was classified as grade 5/5. The physiological reflex of the patient was normal, except for the disappearance of abdominal wall reflex, and the pathological signs were negative. Sitting and standing time was not limited, but the patient’s walking ability is affected and can only walk 1000 m due to low back pain.
Her menstrual history was generally normal. The menstruation started from age 14. Its period was 5-7 d. Its cycle was 25-28 d. The last menstruation was January 24, 2019. The color was normal without blood clots and without dysmenorrhea.
The patient denied congenital scoliosis teratogenic factors such as hypoxia during pregnancy, vitamin A deficiency, diabetes, and preeclampsia. Family history of scoliosis was denied. Adam’s forward bend test was positive, suggesting that the patient had a high likelihood of scoliosis.
Her laboratory examinations have nothing notable.
X-ray, computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the whole spine showed that the Cobb angle was 103.4°, and the T4-6, T8, T12-L1 vertebral body was deformed. At T12-T1, the vertebral bodies fused, the intervertebral space disappeared, and the posterior margin kyphosis. The T11 vertebral body was hemivertebra. There was no obvious herniation of intervertebral disc and no obvious narrowing of vertebral canal. Based on the history, symptoms and signs, the patient was initially diagnosed as mixed congenital scoliosis initially.
The patient and her family members provided informed consent to publish case reports, photographs and carry intraoperative muscle biopsies and ‘whole exome sequencing (Slim version)’ at KangSo Medical Laboratory in Beijing, which was approved by the institutional review board of the authors’ affiliated institutions.
Histological examination: Biopsy from the multifidus of the concave and convex sides of the thoracic vertebra was performed. The patients and their families were informed that data from the case would be submitted for publication, and gave their consent.
The process of muscle biopsy was performed as described by Meier et al. The biopsy tissue was covered with a semi-moist saline gauze pad and transferred immediately. After gently drying, a small portion of the tissue was separated for electron microscopy, and the other fresh tissue was embedded with tragacanth gum. Then the samples were placed in liquid nitrogen-precooled isopentane for 20 s and then stored in a -20° freezer. 5 μm thick tissue slices were cut in a low temperature slicer for hematoxylin and eosin staining, special staining: nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide + hydrogen (NADH), Modified Gomori trichrome (MGT) and immunohistochemistry staining: dystrophin-1, dystrophin-2, dystrophin-3, myosin, major histocompatibility complex I, cluster of differentiation 4 (CD4), CD8, CD163, and CD20.
Optical microscope showed that the main part of the biopsy was skeletal muscle tissue, within a few light to medium volume reduced muscle fibers, muscle fiber gap widening, visible minority nuclear ingression, occasional crack, fibrous connective tissue hyperplasia, and a bunch of severe contraction inside muscle fibers, but no obvious degeneration and necrosis were observed. Numerous tendon-like structures formed by dense connective tissue can be seen around the muscle tract .
MGT staining showed a slight increase in reddening particles in some muscle fibers; NADH-tetrazolium reductase staining showed balanced distribution of the two types of fibers, and a small amount of muscle fibers were rotated. Immunohistochemical staining with dystrophin-1 antibody showed positive staining of muscle sarcolemma; dystrophin-2 and -3 antibody staining showed uneven staining of a few muscle sarcolemma . CD4- and CD8-positive cells and other inflammatory cells were occasionally infiltrated around the small vessels .
Electron microscopy showed that most of the muscle fibers were corrugated and the arrangement of extracellular matrix was slightly disordered. Individual myofibers and myoplasm coagulation with focal muscle mass formation. The inner myofibrils of some muscle fibers were arranged neatly, but the a-band structure was unclear .
Biopsy results suggested that neurogenic muscular atrophy with myogenic damage, congenital muscular dystrophy, and another myopathy were more likely . To further investigate the reason for this presentation, patients agreed to have their genes tested for a clear diagnosis.
Gene testing: Gene testing resulted in the identification of four heterozygous variants of significance (included in the genetic package for hereditary myopathy) : one COL6A1 splicing variant (c.1612-10G>A), one COL6A2 splicing variant (c.115+10G>T), and one COL6A2 missense variant (c.2749G>A). Of those variants, COL6A2 missense variant (c.2749G>A) is considered as a disease-causing mutation by ‘Mutation Taster’, deleterious by ‘Sortig Intolerant from Tolerant’ and probably-damaging by ‘Polyphen2’ . Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with collagen VI-related myopathy with scoliosis alone from the gene.
COL6 staining: Based on the results of gene examination, we carried out COL6 immunohistochemical staining of the patient (with scoliosis) , which indicated the low expression of COL6, compared with another inflammatory myopathy patient matched by same age and sex (without scoliosis) .