The patient is a 46-year-old male who received surgery and 5 cycles of chemotherapy for GC 12 years ago. In September 2018, the patient has suffered from severe headache with nausea and vomiting for one week and was admitted to our hospital. During the physical examination, the patient presented a positive Babinski sign and a grade IV muscle strength on the left side. Head computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a right temporal mass . Positron-emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) of the brain and chest showed evidence of multiple metastases.
In October 2018, the patient underwent his first cranial surgery . Post-operative pathological test confirmed a metastatic adenoma . One month later in November 2018, the patient underwent another surgery to remove the mediastinal metastasis in another hospital instead of administrating systemic chemotherapy. In December 2018, the patient was admitted to our emergency room once again with severe headache. Head MRI demonstrated a recurrent right temporal tumor (red arrow) in situ and a newly diagnosed right frontal tumor (yellow arrow) with apoplexy. A second emergency cranial surgery was performed. The right temporal tumor was resected, and the right frontal tumor was too risky to resect under the same bone window then left for chemo- and targeted therapy . Unfortunately, one week after the second surgery, the patient suffered from severe headaches. CT showed an extradural hematoma in the surgical field (, red circle). However, the patient’s relatives declined further surgical intervention. After systemic mannitol and intracranial pressure control, the hematoma remained stable.
Hematoxylin and eosin (HE)-stained specimens of the brain lesion revealed a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining revealed the BrM was completely negative for B7H1 (PD-L1) in both immune cells and tumor cells, as the combined positive score (CPS) and tumor cell proportion score (TPS) of PD-L1 in this patient was rated below 1 and 1% respectively. However, we didn’t know if PD-1 inhibitors would work in PD-L1 negative BrM patients. Therefore, in January 2019, pembrolizumab (200mg, iv. Day1) plus capecitabine (1.5g, bid, po. Day1-14) were still tried to treat the right frontal tumor based on the advice from a neuro-oncologist. To our surprise, the response was remarkable. Four weeks after the first cycle of administration, the MRI showed that the tumor shrank nearly 80% compared to 3 weeks earlier . The patient then received 10 cycles of pembrolizumab plus capecitabine therapy since February 2019 and recovered quite well without any side effects. Eight weeks after the treatment began, the tumor site achieved a complete response (CR) according to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (Recist, version 1.1). In March 2020, another PET-CT image confirmed a durable remission of the tumors in both head and chest . During the last follow-up (May 2022), the MRI indicated no abnormal signal in the surgical field and right frontal lobe . The overall clinical course is shown in .