A 57-year-old Chinese man was admitted to the Second Hospital of Jilin University due to sensations of redness and foreign body sensations in the left eye.
The patient was came to our hospital 3 wk ago due to sensations of a foreign body in the left eye for 3 years with worsening for 3 mo. He was diagnosed as overhanging filtering bleb, post-trabeculectomy, and optic atrophy of the left eye and underwent an repair of an overhanging filtering bleb. During surgery, we separated the prolapsed filtering bleb tissue from the cornea and found that the scleral flap was well formed; the overhanging filtering bleb was not directly connected to the inside of the eye. Therefore, we directly cut and removed the overhanging filtering bleb and sutured the tissue to the upper conjunctiva. Preoperative and postoperative results are shown in Figure .
Six years earlier, he had been diagnosed with chronic angle-closure glaucoma of the left eye, which resulted in optic atrophy. He underwent trabeculectomy of the left eye under local anaesthesia without complications. After surgery, the patient was examined every 3 mo for 1 year. His intraocular pressure (IOP) was normal (11-16 mmHg in the left eye), and the mean area of visual field damage remained stable.
There is none history of personal and family.
Slit lamp examination revealed mild conjunctival hyperaemia and rough upper corneal surfaces. However, the repaired filtering bleb was formed well, flat and diffuse with no remarkable changes be observed, and the IOP remained normal (13 mmHg). Therefore, the patient was instructed to apply topical antibiotic eye drops. One week later, the patient presented with redness, pain accompanied by severely deterioration in vision. His best-corrected visual acuity in the left eye was reduced to finger count. Slit lamp examination revealed a grey infiltrate of the cornea.
A routine haematology examination was performed before overhanging filtering bleb repair surgery, including routine blood tests, routine urine tests, liver and kidney function tests, coagulation tests and immune tests. The results were almost normal. On ophthalmic examination, a large amount of mycelium was visible under confocal microscopy.
There is none imaging examination.