A 68-year-old Caucasian male was admitted in July 2018 because of fatigue, fever, and back pain. He had lost 14 kg within the previous month. He had a history of arterial hypertension, paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, coronary artery disease, stroke due occlusion of the left posterior cerebral artery, schizoaffective disorder, chronic sinusitis, sigmoid colon resection because of diverticulitis, diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, and chronic renal failure.
Because of an incidentally detected abdominal aortic aneurysm, an endovascular aortic repair was planned in May 2017. Routinely taken swabs from nose showed growth of Staphylococcus aureus, why he received a topical therapy with mupirocin for 7 days. Control swabs showed no growth of S aureus any more. In July 2017, a 4-fold-fenestrated aortic endoprosthesis (AnacondaTM; VASCUTEK Ltd, Inchinnan, Scotland, UK) was placed in the abdominal aorta. As antibiotic prophylaxis, a single dose of cefazolin 2 g intravenously was given immediately before the intervention, according to the standards of the implanting center.
In September 2017, despite statins and ezetimibe, hyperlipedemia persisted with serum cholesterol 227 mg/dL, high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol 53 mg/dL, and triglycerides 560 mg/dL, why a therapy with alirocumab 150 mg subcutaneously every 2 weeks was initiated. In December 2017, a biopsy of the skin of the penis was taken which revealed acanthosis and hyperkeratosis, classified as penile intraepithelial low-grade neoplasia. In May 2018, he received a subcutaneous vaccination against tick-borne encephalitis.
In June 2018, he was admitted in another hospital because of fever and chest pain. Staphylococcus aureus grew in several blood cultures. He received meropenem for 15 days and was discharged with unidentified source of the bacteremia.
One month later he was admitted to our department. He was on a medication with phenprocoumon, risperidone 3 mg/d, aripiprazole 15 mg/d, linagliptin 5 mg/d, pantoprazole 40 mg/d, metoprolol 47.5 mg/d, ezetimibe 10 mg/d, rosuvastatin 20 mg/d, and gliclazide 90 mg/d. He had received the last dose of alirocumab 13 days before admission. Physical examination was without abnormalities, and blood pressure was 140/90 mm Hg. There were no signs of inflammation on the injection sites. The electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm, Q waves in III and aVF, and negative T waves in V4-V6. Laboratory findings showed the already known impaired renal function, elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) level, and an increased blood sedimentation rate of 71 (normal: 2-37) mm/h .
An intravenous antibiotic therapy with ampicillin/sulbactam 9 g/d was started and the infection signs decreased. Since the blood cultures showed growth of S aureus, the therapy was changed to cefazolin 6 g/d and fosfomycin 8 g/d and the systemic infection signs decreased further. Echocardiography showed no signs of endocarditis. Because of anemia, he received 2 units of packed erythrocytes.
Fludeoxyglucose (18F) positron emission tomography computed tomography (F-18 FDG PET/CT) was highly suggestive of an infected aortic prosthesis ( and ), why the patient was referred to the department where the prosthesis has been implanted 13 months previously. There, a CT-guided puncture of the periprosthetic space was carried out under antibiotic therapy. The 2 samples that were taken revealed the growth of 2 different strains of Staphylococcus epidermidis with different antibiotic resistance pattern, bacteria which have never been found in any blood cultures taken between onset of infection symptoms and discharge. Before discharge, the antibiotic therapy was changed to dalbavancin 1000 mg, scheduled to be given every second week. Eleven days after discharge, the patient died suddenly after having complained about back pain for several days. No autopsy was carried out.