A 2.5-year-old Tunisian girl with DS, was admitted to our pediatric department with dyspnea, fever, and motor weakness. She was born at term to nonconsanguineous parents. During the first days of life, she was diagnosed with persistent ductus arteriosus. At the age of 12 months, the congenital heart defect was closed with catheterization. When she was 11 months, she was diagnosed with hypothyroidism secondary to Hashimoto’s thyroiditis and was treated with levothyroxine. Her parents reported recurrent lung infections and the occurrence of recurrent bronchopneumopathies, but no history of hematuria or thrombotic events. On admission, physical examination revealed a normal stature and microcephalic child with height of 83 cm [−1.8 standard deviation score (SDS)], weight of 11.1 kg (−1 SDS), and a head circumference of 45.5 cm (−2.1 SDS). She was pale, febrile (temperature of 38.2 °C), and had severe dyspnea. She had tachypnea at 60 breaths/minute with oxygen saturation in air at 70%. Her heart rate was at 140 beats/minute, her blood pressure was at 110/63 mmHg, and she had no heart murmur. Pulmonary auscultation found crackles and wheeze. Abdominal palpation showed splenomegaly and neurological examination showed isolated left hemiplegia. Chest X-ray showed diffuse alveolar infiltrates and no cardiomegaly . The C-reactive protein was at 50 mg/l, and the complete blood count (CBC) identified severe anemia with hemoglobin of 4.2 g/dl, mean corpuscular volume of 70.1 μm3, mean corpuscular hemoglobin of 18.8 pg, white blood cells of 17,400/mm3, platelets of 169,000/mm3, and reticulocytosis of 223,400/mm3. The blood smear did not reveal schistocytes. Biochemical analysis showed no signs of hemolysis: total bilirubin of 10 μmol/l with a direct fraction of 2 μmol/l, haptoglobin of 2592.6 mg/l, and D-lactate dehydrogenase of 1295 UI/l. Blood urea nitrogen was 7.3 mmol/l, creatinine was 48 mmol/l, and serum ferritin was 71 ng/l. The level of transaminases was in the normal range (SGOT of 22 UI/l, SGPT of 39 UI/l). Microbiological analysis for bacteria, mycobacteria, and viruses, as well as visceral leishmaniasis serology and latex agglutination tests were negative. The direct antiglobulin test, electrophoresis of hemoglobin, and the erythrocyte fragility test showed no anomalies. Flexible bronchoscopy was performed. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) showed 1,750,000 cells/ml (lymphocytes 6%; neutrophils 66%; macrophages 28%). Numerous hemosiderin-laden macrophages were detected (Golde score: 285) confirming the diagnosis of hemosiderosis. Bacteriological culture of the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid isolated neither bacteria isolates nor mycobacterium tuberculosis. Echocardiography showed no lesions and abdominal sonography identified an isolated splenomegaly. However, brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) was 3656 pg/ml. Immunoglobulin E was of 16 UI/ml. Immunoserological markers of celiac disease and autoimmune hepatitis, as well as antinuclear and antiphospholipid antibodies, were all negative. Laboratory investigations of macrophage activation syndrome (calcemia cholesterol, triglyceride, natremia, ferritin, and transaminases) were at normal ranges. Only the circulating anticoagulants were positive.
Concerning hemiplegia, brain computed tomography (CT) identified cortical and subcortical hypodensities located in the right parietal lobe, and hypodensities of the periventricular deep white substance and semi-oval center . These lesions were suggestive of ischemic stroke. There was no intracerebral bleeding. Brain magnetic resonance imaging was not performed. Etiologic exploration of this ischemic stroke identified a protein C deficiency with protein C active or 28% (normal range 70–130%). This biological test was rechecked and the level of protein C was also decreased at 38%. Other biological investigations (hemoglobin electrophoresis, plasma homocysteine, protein S, antithrombin III, antinuclear and antiphospholipid antibodies) showed no anomalies. Repeated echocardiography also showed no anomalies. The diagnosis of idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis (IPH) associated with an ischemic stroke was held. The girl received a blood transfusion and was treated with prednisone (1 mg/kg/day) associated with inhaled corticosteroid (200 mcg) for her hemosiderosis. She was also given vitamin K antagonists for her protein C deficiency. However, she was hospitalized three times for relapse of this disease dyspnea because of poor treatment adherence. No immunosuppressive agent was included in the therapy since the efficacy of corticosteroid could not be verified.
After 1 year of evolution, the patient developed cervical lymphadenopathies with persistence of splenomegaly, and recurrences of dyspnea onsets and anemia. Thoraco–abdominal CT showed multiple cervical and thoraco–abdominal lymphadenopathies and splenomegaly. CT also identified a lung nodule in the right upper lobe.
Bone marrow examination showed no sign of malignancy and tuberculin skin test was negative. Histological analysis of one lymph node showed hyperplasia with evidence of epithelioid histiocytic granuloma and no areas of caseous necrosis. The etiological diagnosis of this lymphadenopathy was finally attributed to IPH. The patient was again put on corticosteroids (1 mg/kg/day) and inhaled corticosteroids (200 mcg/j) with no recurrence of his dyspnea and anemia during 1 year of follow-up.