A 69-year-old female went to a local hospital due to generalized weakness and a poor appetite for more than 1 month as well as a fever and shortness of breath for 5 days. She received a chest computerized tomography scan, which showed extensive miliary nodules in the bilateral lung fields with an uneven distribution and partial fusion. Her shortness of breath exacerbated, and her oxygen saturation decreased rapidly. She received endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation. Later on, her acid-fast bacilli sputum smear results indicated a grade of 3+. For treatment, the patient received isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol. On November 1, 2021, she was transferred to our Tuberculosis Care Unit at the Hangzhou Chest Hospital affiliated to Zhejiang University, Zhejiang, China, with a diagnosis of severe pulmonary tuberculosis. During the hospital admission, the physical examination revealed a body temperature of 36.2 °C, a pulse of 95 beats/min, and a blood pressure of 105/40 mmHg (under intravenous norepinephrine, 0.1 μg/kg/min). The patient was intubated orotracheally and looked calm and anemic, with slight conjunctival icterus. There was no sign of bleeding, petechia, or purpura. A few crackles could be heard in the bilateral lung fields. Her abdomen was flat and soft, with no tenderness. The liver and spleen were not palpated. Routine blood testing showed a white blood cell count of 4.9 × 109/L, a hemoglobin concentration of 73 g/L, and a platelet count of 16 × 109/L. The blood coagulation panel showed the following results: prothrombin time, 17.2 s; activated partial thromboplastin time, 44.6 s; d-dimer concentration, 28,800 μg/L; fibrinogen concentration, 109 mg/dL, and international normalized ratio, 1.45. Other laboratory tests showed the following concentrations: serum procalcitonin, 3.91 ng/mL; amylase, 39 U/L; uric acid, 274 μmol/L; total bilirubin, 76.3 μmol/L, cholinesterase, 1122 U/L; creatinine, 229 μmol/L; lactate dehydrogenase, 603 U/L; and albumin, 24.6 g/L. The blood smear results showed < 1% fragmented red blood cells, a normal reticulocyte count, a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs 13 (ADAMTS13) activity of 12.46%, and negative for ADAMTA13 inhibitor antibody. In addition, the patient tested positive for the direct Coombs test and the platelet antibody IgG, as well as negative by the indirect anti-human globulin test. The chest X-ray showed bilateral patchy infiltration, and the computed tomography scan showed bilateral diffuse patchy miliary nodules . The final diagnosis of the patient included subacute hematogenous disseminated pulmonary tuberculosis, acute respiratory failure, Evans syndrome, renal insufficiency, hepatic failure, thrombocytopenia, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and hypoalbuminemia. Mechanical ventilation was continued after hospital admission. Moreover, the patient received antibiotics including isoniazid (0.3 g, daily), rifapentine (0.45 g, twice a week), and sulbactam and cefoperazone (2.0 g, every 8 h). An intravenous injection of dexamethasone (10 mg, daily) and a subcutaneous injection of recombinant human thrombopoietin (1500 U, daily) were also administered. After this management, the oxygenation of the patient improved. The laboratory test results also showed that the platelet count increased to 63 × 109/L and that the hemoglobin level recovered to 80 g/L. Endotracheal intubation was removed on November 8, 2021. The patient was discharged from the hospital with oral prednisone (15 mg, daily), antituberculosis medications [isoniazid (300 mg, daily), rifampicin (600 mg, daily), and ethambutol (750 mg, daily)], and the antibiotic levofloxacin (500 mg, daily). She was followed up in the clinic in stable condition.