A 56-year-old woman presented at our hospital with an episode of acute urinary retention. She also complained of urinary frequency and urgency for the past 4 months. A physical examination did not reveal any particular findings, including pelvic organ prolapse. The results of a laboratory evaluation were within the normal limits. The urinary cytology was class II. In our cytology system, a scale of 1 - 5 was used. An ultrasonography detected a round mass in the bladder and no signs of hydronephrosis. A cystoscopy revealed a smooth surface and an intact mucosa tumor at the bladder neck. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a homogenous mass measuring 2.7 cm in diameter occupying the space between the bladder neck and the anterior vaginal wall. The tumor was homogenously enhanced after the injection of gadolinium .
From these finding, we suspected a leiomyoma of the bladder. To confirm this diagnosis, we performed a transvaginal needle biopsy under ultrasonic guidance; however, the histological studies were unable to provide a diagnosis because of inadequate tissue collection during the biopsy.
The patient was treated with an anti-cholinergic agent and an alpha-blocker for 2 months, but her LUTS symptoms did not resolve. Therefore, we performed a TUR to resolve her symptoms and to confirm the pathological diagnosis. The TUR was successfully completed, and the patient's post-operative recovery was uneventful. Her LUTS were resolved a week after the operation.
The pathological findings revealed the proliferation of spindle-shaped cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm and muscular and fibrous tissue with fibrous stroma. The nuclei of the cells were cigar-shaped and centrally located. No evidence of mitotic figures, coagulative T-cell necrosis or atypia was seen. Immunohistochemistry showed a positive expression for smooth muscle actin and a negative expression for Ki-67. These findings were consistent with a diagnosis of benign leiomyoma . The final diagnosis was leiomyoma of the bladder without a malignant component.
We performed pre and post-operative (after three months) urodynamic studies (UDS) in this patient. The number of involuntary detrusor contractions decreased from 3 to 1 during a filling cystometry, and the values of first desire to void volume and maximum desire to void volume increased. Preoperatively, she voided with a Qmax of 4 mL/sec and a Pdet of 177 cmH2O. Postoperatively, she voided with a Qmax of 15 cm/s and a Pdet of 62 cmH2O. The preoperative pressure flow study (PFS) indicated female bladder outlet obstruction (BOO), but the post-operative PFS did not . The urodynamic criteria for female BOO in this study were a pressure flow cutoff value of 15 mL/s or less and a PdetQmax of 20 cmH2O or greater .