A 49-year-old man presented with a 1-year history of left knee pain with a limited range of movement. The patient fell on his left knee 20 years prior, and a PCL injury was suspected but was not treated. During the physical examination, a varus deformity was observed in the patient's left knee joint. Anteromedial tenderness of the left knee was evident, and the range of motion (ROM) was 0–130°. The posterior drawer test and the Lachman test were positive, while the front drawer test was negative, and no laxity of the collateral ligament was found. The patient, whose body mass index (BMI) was 22.5, did not have any chronic diseases, such as hypertension or coronary heart disease, nor did he have any endocrine or metabolic disorders, such as diabetes or gout.
Anteroposterior and lateral X-rays of the patient’s left knee revealed a narrow joint space in the medial compartment and a normal joint space in the lateral compartment. The Kellgren-Lawrence grade was class IV. A patellar axial X-ray showed that the patellofemoral joint space was normal. Postoperative full-length anteroposterior standing X-rays clearly demonstrated a varus deformity of the patient's left knee, with a measured hip-knee-ankle angle of 13.6° in varus . The lateral distal femoral angle was 83.4° , the medial proximal tibial angle was 80.5°, the joint line convergence angle was 6.0° , and the posterior tibial slope was 11.5° . MRI revealed complete stripping of the medial cartilage in the left knee joint, partial tearing of the ACL with intact continuity, and the absence of continuity in the PCL . The patient's blood and cardiopulmonary function tests showed no important abnormalities. The preoperative Lysholm score was 47, the Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Osteoarthritis Index (WOMAC) score was 29, and the International Knee Documentation Committee (IKDC) subjective score was 56.3.
PCLR and UKA were decided to perform simultaneously in order to comprehensively address the patient's condition. Following general anaesthesia, standard anterolateral portals were established as a routine procedure after a tourniquet was applied. Exploration revealed complete stripping of the medial cartilage surface, while no apparent damage was observed on the cartilage surface of the lateral compartment . The ACL was partially damaged but maintained tension, whereas the PCL was ruptured and absorbed. Patient's patellofemoral joint was examined and no significant wear was found. The Ligament Advanced Reinforcement System (LARS Company, Arc-sur-Tille, France) was utilized to reconstruct the PCL . The femoral tunnel was placed at the junction of the anterolateral bundle and posteromedial bundle at approximately 10:30 of the femoral condyle. Posteromedial and posterolateral knee joint approaches were used, the synovial fat around the PCL stump and the posterior sagittal septum of the knee were appropriately cleaned, and the PCL tibial interdiction and the posterior tibial margin at least 20 mm below it were exposed. The drill guide tibial locator was inserted through the medial patellar approach, crossed over the ACL and circled from the medial PCL stump to the posterior tibial slope to avoid killer turning. The front end of the tibial locator was extended to 20 mm or less below the tibial plateau as much as possible, crossing the PCL's stop point on the original slope to ensure that the adhesion point of the graft after exiting the internal opening of the tibial tunnel was an obtuse angle of the tunnel and reduced ligament wear and cutting. The external opening of the tibial tunnel was made laterally on the tibial crest. After ligament reconstruction, the posterior drawer test yielded negative results, indicating good stability of the knee joint. Subsequently, the patient underwent medial UKA with a St Georg Sled implant (Waldemar Link GmbH, Hamburg, Germany). In order to prevent excessive relaxation of the medial collateral ligament, the midial tibial plateau osteophytes were avoided removing during the procedure. Therefore, sagittal osteotomy appeared to be slightly medial, and part of the tibial plateau prosthesis was ultimately placed on the osteophytes. The flexion–extension gap was checked postoperatively, the flexion and extension functions were restored, and physical examination, such as the drawer test, confirmed that the joint stability was restored. X-ray images taken after surgery showed substantial correction of varus alignment . No drainage tube was placed postoperatively, resulting in minimal leakage from the incision. The incision exhibited good healing at the 2-week mark, and no complications were observed during the follow-up period.
After surgery, the patient was provided with an adjustable brace for the left knee and encouraged to engage in early rehabilitation training. On the second postoperative day, the patient was allowed to walk with the assistance of crutches. A detailed rehabilitation plan was developed for the patient, which included achieving 120 a degrees of ROM goal by the 3rd week after surgery, continuous muscle strength and gait training, with adjustments based on recovery status and goals. Additionally, early knee straightening and quadriceps muscle strength exercises were recommended. Three weeks after surgery, the patient successfully achieved the rehabilitation goals for range of motion (ROM). The patient was satisfied with the surgical effect. Three months after the operation, the Lysholm score was 81 points, the WOMAC score was 18 points, and the IKDC subjective score was 74.7 points. Infection, poor incision healing, and loosening of the prosthesis were not reported.