A 71-year-old Japanese man complaining of gait difficulties and fever was brought to our emergency and critical care medical center by ambulance. He had had general fatigue for several days before admission. He had alcoholic liver cirrhosis (LC), which had been treated with diuretics and branched-chain amino acids for the past 3 months. He had been taking approximately 100g of alcohol per day for more than 30 years with a balanced diet. At 1 month before admission, his laboratory data were as follows: total bilirubin, 1.36mg/dL; albumin, 3.5g/dL; and international normalized ratio, 1.05. In addition, he had mild ascites, which was medically controlled. These findings were indicative of Child-Pugh class B LC. A gastrointestinal endoscopy had been performed the previous month, but it did not detect any esophageal or gastric varices. In addition, he had not had any episodes of hematemesis or produced bloody stools. On arrival, he appeared to be disturbed and distressed and was classified as 13 (E3V4M6) on the Glasgow Coma Scale. His vital signs were as follows: respiratory rate, 30 breaths/minute; pulse rate, 147 beats/minute and regular; blood pressure, 64/34mmHg; and temperature, 38.4°C. He did not have a headache; sore throat; cough; sputum; or chest, abdominal, or back pain. Auscultation of his lungs and heart produced normal findings. His abdomen was soft and flat and non-tender, and no skin rashes or infectious wounds were present on his extremities. Arterial blood gas analysis detected severe lactic acidosis (lactate concentration: 18mmol/L), which was indicative of septic shock (Table ). Rapid fluid resuscitation with adequate doses of vitamin B administration was started immediately followed by tracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation according to the goal-oriented therapy protocol. Empirical antimicrobial treatment with meropenem and teicoplanin was administered 20 minutes after his arrival, and two sets of blood cultures were obtained at the same time. His laboratory data were indicative of multiple organ failure; that is, pancytopenia, coagulopathy, and acute kidney injury were detected together with high levels of procalcitonin and endotoxins (Table ). However, a whole body computed tomography scan did not identify an infection focus. On admission to the emergency intensive care unit (EICU), his Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation (APACHE II) score was 32, and his Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score was 16. Because he exhibited persistent catecholamine-resistant hypotension, endotoxin absorption therapy based on polymyxin B hemoperfusion (PMX) and cytokine-absorption therapy involving the use of a polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) membrane hemofilter were performed to counteract his multiple organ failure. Other supportive treatments for his refractory shock such as the infusion of immunoglobulins, methylprednisolone, and recombinant human soluble thrombomodulin (rhTM) were also initiated. The level of fluid resuscitation was adjusted to maintain his urinary output at 0.5 to 1.0mL/kg/hour (Figure ), and he was transfused with 6, 14, and 30 units of red cell concentrate, fresh frozen plasma, and platelet concentrate, respectively, within the first 24 hours after his admission. The initial resuscitative treatments resulted in a reduction in his lactate and endotoxin level and the maintenance of his mean blood pressure above 65mmHg. Ongoing aggressive critical care led to a gradual tapering of the catecholamine dose and an improvement in his SOFA score (Figure ). An examination of his blood culture detected A. hydrophila, so, based on the results of sensitivity tests, we replaced the meropenem and teicoplanin with ceftazidime. We finally diagnosed him with spontaneous A. hydrophila septicemia combined with refractory shock facilitated by an immunosuppressive condition (LC). On day 10, he was successfully extubated, and he was discharged from the EICU the next day. Antibiotics were administered for 2 weeks. The patient was transferred to a satellite hospital to continue his rehabilitation on day 19.