A 62-year-old Caucasian man with a history of lung cancer and recurrent pyelonephritis was admitted for work up for possible endocarditis because of fevers and Pseudomonas bacteremia. He had none of the previously mentioned risk factors for Pseudomonas endocarditis. One month prior to admission, he was treated in another state for pyelonephritis and prostatitis with piperacillin-tazobactam (1–3 days), followed by an unknown fluoroquinolone (approximately 10–14 days). Urine culture results from those events were not available. On admission, his serum chemistries, liver associated enzymes, and creatinine were normal. His complete blood count was notable for a hemoglobin of 11 g/dl (13–18 g/dl), and a hematocrit of 37% (40–52%). Computerized tomography of the chest abdomen and pelvis revealed diffuse emphysematous changes, small bilateral pleural effusions, minimal abdominal ascites, and a wedge-shaped zone of diminished attenuation in the right kidney. Treatment with gentamicin and cefepime was initiated. The P. aeruginosa isolated from his bloodstream was susceptible to ceftazidime (minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) =4 μg/ml), cefepime (2 μg/ml), ciprofloxacin (<0.25 μg/ml), piperacillin-tazobactam (8 μg/ml; zone diameter > 21 mm), ticarcillin-clavulanate (32 μg/ml), gentamicin (2 μg/ml), tobramycin (<1 μg/ml), amikacin (</=2 μg/ml), imipenem (2 μg/ml), and meropenem (0.5 μg/ml). On HD-2, infectious diseases consultation was obtained, and therapy was changed to 2 g cefepime every 8 h, plus 7 mg/kg of tobramycin daily. Subsequently, blood cultures became negative and transesophageal echocardiogram revealed a mobile mass on the aortic valve and severe aortic regurgitation. On HD-11, the patient underwent aortic valve replacement, and P. aeruginosa was isolated from the excised valve tissue. Unexpectedly, the valve isolate was resistant to ceftazidime (>/=64 μg/ml), cefepime (MIC 32 μg/ml), piperacillin-tazobactam (128 μg/ml, zone diameter 21 mm); and ticarcillin-clavulanate (128 μg/ml). MICs to all the other previously mentioned antibiotics were the same as the MICs of bloodstream isolate. Both the valve and blood isolates were tested on the same platform (Vitek ®2, bioMérieux, France), with the same card-AST GN69 (bioMérieux, France) from the same lot (5,890,118,103), using the same inoculation protocols. Furthermore, all results for piperacillin–tazobactam are confirmed with supplemental disk diffusion (Kirby–Bauer) testing before being released. The zone diameter of piperacillin-tazobactam on the blood isolate was >21 mm (sensitive) and 12 mm (resistant) on the valve isolate, which were concordant with the Vitek 2 results. We debated whether the bloodstream or the excised valve isolate should dictate the choice of β-lactam, replaced the cefepime with meropenem, and continued the tobramycin.
To assess genetic relatedness and resistance gene content, both isolates underwent whole-genome sequencing (WGS) on a MiSeq bench-top sequencer (Illumina, San Diego, CA) using methods described previously and ResFinder [, ]. On HD14 In preparation for sequencing, both isolates were thawed, re-cultured on the same media (MacConkey agar (Millipore-Sigma, Temecula, CA)), and simultaneously tested on the same platform using the same card from the same lot as was used in the previous tests. Unexpectedly, the cefepime MIC of the valve isolate had decreased from 32 μg/ml–4 μg/ml, and the piperacillin-tazobactam MICs had fallen from >128 to 8 μg/ml. In the interest of antimicrobial stewardship, and cognizant of the fact that in one series more than 50% of the patients who started with a fully carbapenem susceptible isolate had a >/=4-fold increase in carbapenem MIC during carbapenem therapy , we again debated the optimum β-lactam and whether cefepime should replace meropenem for the remaining 3.5 weeks of therapy.
WGS revealed that the valve and bloodstream isolates were identical –differing by only one nucleotide in the cheA gene, resulting in truncation and inactivation of CheA which is involved with motility and chemotaxis [, ]. Both isolates belonged to multi-locus sequence type (ST) 162 and contained the same set of resistance genes (bla
ADC35
, aph(3′)-II, blaOXA
, catB7, and fosA). There are very few reports of P. aeruginosa ST-162. Of those reports available, ST162 has been associated with Klebsiella pneumonia carbapenemase producing strains in Argentina, and a VIM-2 producing strain in Algeria [, ] At the whole-genome level, the isolates in our patient were most closely related to reference strains PA_O1 and PA_O581, followed by strain PA_LESB58 . PA_O1 is a spontaneous chloramphenicol-resistant mutant derived from of the original strain that had been isolated in 1954 from a wound in Melbourne, Australia [, ]. PA_O581 is an alginate producing mucoid strain isolated from the sputa of cystic fibrosis patients in Scotland [, ]. PA_LESB58 is the hyper-virulent ‘Liverpool Epidemic Strain’ from an outbreak in pediatric cystic fibrosis clinic in England. PA_LESB58 is a strain that overproduces pyocyanin and other quorum sensing exoproducts and has been associated with transmissibility, dominance over other P. aeruginosa populations in CF airways, increased morbidity and mortality, and causing infections in healthy parents (and a pet cat) of children with cystic fibrosis [–]. In light of this potential for increased virulence, and the uncertainty of the resistance profiles, meropenem and tobramycin were continued. Two months after completing 6 weeks of total antibiotic therapy, the patient had no evidence of endocarditis and was doing well.