In May 2020, a 52-year-old Iranian-Arab male, a municipal employee, living in Dezful City, Khuzestan Province, southwest Iran referred to the Razi hospital affiliated to Ahvaz Jundishapur University of Medical Sciences for the evaluation of pain in abdomen. He was without any history of smoking, alcohol consumption, drugs, or underlying disease. Vital signs at the first visit were blood pressure 100/60 mmHg, pulse rate 70 beats per minute, respiratory rate 19 breaths per minute, and temperature 36.5 °C. On initial examination, pain in the epigastric region and left lower quadrant was reported. Moreover, splenomegaly (192 mm in size) was observed via ultrasound examination of the abdomen. The patient was admitted with suspicion of lymphoproliferative malignancy and bone marrow and examined by microscopic and flow cytometry methods; however, bone marrow was normal. In the next stage, the patient was tested for viral causes, which was negative for hepatitis B virus antigen (HBSAg) and hepatitis C virus antibody (HCV Ab), but he was positive for HIV. The patient underwent splenectomy, and then antiviral treatment was initiated with highly active antiretroviral therapy (dolatgravir + tenofovir + emtricitabine). Afterward, the patient was discharged from the hospital in good general condition.
About 9 months later, he was referred to the Razi hospital again, because of large lymphadenopathies in the neck, axillary, and inguinal areas (after splenectomy). Then, the patient underwent a lymph node biopsy that indicated visceral leishmaniasis, and then was treated with intravenous amphotericin B at a dose of 5 mg per kilogram of body weight from day 1 to 5, then on days 10, 17, 21, 28, and 35. Due to not responding to the treatment, the patient underwent a lymph node biopsy again and was examined in terms of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB), nontubercular mycobacteria (NTM), Toxoplasma, and Leishmania. Finally, visceral leishmaniasis was confirmed for the second time. The patient was again treated with amphotericin B (350 mg daily for 3 weeks, followed by weekly injections), and during the treatment, multiple, diffused, light-purple to reddish-brown nodular skin lesions were seen on the neck, chest, trunk, and abdomen. Clinical characteristics of the patient with HIV–Leishmania coinfection on the back are shown in Fig. .
After 8 months, the patient was bedridden in the hospital. Vital signs at the first visit were as follows: blood pressure 110/60 mmHg, pulse rate 76 beats per minute, respiratory rate 21 breaths per minute, and temperature 36 °C. On neurological examination, the patient was alert and had no ptosis. Cranial nerve examination was normal. Submandibular and submental lymph nodes (38 × 13 and 34 × 12 mm in size, respectively) was observed via ultrasound examination. Furthermore, para-aortic, porta hepatis, and mesenteric lymph nodes (38 × 35 mm in size) were reported by computerized tomography (CT) scan. For evaluating the reasons, the laboratory tests were carried out with precision. Some of the significant items are presented in Table . Then, again, nodular skin lesions and lymph nodes underwent a biopsy and the specimens were positive and negative for leishmaniasis and acid-fast bacillus (AFB), respectively. At this time, the patient underwent the treatment with amphotericin B and the skin lesions were not removed yet. Due to the pansinusitis in the patient (observed in both clinically and imaging examination), the patient underwent a sinus biopsy for culture of fungi, bacteria, leishmaniasis, and typical and atypical mycobacteria. The results of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and pathological methods showed that the sinus was negative for MTB and NTM; however, leishmaniasis bodies were detected in the sinus. Figure shows Leishmania bodies in the Giemsa-stained smear. Finally, the patient was currently treating by Glucantime (20 mg/kg/day) and amphotericin (5 mg/kg/day), and unfortunately the skin lesions have been not removed yet. The patient was being followed up, but unfortunately he died. Figure shows a summary of the clinical course of all follow-up. A written consent was taken from the patient for the publication of the present case study.