The patient was a 21-year-old Chinese woman who was the first of three siblings in a non-consanguineous marriage, with a normal perinatal period and negative family history of PA. She started school at an appropriate age and graduated from secondary school. She had an unplanned pregnancy at the age of twenty and suffered from severe vomiting at thirteen weeks of gestation. She then developed weakness and was unable to walk steadily. After suffering from frequent vomiting for another two days, she decided to perform a drug abortion. She suddenly began shouting loudly the following day and could not communicate coherently with others. Subsequently, she was admitted to the local hospital after two consecutive seizures, presenting as tics of four limbs and losing consciousness. Each seizure episode lasted about one minute, and the total interval was five minutes. No seizure occurred after treatment with phenobarbital, but she developed a state of mutism after that. Laboratory findings revealed deficiencies of vitamin B12 and vitamin D. T2 weighted imaging (T2WI) showed bilateral hyperintensity of basal ganglia, associated with mixed-signal intensities using diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) sequences . Following these analyses, the patient was tentatively diagnosed with Wernicke encephalopathy. Therefore, she received oral antiepileptic drugs and folate tablets for one week, combined with vitamin B1 and vitamin B12 injections. Her mental symptoms improved and her brain MRI revealed smaller lesions. However, she still was unable to walk steadily.
Four months following discharge, she began presenting frequent and inappropriate uncontrollable laughing without convulsions or loss of consciousness, which would last for one minute. One month later, she was admitted to our hospital in May 2018. Neurological examination showed short-term memory loss, count disturbance, uncontrollable left-beating horizontal nystagmus, gait abnormalities, and decreased sensation below bilateral wrist joints. Muscle strength and tendon reflex were normal and Babinski sign was negative. Brain MRI still showed bilateral caudate head and putamen hyperintensity in T2WI, and T2-fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) imaging, associated with mixed-signal DWI and weak scattered signals in apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) and susceptibility-weighted imaging (SWI) sequences. Magnetic resonance spectrum (MRS) showed decreased N-acetylaspartate (NAA) in bilateral putamens with the emergence of a lipid peak on the left side . Her electrocardiogram demonstrated a sinus rhythm with 68 beats/min and a prolonged QT interval (QTc = 476 ms).
In addition, her visual acuity was 20/400 in the right eye and 20/63 in the left eye. Bilateral optic atrophy was identified by optical coherence tomography. Laboratory testing revealed a continued deficiency of vitamin B12. Urine organic acid tests using gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GS-MS) revealed increases in 3-hydroxypropionate and the presence of methylcitrate, 3-methyl-paracylglycine, paracylglycine, and propionylglycine. Furthermore, propionylcarnitine and C3/C2, C3/C0 levels were also elevated in the plasma amino acid profile.
Whole-exome sequencing for the patient was conducted with a 120.620X average sequencing depth, and 99.80% mean coverage. Genetic analysis revealed compound heterozygous mutations in the PCCB gene: c.1316 A>G (p.Tyr 439 Cys) and c.467T>C ( p.Ile 156 Thr), which were inherited from the patient’s mother and father, respectively . Notably, the c.1316A>G mutation has been previously reported to be pathogenic. In contrast, the c.467T>C mutation is the first to be reported here, which is absent from controls (1000 Genomes, ExAC, gnomAD, and CNGB) and is in trans with the pathogenic mutation c.1316A>G (p.Tyr439Cys). Multiple computational software programs predict that the c.467T>C mutation is likely deleterious. Mutation Taster, Provean, SIFT, and Polyphen-2 predicted the c.467T>C mutation as disease-causing (probability 0.999), deleterious (score − 4.77 < − 2.5), damaging (score 0.000 < 0.05) and/or probably damaging (score = 1.000), respectively (Supplementary data). The entire structure of the PCC enzyme was demonstrated according to the protein sequence (NP_000523) by SWISS-MODEL . The polar interactions between the mutation points and surrounding amino acids changed drastically with the specified mutations . Additionally, the residue p.I156T site was highly conserved across different species. Therefore, the novel c.467T>C mutation is classified as a likely pathogenic mutation according to the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) standard. The process of whole-exome sequencing and assessing the pathogenicity of the novel mutation for the patient is included in the supplementary data [see Additional file and Additional file , respectively].
According to the guideline, treatment principles of PA include dietary management (low-protein diet, gastrostomy tube placement with parenteral nutrition), medications (carglumic acid, biotin, antibiotics), and liver transplantation. The patient’s neuropsychiatric symptoms improved gradually after modifications of protein restriction and oral supplementation of folate, biotin, and carnitine.