We present a 55-year-old male with a history of hypertension, dyslipidemia, gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), and obstructive sleep apnea who presented to our emergency department (ED) with a 3-day history of recurrent cough with 2–3 tablespoons of hemoptysis per episode, chills, and occasional wheezing. He had presented to our ED several months prior with a similar complaint. During the initial admission, he reported one prior event of hemoptysis in his youth and a CTA was performed which revealed an atretic left pulmonary artery and right-sided aortic arch. However, his symptoms were believed to be related to a possible pneumonia and was started on intravenous antibiotics. A bronchoscopy was performed during this initial admission which demonstrated normal airway anatomy with active oozing from the left lower lobe that was managed with topical epinephrine; he was subsequently discharged. Two months later, another bronchoscopy was performed after a repeat episode of hemoptysis with no remarkable findings or endobronchial pathology.
Approximately nine months after the initial presentation, the patient began experiencing hemoptysis once again, prompting him to visit an urgent care center and was treated for what was once again believed to be a possible pneumonia. He began to experience increased frequency and larger-volume hemoptysis prompting him to present to our ED once again. A CTA was again performed which demonstrated a congenital absence of the left pulmonary artery as well as a right-sided aortic arch . Imaging also revealed an absent left superior pulmonary vein. Hypertrophied left intercostal and bronchial arteries were noted to be perfusing the left lung . This was confirmed on 3D reconstruction . Once the diagnosis of unilateral pulmonary artery atresia was made, thoracic surgery was consulted, and the patient was worked up for a left pneumonectomy. Preoperative workup included an echocardiogram that confirmed preserved left and right ventricular function and no elevated pulmonary arterial pressures. Pulmonary function test showed no evidence of obstruction, moderate restriction, and a normal diffusion capacity to the right lung. V/Q scan confirmed a heterogeneous distribution of gas throughout both lung fields with 97% perfusion to the right lung, but no visualization of the left lung on the perfusion images.
Given extensive collateral blood supply to the left lung, interventional radiology performed a GELFOAM® (Pfizer, New York, NY) embolization of the hypertrophied left bronchial artery and two parasitized arteries from the left subclavian artery to minimize intra-operative blood loss. This was immediately followed by a left thoracotomy, pneumonectomy, intercostal muscle flap placement, and bronchoscopy. Intra-operatively, multiple adhesions were carefully divided along the apex, diaphragm, and lateral chest wall where collateral circulation was divided with a combination of vascular staplers, vascular clips, ligation, and bipolar cautery. Multiple feeding vessels were noted coming off the internal thoracic, intercostals, and phrenic artery. An atretic inferior and a generous superior pulmonary vein were divided with vascular staplers. The bronchus was divided with a bronchial stapler and covered with an intercostal muscle flap. The lung parenchyma appeared boggy and thickened and adherent to the pleural planes and diaphragm; the fissure was fused and the hilum rather socked in both at the apex and at the inferior pulmonary ligament with an atretic inferior pulmonary vein, requiring meticulous dissection before division of critical structures. The procedure was 360 min long with a total of 1500 cc blood loss that was salvaged and re-infused. No additional blood products were administered. The patient remained intubated post-operatively and was transferred to the surgical intensive care unit. His postoperative course was complicated by troponin leak, rhabdomyolysis, delirium, and ileus, all of which resolved over time. He was discharged home on postoperative day 7 and continues to do well 1 year later. A flowchart detailing how our center diagnosed and managed this case of unilateral pulmonary artery atresia has been included in this report .