The patient was a 74-year-old female who underwent left lower lobectomy for lung cancer 2 years before presenting to our institution. The histological type was adenocarcinoma, with a pathological staging of T4N1M0 stage IIIA (Union for International Cancer Control: UICC 8th ed) . One year after lobectomy, cystic lesions appeared on the head and tail of the pancreas, diagnosed as IPMN. The cystic tumor on the pancreatic head gradually increased from 20 to 37 mm in 1 year and showed a contrasted solid nodule inside the cystic tumor . The patient was referred to our department for surgery because the tumor was considered IPMN with high-risk stigmata. Her blood test results were as follows: carcinoembryonic antigen, 2.4 ng/mL (normal range, < 5.0 ng/mL); carbohydrate antigen 19-9, 38 U/mL (normal range, < 15 U/mL); DUPAN-2, 39 U/mL (normal range, < 150 U/mL); and SPAN-1, 29.8 U/mL (normal range, < 30 U/mL). Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed a 37-mm cystic tumor with a contrasted solid nodule at the pancreatic head and a 17-mm cystic tumor at the pancreatic tail. Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) revealed that the cystic tumor at the head was a 35-mm solitary cyst with a 24-mm mural nodule, and the cystic tumor at the tail was a 20-mm solitary cyst with a 10-mm mural nodule. The main pancreatic duct had no extension. Although we had confirmed that the cystic tumor and main pancreatic duct were close, we could not define the link between the main pancreatic duct and the cyst . 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron-emission tomography (FDG-PET) showed FDG uptake (SUV max 1.9) at the lesion in the pancreatic head. No evidence of metastasis from other organs was observed . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) could not be performed because of a cardiac pacemaker. The patient developed jaundice because the pancreatic head tumor excluded the common bile duct. From these results, we diagnosed the tumors as IPMN with high-risk stigmata because of jaundice and a contrasted mural nodule. We performed a total pancreatectomy for the two lesions after bile duct drainage by endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP). Because we performed ERCP on emergency, we could not perform brushing cytology or pancreatic juice cytology for food residue in the stomach and duodenum. The tumors were solitary cysts with papillary lesions at the pancreatic head and tail. Histopathological findings showed that tumor cells had papillary components without mucus production . Moreover, a small tumor lesion was also microscopically detected at the pancreatic tail. Immunohistochemical analysis showed positive results for TTF-1, Napsin A, and CK7, but CK20 did not present significant staining , and these findings indicated this tumor to be lung cancer metastasis rather than IPMN. The histological findings were similar to those of the existing lung adenocarcinoma resected 2 years before now . According to these findings, we diagnosed the patient with metastatic pancreatic carcinoma from lung cancer. The postoperative course was good, and the patient was discharged 21 days after the operation. The patient did not received adjuvant therapy and had no recurrence for 6 months after pancreatectomy.