A 23-year-old Asian woman of Pakistani descent presented with blackouts, blurring of vision and headache for more than two months duration. The headaches started in the frontal region then radiated to the whole head, were moderate in intensity and were associated with vertigo, dizziness, palpitations and postural weakness. Her past medical history revealed that she had been diagnosed with epilepsy two months previously, after which she had been given antiepileptic medication. She had been using the medication regularly since being diagnosed. On general examination, pulses in both her upper limbs were deficient and so her blood pressure could not be measured. Our patient was also found to be anemic. On cardiovascular examination a bruit was heard over her left subclavian fossa. Fundoscopy revealed optic disk cupping with irregular margins in her right eye; her left eye was unaffected. All other examination, including respiratory and central nervous system examinations, were unremarkable. A psychiatric evaluation was also inconclusive.
Our patient had anemia (hemoglobin 10 g/dL), thrombocytosis (494,000/mL) and raised erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) (35 mm/hr). The morphology of the red blood cells showed microcytosis and hypochromasia. An investigation into the serum ferritin revealed that it was well above the normal range (315.5 ng/mL). Hemoglobin electrophoresis presented with a mean corpuscular volume of 58.7 fL, mean corpuscular hemoglobin of 19.2 pg, and hemoglobin A2 of 4.7%. Liver enzymes were significantly raised (direct bilirubin 0.3 mg/dL, alanine transaminase 152 U/L, alkaline phosphatase 317 U/L). The C-reactive protein test was also reactive. In addition the following investigations were unremarkable: serum iron, total iron binding capacity and transferrin, antinuclear antibodies, electrocardiogram, echocardiograph and electroencephalogram (EEG).
A computed tomography angiogram (CT-A) of her chest showed a normal ascending aorta, descending aorta and arch of the aorta but there was diffuse intimal thickening of major branches of the aorta including the brachiocephalic, right common carotid, and left subclavian arteries . There was extensive collateral circulation in the subcutaneous tissue in her anterior and posterior neck, chest and axillae.
Our patient had been taking antiepileptic medication for over a month. This was immediately halted because her liver enzymes were elevated above normal range; this decision was also supported by the negative results of the EEG report (the alpha wave was present on closure of eye and had a frequency of 10 cycles per second; which disappeared when the patient was instructed to open her eyes, beta, theta and delta waves had frequencies of 14, 5 and 3 cycles per second). Our patient was kept on one milligram per kilogram bodyweight per day of corticosteroid and was kept under a weekly follow-up for two months to monitor her response to the treatment. Our patient is responding well.