We present the case of a 16-year-old girl who was diagnosed with SLE at the age of 13. She initially presented with multiple swollen lymph nodes, low-grade fever, facial rash, hypertension, and photophobia symptoms; serum antinuclear antibodies (ANA) and anti-double strand DNA antibodies (anti-dsDNA) were positive at high titer, and there was a marked reduction in serum complement fractions, and normal serum creatinine. Kidney biopsy was not performed, and the patient was treated with steroids 1 mg/kg/day, oral hydroxychloroquine, MMF, oral amlodipine besylate, and irbesartan tablets. The symptoms gradually improved.
Of note, she had irregular follow-up visits for 2 years after she was discharged from the pediatric department. In December 2018, she was hospitalized at the kidney clinic of our hospital for severe abdominal pain. Physical examination showed severe pitting edema in both lower limbs. Serum ANA and anti-dsDNA were positive at high titer, and serum complement fractions were low. A CT scan of abdomen showed the appearance of acute pancreatitis (AP) .
The SLE Activity Index was 16, a value consistent with severe flare of SLE. She was treated with 3 high-dose steroid pulses (300 mg/day) plus 1 cyclophosphamide pulse (200 mg), antibiotics, proton pump inhibitor infusion therapy, subsequent oral steroid tapering, oral hydroxychloroquine, and MMF. The symptoms gradually improved.
At 2 weeks after discharge, however, she was hospitalized for edema. Examination of blood and urine showed that blood albumin was 18.6 g/L and 2 + proteinuria on dipstick. Echocardiography showed heavy pericardial effusion. Kidney biopsy again was not performed. She was treated with 3 high-dose steroid pulses (methylprednisolone 300 mg) again; steroids were maintained at a dosage of 1 mg/kg/day of prednisone), and subsequent treatment included 1 cyclophosphamide pulse (0.4 g/2 weeks), oral hydroxychloroquine (0.1 g b.i.d.) and MMF (0.5 g b.i.d.). Two weeks later, a CT scan of the chest showed that she had a pulmonary bacterial infection, which prompted withdrawal of MMF, and calcineurin inhibitor (tacrolimus) was administered (2 mg b.i.d.). However, after 3 months, she was hospitalized for convulsions and disturbance of consciousness. Physical examination showed a great degree of muscle tension in the limbs. Cerebrospinal fluid examination findings were normal. Intracranial pressure was negative. A CT scan of the head showed multiple low-density foci in her bilateral frontotemporal parietal lobes . Blood routine showed that hemoglobin (Hb) was 64 g/L. The SLE Activity Index was 18.
After multidisciplinary discussion, she was diagnosed with lupus encephalopathy and treated with 3 gamma globulin (20 g/day) and 3 high-dose steroid pulses (methylprednisolone 1000 mg), 2 plasmapheresis treatments, oral hydroxychloroquine and MMF, oral sodium valproate (0.5 g b.i.d.). Of note, high grade proteinuria persisted. In December 2019, the patient had a kidney biopsy. Histological analysis by light microscopy revealed 2 globally sclerotic glomeruli, 1 small-cell fibrous crescent formation, moderate proliferation of glomerular mesangial cells and stroma, and mesangial area, subepithelial, subendothelial eosinophil deposition ; Immunofluorescence for immunoglobulin G, immunoglobulin A, complement C3, and complement C1q revealed fused granular and clumpy deposits along the capillary loop and mesangial area ; Electron microscopy results showed the irregular thickening of the glomerular basement membrane and electron-dense deposits along the subepithelial, inner basement membrane and subendothelial and mesangial area .
The findings were consistent with diffuse hyperplasia and sclerosing LN with membranous LN (class IV-(A/C) + V ISN-RPS classification).[ Given the very poor renal function and overall prognosis in LN if left untreated, the use of belimumab as a last resort was deemed reasonable since belimumab was recently approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for children with SLE between 5 and 17 years of age.[ The patient was started on biweekly belimumab infusion at a dose of 10 mg/kg while being maintained on prednisone 8 mg/day. After 1 month of treatment, belimumab was switched to monthly administration and steroid tapering was begun. Belimumab was well tolerated by the patient and the symptoms gradually improved; of note, the patient remained free from infections. Kidney function remained normal, and proteinuria and hematuria gradually decreased. The anti-dsDNA antibody titer diminished rapidly and steadily; serum complement levels (which were already lower before belimumab initiation) normalized. After 10 months of treatment with belimumab, the patient was asymptomatic, with a serum creatinine of 44 µmol/L, 2 + hematuria and proteinuria on dipstick, C3 63 mg/dL, and C4 16 mg/dL, and anti-dsDNA was negative. Hemoglobin levels and blood albumin normalized almost completely. The systemic lupus erythematosus disease activity index (SLEDAI) score was 8, consistent with mild SLE activity. Because of the fair improvement, steroids currently are being tapered.