A 73-year-old Chinese male complained of progressive dysphagia for 7 mo.
Seven months prior, the patient began to have dysphagia with no obvious cause that was initially obvious when eating solid food, which required water intake; his condition worsened, and eventually the patient could eat only liquid food and suffered substantial weight loss of approximately 9 kg; there was no chest pain, nausea, vomiting, vomiting blood, black stool or other discomfort. He then consulted a local hospital, and gastroscopy revealed a purple black mass in the lower part of the esophagus (30-39 cm from the incisor); when touched, red blood flowed from this mass. The local hospital proposed a diagnosis of hematoma or hemangioma, and given the risk of bleeding associated with biopsy, no aggressive biopsy was performed to obtain pathology, and the patient was referred to our hospital for treatment.
The patient had a history of fish spikes that had been stuck in the esophagus 1 year prior, a condition that resolved on its own without endoscopy. Forty years previously, he was diagnosed with tuberculous pleurisy and was cured with standardized antituberculosis treatment for 3 years.
The patient denied any familial history of malignancy.
The admission vital signs were as follows: Body temperature, 36.1 °C; blood pressure, 14.1/9.8 KPa; heart rate, 81 beats per min; and respiratory rate, 21 breaths per min. In addition, the patient was lean with a body mass index of 18.5 kg/m2; there was painless enlargement of axillary and inguinal lymph nodes along with abdominal tenderness unaccompanied by pressure pain or rebound pain; no abnormal masses were palpated. Manual anal examination was not performed.
Hemoglobin levels were normal. Serum tumor markers were normal (including carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate associated antigen 19-9, and alpha-fetoprotein). The fecal occult blood test was negative. The coagulation function D-dimer level was 0.82 μg/mL (reference value less than 0.5 μg/mL). The remaining routine blood and urine analysis showed no abnormalities.
Enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen and pelvis showed a soft tissue mass in the middle and lower esophagus, suggesting esophageal cancer, and multiple enlarged lymph nodes on the gastric lesser curvature and retroperitoneum. Enhanced CT of the chest showed a clear intrapulmonary artery filling defect, and pulmonary thromboembolism was considered. Upon cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), no important abnormal signal was seen in the brain parenchyma.
Gastroscopy was repeated and showed a bulging mass in the esophagus (30-40 cm from the incisor) characterized by a blackish color, rough surface, seeming erosion in the middle of the lesion, and easy bleeding on contact; it caused a narrowing of the esophageal lumen, but an endoscope could pass by it. The gastric fundus and mucosa of the gastric body were scattered with multiple flat elevated lesions, approximately 0.4-0.6 cm in size and blackish in color . Ultrasound endoscopy revealed that the lesion had mixed echogenicity, predominantly hypoechogenicity, and involved the entire wall of the duct, with enlarged lymph nodes visible outside the wall . Gastroscopy and ultrasound endoscopy further validated the enhanced CT findings . A diagnosis of malignant melanoma of the esophagus was considered with a high possibility.
Upon histopathological examination, the combined morphological and immunohistochemical findings were consistent with malignant melanoma [immunohistochemistry: S-100 monoclonal (+), human melanoma black antibody (HMB45) (+),melanoma antigen protein (Melan-A) (+), Ki67 (MIB-1) (80% +), Sry-related HMg-Box gene 10 (SOX-10) (+), CK (AE1/AE3) (-)] .
Whole-body positron emission tomography (PET)-CT revealed hypermetabolic occupancy in the lower and middle esophagus, multiple hypermetabolic lymph nodes throughout the body, multiple hypermetabolic foci in bone, and malignant lesions with multiple metastases in lymph nodes and bone. A ground-glass shadow in the lower lobe of the left lung with mild metabolic increase was seen and cited for close follow-up .
The patient had a brown swelling of approximately 0.5 cm in diameter behind the right ear, which was diagnosed as seborrheic keratosis on dermoscopy.