A 43-year old Malay man presented to our hospital with sudden-onset blurring of the vision, which he described as central foggy vision that occurred after he caught a piece of falling plywood. He fell to the ground on his buttocks while his left hand was still grasping the plywood and he was holding his breath for about two minutes. Following the incident, he noticed that both his eyes became red and that his left eye vision was reduced. His symptoms were not associated with flashes of light or floaters. He had no complaints of headache, vomiting, abdominal pain, or shortness of breath. He had no direct trauma to the head or loss of consciousness. He is a non- smoker, and he had no significant past medical illness or surgery.
His right eye vision was 6/6, and his left eye acuity was finger counting, which improved to 6/90 using the pinhole test. He had profound temporal sub-conjunctival hemorrhages bilaterally but no other significant abnormalities in the anterior segment. The right eye fundus showed mild temporal peri-papillary edema associated with a few dot-blot hemorrhages. An examination of his left fundus revealed peri-papillary and macular edema with multiple dot-blot hemorrhages and cotton wool spots at the posterior pole . His systemic examination revealed no abnormality.
Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) showed good arterial perfusion with no leaking area or neo-vascularization. Blood investigations for complete blood count, serum amylase, and clotting time were normal. His chest X-ray revealed no significant findings.
A diagnosis of Purtscher-like retinopathy following a Valsalva maneuver was made. He was treated with indomethacin tablets 25 mg daily for six weeks. At his six-week follow-up examination, the visual acuity of his left eye had improved to 6/12. His sub-conjunctival hemorrhages in both eyes and his right eye temporal peri-papillary edema had resolved. The left fundus appeared to have residual macular edema and resolving cotton wool spots .