A 20-year-old man suffering from recurrent headache in the standing position for 10 months was admitted to our hospital. He had a history of GSD. In the past twelve years, the patient had undergone a closed thoracic drainage procedure due to chylothorax and 4 spinal surgeries for osteolytic lesions of the spine . Half a year after the last spinal revision surgery, the patient suddenly developed postural headache, which was aggravated while standing and relieved while supine. He was initially confined to bed at home. Five months prior to admission to our hospital, he was admitted to a hospital in Shan Xi with gradually worsening headache, nausea and vomiting. The patient underwent cerebral angiography, which indicated right sigmoid sinus stenosis. Fundus examination showed no bilateral papilledema . He was treated with fluid rehydration and oral anticoagulants. The patient’s condition improved.
However, the patient could still not stand for a long period of time in recent months. After standing for three hours, the headache worsened and could be relieved by lying on the back. For further diagnosis and treatment, the patient was referred to our hospital. After admission, he was treated with absolute bed rest and intravenous fluid infusion. In the meantime, imaging tests were scheduled for the patient. Contrast-enhanced brain magnetic resonance (MR) images demonstrated smooth diffuse pachymeningeal enhancement and cerebellar tonsillar herniation, which was consistent with intracranial hypotension . The sagittal T2-weighted MR image of the total spine showed posterior epidural fluid collections in the cervical and upper thoracic segments and anterior epidural fluid collections in the lower thoracic segments . Then, further spinal MR myelography was performed to locate the CSF leak. Spinal MR myelography revealed no evidence of CSF leakage in the cervical and upper thoracic vertebrae , while images of the lower thoracic and lumbar segments were unclear due to metal artefacts. The clinical and imaging data both indicated intracranial hypotension syndrome, but the current examination methods could not specifically locate the leak, which caused certain confusion for the repair of CSF leakage. Considering the complexity of the case, we organized a multidisciplinary team involving neurologists, neurosurgeons, pain physicians, orthopaedists and radiologists. Subsequently, computed tomography (CT) of the skull base was performed, showing no abnormalities. The lower thoracic and lumbar segments were not visible on MR images due to metal artefacts. Therefore, after ruling out skull base lesions, it was speculated that the possible leakage point was located in the lower thoracic or lumbar segment. Ultimately, we decided to perform lower thoracic epidural blood patching. An 18-G needle was inserted into the patient’s epidural space at the T11/12 level, and 11 mL of autologous peripheral venous blood was infused.
During the next two months, the patient’s headache gradually improved, and he returned to normal activities. However, two months after the EBP, the patient presented to another local hospital with severe headache, orbital pain, nausea and vomiting. He felt that the headache was aggravated in the lying position and relieved in the upright or sitting position. Lumbar puncture revealed a high opening pressure of 20 cmH2O. Based on the symptoms and lumbar puncture pressure, RIH was considered. Meanwhile, with increasing CSF pressure, the Chiari-like tonsillar herniation disappeared. The patient was treated with acetazolamide and mannitol to reduce cranial pressure. At the 1-year follow-up, his headache was in remission.