An 8-year-old girl presented with pain in her right lower extremity and a mass on her right thigh for 1 mo.
The child came to our hospital on January 31, 2019, due to intermittent pain in the right lower limb for more than one week. There was no history of trauma or strenuous activities. The pain was aggravated during activities and was accompanied by a limp in the right lower limb; however, there was no fever and no numbness in the right lower limb. The physical examination showed that the movement of the right hip joint was limited, and there was no obvious mass in the right lower limb. Ultrasound indicated synovitis of the hip, and bed rest was recommended. However, the pain was not relieved and gradually worsened, accompanied by fever. She came to our hospital again on February 3, 2019. Physical examination revealed that a mass was palpable on the back of the right thigh, and the skin surface was red . Ultrasound, images, and routine blood tests were performed, which revealed soft tissue tumors of the right thigh. Infection and calcification of the right thigh were considered, and antibiotic treatment was given. Her temperature dropped to normal, and the pain was relieved, but the mass still persisted, and became hard. She visited our hospital again on March 3, 2019, and was hospitalized.
She was physically healthy and had no history of special disease.
No family history of inherited diseases and malignant tumor diseases was recorded.
On physical examination, the patient had a giant mass on the back of the right thigh; it measured 20 cm × 10 cm × 8 cm. The surface skin of the mass was slightly red, and the temperature was slightly increased. The quality of the mass was hard; the mass had no tenderness with no sense of fluctuation; the boundary was clear, and the active and passive activities of the right hip and right knee joints were limited .
Some inflammatory indicators were abnormally high, and blood calcium was slightly low at the time of admission. Blood analysis revealed white blood cells of 11.3 × 109/L, platelets of 858 × 109/L, C-reactive protein of 74.1 mg/L, erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 98 mm/h, and blood calcium of 2.04 nmol/L.
Radiographs and computed tomography (CT) scans showed a large soft tissue mass on the upper right posterior thigh with progressive calcification inside the mass .