An 18-year-old gravida 1, para 0 (G1P0) woman at 30 + 4 weeks of gestation presented with
sudden-onset cyclic pain in the right lower quadrant. She was admitted to a local hospital
and treated with tocolytics; however, the symptoms persisted, and she was referred to our
hospital. She had no remarkable medical history, including no history of vaginal bleeding,
dysuria, or uterine contractions. The patient had no fever, and her vital signs were stable;
however, physical examination revealed marked tenderness in the right lower abdominal
quadrant. Blood laboratory evaluations revealed a white blood cell count of
22.4 × 109/L and a hemoglobin concentration of 83 g/L; the C-reactive protein
concentration was normal, and urine microscopy results were also normal. There were
irregular uterine contractions. Abdominal ultrasonography showed a normal appendix with
fetal biometry compatible with a 29 + 3-week pregnancy, with normal amniotic fluid volume
and normal placenta on the posterior wall and normal fetal activity. Neither ovary was
identified on ultrasonography, and no mass-like lesions were seen. She received tocolytic
therapy, but the abdominal pain persisted; thus, abdominal MRI was performed on the same day
to obtain an accurate diagnosis. MRI revealed a normal appendix and that both ovaries were
normal. Despite no abnormal imaging findings, the patient continued to complain of right
lower abdominal pain; therefore, we decided to perform exploratory laparotomy. The prominent
tender point was marked on the patient’s abdomen and was compared with the MR images . The marked point was
confirmed to match the position of the right adnexa in the MR images; therefore, we
considered that the pain originated in the right adnexa. Laparotomy was subsequently
performed through a gridiron incision. No abnormal fluid collection, hematoma, or pus were
seen upon entering the abdomen, and the right ovary was immediately identified. The size of
the right ovary was normal, but it was flat and folded . There was no necrosis of the ovary or
fallopian tube. We unfolded the right ovary, but it immediately refolded, and we used
TachoSil® (Takeda Austria GmBH, Linz, Austria) to unfold the ovary. We then attached
TachoSil® to the front and back of the ovary and fallopian tube and packed three rolled
Surgicels® (Ethicon Inc., New Brunswick, NJ, USA) behind the ovary to maintain the unfolded
anatomy .
After surgery, tocolytics were used to address irregular uterine contractions. The patient
experienced minimal postoperative tenderness, the right lower quadrant pain resolved, and
her postoperative course was uneventful. Because the patient had no symptoms of preterm
labor, tocolytics were stopped on postoperative day 4, and she was discharged on
postoperative day 5. She experienced no recurrent abdominal pain, postoperatively, and she
delivered a healthy 2540-g male baby at 35 weeks of pregnancy. There were no maternal or
fetal complications.