A 52-year-old man presented at our clinic with gross macroscopic hematuria, and a 12-month history of the lower urinary tract symptoms. He reported frequency, urgency, nocturia, straining at voiding, dribbling at the end of urination and inability to empty the bladder. He had diagnosed with a urinary tract infection 3 months earlier. Although he had received antibiotic therapy, his urinary complaints persisted. As prescribed by a General Practitioner, his treatment was tamsulosin 0.4 mg/daily, for 2 months with limited success for the reported symptoms.
During the initial evaluation, no abnormalities were found on physical examination or in routine laboratory studies. Ultrasound of the lower urinary tract revealed a smooth endovesical bladder lesion in the bladder trigone area which mimicked the median prostate lobe as well as mild prostate hyperplasia (prostate volume 43 cc). The tumor presented peripheral hyperechogenicity. There was also mild hydronephrosis in the left kidney with no indication of kidney stone.
Given that asymptomatic macroscopic hematuria requires extensive investigation and the questions concerning the existence of a prostate median lobe, the patient was scheduled for computed tomography (CT). CT confirmed the presence of a solid, well-delineated mass measuring 41 × 24 mm that appeared to arise from the bladder trigone wall, independent from prostate, without any evidence of distant metastasis . There was an obstructed and mildly dilated left pelvicalyceal system due to the bladder tumor displacing the left ureteric orifice. Urine cytology showed unremarkable squamous and urothelial cells and was negative for malignancy. MRI revealed a well-defined intramural mass .
The patient underwent cystoscopy, which revealed a protruding mass in bladder trigone next to bladder neck with normal covering urothelium. There was a distortion in the area of the left ureteric orifice, which was displaced by the mass posterior to its normal position .
The patient underwent an uneventful TURBT. After the resection, a yellowish well-defined adipose tissue was revealed in the region of the bladder trigone. There are specific anatomical variations of the bladder trigone; muscularis propria bundles are nearer to the suburothelium and become smaller in caliber towards the surface. Adipose tissues can be seen in between muscularis propria bundles, which may continue extravesically or extend superficially to the lamina propria. Conversely, the outer boundary of muscularis propria with perivesical soft tissues (a landmark for staging extravesical invasion) is irregular and not well defined.
Special care was taken as regards the left ureteric orifice. Both ureteric orifices were seen to be intact. There was a significant concern about the future formation of scar tissue in the trigone area that could distort normal anatomy. The catheter was removed on the second postoperative day and the patient was discharged without any problem. Pathology proved that the lesion was a benign submucosal leiomyoma. The material consisted of interlacing fascicles of spindle-shape cells. The cells displayed no pleomorphism and contained bland-looking central spindle nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasm. Microscopic examination of the whole tissue fragments did not reveal mitotic activity or coagulative necrosis. Immunohistochemical analysis showed an extended and robust cytoplasmic expression of smooth muscle actin (SMA) stain applied to the tissue.
Six months after surgery, an ultrasound revealed no recurrence of the tumor. A 12 month ultrasound follow-up also confirmed that the patient had no remaining lesions. Since a benign condition had already been confirmed, a usual postoperative evaluation involves the ultrasound scan. However, our concerns about a probable scarring in the blabber trigone area and distortion of ureteral orifices made a postoperative cystoscopy necessary.