A healthy 15-year-old Japanese male presented with fever (37°C), general malaise, and nausea after intense kendo exercise for 2 days. Laboratory findings revealed hyperbilirubinemia (total bilirubin 3.8 mg/dL), acute kidney injury (serum creatinine: 3.11 mg/dL, and an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) of 26 mL/min/1.73m2). The levels of serum creatine kinase was within normal limit. Thus, it is suggested that the cause of hemoglobinuria is hemolysis, but not rhabdomyolysis. It was no metabolic acidosis and electrolyte abnormalities. He had no history of kidney disease and was not taking any medications. He had hyperuricemia (uric acid 12.7 mg/dL), hyperbilirubinemia (indirect bilirubin dominant), high lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and his urine test indicated positive results for occult blood; however, hematuria was not detected . At the time of the renal biopsy, the patient’s height, weight, the percentiles of the length and the body weight , heart rate and blood pressure were 173.5 cm, 64.6 kg, 71.57 percentile and 72 percentile, 53/min and 144/83 mmHg, respectively. Physical examination findings were normal. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed no abnormalities in both kidneys. We performed renal biopsy for a definitive diagnosis.
Histological findings showed minor glomerular abnormalities . We observed cast and hemosiderin deposition in the tubules . There were no significant findings in immunofluorescence analysis . Massive hemosiderin deposition was detected in the proximal tubules by Berlin blue iron staining . Electron dense deposits were not detected by electron microscopy; however, lysosome incorporated iron granules were observed in the proximal tubules . Renal biopsy certified hemosiderin deposition in the proximal tubules, suggestive of march hemoglobinuria.
The patient was advised to rest and underwent fluid replacement with 1000 ml of hypotonic solution contained 90 mmol/L of sodium from day 1 to day 3 during hospitalization in addition to whole hospital diet and 1000ml of oral rehydration solution with electrolyte. The output of each day was about 1500-2000ml/day, thus leading to a normal kidney function (eGFR was improved from 27 to 90 mL/min/1.73m2) and bilirubin level. Hyperbilirubinemia and occult blood in the urine test were due to hemolysis. We also examined red blood cell fragility; however, the osmotic fragility test of erythrocytes and Ham’s test were negative . This patient did not show any abnormalities in numbers of erythrocyte as well as peripheral smear. Moreover, hyperbilirubinemia and occult blood in the urine were improved after resting and hydration. Thus, we did not measure glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) in present case. We have followed up 1 year. This patient has resumed kendo practice, however it has been stable without any acute renal injury and hemolysis due to avoiding dehydration and hard exercise.