A previously healthy 37-year-old male was referred to our hospital with a diagnosis of dengue hemorrhagic fever with shock. His clinical course began 6 days prior to transfer when he presented to an outside hospital with fever. He was found to have left sided hemothorax on arrival causing respiratory distress in which intercostal drainage was promptly placed. However, his condition remained unstable following the procedure requiring intravenous norepinephrine for hypotension. His clinical course was shortly complicated by acute renal failure necessitating renal replacement therapy via right internal jugular catheter on hospital day 2. Despite supportive treatment, lactic acidosis was newly demonstrated together with the need for higher dose of vasopressive drug, various antibacterial regimens were prescribed throughout hospitalization and meropenem and vancomycin were selected as initial combination.
On hospital day 3, due to progressive respiratory distress and failure on lung recruitment maneuver, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) was initiated via right femoral catheter. He was also noted to have pancytopenia. Bone marrow study findings were compatible with hemophagocytosis syndrome secondary to dengue infection. Intravenous dexamethasone (10 mg/m2) and intravenous immunoglobulin were started and plasmapheresis replaced immunoglobulin therapy on the following day. Hematologist was able to reverse pancytopenic event 7 days later but profound lymphopenia persisted throughout his hospital course with the highest absolute CD4 count of 90 cells/mm3.
On hospital day 11, ECMO was discontinued and right femoral catheter was removed after stabilization of overall condition. However on hospital day 13, he underwent left below knee amputation for better control of limb ischemia presumably secondary to ECMO complication that had been documented since hospital day 8. His clinical course was also complicated by 1.) Cytomegalovirus reactivation during dexamethasone therapy and required brief duration of ganciclovir treatment given no specific organ involvement identified and 2.) Chromobacterium viloaceum pneumonia and secondary bacteremia on hospital day 18. Bacterial pneumonia was very difficult to control that he required a prolonged course of antibiotics consisting of piperacillin/tazobactam and ciprofloxacin to the point that left pneumonectomy was indicated on hospital day 46. After the surgery, he was prescribed several short courses of antibiotic treatment mainly in order to prevent gut microbial translocation following numerous events of gastrointestinal bleeding. Hemorrhagic complication was later discovered to be secondary to large stress associated rectal ulcer. He died on hospital day 71 due to massive esophageal bleeding that autopsy findings failed to identify infectious etiology at the bleeding site.
Regarding fungal infection risk particularly IA following severe dengue infection, micafungin was begun on hospital day 3 after serum galactomannan (GM) was obtained which later reported to be 2.3 by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Liposomal amphotericin B replaced micafungin for new diagnosis of probable IA that chest radiograph now displayed faint opacities in right middle lung field. In addition, anidulafungin was added in response to rapid progression of pulmonary lesions on chest radiograph. After 6 days of combination therapy, serum GM level declined to 0.55 as the lowest value but no change on chest radiograph findings and respiratory status.
On hospital day 18, micafungin replaced anidulafungin in light of possible cardiac toxicity. Bronchoscopy was done to determine the potential pathogenic fungi but biopsy was avoided given very compromised respiratory status. Antifungal regimen had been switched to and fro between liposomal amphotericin B and amphotericin B deoxycholate due to a fear of drug induced cholestatic jaundice from hospital day 21 until day 31 when polyene antifungals were halted completely after a recognition of A. terreus growth on every respiratory specimen. Intravenous and nebulized voriconazole and oral flucytosine via nasogastric tube were now chosen. Despite of therapeutic voriconazole levels in the range of 3.29–4.89 mg/L, pulmonary lesions were still growing in size with increment of serum GM to 9.73 and worsening respiratory parameters over a period of 10 days. A decision to switch treatment to intravenous posaconazole was made in view of potential SBECD accumulation. Plasma levels of posaconazole were measured to assure drug exposure adequacy. MICs of current A. terreus infection to voriconazole, posaconazole, caspofungin, anidulafungin, micafungin were 0.75, 0.125, 1, 0.004, and 0.064 mg/L, respectively.
Determination of posaconazole concentrations in plasma was performed using validated Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography-Photo Diode Array (UPLC/PDA), according to the US Food and Drug Administration guidance for bio-analytical method validation . Blood samplings for plasma posaconazole levels were performed dividing into two phases. The first phase took place when posaconazole 300 mg was given every 24 h, spotted plasma levels were obtained to determine the appropriate timing of the following doses in which resulted in a new dosing regimen of every 48-h interval. In the second phase happened when posaconazole 300 mg was given every 48 h, blood samples were collected for pharmacokinetic analysis at 0 h (predose), immediately at the end of infusion, approximately 15 min after the end of infusion, and approximately 4, 8, 12, 24 and 48 h after the start of infusion. After 34-day course of posaconazole with confirmation of therapeutic plasma posaconazole levels almost the entire period of time during posaconazole treatment (0.956–7.099 mg/L), his infection still did not subside. Serum GM prior to his death was 8.97. Autopsy result confirmed diffuse IA in his right lung without evidence of dissemination to other organs as well as no bacterial pneumonia documented. Additional immunological tests also declared impairment of natural killer T-cell function. Plasma posaconazole levels and serum GM are shown in Additonal file : Figure S1. An additional figure file shows summary of his clinical course [see Additional file ].
Liver function tests and QTc interval on electrocardiography data prior and during posaconazole treatment are displayed in Table . The findings demonstrated a decline in aspartate transaminase (AST) and alanine transferase (ALT) levels significantly after posaconazole use (p =0.005 and 0.028, respectively). On the other hand, there was an increase in alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) levels after posaconazole use with statistical significance (p = <0.001 and 0.039, respectively). There were no crucial changes on total bilirubin (TB), direct bilirubin (DB) and QTc interval. Statistical analyses on relevant parameters to compare the differences prior and during posaconazole therapy were performed using SPSS version 21.0 for Windows (IBM Corp., Armonk, New York). The distribution of continuous variables was determined by Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. All continuous variables were assessed by the Student's t-test or Wilcoxon Rank Sum test as appropriate. For normally distributed variables, data were described by mean ± standard deviation (SD). For skewed variables were described as median (range). A p value of less than 0.05 was considered significant for all statistic values.