A 67-year-old male, cab driver. Past History: None noted.
On the 3rd day of COVID-19 onset, he did not answer his family’s phone calls, and when the hotel staff checked on him, they found that he had collapsed in his room and was rushed to the hospital. Neurological findings: Glasgow Coma Score: 9 (E2V3M4) with no apparent paralysis. Imaging findings: Computed tomography (CT) scanning revealed SAH, intraventricular hemorrhage, and hydrocephalus . CT angiography (CTA) revealed a spindle-shaped dilatation of the left VA, and the posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) was branched proximally . A simple chest CT revealed multiple frosted shadows in the peripheral areas of both lungs .
The diagnosis of SAH (Hunt and Kosnik: grade 4, world federation of neurosurgical societies (WFNS): grade 4) due to a ruptured vertebral artery dissecting aneurysm was determined to be the PICA distal-type, and the development of a contralateral VA was sufficient flow and endovascular internal trapping was planned.
Endovascular treatment was performed with the minimum required number of surgeons and medical staff under full personal protective equipment (full-PPE) in the angio (ANGIO) suite with a negative-pressure ventilation system. Under general anesthesia, both femoral arteries were punctured and a 5Fr Guiding sheath was placed in the right VA, and a 4Fr catheter was placed in the left VA to control digital subtraction angiography (DSA). DSA revealed that the aneurysm was PICA distal-type with a dome measuring 12.6 mm × 6 mm . The left VA was well-developed, and a branch of the anterior spinal artery was observed. We planned internal trapping of the right VA using the double catheter technique. Thirty platinum coils were used for the occlusion of the right VA. Flow arrest was observed and the procedure was terminated . Blood flow from the contralateral left VA was sufficient and retrograde flow to the ipsilateral VA .
Postoperatively, the patient was managed as in the case of a normal severe SAH, including strict fluid management, blood pressure maintenance, and the administration of fasudil hydrochloride and sodium ozagrel natrium (nimodipine is not applicable in our country). The only deviation from regular treatment, considering the risk of secondary infection due to extubation, is that we continued to manage the patient by intubation. We performed neurological examinations and found no paralysis or sensory disturbance every few hours. Furthermore, the patients have undergone transcranial Doppler (TCD) examinations every day, which revealed results that were not significantly elevated (mean flow velocity was 50–80 cm/s). The patient was extubated 10 days after hospitalization, following two consecutive negative COVID – polymerase chain reaction (PCR) results. At that time, motor aphasia was observed, and CT revealed a focal cerebral infarction in the left frontal lobe that was thought to be caused by cerebral vasospasm at the distal middle cerebral artery (MCA) . On the 30th day, the aneurysm was recanalized . The recanalization segment showed an aneurysmal-like dilatation , and coil embolization using nine coils was performed with a focus on the dilated area, achieving re-occlusion .
A ventriculoperitoneal shunt was also performed for the complication of hydrocephalus. The patient was transferred to a different hospital for rehabilitation on the 50th day, and his symptoms gradually recovered, with mild motor aphasia persisting at 1 year after onset and the modified Rankin Scale 1.