A 41-year-old female patient was admitted to our clinic with a complaint of swelling of the left upper eyelid for 6 months. Visual acuity was 10/10 in the right eye. Best corrected visual acuity was 7/10 with the refractive errors of +3.25D spherical and −3.0D astigmatism in the left eye with Snellen card. Intraocular pressure was 14 mm Hg bilaterally. On palpation, a firm and immobile mass of approximately 10 × 10 mm2 was detected in the midline of her left upper eyelid under eyebrow. Hertel exophthalmometry readings detected no proptosis. Bilateral ocular motilities were not limited in all directions of gaze. The slit lamp biomicroscopic and dilated fundus examinations were unremarkable in her both eyes. The patient’s history and general physical examination were normal. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a well-circumscribed − 9 × 9 mm2 in size – solid mass keeping intensive contrast in the left frontobasal, subgaleal area ( and ). The tumour was located extraconally in the anterior orbit. Although there was a connection between cortical frontal osseous and solid mass, there was no bone destruction in MRI. In the light of these findings, our preliminary diagnosis was dermoid cyst. An excisional biopsy was performed via the left transcutaneous anterior orbitotomy. Under eyebrow, horizontal skin incision was made. The mass was dissected from the surrounding tissue by blunt dissection. Because the tumour was attached to surrounding tissue, it was broken into pieces and removed completely. As the bottom portion of the mass adhered to the periosteum, it was excised together with its periosteum. Additionally, because the inferomedial part of the mass abutted on the supraorbital neurovascular bundle, it was excised together with it and caused bleeding . But it could be controlled by cautery. Excised tumour was lobular form with yellow-grey colour, and it was set for histopathological examination and immunohistochemical investigation. Histopathological examination revealed diffuse infiltration of uniform, spindle-shaped cells arranged in whorls. The nuclei of the tumour cells were elongated cigar-shaped with blunted ends. There were no mitotic figures, nuclear pleomorphism and nuclear atypia . Immunohistochemical staining was positive for smooth muscle actin (SMA) and h-caldesmon, but negative for desmin and S100 protein. CD31 and CD34 immunostaining showed sparse accompanying thin-walled vascular structures. Ki67 index was 1% . According to histopathological and immunohistochemical findings, our diagnosis was orbital leiomyoma. In the postoperative examination, there was anaesthesia on the frontal area of our patient, due to excision of supraorbital neurovascular bundle preoperatively. No complication was found except anaesthesia, and no recurrence was detected in 18 months of follow-up.