A 20-year-old male came to our eye center in 2019, complaining of progressive painless vision loss in both eyes for the past 3 months. He had bilateral ptosis since birth and underwent blepharoptosis correction surgery 3 years ago. He denied any ocular or systemic disease, or any topical or systemic medication history. Family history was negative for congenital ocular abnormalities. IOP condition had never been evaluated in his previous clinical inspections.
Upon examination, the best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 0.3 (logarithm of the minimum angle of resolution, LogMAR) in both eyes, measured by subjective refraction. Myopia was found in both eyes with a spherical equivalent refraction of−6.50/-5.75 diopters without cycloplegia. IOP was 48 mm Hg in OD and 52 mm Hg in OS, measured by Goldmann applanation tonometry (GAT AT900, Haag Streit, Koniz, Switzerland) mounted on a slit–lamp biomicroscope. Mild ptosis still existed in OS, but did not occlude the optic axis. Incomplete eyelid closure existed in OD . Slit-lamp examination (SL-D8Z; Topcon Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) showed transparent cornea with normal size, clear anterior chamber (AC) with normal depth, and bilateral ectropion uveae in both eyes . Gonioscopy revealed abnormal angles with anterior insertion of the iris in both eyes . Fundus examination (TRC-NW8; Topcon Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) showed significant pallor of the neuroretinal rim and the vertical C/D ratios of 1.0 in both eyes . Central corneal thickness was 519/522 μm, measured by a solid-tip, ultrasonic pachymeter (Tomey SP-3000, Tokyo, Japan). Visual field testing (Octopus 900, Haag-Streit, USA) showed bilateral temporal islands, and <5° central vision in OS . The mean retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) thickness was 51 μm in OD and 56 μm in OS, measured by optical coherence tomography (OCT) examination (ZEISS CIRROS HD-OCT4000, Germany, ). Systemic physical examination was notable for facial hypertrophy and thickening of the nasal soft tissue . Skin examination was normal, without presentations of café-au-lait spot or any other sign of neurofibromatosis.
Based on the history and examination, he was diagnosed with bilateral CEU with glaucoma, and started on anti-glaucoma eyedrops. During subsequent 3-month follow-up, his IOP was reduced to 29 mm Hg in OD and 27 mm Hg in OS, under maximal glaucoma medications (Ganfort® (Allergan Pharmaceuticals Ireland) once daily; Azopt® (SA Alcon-Couvreur N V) and Alphagan® (Allergan Pharmaceuticals Ireland), three times a day). Due to the severe glaucomatous optic neuropathy, visual field defect and the uncontrolled IOP, prompt surgical intervention was crucial for this patient. Considering the risks and complications of traditional trabeculectomy (Trab) in advanced glaucoma, we performed CLASS (by KJW, ) in OS with consent from the patient. The operation went smoothly without intraoperative complications. Postoperatively, the IOP decreased from 27 mm Hg to 7 mm Hg on the first day in OS, and reached 15 mm Hg at 1 week. At 1 month after CLASS, the IOP elevated to 18 mm Hg, which was not low enough for such a young patient with advanced glaucoma. Therefore, a fixed-combination anti-glaucoma medicine (Azarga®, SA Alcon-Couvreur N V) was used twice a day, and the IOP was reduced to 12 mm Hg.
During the follow-ups of OS, the IOP in OD ranged from 20-35 mm Hg despite maximal medications. We decided to choose another surgery for OD, expecting to achieve a lower postoperative IOP without anti-glaucoma medicines. The patient was well-informed and agreed with an ab externo MAT surgery (performed by KJW, ) in OD. Hyphema occurred during the surgery, and filled about 1/2 of the anterior chamber on the first day postoperatively. Fortunately, the hemorrhage was spontaneously resolved within 2 weeks, without IOP elevation and any intervention . The IOP in OD reduced from 30 mm Hg to 13 mm Hg at 1-week after MAT, and remained stable during the follow-up period.
Three months after CLASS, IOP in OS was 19 mm Hg under the application of Azarga®. Ultrasonic biomicroscope (UBM) examination indicated scleral lake reduction at the surgical area without peripheral anterior synechia (PAS). Then, a YAG laser goniopuncture (LGP) was performed (by KJW) and the IOP reduced to 6 mm Hg immediately. A diffuse avascular bleb had been maintained in OS since then , and the IOP ranged from 8 to 10 mm Hg without any medication . There was no obvious subconjunctival bleb in OD after MAT. No complications occurred in OD during the follow-up period, while a shallow AC and complicated cataract developed in OS .
Due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, the patient failed to come to our hospital for regular follow-ups during the past half-year. He was under close observation at a local hospital, and we kept regular telephone and WeChat follow-up visits with him. At his most recent visit, which was about 2 years postoperatively, the patient's BCVA (LogMAR) was 0.1 in OD and 0.4 in OS. IOP was 14.5 mm Hg in OD and 8 mm Hg in OS with no antiglaucoma agents. There was no obvious hypotony maculopathy in OS by OCT (Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) examination . During the follow-up period, there was no obvious progression in visual field defect . We have recommended antiglaucoma medication to this patient for further IOP reduction in OD, but he refused to use it, with the concern about the incomplete eyelid closure after blepharoptosis correction surgery and potential ocular surface damage caused by local medication. He is currently receiving acupuncture treatment every 2 weeks, which makes him feel better. At present, he is satisfied with the IOP and visual acuity in the right eye. If there is any progression in the VF defect, antiglaucoma medications should be applied. Cataract surgery should be considered in the left eye, if necessary. He is still under close observation.