A 37-year-old South Asian woman with no significant past medical history except for infertility and thalassemia minor underwent IVF for the first time. Infertility workup before IVF detected no abnormalities of the uterus or tubal lesions but endometrial biopsies were not performed. She had regular prenatal follow up, and used folic acid and prenatal vitamins. With the exception of intermittent vaginal bleeding noted since 10 weeks of pregnancy, her pregnancy was uneventful until 20 weeks of gestational age (GA) when she had spontaneous rupture of membranes. Fetal ultrasound (US) showed severe oligohydramnios. Repeat US at 23 weeks showed absence of the septum pellucidum and right talipes equino varus in the fetus. At 24 weeks GA, the mother presented with generalized seizures, went into precipitous labour delivering a male infant by spontaneous vaginal delivery with a birthweight of 590 g and APGAR scores of 4, 6, and 6 at 1, 5 and 10 min respectively.
Resuscitation of the infant in the case room included intubation, intermittent positive pressure ventilation with up to 100% oxygen and surfactant administration. High Frequency Oscillatory Ventilation (HFOV) was started in the case room due to the high oxygen requirements and absent chest movement.
The mother was admitted to the Intensive Care Unit with continuous seizure activity for a diagnostic workup. Diagnosis of TB was made by placental pathology on day three post-delivery that showed necrotizing granulomatous deciduitis and sub-chorionitis with acid-fast bacilli (AFB) apparent on Ziehl-Neelsen staining . The findings were suggestive of placental involvement from chronic endometrial infection rather than recently acquired or haematogenous infection. The parents denied any family history of TB or contact with a known tuberculous patient. Anti-tuberculosus treatment was started while awaiting confirmation of the diagnosis. The diagnosis was confirmed by a positive Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) on placental tissue for Mycobacterium Tuberculosis and culture of the organism from sputum and urine after 15 and 17 days of incubation respectively. Her chest X ray was suggestive of military TB and CT scan of the chest confirmed the pulmonary involvement. An abdomen ultrasound was reported to be normal. Her brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed multiple small ring-enhancing cerebral and cerebellar lesions, consistent with an atypical infection such as TB .
Immediately after the diagnosis of maternal TB and due to the complicated respiratory course of the infant (HFOV in case room, repeated doses of surfactant, presentation with Persistent Pulmonary Hypertension of Newborn (PPHN) within 24 h of life that required nitric oxide (iNO)), the infant was fully screened for TB.
Given the florid miliary and placental TB in the mother and the infant’s critical condition, he was started empirically on anti-tuberculous treatment on day 3 of life. Mycobacterial culture of blood, cerebro-spinal fluid (CSF), endotracheal aspirates, gastric aspirates, urine and stool were, however, negative. Since confirming the diagnosis of congenital TB is difficult and the associated high mortality and morbidity, it was decided to continue anti-tuberculous treatment. The infant was started on isoniazid (10 mg/kg/d), rifampin (20 mg/kg/d), pyrazinamide (30 mg/kg/d), and ethambutol (20 mg/kg/d) for 2 months with a plan for isoniazid and rifampin for a further 4 months. His course in NICU was complicated by severe respiratory insufficiency, radiological evidence of pulmonary interstitial emphysema and early signs of chronic lung disease (CLD).
The baby remained on HFOV for 25 days and required iNO support for 29 days. A course of dexamethasone was required to facilitate extubation to Continuous Positive Airway Pressure.
At 42 weeks of corrected GA the infant’s growth is appropriate, he has CLD requiring oxygen via nasal cannula and a brain MRI was reported to be normal. His eye examination and liver function tests are normal. The mother continues her anti-TB treatment and is doing well.