A 50-year-old, otherwise healthy female presented to our department with a part-solid ground-glass nodule. The patient was asymptomatic, and chest CT revealed a part-solid ground-glass nodule of maximum diameter 19*14*19 mm in the posterior segment of the right upper lobe . An abnormal right B3 was identified in the Chest CT: the right upper bronchus gave rise to apical and posterior segmental bronchi, and the B3 derived from the right middle lobe bronchus ; A3 was the third branch of the pulmonary trunk, following apical and posterior branches. Those variations are more clearly displayed in the 3-dimensional computed tomographic bronchography and angiography (3D-CTBA) . The distribution of pulmonary vein was relatively normal. No fissure was detected in the right upper-middle lobe region. Preoperative examinations include physical examination, electrocardiogram, abdominal ultrasound, hematology examinations, pulmonary function tests, bone scan and echocardiography. All results were normal without evidence of metastasis. According to the eighth edition of TNM staging system, the clinical staging of this patient was stage IA2 (T1bN0M0).
Considering that the nodule was in the posterior segment of the right upper lobe and the variation of anterior segmental bronchus and pulmonary artery, though the pre-operative results (forced expiration volume in 1 s: 2.21 L) did not suggest that a compromised segmentectomy needed to be performed, an intentional dual portal thoracoscopic apico-posterior segmentectomy was deemed the procedure of choice for this patient.
After general anesthesia, the patient was put into left decubitus position. The apical segmental artery and vein were dissected and divided first. The B1 + 2 was then identified, ligated and divided after the peri-bronchial lymph node dissection. With retraction of the right upper lobe caudally, the posterior segmental pulmonary artery was dissected and divided. Finally, the central vein was dissected and divided. IDT was then applied to delineate the boundary between apical-posterior and anterior segments: double lung ventilation was applied temporally after the division of apico-posterior bronchus to inflate the right lung, and isolated left lung ventilation was resumed after the confirmation that right lung was fully inflated, at this time, unlike in the other segments, air in the apico-posterior segment could not be exhaled as the apico-posterior bronchus was divided, this differential deflation creates a easily recognizable intersegmental plane, which was divided using multiple staplers . Then the right S1 + 2 was retrieved . Intraoperative frozen-section pathologic examination for the resected specimen confirmed the diagnosis of Acinar predominant invasive adenocarcinoma without more invasive histologic subtype and spread through air space, a systematic lymph node sampling was then performed. The operation lasted 1 h and 34 min, and the blood loss was less than 50 ml. The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 4. Postoperative pathologic examination confirmed the diagnosis of acinar predominant adenocarcinoma. There was no sign of involvement of visceral pleura or lympho-vascular invasion. No metastasis was found in the lymph nodes, the pathologic stage was stage IA2 (T1bN0M0).