A 22-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with a 3-mo history of fever and weight loss of approximately 10 kg.
The patient’s symptoms started 3 mo ago with chronic fever and progressive weight loss.
The patient had a 10-year HBV infection in his medical history. He had never taken antiviral treatment against HBV.
This patient had no special personal and family history.
On examination, the patient’s temperature was 39.5 °C, heart rate was 94 beats per minute, respiratory rate was 17 breaths per minute, and blood pressure was 100/70 mmHg, without any other pathological signs.
A laboratory workup revealed a hepatic injury pattern, with alanine aminotransferase of 137 IU/L (normal range, 9-60 IU/L), aspartate aminotransferase of 95 IU/L (15-45 IU/L), alkaline phosphatase of 290 IU/L (45-125 IU/L), and γ-glutamyltransferase of 172 IU/L (10-60 IU/L). The hepatitis panel showed positivity for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg), and hepatitis B core antibody. HBV-DNA level was 3.496 × 107 IU/mL (< 2.0 × 102 IU/mL). C-reactive protein was 46 mg/L (0-3 mg/L). Procalcitonin was 2.37 ng/mL (0-0.05 ng/mL). The purified protein derivative skin test, autoimmune, HIV, and ESR tests were within normal limits.
Abdominal ultrasound showed that the liver was enlarged, with a span of 15.2 cm with no other focal lesions. The spleen was enlarged with a span of 7.3 cm. The right branch of the portal vein showed evidence of a 2.1 cm thrombosis . All other abdominal viscera appeared normal with no free fluid.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) of the thorax and abdomen was then performed to further assess the burden of the disease in the chest and to evaluate the portal vein. CECT confirmed hepatosplenomegaly, with hypodensity of the right lobe of the liver; thrombosis of the right branch of the portal vein ; and enlargement of several hepatic portal, retroperitoneal, and para-aortic lymph nodes.
A bone marrow smear and biopsy were attempted with the result of slightly decreased whole cell counts. The subsequent esophagogastroduodenoscopy and colonoscopy results were normal. Although the possibility of viral, bacterial, and parasitic infestations was clinically considered, it was kept at a low priority due to the lack of significant results of laboratory examinations. Ultrasound-guided percutaneous liver biopsy was then performed. Histology of the liver biopsy showed entirely effaced architecture of hepatic parenchymal and portal areas by inflammation and necrosis. Central caseating necrosis was surrounded by lymphocytes, multinucleate giant cells, and epithelioid macrophages . This revealed epithelioid granulomas with a background of caseating necrosis. Ziehl-Nelson staining showed acid-fast bacilli within the granulomas .