We present the case of a 76 year old female who was referred for TAVR with an extensive medical history including right upper and middle lobectomy for bronchial carcinoma 8 years previously, long-standing GOLD IV COPD with steroid treatment and recurrent exacerbations, coronary three vessel disease with a history of several myocardial infarctions and repeated PCI, diabetes mellitus, carotid artery disease, and peripheral artery disease that had been treated by stenting and bypass grafting. Her Euroscore II was 3.92 / log Euroscore I 26.45%.
TF-TAVR was not feasible due to multiple stenoses of the iliofemoral vessels with presence of several bypasses and a stent protruding from the right common iliac artery into the iliac bifurcation. The subclavian, direct aortic and trans-caval approaches were considered but deemed not feasible due to a stenosis of the left subclavian artery, a heavily calcified, abnormally located ascending aorta, and a heavily calcified abdominal aorta with an acute-angled kink and chronically dissected aneurysm, respectively. CT additionally showed that the mediastinal structures were dislocated rightwards to such a degree that the apex could not be reached through the typical anterolateral incision used for TA-TAVR . The apex was therefore accessed through an untypical subxiphoidal incision without affecting the sternum or the ribs . Pre-incision transthoracic echocardiography allowed us to locate the apex directly below the xyphoid, allowing the incision to be kept extremely small. TA-TAVR using a 23 mm Sapiens 3 (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, USA) valve was performed in standard fashion without complications. After the procedure, the patient took a prolonged course due to pneumonia requiring re-intubation and was finally discharged after an ICU stay and total postoperative hospital stay of 6 and 17 days, respectively. Follow-up after 4 months showed her in a good functional condition with a mean aortic valve gradient of 7 mmHg and no relevant aortic regurgitation.