A 73-year-old Japanese man presented with a 2-month history of a mass at the left abdominal wall. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a 7.5 × 7.4 × 6.6-cm tumor involving the left 10th and 11th ribs and extending to the surface of the paraspinal muscles and quadratus lumborum. The tumor showed iso-intensity with muscles on T1-weighted imaging and mixed high and low intensity on T2-weighted imaging . He subsequently underwent positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET-CT), and the standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of the tumor was 3.96. No regional or distant metastases were identified.
As a needle biopsy confirmed a diagnosis of sarcoma, wide resection and abdominal wall reconstruction with a pedicled anterolateral thigh flap were performed . Histologically, pleomorphic and spindled tumor cells with often atypical mitoses proliferated in a myxoid stroma . The tumor also focally showed elongated capillaries with a prominent myxoid matrix. Necrosis was also observed. On immunohistochemistry, desmin, S100, αSMA, myogenin, and MDM2 were negative. The final diagnosis was high-grade myxofibrosarcoma.
Four months after the initial operation, the patient noticed a 7.0-mm cutaneous tumor on his left upper arm. The tumor was resected and diagnosed as sebaceoma . In addition, 18 months after the initial operation, periodic CT detected local recurrence at the left abdominal wall with a 5.0-cm soft tissue mass, and second wide resection of the recurrent tumor was performed. The resected tumor showed an identical histopathological phenotype to the primary myxofibrosarcoma. At the final follow-up, one year after the reoperation, there was no evidence of recurrence or metastasis.
This patient (Proband, familial number: III-4) had a history of rectal cancer (at 47 years old), transverse colon cancer (at 51 years old), duodenal cancer (at 54 years old), descending colon cancer (at 71 years old), and pancreatic cancer (at 72 years old) . Both descending colon and pancreatic cancer were moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma, and the stages were IIA and III, respectively. His brother (III-2) developed colorectal cancer (at 42 years old), and his sister (III-3) had colorectal cancer (at 42 years old), endometrial cancer (in her 40’s), and pancreatic cancer (at 66 years old), ultimately dying at 68 years old. His maternal uncle (II-4) also had colorectal cancer and died at 60 years old. He met both the Amsterdam II criteria for identifying LS and the revised Bethesda guidelines for testing colorectal tumors for microsatellite instability (MSI) [, ]. We therefore performed an IHC analysis of MMR proteins using surgical specimens from his descending colon cancer, pancreatic cancer, myxofibrosarcoma, and sebaceoma .
The loss of expression of MLH1 and PMS2 proteins was detected in all tumor cells, whereas the expression of MSH2 and MSH6 was retained, although the expression of MSH6 was attenuated in the pancreatic tumor, suggesting that all of his tumors had an MLH1 genetic alteration. In addition, an MSI analysis in tissues from myxofibrosarcoma with the Promega panel (BAT25, BAT26, NR21, NR24, MONO27) revealed MSI-H, with four out of five microsatellites being unstable . We subsequently confirmed MLH1 promoter unmethylation in tissue samples of myxofibrosarcoma by Na-bisulfite PCR/SSCP.
Furthermore, after obtaining consent, germline genetic testing for the MMR genes was performed. RT-PCR/direct sequencing detected a 22-bp duplication in exon 12 of the MLH1 gene, resulting in a frameshift variant (NM_000249.4: c.1233_1254dup22, p.Ile412CysfsTer5) . Signals from the mutated allele were enhanced in puromycin-treated samples, showing the presence of nonsense-mediated mRNA decay in samples without puromycin treatment. This variant was validated in the analysis using genomic DNA samples . Although this variant was not reported in ClinVar, it was regarded as a pathogenic variant because of interrupting protein synthesis (PVS1 in ACMG/AMP guideline) and absence in population database (PM2). In the analysis using MLPA, no difference in the total copy numbers of MLH1 was observed.
Based on these results, the patient was diagnosed with MTS, a subtype of LS, with the MLH1 PGV. His son (IV-7) and daughter (IV-8) underwent genetic testing, but the frameshift variant of MLH1 gene observed in the proband was not detected in either of them .