An 87-year-old Japanese man presented with gross hematuria. Urine cytology was class IV. Cystoscopy revealed a single sessile tumor, approximately 20 mm in diameter, on the right-side wall of the bladder . The bladder tumor was resected via transurethral resection. The pathologic result was high-grade invasive urothelial carcinoma, stage pT1. The patient was followed regularly.
Cystoscopy revealed multiple polypoid yellow tumors that had developed on the anterior wall of the bladder 6 months after the first TUR-Bt . This recurrence location was different from the previous surgery site. Urine cytology findings were negative. Computed tomography revealed no bladder tumor or any upper urinary tract abnormalities because the tumors were very small. TUR-Bt was performed again. A deposit of eosinophilic amorphous material was beneath the nonneoplastic urothelium in the urinary bladder, based on H&E-stained sections observed microscopically . In the Congo red-stained section, the deposit's color ranged from red to orange under non-polarized light, which suggested the presence of amyloid protein . Subjecting the section to the KMnO4 process resulted in the loss of reactivity for Congo red staining . Immunohistochemistry revealed that the deposit was positive for AA . We diagnosed the deposit as AA amyloidosis of the bladder. The evaluation of this patient's underlying diseases of AA amyloidosis revealed a C-reactive protein level <0.03 mg/dL and no inflammatory conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis or uncharacterized inflammatory disease.
The heart is commonly involved in amyloidosis. The patient's electrocardiogram showed arrhythmias (e.g., nonsustained ventricular tachycardia and premature ventricular contractions), and echocardiography revealed fair left ventricular contraction and left ventricular hypertrophy, aortic valve stenosis and aortic regurgitation, and valve tricuspid regurgitation at the preoperative examination of the initial TUR-Bt. After detecting AA amyloidosis of the bladder, we consulted his cardiovascular physician regarding the reason for his cardiac problem. We ultimately concluded that his cardiac condition was most likely caused by amyloidosis. The patient was diagnosed with systemic AA amyloidosis of the heart and bladder. However, a cardiac biopsy was not conducted owing to the patient's advanced age and cost. Therefore, we could not definitively determine a diagnosis of cardiac amyloidosis. At 12 months postoperatively, he had no recurrence of carcinoma or amyloidosis of the bladder.