An 85-year-old man with type B non-Hodgkin lymphoma currently undergoing chemotherapy was referred to the department of cardiology for spontaneous intravascular fracture of his right subclavian port-a-cath and tubulure migration into the right ventricle. His past medical history included arterial hypertension, atrial fibrillation, ischaemic stroke, and bioprosthetic aortic valve replacement due to aortic stenosis 5 years earlier. On admission, he was asymptomatic with normal vital signs. His blood pressure was 128/65 mmHg, heart rate was 73 beats per minute and irregular, body temperature was 36.7°C, and oxygen saturation was 97% whilst breathing ambient air. His physical examination revealed ejection systolic cardiac murmurs and symmetric positive bilateral airway entry. His medication list included low molecular weight heparin, lercanidipine, ramipril, simvastatin, lansoprazole, and alfuzosin. The port-a-cath was initially inserted on 18 January 2022 for his chemotherapy, and the first chemo infusion was successfully performed on 24 January 2022. Concerns were raised on the next session of chemotherapy after failing to achieve blood return during attempted access of his port. The clinical suspicion became stronger following chest X-ray that revealed a new linear opacification on the heart reflecting catheter dislocation . A transthoracic echocardiography was requested, and it confirmed a distal embolization of fractured catheter into the right ventricle . Thereafter, we review the previously performed imaging post port placement including chest X-ray and computed tomography (CT) that showed an unremarkable intact port-a-cath with no evidence of the described linear cardiac opacification. After a multidisciplinary team, it was deemed a feasible option to retrieve the dislocated catheter by using the lasso (Cook Needle’s Eye Snare) technique without doing a CT scan. The patient’s informed consent was given. A long standard guide wire was advanced through the right common femoral vein, and traction was applied on the end of the intervention catheter which was successfully manipulated to adjust the direction of the loop to capture the port-a-cath fragment . Following the successful retrieval of the embolized catheter of 16 cm of length, the port reservoir was also extracted. A new functioning chemo port was lately implanted by the vascular surgeon via the left internal jugular vein.