A 77-year-old-man presented with several months of headache and progressive loss of volitional activity. He had normal language function, normal cranial nerves, normal motor/sensory function, and mild gait disturbance. Noncontrast computed tomography (CT) scan and magnetic resonance (MR) imaging of the head revealed a giant thrombosed DACA aneurysm with thickened calcified walls and significant perifocal edema in the right frontal lobe [Figure and ]. Three-dimensional MR angiography demonstrated that a thrombosed aneurysm with a maximum diameter of 6 cm was located at the left A2–A3 junction . The left pericallosal artery (PcaA) and left callosomarginal artery (CmaA) originated from the aneurysmal neck. The surgical strategy for treatment was to first occlude blood flow into the aneurysm by clipping the neck while preserving patency of the left PcaA and CmaA, and then to eliminate the mass effect in the right frontal lobe by removing the intra-aneurysmal thrombus and aneurysmal wall. Prior to surgery, we considered as an alternative clipping aneurysmal resection with the left PcaA-right CmaA side-to-side anastomosis and the left A2-CmaA end-to-end anastomosis.
The patient was placed in a supine position with a head elevation of 15°. The head was fixed with Sugita Head Holder. A left-side extended bicoronal skin incision was made. A left frontal craniotomy was performed with an extension of 2 cm across the midline to the right side. The dura mater was incised only on the left side. The arachnoid trabeculations and interdigitating gyri of the interhemispheric fissure were opened sharply by microscissors and bipolar technique. The left A2, PcaA, and CmaA were identified. The aneurysm originated just from the left A2–A3 junction and the major part of the aneurysmal dome invaginated into the right frontal lobe. While almost entire lumen of the aneurysm was thrombosed, the near-neck space was nonthrombosed, which was confirmed by pulsed Doppler. First, a bayonet-shaped clip (7 mm) was applied to the neck but it slipped onto the left A2, which caused the reduction of blood flow both in the left PcaA and CmaA. Immediately after this, the aneurysmal wall was incised and the intra-aneurysmal thrombus was evacuated using the cavitron ultrasonic surgical aspiration (CUSA) until the nonthrombosed near-neck space was exposed. This procedure provided adequate pliability and flexibility of the neck for clipping. The second clip was added parallel and adjacent to the first clip on the aneurysm side, and then the first clip was removed. The blood flow of the left PcaA significantly improved but that of the left CmaA was still poor. In the same manner as mentioned above, a third clip was applied closer to the aneurysm and the second clip was removed. Finally, the blood flow of the left CmaA became sufficient. This sequential, progressive clipping technique following intra-aneurysmal thrombectomy is illustrated in . All the residual thrombus and aneurysmal wall were subsequently removed. Hemosiderin deposits were found in the removal cavity of the right frontal lobe, indicating that there was prior subclinical rupture of the aneurysm. After carefully checking for hemostasis, the closure was performed in the usual fashion.
The patient had no additional neurological deficits immediately after surgery. Postoperative CT scan and MR imaging demonstrated no residual aneurysm and resolution of the right frontal edema [Figure and ]. A postoperative digital subtraction angiogram showed complete neck clipping of the aneurysm with preservation of all branches . The patient's gait and volitional activity significantly improved. An angiogram at 2 months revealed no recurrent aneurysm and good flow in both the left PcaA and CmaA. The patient continues to do well 6 months after operation.