A 12-year-old male presented at a massage clinic with pain and swelling in his left knee, which worsened the same night. At the orthopedic clinic, radiography performed on the following day revealed cortical bone destruction, osteoblastic changes, and periosteal reactions, consistent with conventional osteosarcoma . For further examination and treatment, the patient was referred to our hospital 5 days after the massage therapy. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed iso-signal intensity on T1-weighted images and high-signal intensity on T2-weighted images of the left distal femur; it also revealed an extraskeletal mass . Furthermore, MRI revealed diffuse signal alteration in the muscles and the neurovascular areas surrounding the lesion in the distal femur; hence, hemorrhage and dissemination of the tumor were considered . Consistent with osteosarcoma, open biopsy followed by histopathological examination revealed tumor cell proliferation with extensive pleomorphism and mitoses . Seventeen days after the massage therapy, computed tomography revealed multiple metastatic lesions in the lung and liver . Thoracic MRI revealed multiple metastases in the thoracic spine . 18Fluorine-labeled fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography revealed tumor metastasis in the femur and multiple metastases in the thoracic and lumbar spine, liver, and pelvis . The patient underwent chemotherapy comprising ifosfamide, carboplatin, pirarubicin, etoposide, doxorubicin, and methotrexate . During the second course of chemotherapy, paraplegia due to spinal metastases developed and progressed. After eight courses of chemotherapy, the metastatic lesions in the lung and liver reduced in size , although considerable primary tumor growth was observed . Subsequently, the patient received hip disarticulation 6 months after the initial diagnosis, and he then underwent radiation therapy for metastatic lesions in the liver and sacrum. However, metastatic lesion growth was observed, and the patient died due to multiple metastases 13 months after the initial diagnosis.