A 12-months old boy was hospitalized because of a mass in the sacrococcygeal region. The boy was born full term by normal vaginal delivery with a birth weight of 3050 g. The sacrococcygeal mass was detected by prenatal US at 34 week’s gestational age. There was no family history of twins. The patient had no other congenital anomalies. On a physical examination, the boy was well-nourished, except for a lower limb-like structure that measured 35 × 25 cm, with a scrotum like structure in the lower back and buttock of the boy . A complete blood count, kidney-liver function test, and tumor markers including β-HCG, AFP and CEA were within reference range. CT showed a large, complex mass with a bony structure resembling sacrococcygeal bone, hip bone and the femur . The mass had cystic and solid components with blood supply from the aorta of the boy . Spinal dysraphisms of the sacrum of the host were observed and adipose tissue in the epidural space was continuous with mass . MRI showed the mass was connected to the dilated sacral canal of the boy. This resulted in a tethered cord and the conus medullaris was terminated at the level of the fourth lumbar vertebra. The filum terminale was thickened and had been moved to the sacral canal . MRI also showed the mass had bony structure, cystic lesions, soft tissue components similar to skeletal muscle around joints and bones and abundant percutaneous adipose tissue. No anomalies in other systems including the urinary system, the cardiac system and the bowels were detected from abdominal CT, ultrasound, echocardiography and a Barium enema examination. No obvious mass effect was found because the mass was almost exophytic. A preoperative diagnosis of FIF was made and surgery was performed to remove the mass. Lysis of the tethered cord and sacral canal plasty were also performed. The patient’s parents agreed to perform the treatment that the boy received. On gross examination, the mass had malformed trunk, buttock, intestine and 1 lower limb with 1 toe in the foot. Upon incision, bones, soft tissues, malformed intestinal tissues were observed. Histopathological examination of the mass showed skin, nerves, bone and bone marrow, adipose tissue, skeletal muscle and intestinal tissue. The postoperative period was uneventful. The child was in good health during a follow-up of half a year and there was no evidence of recurrence.