A 44-year-old Caucasian male with history of idiopathic cardiomyopathy, hypertension, atrial fibrillation, and depression presented to the hospital with nausea, vomiting, and decreased appetite for 2 weeks. Since discharge after undergoing radiofrequency catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation 2 weeks ago, he has been having nausea, multiple episodes of vomiting, bloating, and constipation. The patient denied any fever, cough, shortness of breath, abdominal pain, or recent use of antibiotics or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). His only medications at the time of admission were omeprazole, amiodarone, ramipril, and Eliquis. Notably, the patient had undergone direct current cardioversion (DCCV) of atrial fibrillation 8 months previously and cardiac ablation 5 months previously due to persistent symptoms.
On the day of admission, physical examination revealed soft, distended, and nontender abdomen. The patient was afebrile with a blood pressure of 112/81 mm Hg, pulse of 74 beats per minute (regular), and respiratory rate of 20 breaths per minute. Laboratory work is shown in Table .
He had an abdominal X-ray (AXR) that showed a distended stomach as shown in Fig. .
The patient was admitted and he underwent an esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD), which showed a moderate amount of food residue in the gastric body and fundus with a hypertensive pylorus, but the scope was able to traverse it . He was discharged home on a low-residue diet, metoclopramide, and pantoprazole.
A repeat EGD was done a week later as symptoms were not relieved, which again showed a large amount of solid food in the stomach and the antrum could only be partially evaluated. The procedure was aborted due to the high risk of aspiration. EGD was repeated the next day under general anesthesia with endotracheal intubation. It showed spastic pyloric channel, and 10 units botulinum toxin was injected into the four quadrants of the pylorus as shown in Fig. . The pylorus was observed for 5 minutes for response, and eventually the scope was able to traverse the pyloric channel into the duodenal bulb.