An 18-year-old male patient was referred to the dental clinic of the Federal University of Goiás (Goiânia, GO, Brazil) with a chief complaint of a “discomfort on the right posterior gingiva” for over a month. At physical examination, a small expansion and redness were found in the buccal and lingual cortical plates of the right mandible in the region of teeth #29, #30, and #31, but no signs of pain or inflammation were observed . The overlying mucosa appeared intact.
Periapical and panoramic radiographs showed periapical radiolucency ranging from 4 to 5 mm in the mesial and distal roots of teeth #29 and #30, a slight rarefaction of the inter-dental alveolar bone, a clear periodontal ligament space widening, and an evident loss of lamina dura .
The patient reported no history of dental trauma. Neither cracks on the crowns of teeth #29 and #30, particularly on the mesial and distal marginal ridges, nor previous restorative treatments, were found. Pulp vitality testing using tetrafluoroethane spray (Endo-Ice; Hygenic Corp, Akron, OH) confirmed positive response in all teeth associated with radiolucent lesions, and therefore root canals were not treated.
Cone beam computed tomography (CBCT) images were acquired. The imaging examinations showed undefined periapical osteolytic lesion, represented by a hypodense lesion with hyperdense areas inside, and thinning of the lingual cortical plate, associated with the roots of teeth #29 and #30. Alterations in trabecular bone were also seen ( and ).
Based on location of the lesion, its radiographic findings and the fact that periapical inflammatory lesions are the most frequent injuries in the affected region, the initial diagnosis included periapical abscess. However, given that the lesion had no relationship with pulp necrosis associated with the previous mentioned clinical and radiographic characteristics, intraosseous malignancies were considered, and an incisional biopsy was carried out. Microscopic evaluation showed a proliferation of round to spindle-shaped cells, with occasional cellular pleomorphism and variable osteoid production . Additionally, a focal area presented proliferation of atypical chondroblastic cells. Immunohistochemical reaction with Ki-67 marker showed evident cellular activity in the specimen . Based on microscopic findings, a final diagnosis of chondroblastic osteosarcoma was confirmed.
The patient returned to the dental clinic 10 days after the incisional biopsy presenting with a considerable enlargement of the region. At this time, the patient was referred to Araújo Jorge Cancer Hospital (Goiânia, GO, Brazil). The treatment consisted of hemimandibulectomy with wide surgical margins and adjuvant chemotherapy.
After surgical treatment, the patient underwent reconstruction of the right mandible with a fibular graft . At the follow-up one year later, a bone scintigraphy was performed and no signs of bone metastases were seen .