An 82-year-old man with no relevant medical history was admitted to our hospital with a diagnosis of acute left thoracic empyema. Computed tomography revealed a solitary mass measuring 7 × 5 × 3 cm in the anterior mediastinum . The computed tomography findings suggested no association between the mass and the empyema. The empyema resolved quickly after thoracoscopic surgery. The patient subsequently underwent further investigation of the mediastinal mass in accordance with the preoperatively provided informed consent. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a high-intensity signal in a large part and a low-intensity signal in the remaining part in the mass on diffusion-weighted images, which confirmed that the lesion was a solid tumor with a liquid component, most likely a high-grade thymoma or thymic carcinoma . No other lesions were detected in the metastatic workup. At 4 months after the empyema surgery, thymectomy was performed through a median sternotomy. The tumor was completely resected and appeared well encapsulated, despite a small area of pericardial adhesion that was excised en bloc. A cut surface of the resected specimen appeared solid and dark-brownish, suggesting extensive pigmentation of the tumor components . Histologic examination revealed a well-circumscribed tumor constituted by organoid or nesting proliferation of spindle-shaped cells with necrosis . There were 2–4 mitotic figures per 10 high-power fields. Dark-brownish pigmentation was easily identifiable in the macrophages and dendritic cells but was less obvious in the tumor cells, reflecting the amount of melanin pigment contained in these cells, as confirmed by Fontana–Masson staining . Immunohistochemical study revealed the epithelial nature of the tumor cells based on positive reactivity with cytokeratins AE1/AE3 and CAM5.2, but also revealed their neuroendocrine nature based on positive reactivity with synaptophysin and CD56 . In addition, there were numerous sustentacular cells surrounding the tumor cell nests, as confirmed by positivity for S-100. The Ki-67 labeling index was 18.7%. Despite positive reactivity of the tumor cells with vimentin, Melan-A, and HMB-45, melanoma was eliminated as a differential diagnosis based on positivity for the two above-mentioned cytokeratin markers and negativity for S-100. The tumor cells also showed negative reactions with epithelial membrane antigen, p63, p40, CD5, CD68, CD57, CD34, smooth muscle actin, CD99, leukocyte common antigen, glial fibrillary acidic protein, and carcinoembryonic antigen. Based on these findings and the opinions of external experts via personal communication, the tumor was finally diagnosed as a pigmented atypical carcinoid of thymic origin. The margins were clear and there was no invasion to the pericardium. However, the tumor had spread to the pericapsular fat tissue and one of the lymph nodes in the perithymic fat (T1aN1M0, stage IVa). Endocrinology laboratory tests exhibited normal values concerning the adrenal corticoid function. The patient has been doing well without adjuvant therapy. No signs of recurrence have been detected in the 9 months after surgery.