A 47-year-old man was bitten by a venomous snake on his right index finger at his home, in a mountainous area, when he was trying to get rid of the animal. One hour after the bite, he was sent to a local hospital for first aid. The staff of the hospital showed pictures of snakes to the patient, who identified the snake that had bitten him as Viridovipera stejnegeri .
Then, the man received four vials of bivalent hemorrhagic antivenom. Because of pain and swelling on the right hand and elbow, he was transferred to our ED for further treatment. Initial clinical examination revealed stable vital signs with a normal level of consciousness. No dyspnea or muscle weakness was observed. However, swelling and tenderness were observed on his right index finger and elbow. A fang mark was observed on the right index finger. On arrival to the ED, laboratory investigation revealed a platelet count of 142,000/μL, prothrombin time (PT) >100 s (international normalized ratio > 10), and activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) > 100 s . Both creatinine and bilirubin levels were normal. We found that he had been a hepatitis C virus carrier for several years. He also had liver cirrhosis, Child–Pugh score A and diabetes mellitus. A surgical history of splenectomy and left nephrectomy caused by a trauma accident 10 years ago was also noted. He was under outpatient follow up of the gastroenterology department without coagulopathy noted before this episode of snake envenoming. Two vials of bivalent hemorrhagic antivenom were given. Blood transfusion with two units of fresh frozen plasma (FFP) and one vial of vitamin K (10 mg) were administered. Fluid replacement therapy with isotonic normal saline (0.9%) was also used for treatment.
The patient was admitted to the general ward and continued to receive antivenom, vitamin K and FFP until the PT level improved. On day 5, the fibrinogen level was low at < 50 mg/dL, and the fibrin degradation product (FDP) was > 80 μg/mL. Cryoprecipitate was given for several days until the fibrinogen level improved. The local toxic effect on the right hand improved. He was discharged on day 9. The man returned to our outpatient department 2 weeks after the snakebite. The laboratory data revealed that PT, APTT, fibrinogen and FDP were all within the normal range. He returned to work 1 week later. He was under outpatient department follow up and the laboratory data of PT, APTT, albumin and bilirubin level were all within normal range 1 year later.