A previously healthy 8-year-old boy with a fever and cough lasting for 1 week was admitted to the Department of Pediatrics in Jinhua Hospital of Zhejiang University. Four days prior to admission, the symptoms did not improve after intravenous antibiotic treatment at a local clinic, but more detailed medical history was unavailable. The patient reported no history of cardiovascular disease, coagulation disorders or any other systemic immune disorder, nor was there any recent history of trauma. The patient’s family history was unremarkable. He was alert on admission. His weight was 24 kg, his body temperature was 37.8° Celsius, his pulse rate was 112/min, his respiratory rate was 24/min and his blood pressure was 108/65 mmHg. A physical examination revealed mild congestion of his throat and moderate enlargement of his tonsils. A chest examination revealed coarse breathing sounds and decreased sounds on the right side without any respiratory distress. No crackles were heard in the lung. The neurological examination and the rest of the systemic physical examination were normal.
A laboratory investigation revealed a white blood cell count of 9900/cubic mm3, with 79.3% neutrophils and 10.2% lymphocytes as well as hemoglobin concentration of 11.3 g/dl and a platelet count of 476,000/cubic mm3. The serum biochemistry and lipid profiles were all within normal ranges. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 22 mm/hr, and C-reactive protein (CRP) was 44.2 mg/dl (normal <8 mg/dl). Antibody titers of IgM to M. pneumonia measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) were negative on admission. The chest radiograph demonstrated that there was a pneumonia patch over his right lower lung lobe and a small right-sided pleural effusion . The patient was considered to have severe pneumonia, probably due to M. pneumonia, and was given intravenous azithromycin, cefotaxime, ambroxol hydrochloride and dexamethasone. The cough began to improve, but the high body temperature persisted. A computed tomography (CT) on the third day of hospitalization showed a large high-intensity lesion in his right lower lung lobe, stenosis of the lower right bronchial lumen and right-sided pleural effusion . A chest ultrasound examination on the 4th day of hospitalization showed a bilateral pleural effusion. On the 6th day of hospitalization, the patient cried suddenly and shook his right upper limb after intravenous ambroxol hydrochloride for 10 min. Ambroxol hydrochloride was stopped immediately and changed to azithromycin because of the possibility of adverse reaction to a drug. The shaking of his right upper limb improved, but he was still crying and complained of blurred vision in his left eye. After stopping the intravenous azithromycin because of the possibility of allergic reaction of azithromycin and shifting to water soluble vitamins, the patient was quiet. The physical examination revealed a garden bilateral pupil with an equal 3-mm diameter, and reaction to light was normal at the initial presentation. No headache, no vomiting, no talking disorders, no disturbance of consciousness, no twitching, no convulsions and no limb movement disorders occurred. The neurological examination showed normal muscle strength and muscle tone of limbs, but no pathologic reflex and no other abnormal signs on presentation. On the following day, the patient still complained of loss of vision in the left eye. The ophthalmologic examination showed no light perception and no pupillary reaction to light, but normal anterior segment and intraocular pressure in the left eye. Visual acuity was 1.0 in the right eye. The fundus examination revealed a cherry red spot with severe retinal edema at the macular and peripapillary area, and the optic disc was pale in the left eye, but the examination was normal in the right eye, suggesting central retinal artery occlusion in the left eye. The detailed neurological examination was perforemed as follows: the nasolabial fold was symmetric, and the tongue was midline protrusion; There was no deviation of the mandible, no involuntary movement; Limb muscle strength was grade IV, and muscular tension was normal; Knee reflex and abdominal reflex was normal, and pathological reflex were negative. Initially, he was given oxygen and a low molecular dextran treatment and carteolol hydrochloride to lower the intraocular pressure 29 h after the onset of vision complaint. Electrocardiogram, echocardiography, and Doppler ultrasound of the bilateral carotid artery and vertebral artery were all normal. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed an abnormal signal of the left lentiform nucleus, caudate nucleus and within the temporal lobe, suggesting an acute infarction of the brain including the above regions . He was prescribed tienam to escalate the anti-infection treatment, and early rehabilitation therapy with neurosupplement treatment was initiated, and prepared to transfer the patient to higher level hospital.
One day after the brain infarction, the patient was transferred to Children’s Hospital of Zhejiang University School of Medicine. Laboratory investigations revealed a normal serum coagulation test. The ESR was 105 mm/hr, and CRP was 106.0 mg/dl. The serum titer of the M. pneumoniae particle agglutination test (IgG and IgM) was more than 1:320 (normal <1:80). The analysis of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) showed a leukocyte count of 40/cumm, with 85% mononuclear cells and 15% multinucleated cells as well as a [Cl−] of 112.6 mmol/L and initial positive qualitative protein. The test of the acid-fast bacilli of the CSF and Cryptococcus neoformans were negative. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for M. pneumoniae of the CSF was negative. The pathogen DNA detection of M. pneumoniae from respiratory secretion was positive (4.2 × 105 copies). The bacteriological cultures of blood, CSF and pleural effusion were sterile. The PPD test on skin was negative. The levels of serologic cytokines, such as interleukin-6 (IL-6) 159.7 (normal 1.7–16.6) and IL-10 7.6 (normal 2.0–4.0), were obviously increased, whereas the levels of IL-2, IL-4, TNF-ɑ, IFN-ɤ were all normal. The ophthalmologic examination showed no light perception, no pupillary reaction to light and a cherry red spot with severe retinal edema in the macular and peripapillary area in the left eye, but no issues in the right eye. A chest X-ray showed a high patchy density over his right lower lung lobe and a large right-sided pleural effusion. The right rib diaphragm angle was lost. The heart shadow had no obvious increase, and the left diaphragm was normal on the second day after transfer . On the basis of his recent medical history and diagnostic workups, we concluded that the diagnosis was acute severe pneumonia with pleural effusion, cerebral infarction and CRAO in the left eye associated with M. pneumoniae infection. Therapy with oxygen inhalation, Tazocin (Piperacillin Sodium and Tazobactam Sodium) antibiotics, low molecular dextran treatment, methylprednisone, gamma globulin, mannitol and nicotinic acid was given, and atropine was injected in the left retrobulbar. The body temperature was normal, CSF was also returned to normal on the 6th day and the cough had disappeared on the 11th day after transfer. MRI of the brain indicated an abnormal signal in the left lentiform nucleus and caudate nucleus (patchy long T1 and long T2 signal), suggesting infarction on the 10th day (not shown), and revealed a softening tendency of the lesions on the left basal ganglia on the 16th day after transfer. Ophthalmologic examination showed no light perception and no pupillary reaction to light, but the retinal edema subsided, the retinal artery was sclerosed, the optic disc was pale and the disc margin was slightly fuzzy at that time. During the 18 days of hospitalization in the children’s hospital, his respiratory symptoms totally subsided and he was discharged.
At the 2 week follow-up, his vision had deteriorated to no light perception OD in the left eye. The retinal cherry red spot had resolved, the disc boundary was clear and pale and the retinal edema had resolved remarkably, but the macular pigment was mildly disordered (not shown). At the 2-month follow-up, there was no light in the left eye, the fundus examination in the left eye revealed the optic disc was clear and pale and the retina was normal, but the macular pigment was severely disordered . The fundus examination was normal in the right eye.