A 84 years old woman with hypertension, chronic vascular disease, chronic cardiac ischemia was admitted because of a dome-shaped bluish skin lesion in her chin of 2x2 cm, characterized by rapid growth. A skin biopsy showed poorly differentiated cells with scarce cytoplasm and vesicular nuclei with inconspicuous nucleoli. High mitotic index and apoptotic figures were present. Immunohistochemical reactions were positive for cytokeratin 8 and 20 and neuroendocrine markers chromogranin, synaptophysin and CD56/N-CAM; TTF-1 was not expressed. A diagnosis of MCC was established .
Total body computed tomography scan and bone scintigraphy excluded mandibular infiltration, regional or systemic metastases. The lesion was staged cT2N0M0. The patient underwent surgical excision of the tumour, bilateral selective neck dissection (levels I–III) and reconstruction with radial forearm free flap. The histopathological examination of resected specimen confirmed a stage IIA (pT2N0M0) MCC and surgical margins free of tumour. The patient refused proposed postoperative radiotherapy, whereas the systemic therapy was not indicated due to co-morbidities.
Two months after the treatment, mass in the area of previous surgery extending into a submandibular region was documented. A biopsy of the mass confirmed recurrent MCC . The re-operation was not an option because of the tumour extension, and radiotherapy was again refused by the patient. She was offered a palliative treatment with ECT. The treatment was performed according to the standard operating procedures of the ESOPE. Intravenous bleomycin infusion of 15.000 IU/m2 was administered eight minutes before delivery of electric pulses under general anaesthesia by means of a hexagonal electrode (length 25 mm) connected to a generator (Cliniporator™ - IGEA srl, Carpi, [MO], Italy). The lesion with 1 cm tumour-free margin was treated by multiple direct insertions of the electrode. The pulses were completed within 28 minutes after the infusion of bleomycin.
The patient was evaluated four weeks after the treatment: 50% reduction of the original tumour volume was observed, corresponding to a partial response according to RECIST criteria. The next ECT treatment resulted in 80% volume reduction compared to the original lesion .
Due to the good response and tolerability of the procedure, two additional ECT treatments were performed during the following sixteen months, which resulted in a good local control of the tumour .
Unfortunately, just after the fourth ECT treatment (and 20 months after the first ECT session), lung metastases were diagnosed. The patient died one month later due to heart failure which was unrelated to MCC.
No major complications were observed during or after ECT treatments. The only recorded side effect was moderate pain after the first ECT session, easily managed with peroral non-opioids. The patient reported a good quality of life until the last two months before she died when severe pain, controlled by opioids, appeared.