A 29-year-old man of Arab origin presented to a dermatology clinic with a complaint of increased sweating, with heavier involvement of his inguinal region, axilla, and lower back. The complaint was associated with a transient hot sensation and erythema over the affected area. Both complaints appeared for the first time 3 years ago and had progressed since then. His symptoms continued on a daily basis without diurnal variation and were aggravated by hot weather, caffeine, and anxiety. His sweating complaint was so severe (score 4 based on Hyperhidrosis Disease Severity Scale) that he had to change his clothes several times a day. This negatively affected his social interaction, quality of life, and the ability to work. He tried several over-the-counter antiperspirants with no significant improvement. He had no symptoms suggesting hyperthyroidism (including tremors, palpitation, and frequent bowel movements), tuberculosis/malignancy (fever, fatigue, loss of weight, and cough), or eczema/allergy (including skin changes, pruritus, and wheezing). He was not a tobacco smoker or alcohol user. He was single with no sexual history. He was socially and economically stable and living with family. He had no previous surgeries with the exception of an appendectomy when he was a teenager. He claimed that he was not taking any medications. His family history revealed no similar conditions and was negative for tuberculosis.
On examination, he was conscious and oriented with stable vital signs and without orthostatic changes. His chest was clear with no signs of infection or wheezing. Heart and blood vessels were normal with no signs of heart failure. His abdomen was soft and lax with no tenderness, organomegaly, or masses. His central nervous system was grossly intact. Joints were normal with no swelling or tenderness. There was no lymphadenopathy, jaundice, or pallor. Laboratory findings showed normal complete blood count, sedimentation rate, electrolytes, blood glucose, liver function, and renal function. A lipid profile showed normal low-density lipoprotein (LDL) and high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol and triglycerides but slightly high total cholesterol. A bone profile showed normal calcium, phosphate, alkaline phosphatase, and parathyroid hormone but low vitamin D. His uric acid just crossed the upper limit. Thyroid function tests showed normal levels of thyroxine (FT4, 13.8 pmol/L) and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH, 3.8 mU/L).
He was treated by topical antiperspirants containing aluminum chloride (Drysol) but without much improvement. To respond to his request of symptomatic treatment of the embarrassing inguinal hyperhidrosis, 50 U Botox (botulinum toxin A) was injected into each inguinal area after localization of sweating activity using a starch-iodine test. Injections were done using local anesthetic, approximately 1 to 2 cm apart, and were well tolerated with no complaint of pain or discomfort. He experienced some improvement in the inguinal hyperhidrosis for the first 3 months after the injections, but then the condition worsened.
He was then referred to an endocrinology clinic to rule out secondary causes of hyperhidrosis and hot flushes. He was reassessed and laboratory tests were repeated with no remarkable changes compared with the initial assessment. To evaluate endocrine causes of hyperhidrosis, a detailed hormonal profile was examined and showed normal thyroid function (FT4 and TSH), adrenal function (cortisol and dehydroepiandrosterone) and reproductive function (follicle-stimulating hormone, luteinizing hormone, testosterone, progesterone, estradiol, and prolactin), and insulin-like growth factor. In addition, to assess the presence of neuroendocrine tumors, a 24-hour urine collection was examined for 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid and vanillylmandelic acid and his blood was examined for chromogranin. The results of the last three tests were high (95.1 umol/day, 104.4 umol/day, and 8.0 nmol/L, respectively), suggesting the presence of carcinoid or other neuroendocrine tumors. Therefore, a series of tests was done to confirm the presence and locate the site of such tumors. Computed tomography of his chest, abdomen, and pelvis was normal. A lower gastrointestinal endoscopy and bronchoscopy were normal. A whole body octreotide scan (somatostatin receptor scintigraphy) showed small focal increase of tracer uptake in his liver. However, single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) scan magnetic resonance imaging of his liver was unremarkable. In addition, repeated blood chromogranin A and 24-hour urine 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid tests done 3 months later were normal (3.0 nmol/L and 26.2 umol/day, respectively).
After ruling out secondary causes, he was diagnosed as having primary generalized hyperhidrosis and hot flushes. The endocrinologist started my patient on oral glycopyrrolate (Robinul) 2 mg twice a day for 3 months. However, his hyperhidrosis and hot flushes did not improve and he was additionally complaining of anticholinergic side effects of glycopyrrolate such as dry mouth and constipation. The glycopyrrolate was then replaced with oral clonidine 0.15 mg twice a day. Clonidine was well tolerated without remarkable side effects. After he was started on clonidine he had regular blood pressure monitoring which showed no evidence of hypotension and he quickly started to feel marked improvement in both his hyperhidrosis and hot flushes (score 1 based on Hyperhidrosis Disease Severity Scale). According to the last patient contact, the improvement was still maintained on clonidine 2 years later without remarkable side effects.