A 73-year-old male was referred to our hospital with worsening diabetes mellitus and pancreatic swelling. He had a history of hypertension, brain infarction, and atrial fibrillation. His son also has diabetes mellitus. He had been diagnosed with type 2 diabetes mellitus 30 years previously and treated with oral hypoglycemic agents. His diabetes has been well controlled with HbA1c levels between 6 and 7%. The patient has non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy, but no diabetic nephropathy or neuropathy. He had lost his appetite 7 months before referral and lost 10 kg bodyweight over 6 months. Diabetic control had worsened 3 months prior with HbA1c levels of 12.6%, and insulin therapy was started by his family physician. To control for malignancy, computed tomography (CT) was performed, showing diffuse swelling of the pancreas.
On admission, the patient’s general condition was fair, and he had no abdominal or back pain. The body mass index (BMI) was 19.6 kg/m2 and blood pressure was 121/80 mmHg. He was hospitalized in our department, and basal-bolus insulin therapy was initiated under a 1700-kcal/day diet calculated by BMI (28.7 kcal/kg). Pre-prandial blood glucose levels fluctuated severely between 50 and 300 mg/dl, and 12 units/day of human insulin was needed to maintain blood glucose. Blood tests showed insufficient insulin secretion: fasting plasma blood glucose, 141 mg/dl; plasma C-peptide (CPR), 0.14 ng/ml; CPR index (CPI), 0.14; urinary CPR, 4.1 μg/day .
Abdominal ultrasonography and contrast-enhanced CT imaging showed diffuse swelling of the pancreas and a capsule-like rim around the pancreas, both imaging features typical of AIP . Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) revealed diffuse irregular narrowing of the main pancreatic duct . 18F-FDG PET/CT showed diffuse tracer uptake (SUVmax, 3.22) in the pancreas . No FDG uptake in extra-pancreatic organs, such as the salivary glands or retroperitoneum, was confirmed.
Endoscopic-ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration (EUS-FNA) was performed to differentiate the pancreatic cancer. Pancreatic cytology revealed remarkable lymphoplasmacytic infiltration and fibrosis, a severely destroyed acinar structure, and absence of islets; however, there was no evidence of malignancy . IgG4 immunostaining revealed the presence of IgG4-positive plasma cells . The total number of IgG4-positive plasma cells was 33/HPF, and the IgG4/CD138 ratio was 82.5%. The anti-CD138 antibody was used to count plasma cells instead of the anti-IgG antibody .
Thus, we diagnosed our patient with type 1 AIP [, ]. He was initially treated with prednisolone 35 mg/day (0.6 mg/kg), which was tapered by 5 mg/day every 2 weeks according to the international consensus for the treatment of AIP . Pancreatic morphology was reevaluated with abdominal ultrasonography and CT scan after 12 weeks of prednisolone treatment, which showed marked improvement of the pancreatic swelling and capsule-like rim around the pancreas . Prednisolone was tapered to 15 mg/day over 12 weeks without recurrence.
Pancreatic endocrine and exocrine function was evaluated before and after 4 weeks of steroid therapy under adequate glycemic control. Considering the daily variance of blood glucose, we measured fasting plasma glucose (FPG) and C-peptide immunoreactivity (CPR) for several days, shown in the scatterplot; the gradient of the regression line increased after 4 weeks of steroid therapy . The CPR index also increased significantly , and the meal tolerance test showed improvement of the change in CPR (ΔCPR) . No recovery of the CPR secretory response was shown by 75 g OGTT, but the area under the curve (AUC)-CPR increased . These results suggested partial recovery of beta cell function due to steroid therapy.
An arginine tolerance test (ATT) was also performed to evaluate alpha cell function. Over 30 min, 30 g l-arginine hydrochloride was administered, and plasma glucagon levels were measured at 0, 10, 20, 30, 45, 60, and 90 min. Plasma glucagon levels were analyzed using both the conventional Glucagon RIA Kit (R-M; Millipore, Billerica, MA) and E-M sandwich ELISA kit (E-M; Mercodia Glucagon ELISA, Uppsala, Sweden). The plasma glucagon response was low and delayed before treatment; it improved remarkably, however, after 4 weeks of steroid therapy .
For further assessment of pancreatic islet damage, immunostaining of insulin and glucagon in pancreatic cytology specimens was added; a few beta and alpha cells were scattered within the fibrotic stroma without intact islet structures .
Regarding pancreatic exocrine function, pancreatic enzyme levels were low on admission . In addition, an N-benzoyl-l-tyrosyl-P-aminobenzoic acid (BT-PABA) test was performed before and again 4 weeks after steroid therapy; the excretion rate of p-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) was 23.1% and 22.4%, respectively (reference value: 73.4–90.4%). Suggesting no improvement of pancreatic exocrine insufficiency, the patient was administered pancrelipase 1350 mg/day to treat malabsorption.
The patient needed a maximum insulin dose of 32 units/day after initiating steroid therapy, but the dose was decreased to 21 units/day after prednisolone had been tapered to 15 mg/day with an HbA1c level of 6.7%. Insulin requirements are expected to decline along with prednisolone tapering.
All procedures reported here were in accordance with the ethical standards of the Wakayama Medical University Hospital Ethics Committee and with the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards. Informed consent was obtained from all subjects in the case report included in the study.