A 15-year-old girl came to our hospital when she started experiencing left leg pain while walking to school from her home on a daily basis which was initially gradual in onset, dull aching, intermittent and localized on the anterolateral aspect of the middle part of the left leg for one and a half year. The pain was aggravated by movement and relieved by analgesics. She described the trauma of falling to the ground a year prior, after which her pain increased from mild to severe, getting worse at night. She also noticed swelling in the same region for the last 1 year which is gradually increasing in size. She could move around only with the aid of a crutch. She had no history of fever, anorexia, weight loss, cough, hemoptysis, or any other constitutional symptoms. Her milestones of development are within the normal range. A general examination revealed no abnormality. Her vitals were normal with pulse = 76 bpm, blood pressure = 100/60 mmHg and respiratory rate = 17/min. On loco-regional examination, there was an oval tender swelling on the anterolateral aspect of the middle part of the left leg, measuring 6 × 7 cm, the temperature of which was raised with firm consistency, smooth surface, ill-defined margin, free to overlying skin but fixed to the underlying structure with no regional lymphadenopathy and intact distal neurovascular status. There was no presence of any discharging sinus or any muscle wasting around that area. Gait was antalgic but the range of motion of knee and ankle joints were within normal limit. Systemic examination revealed no abnormality.
Her initial laboratory investigations were done. On complete blood count, her Hb = 12.6 g/dL, WBC count13630/cu.mm, C- reactive protein was 2.16 mg/L. Her Parathyroid Hormone level = 120 pg/mL, S. calcium = 9.6 mg/dL, S.TSH = 1.22 μIU/mL, S. Inorganic phosphate = 2.5 mg/dL, S.LDH = 198 U/L, Alkaline Phosphatase = 86 U/L were within normal range and Mantoux test was negative. X-ray of chest posterior-anterior view revealed a normal study.
X-ray of the left leg as shown in revealed an osteolytic, expansile, eccentric lesion with sclerotic bone margin on the diaphysis of the tibia suggesting osteofibrous dysplasia. Bone scintigraphy revealed an osteoblastic lesion involving the mid-shaft of the left tibia, compatible with the primary neoplastic bone tumor.
MRI of the left leg with different planes is shown in which revealed a mixed type of altered signal intensity, expansible lobulated cortical lesion in the lower diaphysis of the left tibia, showing heterogeneously hypo signal intensity on T1WI and heterogeneously hyper signal intensity on T2WI and STIR images with internal fluid level. The lesion displaced the adjacent muscle. After IV contrast, heterogeneous contrast was seen in the lesion. Subcutaneous soft tissue showed normal signal intensity without focal lesion. The findings on MRI were suggestive of adamantinoma in the diaphysis of the left tibia. The patient came from a low-socioeconomic background and could not afford two cross-sectional imaging, so a CT scan was not performed.
A core-needle biopsy of tissue from the left tibia was performed and sent for histopathological examination. The finding was quite surprising to us as it revealed the presence of a large number uniformly distributed multinucleated giant cells interspersed with sheets of round to oval mononuclear stromal cells without the presence of any cystic structure compatible with giant cell tumor of bone as shown in .
Therefore, we decided to go for the operative procedure. All the pre-anesthetic workup was completed. Under spinal anesthesia, exploration and curettage were done by high-speed burr followed by chemical cauterization with 5 % phenol and 70 % alcohol followed by H₂O₂, shown in . The tumor cavity was filled with autogenous and allogenic bone grafts as shown in .
Reddish brown fleshy mass was found per operatively as shown in which was sent for histopathological examination which revealed scattered multinucleated osteoclast-like giant cells with round to oval mononuclear stromal cells demonstrating mitotic figures. Foci of osteoid formation were present with some of the fragments suggestive of old hematoma with features of an organization. There were no cystic and necrotic areas. It has been shown in . So the diagnosis of giant cell tumor of the diaphysis of the tibia was confirmed. The postoperative period was uneventful. On the 1st POD, sitting up, breathing exercise, and ankle pump exercise were advised followed by drain tube off, muscle strengthening exercise (Quadriceps, Hamstring), and joint mobilizing exercise on 2nd POD. After removal of the stitch on 14th POD, non-weight bearing for 1st 6 weeks, then toe touching followed by partial weight bearing was allowed for next 6 weeks and full weight bearing was allowed after 12 weeks.
The patient was evaluated after one and half months, 3 months, 6 months, 1 year and 2 year of surgery (as shown in , ). It was found that there weren't any complaints and the patient could walk normally without a walking aid. Clinical and radiological evaluation showed neither signs of recurrence nor prognosis to worse condition(s). However, as planned, the patient will be evaluated every year .