A 34-year-old female at 30 weeks of gestation of her second pregnancy was admitted to the Department of Emergency Medicine at the Medical University of Pecs with worsening hypoxia, dyspnea, hemoptysis and oliguria. The patient had a history of hypothyroidism and thromboembolic events: she suffered a pulmonary embolism at age 20, shortly after initiation of an oral contraceptive medication. Subsequent work-up identified no hypercoagulability risk factors and oral anticoagulation therapy was discontinued after a year. She then suffered a DVT at age 31 after lower extremity fracture and was subsequently restarted on anticoagulation therapy, which was switched from oral to low molecular weight heparin during both her known pregnancies. Her previous pregnancy ended with intrauterine fetal demise 2 years prior at week 38. Her current pregnancy was unremarkable apart from occasional hemoptysis thought to be the side effect of anticoagulation therapy. Upon admittance, examination showed severe hypoxia (sO2 69%), maintained blood pressure, sinus tachycardia, peripheral edema and diminished urine output. Echocardiography confirmed severe right heart dilatation and failure (RV cross section 50 mm, TAPSE 12 mm, systolic D sign, sPAP 77 + 15 = 92 mmHg), raising suspicion of acute pulmonary embolism (PE). Acute CT angiography scan was performed showing chronic pulmonary embolism in subsegmental arteries rather than acute PE. Lab findings were unremarkable. Obstetric assessment found a viable fetus. A critical care and PAH-specialist consult was requested to advise on thrombolysis, but based on the studies and presentation, acute decompensation of previously unknown pulmonary hypertension was diagnosed with no indication for thrombolysis. CPAP with high FiO2 was started and the patient was transferred to the Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Therapy at Semmelweis University for further treatment.
After the transfer, the patient was converted to BIPAP noninvasive ventilation (NIV) with high FiO2 to further improve oxygenation with a goal saturation of > 95%, central venous line and femoral PiCCO line as well as urinary catheter were placed. PiCCO showed diminished cardiac index (2.8 L/min/m2), while echocardiography continued to show diminished right ventricular function and severe dilatation (see Fig. ). Lactate level was 3.5 mmol/L with a base excess (BE) of -8 mmol/L suggesting ongoing right heart failure with elevated pulmonary pressure.
Despite high FiO2 BIPAP NIV, we observed frequent transient desaturation episodes paired with severe dyspnea and concomitant episodes of hypotension suggestive of ongoing right heart failure. After multidisciplinary consult, a decision was made to stabilize the patient’s cardiovascular status and oxygenation, begin fetal pulmonary maturation treatment and schedule a Cesarean within the next 24 h. Cardiac anesthesia consultation was performed for possible acute ECMO requirement. To achieve preoperative cardiovascular stability, inotropic treatment was started (levosimendan in 0.07mcg/kg/min dose). Because of high observed pulmonary arterial pressures, clinical signs of right heart failure and expected possible worsening of hemodynamic parameters after surgery, a decision was made to start vasodilator treatment (intravenous epoprostenol, initially 2 ng/kg/min dose and quick titration to 7 ng/kg/min dose). A follow-up echocardiogram showed improvement (RV cross section 50 mm, TAPSE 12 mm, systolic D sign, sPAP 60 + 10 = 70 mmHg), while we observed improving lactate, BE levels and urine output with minimal diuretic therapy (20 mg furosemide every 12 h).
Anticoagulation (enoxaparin 60 mg SC used prophylactically during pregnancy) was discontinued for 12 h and after thromboelastography (TEG) evaluation of coagulation parameters to rule out prostacyclin-associated platelet dysfunction, an epidural catheter was placed. After improving lactate, BE and urine output, a Cesarean was performed under epidural anesthesia (300 mg lidocaine and 15mcg sufentanil) and continued noninvasive ventilation. Operating time was 35 min with a blood loss of 500 ml, levosimendan and epoprostenol was continued during the operation and cardiac output was monitored via PiCCO. Additional low dose norepinephrine (0.06mcg/kg/min) therapy was started to counteract anesthesia-induced decrease in systemic vascular resistance, maintaining stable blood pressure parameters in the perioperative period (preoperative BP: 124/62 mmHg, lowest intraoperative BP: 75/42 mmHg, postoperative BP: 118/62 mmHg). A 1490 g baby girl was delivered with an Apgar of 8/9. The baby required CPAP therapy and PICU treatment, but adapted as expected in subsequent days.
The patient continued to be monitored during the postoperative period. Low molecular weight heparin anticoagulation was re-established 12 h after the operation and was regularly monitored with anti-Factor Xa activity. No bleeding complications were observed. Repeat echocardiogram showed improving right ventricle diameter (28 mm) but increased systolic pulmonary arterial pressure (72 + 10 = 82 mmHg). Epoprostenol dose was titrated up to 10 ng/kg/min, 24-h levosimendan treatment was followed with dobutamine treatment (4mcg/kg/min) and noninvasive ventilation was continued. During the next 48 h, we observed ongoing improvement in cardiac index (3.4 and subsequently 3.8 L/min/m2 by PiCCO), and in pulmonary pressure (sPAP 60 + 10 = 75 and subsequently 48 + 10 = 58 mmHg by echocardiogram). Urine output was maintained despite tapered diuretic therapy. Despite improving cardiovascular parameters, persistent BIPAP NIV and FiO2 dependence was observed, so chest CT was repeated with right lower lobe bronchi obstruction apparent (see Fig. ). A bronchoscopy was performed in dexmedetomidine anesthesia and ongoing BIPAP noninvasive ventilation and several blood clots were extracted. After the procedure, oxygenation improved markedly and the patient was successfully weaned from BIPAP NIV to nasal O2 therapy.
Epoprostenol treatment was gradually converted to subcutaneous treprostinil therapy, treatment was escalated with digoxin, spironolactone and sildenafil, previously contraindicated for its possible systemic hypotension causing effect. Follow up echocardiography showed improving parameters. Right heart catheterization verified the diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension (PAP 78/35 mmHg, mPAP 49 mmHg, CO 5.33 L/min, PCWP 7 mmHg, PVR 7.88 Woods). Ventilation/perfusion scan was performed showing extensive segmental-subsegmental perfusion deficits in the right lung and scattered perfusion deficits in the left upper lobe (see Fig. ), effectively establishing the diagnosis of chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension with acute decompensation in the late stage of pregnancy.
Pulmonary endarterectomy was advised based on diagnosis and clinical symptoms, however given her continued hemodynamic stability, the patient’s preference was taken into consideration and the operation was postponed until optimal timing for mother and baby. The patient was discharged to the Pulmonology Department of the university after 15 days of ICU treatment. After further titration of treprostinil to 18 ng/kg/min, she was able to leave the hospital with her newborn after 4 weeks. Two- and 6-month follow-up showed further improvement without full resolution of echocardiography findings. She had a functional class (FC) of II (6-min walk test 570 m) with no observed side effects of subcutaneous PC treatment. Pulmonary endarterectomy is planned for a later date as per the patient’s wishes.