A 68-year-old Japanese woman, previously diagnosed as having large AVMs, sustained a right femoral shaft fracture due to a slip and fall from standing. Bruising of the right thigh and limping were noted since 3 years of age. She was diagnosed as having AVMs at 63 years of age , but did not receive any treatment.
At the time of admission, she presented with massive swelling and venous varicosities of the right thigh. Plain radiography of the right thigh revealed fracture of the femoral shaft with bony erosion and numerous phleboliths . Computed tomography showed enhanced AVMs and phleboliths in the quadriceps femoris and the hypotrophy of the femur. In addition, the intramedullary canal was very narrow , so intramedullary nailing would be difficult. Three-dimensional computed tomography angiography showed the AVMs were fed by the branches of the deep and superficial femoral artery . We planned closed reduction and intramedullary nailing using elastic nails fixed to a monotube unilateral external fixator.
The day before surgery, embolization of the feeding artery was performed . We attempted closed reduction of the fracture using the fracture table, but the procedure was difficult. When we attempted open reduction, however, massive bleeding (1000 mL) after incision of subcutaneous tissue occurred within several minutes. Therefore, we closed the wound immediately. Although an additional procedure carried the risk of further bleeding, we carefully applied a Taylor Spatial Frame (TSF) and performed acute correction . Total blood loss was 2300 mL and she was transfused with 23 units of red cell concentrate, 10 units of fresh-frozen plasma, and 20 units of platelet concentrate. She was subsequently transferred to the intensive care unit and received 8 more units of red cell concentrate.
Her postoperative course was uneventful. Residual displacement of the fracture was gradually corrected over 3 weeks. Teriparatide (20 μg daily) was initiated. After 10 weeks, loosening of the proximal half-pins and re-displacement of the fracture occurred. Thus, we performed replacement of the proximal half-pins . Eventually, bony union was obtained 13 months after the second surgery , and the TSF was removed 2 months later. She began weight bearing gradually with Sarmiento type functional brace . Teriparatide was administrated for 24 months. Radiographs taken 24 months after surgery showed the facture was completely united . The patient became fully ambulatory with Sarmiento type functional brace using 1 cane.