A 46 year-old Chinese female presented to a tertiary Emergency Department with acute left monocular vision loss over the preceding 24 h, associated with painful ocular movements and a severe headache. Her background was significant for suspected NMOSD with initial presentation 15 years previously with bilateral optic neuritis treated with 5 days of pulse intravenous methylprednisolone. At the time, serum AQP4-IgG antibody tests were positive but details lacking. She had migrated overseas and described a history of events concerning for area postrema syndrome with recurrent attacks of intractable nausea and hiccups that had spontaneously resolved. She also described recurrent optic neuritis, with her last episode 18 months previously whilst overseas that was not treated acutely and resulted in permanent significant visual impairment in her right eye. Despite these recurrent events, she was not on any long-term immunosuppression.
Physical examination revealed poor visual acuity in both eyes (6/60 right eye, light perception only left eye). There was a left relative afferent pupillary defect and fundoscopy was significant for right optic nerve head pallor. The remainder of her neurological examination was unremarkable and notably there were no signs of a myelopathic syndrome.
MRI brain and whole spine with gadolinium demonstrated a hyperintense T2/FLAIR signal with restricted diffusion in the left corpus callosum, as well as a hyperintense focus at the level of T5 that was also favored to represent demyelination, neither of which had evidence of active enhancement . High signal with enhancement was seen in the left optic nerve with chiasmal extension and the right optic nerve appeared to have significant atrophy . Repeat serum AQP4-IgG was positive at a greater than screening titer of 1:10 with cell-based indirect immunofluorescence assay (Euroimmun), and the remainder of her blood tests were unremarkable. A lumbar puncture was not performed as the patient declined.
Given the typical clinical history and presentation, positive serum AQP4-IgG and neuroradiological findings, the patient was diagnosed with a likely acute relapse of her NMOSD and commenced on pulse intravenous methylprednisolone (IVMP) 1 g once daily for 5 days . Differential diagnoses of her optic neuritis initially considered on presentation included MOG antibody disease, infective etiologies such as bartonella, or other inflammatory conditions such as neurosarcoidosis. These diagnoses were deemed unlikely when her serum AQP4-IgG returned positive.
On her fourth day of IVMP, no improvement in her visual acuity was evident and plasmapheresis was commenced given she was now essentially blind in both eyes with significant disability. She continued to have no improvement in her visual acuity despite two cycles of plasmapheresis and completion of 5 days of IVMP. The main diagnostic challenge at this stage was whether the patient was having a delayed response to her current therapy warranting continuation of her current treatment approach and close observation vs. escalation of therapy.
On day twelve after presentation, she was subsequently administered intravenous eculizumab 900 mg weekly for 4 weeks, then 1,200 mg a week later and fortnightly thereafter. She was also commenced on a slow weaning regimen of prednisolone, starting at 30 mg once daily, decreasing by 2.5 mg every week. On the day prior to administration of eculizumab, she was administered meningococcal vaccinations (MenACWY and MenB) in addition to streptococcal pneumoniae and haemophilus influenza vaccinations as she had not received these before. Amoxicillin 250 mg daily was commenced immediately as meningococcal chemoprophylaxis.
The patient's visual acuity promptly improved to counting fingers with her left eye 2 days after eculizumab commencement and she was able to be discharged home after her first infusion, 2 weeks following her initial presentation. At follow-up 2 and 5 months later, she remained on maintenance eculizumab without complications and there was evidence of ongoing improvement in her left eye visual acuity but still significant loss of central vision. Given the chronicity of her right eye visual impairment, no improvement was expected or found.