A 64-year-old male was admitted with confusion, acute kidney injury, and thrombocytopenia in November 2018. Before the admission, the patient had diarrhea accompanied by abdominal pain. On day 2, diarrhea became bloody, and the patient received gentamycin from a local clinic. Stool culture or Shiga toxin test was not performed during the course of diarrhea. Although gastrointestinal symptoms resolved within a week, he developed confusion, dark urine, jaundice, and blurred vision 11 days after the onset of diarrhea, and was referred to our medical center on day 16. The patient had a history of type 2 diabetes mellitus for 1 year. He had no travel experience before the onset of diarrhea. No ongoing epidemic of Escherichia coli enteritis was reported in his county. On examination, he was afebrile with an arterial blood pressure of 154/80 mmHg. The patient was disorientated, responded slowly and improperly to questions, and was unable to move according to commands. He could not recall his food for the last meal. Other neurological physical examinations were unremarkable. Pitting edema of lower extremities was noted.
Initial investigations at admission revealed hemoglobin 127 g/L, total bilirubin 50.9 μmol/L, conjugated bilirubin 15.9 μmol/L, and serum creatinine 206 μmol/L. Urinalysis showed hematuria (+++), and protein (+++).24-h urine protein was 3.8 g, with serum albumin of 26 g/L. Lumbar puncture was performed. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was colorless and transparent, with normal pressure (130mmH2O). Laboratory analysis of CSF revealed protein 2.47 g/L (reference range < 0.45 g/L), white blood cell count 1 cell/uL, while glucose and chloride were within normal ranges.
During the first week of his hospital stay, a rapid decline of hemoglobin and platelet levels was observed . Further hematological laboratory tests demonstrated elevated lactate dehydrogenase (767 unit/L) and free serum hemoglobin (12.3 mg/dL). Schistocytes were recognized on the peripheral blood smear.
Cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) conducted 8 days after the onset of neurologic symptoms identified symmetrical long T2 signal in the dorsal brainstem, insula, and external capsule . These lesions showed restricted diffusion on diffusion-weighted imaging, and corresponding decreased apparent diffusion coefficient values. Multiple cotton-wool spots were found bilaterally on the ophthalmoscopic examination, consistent with Purtscher-like retinopathy.
Possible causes for thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA) were evaluated. Complement components C3 and C4 levels were 0.724 g/L (reference range 0.73–1.46 g/L) and 0.138 g/L (reference range 0.100–0.400 g/L), respectively. Immunological studies for antinuclear, antiphospholipid, and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies were negative. ADAMTS13 activity was intact without ADMTS13 inhibitor detected. Serum concentration of complement factor H was within normal range, and anti-factor H antibody was not detected.
The patient was clinically diagnosed with post-diarrheal HUS. Initially, he received plasma exchange with fresh frozen plasma for 3 days. Renal replacement therapy was not indicated. Consciousness and cognitive functions became normal within 3 days. Hemoglobin, platelet count, bilirubin, and lactate dehydrogenase levels rapidly improved , and schistocytes disappeared in blood smear within a week. Two weeks after admission, serum creatinine declined to normal range, while a repeated 24-h urine protein test revealed 2.23 g.
Kidney biopsy was performed 1 month after the onset of the disease to exclude other etiologies for nephrotic syndrome and assess the severity of renal damage. Renal pathology showed glomerular endothelial swelling, and segmental lamina rara interna thickening in glomerular basement membrane, without remarkable hypercellularity. Acute tubular injury was also found. . Immunofluorescence staining was negative.
On a three-month follow-up, neurological sequelae were not identified. Blood pressure was 140/90 mmHg. The 24-h urine protein was 0.15 g, and previously identified central nervous system lesions were absent on the cranial MRI . Self-monitored blood pressure was 130/80 mmHg 6 months after the onset without the use of antihypertensives.