A 46-year-old man reported experiencing precordial discomfort and was referred to our department. He was a nonsmoker and had no history of any significant illness or surgery. Physical examination and electrocardiography showed no abnormal findings. Chest radiography, however, showed an enlarged right ventricular shadow, leading to a slightly elevated cardiothoracic ratio of 56%. Transthoracic echocardiography showed a mass in the pericardium, 8.0 × 4.0 cm in diameter, that compressed the wall of the right atrium and ventricle ; left ventricular function was within normal limits. There was no tricuspid regurgitation or stenosis. Contrast-enhanced chest CT showed a low-density mass in the pericardium that compressed the wall of the right atrium and ventricle and encased the right coronary artery . The mass was relatively homogenous except for calcified nodules . No clear separation could be seen between the ventricles and the mass. Coronary angiography showed that the mass had some feeding arteries and that the proximal and mid-portions of the right coronary artery were inside of the tumor without any obstruction . No other signs of coronary disease were observed. Laboratory test results, including biochemistry, coagulation, routine hematology, and serum tumor markers, were all within normal limits.
The differential diagnosis included sarcoma or primary lymphoma, though the epicardial location would have been atypical for both tumors. Subsequently, biopsy and surgical resection of the tumor were scheduled in order to establish a precise diagnosis and to improve the outflow from the right ventricle and, thus, his symptomatic condition.
Median sternotomy was completed under general anesthesia. During surgery, the tumor was determined to be hemorrhagic because incisional biopsy alone caused active bleeding, and cardiopulmonary bypass was initiated. Frozen section led to a diagnosis of a benign vascular tumor, but the right coronary artery was totally encased by the tumor, which was judged to be not amenable to curative resection. Thus, the tumor was resected directly with an electrical scalpel and debulked to the proximity of the coronary artery. The resected tumor specimen appeared as a spindle with a maximum diameter of 6 cm, accounting for approximately 50% of the original tumor volume.
Histopathologically, dilated venous vessels with smooth muscle layer were widely observed in the fat layer of the pericardium , leading to a diagnosis of venous cardiac hemangioma. On immunohistochemical staining, endothelial markers CD31 and CD34 were positive .
The patient had an uneventful postoperative course and was discharged on postoperative day 7. Follow-up chest CT showed volume reduction of the tumor and improvement of the compression of the right ventricular wall, and no subsequent regrowth . Presently, 36 months after surgery, the patient is living a healthy life without any symptoms.