A 77-year-old man presented with dull aching right hypochondrial pain for 1 month duration. The pain was poorly localized and radiated to the back. The patient had no history of jaundice, fever, nausea, or vomiting. There was no history of reported weight loss.
The patient had no history of chronic medical conditions. The past surgical history was negative.
Ultrasound of the liver revealed an evidence of 55*50 mm well defined iso-echoic mass with increased peripheral vascularity within the right lobe of the liver.
CT-scan of the abdomen showed hypo dense soft tissue mass within segment VI of the liver. After intravenous contrast injection the mass showed vivid enhancement with rapid washout, hypo-attenuation was noted in the portal phase with visualization of a feeding vessel to the tumor, the CT-scan findings were suggestive for hepatocellular carcinoma. , .
The hemoglobin level was normal (13.8 g/dl), the WBC were normal (10,500*10*9/L), and the platelets were normal (225*10*9/L). The blood sugar and the renal function test were normal. The serum levels of alpha-feto protein was normal (3.4 ng/mL), CA 19.9 was normal (20 U/mL), carcino-embryonic antigen was normal (4.62 ng/mL) and the CA 125 level was also normal (5.52 U/mL). The bleeding time and the coagulation profiles were normal.
An extended right subcostal incision was done and exploration of the peritoneal cavity was done, there was evidence of 5*5 cm mass related to liver segment VI. During surgery we accidentally discovered gall bladder agenesis with slightly dilated common bile duct. .
The tumor resected using radiofrequency device and sent for histopathological study.
The histopathological examination showed well differentiated proliferating hepatocytes, with formation of thick trabeculae and low grade atypia. The cells were negative for B-catenin, Glypecan-3, and CD10. The proliferative index was 35 %. The diagnosis was consistent with well differentiated with hepatocellular carcinoma. .
The patient was admitted to the hospital for 5 days and discharged with no post-operative complications.