A 56-year-old woman was admitted to the emergency ward with the chief complaint of fever with rigors, low level of consciousness, unilateral bulging right eye, inability to walk, and loss of vision, all of which had sudden onset on April 22, 2015. Her family gave a patient history that described her as a resident of a rural village near Bojnord city in North Khorasan, Iran. Two weeks prior to admission, on April 8, the patient experienced headache, severe earache, and throat pain, followed by fever and chills, which ultimately compelled her to visit a general physician in a rural health center. Temporomandibular joint pain drastically increased within a few hours, and an inflamed tympanic membrane confirmed an acute otitis media diagnosis by the doctor. Treatment was started with antibiotics (amoxicillin 500 mg TDS) and analgesics/antipyretics (paracetamol). Clinical manifestations subsided for two days, but severe headache, anorexia, and high fever appeared again, followed by confusion.
These symptoms impelled the doctor to urgently refer the patient to the Imam Reza governmental specialized teaching hospital, which was the nearest internal disease center that also provides internal services including emergency, neurology, ICU, and specialist clinics. Physical examination of the woman at the time of arrival revealed a reduced level of consciousness. The patient was irritable, pale, and feverish (axillary temperature of 39.5°C), with a pulse rate of 78/minute, blood pressure 130/70 mmHg, respiratory rate of 21/minute, and blood sugar measured by glucometer at 221 mg/dl. Head and neck examination revealed severe unilateral exophthalmos, chemosis, and proptosis .
Intraoral examination was normal. Central nervous system examination revealed a yellow spot in the right eye and sluggish reaction to light in the right eye, while the left was reactive to light. Cranial nerve palsies of III and IV were present, whereas other cranial nerves were grossly intact, however with decreased power tone, reflexes, and positive meningeal signs (e.g., neck rigidity). Other neurological examinations could not be undertaken because the woman was semiconscious and irritable. Other examinations included lung: clear to auscultation bilaterally; abdomen: soft, non-tender, nondistended, normoactive bowel sounds; and heart: normal s1 and s2, no murmurs or gallops.
Other systems findings were non-contributory. The available laboratory tests revealed the following results. WBC: 8700/mm3, ESR: 50 mm/hr, C-Reactive Protein positive (+++), malaria test negative, brucellosis tests (Wright agglutination, Coombs Wright, and 2-Mercapto-Ethanol) negative, electrolytes: Na 131 mmol/L, K 3.4 mmol/L, urea 41 mg/dl, creatinine 1.3 mg/dl, SGOT: 82 U/L, SGPT: 46 U/L, and FBS 96 mg/dl.
The provisional diagnosis was meningitis, orbital cellulitis, cavernous sinus thrombosis, and mucormycosis. The patient had no history of diabetes mellitus (DM), but her family reported her having had polyuria and polydipsia for two weeks prior to admission. While hospitalized, she was NPO over the last 24 hours, but her blood glucose level was 221 mg/dl. On the second day after admission, she rapidly developed left proptosis with moderate chemosis. In addition, movement in both eyeballs was limited in all directions to about half the normal range, but vision and facial sensation were intact. Proptosis and periorbital swelling were present bilaterally, but more severe on the right side. On the third day, extraoral examination revealed a solitary swelling around the mouth and orbital cellulitis with pus discharge .
For immediate management, the patient received intravenous fluids (500cc glucose/saline), antibiotics (vancomycin 2gr BID, meropenem 2gr TDS, metronidazole 500mg QID, serum dextrose saline 1000cc + 5cc Kcl 15%, amphotericin 50mg daily) intravenously. On intraoral examination, the maxillary palatal was grossly intact, and there was no gingival or mucosal denudation exposing the necrotic bone with pus exudation. Tenderness was not elicited on palpation. Hard tissue examination revealed no tenderness on percussion. Based on these findings, the provisional diagnosis of mucormycosis was rejected. For immediate management, the patient received mupirocin topical 2% TDS, vitamins A and D TDS, and Nilstat Oral Drops (Nystatin) 20 drops TDS.
After mucormycosis was rejected, the patient was referred for a computerized tomography (CT) scan, an MRI, magnetic resonance imaging venography (MRV), and blood tests. Blood culture was positive for Staphylococcus aureus. MRI and MRV performed with the clinical suspicion of cavernous sinus thrombophlebitis (CST) demonstrated the following results: engorgement of the right superior ophthalmic vein and hyperintense signal changes of the right temporal and inferior frontal areas. On long TR, sequences were seen, as well as signal changes in the right basal ganglia. Spread Cavernous sinus thrombosis was caused, Restricted ischemic focal on the frontal, temporal and basal ganglia areas. Brain MRI confirmed the cavernous sinus thrombosis. The patient responded well to broad spectrum intravenous antibiotics (meropenem 2gr TDS, vancomycin 1gr BD, and metronidazole 200mg) and supportive treatment. Follow-up MRI was performed. After intravenous antibiotic therapy, all abnormalities resolved, aside from the III and IV cranial nerve pareses, which were unchanged at discharge one month later.