A 46-year-old female was admitted to our hospital after the identification of abnormal chest X-ray shadows during a medical checkup . She had no history of either smoking or dust inhalation, behaviors associated with a risk of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection or any other appreciable disease. She had a family history of rheumatoid arthritis in both her sister and grandmother. She complained of slightly dry eyes, but had no fever, arthralgia, myalgia or dryness of the mouth. Her vital signs were within the normal ranges. A physical examination disclosed no finger clubbing, crackles on chest auscultation or swollen superficial lymph nodes. The laboratory tests revealed a normal blood count and routine chemistry findings. The serum levels of KL-6 and surfactant protein-D, markers for interstitial pneumonia, were 946 (normal value <500) U/mL and 178 (<110) ng/mL, respectively. An examination for autoantibodies showed a positive anti-SS-A antibody titer of 114 (<110), but she was negative for other autoantibodies, such as antinuclear factor, anti-SS-B antibodies, rheumatoid factor, anti Jo-1 antibodies and anti-scl-70 antibodies.
An analysis of her serum revealed an IgG level of 1,700 mg/dL, IgA of 61 mg/dL, IgM of 41 mg/dL, IgE of 21 mg/dL, an albumin fraction level of 57 (>60) %, alpha-1 of 3.4%, alpha-2 of 9.2%, beta of 7.3 (>8.3) %, and gamma of 23.1 (<20) %, an angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) level of 25.0 (<25) IU/L, lysozyme of 16.7 (<10) μg/mL and a level of soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sIL-2R) of 3,570 (<519) U/mL. The patient was negative for the hepatitis B antigen and hepatitis C antibodies, and the titers of antibodies to Epstein-Barr virus and human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 were not elevated. An arterial blood gas analysis during room air breathing revealed a pH of 7.39, a PaCO2 of 37.0 Torr and a PaO2 of 75.3 Torr. Pulmonary function tests demonstrated a mild restrictive impairment [FVC of 2.09 L (79.8% predicted)], airway obstruction [FEV 1.0 of 1.56 L (67.8% predicted)] and a reduced percent diffusion capacity for carbon monoxide of 67.6%. A chest CT (shown in Figure B) and Ga-67 citrate scintigraphy showed no evidence of abnormal uptake. There was lymphocytosis (51%) with a CD4/CD8 ratio of 1.05 in her bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, but the transbronchial lung biopsy specimens did not lead to a definitive diagnosis. As there was little progression of her symptoms, she was discharged home with no treatment and was followed up for any changes.
Five months later, she complained of the gradual development of xerostomia, exertional breathlessness with hypoxemia and a worsening of the chest shadows was observed, along with increases in the serum levels of sIL-2R (5,540 U/mL), lactate dehydrogenase (872 IU/L), ACE (32.9 IU/L) and lysozyme (27.5 μg/mL). The PaO2 was 64.8 Torr and the pulmonary function tests revealed a %FVC of 66.5% and a %FEV 1.0 of 63.6%. A positron emission CT scan showed an enhanced uptake, especially in the left lower lobe (S9), in which the early and delayed maximum standardized values (SUV max) were 2.9 and 3.4, respectively, but there was no enhancement in the extrapulmonary areas. The surgical lung biopsy specimens demonstrated an atypical pattern of cellular interstitial pneumonia . Southern blot hybridization and the polymerase chain reaction were performed to assess the risk of malignant conditions. The infiltrating lymphocytes of the lung consisted of both B-cells and T-cells, however, the monoclonality of T-cells was proven by a Southern blot analysis for T-cell receptor gene rearrangement using the biopsied lung specimens. In terms of the immunoglobulin heavy chain gene rearrangement, neither Southern blot hybridization nor the polymerase chain reaction for complementarity determining region-3 showed any positive findings. Additionally, a histological examination of an inguinal lymph node, which was identifiable and could be biopsied in the extrapulmonary area, revealed no definitive evidence of lymphoma or other disease, and the results of the morphological analysis and gene testing of the bone marrow aspirate were regarded as negative. Moreover, the Schirmer and Rose Bengal dye tests were positive, and a lip biopsy, which revealed infiltration of two foci in 50 or more inflammatory cells within a 4 mm2 area of glandular tissue, confirmed a diagnosis of SS according to the American-European consensus criteria.
The patient was subsequently treated with methylprednisolone pulse therapy, followed by oral administration of prednisolone. The pulmonary lesion partly improved and has been kept in a stable condition with a maintenance dose of prednisolone alone (10 mg/day) for over three years.