An immunocompetent 66-year-old man initially presented in December 2020 with left limb weakness and ataxia. His past medical history included thyroidectomy and gastric ulcer perforation surgery. In February 2021, brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a contrast-enhancing lesion with perifocal brain edema in the near midline of the right frontal lobe . Whole-body positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) demonstrated increased fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) metabolism in the right frontal lobe lesion. According to the imaging characteristics of brain MRI and PET/CT, the patient was suspected of PCNSL. Then, stereotactic biopsy was performed to further clarify the diagnosis. Corticosteroid treatment was not applied before the initial biopsy. Histopathological analysis revealed inflammatory changes in the brain tissue, accompanied by partial myelin destruction. The inflammatory infiltrate mainly consisted of CD3-positive T-lymphocytes and CD68-positive macrophages with only a few CD20-positive B-lymphocytes present and a low Ki-67 index . Meanwhile, 93 tumor-associated genes were tested by NGS technology (Beijing GeneX Health Co., Ltd.). The result showed mutations in RELN, PCLO, and CREBBP genes, which were insufficient to diagnose PCNSL .
The patient developed cerebral hematoma after biopsy, and was treated with high-dose steroids (500 mg methylprednisolone daily for 5 days) and mannitol to reduce cranial pressure. Subsequently, steroid dosage was gradually reduced. In March 2021, brain CT showed no obvious absorption of the hematoma, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination suggested a bacterial infection. The biochemical results of CSF are as follows: glucose: 2.02 mmol/L, range 2.5–4.5 mmol/L; protein: 182.46 mg/dL, range 15–45 mg/dL; chloride: 124 mmol/L, range 118–132 mmol/L; and lactate: 7.9 mmol/L, range 1.1–2.4 mmol/L. The cytological results of CSF are as follows: appearance of CSF: yellowish turbidity; Pandy test: + ; Totle cell: 1843/μl; WBC (white blood cell): 1543/μl; PMN (polymorphonuclear leucocyte): 87.9%; and MN (monocyte): 12.1%. S. aureus was detected by CSF culture. To relieve symptoms of cerebral edema and hematoma, lesion resection by craniotomy and hematoma removal were performed after anti-infective treatment. Excision of the right frontal lobe lesion revealed local area abscess formation, and extensive lymphocytic infiltration composed of mixed CD3 + T-cells and CD20 + B-cells with high Ki-67 index . The descriptive diagnosis was made as an inflammatory lesion with dense lymphocyte, plasma cell, and neutrophil infiltration. Due to insufficient diagnostic evidence for PCNSL and total resection of lesions, the patient did not receive anti-tumor therapy.
In July 2021, 7 months after the initial attack, the patient suddenly developed right limb weakness and ataxia. Cranial MRI disclosed the right frontal lobular surgical remnant and a homogeneous enhanced new lesion in the left frontal parietal lobe with perifocal brain edema . With the suspect of PCNSL, stereotactic biopsy was performed again in August 2021. Biopsy of the new lesion revealed diffuse large B-cell lymphoma . A subsequent systemic evaluation provided no evidence of a systemic lymphoma. Meanwhile, the biopsies were tested for 93 lymphoma-related genes using NGS technology. The result showed 23 gene mutations, including MYD88, CD79B, CDKN2A, PIM1, RELN, PCLO, CREBBP, and so on, supporting the diagnosis of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma . Therefore, the condition was diagnosed as diffuse large B-cell type PCNSL. The patient was treated with intravenous high-dose methotrexate and rituximab for 6 cycles. This treatment provided clinical improvement and nearly complete remission of the lesions on subsequent brain MRI .