A 33-year-old man presented to his primary care provider at Shanghai Shuguang Hospital with a left scalp mass. Biopsy showed a 2.5 × 1.5 × 1.0 cm mass with solid grayish-red coloring. Following a consultation at Zhongshan Hospital on November 15, 2016, a malignant skin tumor, with rich dense cells , moderately severe atypia, and a mitotic phase of approximately 50–60 mitotic cells/50 high-power fields, was identified, but was difficult to classify. Immunohistochemical staining showed strong s-100 expression in the tumor cells . Notably, the Ki-67 cell proliferation index was 80%; however, no expression of CD34, LCA, F8, EMA, SMA, ERG, MUM-1, CD21, CD35, or SOX-10 was detected.
Genetic testing revealed no fusions of the ALK, ROS-1, or RET genes. Furthermore, no mutations were detected in exons 18, 19, 20, or 21 of EGFR, exon 2 of K-RASs, exons 2 or 3 of N-RAS, exon 15 of B-RAF, exons 9 or 20 of PIK3CA, or exon 20 of HER-2. The patient sought treatment at the National Cancer Center in Japan and was recommended for chemotherapy, but no standard regimen was available in January 2017. The patient then went to the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in the USA and was diagnosed with an unclassifiable mesenchymal sarcoma with NTRK1 gene translocation detected by next generation sequencing (NGS) . In February 2017, the patient returned to Zhongshan Hospital with a left ear rash and a mass on the neck and upper right back. Biopsy revealed tumor metastasis and skin involvement. Microscopic examination revealed diffuse tumor cells, which were dense with clear moderate-to-severe atypia, round or oval with unclear boundaries, clear nucleoli, and active mitosis. Needle biopsy of tissue from tumor on the ear, neck, and back were consistent with that from the scalp tumor on the top left side . NGS analysis indicated that exons 1–8 of the KHDRBS1 gene and exons 12–17 of the NTRK1 gene were genetically fused .
Following a consultation with an oncologist and a pathologist in Zhongshan Hospital, Shanghai, China, the patient started on crizotinib (Pfizer; 250 mg/twice a day, orally) in February 2017 and was regularly followed-up at 3-month intervals to monitor his disease status. Moderate transaminase elevation, anorexia nausea, and vomiting occurred after 1 month of crizotinib; therefore, the drug dosage was reduced to 125 mg/twice a day for 2 months. The dosage was then restored to 250 mg/twice per day and reduced glutathione tablets taken daily to protect hepatic function. After 1 month, the lesion on the patient’s upper right back had subsided and flattened . After 3 months, the left ear rash and neck mass completely disappeared. The patient was followed-up after taking crizonib for 3 months by observation of the skin surface lesions. He underwent general check-up every 6 months by imaging examination, fine needle aspiration, or biopsy, to determine whether there was disease recurrence. The most recent follow-up after taking crizotinib for 3 months by was in July 2020. The patient continued to show a complete response to crizotinib, without disease progression, according to examination of visually apparent superficial lesions, pathological assessment, and radiography. The patient is currently taking crizotinib; however, it is not planned for this treatment to continue indefinitely. The long-term sequelae of crizotinib use are likely respiratory system damage, gastrointestinal system damage, heart rate and rhythm disorders, and inevitable acquired drug resistance. Crizotinib will be stopped under medical’s supervision once acquired drug resistance or severe adverse reactions occur.