A 54-year-old male came with complaints of the left knee pain for 6-month duration which was insidious in onset and was associated with diffuse swelling. He had been evaluated in multiple hospitals and treated with analgesics, therapeutic knee aspiration, and compression bandage application. They were no history of preceding trauma, locking sensation, fever, constitutional symptoms, or night cries. On examination, there was diffuse fullness of the left knee with positive patellar tap . The range of movement was 0–100° with pain during terminal flexion, and there was no evidence of ligamentous instability. The radiographs were unremarkable, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a T2 hypointense lesion in Hoffa’s fat pad arising from the synovium measuring 2.5×4.5×2.5 cm . A large joint effusion was noted with associated synovial hypertrophy. Routine hematological, biochemical, and immunological investigations did not reveal anything abnormal.
Differential diagnoses were loose body, synovial chondromatosis, hematoma, and localized PVNS. Patient was planned for arthroscopic excision of the tumor. Under spinal anesthesia, standard arthroscopic portals were made and with the arthroscope in the anterolateral portal, a diagnostic arthroscopy was done. A yellowish-brown pedunculate mass was noted arising from Hoffa’s fat pad near the meniscocapsular junction of the anterior horn of the medial meniscus extending into the suprapatellar region. The synovium was hypertrophied with villous projections .
Due to the large extent of the tumor, the following steps were carried out to resect it:
Superolateral and superomedial portals were made in addition to the standard arthroscopic portals On visualizing the entire extent of the tumor, it was grasped from the superolateral portal using a Kocher forceps after impaling it with a needle. Impaling the tumor gives stable conditions to resect the tumor The intra-articular resection was carried out by piecemealing the tumor using arthroscopic cautery (Vulcan) from the superomedial portal Following which the tumor was resected from its base attachment near the anterior horn of the medial meniscus using arthroscopic cautery and shaver.
Histopathology showed fragments of synovial tissue with inflammatory cell infiltrate comprising lymphocyte admixed with any foamy cells and hemosiderin-laden macrophages. Extensive areas of hyalinization and fibrous areas mimicking osteoid with fibromuscular and fibro collagenous tissue regions were noted . The immediate post-operative period was uneventful and the patient returned to his daily activities after the 2nd post-operative week. There was no recurrence of symptoms after 1 year of post-operative period of follow-up.