A 35-year-old woman was referred to our hospital with a cancer of the right breast. She had discovered a breast mass two months previously and had already been diagnosed with invasive ductal breast cancer at another hospital. A histopathological examination of the core-needle biopsy showed that it was negative for ER, progesterone receptor (PR), and human epidermal growth factor receptor (HER2). Ki-67 labeling index was more than 90% . The histological grade was three. Mammography showed an indistinct high-density mass in the right breast and ultrasonography showed an irregular-shaped low echoic mass with a size of 39 × 20 × 18 mm in the upper-outer region of the right breast . Screening by positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) showed abnormal uptake in the right breast and axillary lymph node. There was no apparent distant metastasis but abnormal uptake in the left cerebellar hemisphere . Brain T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed hyperintense bands, which demonstrated a “tiger-stripe” appearance, in the corresponding lesion . After consulting the department of neurosurgery, this finding was diagnosed as Lhermitte-Duclos disease. The patient also had asthma and schizophrenia. Her mother had died of endometrial cancer at 57 years old. There was no other family history of cancers. We suspected Cowden disease due to the findings of brain MRI. She was subsequently referred for genetic counseling and underwent genetic testing, which revealed germline alterations in the PTEN gene; c.823_840del.18 at exon 8 (p. 275_280del.).
Based on the above examination, the patient was diagnosed with TN breast cancer that was defined as the absence of ER, PR, and HER expression, at stage IIB, cT2N1M0 and received neoadjuvant chemotherapy. We administered four courses of eribulin (1.4 mg/m2) and cyclophosphamide (600 mg/m2), which was a doctor-initiated clinical trial, and subsequently one course of adriamycin (60 mg/m2) and cyclophosphamide (600 mg/m2). After these treatments, the tumor had increased in size to 50 mm and was considered clinically progressive disease. We then switched to surgery and she underwent mastectomy of the right breast and axillary lymph node dissection. Postoperative pathological examination revealed invasive ductal carcinoma, histological grade 3, and pT3 (51 mm) N3a (10/29) M0 stage IIIC. ER, PR, and HER2 were negative and Ki-67 labeling index was 90% . The chemotherapeutic effect was grade 1a. After surgery, she received seven courses of adjuvant treatment with capecitabine (1800 mg × 2/day), which was based on the CREATE-X trial . After seven courses of the treatment, she suffered from dyspnea, resulting in multiple lung metastases and cancerous lymphangiopathy. She had a diagnosis of recurrence of the breast cancer 9 months after surgery.
As the first-line treatment after recurrence, we administered chemotherapy of bevacizumab (10 mg/kg) and paclitaxel (90 mg/m2). However, after one course of treatment, pleural effusion was exacerbated and tumors in the lung increased . We then tried treatment with gemcitabine (1250 mg/m2) as the second line of therapy, but tumors progressed rapidly, and no therapeutic effect was achieved. The patient died due to breast cancer about 3 months after recurrence.