A 27-year-old female who was 26 weeks pregnant presented to her obstetrician with complaints of headaches, blurriness of vision, and left-sided numbness and tingling. She had suffered weekly episodes of headaches for 2 months that were accompanied by blurry vision in both eyes and diffuse left-sided weakness. A computed tomography (CT) scan with contrast enhancement demonstrated ventriculomegaly and was interpreted as an ill-defined pineal thalamic mass. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) without gadolinium enhancement showed a 1-cm mass in the pineal region and obstructive hydrocephalus . An initial neurologic examination yielded normal findings.
To treat the patient's hydrocephalus and obtain tissue for histological diagnosis, we performed an endoscopic third ventriculostomy with biopsy of what appeared grossly to be a thalamic mass. The pathological evaluation, based on a small sample, demonstrated a World Health Organization (WHO) grade II ependymoma. Immunoperoxidase staining was strongly positive for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) with mild diffuse staining for synaptophysin. The Ki-67 proliferation index was below 2%. The initial biopsy report indicated that the biopsy sample was very small, and the biologic behavior of this neoplasm was difficult to ascertain.
The consensus at our multidisciplinary neuro-oncology tumor board was to proceed with expectant management without immediate operative intervention and to perform an MRI with gadolinium after delivery. A follow-up noncontrast CT scan one month later showed stable to decreased ventricle size representing a functional third ventriculostomy. The patient was slowly weaned off of steroids, which had been started perioperatively. After an uncomplicated completion of the pregnancy, the child was delivered via cesarean section at 39 weeks of gestation.
A postpartum MRI showed an increase in the size of the left thalamic mass with extension into the right thalamus, quadrigeminal plate, and midbrain. There was no evidence of obstructive hydrocephalus. A subsequent MRI of the entire spinal cord showed no evidence of drop metastases. A repeat MRI brain 3 months postpartum demonstrated increasing tumor size and enhancement that was indicative of a higher-grade tumor. Because the patient had radiographic evidence of tumor progression and remained minimally symptomatic, resection for tumor debulking and confirmation of histological diagnosis was deemed necessary.
The patient underwent a subtotal resection via a supracerebellar infratentorial approach with stereotactic neuronavigation. Tissue specimens obtained for pathological analysis resulted in a revised diagnosis of WHO grade II ganglioglioma. The pathologic specimen contained marked pleomorphism and gigantic nuclei. There was abundant positive staining with reticulin and rare periodic acid–Schiff (PAS)- and PAS–diastase (PAS-D)-positive droplets . Immunoperoxidase revealed strong staining for the neural markers neurofilament, neuron- specific enolase (NSE), synaptophysin, and glial markers including GFAP . The Ki-67 index was between 3% and 5% .
A multidisciplinary decision was made to begin radiation therapy with a cumulative dose of 59.4 Gy given over 33 treatments. The patient tolerated the therapy with minimal complications, but remained steroid dependent after the resection.
One month after completion of radiation therapy, the patient developed diplopia and headache, which responded to an escalation of her steroid dose. She continued to have nausea and diplopia despite aggressive steroid use. Follow-up MRI 9 months after resection showed increased size and local mass effect of the enhancing mass centered in the midbrain and extension into the thalamus. The steroid dose had to be escalated further to address the patient's persistent blurred vision and headache. She developed significant cushingoid side effects. Imaging showed changes in the amount of necrosis and vasogenic edema surrounding the area in question. After several months of intermittent hospital admissions and emergency department visits, the patient succumbed to her disease almost 2 years after initial presentation.