A 56-year-old man presented with a 1-week history of vague pain in the right flank and suprapubic region, and intermittent haematuria. He recalled having similar mild attacks periodically 2 years before that remitted without treatment. He denied any significant medical history, the habit of smoking and explosion to any solvents or chemicals. Bladder neoplasm was initially suspected by outpatient colour Doppler ultrasonography and cystoscopy at a local hospital 3 days prior to admission. No abnormalities were observed upon physical examination, serological examination, and urine cytology after admission. Computed tomography (CT) revealed an enlargement in the inferior part of the right ureter with a suspected solid mass . Further intravenous urogram (IVU) revealed a “sponge-like” filling defect in the right lower enlarged ureteral lumen and right ureteral orifice inside the bladder, but no dilation of the upper urinary tract and renal pelvis . Ureteral tumour was detected preoperatively.
Ureteroscopy revealed that the right lower ureteral lumen was occupied by multiple white-grey polypoid tumours, floating in the ureter that periodically moved in and out of the bladder through the ureteral orifice. Biopsy demonstrated an inflammatory polyp. This polyp together with terminal lobulations was approximately 7.0-cm in length containing a large pedicle that originated from the tip of the proximal ureter. The ureteral lumen terminated at the base of the polyp, but a ureteral orifice was observed in the centre of the proximal pedicle . After exploring the interior of the pedicle by ureteroscopy , we confirmed that the upper partial pedicle was an intussuscepted segment of the ureter approximately 2.5-cm in length and averaging 8.0-mm in diameter (supplementary video). The patient was treated by ureteroscopic cauterization of the partial polyp at the slimmest point of the pedicle followed by open surgery exploration. A fusiform was found in the lower dilated thick-walled ureter and palpation revealed a firm and mobile tumour. Finally, right ureteral partial resection with reanastomosis was performed to contain the pedicle stalk and ureteral segment. Postoperative recovery was uneventful, and pathological examination confirmed a fibroepithelial polyp. The double-J stent was removed 6 weeks after the operation. A CT scan of the abdomen performed 3 months post-surgery indicated neither uronephrosis nor any signs of polyp recurrence.