A 65-year-old Caucasian male patient presented to the emergency room with a 2-day history of dyspnea on exertion. He also noted experiencing a couple of episodes of diarrhea a few days before his dyspnea started, which resolved on its own. The patient’s wife had recently been diagnosed with COVID-19. The patient denied any fever, cough, chest pain, or lower-extremity edema. His past medical history included type 2 diabetes, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia. His past surgical history included a remote history of arthroscopic knee surgery. No personal history of malignancy was noted. No family history of hypercoagulable disease or thromboembolism was present. The patient had never smoked, denied drinking alcohol, and had previously been taking metformin, amlodipine, and simvastatin when at home.
His vital signs included blood pressure of 150/98 mmHg, pulse rate of 97 beats/min, respiratory rate of 18/min, oximetry 97% on room air, and a temperature of 36.5 °C (97.8 °F). Pertinent findings on physical examination included clear breath sounds and a regular, rapid heart rhythm on auscultation. There was no lower-extremity edema or calf tenderness. An electrocardiogram (EKG) completed in the emergency room showed sinus tachycardia at a rate of 113 bpm with no acute ST-T segment changes. A chest x-ray showed no acute cardiopulmonary findings. Laboratory data showed a white count of 6.9 × 109/L, hemoglobin of 15.3 g/dL, hematocrit at 44.9%, and platelet count of 158 × 109/L. The basic metabolic panel was within the normal range except for the blood sugar of 235 mg/dL. Troponin was 0.16 ng/mL, with normal total creatinine kinase. D-dimer was elevated at 2241 ng/mL . The routine respiratory polymerase chain reaction (PCR) panel was negative. A SARS-CoV-2 PCR test was sent from the emergency room. A computed tomography (CT) angiogram of the chest showed moderately large, bilateral pulmonary emboli with a saddle embolus and evidence of slight right heart strain and pulmonary arterial hypertension with an associated small, left lower lobe, pulmonary infarct .
The patient was admitted to the COVID unit, and he was started on an intravenously administered, unfractionated heparin drip. Ultrasound of the lower extremity showed a non-occlusive DVT at the distal left femoral vein to the left popliteal vein. Since the patient was hemodynamically stable, tissue plasminogen activator (TPA) administration was not considered. His symptoms significantly improved with anticoagulation. The hypercoagulable panel did not show any other active risk factor for thrombotic conditions.
The patient was observed in the hospital for 3 days and then was discharged home on the enoxaparin bridge with warfarin. Since there was a high suspicion of SARS-CoV-2 infection because of exposure through the family member, the patient was instructed to follow strict COVID isolation precautions. Eight days later, his COVID-19 test also came back as positive. Post-discharge telephone calls at day 10 and week 4 revealed that the patient was appropriately responding to anticoagulation treatment and had no recurrence of his symptoms related to VTE/COVID-19.