A 48-year-old female, who denied any systemic diseases, presented with severe gross hematuria and voiding difficulty for one week and came to the emergent department of our hospital for help.
Tracing back her history, she had visited regional hospital for gross hematuria several weeks ago before she came to us. Urinary bladder tamponade was noted and manual bladder irrigation with blood clots evacuation was also performed. Further imaging with contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan showed left hydronephrosis, and a round, well-defined retroperitoneum mass was noted adhering to left upper ureter, lying at left para-aortic region and the aortic bifurcation level. It was measured about 4.3 cm, and displaced the ureter medially, and the ovarian vein anteriorly. It also indented on the psoas muscle. The mass showed homogenously vivid after contrast enhanced. Massive blood clots were found within renal pelvis and bladder. Diagnostic semi-rigid ureteroscopy was arranged, and serpentine blood clots were found within left ureter. However, the ureteroscopy could not pass the compression site, where the sharp angulation existed. Unexpectedly, blood pressure surged when they tried to pass the stricture site with ureteroscope. The diagnostic ureteroscopy was incomplete and double J stent was placed for hydronephrosis. She was then referred to our hospital for further management.
At our emergency department, fever up to 39.2’c was recorded, but the blood pressure was within normal range (112/71 mmHg). The accompanied symptoms include dysuria, urinary frequency, and urgency. Basic hemogram revealed leukocytosis and elevated CRP level, but there was no deterioration of renal function. Meanwhile, pyuria was also recorded through urine analysis.
Reviewing her CT at regional hospital, we could see left hydronephrosis with a left retroperitoneal tumor about 4.3 cm adhering to and compressing left upper ureter with massive blood clots in bladder . We also noticed that blood pressure surge during the ureteroscopy, so the presumption of paraganglioma was raised. Therefore, we tried to collect urine vanillylmandelic acid (VMA) and catecholamine for metabolic workup. Nevertheless, it was due to severe hematuria and bladder tamponade that we could not complete this study.
Fever gradually subsided after adequate antibiotics treatment. However, gross hematuria persisted with intermittent Foley catheter obstructed by blood clots. Manual bladder irrigation with blood clots evacuation was performed several times but in vain. Accordingly, her hemoglobin level dropped from 11 to 8 g/dL, so adequate blood transfusion was also given. During the clinical course before further surgical intervention, her blood pressure was kept within normal range.
After discussing with the patient, emergent excision of left retroperitoneal mass, which compressed and adhered to upper ureter, and possible nephroureterectomy with bladder cuff excision was arranged.
Under the impression of paraganglioma, though laboratory workup failed to be completed, we informed this situation to the anesthesiologist and made sure blood pressure was under cautious monitoring. During the operation, a round tumor was found adhesive onto left upper ureter, and severe adhesion between the tumor and gonadal vein was also identified. Extremely high blood pressure (> 200 mmHg) was detected during tumor manipulation even after multiple antihypertensive agents given by anesthesiologists. After tumor blood supply ligation, blood pressure restored to normal range rapidly. The patient recovered smoothly after the operation, and no hypertension was recorded after the surgery. The hemoglobin level also came back to normal range. Finally, she was discharged 9 days after the operation.
For the surgical finding, we found the specimen was a 4 × 3.5 × 3 cm elastic mass, which attached to left ureter, compatible with CT findings . Microscopically, the tumor cells originated from outer muscle layer and adventitia of left ureter . The neoplastic cells are round to polygonal with abundant eosinophilic granular to clear cytoplasm. The tumor cells are positive for Chromogranin A and Synaptophysin.
Six months after the surgery, the level of 24 h-urine catecholamines were within normal range. The follow-up computed tomography also revealed no recurrence of retroperitoneal tumor.