A 46-year-old male developed fever of 37.8℃, sore throat, and pain and swelling in elbows, wrists, knees and ankles 3 weeks before admission. Physical examination found grade 1 tonsils and laboratory tests revealed leukocytosis of 15.79 × 10^9/L (85.5% neutrophils) at the onset. He was treated for acute pharyngitis with cephalosporin and penicillin for 11 days but symptoms did not resolve. He was admitted to the local hospital 10 days ago because of fever of up to 40.1℃, accompanied with skin rash which was more conspicuous during febrile episodes. Blood tests showed elevated inflammatory markers but did not find clues of infections or autoimmune diseases . Tumor markers, vitamins levels and thyroid function were normal. Bone marrow aspiration showed no findings of phagocytosis. CT scans of the thorax and abdomen were unremarkable. During admission, he was treated on an empirical basis with piperacillin/tazobactam, moxifloxacin, imipenem/cilastatin, teicoplanin, tigecycline and meropenem sequentially but were all of no avail. AOSD was thus suspected. However, he suddenly fell unconscious 14 h ago and was transferred to our hospital. Glucosteroids was not used as planned because of delayed diagnosis of AOSD.
On admission, vital signs were as follows: T: 38℃, HR: 87 bpm, R: 18 bpm, BP:117/86 mmHg, SPO2: 98%. Physical examination found patchy salmon-colored skin rash in the trunk and thighs . Enlarged axillary lymphadenopathy was detected but with no hepatosplenomegaly. Glasgow coma scale was graded 4 (E1V1M2). Pupils were symmetric in size but unreactive to light. Neck was stiff. Babinski signs were positive bilaterally. Laboratory tests results were listed in Table . Lumbar puncture revealed opening pressure of 130mmH2O. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed elevated erythrocyte count to 120 × 10^6/L with normal leukocyte count. CSF glucose, protein and chloride levels were normal. Cultures, cytology and next generation sequencing (NGS) of CSF were negative. Brain CT and MRI revealed lesions involving bilateral striatum, thalamus, and brain stem, typical for ANE . Brain digital subtracted angiography (DSA) was conducted to rule out venous thrombosis and other cerebral vascular diseases. His condition deteriorated rapidly and was intubated on hospital day 2. A repeat brain CT revealed hemorrhage in the lesions . ANE accompanied with AOSD was considered. However, his relatives gave up treatment and the patient passed away on hospital day 3.