A 60-year-old male complaining of sudden left chest and back pain after the severe vomiting of alcohol was transferred to a local hospital. Computed tomography (CT) and chest X-ray examinations showed the findings of left tension pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum, and bilateral pleural effusion, suspicious of spontaneous intrathoracic esophageal perforation . A 20-Fr. trocar was inserted into the left chest pleural cavity, and cloudy dark pleural effusion with gastric juice was discharged. He was transferred to our hospital by a helicopter for further treatment. On arrival, the patient was tachycardic (113 bpm) and tachypneic (32 bpm) and showed signs of respiratory failure (SpO2 of 96% with oxygen at 8 L). He breathed with difficulty, and the breath sounds of the left chest were decreased. There was subcutaneous emphysema in the neck and chest. His face was pale, and his skin was cool and damp. The drain inserted in the previous hospital was removed accidentally during the transfer. His blood test results were as follows: total white blood cell count, 8600/L; platelet count, 229,000/L; C-reactive protein level, 25.68 mg/dl; blood urea nitrogen level, 27.9 mg/dl; and serum creatinine level, 1.36 mg/dl. Through the examinations, his general condition became worse and he began to show dramatic signs of septic shock. We diagnosed him with intrathoracic esophageal perforation and chose conservative treatment with esophageal stent and drainage of the chest and mediastinum rather than any aggressive surgical treatment because surgical trauma in such a critically ill patient could be fatal. We first transferred the patient to the operating room. The anesthetist administered an induction agent while applying cricoid pressure, and rapidly performed the intubation without positive pressure ventilation not to damage the perforation site of the esophagus (rapid sequence induction). Under general anesthesia, we inserted a 20-Fr. trocar into the left posterior pleural space under fluoroscopic guidance; soon, approximately 1300 cc of dark fluid with gastric juice was discharged, and then his vital signs became stable. We evaluated the location of the esophageal perforation by endoscopy and identified a pinhole in the left posterolateral wall of the lower esophagus (38 cm from an incisor) . We did not perform esophagography. We placed a silicon-covered stent with a check valve (HANROSENT®, M.I. Tech, Gyeonggi-do, Korea) at the esophagogastric junction (EGJ) to cover the area of the fistula . Next, we inserted a double elementary diet tube (W-ED® tube, Covidien, Japan) into the duodenum and an 18 Fr. trocar into the left anterior wall. The operative time was 58 min, and the bleeding volume was little. These procedures were performed less than 24 h after onset. As intensive medical care, the patient was administered broad-spectrum antibiotics and catecholamine. The bacterial culture of the blood did not represent any bacteria, but we firstly administered a broad-spectrum antibiotic and an antifungal drug, because our patient was susceptive of bacterial septic shock. Enteral nutrition with the W-ED tube was started on the next day. The two trocars and the W-ED tube were under continuous suction at − 5 cmH2O mmHg and at − 20 cmH2O every 30 s. On the 6th day, we inserted an additional thoracic drainage tube into the left pleura under CT guidance due to fluid accumulation close to the perforation site, and the patient was discharged to the general ward on the 7th day. We performed endoscopy to evaluate leakage using urografin and changed the esophageal stent almost triweekly. The fistula was healed on the 45th day and the granulomatous tissue growth around the esophageal stent was found , and then the esophageal stent was finally removed on that day. On the 59th day, we removed the W-ED tube, and the patient began eating orally. The thoracic drainage tubes and trocars were removed, and he was discharged home on the 70th day. Endoscopy showed the complete healing of the fistula at 4 months .