A 27-year-old Japanese woman (gravida 0) underwent radical hysterectomy and left adnexectomy for stage 1b cervical cancer and an endometrial cyst of the left ovary, followed by four cycles of postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy with intravenous paclitaxel and carboplatin drips at Izumi City Hospital (the previous institution of Izumi General Hospital). Her serum level of squamous cell carcinoma antigen (SCCA) was 5.6 ng/mL before radical hysterectomy and 0.9 ng/mL after postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy. Her high cancer antigen 125 (CA125) serum level of 79 U/mL before radical hysterectomy was considered to mainly originate from the endometrial cyst of the left ovary, and this level decreased to 5.1 U/mL after postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy. Three years after the primary treatment, the patient’s CA125 serum level was elevated at 161 U/mL, and it further increased to 1260 U/mL 10 months later . She began to feel chest pain, and computed tomography showed swelling of left supraclavicular lymph nodes and mediastinal lymph nodes . Biopsy of a left supraclavicular lymph node showed metastasis of squamous cell carcinoma, and type 18 human papillomavirus DNAs were detected by molecular biological analysis. She was a nonsmoker, and we considered the presence of human papilloma virus deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) showed that the lymph node metastasis originated from cervical cancer; the endoscopic examination for upper digestive tract was not scheduled. The patient underwent chemoradiotherapy at 60 Gy/30 times for 6 weeks combined with an intravenous cisplatin drip weekly at 40 mg/m2.
Three weeks after beginning chemoradiotherapy, the patient’s chest pain decreased in severity. Six weeks after beginning chemoradiotherapy, the left supraclavicular lymph node swelling disappeared, and computed tomography showed that the mediastinal lymph nodes had decreased in size. The serum level of CA125 decreased to 175 U/mL. The serum level of SCCA was 1.2 ng/mL before chemoradiotherapy and 0.9 ng/mL after chemoradiotherapy. After the chemoradiotherapy, the patient received four cycles of chemotherapy with irinotecan and cisplatin followed by six cycles of chemotherapy with paclitaxel and carboplatin. The serum levels of CA125 and SCCA were then measured at 12.8 U/mL and < 0.5 ng/mL, respectively. At the time of this writing, the patient had been followed in an outpatient clinic for more than 8 years, and no further metastasis has been found.
We considered that the elevated serum CA125 level originated from metastatic tumor tissue in the lymph nodes. We therefore immunohistochemically analyzed the tissues of the original cervical cancer and supraclavicular lymph nodes with antibodies to SCCA and CA125. Anti-SCCA1/SCCA2 antiserum showed cancer cells in the original cervical tumor and metastatic cancer cells in the supraclavicular lymph nodes . Anti-CA125 monoclonal antibody showed metastatic cancer cells in the lymph nodes but no cancer cells in the original cervical cancer tissues.