Our patient was a 43-year-old Caucasian man with severe hemophilia A and transfusion-related hepatitis B, hepatitis C and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). His HIV viral load was undetectable and cluster of differentiation 4 count was above normal at the time of surgery. No complications due to the hepatitis were noted at the time of surgery. He has longstanding hemophilia and has had multiple joints replaced over the years. On his right arm, he has received both a cemented TEA, seven years prior to presentation (Conrad-Morrey; Zimmer, Warsaw, IN), and a TSA 12 years prior to presentation. He was seen in the spring one year before presentation with arm pain of approximately one year’s duration and diagnosed with a pending interprosthetic fracture .
Within seven months, our patient suffered an interprosthetic fracture after a fall . He was seen on an urgent basis and a discussion about revision arthroplasty was started. He was initially treated nonoperatively, using a Sarmiento brace for comfort while awaiting surgery. Before the operation, he had a normal neurological examination in his right hand, known previous triceps weakness, and there were no signs of humeral TSA component loosening. The hemophilia clinic was consulted for presurgical optimization. With their management, it was decided to go forward with the surgery. After organizing the hemophilia clinic and internal medicine preoperative consultations, surgery eventually consisted of an APC reconstruction of his right distal humerus using a tibial allograft.
Our patient received factor VIII the evening before and the morning of the surgery. His factor VIII level was 2.34U/mL (normal range, 0.54U/mL to 1.47U/mL) on the morning of surgery. He received preoperative antibiotics for Gram-positive bacteria, and was then placed in the lateral decubitus position with an arm bolster. The previous posterior skin incision was used and the ulnar and radial nerves were isolated and protected. A triceps-sparing approach was used to expose the joint, working on the medial and lateral sides of his humerus and leaving the insertion intact on the olecranon. The axis pin was dissociated and the humeral component was loose. The cement mantle came out with little difficulty. The ulnar component was solid with no loosening, so it was left in place. The existing distal humerus stalk was then inspected; we noted a large posterior defect and thin cortical shell both medially and laterally, with very poor bone quality anterior in the distal segment. The previous fracture was found to be united in malposition.
Given the malposition and poor quality bone, we elected to proceed with an APC. The residual humeral bone was osteotomized to remove the malunion and cortical shell. Intraoperative tissue samples were sent to pathology and no evidence of acute infection was identified. This left a stable straight cylinder of bone about 1cm to 2cm distal to the shoulder prosthesis. The allograft for the distal humerus was fashioned from an intact tibia diaphysis. All fibrous tissue was removed from the allograft followed by preparation of the canal. A high-speed burr was used to prepare the proximal extent of the allograft to barrel-stave the allograft over the humerus itself. The distal tibial allograft segment was then osteotomized to leave the appropriate length of the humerus distally. A small size humeral component was used to match the ulnar component. The tibia allograft was prepared using the appropriate broaches. Rotation of the tibia allograft was confirmed and the trial component was inserted, followed by reduction of the elbow prosthesis. Near full extension was achieved and flexion beyond 130°. After cleaning the canal, the allograft was retrograde filled with commercially available cement containing gentamicin. The allograft was barrel-staved onto his humerus first. The cement was then placed into the allograft followed by positioning of the implant into the allograft. A small size distal humerus component was then cemented into place. Care was taken to ensure no extravasation of cement at the host-graft and around his radial nerve. The nerve rested free on the proximal aspect of the allograft at the end of the procedure. His ulnar nerve was transposed anteriorly and ensured to be free from tension with a range of motion of his elbow. The deep medial and lateral fascia was closed with a #1 Vicryl suture; a Hemovac drain was placed deep and superficial to his triceps fascia; the subcutaneous tissue was closed with 2-0 Vicryl suture and his skin closed with a 4-0 Monocryl suture.
Our patient was brought to the postoperative recovery room in stable condition. Unfortunately, an immediate postoperative radial nerve palsy was noted. We placed our patient into a wrist drop splint and he followed up at six weeks with minimal pain and no signs of infection. The postoperative radial nerve palsy persisted, with a normal median and ulnar nerve examination. The wrist drop splint was maintained and electromyogram and nerve conduction studies were organized. Three months after the operation, our patient noted subjectively that his wrist extension and dorsal numbness was improving so he was not using his splint as much. At the time of his electromyogram and nerve conduction studies four months after the surgery, he had grade 2/5 to 3/5 bilateral triceps strength (known prior to previous surgery), grade 2/5 wrist extension, grade 0/5 extensor digitorum communis, extensor indicis proprius and thumb extensors, with decreased pin-prick sensation to his superficial radial and posterior cutaneous forearm. Sensory studies resulted in normal findings for his median and ulnar nerves for both his arms. His right radial nerve demonstrated decreased amplitude at 8μV (left radial nerve, 40μV). Results from bilateral median and ulnar nerve motor studies were normal. Right radial nerve motor studies showed an absent response, fitting with severe radial neuropathy, which is axonal in nature. Some activity of the brachioradialis and posterior cutaneous nerve of his forearm placed the injury between the spiral groove and takeoff of the brachioradialis. Some denervation was demonstrated in his extensor indices proprius. Our impression was that the palsy was either due to a traction injury during the revision or due to the hemophilia, with hemorrhage within the nerve itself secondary to traction.
At 28-months follow-up, our patient stated he was able to perform all activities of daily living (ADL) without restrictions and had not had any concerns with infection since the surgery. His pain was well controlled and he denied any symptoms of instability of his elbow or weakness in his hand. He had near complete resolution of his radial nerve palsy. He had no concerns with his elbow and was quite satisfied. On examination, his incision had healed well, with no signs of current infection, and he had a regular radial pulse. His wrist examination demonstrated slight decreased sensation to the first dorsal web space, and normal median and ulnar sensation. His motor examination demonstrated 5/5 wrist extension, 4/5 extensor pollicis longus, and 5/5 finger extension with no lag. The remaining wrist and hand examination were normal. His wrist extension was 90°, flexion 90°, pronation 95°, and supination 0°. An elbow examination demonstrated 4/5 flexion and 2/5 extension (left 3/5). The arc of motion of his right elbow was 31° to 131° while the left was 15° to 141°. X-rays revealed complete incorporation of the APC to the native humerus with no evidence of loosening and resorption of the olecranon .