A 28-year-old woman presented to our department with body itching for more than ten days and jaundice for nine days. This patient had a long-term history of living in an area in which echinococcosis is endemic. Medical examination demonstrated yellow discoloration in both the skin and sclera, and abdominal examination was negative. After admission, the laboratory tests indicated a serum total bilirubin (Tbil) level of 264.0 μmol/L (5–22 μmol/L), conjugated bilirubin (Dbil) level of 205.6 μmol/L (0–7 μmol/L) and unconjugated bilirubin (Ibil) level of 58.4 μmol/L (0–20 μmol/L). Serum tumor markers, including carbohydrate antigen 19–9, α-fetoprotein and carcinoembryonic antigen, were not present. On the imaging examination, an emergency computed tomography (CT) scan indicated a 6.0 × 5.3 cm cystic lesion in the head of the pancreas adjacent to the lower bile duct and main pancreatic duct that induced expansion. There were no solid nodules or calcifications in this lesion, and a slightly higher lesion density with a curved mild calcification was observed at the edge of the cyst . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) indicated the same signals at the center of the lesion and a high signal around the wall of the capsule, suggesting local diffusion limitation. MRCP imaging demonstrated that the bile duct and main pancreatic duct were clearly dilated, and the cyst communicated with the pancreatic bile duct . Based on the preoperative examination, a diagnosis of pancreatic cystadenoma was made.
During the laparotomy, a cyst lesion located in the pancreatic head was detected, which was adjacent to the duodenum and invaded the main pancreatic duct. After the cyst fluid was completely aspirated, the internal cyst collapsed and separated from what was previously considered the cyst wall . The intraoperative pictures demonstrated signs of hydatid cysts (CE-1). The pancreaticoduodenectomy procedure was initiated successfully, and a “Child type” chongio-/gastric/pancreatic/jejunal anastomosis was performed. The patient was discharged uneventfully 7 days after the operation. A 1-year course of albendazole (15 mg/kg/day) was admitted and no recrudescence was detected in the postoperative 2 years. Pathological results indicated the presence of Echinococcosis granulosus accompanied by inflammatory cell infiltration and eosinophilic infiltration .
A literature search was initiated to review primary pancreatic hydatid cysts. Based on our search results , 22 papers in PubMed reported 33 cases of primary pancreatic hydatid cysts from 2011 to 2021 [–]. In the 33 cases, 14 cases had cysts located in the pancreatic head, and 15 cases had lesions in the body/tail. Nineteen cases reported serum IgG levels, whereas the results of 8 cases were negative.