A 58-year-old Caucasian male presented via emergency medical services (EMS) following a cardiac arrest. He was found in ventricular fibrillation by EMS, resuscitation efforts following advanced cardiac life support (ACLS) protocols were followed, and return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) was subsequently achieved. At the time of hospital admission, he was taken to the cardiac catheterization lab and was noted to have a near 100% occlusion of the left anterior descending (LAD) artery and a 95% occlusion of the left circumflex (LCX) artery, both requiring placement of drug-eluting stents. A 90% occlusion of the right coronary artery (RCA) was noted, but was not immediately intervened on at that time. A transthoracic echocardiogram performed identified a left atrial mass measuring 2.15 cm × 2.22 cm and was noted to be intermittently obstructing the mitral valve. The left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was then noted to be 10–15% with severe diffuse hypokinesis of the left ventricle shortly after the left heart catheterization. Additionally, the right ventricle was borderline dilated and peak pulmonary pressure was 41 mmHg. The patient then became hypotensive and required an intra-aortic balloon pump, which was subsequently upgraded to an Impella device, and reached a maximum setting of p-6. He was then transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) and placed on milrinone, amiodarone, and epinephrine intravenously as well as inhaled nitric oxide in addition to his mechanical circulatory support. His initial calculated Fick’s cardiac output and index while on mechanical and vasopressor support were found to be 6.8 L/min and 3.3 L/min/m2, respectively, with a venous blood gas (VBG) at the time, which had shown an oxygen saturation of 72%. Due to acute renal failure, the patient was also started on continuous renal replacement therapy.
Supplemental history was unable to be obtained as the patient was intubated and sedated at the time of arrival. A history of alcohol abuse was identified, but no other cardiac risk factors were elucidated following discussion with the patient’s family. In addition, family history was significant for bladder cancer in his brother as well as heart disease in his father.
The cardiothoracic surgery and advanced heart failure teams were consulted and he was continued on hemodynamic support with multiple vasopressors and an Impella. A repeat transthoracic echocardiogram was performed 3 days following hospital presentation. LVEF was 35–40%, with diffuse hypokinesis of the left ventricular walls and the left atrial mass measuring at 3.14 cm × 2.02 cm .
After the first week of hospitalization, the patient was medically optimized for a planned resection of the left atrial mass, even though he had continued to require the Impella device at p-3 for hemodynamic support. The patient was then taken to the operating room for a single-vessel coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) and excision of the left atrial myxoma. Following the procedure, the Impella was able to be removed and the left atrial myxoma was sent to pathology.
In addition, he was able to be weaned off all vasopressor and inotropic medications within a day following the procedure, with the exception of dobutamine. On postoperative day 3, he was successfully weaned off dobutamine. During this time, he was also transitioned from continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) to intermittent hemodialysis (iHD). He was weaned off of mechanical ventilation and was initiated on guideline-directed medical therapy (GDMT) for his acute coronary syndrome and heart failure. As the patient became medically stable, he was subsequently transferred to inpatient rehabilitation.