A 49-year-old woman visited a neighborhood eye clinic complaining of a foreign body sensation and pain in her right upper eyelid of several days duration. She was referred to our hospital for further evaluation and treatment on the next day. Several years earlier, she had a tumor excised from her right eyelid, and the tumor was diagnosed as a spiradenoma. Our examination showed that her best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/30 OD and 20/20 OS. A round to oval-shaped nodule with smooth borders was present in the right upper palpebral conjunctiva , which was thought to be the same location of the previous tumor. The tumor was excised and evaluated histopathologically. The tumor cells were arranged in intertwining bands just beneath the conjunctiva. Two types of neoplastic cells were recognized; one had a small dark nucleus representing an undifferentiated cell, and the other was located at the center of the bands with large pale nucleus . Levels of mitotic counts were low (0.3/10 HPF) and immunohistochemical analysis showed that the Ki-67 labeling index was 2.8% . It was unclear if there were the tumor cells still in the incisional margin of the slices.One year later, she visited our hospital again complaining of pain in the right eye. A nodule of approximately 1–3 mm in size accompanying by enlarged blood vessels was observed at the right upper palpebral conjunctiva . This nodule was regarded as a recurrence. Preauricular and cervical lymphadenopathy was not present. Laboratory data including blood chemistry, and serum level of tumor markers were within the normal range. No abnormal findings were seen in the chest X-rays. The tumor was excised with adjunctive cryotherapy and examined histopathologically. The solid and well-circumscribed nodule was located beneath the conjunctival epithelium. The tumor cells were slightly basophilic with clear cytoplasm and oval nuclei were arranged in a thick trabecular pattern . The two cell pattern, which was recognized in the previous tumor, was inconspicuous. Mitotic activity was increased (5.5/10 HPF) throughout the tumor with no necrosis . Immunohistochemistry showed a Ki-67 labeling index of 12.0% . The tumor stained weak positive for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), and negative for carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), low molecular-weight cytokeratin (CAM5.2), synaptophysin, and chromogranin A immunohistochemically. Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) stain was positive in the cytoplasm , but the positivity disappeared after digestion by diastase . The tumor was diagnosed as a recurrence of the spiradenoma. There has been no recurrence in the 6 months after the surgical removal and cryotherapy.