An 56-year-old female patient presented with complaints of chest pain on exertion. On admission, the patient was normotensive with a mean arterial pressure of 70-85mmHg and a heart rate of 70 beats/min. A palpable mass was noted by physical examination, which was confirmed to be Stanford type B (De Bakey IIIB) acute aortic dissection by computed tomography angiography (CTA). The primary entry tear was located above the celiac trunk artery, while the distal tear connected to the enlarged pseudoaneurysmal sac was located near the aortic bifurcation . The patient was managed with the multi-layer bare-metal stent technique, in which 4 bare metal stents (one 24 × 80mm, one 28 × 80mm and two 26 × 80mm, Sinus-XL stent, OptiMed, Ettlingen, Germany) were deployed at the proximal segment of the descending aorta around the primary entry tear. Post-procedural angiography showed significantly reduced blood flow in the false lumen and the patient was discharged uneventfully.
Six years later, the patient complained of recurrent exertional chest pain, which was attributed to the enlarged descending aorta to more than 60mm with a patent false lumen on CTA. An endovascular procedure was performed to embolize the false lumen by using 3 vascular coils (20 mm*40 cm, Boston Scientific Interlock-35, USA). The angiography on completion revealed significantly reduced backflow in the false lumen and the patient was scheduled follow-up visits on a 6-month interval. Regrettably, subsequent imaging 1 year later showed gradual increase in the diameter of the descending aorta with a patent false lumen and no false cavity thrombosis . Thus, additional 4 vascular coils were delivered again to the false lumen , since it was the only available material readily available.
In the next 2 years of follow-up, CTA scan showed suboptimal false cavity thrombosis and aortic remodeling, and the patient experienced pain that can only be managed with analgesics. Therefore the patient was re-admitted for further treatment. In view of the unfavorable effect of coil embolization in this case, we decided to switch to the candy-plug technique with modifications for false lumen embolization. In brief, instead of tapering the midsection of the stent graft to 10-18mm to accommodate to the size of the vascular plug, an atrial septal defect occluder was used. At the procedure, the stent-graft was installed into the false lumen through the distal re-entry tear, followed by sealing of the distal re-entry tear by release of an atrial septal defect occluder (42–28-38mm, Starway Medicak Technology, Inc.) with a neck length of 4mm and a diameter of 28mm . Patient’s pain decreased significantly and obvious thrombosis of the false lumen was observed by CTA 6 month post-operatively .