A 44-year-old male presented with pain in both hips for 2 years along with a history of rest pain in both hips. The patient had a BMI of 28.4 and complained of difficulty in walking and prolonged standing with restricted movements in both hips. No history of any trauma/covid/steroid/ alcohol use in the past was elicited. On examination, tenderness was demonstrable on both the hip joints over the Scarpa triangle with the telescopy test being negative. No evidence of swelling or deformity was noted over both hip joints. Trendelenberg test was positive with an antalgic gait. The terminal range of movements was restricted in both hips. A plain radiograph of the pelvis with bilateral hips showed evidence of AVN of bilateral femoral heads as depicted in . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of both hips showed AVN of the bilateral femoral head with 10–30% involvement (Ficat-Arlet stage I) with the visualization of the hypointense line of demarcation. BM edema was demonstrated in the head, neck, and proximal shaft of the right femur with mild joint effusion in both hips.
Based on the MRI and clinical findings, the patient was advised to undergo surgical intervention for both hips and the patient was informed about the potential for AVN progression on the opposite side. However, the patient was hesitant and only agreed to have surgery done on his right hip, which was more symptomatic at the time and was therefore treated first using decompression and BMAC injection as depicted in Figs. , , , . The patient noticed a gradual reduction in pain and also the ability to do his daily routine activities without any restriction. One year later, the patient reported similar complaints of pain, restricted movement, and difficulty in activities of daily living in the left hip for which he underwent decompression along with the injection of AALCO implantation as depicted in Figs. and .
BMAC implantation: 80 ml of BM was aspirated from the right anterior iliac crest and was processed with the help of Ficoll solution by differential centrifugation to obtain 16 mL of autologous BMAC injectate. A total of 48 million BMAC cells were obtained.
AALCO implantation: 12 mL of BM was aspirated from the right anterior iliac crest and sent to Regrow Biosciences laboratory for the further ex-vivo culture of MSCs. Then MSCs are directed towards osteoblastic lineage till third passage. A total of 48 million AALCO were obtained. OSSGROW® (from Regrow Biosciences Pvt Ltd., Mumbai, India) is a commercially FDA-approved technology that involves implanting autologous adult live-cultured osteoblasts (AALCO), which are derived from mesenchymal stem cells sourced from the BM aspirate, for the treatment of osteonecrosis of the hip.
The patient reported a gradual reduction of pain and symptoms on both sides following the procedure and there was a gradual improvement in the modified Harris hip score (mHHS) from 29 to 77 on the right side and from 31 to 83 on the left side. However, comparing VAS and functional scores of both hips at the same follow-up intervals, the left hip (AALCO) was found to have better function and pain scores when compared to the right hip (BMAC) which was found to be statistically significant (p<0.05). The serial radiographs of both hips show the impact of both surgeries on the necrotic process of the femur head. At 4-year follow-up, the right hip (BMAC) started showing signs of AVN progression with femoral head flattening and sclerotic margins whereas the left hip (AALCO) does not show any significant disease progression even at the final follow-up of 6 years.