A 52-year-old-male patient presented to the hospital on 4th of January 2018 with a 1-year duration of chest tightness and shortness of breath. The symptoms had been worsening for the past 1 month. Physical examination showed BP120/70 mmHg, HR 72/min. Electrocardiography (ECG) showed a heart rate of 72/min, sinus rhythm and an incomplete right bundle branch block. Echocardiography (ECHO) of the heart revealed that the left atrium was 56 × 72 mm, the right atrium was 42 × 56 mm, the left ventricle was 42 mm, the right ventricle was 19 mm. Left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was 56%. Mitral valve disease with valve leaflet thickening, left atrial enlargement, thrombosis over the left atrial anterior wall and left atrial appendage was also noted. Arterial blood gas analysis was normal. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) with iodine based contrast medium was performed. It revealed a 3 × 2 cm mass on the epicardium, located just over the anterior wall of the right ventricular outflow tract . All these findings were consistent with the diagnosis of cardiac haemangioma. Patient was also revealed to have underlying rheumatic heart disease, specifically mitral stenosis with regurgitation during the investigation.
On day 5 of admission, patient underwent open surgery for tumour resection and mitral valve replacement. Median incision was performed, followed by cannulation of aorta, superior, and inferior vena cava. Cardiopulmonary bypass was established. Under moderate temperature and myocardial protection with cold blood cardioplegia, myocardial anterograde and retrograde cardioplegia perfusion through the aortic root and coronary sinus were established. A heart-shaped mass was visible on the surface of the anterior wall of the right ventricle. It was about 3 × 2 cm in size. The capsule was intact with a dark red appearance and tough texture. There was no adhesion to the surrounding tissue, and also no connection of blood vessels between the tumour and the heart, the haemangioma was nourished by general superfusion of blood. As a result, complete resection of the tumour was achieved with minimal difficulty. A patch of pericardium was sutured with 5–0 Prolene to repair the defect. Following that, the mitral valve was excised and the St Jude Regent No. 21 tissue valve was implanted. Post-operative histopathology examination (HPE) of the mass revealed multiple thin- and thick-walled dilated vessels, suggesting a cavernous type of haemangioma .
Post-operatively, patient was observed in the hospital for 2 weeks for another neurological illness and subsequently discharged well on January 24th, 2018. The chest tightness and SOB improved significantly after the operation, resulting in better exercise tolerance. After 3 months, the patient returned to the hospital for follow up. There were no new complaints. No haemangioma recurrence was seen on CTA.