The patient was a 62-year-old male.
After having been diagnosed with disseminated intravascular coagulation by an internist at a nearby medical clinic, the patient was transferred to the Medical Emergency Center at Takatsuki Red Cross Hospital, Takatsuki, Japan, where Klebsiella pneumoniae was detected from a blood/liver abscess culture. His condition was diagnosed as septicemia due to the liver abscess. Thereafter, meningitis and suppurative spondylitis occurred concurrently. Moreover, since the conjunctival hyperemia in both of his eyes did not improve, a medical house call by an ophthalmologist was requested.
The patient had a past medical history of alcohol-related hepatitis, liver abscess, and lumbar degenerative spondylosis.
Upon examination, the patient's visual acuity (VA) could not be measured due to his poor general condition and low level of consciousness. Bilateral ocular conjunctival hyperemia was observed, and an optical examination revealed iritis, posterior iris synechia, and cataracts. The ocular fundus was invisible due to the vitreous opacity, and an ultrasonic B-mode examination revealed subretinal abscess and suspected exudative retinal detachment, leading to the diagnosis of EBE.
Although the patient's ocular findings were considered to be an indication for vitreous surgery, the operation was deemed difficult to perform due to his poor general condition. Thus, we injected ceftazidime 2.0 mg/0.1 mL into the vitreous cavity of both of his eyes. Concurrently, we administered an intravenous drip treatment of 600 mg linezolid. Following the ceftazidime injections, the intraocular inflammation and exudative retinal detachment in his right eye did not improve and resulted in no light perception; yet the exudative retinal detachment in his left eye was gradually relieved and his corrected VA improved to 0.02. Thereafter, even though the scar formation in the macular lesion remained in his left eye, the endophthalmitis subsided and the subretinal abscess nearly disappeared. However, the patient revisited our department approximately 10 months later after having become aware of blurred vision in his left eye.
Upon examination, the patient's corrected VA was no light perception OD and 0.01 OS, and his intraocular pressure was 5 mm Hg OD and 2 mm Hg OS. The patient's right eye was affected by phthisis bulbi. In his left eye, progression of the posterior iris synechia and cataracts were detected and the fundus was difficult to observe. An ultrasonic B-mode examination revealed total retinal detachment .
For treatment, vitreous surgery was performed on the patient's left eye. First, after pars plana lensectomy, the vitreous gel was excised by use of a vitreous cutter. No posterior vitreous detachment occurred, and an artificial posterior vitreous detachment was created from the posterior to the peripheral pole. A proliferative membrane was observed on the temporal side of the scar lesion near the macula, which had been detected before the onset of retinal detachment, and a retinal break had formed at the temporal edge of the scar lesion due to the traction caused by the proliferative membrane . Next, the proliferation membrane was removed with vitreous forceps, and the highly viscous subretinal fluid was discharged from the retinal break. After removal of the peripheral vitreous gel, pneumatic retinal replacement was performed, followed by endolaser photocoagulation around the break . In order to relieve the residual vitreous traction, a peripheral encircling procedure was performed, and, finally, silicone oil tamponade was indicated. After surgery, the retina was reattached under silicone oil, the corrected VA improved to 0.02 (uncorrectable) , and the intraocular pressure was approximately 15 mm Hg in his left eye.