Sixty-one-year-old male.
Generalized weakness and bone pain.
No specific past medical or family history.
No specific occupational history.
The patient initially presented with bone pain accompanied by generalized weakness. The result of the urinalysis indicated signs of a urinary tract infection. Treatment with antibiotics was attempted, but without improvement. Thereafter, he was admitted for acute renal failure. Bone marrow biopsy was also performed, and the patient was diagnosed with multiple myeloma (IgG, lambda type, CRAB (−/+/+/+), ps1 iss3). Following the diagnosis, a hematologist started the patient on chemotherapy and hemodialysis.
The patient was the sole operator of a poultry farm, established in 1996, that had three chicken sheds in operation from 1996 to 2005 and two from 2005. The measurement of each chicken shed was 105 × 8 × 3 meters with a maximum capacity of approximately 30,000 chickens. Aside from two air intake and exhaust ventilators, six ventilator fans are present on the sidewalls of each chicken shed. The air intake and exhaust systems are used during chicken rearing periods. After the chickens mature, they are shipped out of the sheds, and then a consecutive fumigation is performed (approximately 6 times/months). In order to maximize the fumigation effect, ventilators are only turned on after the fumigation is finished, regardless of whether a worker is present in the shed at the time of the fumigation.
The patient’s tasks at the poultry farm included the management and maintenance of consumable supplies and hygiene control, although his main tasks varied depending on the chicken rearing period. During the chickens’ growth period, the patient’s job was to spray pesticides containing dichlorovinyl dimethyl phosphate or ortho-dichlorobenzene on the floors using hand sprayers to maintain hygienic conditions in the sheds. In addition, the patient performed irregular weeding around the outside of the sheds using paraquat dichloride. After the mature chickens were shipped out of the sheds, the patient was responsible for fumigating the inside of the sheds using a diesel-fuel operated, manual, combustion fog machine. Thus, the patient was exposed to various chemicals during the fumigation, and other than cotton masks and cotton gloves, he wore no other personal protective equipment. The entire fumigation process from the inside wall to the entrance of the shed takes approximately one hour. Overall, five to six fumigations were performed in two months; thus, the average time spent on fumigations was approximately 18 hours per month between 1996 and 2005 when all three sheds were in operation and 12 hours per month from 2006 to 2011 when two sheds were in operation (Additional file : Table S1). Therefore, the estimated time spent fumigating was approximately 3,024 total hours over the course of the patient’s employment at the farm.
According to the materials safety data sheet, the fumigation chemicals used contain dichlorovinyl dimethyl phosphate, ortho-dichlorbenzene, cresol, methyl alcohol, benzalkonium chloride, high boiling tar acids, paraquat dichloride, sulphonic acid, chlorinated xylenols, and formaldehyde . Previous measurements of chemicals used in the farm do not exist because the patient, who was the sole operator of the poultry farm, did not record this information.
Reenactment of the fumigation tasks were performed in January 2013 using personal samplers to estimate the levels of exposure to formaldehyde and organic solvents including benzene, which is an impurity sometimes present in pesticides . Samples were collected over the course of one hour. Eight-hour time weighted average exposure concentrations and the short-term exposure limit were calculated. The concentration of formaldehyde and benzene were estimated using NIOSH 2016 and the 1501 methods . Samples were analyzed using high-performance liquid chromatography for formaldehyde and gas chromatography with a flame ionization detector for benzene.
The results of our analysis showed only small traces of benzene in the collected samples; however, our results may not be representative of the actual concentration of benzene in the pesticides used. The concentration of formaldehyde was estimated as 17.53 ppm, which greatly exceeds the time-weighted average and short-term exposure limit of 0.5 ppm and 1.0 ppm, respectively, that are suggested in the Korean Industrial Safety and Health Act .