The patient was a 24-year-old tertiary-educated female who worked in a remote village as a teacher. The patient presented to our emergency department via ambulance as a referral from a hospital where she had been managed for two days for pelvic inflammatory disease (PID). She presented with a 2-day history of sudden onset central abdominal pain that was piercing, constant, aggravated by walking or lying flat but relieved on bending over. It was not associated with food intake or high-fat meals but with fever, chills, headaches, nausea, and non-bilious vomiting that later became bilious. The pain was rated 9/10 and rendered her unable to perform her daily activities. Her past medical history revealed chronic recurrent abdominal pain that was associated with vomiting for the past seven years. It was managed as either peptic ulcer disease (PUD) or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) with omeprazole without a confirmatory test. She had no prior surgeries. She did not smoke cigarettes, drink alcohol, or use illicit drugs. She was single and sexually active. She was triaged and managed from the emergency department as a gynecological case with suspicion of PID. Our general surgery team was consulted after she experienced her first episode of bilious vomiting, on suspicion of intestinal obstruction on admission day three.
The examination revealed a young female adult who was met bent forward by her bed moaning in pain. On lying down she assumed a knee-chest position. She was neither pale nor jaundiced. Her temperature was 37.4 degrees Celsius. She had tachycardia of 105 beats per minute (bpm) and a blood pressure reading of 110/68 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg). The precordium examination had normal findings. She had tachypnea of 30 cycles per minute (cpm), and air entry was normal with vesicular breath sounds throughout the lung fields. The abdominal examination revealed a flat abdomen that moved with respiration. No scars were seen on her abdomen. She had generalized abdominal tenderness marked in the epigastric and umbilical areas with guarding and rebound tenderness. There was no organomegaly palpated. Digital rectal examination was normal with normal soft stools in the rectal ampulla.
Laboratory investigations showed anemia (HB: 9.1 g/dL) with normal blood urea, creatinine, electrolytes, and liver function tests (See ).
She was kept nil-per-os (NPO). A nasogastric (NG) tube decompression was done with about 450mLs of bilious fluid drained, after which the abdominal pain remarkably subsided to a pain score of 2/10. She was managed on intravenous (IV) fluids and medications (lactated ringers solution, normal saline solution, dextrose 5 % solution, omeprazole, morphine, and paracetamol). An impression of acute intestinal obstruction was made with a differential of acute pancreatitis. Further investigations revealed normal serum amylase, and lipase levels (See ).
An abdominal x-ray was considered normal under the consideration of intestinal obstruction. A review of the x-ray in hindsight, post-surgery, revealed the absence of a caecal gas shadow in the anatomical right lower quadrant. It was noted in the epigastrium with the large intestinal loops seen on the left side of the midline on the X-ray .
An abdominal ultrasound showed normal findings. A computed tomography (CT) scan was done which reported swirling of the vessels and mesentery in the central abdomen around the axis of the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) with moderate distension of the central loops of the small bowel. This was interpreted as a midgut volvulus with small bowel obstruction.
Based on these findings an emergency exploratory laparotomy was performed by a specialist and a resident in general surgery on account of the small intestinal volvulus about 2 h after receiving the CT scan report. The intra-operative findings were a high-riding caecum and Ladd bands constricting a segment of the duodenum on the right side . The ligament of Treitz was on the right side of the midline. These were indicative of malrotation. The bowel was viable, and no volvulus was noted. A Ladd procedure was done; the Ladd bands were divided, and the C-loop of the duodenum was straightened. The adhesions surrounding the SMA were divided, and a prophylactic appendectomy was performed. The caecum and colon were mobilized and reflected to the left with the small intestines to the right in a “non-rotational” position.
The patient recovered uneventfully up to postoperative day five when she experienced colicky abdominal pain after meals. The pain was associated with a single episode of vomiting containing previously eaten food but progressed to several episodes of bilious vomiting. An NG tube was inserted which immediately drained about 480mLs of bilious gastric content. She recorded a blood pressure of 144/96 mm Hg, a pulse of 73 bpm, a respiratory rate of 20 cpm, and an oxygen saturation of 99 % on room air. An electrocardiogram and echocardiogram revealed hypertrophic heart disease. Serum electrolytes and renal function tests remained normal . She also developed surgical site infection with a culture and sensitivity results indicative of enterobacter aerogenes with sensitivity to amikacin. The patient was managed NPO and given intravenous fluids, IV antibiotics including IV amikacin, IV antihypertensives, IV omeprazole, IV analgesics, and placed on subcutaneous clexane.
The pediatric surgery team was consulted due to their expertise in managing malrotation. They advised watchful waiting for delayed gastric emptying that may result after the Ladd procedure with a differential of incomplete Ladd band release and duodenal stenosis from the constriction of the duodenum seen in the first surgery. The patient was managed conservatively and optimized to postoperative day 12 when she was stable. A repeat abdominal x-ray showed the double bubble sign on the erect view . A decision was taken with the pediatric surgery team to have a relaparotomy done. An informed consent was taken from the patient and surgery was performed by a specialist in pediatric surgery and a resident in general surgery under direct supervision of a consultant. The intraoperative findings were duodenal stenosis from a fibrous constriction of the duodenum with few non-constricting adhesion bands holding down the duodenum. The duodenum was dilated proximal to the stenotic end . The bands were released to free the duodenum completely. Duodenal patency was tested with saline injected into the stomach and milked down through the duodenum. The duodenum was stenotic. A Heineke-Mikulicz strictureplasty was done. The patency of the duodenum was confirmed, and a leak test was done to confirm the integrity of the anastomosis. An omental patch was added to reinforce the anastomosis .
The patient on postoperative day six experienced non-bilious vomiting after feeding. She was managed as delayed gastric emptying. She reverted to light diets and graduated to full feeds over three days, and the vomiting resolved. She was switched to oral medications and discharged on postoperative day ten after the second surgery in a stable condition.
The patient was seen on an outpatient basis with normal laboratory investigation. She complained of occasional colicky epigastric abdominal pain that resolved over a 2-month period during her outpatient care with conservative treatment. The patient is currently pain-free, has not experienced any episodes of vomiting as before surgery, has a normal bowel habit, and has returned to work as a teacher.