An 81-year-old Caucasian female with a remote history of renal cell carcinoma, hypertension, and pulmonary nodules presented to the hospital with 3 days of headaches and confusion. On examination, the patient was found to have an expressive aphasia. Computed tomography (CT) of the head demonstrated a heterogeneously enhancing left temporal mass with surrounding edema concerning for a primary neoplasm. The patient was then transferred to our institution for neurosurgical consultation. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with contrast was completed revealing a heterogeneously enhancing mass involving the left temporal lobe with extensive vasogenic edema raising concern for glial neoplasm [ and ]. The patient was administered intravenous dexamethasone without any improvement. Ultimately, a left frontotemporal craniotomy was performed with intraoperative findings consistent with abscess formation. The final pathology report described necrotizing granulomatous inflammation and immunostaining that was positive for Candida but negative for neoplasia. Cultures obtained intraoperatively grew C. bantiana [-]. The patient recovered well postoperatively and was discharged home on intravenous (IV) voriconazole.
Six weeks following initial operative management, the patient was readmitted with worsening confusion and repeat imaging demonstrated a recurrent abscess with significant edema and midline shift [ and ]. Understanding the risks for permanent neurologic deficit, the patient’s husband agreed to a “re-do” craniotomy and a gross total resection was achieved. The operative cultures remained negative, however, pathologic review again demonstrated Candida colonization. The patient developed communicating hydrocephalus and required an external ventricular drain. The CSF culture samples drawn during ventricular drainage were consistently negative for both fungus and bacteria, and the intracranial pressure remained low. CT imaging of the sphenoid and maxillary sinuses demonstrated pansinusitis. A chest X-ray performed during the patient’s ICU stay revealed the right upper lobe lesion, confirmed by CT as a cavitary lesion of the right upper lobe with hilar lymphadenopathy. A PET scan was completed revealing multiple lesions in the right lung making the patient a poor candidate for thoracic surgery intervention. Palliative care was consulted and the family did not want to pursue any further aggressive care. Oral flucytosine was added to the IV voriconazole, and the patient and family ultimately opted to transfer home with assistive services.
Remarkably, the patient had a significant improvement at her 6-week follow-up visit and an MRI of the brain showed decreasing size of the temporal lesion. A 8-month follow- up showed complete resolution of the left temporal lesion . The patient is home doing well carrying out many of her activities of daily living.