A 47-year-old male patient was first admitted to our department for further evaluation and treatment of a gastric mass incidentally discovered by gastroscopy during a routine health check-up. One week after undergoing exposed EFTR, the patient was re-admitted to our department due to fatigue and anorexia for 2 d.
The patient did not have symptoms such as abdominal pain, diarrhea, nausea, or vomiting.
The patient had a history of hypertension and took medication regularly.
The patient was a non-smoker and did not drink alcohol. He had no significant family history.
Both during the first and second hospitalization, physical examination revealed no obvious abnormalities, and his abdomen was soft without tenderness and no palpable mass.
Before exposed EFTR in the first hospitalization, laboratory tests demonstrated normal routine blood tests, coagulative function, liver function, and renal function. Moreover, common serum tumor markers, including alpha-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, and carbohydrate antigen 19-9, were normal.
Following exposed EFTR in the first hospitalization, on the day after surgery, the patient’s temperature was 37.5 °C, and routine blood tests showed the following: White blood cell (WBC) count: 14.5 × 109/L; neutrophil/granulocyte (NE) ratio: 85.6%; hemoglobin (HB): 127 g/L; and hypersensitive C reactive protein (hsCRP): 25.89 mg/L, which suggested post-polypectomy syndrome with fever and signs of inflammation. On the third day after surgery, all laboratory examinations showed normal results.
During the second hospitalization, laboratory examinations showed WBC count: 19.7 × 109/L; NE ratio: 82.9%; HB: 134 g/L; and hsCRP: 206.06 mg/L. Blood chemistry tests demonstrated signs of inflammation/infection. On the second day, laboratory examinations revealed WBC count: 12.3 × 109/L; NE ratio: 87.6%; HB: 114 g/L; and hsCRP: 161.16 mg/L. Blood tests indicated inflammatory and infectious complications; therefore, abdominal puncture fluid culture and blood culture were performed. Both aerobic and anaerobic cultures of the puncture fluid indicated infection with Klebsiella pneumoniae and Streptococcus parahaemolyticus, sensitivity to carbapenems, and negative blood culture.
Prior to exposed EFTR, endoscopic examination revealed a hemispherical protrusion, approximately 16 mm in diameter, located at the upper gastric curvature adjacent to the stomach fundus, with a smooth surface mucosa and poor mobility . Gastric endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) examination revealed a mass 19.3 mm × 16.1 mm in size, derived from the muscularis propria, which grew outside the cavity. The echo pattern of the mass was uniform and at a low level ; however, the results of EUS were insufficient for diagnosis. Gastric computed tomography (CT) illustrated a well-demarcated mass 16 mm × 15 mm in size, demonstrating mild enhancement, with an intact mucosal line. Additionally, the CT scan showed no significant evidence of lymph node enlargement or distant metastasis .
Following exposed EFTR, abdominal CT illustrated that titanium endoclips remained in the stomach, with a large amount of encapsulated fluid and gas accumulation around the stomach . Emergency gastroscopy also revealed a small amount of dark red bloody liquid in the lower part of the stomach and duodenum. After surgery, multiple metal endoclips were observed on the surface of the wound, with obvious swelling of the anal mucosa and a small amount of bleeding on the surface. The wound was cauterized with hemostatic forceps and re-clamped with metal endoclips. Ultrasound examination showed that a mixed mass of gas and liquid was detected around the upper abdominal cavity and stomach, which was approximately 80 mm × 151 mm in size with an alveolate-like shape inside. These imaging features guided treatment by abdominal puncture drainage and gastrointestinal decompression.