The study patient was a 61 year old male diabetic who had been treated with hemodialysis three times per week for 4 years, due to idiopathic end stage renal disease. Twelve years earlier, the patient had been diagnosed with brucellosis. At that time, he was hospitalized and hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) positivity was detected for the first time. No other members of his family were shown to have a hepatitis B infection on examination. The patient had never used intravenous drugs in the past and had no history of blood transfusion, nor had he ever traveled abroad. The patient did, however, have a history of multiple sexual partners. The laboratory analyses yielded; transaminase levels, ALT:41 U/L, AST:25 U/L; bilirubin levels, BU:0.1mg/dl, BC:0.3 mg/dl; HBsAg, positive (S/Co:3894); anti HBs antibody, negative; anti-HBcAg total antibody (anti-HBcIgG), positive; anti-HBcAg IgM antibody (anti-HBcIgM), negative; HBeAg antigen (HBeAg), negative; anti-HBe antibody (anti-HBe), positive; HBV DNA load, 5.94E+05 IU/ml; anti-HAV IgG, positive. Our case was characterized by seronegativity for HDV, HCV and HIV (he was also HIV-PCR negative) and with autoantibody negativity (anti-nuclear, anti-mitochondrial, anti-double stranded DNA and anti-smooth muscle antibodies). The patient did not give his consent for a liver biopsy procedure; therefore assessment of liver damage was not possible. The patient was evaluated as having "HBeAg - negative chronic hepatitis B," according to the European Association for the Study of the Liver (EASL)clinical practice guidelines, and he was treatment naive. Serological markers for HBV were tested using the commercially available microparticle enzyme immunoassay kit (AxSYM, Abbott Laboratories, IL, USA). HBV DNA was isolated from the serum sample on the bio-robot workstation, using magnetic-particle technology (QIAsymphony SP, QIAGEN GmbH, Hilden, Germany). HBV DNA was detected and quantified by a commercial PCR assay (artus HBV QS-RGQ test, QIAGEN GmbH, Hilden, Germany) on the real-time platform (Rotor-Gene Q, QIAGEN GmbH, Hilden, Germany). A pair of primers was designed (forward: 5'-TCGTG GTGGACTTCTCTCAATT-3' and reverse: 5'-CGTTGACAGACTTTCCAATCAAT-3') for amplification of the HBV pol gene region (pol gene sequence used routinely for HBV genotyping and genotypic resistance analysis to nucleos(t)ide analogues in our clinical laboratory). The PCR conditions were applied as previously described .
HBV genotype was determined by phylogenetic analysis. The nucleotide sequence was compared to those from the international DNA data bank (GenBank+EMBL+DDBJ+PDB). Phylogenetic comparison was performed by UPGMA analysis using the CLC Sequence Viewer 6.0.2 (CLC bio A/S, Aarhus, Denmark) software. However, the HBV genotype was also determined with the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLASTN program 2.2.25, blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) and by various genotyping tools; (I), The National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI, U.S National Library of Medicine, Bethesda - USA, www.ncbi.nih.gov), (II), The Genafor/Arevir - Geno2pheno Drug Resistance Tool (Center of Advanced European Studies and Research, Bonn - Germany, www.coreceptor.bioinf.mpi-inf.mpg.de), (III), and Stanford University HBV Drug Resistance Database (HBVseq: Sequence Analysis, hivdb.stanford.edu/HBV/HBVseq)
Extracted HBV DNA was amplified with biotinylated primers using AmpliTaq Gold DNA polymerase (Applied Biosystems, Inc., California, USA) and PCR buffer provided in the INNO-LiPA HBV genotyping kit (Innogenetics, Gent, Belgium) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The Lipa procedure was completed using the Auto-LiPA instrument (Innogenetics, Gent, Belgium). Phylogenetic analysis of the pol gene sequence showed that the isolate 181 clustered on a genotype G branch . The isolate 181 was also classified as genotype G according to subtyping tools . The genotyping match and molecular features of the HBV isolate as indicated by the different genotyping tools are illustrated . The biotinylated PCR product showed A + G mixed genotype infections with single reactive lines for genotype A and G on the INNO-LiPAHBV genotyping assay, respectively. After the pol gene sequence of the HBV isolate 181 was submitted, it was assigned a GenBank accession number: JN010438.