A previously healthy 42-year-old woman of Caucasian origin attempted to commit suicide on a winter afternoon in a hilly coastal area. Her intention was to fall to the sea from a tall rock. On her way to the rock, however, it became dark and she encountered a snow blizzard that made her disoriented and led to her subsequent fall towards a ravine. She was discovered after 18 hours. She had no history of alcohol use or substance misuse. She was not on any medication.
The patient was admitted to hospital in a semi-comatose condition, with a body core temperature of 29°C and no external injuries. She required warmed (43°C) intravenous fluid infusion, inotropic support and mechanical ventilation due to cardiocirculatory collapse (systolic blood pressure of 70 mmHg). Although cardiopulmonary bypass re-warming was proposed, the patient's relatives refused the use of any invasive technique. Her core temperature was restored after four hours of external electric warming.
An admission ECG showed atrial fibrillation with a mean rate of 85 beats per minute. The patient was administered 1 mg of atropine intravenously in the ambulance prior to admission due to bradyarrhythmia. ST segment elevation and Osborn waves were apparent in leads V4-V6 . Her ECHO revealed global hypokinesia of left ventricular (LV) wall segments with an ejection fraction of 25%. A mild rise in the patient's CK (290 U/l), troponin I (4.15 ng/ml) and BNP (330 pg/ml) values was also observed. Eight hours after the patient was warmed up, her sinus rhythm was restored and Osborn waves were replaced by minor ST elevation in leads V4-V6 .
Over the next few days the patient's ECHO showed a progressive circumferential thickening of the LV wall, which is suggestive of interstitial oedema . Her LV contractility also showed some improvement and atypical ST changes appeared on the ECG . Extubation and weaning from inotropes became possible on the third day. The patient then regained full consciousness and became asymptomatic apart from mild dyspnoea. Neurological examination was negative for focal neurological damage and a coronary angiography revealed normal coronary arteries.
Concerning the ECHO findings, prolonged exposure to a cold and wet environment could have led to a viral insult on the patient's myocardium. This could account for the mild rise of troponin I and the observed ischaemia-like changes of ECG. For this reason CMR was ordered, which showed hyper-enhancement of LV myocardium on T1-weighted images, before and after gadolinium, compatible with diffuse myocardial inflammation and oedema. Neither focal increases of mid-wall or subendocardial signal nor residual fibrosis were found. This made the diagnosis of acute viral myocarditis, as well as the need for a CMR guided biopsy, less likely. Furthermore, a viability study excluded myocardial infarction. No other causes on which to attribute the ECHO and CMR pattern were detected apart from PAHT. Viral and immunological screenings were also negative for myocarditis.
The patient constantly improved and was discharged after 10 days. She was given ACE-inhibitors, beta-blockers and a statin. We prescribed this empirical treatment on the basis of known pleiotropic properties of such drug categories.
One month later, the patient's clinical and biochemical parameters were completely restored and there were no evidence of myocardial oedema or depressed LV functions on her ECHO. At the time of writing this case report, the patient has already completed one year of clinical and ECHO follow up examinations and is doing well without any pharmacological treatment.