A 35-year-old male businessman presented to the emergency department of our center with the chief complaints of fever for the last two weeks, severe diffuse headache and vomiting for the past one week, and swelling and loss of vision in the right eye for the past two days. Fever was high-grade and intermittent with chills and rigors and was not relieved by over-the-counter medication, namely diclofenac 50 mg, used daily for 7 days. After one week of febrile illness, the patient developed a severe diffuse headache and nonprojectile vomiting for which he consulted a local practitioner and was admitted and started on empirical intravenous antibiotics (i.e., piperacillin/tazobactam). Two days after admission, he developed pain and swelling accompanied by loss of vision in the right eye, for which the patient was referred to our center. There was no significant history of smoking, alcohol consumption, medical illness or trauma to the face or eye in the past.
Physical examination revealed a temperature of 100.4 F and blood pressure of 101/67 mm Hg. He was alert and oriented to person, place, and time. In addition, he had no nuchal rigidity or neurologic deficit, and the rest of the systemic examination was within normal limits. On ophthalmologic examination, decreased eye movements with relative afferent pupillary defect due to optic nerve involvement was observed on the right side. The fundus examination revealed central retinal artery occlusion in the right eye. Furthermore, the examination of the nasal cavity revealed thick mucopurulent discharge in both of the middle meatuses.
Laboratory findings included a total leucocyte count of 11,500 per mm3 and mild neutrophilia (8,650 per mm3) with lymphocytes, eosinophils, monocytes, and basophils being in the normal range, as well as nonreactive results for HIV, hepatitis B virus, and hepatitis C virus. In addition, proteinuria and glycosuria in the urine, random blood sugar of 238 mg/dl, and hemoglobin A1C of 14.2% indicated uncontrolled sugar metabolism.
Mucosal biopsy from the middle meatus was sent to the microbiology laboratory for fungal examination. On KOH wet mount, irregularly branched septate fungal hyphae were seen in the sample. Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging showed the features of ethmoidal sinusitis with intracranial extension across the lamina papyracea causing orbital cellulitis and ischemic optic neuropathy on the right side. Based on the above findings, the patient was diagnosed with type II diabetes mellitus with invasive fungal rhinosinusitis leading to orbital cellulitis.
The patient was started on insulin glargine injection (8 units) at bedtime, human regular insulin injection (6 units) three times a day, and clindamycin injection (600 mg) three times a day; however, no antifungals were prescribed. After the implementation of surgical debridement, the tissue sample was sent to the microbiology laboratory for the identification of fungal elements by wet mount and culture methods. The KOH wet mount showed irregularly swollen, branched septate fungal hyphae .
In addition, the primary culture of the patient′s sample was performed on Sabouraud dextrose agar (SDA) and SDA with gentamycin and cycloheximide at two incubation temperatures of 37°C and 25°C. Four days after incubation, a dark brown mold was seen on the obverse side with nondiffusible black pigment on the reverse side of the growth . Lactophenol cotton blue staining from growth showed irregularly branched hyphae with spores having three septations . Based on the above micro-morphological findings, the diagnosis of rhino-orbital cellulitis due to C. lunata was established. Further confirmation was achieved by performing matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) which also led to the identification of the fungus as C. lunata.
Extensive surgical debridement was carried out, and the patient was started on intravenous (IV) voriconazole (6 mg/kg) every 12 h for 2 days, followed by 4 mg/kg IV every 12 h for 7 days . Itraconazole (200 mg) was also added twice a day for 4 weeks. For the correction of the underlying condition, the patient was subjected to glargine injection (8 units) at bedtime and human regular insulin injection (6 units) three times a day. In the maintenance phase, itraconazole (200 mg) and subcutaneous glargine (10 units) were given at night for 4 weeks. The patient was followed up for 4 weeks. Blood sugar was well controlled, and nasal symptoms were absent; however, the loss of vision in the right eye was irreversible.