In February 2019, a 22-year-old man presented to our emergency department with uncontrollable extremity and facial numbness, spasm and twitching lasting for half an hour. He had a history of the above-mentioned symptoms for 9 years and aggravation for 1 year (1–2 times a day, no consciousness disorder). Previously, multiple electroencephalogram examinations were performed at his local hospital, and the results showed occasional short-term sharp waves in his forehead. In the absence of laboratory tests of parathyroid hormone (PTH) and serum calcium, he was empirically diagnosed with epilepsy and treated with oral sodium valproate (1,000 mg qd) without improvement; hence, he decided to stop taking the medicine 6 months prior.
After visiting our hospital, the laboratory examination upon admission revealed the following: PTH 1.34 pmol/L (reference range, 1.60–6.90 pmol/L), serum calcium 1.55 mmol/L (reference range, 2.10–2.70 mmol/L), inorganic phosphorus (IPOS) 1.84 mmol/L (reference range, 0.81–1.45 mmol/L), magnesium 0.84 mmol/L (reference range, 0.67–1.04 mmol/L) and 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 63.11 nmol/L (reference range, 47.70–144.00 pmol/L). The urinary system ultrasonography was negative. He had no history of neck surgery, neck radiotherapy, parathyroid disease or hereditary disease. In addition, the patient had no special facial features, no history of macrovascular abnormalities, no history of serious fungal infection, such as Candida and Pneumocystis carinii, and an absolute count of peripheral blood lymphocytes in the normal range; thus, the possibility of congenital hypo-parathyroidism, such as De George’s syndrome, was excluded. Furthermore, no abnormal family history or autoimmune history was presented. Given the patient’s obvious extremity and facial numbness and spasm and because the laboratory tests showed hypoparathyroidism, hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatasemia, after excluding other possible etiologies, a diagnosis of IHP was suspected, and his symptoms were alleviated by urgent intravenous calcium gluconate (20 mg IV).
To comprehensively evaluate the condition of IHP, cervical ultrasonography was performed and showed negative results for the parathyroid glands, but a solid hypoechoic mass measuring 13×8×9 mm with irregular margins, macrocalcifications, a taller than wide shape and suspicious extracapsular extension was accidentally found in the upper pole of the right thyroid gland . Then, fine-needle aspiration (FNA) was performed on this nodule, and PTC was suspected according to the cytology results. In addition, all thyroid function test values were within the normal reference range, as well as the levels of thyroid peroxidase antibody (TPOAb) and anti-thyroglobulin antibody (TgAb). Subsequently, a therapeutic measure of oral Caltrate D 600 mg bid and oral calcitriol 0.25 µg qd was administered until the preoperative time to control symptomatic hypocalcemia.
Multidisciplinary discussions focused on how to address PTC and protect the parathyroid function in the presence of IHP. Given that the size of the primary lesion was greater than 1 cm, active surveillance and thermal ablation were ruled out, and surgical intervention was finally considered. According to the 2015th ATA guidelines, for patients with PTC >1 cm and <4 cm without high invasive characteristics, the initial surgical procedure can be either total thyroidectomy or lobectomy. To reduce the risk of postoperative hypoparathyroidism, hemithyroidectomy was determined as a basic surgical procedure. However, the primary premise is a sufficient surgical resection range to avoid the recurrence of the tumor and a secondary operation, which may also increase the risk of parathyroid injury. Therefore, the final resection range should be comprehensively judged by the preoperative and intraoperative findings. Besides, the protection of parathyroid gland during operation lies in careful anatomy and avoidance of parathyroid and supplied vascular injury.
As mentioned above, sufficient preoperative evaluations, including neck ultrasonography, thyroid function tests and FNA, were performed, and normal bilateral vocal cord activity was confirmed by preoperative vocal cord laryngoscopy. In addition, the serum calcium and PTH levels were evaluated again, and the PTH value was still at an abnormally low level (1.26 pmol/L), while the serum calcium value returned to within the normal range (2.24 mmol/L) after the calcium and calcitriol supplementation.
During the operation, first, right hemithyroidectomy and isthmusectomy were performed. After dissecting the isolated thyroid gland evenly according to a thickness of 1-2 mm, a hard, white nodule measuring approximately 13×10×10 mm in size was found in the upper pole of right thyroid gland. Moreover, several fused LNs ranging in size from 2 to 12 mm were found in the right central and pretracheal areas with a maximum diameter of 12×10×8 mm. Then, the tissues in the right central and pretracheal areas were examined by intraoperative cryosectioning, and a high LN metastasis ratio was found (5/5 and 6/8, respectively). Considering the possibility of LN metastasis in the contralateral central area, the patient could have needed RAI ablation after the operation; thus, total thyroidectomy plus bilateral CND were finally performed. After the excision of the tissue, a careful search in the dissected thyroid (slice thickness 1–2 mm) and central tissue was routinely performed to identify mistakenly cut parathyroid glands. During the operation, only one suspicious parathyroid was found in the superior left position , which was a small brown yellow nodule with a soft texture and approximately 3×2×2 mm in size that was supplied by the posterior branch of the superior thyroid artery; this gland was kept in situ. No suspicious parathyroid glands were found in the dissected thyroid or central tissue. Considering the diagnosis of IHP, we speculate that this patient only has one parathyroid gland, while the other parathyroid glands may be absent due to congenital or acquired factors. Intraoperative nerve monitoring (Medtronic, NIM-Response 3.0) was recommended to prognosticate recurrent laryngeal nerve (RLN) function.
The postoperative paraffin section examination showed a hard, grayish-white nodule measuring 13 mm in diameter with an extracapsular extension in the right thyroid gland, and the histological findings showed that the tumor cells were arranged in branched papillary structures, and the nucleus was ground glass-like with pseudoinclusion bodies and nuclear grooves; granular calcification was scattered between the tumor cells. Furthermore, a high metastatic ratio was found in the central LNs (5/5 in the right central LNs, 6/8 in the pretracheal LNs and 2/3 in the left central LNs), which ranged in diameter from 2–12 mm. A protocol of oral levothyroxine 100 µg qd was applied for long-term TSH inhibition. The postoperative calcium supplementation strategy consisted of calcium gluconate 20 mg IV bid and oral calcitriol 0.25 µg bid until discharge. Subsequently, the protocol was changed back to oral Caltrate D 600 mg bid and oral calcitriol 0.25 µg qd for the long term.
Three months after the operation, due to the high metastatic ratio of LNs, the thyroid function tests indicated stimulated TSH > 100 mU/L and stimulated human thyroglobulin (hTg) 21.23 µg/L, and 131 whole-body diagnostic imaging with a dose of 5 mCi revealed no abnormal radiation uptake anywhere in the body, except for the thyroid bed area; thus, RAI therapy was considered. Subsequently, RAI therapy with 150 mCi was performed. The patient was discharged 4 days after the treatment, and despite the long-term follow-up, the hTg value remained outside of the desired range recommended by the 2015th ATA guidelines .
During the follow-up period, the serum calcium and PTH values were continuously monitored, and the variation curve is shown in . The postoperative PTH value was lower than the preoperative value, while the calcium level remained normal because of the routine oral calcium and vitamin D supplementation. Moreover, significant symptoms of calcium deficiency were no longer mentioned by the patient, and no other surgery-related complications were found.