A 67 year-old woman was admitted to the Department of Respiratory Diseases and Thoracic Oncology for dyspnea, increasing over a few weeks, without infectious context. Her medical history was a breast cancer in 2006 treated by surgery, chemotherapy and radiotherapy, without evidence of recurrence, diabetes, systemic hypertension and an active smoking at 40 packet-years. The oxygen saturation at the admission was at 80% in room air, with need for supplementation of oxygen at 6 l/min. Arterial blood gas on 6 l/min O2 supplementation showed a PO2 of 70 mmHg, a PCO2 of 39 mmHg and pH of 7.42. Functional tests showed a moderate obstructive syndrome, with a forced expiratory volume in 1 sec (FEV1) on vital capacity ratio at 66%, and a FEV1 at 1350 ml (62%). Unfortunately, the evaluation of diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO) was not feasible at the time of the diagnosis, due to the severity of dyspnea. The CT-scan revealed ground-glass opacities and alveolar consolidation in the right lower lobe . Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated normal left ventricular ejection fraction. Cytology on bronchial aspiration and right lower lobe transbronchial biopsy found adenocarcinomatous cells with positive staining for Thyroid Transcription Factor-1 (TTF-1) in immunohistochemistry (IHC). Brain CT-scan was normal, and PET-CT showed localized hypermetabolism on the right lower lobe. A pulmonary angiography was performed. The temporary balloon occlusion of the right lower pulmonary artery showed a rapid increase of the oxygen rate from 90% on oxygen 6 L/mn to 100% in room air, and the patient underwent thereafter an intravascular occlusion of this artery by coils and plugs . The oxygen saturation increased instantly to 100% at room air; arterial blood gas at room air showed a PO2 of 82 mmHg, a PCO2 of 33 mmHg and a pH of 7.43. One week later, a lower right lobectomy with mediastinal lymphadenectomy was performed without post-operative complication. The pathological study showed a 9 cm-sized lepidic predominant adenocarcinoma (pT3N0M0), with necrotic and hemorrhagic changes due to the embolization, and Cytokeratin 7 (CK7) and TTF-1 positive IHC staining. The patient received adjuvant cisplatin and vinorelbine chemotherapy.