A 57-year-old Caucasian man was admitted to the emergency room in a febrile comatose state. He was working as a chimney sweep and was known for hypertension, type II diabetes, dyslipidemia and essential tremor for which he had been prescribed topiramate 6 weeks earlier, at an initial dosage of 25 mg per day. The dosage was progressively increased by his physician, up to 50 mg twice a day on the day of admission. Other medication included citalopram, clonazepam, allopurinol, ibuprofen, mefenamic acid, metformin, esomeprazole, propranolol, losartan, torasemide, and hydrochlorothiazide.
Our patient was admitted in July, and the temperature on the day of his admission reached 39.7 °C (103.4 °F, heat index >93). The mean temperature of the week before was 36.6 °C (97.3 °F), making this week the second warmest week noted in Switzerland for more than 150 years, according to the national meteorological station .
Earlier on that day, as he was walking toward his car after work, our patient suddenly lost consciousness. At the arrival of the ambulance, our patient was found in a comatose state, with a Glasgow Coma Score (GCS) of 3. He was tachypneic with a rate of 50 breaths per minute with a preserved oxygen saturation and his tympanic temperature was more than 41 °C (105.8 °F), reaching the maximal scale of the thermometer. His blood pressure was 110/62 mmHg and his heart rate was 89 beats per minute. The onsite glycemia was 10 mmol/L. He was intubated and then brought to the emergency room. Given these circumstances, the initial neurologic examination was limited, but showed no asymmetrical pattern, no clonus, and no hyperreflexia.
On arrival, his temperature was 40.4 °C (104.7 °F) and he became hemodynamically shocked, needing volume resuscitation with 4 liters of sodium chloride 0.9 % and administration of noradrenaline. The electrocardiogram showed ventricular bigeminy and he received intravenous magnesium. Ceftriaxone and acyclovir were administrated, given a primary hypothetical diagnosis of meningoencephalitis.
Table depicts the blood analyses at admission and a few hours later. They reflect a progressive multiple organ failure developing within 48 hours. A brain and thoracoabdominal computed tomography (CT) scan with injection of radiocontrast media showed no abnormalities except nonspecific, basilar pulmonary infiltrates of limited interest to explain our patient’s condition. Echocardiography showed a normal left ventricular ejection fraction and no pericardial effusion.
A lumbar puncture showed an albuminocytologic dissociation (1 M/L leukocytes, 0.72 g/L proteins) without oligoclonal distribution, and an augmented glycorrachia (5 mmol/L). Cultures of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) remained sterile and viral polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays [enteroviruses, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), herpes simplex virus (HSV), human herpes virus 6 (HHV6), Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)] were negative, as well as blood serologies (HIV, parvovirus B19) and blood cultures. Toxicological analysis was only positive for benzodiazepines. The electroencephalogram (performed when our patient was already extubated and alert) showed no sign of epilepsy.
The hemodynamical and neurological courses were quickly favorable, allowing for an extubation and a transfer to a regular hospital ward within 24 hours. A clinical examination after extubation was strictly normal, including complete neurological status, and our patient was symptom-free.
Our patient could not recall what happened on the day he lost consciousness. Given our suspicion of heatstroke and the lack of evidence for an infectious disease, antibiotics and antivirals were stopped. His history was completed. Our patient had spent several hours in an unusually hot environment 3 days before the admission, while attending a meeting under a tent. It has to be pointed out that the weather had been exceptionally hot in Switzerland during this period of time, with temperatures reaching record levels. When specifically asked about his sweating, our patient immediately reported a decrease in his sweating since he started to take topiramate, while he used to sweat profusely before.
The clinical and biological courses were uneventful, with a normalization of all the parameters within 1 week, except for his gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) level, which remained at the upper limits of normal, as already noted by his physician in the past.