A 71-year-old male patient was admitted into our hospital with chronic right flank pain. The abnormal computed tomography (CT) image presentation of right renal mass, revealed by occasional health examination, accompanied with the complaint of intermittent nausea. Besides, his past medical history also included diabetes mellitus (type 2) for 10 years and significant hypertension for 12 years, ranging from 140–160/90–95 mmHg, fluctuated periodically. Regular combined subcutaneous injection of short-acting insulin and insulin glargine was recorded for the treatment of diabetes mellitus, and the patient claimed that the serum glucose level was controlled satisfactorily all the time. As for hypertension, nifedipine sustained-release tablets were prescribed as the oral therapy by the physician, but the patient admitted that he failed to follow the long-term regular medication.
The patient’s height was 171.0 cm, and the body weight was 65.0 kg. The BMI was 22.23 kg/m2. The laboratory tests presented the elevated level of white blood cell (WBC) count (29.9 × 109/L). The red blood cell (RBC) count and other vital parameters were all within the reference range.
As for the medical image examinations, the routine chest X-ray image did not reveal the abnormal findings. The strong and heterogeneous enhancement pattern from the dual-source 64-slice enhanced CT-scanned films including arterial phase, venous phase, and excretory phase indicated the radiologic diagnosis of right malignant renal tumor with the size of 13.0 × 10.0 × 8.0 cm .
In order to facilitate the surgical orientation and improve the manipulating accuracy, the data from CT images was extracted, and the three-dimensional digital model (3D-DM) was reconstructed. The copied information was analyzed and reconstructed into the 3D-DM by using a postprocessing software named three-dimensional medical image reconstructing and guiding system (3D-MIRGS, China). The retroperitoneal space along with critical anatomic structures including renal tumor, the relevant vasculature, the kidney, and the renal collecting system on the affected side were reconstructed and marked by using different colors simultaneously .
The retrolaparoscopic RN was performed under the assisted navigation of 3D-DM at the Department of Urology. The right kidney along with the right adrenal gland was dissected and excised completely. The hemostasis was achieved carefully.
The operative time was 1 h and 30 min, with no intraoperative complications happened. The estimated blood loss was about 20 mL. The size of resected tumor was 10.0 × 8.0 × 6.0 cm. The final pathological diagnosis was hybrid (clear cell and papillary type) renal cell carcinoma (nuclear grading III) . WBC count fell back to the level of 10.6 × 109/L at the first day postoperatively, which further dropped down to 7.3 × 109/L 2 days later. The recovery course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged after 7 days postoperatively.
Ten days after the patient was discharged, he was readmitted with the chief complaint of high fever with severe right flank pain. CT scanning revealed that right retroperitoneal hematoma and the blood routine showed the dramatic elevation of WBC count (96.3 × 109/L). At the same time, the body temperature was high (37.9 to 40.5 °C). ALR was established. He was treated with systemic antibiotics and the temperature decreased, but the WBC count still remained on high level. After the consultation of multi-disciplinary team and department discussion, we decided to perform the percutaneous puncturing and drainage for him after a 5-day systemic antibiotic therapy. Even though there was bloody drainage fluid with the amount of about 300 mL each day, the patient’s condition still exacerbated rapidly and the CT scanning result showed no significant shrinkage for the retroperitoneal hematoma . Five days after the drainage, the patient’s symptom of right flank swelling and pain still aggravated significantly. In spite of the immediate reoperation of hematoma evacuation, the patient died of multiple organ failure 10 days after the reoperation eventually. The day before his clinical death, the rechecked CT scanning images showed the rapid retroperitoneal cavity metastasis with obvious sign of puncturing track implantation . From the admission to clinical death, the trend of WBC counts can be seen in Fig. .
The final pathological result of reoperation showed the necrotic and hematoma tissue blended with RCC tumor cells (nuclear grading IV) . Furthermore, the immunohistochemical staining from the specimens of two operations was performed to evaluate the expressions of 4 markers. Primary antibodies used in the study included paired box 8 (Pax8) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology sc-514352, Dallas, TX, USA), carbonic anhydrase 9 (CA9) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology sc-365900, Dallas, TX, USA), cytokeratin 7 (CK7) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology sc-23876, Dallas, TX, USA), and α-methylacyl-coenzyme A racemase (AMACAR) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology sc-515623, Dallas, TX, USA). UltraView™ DAB detection kit was purchased from Ventana (Arizona, America). All immunohistochemistry assays were performed on the Roche BenchMark XT fully automatic IHC/ISH instrument by optimized protocols. The results of immunohistochemical staining from the specimens of two operations all indicated that the tumor cells were immunopositive for Pax8 and CA9, but negative for CK7 and AMACAR .
After the death of the patient, we retrieved part of the surgical specimens from two operations he underwent and delivered them to a biochemical company (Life Healthcare, China) which provides the service of genetic testing. Both of the postoperative tissue-originated comprehensive genomic profiling by using the specimens from the RN and reoperation respectively indicated significant mutations of several genes . There are 7 genes’ mutation abundance that showed a statistical difference between two operations’ specimens, featuring the most dramatic elevated mutation of phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase catalytic subunit alpha (PIK3CA) and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) .
Given some cases of G-CSF-producing RCC with leukemoid reactions have been reported previously [, ], the IHC for assessment of G-CSF expression in the renal tumor and in the specimen from the reoperation were performed on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue blocks. The blocks were sectioned into 4 μm and pretreated using PT Link (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark) with EnVisionTM FLEX Target Retrieval Solution High pH (Dako) containing Tris/EDTA buffer at pH 9.5. All washing was performed with EnVision FLEX Wash Buffer pH 7.75 (Dako). Staining was performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Dako). The samples were incubated with the primary mouse monoclonal anti-G-CSF antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology sc-53292, Dallas, TX, USA) at dilution 1:50 for 30 min. The secondary antibody incubation time was 15 min. All detection reagents were from the EnVision FLEX series by Dako (secondary antibodies, EnVision FLEX HRP, and EnVision FLEX Substrate Buffer). The slides were counterstained with hematoxylin (EnVision FLEX Hematoxylin) and dehydrated. Both of the staining outcomes revealed the positive expression of G-CSF .