A 56-year-old female patient presented to her gynecologist in February 2013 with a palpable lymph node in the right axilla. Bilateral mammograms and blood tumor markers were obtained. Mammograms identified bilateral lymphadenopathy. With the exception of an elevated carbohydrate antigen CA19-9, all other tumor markers were normal. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the abdomen and computed tomography (CT) confirmed bilateral axillary nodes, multiple liver lesions, retroperitoneal lymph, and multiple bone lesions. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and colonoscopy were negative.
A Positron Emission Tomography Scan (PET-CT) obtained revealed neoplastic disease with high metabolic activity in cervical lymph nodes as well as in mediastinal, mesenteric, and retroperitoneal areas. The lesions in the liver were also identified. High metabolic uptake was also observed in sclerotic bone lesions in the thoracolumbar spine. Brain MRI was negative for central nervous system lesions .
Histopathology of the axillary and liver nodule confirmed poorly differentiated invasive carcinoma . Immunohistochemistry was negative for estrogen and progesterone receptors, Human Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 2, chromogranin, and synaptophysin, and positive for p63, pan-cytokeratin, and CD56.
Capecitabine 3000 mg daily in divided oral dose was initiated. An additional expanded immunohistochemical (IHC) profile was negative for smooth muscle actin, GCDFP15, epithelial antigen, CD45, COX-2, Platelet-derived growth factor receptor, somatostatin, C-kit, Fibroblast Growth Factor-basic, vascular endothelial growth factor, vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR), and CD-20, and positive for vimentin, CD117, p21, Ras, B cell lymphoma 2, Excision Repair Cross-Complementation Group 1, and weak expression of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma.
A portion of the tumor was submitted for Ex Vivo Analysis of Programmed Cell Death (EVA/PCD). The techniques have been the subject of prior review. This analysis revealed activity for paclitaxel and vinorelbine, with intermediate activity for fluoropyrimidines, carboplatin, irinotecan, and gemcitabine. A strong cytotoxic signal was observed for sorafenib. Despite the high degree of activity for sorafenib, erlotinib, pazopanib, and imatinib revealed no activity.
Following four cycles of oral capecitabine, the patient, who had previously been asymptomatic, now presented with paresis and spasms in the right lower limb. MRI of the cervical spine confirmed bony destruction of the entire C7 vertebral body causing dural compression. Radiotherapy was immediately initiated. Then, a new PET-CT in June 2013 revealed massive disease progression . Based upon the results of the ex vivo analysis, we initiated a treatment regimen consisting of oral sorafenib at 200 mg bid, combined with Vinorelbine at 25 mg/m2 and Paclitaxel at 80 mg/m2, both given weekly.
After 2 months of treatment, PET-CT obtained on 21 August 2013 confirmed significant reduction in the size and metabolic activity of the lesions in the liver as well as in the cervical, supraclavicular, axillary, retroperitoneal, and mediastinal lymph nodes. In addition, the multiple subcutaneous, peritoneal, pleural, and pulmonary nodules as well as the pleural effusion had all disappeared. The bone lesions had also decreased revealing absence of metabolic activity .
The patient remained on the sorafenib/vinorelbine/paclitaxel regimen for over 1 year with continued response and good tolerance. After 1 year of treatment, PET-CT obtained on August 2014 evidences multiple new hepatic lesions. Based on ex vivo analysis, we initiated treatment with carboplatin area under curve 2 and irinotecan 80 mg/m2 weekly. Scheme maintained until December 2014, when control PET-CT showed progression of liver lesions besides the appearance of pulmonary nodules. Then we initiated new treatment with gemcitabine (800 mg/m2) 2 weeks in a row every 3 weeks. Despite of treatment, in March 2015, new hepatic lesions are evidenced in PET-CT. We started (fluorouracil, 2400 mg/m2; leucovorin, 400 mg/m2; and oxaliplatin, 85 mg/m2 q2w (FOLFOX regimen). After a further progression in July 2015 , the patient died in August 2015.