A 1-year-old, 420 g female chinchilla (Chinchilla lanigera) was presented for clinical examination due to 2 days haematuria episodes and anorexia. Husbandry and diet were adequate for the species and no recent traumas were reported by the owner. Physical exam revealed slight tachypnea compared to the reference values [90 breaths/min (bpm)] and increased rectal temperature (40,2 °C). A biochemical analysis was performed, showing severe renal involvement. . The complete blood count (CBC) parameters showed also a moderate heterophilia compared to the species reference values . The CBC count was performed using Idexx ProCyte® Dx analyzer [IDEXX Laboratories Italia, S.r.l. Via Canova 25, 20,147 Milano, Italia]. Radiograms were also performed, showing severe intestinal meteorism affecting mostly the cecum and a soft tissue density mass with translucent areas (air) located in the caudal thorax, making it hard to distinguish the cardiac silhouette Suspecting a diaphragmatic hernia, a barium swallow (barium sulfate) was performed at the dosage 2% of the body weight (60% weight/volume micro pulverized barium sulphate and water) gently administered with a 2,5 ml syringe, orally. After 20 min, other lateral and ventro-dorsal radiograms were performed, showing the half of the stomach dislocated into thorax . Abdominal ultrasound was also performed confirming the partial stomach herniation in the thoracic cavity and also a severe nephropathy involving both kidneys. Bladder was empty at the ultrasonography, so the urinalysis couldn’t be performed. The patient was euthanized after the owner’s consent. Gross pathological investigation, performed by a certified pathologist, showed half of the stomach displaced into thorax without any signs of recent traumas . A slight presence of adherences between pleural surface and stomach serosa were visible . No scar tissue or thickening were highlighted at the margins of the pathological diaphragm window, which was set between muscular pillars in the central tendon supporting the hypothesis of a congenital defect. Both kidneys were affected by disseminated yellowish miliary lesions, deforming the kidney’s surface . A small fragment of kidney parenchyma was sampled for bacterial culture; unfortunately, bacterial isolation was not possible due to the large amount of different bacteria grown on the blood agar plate (BAP). Both kidneys were sampled and 10% buffered formalin fixed for the histology. Olympus CX-43 microscope [Olympus Italia SRL, Via Modigliani 45, Segrate, 20,090, MI, Italia] equipped with Olympus EP-50 camera [EPview software, 5 Megapixel, 2592 × 1944 Resolution photograph (Pixel)] was used to capture histological images. The histopathologic diagnosis was acute, severe bilateral bacterial glomerulonephritis, with 90% of parenchyma involved and infiltrated by degenerated heterophils. Bacterial aggregates and necrosis were also present in both kidneys. The diagnosis was CDH concomitant to a severe bilateral bacterial glomerulonephritis .