A 42-year old woman underwent LSG for class 1 obesity (BMI 31 kg/m2) in a private hospital in October 2018. Her past medical history was unremarkable, except for psoriasis and a previous laparoscopy for extrauterine pregnancy. The operation lasted 37 min and there were no obvious intraoperative complications. Immediately after the operation the patient started complaining about pain in the throat, mild difficulty swallowing and pain when moving her neck. During the night she complained about chest discomfort. Her vital signs were checked regularly and were normal. The next morning the pain was increasing together with swelling of the throat and marked sialorrhea. These symptoms led to further investigation with laryngoscopy, which was without remarks. A few hours later the patient developed subcutaneous emphysema and subsequently underwent an emergency CT scan, which showed free air outside the esophageal lumen, up to the neck and along the entire intrathoracic esophagus . The patient was still hemodynamically stable and in good general condition and was transferred to our hospital, which is a tertiary referral center for esophageal surgery, for further management.
The patient was taken directly to the operating room and a gastroscopy was performed under general anesthesia, revealing a 3 cm long perforation located 14–17 cm from the incisors on the posterior wall of cervical esophagus . Due to the proximity to the cricopharyngeal muscle, sealing of the perforation by placement of a fully covered esophageal stent was not possible. Additionally, use of Eso-SPONGE® Endoluminal Vacuum Therapy System (B. Braun, Germany) was considered not feasible because of the large size of the defect. Based on the gastroscopy findings, the perforation was estimated to be at exactly the level of the thoracic inlet. Nevertheless, the false lumen was extending more distally, and the prevertebral space was at the time of surgery filled with purulent fluid . Our assessment was that we needed access to the upper mediastinum to achieve satisfactory drainage and, hopefully, also repair the defect at the same time if possible. The patient was placed in the prone position and a right-sided thoracoscopy was performed. The intrathoracic esophagus was mobilized by incising the mediastinal pleura and a large mediastinal fluid collection was evacuated. The lower border of the perforation high up on the posterior wall of the esophagus at the level of thoracic inlet could be visualized but suturing was technically not possible thoracoscopically. After placing two drains in the thoracic cavity, the patient was placed on the supine position and the cervical esophagus was approached through a left-sided neck incision. The proximal esophagus was mobilized and rotated giving access to the posterior side, the defect was visualized and repaired with interrupted 4/0 PDS sutures . Further reinforcement was applied by a muscle flap constructed from the sternal head of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. Due to neck edema, delayed extubation was performed as a precaution, and the patient spent the first post-operative day in the Intensive Care Unit but could be discharged and transferred to the ward the following day. Further treatment with nil by mouth, broad-spectrum antibiotics and parenteral nutrition was carried out. The recovery was uneventful; the patient could start an oral diet on post-operative day 6 and was discharged from the hospital 2 days later, on postoperative day 8.