We present the case of a female born with birth weight 3.300 g by cesarean delivery in the 38th week due to labor dystocia after uneventful first pregnancy of a healthy 26-year-old (y-o) mother without addiction or continuous use of medication. Non consanguineous father; absence of neurological disease in the family. Left-hand was dominant. There was normal neuropsychomotor development until 5 years of age, when marked learning difficulties were observed at school. At 8 years, KS was diagnosed due to characteristic phenotypic traits such as eversion of the lower eyelid, elongated eyelid closure, arched eyebrows, long eyelashes, nasal tip facing down, high palate, and large and protruding pinna and fingertips with fetal aspect . Furthermore, she had moderate conduction hearing loss and mild scoliosis, and scored 51 points on the intelligence quotient (IQ) test. Ophthalmologic evaluation was normal. At age 15, she had an unexplained episode of transient global aphasia with no trigger history of infection, cranial or cervical trauma, or pain. After referral to our service, the patient showed improvement of the transient deficit, presenting preservation of language (though with poor content, due to cognitive impairment). Physical examination did not detect motor deficit or other focal alterations. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed a hyperintense lesion in right posterior white matter, as shown in . A Doppler ultrasound of cervical vessels suggested severe right internal carotid artery (ICA) stenosis. A brain computer tomography demonstrated a bilateral patent carotid foramen, indicating a noncongenital ICA occlusion . Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) showed right ICA occlusion at the bulbar portion, with compensatory perfusion of the ipsilateral hemisphere through anterior communicating artery, external carotid artery, and temporal branches anastomoses from the posterior circulation , suggesting ICA dissection. Investigation of cardiologic and thrombophilic diseases were negative; her mother did not allow biopsy due to surgical risks (mainly visuals). Oral acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) was taken for 6 months, and no further treatment was recommended. Follow-up was done with MRI every 6 months to evaluate white matter, which did not show growth and pattern change, ruling out demyelinating, inflammatory, or neoplasic disease, and supporting primarily diagnostic hypothesis of gliosis. On 2-years follow-up, 3D-CTA identified complete spontaneous recanalization of ICA . No other intercurrence was observed on the long-term follow up, but at age 16 a benign polyp of the gallbladder was removed.
Research was performed using PubMed database on articles published before 2016 September, using the following MESH terms: Kabuki syndrome, Kabuki makeup syndrome, Kabuki make-up syndrome, Kabuki make up syndrome or Niikawa-Kuroki syndrome combined with stroke, brain ischemia, brain hypoxia–ischemia, transient ischemic attack, cerebral infarction, carotid artery stenosis, carotid stenosis narrowing, vascular malformation, vascular anomaly, carotid arterial diseases, carotid arterial injury, or dissection. Only articles in English, Spanish, or Portuguese were included. A few articles met the review criteria. Other articles were included by decision of the authors aiming to improve discussion.