A 65-year-old man had chest pain that radiated to his left and right arms. An ambulance was called and an electrocardiogram (ECG) showed anterolateral ischemia. The patient was thus brought to our emergency department.
The patient suffered from acute myocardial injury two weeks before this episode of cardiac arrest with coronary angiography showing a 90% stenosis of the circumflex artery. He underwent immediate percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty plus one stent on each of the following coronary arteries: left main, left anterior descending, and left circumflex. On day +9 after admission, he started dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) anticoagulation (acetylsalicylic acid + Ticagrelor) and was discharged from the hospital. At the same time, he was found to be positive for Coronavirus-19 on a nasal swab but was asymptomatic. On day +12 he experienced a new ischemic episode (he was apparently uncompliant with the DAPT therapy due to Ticagrelor unavailability). He returned to the emergency department with an ECG showing an anterolateral ischemia.
No previous history of angina symptoms from cardiac disease.
No personal or family history of cardiac disease.
The patient was brought to the emergency department by ambulance with chest pain that radiated to the left and right arm. Upon arrival, the patient was awake but immediately went into cardiac arrest with an ECG showing ventricular fibrillation.
During the patient’s stay in the intensive care unit, the most important laboratory exams ordered included those relating to the ECMO configuration and complications.
Free hemoglobin, D-Dimer and Antithrombin III were all requested daily. Platelet count was closely monitored as it reduced progressively due to the extracorporeal circuit. Other complications included bleeding and sepsis. Anticoagulation was constantly monitored through activated coagulation time (every 2 h) and activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) twice daily. Pneumonia was also diagnosed through bacterial cultures.
Imaging procedures included ultrasound, X-ray imaging and computerized tomography. An X-ray after LAVA-ECMO placement is shown in Figure .