The 71-year-old proband had been clinically suspected of having LCD at the age of
65 years, at which time she had full vision and no symptoms, whereas no corneal
abnormalities had been seen at the age of 53 years. She had no family history of
corneal disease, ocular trauma, or familial amyloidosis, Finnish type. During the past year, her visual acuity declined, ocular discomfort appeared
and a spontaneous corneal erosion developed in her right eye. The proband was
enrolled after being referred to the Cornea Service, Department of Ophthalmology,
Helsinki University Hospital, Finland. She underwent a thorough clinical
examination, including best corrected visual acuity (BCVA), tonometry, corneal
sensation testing using a cotton-tipped applicator, biomicroscopic evaluation and
anterior segment optical coherence tomography (AS-OCT), and corneal confocal
microscopy. Her BCVA was 0.9 and 1.0 in her right and left eye, respectively. The
keratometric values were 41.9/41.6 D (steep/flat) in her right, and 42.5/41.8 D in
her left eye. Slit lamp examination revealed an inferonasal corneal erosion and
corneal stromal lattice lines beneath and around the erosion in her right eye, and a
few lattice lines in the inferior midperipheral left cornea. Bilateral corneal arcus
was noted. The corneal endothelium, anterior chamber, iris and intraocular pressure
were normal. She had a mild age-related cataract. The corneal erosion healed with
minor scarring. Corneal sensation was normal in both eyes.
A year later, her BCVA was unchanged. Slit lamp examination of the right eye showed
translucent subepithelial irregularity, relatively short and thick, branching
centrally located lattice lines ( and ), which extended midperipherally, especially inferotemporally.
Similar, inferiorly located subepithelial irregularity and fainter lattice lines
were noted in her otherwise normal left eye ( and ). Retroillumination highlighted the
translucency of the subepithelial and stromal deposits . AS-OCT of the proband
showed hyperreflective deposits in the corneal stroma, mainly in the right eye
( and ). Central corneal thickness
was 559 µm in the right eye and 543 µm in the left eye. Specular microscopic imaging
showed a normal endothelial cell morphology and density. Corneal confocal microscopy
of the right eye demonstrated stromal opacities involving mainly the middle and the posterior stroma.
Opacities varied from small hyperreflective dots to larger irregular areas.
Hyperreflective haze, possibly representing stromal scarring, was also noted. The
corneal epithelium and endothelium appeared normal. We failed to capture the larger
lattice lines. Two of her brothers, one sister, two daughters and one son were
examined . A 49-year-old
daughter (III.2) with BCVA 1.0 had bilateral thickening of stromal nerves. None of
the other family members had any relevant corneal findings.
Blood samples were collected from the proband and family members to obtain DNA.
Genetic analysis in the proband included polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
amplification and Sanger sequencing of the most frequently mutated exons 4, 11, 12,
13 and 14 of TGFBI as well as the gelsolin (GSN)
pathogenic variant c.640G>A, which in Finland causes familial amyloidosis,
Finnish type (FAF) with corneal lattice amyloidosis, using standard HUSLAB protocols. Exome sequencing (ES) was performed at the
Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM, Helsinki, Finland) as previously described. In silico predictions were performed with PolyPhen, SIFT, MutationTaster and CADD. Analysis of conserved sequences was obtained from the University of
California Santa Cruz (UCSC) genome browser using
the human genome build h37/hg19. Variant allele frequency was examined using the gnomAD r2.0.2 database
, accessed June 2019. The location of the fourth fasciclin 1 (FAS1-4) domain of TGFBI (Q15582) was
determined using the Uniprot database. Genetic testing of the index patient revealed wild type GSN
and a variant c.1772C>T in exon 13 of the TGFBI gene that leads to the
amino acid change p.(Ser591Phe) . Multiple prediction programs predict it to be pathogenic
(Polyphen2: probably damaging, SIFT: damaging, MutationTaster: disease causing,
scaled-CADD score: 34). The variant has not been reported before, and it is not
present in the gnomAD database that includes 12,897 Finns. The corresponding serine
is highly conserved across species, further supporting a pathogenic effect for this
variant .
Because paraproteinemic keratopathy associated with monoclonal gammopathy can mimic LCD, we performed serum protein immunoelectrophoresis with normal findings.
Finally, to exclude other possible corneal dystrophies, we performed ES and
candidate gene analysis for the proband. After filtering, we detected two rare
heterozygous variants: the already known c.1772C>T in TGFBI and
c.6457G>A, p.(Val2153Ile) in ZNF469. Recessively inherited
pathogenic variants in ZNF469 cause brittle cornea syndrome 1
(BCS1; OMIM #229200), characterized by extreme thinning of the cornea and sclera.
The ZNF469 c.6457G>A variant was predicted to be benign by all
prediction programs used. Therefore, we conclude that this variant is very unlikely
the cause of this variant LCD phenotype. We sequenced the variant c.1772C>T in
TGFBI from the six family members. The 49-year-old daughter
(III.2) with bilateral thickening of stromal nerves had the same variant as the
proband. None of the other family members carried the variant .