The primary complaints included urinary frequency, urgency, and pain over a period of three months.
A 44-year-old woman was hospitalized in our department for a 3-mo history of urinary frequency, urgency, and pain. She denied fever, lumbago, back pain, and hematuria.
The patient had no contributory medical history, except for an IUD implantation seven years prior.
The patient had no pertinent family history.
No obvious signs were found on physical examination. The patient did not demonstrate any pain on percussion of the bilateral renal areas or obvious tenderness along the path of the ureters. The patient exhibited normal external genitalia.
A routine urinary examination was performed when the patient first developed symptoms. The examination results were as follows: 844 red blood cells/uL, 1063 white blood cells/uL, and 1873 bacteria/uL. She was treated with antibiotics; however, after 3 mo, another routine urine analysis demonstrated 131 red blood cells/uL, 330 white blood cells/uL, and 432 bacteria/uL. After she was hospitalized, her urine test showed 3 red blood cells/uL, 25 white blood cells/uL, and 5 bacteria/uL. A urine culture demonstrated colonization with Enterococcus faecalis.
The patient had recurring symptoms of urinary tract infection. Combined with her history of IUD implantation, we considered IUD displacement. CT revealed an abnormally positioned IUD, which had penetrated the uterine wall and was protruding forward into the bladder . Cystoscopic and hysteroscopic exploration was subsequently scheduled. Cystoscopy was performed with a 22-Fr cystoscope with a 70° lens. Cystoscopy demonstrated an IUD, which had penetrated the left posterior bladder wall. Approximately 1 cm of the IUD was located in the bladder cavity, and a large number of stones were visible on its surface . Subsequently, hysteroscopy demonstrated a V-shaped IUD in the middle section of the cervical canal. One of the arms of the IUD was notably incarcerated in the muscular layer of the canal .