A 41-year-old Caucasian woman discovered the presence of a mass on neck palpation. Her family history was negative for thyroid illnesses, and she stated that she had no past medical history. The woman was an office worker, did not live or work in an iodine-poor area, and reported having a good dietary intake of iodine. She neither smoked nor drank alcohol and was not taking any medication. She was lean (body mass index 17 kg/m2), and her blood pressure, heart rate, and temperature were normal (100/65 mmHg, 76 beats/minute, and 36.2 °C, respectively). A physical examination confirmed the presence of a soft mass in the right portion of her neck, which was mobile on swallowing. The results of her cardiac, pulmonary, abdominal, and neurological examinations were unremarkable.
The patient underwent an ultrasound (US) scan, which showed a single, solid, isoechoic nodule of 12 ml (anteroposterior × laterolateral × craniocaudal diameters 20 × 30 × 40 mm, respectively) in the right lobe of the thyroid . She was symptomatic for neck discomfort, with a score of 6/10 on a visual analogue scale. Her thyroid function was normal (thyroid-stimulating hormone concentration 1.81 mIU/L, free T3 5.0 pmol/L, free thyroxine 14.12 pmol/L); her calcitonin level was normal (< 1 ng/L); and her thyroid autoimmunity was negative (thyroid peroxidase antibodies 18 U/ml).
The patient underwent a fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB), which revealed a colloid nodular hyperplasia with hyperplastic thyrocytes and fluid colloid (Thy2 according to the British Thyroid Association). Because she refused lobectomy for fear of surgery, we proposed RFA of the nodule. After a second FNAB (Thy2 according to the British Thyroid Association), a phoniatric evaluation, which excluded anomalies of vocal cord motility, and an electrocardiogram, which excluded arrhythmias as suggested by the Korean consensus statement , a single session of RFA was performed by means of transisthmic access and moving-shot technique , with a delivered energy of 41,868 J (3489 J/ml) in a day-hospital regimen. RFA was performed by means of 7-cm, 18-gauge electrodes with a 1-cm active tip, with the support of the MyLabFive US system (Esaote, Genoa, Italy) with a 7.5-MHz linear probe (LA523). The radiofrequency generator used was a Viva VRS01 RF system (STARmed, Seoul, Korea), and the peristaltic pump used was an R4S100 (STARmed, Seoul, Korea).
Before RFA, the patient underwent an intravenous infusion for 30 minutes of ketorolac (20 mg) and ranitidine (50 mg) diluted in 100 ml of 0.9% saline solution. Subsequently, intravenous ketorolac (40 mg) and ranitidine (50 mg) were administered in 500 ml of 0.9% saline for about 5 hours (during and after thyroid RFA). Preprocedural local anesthesia with 2% lidocaine was carried out at the puncture site. The procedure was well tolerated by the patient, and no adverse events occurred. After thyroid RFA, a compressive bandage and ice were applied to the patient’s neck, and she received a domiciliary prescription for steroid administration (prednisone 25 mg for 3 days, 12.5 mg for 3 days, 6.25 mg for 3 days) and gastric protection. At the time of the RFA, our operator had 1 year of experience with this technique.
At both the 6- and 12-month follow-up examinations, the patient’s neck discomfort was seen to persist . A physical examination confirmed the unchanged presence of the soft mass, which was mobile on swallowing, in the right portion of the neck. On a US scan, the nodule displayed only a modest and transitory volume reduction up to the 6th month, followed by regrowth .
Twenty-four months after RFA, because the patient again refused to undergo lobectomy, we proposed a single session of LA. This was performed by the same operator, who had 1 year of experience with this technique, by means of two 300-μm-diameter fibers inserted by means of a 21-gauge Chiba needle (Elesta, Calenzano, Italy) with one pull-back of 1 cm and a delivered energy of 5489 J (457 J/ml). LA was performed by means of a commercially available US scanner (EchoLaser X4®; Esaote, Genoa, Italy) equipped with a 7.5-MHz linear transducer (LA 332; Esaote, Genoa, Italy) with a 1064-μm diode laser unit and an individual energy emission setting and independent activation. The preprocedural modalities were the same as for RFA.
The patient tolerated the procedure well, and no adverse events occurred. At the time of LA, our operator had 1 year of experience with this technique. The patient reported a progressive improvement in neck symptoms and cosmetic complaints, and follow-up examinations showed a marked, progressive reduction in nodule volume . The patient’s thyroid function and thyroid autoimmunity remained unchanged after RFA and LA .