A 75-year-old male patient met with an road traffic accident and presented to our emergency department with a major crush injury with Gustilo type 3B open OTA 33.C3 distal femur and Gustilo type 3B open OTA 42.C1.2 both bones leg fracture of right lower limb and with ipsilateral OTA 31.B2.1 of Garden type 3 neck of femur fracture . On examination, he was drowsy and found to be hemodynamically unstable. Initially, his airway was compromised, so to secure the airway, intubation was done and controlled ventilation was given. For circulation, two large IV assess were taken and 2 L of IV fluids to stabilize the blood pressure. Urinary catheterization was done to check the urine output. Damage control surgery was done in the form of debridement and knee spanning external fixator application. Patient was reviewed periodically, and after 48 h in view of inadequate perfusion of right leg, an above-knee amputation was performed. The patient was in intensive care unit under care of the intensivist and neurologist for another 2 weeks in view of disorientation, altered sensorium, and an ill responding electrolyte imbalance. There was no head injury but bilateral parietal infarcts were noted on computed tomography brain. After these 20 days, a thorough multidisciplinary assessment was done and the patient was taken up for surgery. We planned to do cemented bipolar hemiarthroplasty for the neck of femur fracture considering the age of the patient which was 75 years. A cemented bipolar hemiarthroplasty was done with no anesthetic, intraoperative or post-operative complications.
Under combined spinal epidural anesthesia patient was positioned supine with a sand bag under the ipsilateral buttock. The operative site was draped in the standard manner. Initially, as the first step two 6.5 mm Schanz pins have been applied perpendicular to each other with one pin in anteroposterior plane and the second pin in saggital plane ( and ) with an idea that this will aid in traction and also manipulating the femur which is difficult in such cases. We applied the Schanz pins just proximal to the amputation stump as they will not obstruct the stem of the prosthesis. The first Schanz pin was applied from the lateral aspect with the limb in neutral position and perpendicular to the bone under c-arm guidance. The second Schanz pin was applied in the anteroposterior plane perpendicular to the first Schanz pin. The hip was approached by the standard lateral approach. After exposing the fracture site, neck cut was performed and head delivered. The canal was rasped and in view of a wider canal cementing was done and bipolar prosthesis inserted. There was no restriction of the length of the prosthesis as the length of the amputation stump was adequate. The prosthesis was inserted 10° anterior to the sagittal Schanz pin to maintain the version. Traction and internal rotation was applied using the Schanz pins and the joint relocated. Position was verified on fluoroscopy ( and ) and intraoperative stability confirmed. The Schanz pins were removed. The wound was closed in layers over a vacuum suction drain and a separate dressing was done for the surgical site and amputation stump.
During the immediate post-operative period, the patient was clinically stable without any complication. Physiotherapy with isometric exercises was started after 48 h, and the patient was mobilized with the help of walker after 4 days. The patient was discharged on 7th post-operative day and was again reviewed 10 days later for suture removal. The patient began to walk full weight bearing walking with above-knee prosthesis with walker support at 6 weeks. He began to walk without any support with above-knee prosthesis at 10 weeks. Now at 14 months, the patient is comfortable, pain-free and walking full weight bearing without any support .