A 172-cm tall, 18-year-old man, weight 100 kg, was admitted to our department in January 2020 due to left medial deep ankle pain after stamping the clutch about 10 days ago, who had an extreme liking of seafood, beer and carbonated drinks. During the physical examination, medial ankle tenderness and mild swelling were present, with a VAS score of 6 or 7, but the range of ankle motion was normal. Ankle X-rays, computerized tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans were conducted and a medial talus osteochondral lesion with subchondral cyst formation was detected . Various laboratory tests detected high levels of uric acid (568 µmol/L), anti-streptolysin O (130.10 IU/mL), procalcitonin (0.28 ng/mL) and a high level of serum C-reactive protein (39.50 mg/L). The patient’s erythrocyte sedimentation rate, blood cell counts, and other biochemical indexes were all within the normal range. He was primarily diagnosed with a Hepple stage V type talus osteochondral lesion, but the etiology was not clear. An ankle arthroscopy was conducted, and we found a few gouty tophus deposits in the talus articular cartilage and synovial tissue. The medial, central talus articular cartilage was soft, uneven and partially defective, with gouty tophus deposits. A 1.5-mm K-wire was drilled into this site to confirm the talus lesion site under C-arm fluoroscopy. A medial curved incision was made on the medial malleolus and the talus osteochondral lesion was exposed after inverted V-shaped medial malleolus osteotomy and removed with trephine; the removed lesions were found to be gouty tophus , which was further confirmed by the finding of monosodium urate monohydrate (MSU) crystals in postoperative histological sections . After complete debridement of these lesions, the lesion site was not a regular shape, and a very small amount of normal osteochondral tissue was cut with a small osteotome to form a square lesion site. Then an osteochondral block of the same size was harvested from the autologous talus neck and grafted onto the site and fixed with two 2.0 mm bioabsorbable screws. The donor site was filled and tamped with the cancellous bone on the osteotomy surface of the medial malleolus. Then the medial malleolus was fixed with three cannulated screws after reduction. Aceclofenac dispersible tablets and allopurinol were taken by the patient immediately after the operation and he was advised to use his left ankle passively, with no weight-bearing for 5 weeks. At this time his serum uric acid concentration was in the normal range and a good medial malleolus union was revealed by X-ray imaging. Partial weight-bearing was encouraged 2 months postoperatively when the cyst talus osteochondral lesion had disappeared and was replaced with normal bone tissue 6 months postoperatively. The patient could walk with slight pain at this time with a VAS score of 1 and was very satisfied with the outcome. Regular monitoring of serum uric acid concentrations and his modified diet continued, and he has been followed up for 12 months.