An 82-year-old male presented to our clinic and complained of dysphagia and loss of appetite, accompanied by diffuse cutaneous metastasis.
An 82-year-old male presented to our outpatient clinic and complained of difficulty in dysphagia and loss of appetite, accompanied by acid reflux without nausea and vomiting from May 2018. The positron emission tomography/computed tomography (CT) revealed diffuse thickening of the esophagus and stomach wall, with a maximum standard uptake value of 11.2 and bilateral pleural effusion rendering the tumor inoperable . Because the cytology of the patient’s pleural fluid revealed pleural metastases, the tumor was staged as T4N3M1 (Stage IVB). The endoscopic study revealed a peripherally protruding neoplasm at 35 cm from the dental arch, which almost completely occluded the esophageal lumen. A biopsy was taken from the circumferential bulge. The pathological findings revealed poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma from the esophagus.
Subsequently, chemotherapy was performed: S-1 50 mg day 1-14, cisplatin 30 mg day 1, 21 d, one period, a total of four cycles (weight, 55 kg; height, 1.62 m; body surface area, 1.64 m2). After four cycles of chemotherapy, the patient’s symptoms were relieved, and the pleural effusion disappeared upon evaluation of the lesion, according to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors 1.1 criteria. Furthermore, after completing the four cycles of chemotherapy, the patient had a partial response (based on the medical records provided by the hospital where the patient previously visited). Afterward, the patient went home.
In early March 2019, the patient realized that the skin of the abdominal wall was hard and rough without pain, and the color became darker than the normal skin . The CT scan of the abdomen showed no obvious changes in skin and subcutaneous soft tissue . At the same time, we performed a fine needle biopsy of the skin of the changing part . Pathological results showed that the skin metastasis was derived from the poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus . Thus, the patient visited our hospital for a workup for his dysphagia and diffuse cutaneous metastasis. Based on the medical history and pathological findings, the skin metastasis was derived from the poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus .
The patient had a history of diabetes for 20 years and did not regulate the use of drugs. He denied the history of operation.
The patient had no history of smoking and occasionally drank alcohol. Furthermore, the patient quit drinking before admission to the hospital.
The patient’s vital signs were stable. The physical examination of the abdomen revealed that the skin of the abdominal wall was hard and rough without pain, and the color became darker than normal skin .
Blood tumor markers: total prostate specific antigen 6.92 ng/mL, serum CA72-4 61.32 U/mL, alpha-fetoprotein 3.65 ng/mL, carcinoembryonic antigen 915.10 ng/mL, serum CA125 90.91 U/mL, CA153 38.24 U/mL, gastrin-releasing peptide precursor 74.40 pg/mL, squamous cell carcinoma antigen 2.20 ug/L, neuron-specific enolase 11.00 ng/mL and serum CYFRA21-1 5.06 ng/mL.
The abdominal CT revealed no obvious changes in the skin and subcutaneous soft tissue .
Infiltration of cancer cells was observed in the fibrous connective tissue by the puncture. The cancer cells were distributed in nests, with enlarged nuclei, hyperchromatic nuclei, heteromorphism, increased nucleoplasma ratio, and crowded arrangement . Further immunohistochemical results showed that skin was positive for CK , P40 , P63 , CK5/6 , partially positive for P53 , and about 20% positive for Ki67 . The pathological results revealed that the skin metastasis was derived from the poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus .