A 70-year-old man with anal metastatic melanoma was admitted on December 2017 for severe asthenia.
He was treated on August 2016 by abdominoperineal resection and bladder reconstruction. Serum creatinine was 1.0 mg/dl before the surgery. He presented an acute kidney injury in a context of urinary tract infection one month later (serum creatinine 2.9 mg/dl). Kidney function recovered partially (serum creatinine 1.4 mg/dl - Fig. ). In September 2016, he received nivolumab, a monoclonal anti-PD-1 receptor antibody. In October 2017, progression of the disease was detected on a pelvic MRI and treatment was switched by ipilimumab, a monoclonal anti-CTLA-4 receptor antibody, 3 mg/kg every three weeks. Serum creatinine was then at 1.7 mg/dl. He had no other medical history nor took any other drugs.
Approximately ten days after completion of his third cycle, he presented with a history of one-week fatigue. At admission, blood pressure was 116/60 mmHg and physical examination revealed no particularity. Laboratory findings revealed an acute renal failure with serum creatinine rising to 5.8 mg/dl , a 24-h urine total protein excretion of 1.0 g and an inflammatory syndrome. Urine cytology showed leukocytes (100/mm3) and red blood cells (50/mm3). Ultrasonography excluded urinary tract obstruction. All laboratory results are detailed in Table .
A percutaneous kidney biopsy was performed and revealed on light microscopy interlobular and juxtaglomerular noncaseating granulomatous arteritis , accompanied by severe interstitial inflammation. The glomeruli appeared unremarkable. Immunohistochemistry for IgG, IgA, IgM, C3, C4, kappa and lambda chains was negative. Stainings for fungi and acid-fast bacilli were also negative. Acute segmental and focal granulomatous arteritis induced by ipilimumab was diagnosed.
Antinuclear antibodies and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) were negative (anti-MPO < 3.2 and anti-PR3 < 2.3). Angiotensin convertase enzyme (45 UI/L), calcemia (2.24 mmol/L) and chest CT-scan were normal. These negative exams and the absence of cutaneous or peripheral lymph node involvement allowed us to exclude sarcoidosis.
Ipilimumab was immediately discontinued, and the patient was treated with oral prednisone at a dose of 1 mg/kg/day for one month, followed by gradual discontinuation over 4 weeks. Serum creatinine rapidly improved to 2.8 mg/dl two weeks after steroid introduction. One month after steroid discontinuation, serum creatinine remained stable (2.8 mg/dl - Fig. ). Unfortunately, the patient died a few months later from progression of his melanoma.