A 35-year-old Japanese man with no past psychiatric history, but with a past neurologic history of PKD, was referred by the neurologic department at our hospital to the Department of Psychiatry because of severe anxiety and hyperventilation. When the patient was 16 years old, he was clinically diagnosed as PKD by a neurologist based on characteristic symptoms including involuntary movement induced by voluntary movements and various examination findings, such as test using blood and cerebrospinal fluid, and several image findings. After that, he had been maintained on carbamazepine (CBZ) at 200 mg/day since 16 years of age without any attacks.
In February 2013, on a regular follow-up in the neurologic department, the neurologist changed CBZ to topiramate after the patient complained of long-term symptoms of drowsiness and wobbliness, which he thought might be the side effects of CBZ. Two days later, he visited the emergency department at our hospital with chest pain and hyperventilation. Although the neurologist suspended topiramate and resumed CBZ, his anxiety and hyperventilation did not improve as was expected. The following month, the patient was referred to our department, but he stated that he had no anxiety about PKD or any other psychosocial stressors. He presented as a gentle young man without any abnormal affect, but seemed somewhat nervous with an impassive facial appearance. We took time to have a good discussion about his history and symptoms. At last he confessed that, 10 years before this referral, he became aware of a feeling of breakdown in his overall physical functions to what he considered as about 70% of his earlier state. He had then avoided becoming familiar with people out of concern that his physical dysfunctions might be perceived in a negative light. It means that his anxiety symptoms had existed and persisted 10 years before a change of drug, CBZ to TPM, though we could not completely deny it affected these symptoms. Then we began treatment with escitalopram at 10 mg/day, targeting the symptoms of anxiety and depression. Moreover, we added aripiprazole at 3 mg/day and ethyl loflazepate at 1 mg/day . Both his subjective physical condition and objective expressions subsequently showed gradual improvement. Feelings of chest compression and anxiety entirely disappeared. By contrast, his speed of speech and amount of conversation increased markedly, and he seemed more cheerful in his appearance. He stated, “Amazing! After 10 years’ absence, this feeling came to me! My ability to judge things has been improved and I don’t feel hesitant in starting new things,” “I can perform complicated movements and quick motions. Now I can run and swim!,” “I gained a larger circle of acquaintances and at last I have a girlfriend!.” He himself called this phenomenon “Awakenings”, as an analogy to the well-known movie.
In short, escitalopram, aripiprazole, and ethyl loflazepate proved effective in addressing both subjective and objective symptoms (but increased doses of these drugs have loss of efficacy) in the present case. As a result, his quality of life was prominently enhanced as the scope of his activities and friendships rapidly expanded. In addition, increases in plasma monoamine metabolite levels were observed for homovanillic acid (a dopamine metabolite), total 3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylglycol (a noradrenaline metabolite), and free 3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylglycol, which were analyzed with high-performance liquid chromatography with electrochemical detection. In particular, homovanillic acid level was doubled after this change in pharmacotherapy . Furthermore, the c.649dupC mutation, which has been found in most Japanese PKD families, was detected in his PRRT2 by direct sequencing after polymerase chain reaction amplification.