A 52-year-old Caucasian woman presented to a healthcare center with high fever, sore throat, itchy rash, generalized muscle pain, and nausea, which had continued for 15 days. The patient’s husband and son had similar complaints over the same period. She was administered Penicillin G, antihistaminic and antipyretic drugs. Because her condition did not improve, she was referred to a dermatology clinic with the suspicion of urticarial vasculitis. She received antihistaminic and depot steroid treatment there and a consultation with the infectious diseases department was requested. Her body temperature was 39°C (centigrade), her pulse rate was 96 beats/minute, and respiratory rate was 22 breaths/minute at first examination. She had a generalized maculopapular rash spread over her entire body, even the palms of her hands and the soles of her feet. Our patient had bilateral cervical and axillary painful and mobile lymphadenopathies.
Her laboratory test results were as follows; serum urea: 151mg/dL (normal range: 10 to 50mg/dL), serum creatinine: 2.6mg/dL (normal range: 0.6 to 1.1mg/dL), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH): 608U/L (normal range: 207 to 414U/L), total protein: 5.8g/dL (normal range: 6.4 to 8.3g/dL), albumin: 2.7g/dL (normal range: 3.8 to 5.1g/dL), white blood cell (WBC) count: 22,300/μL (normal range: 4300 to 10,300/μL), red blood cell (RBC) count: 4.02×106/μL (normal range: 4.38 to 5.75×106/μL), hemoglobin: 12.4g/dL (normal range: 13.6 to 17.2g/dL), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR): 45mm/h, C-reactive protein (CRP): 52mg/L (normal range: 0 to 5.0mg/L).
Abdominal ultrasonography (USG) revealed that hepatomegaly was present. All other intra-abdominal structures were normal. Her cervical USG revealed a large number of reactive lymphadenopathies at submandibular, submental, posterior cervical, upper and lower jugular regions bilaterally and at the right and left submandibular regions. Some of them were conglomerated. There were also several reactive lymphadenopathies at both her axillary regions, which were observed on the axillary ultrasonography. A thoracic computed tomography (CT) scan was performed because our patient’s chest radiography revealed several uncertain nodular lesions. The thoracic CT scan presented widespread areas of air trapping. Bilateral multiple lymphadenopathies were present in the aortic pulmonary, prevascular, precarinal, paratracheal, subcarinal and left supraclavicular regions.
Levofloxacin treatment was initiated empirically at the dermatology clinic. On the fifth day, this treatment was discontinued and our patient was transferred to the infectious diseases clinic because there was no improvement in her signs and symptoms.
Measles, Rubella, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), Cytomegalovirus (CMV), Toxoplasma immunglobulin (Ig) M tests were reported to be negative. The tests for Ricketsiosis, Coxiellosis, Brucellosis and Tularemia were reported to be negative. The autoimmune markers were studied to exclude a rheumatologic disease and found to be negative.
On the twelfth day of admission, our patient’s WBC count increased to 35,000μL and her hemoglobin decreased to 10.6g/dL (normal range: 13.6 to 17.2g/dL). Therefore, our patient was referred to the hematologists. A total of 45% polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMN) (50% band form), 40% lymphomonositer cells (50% atypical lymphocytes), and 11% eosinophils were identified in her peripheral blood smear. Dysplasia was also present in neutrophils. A bone marrow biopsy and tests were performed, yielding no positive results.Desquamation spread over her entire body , an evident erythematous rash on her palms and soles, dyspnea, chest pain and hypertension developed in the following days. Kawasaki syndrome was suspected. Our patient consulted with a chest diseases specialist and a cardiologist. An electrocardiogram and echocardiogram were performed and no cardiologic cause was found for her symptoms. Bronchodilator and antihypertensive agents were added to the treatment.
After insistent efforts of repeated medical history taking, we learned that the patient’s son had brought mercury home from school in a bottle and had spilled it on the hot stove. All of the family members (mother, father and son) were exposed to this environment of dense mercury fumes for a long period of time. Because mercury fumes are colorless and odorless, they were unable to detect it. Approximately 10 hours after this event, our patient’s husband developed dyspnea, hypertension, tachycardia, high fever and sore throat. He was admitted to the healthcare institution with these complaints. A physical examination of the patient revealed no pathological findings other than hypertension (tension arterielle (TA): 160/100mmHg) and erythema in the legs. His laboratory test results showed leucocytosis (WBC count: 13,200/μL (normal range: 4300 to 10300/μL)). Other laboratory findings were considered normal. His complaints improved with the supportive treatment administrated at the respiratory diseases clinic of the hospital. He was discharged after eight days of hospitalization, but a personality disorder developed in the following days.
The 14-year-old son suffered from high fever, sore throat, skin rash, diarrhea, and dyspnea. He was admitted to the pediatric hospital with these complaints. A physical examination revealed the following: fever: 39°C, TA: 110/50mmHg, respiratory rate: 20 breaths/minute, pulse: 104 beats/minute. A generalized maculopapular rash was spread over the patient’s entire body, and he was identified with hyperemia in the conjunctivas and cervical and bilateral axillary lymphadenopathy. Rhoncuses were determined in the lungs by oscultation. No abnormal laboratory findings, other than leucocytosis (WBC count: 11,100/μL (normal range: 4300 to 10,300/μL)) were identified. The patient was initially given empirical doxycycline and bronchodilator therapy based on the family history. A thoracic CT scan was performed. Consolidation areas containing air bronchograms were detected in the paracardiac region in the right lung middle zone. Ceftriaxone and clarithromycin were included in his treatment. The tests performed revealed no findings of infection. Material was submitted to the reference laboratory for blood and urine mercury level tests upon persistent fever on day 10 of hospitalization.
The son’s serum and urine mercury levels were analyzed using the inductively coupled plasma - mass spectrometer (ICP-MS) method in the reference laboratory. His serum mercury level was 130μg/L (normal range: 0.6 to 59μg/L), and his urine mercury level was 31μg/L (normal range: 0.1 to 20μg/L). He received chelating therapy after high levels of mercury were identified in his blood. Therefore, our patient’s serum and urine mercury levels were analyzed using the ICP-MS method in the reference laboratory. Her serum mercury level was 207μg/L (normal range: 0.6 to 59μg/L), and her urine mercury level was 524μg/L (normal range: 0.1 to 20μg/L).
The diagnosis of mercury intoxication was also corroborated by the consulted toxicologist. The toxicologist recommended the administration of penicillamine instead of dimercaprol as our patient recovered from the acute period. A dosage of 300mg of penicillamine every six hours was administered for seven days. Her clinical and laboratory test results were significantly improved by the treatment. No side effects of penicillamine were seen and our patient was discharged.
Her husband’s serum mercury level was 197μg/L (normal range 0.6 to 59μg/L), and his urine mercury level was 412μg/L (normal range 0.1 to 20μg/L). Therefore, he received the same treatment as his wife.