A 16-year-old Bangladeshi boy was brought to the Department of Otolaryngology of Dhaka Medical College Hospital in March 2010 with severe respiratory distress and cyanosis. A short history from his father suggested he might have impacted a live fish in his throat. A quick examination of the throat was carried out and some lacerated areas were found in the oral cavity, oropharynx and hypopharynx. No foreign body was found but the patient was in severe distress, vigorously coughing and unable to talk. To relieve respiratory distress and secure life, an emergency tracheostomy was carried out under local anaesthesia. Still, respiratory distress was not relieved. A quick examination of the inside of lower trachea through the tracheostome revealed a tail fin of a fish directed to the right side of the bronchus. It was grasped with an artery forceps and pulled out of the trachea. Respiratory distress was relieved immediately. The patient was moved to the recovery room and monitored. The fish removed from the trachea was locally known as Guchi Baim fish (Macrognathus pancalus) . It was about 16 cm long and about 2 cm wide at its central region. It was very slippery.
After the emergency procedure, detailed history was taken from the parents. They said that on the Eid day (a Muslim religious festival), the boy with his friend had gone to a nearby canal to catch fish. He found two fishes at a time, and at one point held one’s head between his teeth while trying to catch the other one, keeping both hands free. Then suddenly the live moving fish slipped into his mouth and the boy immediately rushed home. Initially his family members saw the fish in his mouth and tried to pull it out with hands by holding the tail end, but couldn’t do so, as it was live, moving and very slippery. The fish slipped downwards beyond their vision. Then they rushed to the nearby Upazilla Health Complex from where the boy was referred to a District Hospital. At the District Hospital, attending doctors failed to remove it and as respiratory distress kept increasing, they immediately referred him to Dhaka Medical College Hospital (a tertiary level medical facility). Already five valuable hours had passed from the onset of incident to removal of the fish at the hospital. Probably he is one of the lucky survivors of this kind of incidence. Tracheostomy was closed within seven days and the patient was discharged from hospital.
The case report was approved by the ethical review committee of Dhaka Medical College.