A 43-year-old woman presented to Yehuleshet Specialty Clinic with history of progressive weakness of all her extremities over the past seven years. She was apparently healthy before the onset of the weakness. The weakness started from her left leg and subsequently involved her right leg and since the past two months weakness involved both her upper extremities forcing her to be dependent on her family care for day-to-day activities, including feeding and dressing. Since the past two months, she became wheel chair bounded. She had speech difficulty, blurring of vision, headache, difficulty of swallowing, and since 3 weeks, she developed urinary and fecal incontinence. She had history of sudden inappropriate laughter episodes. Otherwise, she had no history of head trauma or chronic medical illness. She was educated up to grade 10 and was working on her private business before the onset of the illness. She had 3 siblings and both of her parents were alive and healthy. Neurological examination showed bilateral reduced visual acuity, horizontal nystagmus, dysarthria, and spastic quadriparesis with increased deep tendon reflexes and upgoing plantars bilaterally. Cognitive assessment and cranial nerves examination were normal. She had bilateral pes-cavus . Liver and renal functions and lipid profiles are normal. A total blood count was normal. Serological tests for HIV, HCV, HBV, and syphilis were negative. Chest X-ray, Echocardiography, stool examination, urine analysis, and Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) were unremarkable. Brain MRI showed multiple, bilateral, and symmetrical T1 hypointense, T2 hyperintense, and rounded lesions . The cystic lesions shows CSF-like content with increased signal intensity of the surrounding brain parenchyma on FLAIR sequences . The lesions are non-enhancing to contrast material and predominantly observed in basal ganglia area causing mass effect on adjacent descending motor fibers and lateral ventricles. A single lesion was also seen in right pontomesencephalic region . Diffusion-weighted image apparent diffusion coefficient map shows no restricted diffusion in the affected part of the brain . Cervical, lumbosacral MRI and nerve conduction study of lower extremity were normal. Neurosurgical team was consulted for possible surgical intervention, but they deferred surgical management and advised to optimize conservative management strategy. Currently, the patient has been managed in the following ways: twice weekly physiotherapy to improve her spasticity and to prevent contracture, amitriptyline 25mg daily was started for pseudobalbar affect and associated neuropathic pain, and home care. Home care focus on optimizing feeding and bowel/bladder care to avoid infections and, advised on importance of follow-up evaluation every three months.
Ethics approval and consent to participate: The authors' institution does not require ethical approval for publication of a single case report. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient. Written informed consent for publication of clinical details and images was obtained from the patient.