Seventeenyears ago, a45-year-old lady was admitted to our hospital due to coxarthrosis secondary to developmental hip dysplasia. In six months interval, she underwent bilateral THA with Exeter™ Universal Hip system. She had re-operated on her 3rd year because of right femoral stem fracture.Since then, she has beenexamined at the outpatient clinic regularly on1-year-based intervals. Onher last follow-up, the physical examination revealed minimal pain on her right thigh and nothing more. The patient was 1.62 m tall and weighed 84 kg, with abody mass index (BMI) of 31.25kg/m2 (obese class).There was no difference between the range of motion of bilateral knees and hips when compared withprevious records. The patient’s gait was observed adequately, and nothing significant was detected. There was no trauma or obvious activity experienced. Radiographs of the pelvis and bilateral femur were obtained,and it was demonstrated that both femoral stems were broken . It was also revealed that radiolucent lines had seen both femoral stems and left acetabulum.The patient was informed of the fact that this asymptomatic situation requires revision surgery. With the informed consent of the patient, revision surgery was scheduled. Both thefractured stems were removed by extended femoral osteotomy via a lateral approach.Intraoperative examination revealed that the right acetabular component was well-fixed but there was a loosening of the left acetabularcomponent.Acetabularrevision was performed to the left side. Echelon cementless revision hip system (Smith and Nephew) was used for the right and left sides .. Patient was stood–up on the first post-operative day and weight – bearing was permitted as much as tolerated. . At the end of 6 weeks, full weight bearing was permitted. She returned to her routine daily life activities after 4 months. The preoperativeHarris score was 90.25, and the postoperativeHarris score was 91.25. After 2-year follow-up, no major or minor complications were reported.