A 13-year-old boy from India belonging to South Asian ethnicity had sustained an unprovoked bite on his right hand from a street dog on Aug. 26, 2014. He was taken to a local hospital where the wound was cleaned, and was given the first dose of intramuscular (im) Rabipur as part of the post-exposure prophylactic (PEP) treatment. He was not given rabies immunoglobulin and received two more doses of im Rabipur on days 3 and 7 after the bite. The patient complained of headache and fever from the 10th day and was treated symptomatically by the local physician. Over the next two days he started vomiting and became drowsy. He was brought to our hospital 35 days after the dog bite with an altered state of consciousness. His initial clinical examination revealed normal vital parameters with no dysautonomic features. Neurological examination showed a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 11/15 (E2 M5 V4) and intact brain stem reflexes along with signs of meningeal irritation. He had no focal neurological deficits, and a fundal examination was normal.
He was initially treated with broad spectrum antibiotics as well as antimalarial agents in response to febrile encephalopathy in an endemic region and was investigated for possible etiologies. His hematological and biochemical parameters were normal. Screening for malaria and toxic substances, including lead and benzodiazepines, showed negative results. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed lymphocytic pleocytosis (WBC-20), elevated proteins (76 mg/dl), normal glucose (60 mg/dl, blood glucose of 112 mg/dl), and negative staining (Gram stain, Acid fast bacilli, India ink preparation) of the CSF culture. The initial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed bilateral thalamus and brainstem hyperintensities in the T2W and FLAIR images without diffusion restriction or hemorrhages on the gradient; these findings were suggestive of encephalitis .
The possible diagnoses after neuroimaging were Japanese B-, West Nile-, or rabies-associated encephalitis. The CSF screen was negative for Herpes, Japanese B, and West Nile viruses by RT-PCR. In view of the possibility of rabies encephalitis, he was evaluated using paired serum and CSF samples for antibody titers. The paired sera showed the antibody titers in excess of 1:60,000 dilution after 45 days of vaccine treatment confirming the diagnosis of rabies infection. Subsequent to these results, other samples were collected from the nape of the neck and the cornea. The presence of the rabies antigen in the nerve twigs confirmed the diagnosis of rabies encephalitis. The confirmatory tests were conducted at the Department of Virology, Armed Forces Medical College (AFMC), Pune and the National Institute for Mental Health and Neurological Sciences (NIMHANS), Bengaluru.
He was managed in the intensive care unit (ICU) with ventilator support, barrier nursing, and strict universal precautions. The ICU course was complicated by ventilator associated pneumonia, autonomic storms, and recurrent seizures. The sympathetic storm management included the use of intravenous labetalol for tachycardia and hypertension. His management included broad spectrum antibiotics for Pseudomonas pneumonia, prophylaxis for deep vein thrombosis, a tracheostomy, antiepileptic drugs, and aggressive physiotherapy. For approximately three weeks, he remained comatose with a motor score of 3 and a GCS score of 5 with pronounced bulbar palsy. Nutritive requirements were met by the nasogastric feeds. He was weaned off of the ventilator after eight weeks of illness.
Over the next two months he developed spontaneous eye opening and was able to follow verbal commands. Motor functions partially improved with spontaneous movements of the limbs and truncal muscles. He continued with aggressive physiotherapy, and after five months of hospitalization, he was discharged in stable condition with neurological sequelae. MRI scans were conducted at serial intervals and showed the reduction of hyperintensities along with marked cortical atrophy . During the last review (two months after discharge), the patient was able to make meaningful eye contact and follow single step commands.