A 3-year-old Caucasian girl with Noonan syndrome (heterozygous RIT1 mutation) initially presented at the age of 18 months with a heart murmur and was diagnosed with HCM causing mid cavity left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) obstruction, severe right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) obstruction, and a dysplastic stenotic pulmonary valve ( and ). She underwent surgical relief of LVOT obstruction with myectomy and relief of RVOT obstruction with muscular resection and a transannular patch at 22 months. An epicardial pacemaker was required for post-operative complete heart block. She recovered well following the procedure with no progression of HCM.
She was admitted to intensive care unit at 2 years and 8 months due to respiratory failure caused by parainfluenza 3 infection, 10 months following her cardiac surgery. She developed significant bilateral pleural effusions requiring drainage. The fluid analysis confirmed chylothorax: fluid triglycerides 1.9 mmol/L (reference value >1.24 mmol/L diagnostic of chylothorax) and fluid protein 30 g/L (gram stain negative, mononuclear white blood cells). She was treated with a low fat and high medium chain triglycerides (MCT) diet, as well as an octreotide infusion. Despite this, she was losing a significant amount of chyle, which resulted in low immunoglobulin levels. She acutely deteriorated with spontaneous bowel perforation, requiring 10 cm of terminal ileum to be resected, and a stoma formed. Her acquired immunocompromised state led to bacterial and candida sepsis. She was treated with multiple courses of antibiotics and antifungals, as well as immunoglobulin replacements.
Parenteral nutrition was started in view of ongoing refractory pleural effusions and high stoma losses. She was gradually transitioned back to MCT and was discharged home after 3 months of hospital stay. However, she repeatedly represented with reaccumulation of pleural effusions despite MCT diet and underwent multiple chest drains for respiratory compromise ( and ).
Pulmonary lymphangiectasia secondary to the underlying syndrome or to residual cardiac anomalies were considered as differential diagnoses. Surgical damage to the thoracic duct was felt to be unlikely due to a long-time period (ten months) between the surgical repair and first presentation with chylothorax. Transoesophageal echocardiogram confirmed no residual left or right ventricular outflow tract obstruction ( and ); there was a small atrial septal defect with a bidirectional shunt and consistent with restrictive right ventricular (RV) physiology. Invasive haemodynamic measurements showed elevated bi-atrial pressures at 14 mmHg (reference value 3–6 for right atrium and 6–9 for left atrium in children), mean pulmonary artery pressure of 20 mmHg (reference value 15 mmHg), mildly increased pulmonary vascular resistance at 2.1 indexed Wood units (reference value <2 indexed Wood units), and calculated cardiac index of 3.8 L/min/m2. Innominate vein (IV) wedge angiogram did not demonstrate the thoracic duct entry point, and the IV was unobstructed (see , ). We concluded that the main underlying pathology was likely lymphatic dysplasia driven by her primary syndrome with some contribution from her elevated right-sided filling pressures.
In view of restrictive RV physiology, we initially tried to manage her with parenteral nutrition and intense diuresis, with no improvement. We exhausted all conventional treatment options and considered the condition incompatible with long-term survival, especially as she had already suffered from life-threatening complications. The family was offered a trial of trametinib treatment as the last resort with the potential for lymphatic remodelling. Side effects were discussed in detail and written information given to the family. Hospital Trust board approval was obtained and managed access for unlicensed use was arranged with Novartis (Novartis International AG, Basel, Switzerland). She was started on trametinib 0.032 mg/kg/dose once a day following a prescribing guideline for trametinib use for oncological indications. Monitoring plans were put in place with clear instructions for side-effect management. Baseline bloods were monitored weekly (full blood count, urea and electrolytes, creatine kinase, liver function tests, and HbA1c), and ophthalmology review was performed monthly. Weekly echocardiograms were performed to monitor ventricular function and pleural spaces. Both pleural spaces were drained prior to commencing treatment.
She developed severe eczema affecting the arms, legs, and trunk, which responded to emollients and topical steroids. Her stoma output increased, but was manageable with parenteral nutrition (small amounts of fat-free oral feeds were allowed) and stayed below an agreed cut-off for discontinuation of treatment (30 mL/kg/day). No other significant side effects were seen. Reduction in left ventricular mass was noticed on serial echocardiograms.
We set a goal of completing a 3-month course of trametinib at the outset. Following completion, she was gradually transitioned to enteral feeds (initially with MCT diet, followed by a diet with normal fat content) and discharged home. She has since been followed in the outpatient clinic and remains free of chylothorax recurrence (monitored by chest X-ray, , and ultrasound) for the last eight months since completing her treatment and eleven months since commencing treatment and her last pleural drainage.