A 50-year-old diabetic woman with a six-day history of fever (38.3 °C), myalgia, dry cough and severe dyspnea (SpO2 was 86% - room air) was presented to the emergency department. She had a medical history of type 2 diabetes mellitus treated with an oral hypoglycemic agent and history of hypertension. RT-PCR confirmed SARS-Cov-2 diagnosis. High-resolution chest CTs obtained at admission revealed areas of ground-glass opacification. The patient received supportive oxygen therapy with nasal cannula in addition to remdesivir at a dose of 200 mg on day 1 and 100 mg/d for 5 days and methylprednisolone 60 mg every 12 hours for three days. After three days, the methylprednisolone was switched to dexamethasone 4 mg/d continued for 7 days. The patient's condition improved over 15 days, and she was discharged with SpO2 = 93%, afebrile, and improved cough. Following 12 days, the patient presented to our hospital with a history of left facial pain. At admission, physical examination showed a hemodynamically and respiratory stable condition. The initial laboratory data were as follows: white blood cells (WBC) 12,500/μl, platelet (PLT) 300,000/μl, hemoglobin (Hb) 11 gr/dl, creatinine (Cr) 0.8, and C reactive protein (CRP) 19 mg/dl. In the physical examination, extra oral swelling over the left side of her face and numbness of the left side of her upper lip was observed. Subsequently, computed tomography of sinuses and lungs were performed . According to the mucosal thickening in both maxillary sinuses and ethmoidal air cells, the patient underwent functional endoscopic sinus surgery (FESS) and severe involvement and necrosis were observed. Microscopic examination revealed mycelium with septation suspected to Aspergillus species. The culture was consistent with Aspergillus spp phenotypically resemble Aspergillus flavus and Aspergillus niger . In pathology specimen of the left maxillary sinus acute on chronic osteomyelitis associated with many calcium oxalate crystals, as byproducts of Aspergillus spp, and occasional degenerated fungal hyphae were also observed . Empirical treatment with liposomal amphotericin B (5 mg kg−1 d−1) was initiated. According to the results of pathology and the diagnosis of proven aspergillosis with two species, intravenous voriconazole 400 mg was administered every 12 hours on day 1 and 300 mg was prescribed every 12 hours for the following days. The patient was discharged with no signs of necrosis and therapy switched to oral voriconazole. After one month of follow-up, she is still healthy.