A 62-year-old male patient with a 28-year history of Type II diabetes mellitus that was treated with metformin and empagliflozine was admitted to our clinic. Six months before first evaluation at our center, he experienced an episode of disturbed speech featuring dysarthria, dysphonia, and a weakness of the right-sided buccal branch of the facial nerve. On admittance to a local hospital, he was diagnosed with a urinary tract infection. Here, the admission diagnostic including noncontrast Computed tomograhpy (CT) followed by a CTperfusion and CT-angio excluded the possibility of a stroke. In addition, a serum glucose level of 500 mg/dL and Glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) of 16.6% were found. T1 MRI revealed a hyperintense lesion within the left putamen and globus pallidus. Over the course of several weeks after antibiotic treatment for the infection and changes to antidiabetic medication, the patient developed progressive chorea of the upper right extremity. The previous unsuccessful therapeutic efforts included tiapride 600 mg/day and tetrabenazine 25 mg/day. Administration of higher doses was not possible as side effects occurred.
Relevant medical history included complications secondary to diabetes mellitus (e.g., peripheral neuropathy) and cardiovascular disease (e.g., arterial hypertension, coronary heart disease and ischemic cardiomyopathy). Five months after symptom onset, the patient experienced traumatic injury with serial rib fractures on the right hemithorax, as well as a periprosthetic fracture of the formerly replaced femur head, which left him wheelchair bound.
Neurological examination of the right-handed patient revealed ptosis and perioral synkinesis on the right face-side accompanying ballistic movements of the right arm and athetosis of the right hand without paresis, including involuntary movements of the trunk. He also reported hypesthesia of the right upper extremity. Images of the preoperative 3D-MRI revealing a hyperintense lesion in the left putamen which extends into the pallidum are shown in -. After psychiatric evaluation and neuropsychological testing where mild cognitive deficits (Montreal Cognitive Assessment score 25/30 points, Mini-Mental-Status-Test 28/30 points), but no mnestic impairments were detected, our multidisciplinary deep brain stimulation (DBS) board agreed to recommend DBS of the left globus pallidus internus (GPi).
The patient was implanted with a directional electrode (Cartesia D-Lead, Boston Scientific) unilaterally in the left GPi [ and ] at our center. No adverse events occurred perioperatively. Initial programming began 5 days after surgery. Here, symptoms resolved within several hours. The patient regained full function of his right hand and was able to perform fine motor tasks within days after programming. Twelve months postoperatively, the patient reported no side effects associated to DBS and the favorable clinical effect persisted without changes [cf. Supplementary Video 1]. The stimulation setting was C+, 2− (18%), 3− (16%), 4− (16%), 5− (18%), 6− (16%), 7− (16%), 1.9 mA, 90 µs, 130 Hz. To corroborate the effect obtained by DBS, the stimulation was turned off for short periods of time, where a recurrence of symptoms was observed at every time-point, up to 12-month postoperatively. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images.