A 53-year-old Japanese man who complained of epigastric pain and hematemesis visited our emergency room. The patient had no particular family history, but a history of SLE, pancreatic pseudocyst, and chronic pancreatitis. He took 5 mg of prednisolone, camostat mesilate, and berizym. He had epigastric pain since midnight of the day of visit, and vomited blood five to six times an hour after the onset. Upper endoscopy performed after the visit revealed that an ulcer was formed on a submucosal tumor-like lesion . He bled from the ulcer, and the bleeding was stopped using thrombin. Upper endoscopy on the next day showed that the bleeding from the ulcer was stopped. However, he was suspected to have penetration into a hollow viscus after the removal of clots . We performed computed tomography (CT) scan analysis to identify the hollow viscus. The CT result revealed the accumulation of fluid around the pancreas and penetration of pancreatic cyst into the stomach . Blood test performed on the same day indicated that the serum amylase level was 164 U/L, which is higher than normal level. Considering the CT image finding, the patient was diagnosed as gastric penetration caused by acute pancreatitis episode in chronic pancreatitis. We considered surgery, but we decided that we can take a wait-and-see approach, since hemostasis was confirmed on the upper endoscopy. He had abdominal pain 5 days after hospitalization, and blood test and CT scan were performed. The blood test result showed a slight increase in inflammation and no elevation of serum amylase level. The CT scan result indicated no new findings but revealed left pleural effusion. We suspected that he might have secondary pleural effusion. However, since we cannot deny the possibility that he had pancreatic cyst and diaphragmatic penetration, the thoracostomy tube was inserted 7 days after hospitalization. Only a small amount of pleural effusion was obtained, and the amylase level in the pleural effusion was normal. To identify the cause for the small amount of pleural effusion, we performed CT scan analysis 8 days after hospitalization. The CT result revealed that there was no problem with the insertion position of the thoracostomy tube, and the cause for the small amount of pleural effusion remained unclear . We took a wait-and-see approach, since he had fever but had been stable up to this point. However, he had massive hematemesis and melena 9 days after hospitalization, and his condition rapidly deteriorated. Blood transfusion was performed but had no effect, and he died on that day. Autopsy performed on the day of death showed that the large amount of bleeding was not from an aneurysm but from the cyst wall, and revealed that he actually had pleural thickening, which is not caused by accumulation of left pleural effusion but by severe pleural inflammation, indicating that he had pleural inflammation. In addition, accumulation of cardiac effusion was also observed, and he was suspected to have pericardium inflammation. We therefore performed additional blood and urinary tests 9 days after hospitalization. The test results were as follows: platelet count, 8.1 104/UL; anti-dsDNA antibody titer, 92.8 IU; complement component, C3, 29 mg/dL; C4, 4 mg/dL; CH50 < 10 U/mL; red blood cell count in urine, 20–29 per high-power field (HPF). Considering that he had fever, pleural inflammation, and pericardium inflammation, it turned out that SLE had high disease activity in this patient, resulting in bleeding.