A 47-year-old woman was followed for sporadic NF1 diagnosed by the association of numerous café-au-lait spots, cutaneous neurofibromas (NFBs) of the limbs and trunk, nodular NFBs of the scalp, and a plexiform NFB of the ankle. Her medical history was notable for a thoracic paraspinal NFB extending into the neural foramina of T12-L1, which had been resected neurosurgically in 2005, and numerous cutaneous NFBs treated by CO2 laser sessions on a regular basis. During follow-up, a 10-cm, hard, tender pelvic mass was discovered that had been absent at the prior examination 12 months earlier. She acknowledged having experienced menorrhagias and pelvic pain and pressure for several weeks. Laboratory testing revealed decreased ferritin (3 ng/ml, N > 11) without anaemia and a mild inflammatory syndrome with a slightly elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate at 30 mm, elevated fibrinogen of 5.5 mg/l (N < 4 mg/l), and C-reactive protein within the normal range. Transabdominal ultrasound imaging displayed numerous leiomyomas with a normal endometrium. Positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) disclosed an area of increased 18-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in the upper right part of the pelvic mass. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was then performed to evaluate the diagnosis of uterine leiomyomatosis, to map the lesions, and to rule out the diagnosis of NFB or malignant lesion-like sarcoma. MRI confirmed numerous intramural leiomyomas ranging in size from 1 to 6 cm. A 6-cm submucosal leiomyoma displayed abundant cellularity, matching the FDG uptake on PET/CT. The endometrium and ovaries were normal. The patient subsequently underwent abdominal hysterectomy without salpingo-oophorectomy to rule out a malignant lesion. The specimen consisted of a uterus with attached cervix. The uterus measured 14 × 12 × 10 cm and the cervix measured 4 × 3 cm. The myometrium contained multiple nodules consistent with intramural, submucosal and subserosal leiomyomas. The endometrium was smooth without anomaly. Microscopic examination of the myometrium revealed long fascicles of spindle cells without nuclear atypia and eosinophilic cytoplasm, few mitotic figures < 1/10 (at × 400) and no tumour necrosis. The endometrium and the cervix were normal. The aspect was in favour of multiple benign smooth muscle tumours (uterine leiomyomatosis). No leiomyosarcoma or neurofibroma was diagnosed.