A 52-year-old woman with, a known case of type 2 diabetes mellitus, systemic hypertension, dyslipidaemia, hypothyroidism and chronic kidney disease presented to the Emergency Department of a tertiary care hospital with complaints of disoriented talk.
Following disoriented talk in the Emergency Department, she was subjected to CT brain, which showed ICH and later shifted to MICU.
At the time of admission to the medical ICU, she was drowsy with a GCS (E2 V1 M4) without any focal neurological deficits, temperature of 104 °C, tachycardia, and hypotension requiring minimum noradrenaline support.
She was intubated because of low GCS and antibiotic Inj. Piperacillin Tazobactam 2.25 mg BD IV was started empirically after obtaining a blood sample for blood culture.
MRI of the brain to reassess the ICH bleeding in CT brain showed multiple ring-enhancing lesions.
Complete blood count showed WBC-10,800/mm3, Procalcitonin- 1.9. Urine routine showed numerous pus cells.
Urine culture showed the presence of (106 c.f.u. ml−1) and was sensitive to Inj. Meropenem. Antibiotics were escalated to Inj. Meropenem 1 gm IV TID × 7 days and Inj. Vancomycin 1 gm IV BD × 5 days.
Her GCS improved (E4VTM5), hemodynamics stabilized and the patient was extubated within the next 3 days.
A differential diagnosis of septic emboli/cerebral vessel vasculitis/tuberculous encephalitis was considered and planned for trans oesophageal echocardiography (TEE), peripheral blood smear, autoantibody screen, CSF study, India ink staining, Gram staining and HIV screening. Due to persistent fever, a repeat blood culture was sent. All the aforesaid investigations were insignificant except for CSF study, which showed a total count of 128 cells, polymorphs – 12, lymphocytes 88 and protein 119 g dl−1, glucose 90 mg dl−1. GeneXpert was done on the CSF sample and was found negative.
The patient continued to have fever spikes and was started in NIV support. In view of hypovolemia, desaturation, hypotension, patient was re-intubated. Tab Fluconazole 400 mg was added due to elevated counts (12000 /mm3). CT chest was done, which showed mediastinal lymph nodes. Endotracheal secretions for ZN staining and CBNAAT were negative.
The patient showed a further drop in GCS and started on anti-tubercular along with steroids, since repeat MRI brain and spine showed multiple tuberculoma with no resolution and, mild obstructive hydrocephalus of the third ventricle.
After considering the radiological imaging, deteriorating condition, and no confirmatory diagnosis being made, the patient underwent a navigation brain biopsy and samples were sent for bacterial, fungal and mycobacterial culture by MICRO MGIT. Blood C/S grew Sternotrophomonas maltophila and was escalated to Inj. Colistin 1 million IU BD and T. Cotrimoxazole 480 mg BD × 5 days.
The patient's condition continued to deteriorate and chances of septic encephalopathy, intracranial haemorrhage and cerebral oedema due to inflammation from TB encephalitis were considered. A repeat MRI brain showed dilated third and fourth ventricles for which the patient was shifted to the neurosurgery ICU and an extra ventricular drain was placed. The patient with no signs of clinical improvement finally succumbed to death . Brain biopsy was negative for fungal and bacterial culture but 6 days after her demise, the mycobacterial culture of the brain biopsy grew complex. (Time of positivity, 12 days.) This was confirmed by ZN smear and MPT 64 Antigen Kit (BD Diagnostics) .