A 57 year-old male presented with a history of acute-on-chronic low back pain and bilateral lower extremity numbness and tingling status post spinal cord stimulator implantation. He noted several years of low back pain and bilateral lower extremity numbness and tingling that was initially non-responsive to trials of physical therapy, chiropractic, aquatherapy, and lumbar epidural steroid injections. In 2013 he underwent spinal cord stimulator implantation after reporting greater than 60% reduction in low back pain and 95% reduction in his bilateral lower extremity numbness and tingling with a stimulator trial. He experienced approximately 2 years of durable relief post implantation until bending over to pick up a bar of soap; this resulted in a flare-up of his low back pain and bilateral lower extremity numbness and tingling. At the time of presentation to our clinic his symptoms had persisted for 3 weeks and remained unchanged despite trials of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), moist heat, and rest. His complaint was provoked with standing more than 10 min and walking. Mild relief was achieved with lying down and sitting. He denied bilateral lower extremity weakness, radiation, saddle anesthesia, bowel or bladder dysfunction, unexplained weight loss, fever, chills, nausea, vomiting, temporal factors, and change in symptoms with coughing, sneezing, or bearing down.
Past medical history was remarkable for depression, gastroesophageal reflux disease, type 2 diabetes mellitus, migraine headaches, morbid obesity, obstructive sleep apnea, and a remote history of polysubstance abuse. The patient was single, denied the use of alcohol or tobacco, and worked in customer service.
The examination revealed a mildly obese, well-groomed male who was cooperative and in no apparent distress. He was alert, awake, oriented to person, place, and time, his speech was intact and fluent, and his gait and station were within normal limits. A well healed scar was present midline in the lower lumbar spine. The patient’s DTRs were 2+ bilaterally and symmetric at the patella and achilles, strength was 5/5 throughout the lower extremities bilaterally and hypoesthesia was noted over the proximal anterior right thigh. SLR was negative both seated and supine, and femoral nerve stress test was unremarkable. Lumbar spine range of motion was full with mild end range low back pain during extension. Repeated end range loading was unremarkable for peripherlization or centralization. Facet loading was positive for concordant low back pain to the right, while sacroiliac and hip provocation were unremarkable. Articular stiffness and pain was noted in the lower lumbar spine and hypertonicity and tenderness was present in the adjacent lumbar paraspinal musculature. A CT of the lumbar spine demonstrated severe central spinal stenosis at L4-L5 and L5-S1 and a neurostimulator placed in the left superior gluteal region with lead tip entrance at L1-2.
The patient was diagnosed with symptomatic lumbar spine stenosis status post spinal cord stimulator implantation. He was deemed a candidate for side posture HVLA lumbar spine manipulation, as there was no increase in his low back pain, or provocation of lower extremity symptoms during pre-manipulative loading. He also received flexion-distraction mobilization to the lumbar spine and myofascial release to the lumbar paraspinal muscles. He was treated 5 times over the next 4 weeks reporting durable relief of his low back pain and bilateral lower extremity numbness and tingling to pre-injury levels. He also noted improved tolerance to walking and standing (30 min vs 10 min at the initial consultation). Moreover, he denied any adverse effect from treatment or onset of new symptoms post spinal manipulation.