A 66 year-old Caucasian female, with past medical history significant for asthma, presented with an asymptomatic 3.2 cm lesion within the inferior pole of the left kidney. The patient had no family history of kidney cancer and there were no significant findings on examination. The lesion had been diagnosed a few months ago on an abdominal ultrasound as a hypo echoic 2.6 circular abnormality. No significant vascularity was seen in the lesion using doppler ultrasound. A follow-up contrast enhanced CT showed the abnormality to have Hounsfield attenuation units of 63. The attenuation increased to 70 units on the early arterial and delayed phases. A diagnosis of a hyper-attenuating benign renal cyst was consequently made. A follow-up CT scan showed an increase in the size of the lesion to 3.2 cm within 4 months and to have equivocal enhancement of about 10 Hounsfield units on post contrast images. The lesion did not demonstrate significant wall thickening, septations, or mural nodules . The patient then presented to our clinic for further management. Fortunately, a DECT scanner was recently installed at an affiliate hospital of the Southern Illinois University School of Medicine (St John’s Hospital - Springfield, IL), and the Radiology Department at St. John’s Hospital had communicated to us the possible benefit of DECT in renal tumors with equivocal enhancement characteristics. A shared decision was made with the patient to proceed with DECT imaging of the kidneys to further characterize her renal lesion. DECT was performed using Siemens 128 dual source dual energy computerized tomography machine, and Siemens Syngo Via software was used to process the images. Iodine was noticed inside the lesion on DECT indicating tissue enhancement that is associated with solid tumors . Recommendation was made to the patient for tumor removal and surgery was done robotically with no complications. Intra-operatively, the lesion was found to be a solid tumor emanating from the lower pole of the left kidney (see Additional file for timeline).
The final pathology demonstrated papillary renal cell carcinoma type I, approximately 3 cm in size, confined to the kidney with negative surgical margins .