A 31-year-old male, otherwise in good health, experienced a sudden onset of severe headache 5 days prior to admission. After experiencing a nonspecific lightheadedness, he was brought to an outside hospital. Initial head computed tomography (CT) scan showed a subarachnoid hemorrhage in the basal cisterns, most extensively in the interhemispheric fissure, suggestive of a ruptured aneurysm. Upon arrival the patient was normotensive and had a nonfocal neurological exam. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) and computed tomography angiography (CTA) documented the presence of an elongated aneurysm arising from the anterior communicating artery. The aneurysm measured 6.2 mm in its greatest dimension and was directed superiorly. A second pouch measuring 2 mm projected inferiorly. Both studies documented multifocal narrowing of bilateral A1 segments, suggestive of angiographic vasospasm. The left A1 was dominant. Therapeutic options were presented to the patient including coil occlusion and surgical clipping. Given the patient's young age, the morphological characteristics of the aneurysm, and the risk of coil compaction over time, surgical treatment was elected.
The patient underwent a left fronto-orbital craniotomy to access the anterior communicating artery ruptured aneurysm. A lumbar subarachnoid drain was inserted prior to the craniotomy for intraoperative drainage of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and subsequent brain relaxation. After administration of mannitol, and CSF drainage, the sylvian fissure was dissected distally to proximally, following the proximal M1 segment toward the ICA. At that point, blood spontaneously filled the basal subarachnoid spaces, suggesting aneurysm re-rupture. Barbiturates were administered and burst suppression was rapidly achieved. The arterial blood pressure was lowered to 70 mmHg systolic. Although the bleeding stopped, the brain was swollen, obliterating the subdural and subarachnoid spaces, and bulged from the craniotomy. The temporalis muscle, galea, and scalp were closed in layers without replacing the bone flap. Intraoperative CT scan revealed evidence of new blood in the interhemispheric fissure without any intraparenchymal hematoma.
The patient underwent an urgent cerebral angiogram. In addition to the two lobulations documented preoperatively, there was an additional lobulation, likely representing the rupture site. Both A1s, right more so then left, were spastic. The aneurysm was almost completely occluded with Guglielmi detachable coils (GDC), leaving only partial filling at the base of the aneurysm, which is protective in the acute period. Immediately after the coiling, an external ventricular drain was inserted to aid in the management of intracranial pressures.
Throughout his postoperative course, daily transcranial Doppler studies (TCDs) were performed to follow arterial velocities. On postoperative day 4, pharmacological angioplasty with intraarterial verapamil injection in both ICAs and left A1 was performed. Although improved, the TCDs remained elevated, and the patient remained on aggressive triple H therapy maintaining blood pressures above 180 mmHg systolic. On postoperative day 22, a mass was noted in the left temporal region as seen in . A head CT scan was performed initially and showed a partially hypodense-isodense fluid-filled mass just superior to the zygoma and adjacent to the lower part of the craniotomy site . The following day (POD23), the mass had progressed in size and revealed avascular bruit on auscultation and arterial pulsation on the duplex Doppler. The magnetic resonance imaging/magnetic resonance angiogram (MRI/MRA) showed a temporal mass isointense on T1WI, heterogeneous on T2WI with pulsation artifacts and homogeneous enhancement [Figure and ]. The suspected diagnosis of an STA pseudoaneurysm was confirmed by transfemoral angiography [Figure and ]. Interventional approach was elected and the STA was occluded with coil embolization and sealed with liquid Onyx (ev3 Inc.). On the final postintervention angiogram, no contrast opacification was seen within the pseudoaneurysm . No other extracranial arterial supply was observed on the last sequences following embolization. No intimal flaps or intraluminal filling defects were seen within the parent artery. A follow-up angiogram was performed 8 days later (POD31), confirming persistence of the occlusion of the STA pseudoaneurysm. Over time, the temporal subcutaneous mass progressively decreased in size. The patient had a slow postoperative recovery. A follow up angiogram is planned in 3 months.