An 80-year-old Caucasian woman, with a medical history of hypertensive heart disease, reached the emergency room (ER) because of a fever lasting 3 days occurring after dental treatment, and no other relevant symptoms.
She also reported two hospitalizations over the previous year: one for anaemia and unexplained deep vein thrombosis of the right leg; the other one for bowel sub-occlusion. During these previous admissions, an abdominal CT scan detected the presence of a jejunal mass, described as a mixed (solid-liquid) roundish lesion (54 × 48 mm). The surgeon did not prescribe any additional diagnostic investigation of the mass.
At the admission to the ER, the patient was febrile (38,5 °C). No remarkable signs were observable at physical examination and chest X-ray was negative. Blood test showed leucocytosis (23.6 × 109/L) with 84.4% neutrophils and increase of both CRP (88.2 mg/L, normal values – nv − 0.0–5.0) and procalcitonin (41.2 ng/ml, nv < 0.5). After blood sample was drawn for blood cultures, an empirical antibiotic therapy with piperacillin-tazobactam was initiated.
Thereafter, the patient was transferred to our Internal Medicine Unit.
On the 3rd day an hypoxemic respiratory failure occurred, despite no inflammation nor infective process was observable on CT scan. It was interpreted as the first manifestation of a probable incipient Multiple Organ Dysfunction Syndrome (MODS). Blood tests only slightly improved (14.3 × 109/L leucocytes with 76% neutrophils, CRP 111.9 mg/L, and procalcitonin 1.8 ng/mL).
On day 6th blood cultures showed the growth of Sc.
Strains of Sc were identified in the blood by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF) using the VITEK® MS system (bioMérieux).
The pathogen showed the following antibiotic resistance profile:
Sensitivity to piperacillin-tazobactam was not part of the routine test of our Laboratory. After the lack of a significant improvement in clinical or laboratory parameters, teicoplanin was added to therapy and, after four days of treatment, produced a relevant benefit on respiratory signs and oxygen supplementation demand, as well as on laboratory test (further decrease of WBC to 11.3 × 109/L leucocytes with 67% neutrophils, CRP 17.5 mg/L, and normalization of procalcitonin).
Meanwhile, we searched for septic foci. Urine culture was negative. A CT scan of facial bones did not show any periodontal inflammation or pulpal infection, ruling out the oral cavity as the source of the bacteremia. Unfortunately, oral cavity swabbing was not performed, thus precluding the possibility to ascertain whether the same Sc was also part of the “normal flora” of our patient.
Echocardiography excluded an infective endocarditis. An abdominal US revealed the presence of multiple hepatic lesions .
These lesions appeared as three multiloculated cystic lesions surrounded by pseudocapsules at contrast-enhanced CT scan, suggesting the diagnosis of pyogenic liver abscesses; they were in SIII-IV (4 cm), SV (4 cm) and SV-VIII (8 cm) .
Though the significant peripheral arterialization indicated they were “pure” abscesses, we also considered whether they hid underlying hepatic metastatic lesions eventually infected by Sc. Therefore, we looked for possible primary neoplastic lesion.
Breast examination did not reveal the presence of a palpable mass, and the CT done on day 3rd failed to identify any potential previous unknown thoracic cancer.
A total colonscopy showed a normal mucosa.
Lastly, we focused on the jejunal mass detected at the previous hospitalization. It was no longer observable as a roundish lesion at CT scan; now it appeared as an eccentric thickening (20 × 10 mm) of the same intestinal loop with some inner cystic areas. Whether the lesion was an abscessed intestinal loop, or a group of inflammed diverticula, or the less common Meckel’s diverticulum, the patient underwent a surgical excision of the jejunal mass. Pathology identified the lesion as a Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumour (GIST). Due to its location, size (30 mm) and mitotic index (25/20 HPF), it was considered as high-risk lesion and a chemotherapy with imatinib was then prescribed.