A 33-year-old male with a 20 pack-year smoking history and untreated hypertension was brought to the emergency department after a witnessed cardiac arrest. Limited history was initially available, but paramedics (EMS) reported that he had been vomiting earlier in the day and later collapsed. Bystander cardiopulmonary resuscitation was initiated, and EMS found the initial rhythm to be pulseless electrical activity (PEA) arrest. EMS continued chest compressions and provided a single dose of epinephrine via intraosseous access with the return of spontaneous circulation. He remained unresponsive, was intubated without sedating medication, and was transported to the hospital.
Upon arrival at the emergency department (ED), the patient had a blood pressure of 249/149, a heart rate of 114/min, and was not on a vasoactive agent. Oxygen saturations were appropriate and end-tidal CO2 was elevated. His pupils were questionably reactive, and he had no purposeful movements. He received a paralytic to facilitate effective ventilation.
Given his presenting symptoms, common causes of PEA arrest were considered, but initial evaluation did not identify a clear cause of the patient’s arrest. Point of care and bedside testing revealed normal potassium and hematocrit, as well as a mixed metabolic and respiratory acidosis with pH 6.99, CO2 94, and lactate 9.06. Subsequent laboratory tests included a normal serum troponin, serum toxicology, and COVID-19 PCR. Urine toxicology was presumptive positive for tetrahydrocannabinol.
A non-contrast CT of the head was initially thought to be normal, but upon further scrutiny, there was concern for a hyperdense basilar artery sign .
CT angiogram of the head and neck demonstrated a complete basilar artery occlusion (BAO) at the vertebrobasilar junction .
Additional history was obtained from the patient's partner after initial stabilization. The patient was noted to have a 20 pack-year smoking history and untreated hypertension. He was last known to be normal seven hours before arrival, before experiencing acute emesis, vertigo, and diaphoresis. Symptoms progressed to include dysphagia, ataxia, and left hemiparesis. Three hours later, he developed a right facial droop and dysarthria, and then he fell. EMS was ultimately called, and before their arrival, the patient collapsed and became unresponsive.
Due to the time of onset, the patient was not considered a candidate for intravenous thrombolysis. He emergently underwent mechanical embolectomy with successful recanalization of the basilar artery .
Unfortunately, there was persistent occlusion of the distal bilateral posterior cerebral arteries (PCA). Multiple attempts at recanalization were unsuccessful, and the patient was taken to the intensive care unit for further management. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain without contrast demonstrated extensive posterior circulation infarcts, mass effect with effacement of the basilar cisterns, and obstructive hydrocephalus .
Due to worsening neurologic examination, loss of upper brainstem reflexes, and poor prognosis, the family elected to pursue comfort measures.