A 60-year-old female patient was referred for transthoracic ultrasound of the heart as part of a routine examination because of long-term arterial hypertension treatment. In daily life she reported no significant symptoms in the form of shortness of breath, chest pain or headache. She did not experience syncope or dizziness.
The patient had well-regulated arterial hypertension managed with a combination of losartan and hydrochlorothiazide (50/12.5 mg). Cholesterol levels were within range managed with a low dose statin therapy (atorvastatin 10 mg).
Apart from arterial hypertension for the last 10 years and dyslipidemia that was treated for 2 years, the patient does not have other chronic diseases. In the family, there were no sudden deaths or known cardiovascular diseases.
There are no documented cardiovascular illnesses in the family.
Blood pressure was 120/75 mmHg, heart rate 68/min. Heart murmur was not described in clinical status and there were no clinical signs of heart failure (no edema of limbs, without lung crackles). Abdomen was not painful and liver and spleen were not enlarged.
Complete blood count was normal, as well as biochemistry and urine analysis. Cholesterol was 5.0 mmol/L and LDL-cholesterol 2.2 mmol/L. Electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm 71/min with no elements of left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH).
Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) verified normal dimensions of left ventricle (LV) (left ventricular end-diastolic diameter - LVDd 5.1 cm; end-diastolic volume - EDV 118 mL), without LVH (wall thickness 0.9 cm, LVmass 165 g), no regional wall motion abnormalities, with normal global systolic function [LV ejection fraction (EF) - Teichholz ​​66%, Simpson biplane 65%] and second-degree diastolic dysfunction of the LV (E/A 1.2, dt 220 ms, E/e' 10, during Valsalva maneuver E/A 0.6). Mitral valve function was normal and there were no indirect signs of pulmonary hypertension while resting. The aorta was of normal diameter at all levels (annulus, bulbus, sinotubular junction, ascending segment, and arcus). QAV was verified and at first it seemed that in the projection of the presumed left coronary cusp, there were two smaller and equally large cusps along with two larger and normally developed cusps . There were no elements of QAV stenosis (aortic valve area planimetric — 3 cm2) with moderate aortic regurgitation (vena contracta 5 mm, pressure half time — PHT 499 ms, retrograde pressure gradient 45 mmHg, according to the depth of the jet in LV angio 3+, reversal flow in descending aorta 0.14 m/s), . Ascending aorta measured 27 mm. The diagnostic algorithm was then extended with multislice computed tomography (MSCT) imaging to obtain an even more precise QAV morphology and it showed that the location of the supernumerary cusp (asterisk) is between the right and left coronary cusp, with visible central malcoaptation of the cusps . Coronary CT angiography (CCTA) confirmed the right ventricular type of myocardial bridging at the distal segment of the left anterior descending (LAD) coronary artery . In this type of myocardial bridging, an intramuscular artery segment is running in the right ventricular anterior wall or in the right ventricular cavity. Other possible associated pathologies such as abnormally located coronary ostia, patent foramen ovale, etc were excluded. Since the patient was asymptomatic, the medicament therapy remained the same. A 1-year TTE control examination was recommended.