A 54-year old Thai woman presented to our facility with a two-month history of urinary incontinence induced by coughing.
She had a history of cervical squamous cell carcinoma, stage IIb, which was treated 15 years previously with radiation therapy. Her six-month interval follow-up pelvic examination and cervicovaginal PAP smears had revealed negative findings and the disease had been considered as in complete remission by the attending radiologist. She was first referred to our gynecology department to find out the cause of her incontinence. On pelvic examination by a gynecologist, her uterine cervix was found to be atrophic with an extraluminal compression at the anterior vaginal wall, covered by an intact vaginal mucosa. Laboratory investigation results revealed mild hematuria (3 to 5 red blood cells per high-power field) and mild anemia (hemoglobin 10 g/dL, hematocrit 31.1%). Eventually, our patient was referred to our urology department for further management.
During the process of the Q-tip test, the applicator was passed with difficulty and deviation to the right. Cystoscopy was performed. Her urethra showed no meatal stenosis and unremarkable mucosa, but the device was passed with difficultly due to external compression from the left side of the proximal urethra. Her bladder had a large sessile mass on the left lateral wall with extension to the bladder neck. Both ureteral orifices could be identified clearly with unremarkable appearance and efflux. Clinically, the differential diagnosis included recurrent cervical cancer, bladder cancer and retroperitonal sarcoma. Urine cytology and transurethral resection of the bladder tumor were performed, with a negative cytology report and a pathological diagnosis of high-grade urothelial carcinoma. A computed tomography scan demonstrated a heterogenous enhancing mass, 5.3 × 6.5 × 6.0 cm, at the left inferior-lateral wall of the bladder with invasion of the uterus and attachment to the left pelvic side wall, as shown in Figures and . There was no hydronephrosis, hydroureter, liver mass or lymphadenopathy seen radiologically. Subsequently, anterior pelvic exenteration and ileal conduit with pelvic lymphadenectomy, as well as an incidental appendectomy, were performed.
Gross pathological examination revealed a large mass on the left lateral wall that measured 7.0 cm across its greatest dimension. The surface of the tumor on the mucosal side was smooth. The mass obviously protruded from the serosal surface of the bladder and was attached to the uterus, but could still be separated from the organ with ease.
Microscopically, the overlying urothelium was intact with no dysplastic change . The underlying mass was composed of highly pleomorphic spindle-to-polygonal shaped neoplastic cells with frequent mitotic figures and many atypical ones . Their cytoplasms ranged from clear to pale on eosinophilic staining. Many cells contained bizarre-shaped nuclei with focal multinucleated giant cells. No definite component of urothelial carcinoma was seen. An immunohistochemical study was performed, showing that the neoplasm was immunoreactive for vimentin and CD68 , but negative for epithelial marker (AE1/AE3) and other markers for soft tissue tumors (desmin, smooth muscle actin and S-100 protein). A CD10 test was also performed for exclusion of carcinoma of renal cell origin, and yielded a negative result. Therefore, a diagnosis of malignant fibrous histiocytoma was made.
Pathological findings from other organs, including the uterine cervix, were unremarkable. No residual cervical dysplasia or neoplasm was detected. All 12 lymph nodes showed no neoplasm. The disease was clinically and pathologically staged as T4b N0 M0.
After surgery, our radiation therapist advised not providing additional radiation therapy in the pelvic area. Our patient, therefore, received a course of adjuvant chemotherapy (doxorubicin and ifosfamide). However, two months after the surgery, a bony metastasis was detected at the L5 spine level, and palliative radiation therapy in that area was suggested. Despite aggressive surgical treatment along with adjuvant chemotherapy and palliative radiation therapy, our patient developed further locally recurrent disease with invasion to the right pubic bone and rectum. At this time, a multidisciplinary approach for palliation of our patient's symptoms is still in process.