Our patient, a 12-day-old Asian male infant, weighed 1025 grams and was the second twin born of in-vitro fertilized donor eggs to a 47-year-old nulliparous woman at 301/7 weeks gestation. The pregnancy was complicated by hypertension requiring 10 days of hospitalization prior to delivery for administration of labetolol. Her condition was associated with normal liver function tests and a platelet count of 150,000/ mcl. Prior to delivery, the mother received dexamethasone and ampicillin therapy because of the unknown status of her group B streptococcus cervical cultures. Premature spontaneous vaginal delivery (ascribed to hypertension and mild toxemia) was complicated with breech presentation and poor respiratory effort requiring 30 seconds of positive-pressure ventilation. Apgar scores were 5 at one minute and 7 at five minutes. The infant was intubated for worsening respiratory distress at 20 minutes of life. Initial arterial blood gas demonstrated a pH of 7.35, carbon dioxide of 44 mmHg, PaO2 of 66 mmHg with a bicarbonate level of 23 mg/dl and a base deficit of -1.6. Beractant was delivered via endotracheal tube at 1.5 hours of life. Echocardiography revealed a 2 mm patent ductus arteriosis on the first day of life treated with 72 hours of indomethicin. Repeat echocardiography demonstrated closure of the ductus. Feeds were begun, via naso-gastric tube, on the third day of life. Antibiotic therapy with ampicillin and gentamicin were continued for a total of seven days for presumed bacteremia. Complete blood count at birth was not significantly abnormal revealing a WBC count of 7,500 /mcl, a hematocrit of 53%, however platelets were low at 132,000 and were attributed to the low maternal platelet count. Initial immature to total neutrophil ratio on admission was 0.2. Initial cranial ultrasound was normal for gestational age.
The patient weaned from conventional mechanical ventilation and was extubated to nasal continuous positive airway pressure of 5 cm H2O on the second day of life. He required only nasal cannula supplementation by his seventh day of life. On the twelfth day of life, at a weight of 1045 grams, the infant presented with increasing nasal secretions and oxygen desaturation episodes. Within 45 minutes the patient's work of breathing increased and his respiratory rate rose to 100 breaths/minute requiring intubation. Large amounts of fresh blood were noted upon laryngoscopy prior to intubation. Extensive bleeding was noted after endotracheal tube placement with worsening respiratory function requiring increased ventilatory settings in 100% Fio2 to maintain pulse oximetry saturations of 87%. Arterial blood gas and complete blood count sampling at this time were significant for a pH of 6.99, carbon dioxide of 74 mmHg, paO2 of 48 mmHg with a base deficit of -15. The infant's hematocrit decreased from 30.1% the previous day to 19% with a platelet count of 252,000. Mean arterial pressure decreased from a baseline of 33 mmHg to 27 mmHg with associated tachycardia to 220 beats per minute. Partial thromboplastin time and prothrombin time at this time were normal for gestational age. Chest X-Ray was consistent with acute pulmonary hemorrhage.
After placement on high frequency oscillatory ventilation (HFOV) as well as three rapid infusions of packed red blood cells, the infant stabilized. Treatment with vancomycin, cefotaxime and acyclovir were initiated. Blood culture and surface cultures for herpes simplex virus were negative. The possibility of RSV was entertained upon discussion with the nurse caring for the infant. She noted the patient's father engaged in kangaroo care with the infant and his twin while exhibiting clear rhinorrhea and sneezing. Rapid RSV and influenza studies were sent from both nasal secretions and tracheal aspirates. Rapid RSV was positive in both specimens and RSV was also demonstrated from the father's secretions via rapid assay. Antibiotics were discontinued after 48-hours of blood cultures demonstrating no growth. Infectious disease consultation did not recommend use of ribavirin [,]. Nasal viral cultures and viral electron microscopy were positive for RSV but negative for the presence of other viruses.
The patient remained on HFOV for three additional days prior to weaning to conventional ventilation for 15 additional days. Head ultrasonography on day of life 19 demonstrated increased echogenicity in the left periventricular white matter consistent with cerebral ischemia as compared to a normal initial study obtained at seven days of age. The patient was discharged on hospital day 147.