A 65-year-old white male patient, a chronic smoker, with no prior medical history, was admitted to the emergency department for palpitations and epigastralgia. He stated that he had been experiencing these symptoms for the previous two weeks, but they became more severe and prolonged on the day of admission.
Clinical examination showed a heart rate at 198 bpm, blood pressure was 130/60 mmHg with oxygen saturation was 95% on room air. A per-critical electrocardiogram (EKG) revealed a broad-complex tachycardia consisting with ventricular tachycardia t at a rate of 198 bpm . Cardiac auscultation was difficult due to the rapid rhythm, but there were no signs of heart failure. After few minutes, the patient began to alter his state of consciousness, which justified an external electric shock at 150 J, allowing an immediate restoration of a sinus rhythm at 70 bpm. The EKG after cardioversion revealed necrotic Q waves in the inferior leads and negative T waves in the lateral leads .
Transthoracic echocardiography showed ischemic heart disease, with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 50%, akinesia of the basal segments of the anterolateral and inferolateral walls, and minimal mitral regurgitation. Apical 4-chamber view revealed a large cavity (30 × 21 mm in diameter) adjacent to the mitral valve communicating with the left ventricle via single neck, but not with the left atrium, clogged with thrombus and moderate pericardial effusion not compromising right ventricular function . Biological analysis (before electric shock) showed a significant increase in troponin and manifest inflammatory syndrome. The coronary angiography showed an atheromatous coronary network with occlusion of the left circumflex artery without intracoronary thrombi , which was successfully treated with coronary stent implantation.
The patient was put on anti-ischemic medical treatment with continuous monitoring; there was no recurrence of symptoms or complications. Following a medico-surgical discussion, it was decided to re-evaluate the aneurysm's size in one month.
The patient was doing well at the one-month follow-up, the holter EKG analysis revealed only a few ventricular extra systoles, TTE showed a stationary aneurysm, and disappearance of the pericardial infusion. We decided not to operate on the patient based on these findings and instead to keep him under carful follow-up.