A 77-year-old Caucasian male with a past medical history of hypertension, vitamin D deficiency and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation presented to primary care clinic with a 2-week history of bilateral lower extremity edema, two months after completing 4 monthly intravitreal injections of bevacizumab for ARMD. Past surgical history was remarkable for a right hip replacement. Home medications included hydrochlorothiazide, cholecalciferol and lisinopril with no known drug allergies. Social history was remarkable for a 30-pack-year tobacco smoking, and no alcohol or illicit drug use. Vital signs were notable for a blood pressure of 187/91 mm Hg. Physical examination revealed significant bilateral lower extremity edema up to the thighs. Work up which included complete blood count (CBC), comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP), lipid panel, and echocardiography returned within normal limits, except for albuminuria of 491 mg/dL. Metoprolol and furosemide were added to patient’s medication regimen. Five months after presentation, patient was referred to nephrology clinic and laboratory testing was notable for urinalysis revealing 3 red blood cells/high power field (RBC/HPF), 24-hour urine protein of 8.6 g, and serum creatinine of 1.2 mg/dL. A percutaneous renal biopsy revealed mild focal increase in mesangial matrix, minimal interstitial fibrosis, scattered lipid droplets in proximal tubular epithelial cells and on silver-jones staining capillary basement membrane was thickened with spikes. On immunofluorescence, there was 3+ diffuse global granular glomerular basement membrane staining. On electron microscopy, there was global basement membrane thickening with subepithelial electron-dense deposits (immune complexes) with intervening basement membrane (spikes), widespread visceral epithelial foot process effacement, and a mild increase in mesangial matrix. The findings were consistent with membranous nephropathy . Viral hepatitis panel, total complement activity (CH50), C3, C4, anti-nuclear antibody (ANA), anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA), serum and urine protein electrophoresis were all within normal limits. Computerized tomography (CT) scan of the chest and colonoscopy were unremarkable, and prostate-specific antigen (PSA) was elevated at 7.5 ng/mL. During follow up, random urine protein-to-creatinine ratio declined to 2 g/g and later to 0.56 g/g at 7 and 10 months, respectively with subsequent improvement in his lower extremity edema. Serum blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine remained within normal range throughout the course of illness. Patient did not require any treatment with steroids or immunosuppressant therapy.