A 58-year-old Japanese man was referred to our hospital for surgical treatment of two hepatic tumors. He had a history of blood transfusion at the age of 6 years during surgical treatment for a traumatic left femoral fracture. He was diagnosed as hepatitis B and C viral infection positive at the age of 30 years, and he had a history of interferon therapy at the age of 33 years. He also had a history of diabetes, and hemodialysis was introduced for diabetic renal failure at the age of 49 years. He had no familial history. Medical check-ups included computed tomography (CT) scans at his previous hospital each year. A CT scan revealed two hepatic tumors, and he was referred to our hospital 1 month later. His abdomen was soft and flat without ascites; his liver and spleen were not palpable in the subcostal area on physical examination. Laboratory findings on admission to our hospital included: platelet and white blood cell counts of 4.0 × 104/μL and 2000/μL, respectively; hemoglobin, albumin, and total bilirubin levels of 12.0 g/dL, 3.8 g/dL, and 0.4 mg/dL, respectively; and aspartate and alanine aminotransferase, alkaline phosphatase, and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase concentrations of 27 U/L, 27 U/L, 199 U/L, and 29 U/L, respectively. He had a prothrombin time (percent) of 66.5%. His Child–Pugh grade was corresponding to A. His indocyanine green retention rate at 15 minutes was 4.9%. Hepatitis B virus antigen and hepatitis C antibody were positive. His serum alpha-fetoprotein was elevated (126.0 ng/mL). The protein level induced by the vitamin K antagonist (18.0 mAU/mL) was within normal reference limits.
Pre-contrast CT scans revealed two hypoattenuating hepatic lesions (each ≤1.0 cm in diameter) in segments 3 (S3) and 7 (S7). Contrast-enhanced CT scans revealed that the tumor in S3 was enhanced in the arterial phase and became isodense to liver parenchyma in the portal and venous phase. The tumor in S7 was not enhanced in any phase . Magnetic resonance imaging revealed similar findings of low signal intensity on T1-weighted images and high signal intensity on T2-weighted images for both the S3 and S7 lesions . The preoperative diagnosis was multiple HCCs. However, CT findings were not typical of HCCs. Partial resections of S3 and S7 were performed. The resected specimens revealed that the tumors in S3 and S7 were well-defined lesions of 8.0 mm and 14.0 mm, respectively . His preoperative platelet count was low, but a transfusion was not required. Pathological examination of tissue from the S3 tumor revealed small, regular, oval-shaped cells with mild atypia, which formed the luminal structure. Tumor cells proliferated in an anastomosing pattern of Hering’s canal-like small glands with an abundant fibrous stroma that replaced the non-cancerous tissue . The pathological diagnosis was CoCC. The tumor in S7 was partially surrounded by a thin fibrous capsule and septum. Atypical tumor cells proliferated in a trabecular and pseudoglandular pattern corresponding to moderately differentiated HCC . The pathological findings of each cancer resulted in T1aN0M0 stage I according to Union for International Cancer Control the 8th edition. The pathological findings of the non-cancerous tissue included liver cirrhosis. On immunohistochemical analysis, S3 tumor cells stained positive for cytokeratin 7 and cytokeratin 19 and negative for hepatocyte paraffin 1 and Alcian blue. The membranous region of the lumen stained positive for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA; Fig. ).
His postoperative course was uneventful and he was discharged on postoperative day 13. He was alive without recurrence 36 months after surgery.