A 5-year-old, 28 kg, spayed male German Shepherd Dog was presented to the emergency service of the Small Animal Clinic of the Freie Universität Berlin for evaluation of acute, moderate bilateral hind limb lameness. The lameness occurred after the dog had jumped off of a car. On physical examination, only palpation of the cranial lumbar spine revealed pain. Otherwise, both the neurological as well as the orthopedic examination were unremarkable. A tentative diagnosis of mild intervertebral disc disease was made and the dog was treated symptomatically with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medication (Robenacoxib, Onsior 40 mg once daily, Elanco GmbH, Cuxhaven, Germany) and strict cage rest for at least 5 days. However, the dog was re-presented the same night with acute paraplegia with intact deep pain perception, accompanied by normal to increased spinal reflexes in both pelvic limbs. The cutaneous trunci reflex was absent caudal to the thoracolumbar junction. On palpation, the whole back of the dog appeared to be painful. The remaining neurological examination revealed no abnormalities. Based on the neurological findings, an upper motor neuron lesion localized to the Th3-L3 spinal cord segment was suspected. The exact localization of the maximal spinal cord lesion was assumed to be at the level of Th12-L1, at the level or slightly cranial to the cut-off of the cutaneous trunci reflex.
Results of a complete blood count and blood chemistry were unremarkable, as well as thoracic and abdominal radiographs.
Axial computed tomography (CT) with lumbar myelography (Phillips Brilliance TM CT 16, Phillips GmbH Market DACH Healthcare, Hamburg, Germany) under general anesthesia revealed dorsal to dorsolateral, mostly left-sided extradural spinal cord compression, extending from Th6 to L1 . The degree of extradural spinal cord compression varied between 20% and 50% of the cross area of the spinal canal, being most pronounced at Th13-L1. The extradural compressive mass was mostly homogenous in appearance with a mean Hounsfield Unit (HU) of 54, slightly higher than the spinal cord (42 HU). At some locations, small hyperdense bodies within the mass were also visible. At the intervertebral space Th13-L1, a vacuum phenomenon was also noted. No further abnormalities were detected. Based on CT-myelography and the results of clinical history and physical examination, DEEH was suspected, but the most likely differential diagnosis at this point included, among others, malignancy and coagulopathy. Because mucosal bleeding time, as well as full coagulation profile, revealed no abnormalities, coagulopathy was excluded from the list of differential diagnoses.
The dog was positioned in sternal recumbence and decompressive surgery was performed to gain access to the vertebral canal by left-sided mini-hemilaminectomy at Th13-L1. A pasty, bright red substance protruded from the spinal canal, once the lamina was penetrated. Based on the cytological examination, the substance was classified to be hemorrhage and cartilage without any sign of malignancy, resulting in the final diagnosis of DEEH. The mini-hemilaminectomy was subsequently extended towards cranial and caudal, up to the point, where normal epidural fat and a non-compressed spinal cord were present. Using suction and gentle probing allowed for complete evacuation of epidural hemorrhage mixed with extruded disc material from within the spinal canal, reaching from Th6 to L1 .
Before routine wound closure, morphine (Morphinsulfat-GRY, 0.1 mg/kg, TEVA GmbH, Ulm, Germany) was dropped onto the exposed dura. No fat graft or the like was applied. Postoperative CT confirmed the complete resolution of extradural spinal cord compression along the entire extent of the performed hemilaminectomy . In total, anesthesia time was 7 hours and surgery took 5 hours.
Multiple samples of peri-spinal tissue at the levels Th6-Th7, Th10-Th11, and Th13-L1 were sent for histopathologic examination, and were defined to be fibrocartilage material with acute hemorrhage in all locations, further strengthening the clinical diagnosis of acute DEEH.
Postoperatively, the dog received intravenous infusion of balanced electrolyte solution (Sterofundin, B. Braun, 2 ml/kg/h, Tuttlingen, Germany) and fentanyl (Fentadon, 1 µg/kg/hour, Dechra GmbH, Aulendorf, Germany) for 5 days, along with robenacoxib once daily, orally (Onsior, 40 mg, Elanco GmbH, Cuxhaven, Germany). Physiotherapy was initiated immediately the day after surgery. Bladder management consisted of permanent urinary catheterization. First signs of regaining pelvic limb motor function could be observed 6 days postoperatively. Two days later, the dog could walk with minimal support and showed independent urination. On day 11, the dog was discharged with ambulatory paraparesis and without signs of pain. The owners continued physiotherapy for approximately 3 months.
A follow-up examination four and a half weeks after discharge showed a mild ambulatory paraparesis with slightly decreased proprioception and normal spinal cord reflexes in the pelvic limbs. Palpation of the spinal column revealed no pain and wound healing had been uneventful. While the left latissimus dorsi muscle showed some mild atrophy extending from Th6 to Th9, no signs of scoliosis were present. At 6, 11, and 36 months postoperatively, the dog continued to be without any sign of pain and did not show any neurological deficits. Latissimus dorsi muscle atrophy had disappeared already at the 6-month re-check.