A 28 months-old boy presented to our emergency department for evaluation of recurrent upper airway infections in the six weeks prior to admission, non-icteric pruritus, and progressive tiredness. He refused to walk although he was described to have been an active child before. He had lost more than 10% of his body weight within 2.5 months. Body weight at presentation was 10.3 kg (5th percentile). Previous history included a heminephrectomy at age 5 months due to a double kidney. The surgery had to be postponed due to a pathologic prothrombin time. As this responded well to a single dose of vitamin K no further evaluation was initiated. Family history was unremarkable.
On clinical examination, hepatomegaly without splenomegaly was noted. The skin was pale; he showed no signs of dehydration and no signs of pathologic coagulation. Clinical examination was normal otherwise. Laboratory parameters at presentation are shown in Table . The patient was admitted for further diagnostics and therapy. Infectious causes including CMV, EBV, HSV, hepatitis A-C, and HIV were excluded serologically. Acute phase proteins were normal. No evidence for alpha 1-antitrypsin deficiency, autoimmune hepatitis, or Wilson’s disease was found. Celiac disease was excluded by serological testing. A sweat test yielded no result as the child did not sweat. Vitamin K concentration in serum was again decreased , as were other fat-soluble vitamins. Supplementation of vitamin K and other fat-soluble vitamins was started.
After admission, severe hypoglycemia (minimum 1.4 mmol/L) was noted. Due to the combination of hepatomegaly, dystrophy and fasting hypoglycemia with only mildly elevated lactate and no cardiac or muscular involvement, a glycogen storage disorder was suspected. A broad metabolic work-up was initiated: Glycogen storage disorders III and IX were excluded. Acid lysosomal lipase activity, a marker for Wolman disease, was within normal ranges. Tyrosinemia type 1 was excluded. Total cholesterol was reduced but a defect of the cholesterol biosynthesis (Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome) could be excluded. We performed an isotransferrin electrophoresis to check for congenital disorders of glycosylation. The result was inconclusive, further investigations were initiated and finally, a congenital disorder of glycosylation was ruled out. Hypoglycemia recurred and a diet with frequent carbohydrate-rich meals during the day was initiated. To prevent fasting hypoglycemia, the child was given several doses of uncooked corn starch during the day and at night via nasogastric tube. Hypoglycemia could be controlled and the patient was discharged.
Four weeks later, the patient was admitted with bacterial pneumonia. The parents reported recurrent soft and fatty stools. Elastase was tested in three separate stool samples and was markedly reduced to less than 15 U/L. Sweat test was repeated and showed a markedly increased sweat chloride concentration of 87 mmol/L, which was confirmed by a second sweat test (Cl− 94 mmol/L). Genetic analysis revealed Phe508del (c.1521_1523delCTT) and Arg1066Cys (c.3196C > T) mutations in the CFTR gene, confirming the diagnosis of cystic fibrosis.
Appropriate therapy with supplementation of pancreas enzymes, inhalation therapy, and physiotherapy was initiated, and vitamin supplementation was continued. Under this regimen appropriate weight gain could be recorded (see Fig. ). Morning fasting blood glucose normalized and nocturnal corn starch supplementation could be stopped after four months of therapy. Since then, the patient had one pneumonia, treated with oral antibiotics, but otherwise an unremarkable course. Lung function at age 6 years was normal with a Forced Expiratory Volume in 1 s (FEV-1) of 104.4 predicted. Transaminases have been in the normal range for almost five years and hepatomegaly resolved slowly over 9 months.