A 47-year-old female patient without familial tumor history was admitted to the hospital because of a 2-week history of visual disturbance with muscae volitantes symptom. The examination of visual acuity and field showed no abnormal. However, the brain MRI displayed multiple abnormal signals occurring, which located at right parietooccipital lobe with diffuse high signal intensity on T2-weight images and the lesion located at splenium of the corpus callosum with light enhancing. The patient underwent a biopsy operation on right parietooccipital lobe lesions and the pathological detection demonstrated diffused astrocytoma . Following, the patient received radiotherapy (comprising of 2-Gy daily fractions; day 1 to day 5 per week; total dose 60-Gy) and concomitant chemotherapy with temozolomide (75 mg/m2/day). Four weeks after the radio-chemotherapy, she also received adjuvant chemotherapy with temozolomide (150–200 mg/m2/day, 5/28 day per cycle).
After the first cycle of adjuvant Temozolomide (TMZ) chemotherapy, the patient presented to our institution with a 7-days history of progressively weakness. The neurological examination of the patient showed hypersomnia, hemiparesis of left limb. Compared with previous MRI, the MRI of this time in our institution displayed a significant enlargement of the lesion located at splenium of the corpus callosum with significant enhancement, the right parietooccipital lesion remain stable. New visible enhancing lesion was also detected at right lateral ventricular wall of occipital angle, which indicated possible multiple intracranial metastasis of tumor . We performed occipital craniotomy and conducted total resection of all the enhancing lesions with intraoperative neuro-navigation and electrophysiological monitoring . Whole-exome sequencing and pathological examination revealed glioblastoma, IDH1 wild type, PTEN deficient, TERT mutated, NF1mutated, MGMT unmethylated .
After surgery, the patient received combined therapeutic regimen of dose-dense adjuvant TMZ chemotherapy (150 mg/m2/day, 7/7 day per cycle) plus TTFields plus pembrolizumab (200 mg, every 3 weeks). No steroids were administered during treatment. Subsequent MRI (2 weeks after combination therapy) with post-gadolinium T1 and contrast perfusion revealed tumor rapid relapse at left lateral ventricular wall . Considering the time window of treatment works, the combination therapy continued. The follow-up MRI (10 weeks after combination therapy) displayed a progressive decrease in lesion size . Subsequent MRI (16 weeks after combination therapy) revealed partial response according to the RANO criteria . However, pembrolizumab was discontinued for the reasons of patient’s family. After stopping pembrolizumab for 4 weeks, several new enhancing lesions at brainstem and temporal horn of right lateral ventricle were visible . Oral mTOR inhibitor everolimus demonstrated significant disease stability/shrinkage in recurrent/progressive NF1-associated low grade glioma with a well-tolerated toxicity profile . According to the NF1 mutated and PTEN deficient background of tumor, we stopped use of temozolomide and add oral everolimus into combined therapeutic schedule for salvage therapy. After receiving combination therapy of TTFields and everolimus for 4 weeks, the newly enhanced lesions shrank by over 90% . However, everolimus was ceased due to severe myelosuppression reaction (lymphocyte count: 0.28 × 109/L, platelet count: 26 × 109/L). Further, the myelosuppression was persistent and fail to remission. Almost 8 weeks later, the patient passed away due to severe lymphopenia and pulmonary infection.
In this case, an extremely rare secondary malignant neoplasm occurred during combined therapeutic course, femur MR and pathological detection of biopsy tissue demonstrated a secondary osteosarcoma . The secondary osteosarcoma remained stable during combination therapy. In order to reveal the potential genetic mechanism of secondary osteosarcoma occurrence, we analysis the result of whole-exome sequencing and found 8 germline gene variations, which consist of 7 germline genes (including EPAS1, SETD2, MSH3, BMPR1A, ERCC4, CDH1 and AR; shown in Table ). All the combined therapeutical regimen described above were approved by the medical ethical committee and obtained informed consent of both the patient and patient’s relative.