A 16-day-old male neonatal presented with corneal clouding in the right eye ever-increasing since birth. The patient's medical and family history was unremarkable. An ocular examination of his right eye revealed buphthalmos with diffuse corneal clouding, conjunctival hyperemia, and iris heterochromia with yellowish superficial dots and membranes . Fundus details of the right eye could not be seen due to corneal cloudiness. The ocular examination of the anterior and the posterior segment of the left eye was normal . IOPs were 11 mm Hg and 10 mm Hg with Tono-Pen (Reichert, NY, USA), and the corneal diameters were 13 mm and 11 mm in the right eye and left eye, respectively.
The aqueous sampling was performed to screen for infectious causes, including cytomegalovirus, and the results were negative. Gonioscopy was normal, which was performed in the same session. Laboratory tests revealed that the level of cholesterol, triglyceride, and white blood cell count was normal, and the serology for TORCH infections and Toxocara spp. were negative. Third weeks after weekly follow-ups, IOP increased up to 28 mm Hg, and spontaneous hyphema was seen in the right eye, which did not respond to antiglaucoma medications and topical corticosteroids for three days. Therefore, an AGV implantation was performed uneventfully. Intraoperatively, the yellowish membrane-like formations were peeled off from the iris. The IOP decreased to 13 mm Hg postoperatively. Corneal cloudiness persists in the center despite clearing in the peripheral areas.
Two months later, the patient was prepared for an examination under general anesthesia, and numerous firm yellowish nodules between 2 and 20 mm in diameter were noticed at the abdomen skin around the umbilicus and under the left nipple .
A biopsy taken from his skin lesions revealed infiltration of histiocytes, foamy cells, and Touton giant cells in the dermis with variable lymphocytes, eosinophils, and neutrophils. Further pathological examination with IHC staining revealed positive staining with CD68 and no staining with S-100 protein and CD1a, confirming the diagnosis of JXG.
The patient was diagnosed with secondary glaucoma due to ocular JXG. During the patient's subsequent visits, corneal cloudiness regressed, and the tube position was stable in the anterior chamber. The fundus examination revealed widely spread pigment clumps around the atrophic retina, and optic atrophy was noted. Under topical prednisolone acetate and cyclopentolate therapy, the IOP maintained around 13 mm Hg. However, lens subluxation and phacodonesis were observed at the last examination, and pars plana lensectomy was performed. After a silent period of 3 months, an epithelial ingrowth was determined around the side port entrance. The ingrowth did not respond to cryotherapy and resulted in phthisis bulbi.
After a 2 years follow-up, the patient's parents decided to have enucleation surgery because of persistent pain in the eye and cosmetic concerns. Pathological examination of the enucleation material revealed retinal detachment with gliosis areas, osseous metaplasia of the retina pigment epithelium, subretinal melanin pigment accumulation, and hemorrhage. Besides, choroidal, scleral, and episcleral infiltration of histiocytosis was observed in the microscopic examination, which was compatible with JXG .