A 46-year-old woman presented with erythematous papules, papulopustules, and a plaque on the right lower limb of more than two years duration without other symptoms. Before her presentation here, she had visited multiple other hospitals. After the diagnoses of dermatitis and eczema, she was treated orally with antihistamines such as cetirizine, loratadine, and ebastine, and topical glucocorticoid ointments, such as mometasone furoate and halometasone. However, the lesions did not respond to treatment, and the rash gradually increased. The patient had a history of type 2 diabetes mellitus for more than 10 years and a tattoo on her right lower limb acquired two years before the lesion onset. After her diagnosis of diabetes mellitus, she was taking metformin orally (0.5g three times a day). In the first half of the year, the glycemia control was satisfactory, generally at 6–7 mmol/L (fasting) and 9–10 mmol/L (postprandial). However, the patient failed to regularly monitor her glycemia levels for a long period because she had not experienced any symptoms. As the patient remembered, her postprandial glycemia were generally 20–30 mmol/L around tattooing and 13–15 mmol/L around lesion onset (see ). She denied any use of immunosuppressive agents, or immunodeficient disorders.
The physical examination revealed only the presence of a cutaneous lesion on the right lower limb and red and blue-black tattoos . The human immunodeficiency virus test was negative. Results of the laboratory tests for routine blood, T and B lymphocyte subpopulations, renal and hepatic functions, Treponema pallidum hemagglutination, rapid plasma reaction, and immune indices were the normal range. Specifically, the immune index test measures levels of anti-nuclear antigen and anti-extractable nuclear antibodies, immunoglobulins, and complement.
A KOH (potassium hydroxide) examination revealed visible fungal hyphae under the microscope . A lesion biopsy specimen was cultured on Sabouraud dextrose agar at 25°C, and numerous and identical fungal colonies grew that were dense, and grey-black in appearance . Microscopically, the colonies were characterized by septate and hyaline hyphae with columnar conidia 2.5 to 3 µm in diameter, produced in chains basipetally from single palisade-like layer phialides that were borne directly on broadly clavate vesicles . The pathogen was identified as A. fumigatus based on these characteristics and matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionisation-time of flight mass spectrometry.
The histopathological examination of the skin biopsy revealed a reticulate corneous layer, oval spores in the corneous layer, a slightly thickened epidermis, and in the superficial dermis a few infiltrating lymphocytes and neutrophils around the blood vessels in the superficial dermis . Periodic acid-Schiff staining was positive, and spores were observed in the cuticle . Therefore, the patient was given a diagnosis of PCA based on the clinical manifestation, histopathology, and culture, and the exclusion of infection in other systems.
Treatment included oral itraconazole (200 mg/d) and local wound care with ciclopirox olamine 1% ointment. One month after initiating treatment there had been gradual improvement to a certain extent in most lesions . Complete resolution of lesions was achieved three months after initiating treatment . There was no report of any adverse event during the treatment period. Until now, no recurrence has been observed after 6 months of follow-up.