The patient started to present with severe myalgia, weakness of legs, and tremor of hands during high school training when he was 13 years old. Those symptoms gradually eased after rest for half a month. Later, exercise-induced myalgia frequently led to falls, and his symptoms relapsed. At the age of 16, he developed dysphagia, and he was confined to bed for months due to the stiffness and myalgia of legs. He had difficulty bending his knees and could not ambulate independently due to his leg spasticity . A detailed investigation of family history revealed that the patient’s father died of cardiac arrest in his thirties, and his grandmother also had a history of hyperthyroidism in her thirties (A).
Upon admission at age 17, he looked very thin and weighed 60 Kg, and his height was 1.8 m. His palms were abnormally over-sweating which was associated with palmar hyperhidrosis. No exophthalmos and palpable thyroid enlargement were found. Mental function and cranial nerves were normal. A fine intention tremor of bilateral hands and noticeably increased tone of his legs were present. Involuntary jerks without pain were noted in the thigh muscles of the right leg and became more obvious with exertion . Tendon reflexes were exaggerated on both sides. Abdominal reflexes were brisk. Moderate (grade 3 to 5) weakness of muscular groups of lower limbs was evident, most prominent proximally. Finger flexion reflex and extensor plantar response could not be elicited bilaterally.
Laboratory tests revealed undetectable serum thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) with raised free T3, free T4, and TSH receptor antibodies (TRAb), suggesting hyperthyroidism . Blood cell count, electrolyte, glucose, liver function, creatine kinase (CK), rheumatic antibodies, folate, and vitamin B12 were all within normal range.
The patient’s electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus tachycardia of 119 beats per minute with a prolonged QTc of 453 ms (normal range: 350–440 ms). An ultrasound of the thyroid gland showed an enlarged gland with increased parenchymal vascularity, the right lobe of 20 mm × 23 mm × 51 mm and left lobe of 18 mm × 19 mm × 50 mm, and isthmus of 3.0 mm. Pharyngolaryngoscopic study revealed neither an organic lesion nor obstruction, and normal vocal movement. Detailed magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and cervical and thoracic spinal cord were unremarkable. Needle electromyography (EMG), nerve conduction studies (NCS), and electroencephalographic studies were within normal limits. In long exercise test (LET), a decrement of the compound muscle action potentials (CMAP) amplitude and area immediately after exercise followed by a significant time-dependent gradual decline was observed up to 30 min postexercise (C,D). Genetic testing was performed for the patient’s family history and revealed a heterozygous missense mutation of the SCN5A gene (NM_198056: c.4018G>A) resulting in the substitution of isoleucine for valine at codon 1340 (p.V1340I) in the patient. The same variant was also identified in his grandmother, implying that the patient’s father also carried the variant (B). The SCN5A gene encodes the major cardiac voltage- gated sodium channel α-subunit Nav1.5, and the SCN5A V1340I variant has been previously reported to be detrimental in patients with Brugada syndrome (BrS) . In this case, the cardiac arrest of the patient’s father was also highly suggestive of the pathogenicity of the variant. This variant has not been reported in 1000 genomes and has an allele frequency of 0.0003 in East Asian people in the ExAC database. In silico predictions (SIFT, MutationTaster2, and PolyPhen-2) suggested its pathogenicity. We interpreted the variant to be pathogenic according to the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) standards and guidelines.
The patient was diagnosed with Graves’ disease, and antithyroid therapy with methimazole and beta-blockers was initiated. Within two weeks, his muscle hypertonia of lower limbs eased dramatically, and his gait returned to normal . By two months, his body weight increased to 65 Kg. Dysphagia and myoclonic movements were no longer present. Exercise-induced myalgia and stiffness occurred only if he kept walking. Extremity strength and hyperreflexia remained almost unchanged. His ECG reverted to normal sinus rhythm of 77 beats per minute with a QTc of 400 ms. LET showed an increase in CMAP amplitude and area immediately after exercise and a slight decline postexercise. The greatest decrease in CMAP amplitude at 30 min postexercise was greatly improved from 65.7% of the baseline value of pre-treatment to 10.3% of post-treatment.