The patient is a 40-year-old Indian male. He has no previous medical or surgical history and no relevant family history. He presented to the emergency department with a single stab wound in the anterior abdomen caused by a large knife after a physical altercation. There was no active bleeding from the wounds and there was no history of chest pain, shortness of breath, and loss of consciousness. His vital signs were stable. Focused assessment with sonography in trauma was performed which came out negative. On examination of the abdomen, one deep stab wound could be seen located in the lower right abdominal quadrant. The wound was associated with bowel evisceration . There were no signs of hematoma nor compartment syndrome. Primary and secondary survey were carried out and no other injuries were detected.
A preoperative computed tomography (CT) scan with intravenous contrast revealed a deep penetrating injury to the medial aspect of the right lateral abdominal wall penetrating both the external and internal oblique muscles and the transverse muscle. Other findings included both a superficial hematoma and an intraperitoneal hematoma tracing around the proximal ileal loops and the ascending and transverse colon that was associated with stable hemoperitoneum. A right psoas hematoma was noted that was suspected to be active extravasation in the venous phase from branches of the lumbar vessels.
The patient underwent emergency exploratory laparotomy shortly thereafter. Intraoperatively, three penetrating injuries to the cecum that were going through and through were discovered along with a right parabolic gutter hematoma and a retroperitoneal hematoma with fecal contamination. Right hemicolectomy with primary anastomosis was performed. The retroperitoneum was explored through an opening over the hematoma on the right side which revealed a right psoas muscle injury . The hematoma was evacuated, and intraoperative evaluation of the psoas muscle showed no active major bleeding. There was, however, minimal oozing that was controlled by compression and the use of hemostatic dressing. A drain was left inside, and two other drains were placed in the pelvic and right paracolic gutters. The urology team assessed for any ureteric injuries for which none were detected. The laparotomy incision was closed in the usual manner.
The patient was evaluated daily, and he was showing clinical improvement. He was able to tolerate a full diet and was only complaining of mild back pain. Laboratory investigations showed significant improvement in his C-reactive protein level which decreased from 25.5 mg/dl to 11.7 mg/dl. His white blood count remained within the normal limits throughout his admission and was ranging from 6.2 to 7.5 K/ul. Six days after the operation, a peritoneal fluid culture tested positive for Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Escherichia coli, and Enterococcus faecalis. The infectious diseases team recommended the use of meropenem. Consequently, a CT scan of the abdomen was ordered. It showed a partially walled-off collection measuring 6.7 x 4.3 x 7.9 cm, the majority of which was embedded within the right psoas muscle. A CT urogram was performed on day 10 of admission to rule out urine leak from the right ureter which showed an increase in the size of the previously detected right psoas muscle collection that displaced the ureter anteriorly without disrupting its patency and without leakage of urine nor contrast. On day 11 of admission, an ultrasound-guided pigtail tube was later placed for drainage of the right psoas collection, and it drained well without any complications.
On day 17 of admission, a CT scan of the abdomen was performed which showed regression of the right psoas muscle collection along with a decrease of its mass effect on the right ureter. The patient was being evaluated both clinically and by his laboratory values. He showed improvement and was tolerating a full diet, passing bowel motion, and mobilizing fully. All inflammatory markers were decreasing and returned to within the normal limits. A multidisciplinary team meeting was conducted with all relevant teams and after taking the patient’s own perspective and wishes into account, a decision was made to discharge the patient. He was discharged on day 19 of admission along with a prescription of oral antibiotics targeting the results of the latest culture result which was positive for Escherichia coli and sensitive to amoxicillin/clavulanate. The patient was lost to follow-up as he returned to his home country of India.