A 56-year-old woman presented with dysphagia in 2007. The results of an endoscopic examination performed at the previous hospital were unremarkable. Her complaints became more severe in November 2009, and she was referred to our hospital for treatment.
Endoscopic examination at our institution revealed a circumferential erosion of the esophageal mucosa 28-40 cm from the incisors, and it was impossible to advance the endoscope due to stenosis at 37-40 cm . Type A vessels were detected by magnified narrow band imaging (NBI) , and the lesion did not stain with iodine . Esophagography revealed smooth stenosis of the lower esophagus . A CT scan showed mild thickening of the lower thoracic esophageal wall but no evidence of lymph node swelling in the thoracic or abdominal cavity. 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET)/computed tomography (CT) did not show FDG uptake, and the levels of the tumor markers SCC, CEA, and anti-p53 antibody were within their normal ranges. Although the lesion was suspected of being a malignant tumor of the esophagus, pathological examination of biopsy specimens from four different sites resulted in a diagnosis of esophagitis. We then performed esophageal high-resolution manometry and an esophageal pH study, but because these studies did not reveal abnormal esophagogastric reflux or esophageal motor dysfunction, we followed up the lesion by upper gastrointestinal endoscopy every 3 months.
Polypoid lesions and fungal infection were observed on the erosive lesion during the follow-up examination after 1 year , but no evidence of malignancy was detected during the pathological examination of the biopsy specimens , and the CT scan showed no particular changes during the period. Antifungal agents were administered for 1 month for fungal infection of the lesions, but the lesions did not change.
Polypoid lesions have further increased in size , and the biopsy specimen was diagnosed as highly suspicious of well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma. Esophagography revealed irregular stenosis , and a CT scan showed circumferential wall thickening in the lower esophagus with increased FDG uptake (SUV max, 9.5) on PET/CT . Because the patient’s condition rapidly deteriorated due to worsening of the dysphagia and weight loss, we performed a thoracoscopic esophagectomy with lymph node dissection and reconstruction with a gastric tube via the posterior mediastinal route. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 28. The patient did not receive any adjuvant chemotherapy, and there have been no recurrences as of 8 years after surgery.
Macroscopic examination of the resected specimen revealed a white protruding lesion with an irregular surface in the lower esophagus . Microscopic examination showed epithelial downgrowth and invasive findings of the tumor, and the diagnosis was xwell-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma. Focal hyperkeratosis with a church spire configuration was also seen . These macroscopic and microscopic features were consistent with the growth pattern of VC. The pathological stage was T3N0M0, pStageIIA (UICC7th). No venous or lymphatic invasion was detected. All surgical margins were negative for malignancy.