A 17-year-old female presented to the clinic with abdominal pain that has been ongoing for 3-months. The pain was described as stabbing in nature and worsened when lying flat. Additionally, there was a history of dry cough for 4 weeks and noticeable weight loss. No other abnormalities were noted. There is no history of the same disease among the parents or other family members. During the physical examination, there was evidence of a generalized abdominal distension. A CT scan revealed a large multicystic abdominal mass located on the right side, crossing the midline, with the absence of the right kidney. In contrast, the left kidney was normal in size, appearance, and position.
The patient was subsequently taken to the operating room, where intra-operative findings revealed ascites that were slightly blood-stained. There was also a large polycystic intra-abdominal mass measuring 30 cm x 33 cm x 9 cm. This mass was cystically dilated and consisted of multiple cysts with mucosa material and solid areas . The whitish tumor was observed at the midportion of the colon , partially obstructing the lumen with a thick wall that was presumed to be the ovary, which was attached to the right fallopian tube. No kidney could be palpated on the right side. Multiple metastasis were found on the mesentery and on top of the peritoneum, especially in the suprapubic region. The tumor surrounded the sigmoid colon . The uterus was bicornuate, and the left ovary was found to be normal. The mass was then removed and sent to the pathology lab.
Histology results revealed an ovarian cystic mass showing an infiltrating tumor with glandular differentiation floating in mucin lakes that extended to the sigmoid colon with extensive involvement of peritoneal fat (omentum). A diagnosis of invasive ovarian mucinous cystadenocarcinoma with metastasis to the colon and omentum was made .
Post-operatively the patient was then given platinum-based chemotherapy of carboplatin and paclitaxel in the medical oncology department respectively. However, her condition worsened, and she presented with vomiting and loss of appetite. There was a biochemical and clinical progression of the tumor despite receiving chemotherapy. Unfortunately, she passed away after 6 cycles of chemotherapy with elevated tumor markers levels of CA 125 level of 80.600U/ml and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level of > 100.00ng/ml compared to levels of carcinoembryonic antigen of 18.330 ng/mL and CA125 level of 55.4 before chemotherapy.