A 33-year-old female administrator, who gave her written informed consent for publication, was admitted to our hospital in 2013. She was previously diagnosed with hyperprolactinaemia, due to which she received bromocriptine treatment. Investigations concerning family history revealed no relevant immunological or genetic conditions.
She presented with limb ataxia and tactile sensory loss in both legs, accompanied by paresthesia of the hands and feet as well as anxiety and dysthymia .
Nerve conduction study excluded peripheral neuropathy. Cervicothoracic spinal cord MRI showed no structural changes. Cranial MRI revealed bilateral, multiple periventricular white matter lesions, including a gadolinium enhancing lesion in the left occipital area, as well as a juxtacortical lesion in the left frontal lobe, and a lesion in the left thalamus . In the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), elevated IgG index (2.31; elevated when > 0.67) and oligoclonal bands (OCB) were detected. Cobalamine and folate levels were within the physiological range. The CSF neurofilament light chain level was 1904 pg/ml, retrospectively. Parenteral methyl-prednisolone therapy was initiated (3.5 g during the course of 4 days), leading to improvement in the neurological symptoms. Based on the clinical presentation and diagnostic findings, the criteria for dissemination in space and time were fulfilled in accordance with the McDonald Criteria of 2010 , and the diagnosis of multiple sclerosis was established. Despite international recommendations, at that time, the national therapeutic protocols did not support immunomodulatory treatment for patients with only one clinical event, while the patient herself was strongly opposed to long-term medication. For these reasons, at this point, disease modifying therapy could not be initiated. In 2014, a follow-up MRI scan indicated left optic neuritis with no progression of white matter lesions. Visual evoked potentials (VEP) revealed increased latency on both sides without clinical signs. In 2015, antibody levels indicative of systemic immunological diseases with potential CNS involvement were examined and found to be within normal range. Serologic tests ruled out a potential infectious etiology. After 5 years without clinical signs of disease activity, in 2018, a relapse occurred causing new, fluctuating sensory disturbances in both legs, with MRI scans showing multiple novel lesions in the spinal cord and one in the right parietal lobe . At this time, EDSS was 1, the symbol digit modality test was 56, the 25 ft test was 5.75 and 5.40 seconds, and the 9 hole peg test was 23.2 and 19.1 seconds for the dominant right hand and 22.7 and 21.1 seconds for the left hand. After an elective surgery because of a pleiomorphic adenoma of the parotid gland, immunomodulatory treatment (glatiramer acetate) was initiated in 2019, which proved to be successful in preventing further relapses with no issues concerning adherence and tolerability.
Parallel to the neurological investigation, starting in 2013, a thorough gastrointestinal examination was conducted due to constipation and flatulency. Accompanying symptoms were anxiety, avoiding behavior, and eating problems. To evade uncomfortable situations at her workplace due to flatulency, the patient woke up at 4:00 in the morning to eat and fasted until the end of the working hours. She behaved the same way in the company of relatives. Consequently, she became underweight. Gastric, duodenal, coecum and colon biopsy showed chronic, mild and non-specific signs of inflammation. Coeliac disease and alimentary allergy screening was normal. Elevated liver enzymes were found in the serum, due to which several tests were performed to investigate an infective or immunological etiology, all yielding negative results. During the gastrointestinal follow-up in 2014, the suspicion of Wilsons’s disease was raised . Serum ceruloplasmin levels were significantly decreased (0.092 g/l). Kayser-Fleischer ring was not detected. In 2015, she was hospitalized because of massive lower limb edema, hypoproteinemia, anemia, and ascites. Laboratory test results were consistent with hepatic decompensation. Abdominal ultrasound displayed hepatomegaly and ascites. Extended virological tests showed negative results. Liver biopsy proved chronic hepatic cirrhosis with copper accumulation. Genetic testing detected heterozygosity for the H1069Q and R778Q mutations of the ATP7B gene, both of which are missense point mutations classified as pathogenic. Based on these findings, the diagnosis of Wilson’s disease could be established . There were no neurological symptoms typical of Wilson’s disease. At the time of severe hepatic decompensation, transfusion, parenteral albumin supplementation, and oral diuretic treatment were necessary. Subsequently, oral penicillamine therapy was initiated, which the patient continues until present day. This treatment led to the slow normalization of hepatic function and significant amelioration of the patient’s symptoms, including the disappearance of edema and ascites, as well as an improvement in her mood and appetite.
The patient was followed by a hepatologist monitoring liver function, performing laboratory tests and abdominal US as well as by a neurologist clinically. The patient displayed MRI progression (novel lesions in both frontal lobes as well as in the pons), and a relapse with loss of vibration in both lower limbs in 2021, which led to therapy escalation to cladribine. During the last examination, EDSS was 3 (due to sensory functional score), the symbol digit modality test result was 51, the 25 ft walking test was 6.13 and 5.57 seconds, and the 9 hole peg test was 20.24 and 19.4 seconds for the dominant right hand, while 24.96 and 23.28 seconds for the subdominant left hand.