A 35-year-old woman had originally presented with recurring attacks of lower extremity joint/bone pain and chronic nasal stuffiness and congestion. With a diagnosis of palindromic rheumatism and chronic rhinosinusitis for 9 years, she had been treated with intermittent corticosteroids, typically methylprednisolone 40 mg for 5 days duration. Upon gradual progression of her nasal congestion, she was found to have obstructing nasal cavity lesion on physical examination which was subsequently biopsied. Pathology of the sample was consistent with RDD, demonstrating proliferation of macrophages devoid of cytologic atypia in which emperipolesis was easily identifiable. The macrophages had open chromatin, distinct nucleoli and eosinophilic or foamy cytoplasm. Macrophages were S100+, CD1a−, and langerin negative. Plasma cells within the expanded medullary cords were IgG-positive. IgG4 positive plasma cells accounted for 20% of the plasma cells.
Imaging evaluation consisted of gadolinium-enhanced maxillofacial MRI , to assess the locoregional extent of the disease, and also subsequent whole body 18F-FDG PET/CT, for staging of the disease. The MRI showed a non-specific T2-hypointense enhancing infiltrative lesion in the left anterior ethmoid sinus and middle nasal turbinate which was FDG-avid on PET/CT . 18F-PET/CT also showed a large FDG-avid left pelvic lymph node , and focal FDG-avid mixed lytic/sclerotic subchondral lesions in the left lateral femoral condyle and left talus .
Her rheumatologic work-up was positive for Anti-Nuclear Antibody (ANA), and negative for other autoimmune/inflammatory antibodies including RF, anti-CCP, anti-smith, anti-ds-DNA, TPO, C3, C4, anti-SSA and anti-SSB. Diagnosis of palindromic rheumatism was confirmed based on her work-up, and history of recurrent attacks of arthritis/peri-arthritis without joint space loss or erosion. RDD can behave as a malignant disease with somatic alterations [, ], thus she underwent peripheral blood next-generation sequencing which did not detect any genomic alterations, consistent with benign RDD.
She underwent maxillary antrostomy, total ethmoidectomy, and frontal sinus exploration to resect the infiltrative nasal mass. Sinonasal surgery helped her nasal obstruction. Currently three years after the surgery, her sinonasal symptoms are under control, by regular saline irrigation and Budesonide rinse, twice a day. She received Methotrexate, 25 mg weekly, and prednisolone, approximately twice a year, for palindromic rheumatism flares. For staging evaluation of RDD she undergoes clinical follow-up including 18F-FDG PET/CT, semiannually. Although her palindromic rheumatism flares and sinonasal symptoms have been under control for three years, her recent 18F-FDG PET/CT demonstrated progressive disease with new hypermetabolic pericardial involvement, in keeping with her new symptom of pleuritic chest pain. Methotrexate was switched to cladribine 5 mg/m2 on days 1–5 every 28 days, per expert guideline, considering limited data to guide therapy in this rare disease . She is currently on the third cycle of cladribine. Her most recent 18F-FDG PET/CT demonstrated favorable treatment response with decreased sinonasal disease burden and decreased pericardial effusion size and metabolism.