A 53-year-old female patient was admitted to our emergency department for evaluation of an intrahepatic foreign body.
The patient had attended an outside hospital on the same day with a two-week history of persistent epigastric pain. Abdominal CT had revealed a needle-like structure in the left liver lobe. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy had demonstrated a fungating mass-like lesion with central depression on the anterior wall of the lesser curvature of the stomach without ulceration or perforation . At the time of evaluation at our center, she complained of persistent epigastric pain accompanied by vomiting. She denied any history of fever or chills.
The patient denied any past illnesses.
The patient denied any personal or family history of related diseases.
On arrival at the emergency department, her vital signs were stable with a blood pressure of 126/81 mmHg, pulse rate of 80 beats per minutes, respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minutes, and body temperature of 36.9 ℃. Physical examination revealed no signs of peritonitis, with a soft, flat abdomen without any focal tenderness.
Laboratory studies demonstrated a white blood cell count of 13120/µL with 83.4% neutrophils, a hemoglobin level of 13.4 g/dL, and a serum C-reactive protein (CRP) concentration of 17.70 mg/dL. Mild increases in serum liver enzyme levels were observed with a serum aspartate transaminase level of 45 IU/L and serum alanine transaminase level of 46 IU/L. Blood cultures yielded no bacterial growth.
Chest and abdominal plain radiography were unremarkable. CT images from the outside hospital were re-evaluated by our radiologists and demonstrated a thin linear radiopaque lesion with an adjacent low attenuating lesion in S3 of the liver . Mild infiltration was observed along the lesser curvature of the stomach adjacent to the S3 Lesion. Accordingly, foreign body penetration from the stomach to the liver was suspected. The patient was unable to recall the event of foreign body ingestion. She was admitted for conservative management including intravenous antibiotic therapy (ceftriaxone 2 g/d and metronidazole 500 mg every 8 h) and analgesia. Follow-up CT was performed on the second day of admission. An interval increase in size of the adjacent complicated fluid collection was noted, indicating formation of a liver abscess.