A 23-year-old Chinese woman was referred to our hospital from the emergency department due to persistent palpitations and several episodes of syncope for 8 h in December 1993. She denied chest pain, shortness of breath, and impaired exercise capacity. During the first hour in the emergency room, she experienced three more episodes of syncope. She was unconscious for approximately 10 s and spontaneously recovered to consciousness after each attack.
There was a recent history of a cold with a low fever, stuffy nose, and sore throat in the previous week.
She denied a history of structural heart abnormality, cardiac surgery or drug use. She also did not have a special birth history, and growth and development were normal. Bradycardia was identified when she was 1 year old without further evaluation. The patient has had a regular heart rate of 40-50 beats per minute (bpm) for many years. However, no syncopal episodes had ever occurred before onset.
The patient denied a familial history of syncope, sudden death, and rheumatological disease.
On admission, she was afebrile with stable hemodynamics. There was no cyanosis, edema or bibasilar rales in the lungs. A cardiac murmur, which was strongest at the apex, was a grade III/VI systolic murmur radiating to the neck. She was awake and oriented, with no focal neural deficit.
Electrocardiography (ECG) on admission revealed complete atrioventricular block with junctional escape at 48 bpm . Considering the patient’s history of prodromal infection, myocarditis-induced complete atrioventricular block (CAVB) was considered first. Laboratory data showed a white blood cell count of 15.8 × 109/L, neutrophil percentage of 78%, hemoglobin level of 118 g/L, and platelet count of 114 × 109/L. Creatine kinase MB was in the normal range. Antibodies against cytomegalovirus and Epstein–Barr virus were negative. Clearly, the myocarditis-associated laboratory data above did not support the diagnosis of myocarditis. Serum electrolytes, thyroid hormone, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, and anti-streptolysin O were all normal, which together ruled out the possibility of electrolyte disturbance, thyroid dysfunction, and rheumatic heart disease. As the majority of CCHB cases were regarded as immune-mediated atrioventricular nodal injury, further investigations including autoantibodies were conducted, which were negative for antinuclear antibodies, anti-Ro, anti-La, anti-ds deoxyribonucleic acid, and rheumatoid factor.
Transthoracic echocardiography and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging were unremarkable, which further excluded the possibility of myocarditis. Although the patient did not have risk factors for atherosclerosis, gated single-photon emission computed tomography myocardial perfusion imaging was still performed, and the uneventful result did not support coronary heart disease. Right cardiac catheterization findings were normal at rest. Electrophysiological testing localized the site of the block to be proximal to the His deflection, and the junctional recovery time was more than five seconds, which was measured following right ventricular stimulation at several pacing rates between 120 and 150 bpm.