A 60-year-old woman presented to an outpatient colorectal clinic with a 2-month history of rectal bleeding. Her past medical history included a colpopexy which had been performed via a Pfannenstiel incision 20 years earlier. On examination a large villous adenoma was palpable within the rectum. She was referred for a diagnostic colonoscopy. The colonoscopy was performed without immediate complication using 25 μg of fentanyl and 2 mg of midazolam. Bowel preparation was performed to good effect with 2 litres of polyethylene glycol solution. The exclusion value of the examination was reported as excellent. Caecal intubation was confirmed by visualisation of the ileocaecal valve. The terminal ileum was not intubated. Two 4 mm sessile polyps were located within the middle third of the rectum and these were removed using hot biopsy. The lower third of the rectum contained a large sessile villous adenoma which occupied 50% of the rectal circumference at this level (7 cm diameter). The lesion was sampled by plain biopsy. Histological analysis revealed the 4 mm polyps to be tubulovillous adenomas and the larger sessile polyp to be a villous adenoma.
Eight hours after colonoscopy the patient developed gradual onset of abdominal pain associated with nausea and vomiting. She was admitted under the acute surgical service the next day. On examination she was afebrile with a heart rate of 130 beats per minute. Abdominal examination revealed diffuse tenderness with fullness and peritonism in the right iliac fossa. Peripheral blood analysis demonstrated a white cell count of 16.9 × 109/litre. Plain abdominal and chest radiography demonstrated several loops of dilated small bowel in the left upper quadrant but no evidence of free abdominal gas . The patient was assumed to have a post-colonoscopic perforation with a resulting ileus. At laparotomy the mid-ileum was found to be strangulated within a congenital band adhesion. The adhesive band was localised to the right iliac fossa and was well removed from the site of her previous pelvic surgery. The 30 cm herniated intestinal segment was non-viable and was resected. Continuity was restored with a primary end-to-end anastomosis. The patient made an unremarkable recovery and was discharged home 6 days later.