A 20-year-old primigravid woman was referred to our hospital at 22 weeks of gestation with a diagnosis of large fetal intra-abdominal cysts identified during a routine ultrasound examination. In our center, detailed fetal two-dimensional (2D) ultrasound anatomic scanning was done, revealing two fetal heads at a fixed position, facing each other . There was a fused chest and abdomen with a single shared distorted heart and one aorta. A single umbilical cord was noted. There was a single shared liver. The kidneys appeared enlarged with multiple non-communicating cysts and thinned-out cortical tissue. Two separate spines were visualized on either side of the uterine cavity . Conjoined, thoraco-omphalopagus twin pregnancy was diagnosed. Fetal karyotyping was offered but declined by the family.
Assessment and counseling were done by a multidisciplinary team composed of obstetricians, fetal medicine specialists, family planning specialists, and anesthetists. After discussion on prognosis and options of management, the patient opted for termination of pregnancy. Different options of termination were discussed and the patient consented for D&E, with the possibility of reverting to hysterotomy in case intraoperative difficulty was encountered.
We performed a 2-day cervical preparation. On day 1, 200 mg mifepristone was administered orally and five laminaria were inserted. On day 2, the patient was admitted and a new set of 10 laminaria were inserted. On the morning of the procedure, she was provided with 400 µg misoprostol sublingually and 200 mg doxycycline orally. After 2 hours she was transferred to the operating room and spinal anesthesia was given. D&E was done under ultrasound guidance. We started the procedure by rupturing the membranes to bring down fetal parts to the lower uterine segment. Initial extraction of fetal parts was done by disarticulating and removing the extremities. Decompression of the thoracic and abdominal cavity allowed further descent and separation of the thoracopagus. The presenting calvarium was decompressed with suction and delivered. Finally, the second twin and placenta were delivered intact. The procedure was completed without complications. Post-procedure tissue count showed two calvaria and spines, four well-formed upper limbs, single thorax and abdomen, and two well-formed and two fused primitive lower limbs. The patient recovered well and was discharged after 24 hours. A follow-up phone call after 2 weeks revealed an uneventful course.