A 41 years old man referred to our department for painless enlargement in the left hemiscrotum. Personal and familial history were unremarkable, without epididymitis, torsion or trauma. On physical examination, a hard, painless, firm, intrascrotal mass at the lower pole of the left testis was revealed, apparently distinct from the testis and arising directly from the surface of the left epididymis. Scrotal skin epididymis, spermatic cord, inguinal region and right testis were normal.
Ultrasonography confirmed a solid isoechoic lesion lying on the border between epididymal tail and lower pole of the left testis, without any disruption of the architecture of the testical parenchyma. The testicular parenchyma immediately adjacent to the mass showed slightly degreased echogenity compared with the parenchyma elsewhere. Preoperative laboratory investigation, including hemogram, blood chemistry studies were within normal limits. Plasma levels of β-hCG (β-subunit human chronic gonadotropin), α-fetoprotein (AFP), lactic dehydrogenase (LDH) were within normal ranges. The first clinical impression was a probable germ cell neoplasm.
The patient subsequently underwent a total left orchiectomy-epididymectomy, which revealed a white, crescent-shaped, well circumscribed tumor, about 1,5 cm, without involvement of the testicular parenchyma.
Histological appearance of this paratesticular tumor is represented by cuboidal cells, with vacuolated cytoplasm and with gaping spaces . The neoplasmatic cells had lymphoplasmacytic and eosinophilic infiltration, which varied in intensity, from scan to moderate dense, and especially the presence of prominent lymphoid aggregates, particularly towards the periphery of the neoplasm, is a helpful clue to the diagnosis of the adenomatoid tumor . The cellular vacuoles had a signet ring-like appearance in some fields but epithelial type mucin was not present There was no mitotic activity and no suspicious neoplasmatic areas in testicular parenchyma was been detected.
Immunohistochemical positivity for mesothelial marker HMBE1 (mouse anti-human antigen mesothelial cell) and calretinin confirm the mesothelial origin of the tumor . This tumor was diagnosed as an adenomatoid tumor in the epididymis and the patient underwent no additional treatment.