A 28-year-old female with a history of hypothyroidism on levothyroxine developed symptoms of productive cough, low-grade temperatures, low back pain, myalgias, and rhinorrhea during the novel coronavirus pandemic. She tested positive for COVID-19 via an at-home swab ordered by her primary doctor. Her upper respiratory symptoms resolved over the next week, but her lumbosacral back pain persisted and worsened, although without radiation. In addition, she developed paresthesias in her lower extremities, which progressed to total loss of sensation and with ascension of symptoms up to her mid-chest below the nipple line and bilateral upper extremities, as well as numbness to the tip of her tongue. She also reported approximately 48 hours of urinary retention as well as nausea and vomiting. She did not have any headaches, dysarthria or dysphagia, vision changes, or dyspnea. She was admitted to a large, academic, tertiary care center in Denmark.
The patient’s neurologic exam was notable for symmetrically decreased sensation below the fifth thoracic vertebra level but preserved two-point discrimination and lower-extremity motor strength. She experienced decreased proprioception and four out of five strength in bilateral upper extremities with intact reflexes throughout. Lhermitte’s sign (electric shock-like sensation down the back triggered by bending the head forward) was positive and she had a wide-based gait. She retained 1.4 liters (L) of urine in her bladder, which was relieved after Foley catheter insertion. Lumbar puncture showed 125/per microliter (/μl) mononuclear cells (laboratory reference range 0–5/μl); 0.6 grams per liter (g/L) protein (laboratory reference range 0.15 to 0.6 g/L)); normal glucose (laboratory reference range 45–80 milligram per deciliter); negative antibodies; and gram stain and culture negative for infection. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with and without contrast of the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar spine showed widespread elongated signal changes throughout the spinal cord to the conus medullaris and involving the medulla, with no disc pathology or spinal canal narrowing. These findings were consistent with longitudinally extensive acute transverse myelitis (given involvement of more than three spinal cord segments), thought to be reactive in the setting of recent COVID-19 infection. The patient was started on prednisolone and received two plasma exchange treatments with rapid improvement of symptoms. After eight days in the hospital, she was discharged on a steroid taper with improved symptoms including normal urinary function. Her residual symptoms included decreased sensation in the lower extremities up to the mid-thighs bilaterally.