A 26 year-old-woman, with a history of infertility for five years (treated by ovulation induction medications), was admitted to the hospital for evaluation of amenorrhea, galactorrhea and neurological disorders. She was well until 6 months before her admission in the neurology department of the University Hospital of Rabat. She developed weakness, headaches associated with nausea and vomiting, shaking chills, night sweats, an 8-pound weight loss and diplopia. Computed tomography scan (CT scan) of the brain showed a hyperdense mass in the suprasellar region . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain (T1 and T2 weighted with contrast) revealed an enhancing suprasellar mass (9 × 6 mm) and thickening of pituitary stalk .
Laboratory findings showed: microcytic anemia (10 g/dl), hyponatremia (130 mEq/L), elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (40 mm in first hour) with an increased alpha-2-gobulin in serum protein electrophoresis. An endocrinological evaluation revealed low levels of follicle stimulating hormone (2.5 IU/L; normal ranges in the laboratory 5-20 IU/L) and luteinizing hormone (0.5 IU/L; normal ranges in the laboratory 10-70 IU/L), serum prolactin level was greatly increased (145 ng/ml; normal ranges in the laboratory 2.8-29.2 ng/ml) without dysfunctions of Antidiuretic Hormone. She underwent an extensive biological work-up evaluation including: thyroid function tests, skin testing for tuberculosis; serological tests for HIV, panel hepatitis and syphilis; lumbar puncture and salivary gland biopsy; all were unrevealing. Chest x-ray and abdominal echography were normal.
Initially, the diagnosis of granulomatous processes was suggested, on the basis of the patient's presentation and imaging findings. Then the patient was given prednisolone 60 mg/day with clinical improvement. However, subsequent head MRI detected new lesions of the brain in contrast with regression of the first mass . She underwent stereotactic biopsy of the paraventricular lesion. Histological examination revealed infiltrative large-sized lymphocytes with occasional mitotic figures. The immunohistochemical tests confirmed the diagnosis of large B-cell lymphoma (the B-cell marker CD20 was positive and the CD3 T-cell marker was negative) . CT scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis were negative.
The patient died of hydrocephalus before the initiation of treatment two weeks after the diagnosis.