A 21-year-old male patient presented with a 2 weeks history of intermittent headache followed by nausea and vomiting, double vision, discrete horizontal nystagmus bilaterally, and discrete dextropulsion. Initial computerized tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an extensive cystic-solid expansive formation in the posterior cranial fossa with a solid part in the area of the pineal gland. After the administration of intravenous contrast, the solid mass showed heterogeneous enhancement . Neuroradiologically, differential diagnoses included hemangioblastoma.
The patient underwent a paramedian occipital and suboccipital craniotomy and total tumor removal. The surgery went without any complications. A control CT scan performed on the 1st postoperative day, revealed a satisfactory finding without any signs of ischemia, hemorrhage, or residual tumor. The patient recovered uneventfully. Tissue samples acquired during the surgical procedure underwent pathohistological and cytological analysis. Cytological analysis showed no signs of malignant cells. The pathohistological analysis showed two types of tumor cells. A major part of the tumor, more than 75% of total tumor tissue, consisted out of compacted bipolar piloid astrocyte. Focal microcystic changes were observed. The vascular network was pronounced, and the mitosis was not found. Scattered eosinophilic granular bodies and Rosenthal fibers were observed under higher magnification. Proliferation index Ki67 was up to 3% diffusely and up to 10% focally . According to the World Health Organization (WHO) classification, major tumor part corresponded to a PA WHO Grade I. Minor part of the tumor, which was approximately around 25% of total tumor tissue, showed moderate cellularity. It consisted of uniform cells resembling pinealocytes, with a round core and medium abundant cytoplasm. Tumor cells form clusters. Immunohistochemical analysis showed focally slightly positive glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), positive synaptophysin, and negative chromogranin A staining. The proliferation index Ki67 was around 1% . According to the WHO classification, minor tumor part corresponded to a pineocytoma WHO Grade I. There was no indication for further oncological treatment.
Five months afterward, an MRI and neurosurgical control was performed. The patient was without any neurological deficits. MRI revealed a satisfying postoperative result without the recurrence of intracranial masses .