A 69-year-old White European woman consulted with suspected chronic adult hydrocephalus. She had a history of subarachnoid haemorrhage from a ruptured aneurysm in the terminal region of her basilar artery and an unruptured aneurysm of her anterior communicating artery. She had undergone cerebral embolization 6 months earlier. On clinical examination she presented with gait disorders associated with cognitive impairment. Computed tomography found hydrocephalus. She was admitted to our neurosurgery unit for a depletive lumbar puncture (50cc). Twelve hours after the procedure, she experienced complete and proportional right hemiplegia, confusion, deviation of her head and eyes to the right, and cortical blindness. She also had a generalized tonic-clonic seizure which ceased with a dose of clonazepam. Her blood pressure at that time was normal. Emergency cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed bioccipital and left-side basal ganglia hyperintensities in the fluid attenuated inversion recovery and the diffusion-weighted images . We observed a high apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) suggesting vasogenic oedema. The above MRI image findings are consistent with a radiological diagnosis of PRES. We implemented antiepileptic therapy, calcium channel blockers to prevent vasospasm and antiplatelet therapy to prevent ischemia.
We noticed a pronounced improvement concerning her neurological deficit in the first 2 days and almost complete recovery of motor disorders after 5 days. Her vision problems persisted with minimal recovery of central vision. She also had massive amnesia.
After a positive progression for 5 days, she had perseverations and automatism with difficulty to make contact.
Electroencephalography showed posterior slow waves without any spikes.
Her evolution was successful with appropriate antiepileptic therapy. She left the unit to go to a rehabilitation centre. Four months later, her clinical state worsened and she went into a coma. A cerebral computed tomography scan showed acute hydrocephalus. An emergency ventriculoperitoneal shunt was performed. After the surgery, her state of consciousness returned to normal, but right hemiplegia appeared. The cerebral MRI showed a new PRES. The valve of the shunt was set to “high pressure” in order to reduce cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) flow. This reduced the hemiplegia but difficulties with executive functions remained.