Clinical history.
A 44-year-old man was admitted into our hospital for evaluation of a hepatic mass in April 2020. The mass was first discovered during regular examination in a local hospital five years ago. Ultrasound showed a 4.24 × 2.63 cm hypoechoic nodule in the right lobe of the liver. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed a well-circumscribed oval mass with low density in segment 6 of the liver. Enhanced CT indicated that the mass was heterogenous with obvious enhancement in the margin and a hemangioma was suspected. The patient underwent regular examination in the following four years and the mass was growing slowly. In January 2020, enhanced CT revealed a much larger mass with the maximum diameter of 7.8 cm in the space between segment 6 of the liver and right adrenal gland . The margin displayed apparent enhancement in arterial phase, but hypointensity in portal and delayed phase compared with the surrounding liver tissue. A primary liver malignancy was suspected by clinicians. During the follow-up time, the patient was asymptomatic. In blood tests, the patient was negative for serum hepatitis B surface antigen and anti-hepatitis C virus, and was positive for hepatitis B surface antibody. Tumor markers including α-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, and carbohydrate antigen 199 were all within normal range. The patient had no smoking, drinking, medical, or psycho-social history. No genetic tests were performed previously. Physical examination revealed no obvious abnormalities.
The mass was located on the border of segment 6 and segment 7 of the liver and was close to the inferior right hepatic vein. Partial hepatectomy was performed.
The specimen measured 8.5 × 8 × 4.5 cm. On the cut surface, a mass measuring 6 × 5.5 × 4 cm was found immediately beneath the liver capsule. The mass had a relatively clear margin with no obvious capsule. Its cut surface was solid and yellowish-grey with focal hemorrhage . No necrosis was observed. The surrounding liver tissue showed no abnormalities.
Microscopically, the lesion was incompletely encapsulated . Cells were arranged in solid sheets and partial hemorrhage could be seen. There was little stroma and no obvious arterialization. Most of the tumor cells were large, polygonal, had prominent nucleoli and were rich in eosinophilic cytoplasm . Pleomorphic nucleus was frequently found . Nonetheless, the nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio was low. No mitoses, necrosis, or vascular invasion were observed. Focally, smaller cells were found with small nuclei and granular cytoplasm. The surrounding liver tissue was near-normal and the surgical margins were clear. HCC was suspected and perivascular epithelioid tumor (PEComa) was also taken into consideration.
Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were negative for Arg-1, glypican-3 (GPC3), hepatocyte specific antigen (HSA), epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), CK7, CK19, desmin, HMB45, and chromogranin A (CgA). Synaptophysin (Syn), α-inhibin and Melan A were positive. The Ki-67 index was 1 % . The final diagnosis was ectopic adrenocortical oncocytic adenoma, which was considered to be a benign neoplasm. The patient has been uneventful after the surgery.