A girl born at the 40th week of gestation with a weight of 2,380 g presented hypotonia and submucous cleft palate, surgically corrected when she was 6 years old. Physical examination at 3 years of age showed facial anomalies including arched eyebrows with lateral thinning, long palpebral fissures with lateral eversion of the lower eyelid, long eyelashes, large prominent ears with dysplastic helices, and a depressed nasal tip, suggestive for KS. She also had hypotonia, joint laxity, retarded motor developmental milestones and mild cognitive deficit. Two-dimensional color-doppler echocardiography and renal ultrasound examination were normal. Genetic testing of KMT2D gene, performed by target resequencing on the MiSeq (Illumina) platform showed the heterozygosis deletion of two bases c.16085_16086delAG; the identified variation resulted at protein level in the nonsense mutation p.Lys5362Serfs*96.
At the age of 23, she presented with intermittent tactile hypoesthesia of the feet and worsening lumbar pain. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spine revealed the presence of a lumbar endocanalar mass extending from L3 to L4, isointense on T1 and T2 weighted images with peripheral contrast enhancement. The lesion had a maximum cranial-caudal diameter of 45 mm with diffuse compression and posterior displacement of spinal nerve roots. At surgery, an L3 to L5 laminotomy was performed and gross total resection of a clivable tumor arising from the filum terminale accomplished . No neurological complications occurred. Histology revealed a monomorphic proliferation of elongated cells with mild nuclear atypia, surrounded by eosinophilic fibrillary stroma with a fascicular or vaguely perivascular pattern of growth. Cells showed diffuse positivity for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP +++) and dot-like positivity for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA). The mitotic index assessed by immunohistochemical staining against anti-Ki67 was about 3–5 % . These findings led to the diagnosis of ependymoma, likely the tanycytic type (WHO grade II). On the basis of site of the lesion, extent of resection, histology and age of the patient, no other treatment was offered after surgical resection. She remains disease free fourteen months after diagnosis.