A 72-year-old woman with a 5-pack-year smoking history presented with drowsiness after esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD). Her past medical history was remarkable for community-acquired pneumonia at right middle lung 3 months prior, from which she made a full recovery following antibiotic therapy. She had a 2-month history of polyuria, polydipsia, nocturia, lightheadedness upon standing up quickly, fatigue, loss of appetite, and 15 kg of weight loss from a baseline weight of 60 kg. She had no fever, cough, dyspnea, hemoptysis, chest pain, or night sweats. She presented to the outpatient unit, and the investigation at that time showed a fasting plasma glucose level of 100 mg/dL (5.5 mmol/L) and an HbA1c of 4.8%. Thyroid function tests revealed a normal serum triiodothyronine (T3) level of 2 nmol/L (reference range 1.23–3.07 nmol/L), a low free thyroxine (FT4) level of 3.86 pmol/L (reference range 11.97–21.88 pmol/L), and a suppressed thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) level of 0.06 mIU/L (reference range 0.27–4.0 mIU/L). A chest x-ray showed minimal infiltration at medial aspect of right lower lung, which had decreased compared with a previous chest x-ray .
The patient underwent EGD 2 months after the outpatient visit. She was kept nil
per os for 10 h prior to the procedure. The EGD findings were mild non-erosive antral gastritis. After EGD, she developed nausea, vomiting, and drowsiness. Physical examination revealed a body temperature of 37 °C, a blood pressure of 100/57 mmHg, a pulse rate of 90/min, and a respiratory rate of 16/min. She was 44.5 kg in body weight, was 148 cm in height, and had a body mass index of 20.3 kg/m2. She had flat neck veins, a normal thyroid gland without nodules, normal breath sounds, no abnormal palpable masses, no hepatosplenomegaly, no breast masses, and no superficial lymphadenopathy. Neurological examination was remarkable for bitemporal hemianopia evaluated by confrontation test.
She was immediately admitted to the hospital because of the altered mental status. At the first hour after admission, she had polyuria with a urine output of 300 mL/hour (6.7 mL/kg/hour). Laboratory tests showed a serum sodium level of 160 mmol/L; a potassium level of 3.9 mmol/L; a chloride level of 125 mmol/L; a bicarbonate level of 24 mmol/L; a creatinine level of 1.4 mg/dL. Serum osmolality was 325 mOsm/kg. Her urine specific gravity was 1.002 without proteinuria or glucosuria. Urine osmolality was 62 mOsm/kg. Diabetes insipidus was diagnosed based on evidence of polyuria along with hypernatremia and low urine osmolality. Desmopressin acetate (DDAVP) 1 microgram was given by subcutaneous injection. One hour later, her urine output decreased to 70 mL/hour, and urine osmolarity increased to 570 mOsm/kg. Based on decreasing urine output and a more than 50% increase in urine osmolality in response to DDAVP, a diagnosis of central diabetes insipidus was made.
Given the diagnosis of central diabetes insipidus, further investigations including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pituitary gland and evaluation of the anterior pituitary hormones were performed. Pituitary MRI demonstrated a heterogeneous high signal intensity (SI) lesion in T1-weighted (T1W) imaging, which also appeared as a low SI lesion in T2-weighted (T2W) imaging with heterogeneous gadolinium enhancement at the sellar and suprasellar region, measuring 2.4 × 2.6 × 3.9 cm. The lesion was compressing the hypothalamus bilaterally and the inferior aspect of optic chiasm with increased SI in T2W imaging at the right optic nerve and bilateral optic tracts. It was also anteriorly displacing the residual pituitary gland. The pituitary stalk could not be identified, and the bright spot of posterior lobe was absent. These MRI findings suggested pituitary macroadenoma with hemorrhage . The bony skull showed a normal appearance without lytic lesion. There were also multiple small gadolinium-enhancing lesions up to 0.7 cm in size with adjacent vasogenic brain edema at subcortical and subpial regions of the left frontal and parietal areas; therefore, multiple stages of cysticercosis and brain metastases were included in the differential diagnosis .
Pituitary hormonal profiles showed inappropriately low gonadotropins levels, a low plasma adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) level, and a low morning serum cortisol level that did not respond to cosyntropin stimulation, indicating secondary adrenal insufficiency. Serum prolactin level was mildly elevated, but no further increase was seen in a diluted sample. Hyperprolactinemia was suspected to be caused by stalk interruption. Thyroid function tests performed 2 months prior to admission showed a low free T4 level of 3.86 pmol/L and a low TSH level of 0.06 mIU/L, suggesting central hypothyroidism. On admission, serum free T4 level had decreased to 2.32 pmol/L with an unexpectedly elevated TSH level of 19.07 mIU/L. A low IGF-1 level in combination with deficiency of more than two pituitary hormones was highly indicative of growth hormone deficiency.
The patient underwent craniotomy for tumor removal. Intraoperative findings showed one grey-purplish firm mass at the sellar and retrochiasmatic regions with some necrosis and hemorrhage. The tumor was partially removed. A histopathological study revealed adenocarcinoma with the immunohistochemical staining positive for cytokeratin-7 and thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) but negative for cytokeratin-20, CDX-2 and GFAP . These findings were consistent with metastatic adenocarcinoma originating from the lung.
To identify the primary adenocarcinoma of the lung, a CT scan of the chest was performed which revealed a 2.2 × 2.2 cm enhancing soft tissue mass at the proximal part of the right bronchus that supplies the medial segment of the right middle lung. This was causing atelectasis of the distal part of the medial segment of the right middle lung and diffuse centrilobular emphysema at both upper lobes without pleural effusion. The liver, spleen, kidneys, and adrenal glands appeared unremarkable. No osteolytic lesion of the ribs, spine, and other bony structures were seen . The final diagnosis was advanced adenocarcinoma of the lung with pituitary metastasis associated with panhypopituitarism and central diabetes insipidus.
Palliative care for the advanced-stage lung cancer was offered to the patient. She received hormone replacement including desmopressin acetate 10 mcg intranasal solution daily, oral prednisolone 5 mg daily, and levothyroxine 75 mcg daily for central diabetes insipidus, secondary adrenal insufficiency, and central hypothyroidism, respectively. Two months later, she developed bilateral ophthalmoplegia and died 4 months after the diagnosis.