We present a 58-year-old female with a history of rheumatoid arthritis, off medication, and melanoma of the left lateral foot who developed recurrence and disease progression after surgery. Family history is significant for mother with melanoma and colon cancer. This case report has been reported in line with the SCARE 2018 criteria .
Her clinical course began with wide excision of the skin and subcutaneous tissue of the left lateral foot primary with negative margins and a sentinel node biopsy; Stage IIB pT3aN0M0. The DecisionDx-Melanoma™ 31 gene panel (Castle Biosciences, Friendswood, TX) demonstrated a high risk of five-year recurrence. No BRAF, KIT, NRAS mutations were identified. She developed an inguinal recurrence after a short disease-free interval (3mo). After full staging investigations which were negative for pelvic or distant metastatic disease, she underwent a left superficial and deep inguinal lymphadenectomy with sartorius muscle transposition flap followed by nivolumab therapy, which was well tolerated.
She subsequently developed visible cutaneous in-transit lesions in the left groin concerning for recurrence. Restaging with CT and MRI scans confirmed new brain and liver (1.7 cm) lesions and the presence of hilar and pelvic nodal disease. Secondary to her rheumatoid arthritis, the patient was not eligible for clinical trials. Ipilimumab in combination with nivolumab was attempted without success. Talimogene Laherparepvec (T-VEC) therapy was attempted for severely symptomatic in-transit lesions without success. Stereotactic radiosurgery was used to control her brain metastasis, and external beam radiation was used to treat her in-transit lesions and pelvic adenopathy with a partial response.
FDA approval for expanded access on a compassionate use basis of a novel therapeutic treatment TAVO + Pembrolizumab was obtained (FDA IND 18672). This was then approved by our institutional IRB (2018–17). Informed consent was obtained from the patient. Two in-transit lesions in the left groin were treated by direct injection of TAVO and electroporation. This was given in concert with intravenous pembrolizumab. TAVO Treatment cycles on days 1, 5, and 8 were given every six weeks, and pembrolizumab was given every three weeks.