This is the case of a 43-year-old woman who presented with syncope. Four months before admission, she had dyspnoea and epigastric discomfort and was hospitalized after contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) that showed a large pericardial effusion, which was confirmed by a subsequent contrast-enhanced chest CT . Pericardiocentesis yielded 600 mL of bloody pericardial fluid, and biochemistry, microbiology, and cytology analyses were negative. Blood tests for autoimmune disease, thyroid function, and screening of tumour markers revealed negative results as well. A pigtail catheter was inserted into the pericardial space for drainage. A fluorodeoxy-glucose-18–positron emission tomography–computer tomography (FDG–PET–CT) scanning showed hypermetabolism only in the right cardiac region, suggestive of malignancy. No other extracardiac hypermetabolic sites were observed . No medications were prescribed because of the unknown aetiology of the pericardial effusion, and the pigtail catheter was removed upon discharge.
At the time of admission, the patient experienced syncope without prodrome for 10 s. Physical examination showed no relevant findings. Haematologic analysis showed microcytic anaemia. Biochemical analysis was unremarkable. Electrocardiography findings showed sinus rhythm. Chest radiograph results revealed an enlarged cardiac silhouette. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) once again showed a large pericardial effusion, and pericardiocentesis was performed. Black blood T1-weighted inversion-recovery cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with fat suppression showed a 3.8 cm × 5.8 cm × 6.8 cm lesion arising from the right atrium (RA) with thick pericardium (, yellow arrows). The patient was referred to our institution for further evaluation.
At our hospital, repeat echocardiography showed minimal pericardial effusion without remarkable abnormalities (, Video 1). Electrocardiogram (ECG)-gated coronary CT angiography followed by non-ECG-gated chest CT using high-pitch scan mode showed a large (3.8 cm × 6 cm × 7.7 cm), cauliflower-like tumour located mainly in the RA (, black arrows), with inner thrombus formation (, white asterisk), RA anterior wall aneurysm formation , and obliteration of fat plane at the right atrioventricular groove (, black square) and epicardial extension along with encasement of the middle portion of the right coronary artery (RCA) (, white arrowheads). A primary cardiac tumour was suspected based on previous FDG–PET–CT results. Since the tumour arose from the RA and is extended to the atrioventricular groove, initial differential diagnoses include angiosarcoma, paraganglioma, and lymphoma. Coronary angiography findings revealed multiple feeding arteries originating from the RCA to the tumour . Blocking of the feeding arteries by placing a cover stent in the main trunk of the RCA up to the bifurcation of the posterior longus and posterior descending arteries was considered but not performed because of the lack of stents with a suitable size.
Thoracoscopic biopsy resulted in massive bleeding because of the high vascularity of the tumour, and conversion to thoracotomy for haemostasis after completion of biopsy was required. Biopsy within the perimeter of a pre-emptively created ring of purse-string suture was performed. Histopathology findings revealed atypical cells with mild nuclear atypia arranged in cords, small nests, glandular-like structures, and vascular channels mixed with fibrinoid material and spindle cells arranged haphazardly in a myxomatous background. Immunohistochemistry yielded positive results for CD34 and CD31 and negative for calretinin . Thus, the final diagnosis was angiosarcoma. Tumour resection was not performed because of the infiltrative involvement into the RA, the right ventricle, and the RCA when visualized directly during biopsy. Fluorodeoxy-glucose-18–positron emission tomography–computer tomography findings showed bilateral lung nodules, which were suspected as metastases (, black arrowhead). The patient was treated with a combination of paclitaxel (90 mg/m2) and bevacizumab (10 mg/kg). At 10 months’ follow-up, the patient received a total of 23 and 13 courses of paclitaxel and bevacizumab, respectively. Non-ECG-gated contrast-enhanced chest CT using high-pitch scan mode revealed an interval decrease of the primary tumour size and a new well-enhanced pulmonary nodule (1.2 cm) over the left upper lobe. Surgical resection of the nodule confirmed the diagnosis of metastatic angiosarcoma. At 12 months’ follow-up, the patient’s anti-cancer treatment was shifted to oral pazopanib (800 mg/day) after an abdominal ultrasound showed liver metastases. At 18 months’ follow-up, oral pazopanib was shifted to monthly ifosfamide (1500 mg/m2) and doxorubicin (25 mg/m2) after chest CT confirmed the presence of progressive disease. Up to the present, the patient is still under active treatment.