A 38-year-old 62-kg pregnant woman (gravida 4, para 0) was admitted to the cardiology department of our hospital at 22 wk of gestation with complaints of chest tightness and shortness of breath for 3 wk.
The patient’s symptoms started 3 wk prior with chest tightness and shortness of breath. The degree of heart failure was New York Heart Association grade II.
At 25 years of age, the patient had a history of transcatheter closure of a PDA in a local hospital. The patient stated that the PDA was completely closed by the transcatheter interventional procedure, and she attended irregular follow-up in the local hospital after the operation.
Between 2010 and 2020, the patient experienced three spontaneous abortions in the first trimester without any pregnancy discomfort. No similar family history was noted.
After admission to our hospital, the patient’s temperature was 36.2°C, heart rate was 75 bpm, respiratory rate was 19 breaths per minute, blood pressure was 92/53 mmHg, and oxygen saturation in an oxygen concentration of 33% was 97%. The clinical examination revealed mild cyanosis of the lips and a loud P2 systolic murmur in the second to fourth intercostal spaces of the left margin of the sternum.
Blood analysis revealed a mildly elevated hemoglobin level of 15.3 g/dL, with a normal hematocrit of 44.4% and a platelet count of 1.22 × 1011/L. The prothrombin time was normal, and the partial thromboplastin time was slightly decreased, at 27.6 s. Electrocardiography (ECG) showed an abnormal Q wave in the high lateral border, slight ST-segment change in the lower border, right axis deviation, and clockwise transposition. Arterial blood gas analysis revealed pH: 7.47, PCO2: 28.2 mmHg, PO2: 85.3 mmHg, and SaO2: 97.4% at 21% oxygen concentration.
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed the occlusion (manifesting as a stronger echo) between the descending aorta and pulmonary artery . Color Doppler echocardiography revealed a bidirectional shunt signal on both sides of the occlusion . Spectral Doppler echocardiography revealed the pressure gradient (PG) and blood velocity of the bidirectional shunt . The pulmonary artery systolic pressure (PASP) was estimated at 117 mmHg, and the brachial systolic pressure at 124 mmHg.