In December 2015, a sixty-year-old man was referred to Kowsar Hospital in Semnan, Iran, which is a specialized, government referral hospital. The patient was complaining of skin rash, fever, a distended abdomen, and severe pruritus, which had been going on for 10 days. He had a history of asthma and was using inhaled steroids. His history had not been remarkable until four months prior to his admission. The report showed that the patient had been admitted to another hospital four months previously complaining of a severe headache. A subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) was diagnosed by the neurologist and the patient was given valproic acid (Depakene®, Abbvie, US) 500 mg PO once daily to prevent seizures. Twenty days before admission to our hospital, the dose of valproic acid increased to 1000 mg PO once daily. In addition, he was using 26 units of insulin glargine (Lantus®, Sanofi Aventis, France) and 22 units of insulin aspart (Novorapid®, Novo Nordisk, Denmark) for three months. He had no history of drug allergies. On admission to Kowsar Hospital, physical examinations showed that the patient was conscious and well nourished, and had no signs of respiratory distress. He had erythematous maculopapular rashes covering the body, severe pruritus, and no mucosal involvement. He was febrile, with a temperature of 39°C. The patient’s other vital signs were normal. He also had bilateral cervical lymphadenopathy, with lymph nodes of 1 × 2 cm in size that showed slight tenderness. Tender hepatomegaly was observed. Based on these findings, the patient was admitted to the department of internal medicine, section 2, bed number 9. His clinical characteristics are presented in . The suspected diagnosis of the patient included skin vasculitis, drug eruption, fascioliasis, and Churg-Strauss syndrome, as well as viral infections such as cytomegalovirus and toxoplasmosis. Blood and urine cultures were negative for bacteria. The patient was given an antihistamine and hydrocortisone 30 mg PO on admission day, and the rash and fever subsided. After two days, rash and severe pruritus were seen again with transient fever. The previous treatments, including the insulin and valproic acid, were not stopped. On day 2, prednisolone 45 mg PO was administered. On day 4, purpura and petechia were present on the hands, and a few vesicles were present on the inguinal area and the thigh. Insulin and valproic acid were discontinued. A skin biopsy showed a high infiltration of lymphocytes and scattered eosinophils and neutrophils with focal exocytosis and spongiosis. Mucosal involvement was also present, and esophageal candidiasis was diagnosed by endoscopy (Olympus, Japan) . Fluconazole was initiated to treat the candidiasis (200 mg PO on diagnosis and 100 mg QD thereafter). Due to the patient’s consumption of local vegetables, anthelminthic therapy with albendazole (400 mg PO) was introduced but did not lead to a response. A respiratory examination revealed reduced sounds at both lungs. Due to bilateral costophrenic angle blunting, a chest CT scan (GE Healthcare, USA) was performed, and showed bilateral pleural effusion . Serologies for cytomegalovirus and brucellosis were negative. A significant drop was seen in hemoglobin concentration and platelet numbers, while bone marrow biopsy was negative for blood malignancies. Sonography showed a severe gaseous abdomen suggesting grade 1 fatty liver. According to the RegiSCAR scoring system, the patient had a score of six points, which indicated a definitive diagnosis of DRESS syndrome. On day 10, DRESS was diagnosed. Due to unsuccessful treatments with corticosteroids and a rise in hepatic transaminase to more than 1000 IU/L, intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) of 2 gr/kg (Intratect®, Biotest Pharma, Germany) was administered for three consecutive days. On day 13, the general condition of the patient was found to have improved. On day 16, he was discharged with stable laboratory findings and diminished skin rashes . He also remained afebrile. There was considerable improvement in his respiratory symptoms and hepatitis. In addition, the patient’s general condition remained satisfactory for the two-month follow-up period.