This case report is of a 52-year-old kurdish male patient with a 7-year history of type 2 diabetes. He was from a village located in West Azerbaijan (a province in northwestern Iran) and had a primary education. About 6 months earlier, on 13 April 2020, he sustained a traumatic injury to the right tibia while on a bike ride. He was taken to the emergency department of Imam Khomeini hospital, Urmia and was hospitalized for a week. The wound was in the form of a deep skin gash measuring 14 × 5 cm on the right tibia without any evidence of fracture in the anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the right leg . During the hospital stay, the patient's wound was sutured using 3-0 nylon sutures and treated using intravenously administered antibiotics including cefazolin 1 g every 6 hours (three times daily), ciprofloxacin 400 mg every 12 hours (twice daily), and clindamycin 600 mg every 8 hours (three times a day). His foot ulcer was dressed twice a day using saline wound dressing. The patient's vital signs on admission to the hospital were as follows: temperature 37.6 °C, respiration rate 17 breaths per minute, pulse rate 96 beats per minute, blood pressure 130/85 mmHg, and oxygen saturation 93%.
The patient's laboratory data are shown in Table .
During history-taking and physical examination, the patient mentioned a history of beta thalassemia trait, hyperthyroidism, and benign prostatic hyperplasia, for which he had undergone transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) 3 years earlier. No pathological findings were noted during the neurological examination, which included an assessment of motor and sensory systems, gait and stance, coordination, mental status, reflexes, and nerve functioning. Moreover, during the history-taking, it was found that he was not taking his medication regularly and was not following a sensible diet. His blood glucose was also not in a normal range. The patient also had a family history of diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and beta thalassemia trait. He was a smoker (23 pack-years), but he denied any drug or alcohol addiction. He was also from a low-income family and commanded the full social support of his family. He was a farmer and had a small farm for keeping livestock. He was treated with metformin hydrochloride 500 mg tablets twice a day after meals and glibenclamide 2.5 mg tablets twice a day, 30 minutes before breakfast and dinner, to control his blood sugar level. He also took levothyroxine sodium 0.1 mg tablet once daily, 1–1.5 hours before breakfast.
After 1 week of hospital stay, the patient was discharged with cephalexin 500 mg capsules. He was also ordered to do daily saline wound dressing. About 10 days after hospital discharge, the wound sutures were removed. However, the patient complained that his wound did not heal as it should and the wound area was giving off an unpleasant odor. On 3 May 2020, he was referred to our wound-care team, since no improvement was noted in the healing of his DFU using conventional treatment .
The patient's vital signs upon the second admission were as follows: temperature 37.1 °C, respiratory rate 16 breaths per minute, pulse rate 87 beats per minute, blood pressure 125/80 mmHg, and oxygen saturation 93%.
The patient's laboratory data during the second admission are shown in Table :