A 30-year-old man visited our clinic in 2010 with an asymmetric orbit, right eye set 1 cm lower than the left and a soft, movable mass of 3 cm × 1 cm in his right eyelid, which all first appeared at the age of five. He had no signs of visual disturbance, including diplopia or limitation of the motion of the extraocular muscle. We planned to resect the eyebrow and eyelid mass and correct the dystopia; however, the patient refused to undergo orbital correction, so we settled for the excision of the eyelid mass. The mass was partially resected and was pathologically confirmed as neurofibroma.
Four years later, in March 2014, he returned to our clinic complaining about the protruding recurred mass in the right eyelid and eyebrow with orbital dystopia . Facial computed tomography showed dysplasia of the right frontosphenoid and orbital bone, enlargement of the volume of the orbit, widening of the superior orbital fissure, and a mass located in the superior orbital space, protruding to the right temporal lobe. The mass effect of the superior orbital mass and the longitudinal widening of the orbit were presumed to be the reasons for the dystopia. Therefore, we planned to excise the mass and remodel the longitudinally widened orbit. A two-team approach with the neurosurgeons was adopted. Using a bicoronal incision, we exposed the frontal, temporal, and zygomatic bones. The neurofibroma mass in the supraorbital region was totally excised by opening the orbit roof and lateral wall by a transcranial approach and zygomatic osteotomies. After removing the mass, a 5 cm × 7 cm bone graft was harvested from the outer cortex of the bone fragment of the calvarium, which was excised when the craniectomy was performed. The bone graft was designed into an L-shape to restore the lateral wall and floor of the widened orbit .
The right eyeball was elevated 1 cm upward by a calvarial bone graft in the orbit, resulting in both eyes being placed almost at the same level, restoring orbital symmetry . However, as a result of this dystopia correction, ptosis was exacerbated from moderate to severe, with the degree of ptosis measuring 4 mm, and levator muscle function measuring 1 mm. Three months after the primary surgery, the periocular swelling had subsided, and the tissue was suitable for the secondary operation of ptosis correction. The Muller muscle and levator aponeurosis composite flap was elevated and fixed to the superior portion of the tarsal plate at three points. The patient was satisfied with the symmetric orbit and ptosis correction .