A 59-year-old man presented to our hospital complaining of nausea, vomiting and diarrhea for 2 d and both retrosternal pain and dysphagia for 10 h.
The patient developed nausea and vomiting after eating overnight food 2 d previously with vomiting and retching more than 10 times/d. Vomitus consisted of intragastric mucus accompanied by intermittent abdominal pain and diarrhea with yellow watery stool approximately 10 times/d. The patient received a proton pump inhibitor and intravenous fluid rehydration in the outpatient clinic. His symptoms of diarrhea were relieved, but there was still nausea. The patient developed sudden retrosternal pain, dysphagia and salivation 10 h previously after severe retching. His symptoms persisted, and he was admitted to the Department of Digestive Internal Medicine in our hospital.
The patient had a history of type 2 diabetes mellitus for 9 years and was treated with an injection of NovoMix30; however, his blood glucose was poorly controlled. He liked to eat persimmon. He had no history of gastric surgery.
The patient had no pertinent family history.
The patient’s vital signs were stable. He had epigastric tenderness and excessive salivation.
Blood analysis revealed normal white blood cell count, elevated neutrophils (90.0%), and normal hematocrit and platelet count. Serum C-reactive protein was increased at 22.0 mg/dL (normal range < 0.83 mg/dL). The plasma levels of myocardial enzyme were normal. Other blood biochemistries were normal with the exception of fasting blood glucose, which was 7.82 mmol/L (normal range 3.2-6.2 mmol/L). Electrocardiogram was also normal.
Computed tomography (CT) scan revealed dilated lower esophagus, thickening of the esophageal wall, a mass-like lesion with a flocculent high-density shadow and gas bubbles in the esophageal lumen (5 cm long and 4.2 cm in diameter). The CT value was 106-53 HU .
The patient underwent upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, which showed large immovable brown bezoars in the lower esophagus, which led to esophageal obstruction . The endoscope was unable to pass the bezoars to enter the stomach. The patient was treated with endoscopic fragmentation, and multiple mucosal edema, erosions and superficial ulcers were observed in the lower esophagus during the treatment . Multiple biopsy specimens were obtained from these sites, and examination of these specimens revealed nonspecific findings.