Seventy-five-year-old man was admitted to the cardiology department for treatment of drug refractory supraventricular tachycardia and heart failure (HF). He had a history of arterial hypertension and normal coronary angiography. On admission he presented with palpitations, fatigue, legs sweeling, and weight gain of 3 kg in one week. Two weeks prior to admission, the patient underwent cardioversion of atrial flutter, albeit on two antiarrhythmic drugs. Apart from atypical atrial flutter with rapid ventricular rate of 129 bpm, prolonged QRS duration (150 ms) with left bundle branch block (LBBB) morphology was also noted on surface 12-lead ECG . Transthoracic echocardiography showed severely enlarged right and left atrium (LAVI 69 ml/m2), mildly enlarged left ventricle (EDVI 80 ml/m2), reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 45% with clear signs of LV mechanical dyssynchrony (septal flash and apical rocking). As tachycardia-induced HF along with LBBB-induced cardiomyopathy was suspected, and sinus rhythm restoration after potential catheter ablation was presumed to be low, we decided for pace and ablate strategy. With reduced LVEF and LBBB standard RV pacing was presumed suboptimal. Therefore, LBBAP was opted as a good pacing option while this physiological pacing mode could also deliver correction of LBBB with single lead implantation.
Venography on the left side showed a persistent left superior vena cava . A decision was made to attempt LBBAP lead implantation from the right side. To enable SelectSecure 3830 69 cm pacing lead (Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) positioning and adequate support for transseptal screwing, the delivery sheath C315-HIS (Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) was manually modified with dilator in place by creating a 90-degree curve at the right subclavian vein-superior vena cava junction. The distance between the reshaping point and the presumed septal region was estimated by placing the sheath on the body surface under fluoroscopy . The sheath was then inserted through the guidewire from the right subclavian vein access to the basal part of the RV septum as previously described. Then, in right anterior oblique 200 the pacing lead was inserted into the delivery sheath to find the initial pacing site, where the V1 lead appeared to be W-shaped. The modification of the C315-HIS catheter allowed perpendicular positioning of the lead tip to the interventricular septum in left anterior oblique 300 with minimal torque. The fluoroscopic image of the final pacing lead implantation site can be viewed in Fig. A. Subsequently, the lead was gradually screwed transeptally until unipolar pacing at the site showed a right bundle branch block QRS morphology with a notch in the nadir of the QS complex. With the time interval from stimulus to peak of R wave in lead V6 of 80 ms, isoelectric interval on intracardiac electrogram, and the V6-V1 interpeak interval of 50 ms LBB capture was confirmed . Pacing parameters were excellent: R-wave sensing 15.4 mV, threshold 0.75 V at 0.5 ms, and unipolar pacing impedance 646 Ohm. The lead was connected to dual-chamber pacemaker device in the ventricular port, while a pin was inserted in the atrial port . Dual-chamber device was selected in case of any additional lead insertion in the future, e.g. in case of sinus rhythm restoration. The total procedural time was 50 minutes and the fluoroscopy time was 7.4 minutes. During and after the procedure the patient reported no chest pain or other adverse events and there were no ST-T changes present on native 12-lead ECG. AV node ablation with non-irrigated ablation catheter was performed the next day . The periprocedural LBBAP lead parameters remained stable. Pacemaker was set to VVIR pacing with 80 bpm rest rate .
In a short-term follow-up of 6 months, the LBBAP parameters set to bipolar pacing remained stable (threshold 0.75 V at 0.5 ms, impedance 689 Ohm), the mechanical dyssynchrony was no longer present, and the cardiac function improved (LVEF 60%) . The patient also reported improved exercise capacity and no signs or symptoms of HF.