A 28-year-old female with a history of preeclampsia and treated cervical cancer resulting in ovarian insufficiency presented to the emergency department with chest pain, nausea, vomiting, and diaphoresis. She was tachycardic, tachypnoeic, and hypotensive with diffuse bilateral rales and cold extremities. Cardiovascular examination was significant for tachycardia with a normal S1 and S2; no murmurs were appreciated. Initial lab values are outlined in and were significant for leucocytosis, acidemia, hepatocellular transaminitis, and troponinaemia. Electrocardiogram revealed lateral ST depression in V4 and V5 (see , ). Computed tomography (CT) imaging did not reveal a pulmonary embolism and showed bilateral lower lobe opacities along with a 3.6 × 2.7 cm right adrenal mass . Coronary pathology, such as myocardial infarction, dissection, or thromboembolism, was considered. However, coronary angiography was deferred given the demographics (young age, absence of risk factors, and no family history) and clinical presentation (rapid respiratory failure, adrenal mass). Sepsis was considered given pulmonary infiltrates and rapid respiratory failure but ultimately ruled out given limited supporting evidence. She was intubated, started on vasopressor support, and life flighted to an ECMO-equipped facility.
Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) on Day 1 showed LV ejection fraction (LVEF) of 20–25% with a hypokinetic base and preserved apex, suggestive of rTCC . Due to end-organ hypoperfusion refractory to pressors, the decision was made to cannulate for VA-ECMO on Day 1. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation weaning trials were attempted daily, and upon LVEF recovery, ECMO was decannulated on Day 7. Due to complete LVEF recovery, a coronary aetiology was considered less likely. Continuous renal replacement therapy was required for volume overload and azotaemia from Days 5 to 7. She was extubated on Day 9 and transitioned out of the intensive care unit (ICU) on Day 15. The secretory capacity of the adrenal mass was investigated with plasma and urine metanephrines and normetanephrines, which were elevated, but difficult to interpret in the setting of high-dose exogenous catecholamine administered in the peri-shock period . On the regular nursing floor, the patient demonstrated stability with controlled blood pressure and improved renal function. On Day 18, the patient was discharged with close outpatient follow-up with endocrine for further management of her adrenal mass.
The patient was readmitted on Day 20 with dyspnoea, chest tightness, and bibasilar crackles. She was in hypertensive emergency and flash pulmonary oedema with preserved LV function. Repeat imaging showed an unchanged 3.6 × 2.7 cm right adrenal mass. Given that she had not been on exogenous catecholamines recently, urine metanephrines and normetanephrines were obtained again and were elevated. A deep vein thrombosis (DVT) was identified in the left lower extremity on Day 22, the same side as the recent VA-ECMO cannulation. Oxygenation improved following blood pressure control with prazosin. After sufficient alpha-blockade with prazosin, blood pressure remained elevated, necessitating the addition of labetalol, chosen for its alpha- and beta-blocking properties. Despite an escalation of alpha-blockade, the patient had early morning blood pressure spikes associated with hot flashes. These symptoms of chronic ovarian insufficiency potentially contributed to PGL-mediated catecholamine surges predisposing to rTCC. She was started on megestrol and venlafaxine to manage the vasomotor symptoms of ovarian insufficiency. Given planned adrenal mass resection, she received a retrievable inferior vena cava (IVC) filter on Day 30 so that anticoagulation could be safely stopped prior to surgery. On Day 44, she underwent laparoscopic right adrenalectomy; pathology confirmed the diagnosis of peri-adrenal PGL. At follow-up, genetic testing was negative, and the patient remained asymptomatic. Upon further history obtained from the family, the patient had a 2-year history of flushing, tachycardia, palpitations, and dyspnoea not associated with exertion prior to this presentation. At a 1-year follow-up, the patient’s echocardiogram showed a preserved LVEF without evidence of wall motion abnormalities or valvular disease.