A 75-year-old man with a past medical history of diabetes mellitus was admitted to the Emergency Department of our University Hospital. He had a history of acute low back pain in the region of the lumbar spine in the last 4 days before his admission to the hospital. Two days before his admission he experienced lower leg weakness and fever (oral temperature 38.5°C). Clinical examination showed neck stiffness. After initial evaluation and brain CT scan – which revealed no damage – he had a lumbar puncture. The patient hospitalized with the diagnosis of meningitis (CSF: 765 white cells per cubic millimeter, elevated protein level: 70 mg per deciliter, decreased CSF glucose levels: 35% of serum glucose). Staph. aureus was cultured from cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) sample.
The neurologic condition of the patient impaired very quickly and at the end of the third day, after his admission, he developed paraplegia. Deep tendon reflexes were absent in the lower limbs and severely diminished in the upper limbs. After neurosurgical consultation an emergency magnetic resonance imaging scan (MRI) of the brain and the whole spinal spine was performed, five days after the admission of the patient to the hospital. It revealed a contrast-enhancing subdural mass collection posterior and left lateral to the spinal cord at the level L2 – L4 which was compressing the spinal cord. It also revealed arachnoiditis in the whole thoracic and lumbar vertebral body of the spinal cord. After intravenous contrast administration there was an intense enhancement on the boundaries of the collection and widespread meningeal enhancement . Brain MRI with intravenous contrast revealed no intracranial abnormalities.
Meanwhile, at the end of the fifth day, the condition of the patient impaired with respiratory failure and quadriplegia and he was admitted to the ICU. The patient remained alert and cooperative. Laboratory data showed a leukocytosis of 20,000/mm3 with a left shift, median elevated serum alkaline phosphatase (789 IU/l) and decreased albumin (2.8 g/dl). Also the C-reactive protein was elevated (17.5 mg/dl).
A L2–L4 laminectomy with midline incision of dura and arachnoid was performed eight days after the admission of the patient into the hospital. The purulent material of the abscess was observed posterior and left lateral to the spinal cord and unfortunately extended in the whole lumbar vertebral body of the spinal cord (according to the surgeon, there was possibly an empyema to the whole vertebral body of the spinal cord). An empyema was extended to lumbar nerve roots and to the psoas muscles. The purulent material was removed at the levels of laminectomy and the vertebral body copiously irrigated superiorly and inferiorly with saline solution. The wound was closed, and a usual drainage system was placed (inflow/outflow drain). Cultures from the purulent material and the blood were positive for staph. aureus.
Despite the removal of the purulent material and the appropriate antibiotic treatment (IV vancomycin, meropenem, fluconazole) the neurologic condition of the patient declined immediately after the operation and he developed severe impairment of consciousness. Except respiratory failure, which was always a problem, hemodynamic instability was also reported during his ICU stay. In ICU, all failure systems were supported. The patient was well hydrated, he was fed with enteral nutrition and he had an early tracheostomy in an attempt of weaning from mechanical ventilation. Inotropic and vasoactive agents were needed to stabilize mean arterial pressure >65 mmHg. The patient died 6 weeks after his ICU admission.