A 26-year-old woman visited our hospital with bilateral lower extremities weakness and numbness for two months, progressive worsening. One month ago, she couldn’t stand or walk without assistance. There was no history of trauma to the thoracolumbar region, and no relevant past interventions. She had no impairment of cognitive function or mental retardation. There was no exposure of known teratogenic agents and drugs. Her parents were healthy and their marriage was non-consanguineous. She had two unaffected older brother, and no known family history of PE, scoliosis or other problems. The pregnancy was uncomplicated, labor was spontaneous at 38 weeks and birth weight was 3350 g.
On physical examination, muscle testing revealed weakness of bilateral psoas and quadriceps with grades of 2/5, 2/5 in the left tibialis anterior, 1/5 in the right tibialis anterior, and 1/5 in bilateral toe extensors. She had paresthesias under the bilateral T12 distribution, as well as bowel bladder dysfunction. Her bilateral knee and ankle-jerks were hyper-reflexia; and Babinski sign were positive on both sides. The thoracolumbar spine was rigid with segmental kyphosis and absent extension when the patient bent backward. In addition to, uneven shoulders, back bulge, and trunk shift to the right were occurred.
Neurological symptoms and signs suggested spinal cord compression. Thoracolumbar computed tomography scan showed multiple wedge-shaped vertebral bodies and posterior osteophytes from T12 to L2, lamina sclerosis and thickening in thoracic spine, ossification of ligamentum flavum at T9/10, T10/11 and T11/12, with a kyphotic curvature . She had no history of lung or other disease. The routine laboratory test, pulmonary function test and echocardiography were normal. Magnetic resonance image of the spine showed multi-level spinal canal stenosis with cord compression at T10-L3 . Her radiographs of the whole spine demonstrated thoracolumbar kyphoscoliosis from T10 to L2. The coronal scoliotic Cobb angle is 32° and segmental kyphotic Cobb angle is 50° . Sagittal vertical axis (SVA) is positive with three centimeters forward the superior-posterior edge of S1 endplate . In axial CT scan of lung, central depression of sternum produced a funnel-shaped chest. The anteroposterior distance of the thoracic cage is significant diminished. The Haller Index (width of the chest divided by the distance between the posterior surface of the sternum and the anterior surface of the spine ) is 3.4. The sternum rotation is 7 degree on left side. The Louis angle (the angle between the manubrium and the body of the sternum ) is 120 degree .
The surgery was suggested to rescue the function of spinal cord and correct the spinal deformity. A posterior multi-level laminectomy, ponte osteotomy (T11/12, T12/L1, L1/2), resection of the ossified ligamentum flavum, instrumentation, correction and bone graft fusion were performed from T9 to L4. The operation time was 270 min. The total amount of blood loss was 500 cc. During the operation, the signal of spinal cord monitoring was stable on baseline preoperatively. We found the MEP signals get better when spinal canal decompression is completed. The procedure went very well, no cardiopulmonary dysfunction or severe hypotension during her kyphoscoliosis correction and decompression surgery. Postoperatively, there was significant improvement in weakness of the bilateral lower extremities. Her postoperative course was uneventful and discharged in five days after surgery. The patient has been prescribed regular follow-up on 1, 3, 6, 12 months after surgery and every year further. The observation of neurological function was needed.
A postoperative X-ray demonstrated the lumbar scoliotic Cobb angle correction from 32° to 8°, the correction rate is 75%; and the focal kyphotic Cobb angle were from 50° to 16° in thoracolumbar region, the correction rate is 68% . Neurologic examination of the lower extremities revealed a 5/5 muscle strength bilaterally and the patient was able to walk without assistance at 6 months after surgery. Well spinal balance in the sagittal and coronal planes was maintained . Proximal kyphosis was increased in the upper thoracic spine from 18°to 24°when compared to the radiographs immediately postoperatively. We think the pose of upper extremities is one of the reasons when radiograph. Of course, further follow up was needed.