A 56-year-old female was referred to the endocrinological department of a university hospital with the diagnosis of hypercalcaemia. Due to mid-back pain osteodensitometry was done prior to referral revealing pronounced osteoporosis (T-Score − 4.2 BMD: 0.589 g/cm3). External laboratory diagnostics found hypercalcaemia, vitamin D deficiency and hyperparathyroidism. Total calcium was 3.38 mmol/L (2.2–2.65 mmol/L), ionized calcium 1.71 mmol/L (1.15–1.29 mmol/L), serum phosphate 0.72 mmol/L (0.76–1.37 mmol/L), vitamine D (25-OH) 66.1 nmol/L (75–375 nmol/L), vitamine D (1.25-OH) > 360 pmol/L (36.5–216.2), intact parathyroid hormone (iPTH) 190 ng/L (6.7–38.8 ng/L, assay listed in ), thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) 0.71 mU/L (0.25–4.04 mU/L), estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) (CKD-EPI) 84 mL/min. There was no proteinuria.
Due to the history of breast-cancer diagnosed 4 years before and in complete remission since curative therapy (which was immediately initiated after diagnosis) metachronous bone metastases were excluded via MRI of the spine and breast as well as a scintigraphic bone-scan. Chronic and acute kidney-injuries, nephrolithiasis and nephrocalcinosis were excluded by kidney-ultrasonography. Kidney sizes: right kidney 11.3×5.1x5x2 cm, left kidney 12.6×4.2x5x1cm.
Cervical ultrasonography (US) showed a normal thyroid gland (volume: 13 mL) without nodules . No parathyroid adenoma was found, but a cystic mass (of 10.2 mL), most probably benign, on the left dorsum of the thyroid was identified. 99m-technetium-MIBI scintigraphy failed to find a focus , especially the assumed cyst did not show pathological tracer uptake. 99m-technetium-pertechnetate scintigraphy revealed reduced left-sided activity in correlation to the cystic lesion. In summary, no obvious parathyroid adenoma could be identified, and the cystic lesion was diagnosed as an unsuspicious thyroidal cyst.
Calcium lowering therapy was performed with forced diuresis and infusion of 5 mg zoledronic acid. Calcium-level decreased to normal values (2.39 mmol/L), but the iPTH remained elevated (100 ng/L). A working diagnosis of primary hyperparathyroidism without detectable focus was made and a therapy with cinacalcet 30 mg/d was initiated. Close ambulatory follow-up in our outpatient department was scheduled.
After 2 months of ongoing cinacalcet therapy, serum-calcium increased again to 2.94 mmol/L along with an iPTH of 190 ng/L and a vitamin D (1.25-OH) over 360 pmol/L. The patient had no complaints others than back pain. Sonography of the thyroid gland still did not reveal any further lesions, but the volume of the “cyst” had increased to 13.9 mL. For further clarification, dynamic magnetic resonance angiography of the neck was performed, knowing its high diagnostic accuracy in this field . The examination revealed a small focal arterial hypervascularization at the ventral part of the lesions capsule, which is frequently seen in parathyroidal adenomas . Nevertheless, since no further suspicious features could be identified on the MRI scan, the images were finally interpreted to be more likely for an unsignificant cystic lesion. Because of the highly elevated calcium level, the dose of cinacalcet was increased to 60 mg/d.
Four months later the patient presented again. She reported a painless swelling on the left site of the neck without pressure symptoms. Despite of the elevated cinacalcet dosage, calcium (2.71 mmol/L) was still elevated, iPTH was 138 ng/L, and the eGFR (CKD-EPI) 84 mL/min. The “cyst” showed further growth to 29.7 mL. Due to patients discomfort and for further diagnostic approach we decided to perform a fine-needle aspiration (FNA), which was carried out with a novel ultrasound-guided standard needle magnetization guidance system . This system enables the needle tip to be tracked, which facilitates the complete aspiration of the fluid and punctation of the wall.
The aspirated fluid (approx. 25 mL) was brown at the beginning and slightly bloody at the end. We measured iPTH in the cyst fluid, which was on the upper scale of the calibration curve of the assay (> 1800 ng/L). Dilution (1:100) showed the same result (expected concentration > 180.000 ng/L). Cytopathological workup of the aspirated fluid revealed follicular epithelial cells. Staining for thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) as well as thyroglobulin (Tg) was negative, suggesting other than thyroid origin. A subsequent immunohistochemical staining for parathormone was positive .
After the diagnosis was ascertained the cyst was surgically removed 8 months after the initial presentation of the patient. Preoperative sonography revealed that the cyst again had grown from about 5 mL to 14.4 mL about 1 month after FNA. iPTH intraoperatively dropped from 88.7 ng/L to 10.6 ng/L after resection. Intraoperative frozen section as well as routine histopathological workup confirmed diagnosis of cystic parathyroid adenoma. Immunohistochemistry showed strong expression of parathyroidal hormone .
The patient experienced hypocalcemia on the first postoperative day (1.8 mmol/L), but values quickly normalized under mid-dose oral calcium substitution (300 mg calcium ions per day). In the 2 month follow- up visit serum calcium (2.62 mmol/L) and iPTH (16.6 ng/L) were normalized without further medication. Sonography revealed only a small residual haematoma at the site of the former cyst .