A 62-year-old male, with a history of chronic smoking and hypertension, presented with chest pain radiating to left arm at another hospital on 15 July 2020. Electrocardigram (ECG) showed inferior wall/posterior wall MI according to patient’s discharge records. His coronary artery angiography (CAG) showed 100% occlusion of RCA . Patient underwent PTCA to RCA on the same day, and two cobalt–chromium DESs were deployed in the RCA. The patient was re-admitted to same hospital after 1 week of PTCA with chest pain. The ECG was suggestive of ST elevation according to the patient’s discharge records. The CAG showed 100% acute ISR in distal stent. The POBA to RCA was performed in that hospital with thrombolysis in MI (TIMI) Grade III flow.
However, in less than 1 month of POBA, the patient developed recurrent chest pain and presented at our hospital with The Canadian Cardiovascular Society (CCS) functional Class IV angina (angina presenting with minimal activity; comfortable only at rest). On examination, his blood pressure was 120/80 mmHg, pulse was 72 b.p.m., and on auscultation of chest, S1 and S2 heart sounds were normally heard, there were no murmurs or other cardiac sounds; normal breath sounds. There were no signs of heart failure. The ECG did not show any dynamic changes. The patient had no history of fever and his total leucocyte count was normal at 7500 cells/µL (range 4000–11 000 cells/µL). Other inflammatory markers like erythrocyte sedimentation rate (at 8 mm/h) and C-reactive protein (at 2 mg/L) were all normal. Cardiac enzymes were within normal limit: creatinine phosphokinase (CPK) 130 IU/L (range: 20–200 IU/L); CPK-MB 15 IU/L (range: 5–25 IU/L); Troponin T was negative (quantitative analysis is not done at our centre).
We did an intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) on 20 August 2020 to find the cause of angina. The IVUS showed crushed and damaged stent struts compressed to one side of the wall and PSA to adjacent RCA segment . A polytetrafluorethylene (PTFE)-covered stent was deployed which effectively sealed off the PSA and resumed good TIMI Grade III blood flow to distal RCA .
The post-PTCA stay in hospital was uneventful. The patient did not have symptoms of angina post-covered stent to date and is being managed on aspirin 75 mg once daily, atorvastatin 80 mg once daily, and P2Y12 platelet inhibitor (Ticagrelor) 90 mg twice daily until the date of this publication. Additionally, the patient continued on his prescribed anti-hypertensive medications (an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor and a beta-blocker) with good blood pressure control.