A 54-year-old woman was transferred to the emergency department with complaints of severe abdominal pain and a cold sweat that had developed 3 h earlier. She had developed mild abdominal pain and nausea 3 days earlier. She had no other relevant medical history. Her vital signs were as follows: blood pressure, 116/84 mmHg; pulse rate, 74 beats/min; and body temperature, 35.7 °C. Physical examination revealed tenderness in the epigastric area. Her laboratory tests were normal except for a low hemoglobin level (10.9 mg/dL). Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed a mass on the lesser omentum with enhancement in the early phase, and the liver surface was surrounded by high-density ascites . Extravasation of the contrast media from the RGA was also visible. A diagnosis of hemoperitoneum consequent to the rupture of an RGA aneurysm was made. She subsequently underwent angiography, which revealed aneurysmal dilatation of the branch of the left gastric artery (LGA) and right gastroepiploic artery (RGEA) . The interruption in the peripheral branch of the RGA precluded the detection of extravasation from this artery via angiography . Because we suspected a rupture of the RGA aneurysm, we performed coil embolization at the point of interruption in the RGA to prevent major bleeding. However, her hemoglobin levels continued to decline on the following day. Considering her continuous bleeding, we performed a diagnostic laparoscopy which revealed a lot of bloody ascites in the peritoneal cavity. Additionally, a massive hematoma was found in the lesser omentum . We converted to laparotomy due to insufficient view because of the massive hematoma, and performed a distal gastrectomy with Roux-en-Y reconstruction to resect the aneurysms in the RGA, LGA, and RGEA. There were no postoperative complications and the patient was discharged 17 days after surgery.
A pathological examination of the resected RGA revealed partial dissection of the tunica media and intima and a hematoma that had filled the dissected cavity, indicating rupture of the RGA aneurysm . Multiple vacuoles, a characteristic of SAM, were seen in the medial muscle layer . Similar findings were observed in the resected specimens of the LGA and RGEA. Based on these findings, we made a final diagnosis of a ruptured RGA aneurysm caused by SAM.