A 51-year-old male patient presented at our hospital, reporting a decline in cognitive functions and notable personality alterations over the previous five months. Throughout this timeframe, he exhibited symptoms consistent with dementia, such as memory deficits, growing apathy, and a decline in his professional performance as a driver. The patient had a background of non-specific headaches. Over time, his condition worsened, manifesting in an increasingly irregular walking pattern and involuntary tremors of the upper limbs when engaging in tasks like using chopsticks or holding items.
This patient was conscious and spoke fluently during neurological examinations. Both pupils were normal, equal in size, and reactive to light. No nuchal rigidity or other signs of meningitis were identified. The cranial nerve, motor, sensory examinations and reflexes showed no abnormalities. He had a positive Romberg test and postural and intentional tremors in his upper limbs. The cognitive assessment revealed severe memory, orientation, comprehension, and calculation impairments. He scored 6 out of 30 on the mini-mental state examination (MMSE) and 3 out of 30 on the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA).
Blood tests, including blood cell analysis, thyroid hormones, vitamin B12, folic acid, treponema pallidum particle agglutination, and human immunodeficiency virus, excluded some reversible causes of cognitive impairment. Biochemical tests showed no abnormalities. Lupus anticoagulant, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, rheumatoid factor, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, anti-double-stranded DNA antibody, antinuclear antibodies, and antiphospholipid antibodies were normal. Homocysteine, coagulation function, D-dimer, protein C, protein S, and antithrombin III were also within the normal range.
Lumbar puncture examination revealed that the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pressure was 280 mmH2O. The total protein level was 0.56 µg/L (normal range: 0.15–0.45 µg/L). CSF cell count, glucose, electrolytes, and lactate dehydrogenase were within the normal range. Microbiological tests showed no abnormalities. Autoimmune encephalitis antibodies in both the CSF and serum were negative.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) displayed diffuse T2-weighted fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) and diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) white matter hyperintensities in bilateral corona radiata areas . The susceptibility-weighted imaging (SWI) and magnetic resonance venogram (MRV) of the brain showed extensive tortuous dilatation of the intracranial veins .
Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) revealed a DAVF in the right sigmoid sinus and CVST of the left transverse sinus . The DAVF was fed from the right occipital artery and middle meningeal artery.
Whole exome sequencing of blood samples revealed a heterozygous mutation in exon 12 of the LDLR gene (c.C1747T), resulting in an amino acid change from histidine to tyrosine (p.H583Y) .
Angiography revealed the right sigmoid sinus DAVF; the fistula was fed by bilateral occipital arteries, meningeal hypophyseal trunks, middle meningeal arteries, etc.; meanwhile, the left sigmoid sinus was occluded.
The procedure was performed under general heparinization. Transarterial embolization was performed via the meningeal branch of the right posterior cerebral artery, and 0.2 ml Onyx-18 was injected gently to occlude the pial feeding artery. Then, the Marathon microcatheter was advanced via the meningeal branch of the right occipital artery, and 6.5 ml Onyx-18 was injected, obliterating the fistula.
The 8 F Britetip catheter was advanced to the proximal side of the occlude left sigmoid sinus via a transvenous access route. The microcatheter was penetrated to the superior sagittal sinus. The occluded segment was expanded with a Gateway 4.0*9mm (Boston Scientific) and a Stering 5.0*20 (Boston Scientific) balloon sequentially over the Floppy-300 exchanging wire. Direct venography revealed moderate residual sinus stenosis. Post-operative Dyna-CT demonstrated no hemorrhage.
A Wallstent 7.0*30mm stent (Boston scientific) was deployed at the stenotic sinus in the second stage. After sinus stenting, the cerebral antegrade drainage improved significantly.
Shortly after admission, the diagnoses of CVST and DAVFs were made, and the patient received oral anticoagulation treatment with rivaroxaban. Subsequently, DAVF embolization and balloon dilation of the left transverse sinus were performed. Ten days after the surgery, a brain MRI showed that white matter hyperintensity decreased on T2-weighted FLAIR and DWI sequences . SWI and MRV imaging showed a significant reduction in multiple vascular shadows on the brain surface and subcortex .
Two months later, the MMSE score of this patient was 18 out of 30 and the MoCA score was 10 out of 30, suggesting significant cognitive function improvement after treatment. However, his CSF pressure remained above 200 mmH2O despite ongoing anticoagulant therapy. Therefore, three months after the first endovascular therapy, this patient underwent another balloon dilatation and stent implantation for severe stenosis in the left transverse sinus . After the surgery, dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and clopidogrel was administered for three months to prevent stent thrombosis. In the telephone follow-up conducted six months later, the patient’s cognitive function improved significantly, and he demonstrated a better ability to perform daily life activities. He could also take care of himself without any walking disruptions. Given the association between CVST complicated with DAVFs and the LDLR gene mutation, continuous anticoagulation therapy with rivaroxaban was recommended .