A 37-year-old Indian woman presented to our university based, academic emergency department, with a chief complaint of fever of one-week duration. The patient reported the fever was persistent and fluctuated between 102 and 103 degrees Fahrenheit. The elevated temperatures were associated with shaking chills and diffuse myalgias. Review of systems was otherwise unremarkable. She denied any recent change in her appetite or weight.
The patient had a past medical history significant for Systemic Lupus Erythematosis (SLE) that was diagnosed at age 16. She received a cadaveric renal transplant ten years prior to admission secondary to Lupus nephropathy. Over the past year, the patient had suffered from chronic rejection and was on the renal transplant list for a second time. Additional past medical history includes hypertension, chronic Molluscum contagiosum on the lower extremities, thyroid cancer status post total thyroidectomy, and renal cell carcinoma status post right native nephrectomy.
Medications included tacrolimus 2 milligrams twice daily, prednisone 5 milligrams daily, darbepoetin alfa 60 milligrams subcutaneously weekly, atenolol 25 milligrams daily, amlodipine 5 milligrams daily, calcitriol 0.25 micrograms daily, levothyroxine 100 micrograms daily, iron supplementation, and a daily multivitamin. Mycophenolate mofetil was recently stopped secondary to epistaxis and gingival bleeding. The patient denied any known drug allergies and was not taking any over the counter medications.
The patient denied any recent travel history but did report spending fourteen days in Nicaragua approximately nine months prior to presentation. While in Nicaragua, the patient recalled a transient diarrheal illness that resolved without incident. The patient denied a history of smoking, alcohol use, illegal drug use, or high-risk sexual behavior.
On physical examination, the patient was awake, alert, and oriented to person, place, and time and in no acute distress. The patient’s vital signs were as follows: blood pressure 112/81, heart rate 115, respiratory rate 16, oral temperature 101.6 degrees Fahrenheit, oxygen saturation on room air 97 percent. The remainder of the patient’s physical examination was unremarkable except for the skin, which was warm, dry, and with numerous 2-5 millimeter pearly, flesh-colored, umbilicated papules on the lower extremities consistent with Molluscum contagiosum.
Initial laboratory studies were significant for a relative monocytosis, normochromic normocytic anemia, increased lactate dehydrogenase with normal Coombs test, thrombocytopenia, high indirect bilirubin, hyponatremia, metabolic acidemia, and renal failure. The patient reported her creatinine was recently measured to be approximately 2.4. It was 3.7 in the emergency department at presentation. A urine analysis was performed and found to contain 1+ blood; however, microscopic analysis failed to reveal any erythrocytes. The patient’s initial chest radiograph was negative for any acute disease process. A blood smear was obtained . Numerous ring trophozites measuring approximately 2.0 microns were seen and estimated to involve 3.8 percent of the erythrocytes. The infected erythrocytes appeared the same size as the surrounding, non-infected cells. No other inclusions, with the exception of the pyroplasms, were seen in the erythrocytes. A rapid malaria antigen test was performed and found to be negative.
At this point, the patient was admitted with a presumptive diagnosis of Babesiosis. The patient was started on azithromycin 250 milligrams daily, doxycycline 100 milligrams twice daily, and atovaquone 750 milligrams twice daily. On hospital day two, additional data was obtained about the patient’s hematologic status. The patient was found to have a reticulocyte count of 1.32 (an inadequate bone marrow response most likely secondary to chronic renal failure), a haptoglobin level less than 7, and a falling hemoglobin level. In the setting of increased red cell destruction and decreased red cell production, the patient was transfused two units of packed red blood cells. The patient responded well to the transfusions and her hemoglobin subsequently stabilized while her lactate dehydrogenase and haptoglobin improved only marginally.
While the patient’s hemoglobin initially dropped, the patient’s renal function steadily improved with treatment of her underlying infection. By the end of the patient’s one-week hospital stay, her creatinine had returned to baseline. In addition, her bilirubin, electrolytes, white blood cell count, and platelet count improved over the week.
The diagnosis of Babesiosis was eventually confirmed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) performed by Focus Diagnostics Incorporated in Cypress, California. In addition, a diagnosis of Lyme disease was presumed secondary to elevated Lyme titers and high rate of concurrent infection of Babesiosis with Lyme disease. Our patient did extremely well and was discharged home with no residual symptoms.