Our patient was a 44-year-old Japanese man who worked as a karate coach. He had no other past medical history. He does not smoke and is a moderate alcohol drinker. He complained of pain and swelling on the medial aspect of his right ankle and had difficulty in ambulation. He was injured while acting as an umpire in a karate competition. While trying to avoid contact with a player, he stepped on the floor with his ankle dorsiflexed and with his knee flexed. He immediately felt pain and heard a snapping sound in his ankle. He was brought to the hospital on the same day because of difficulty in ambulation after the injury.
No abnormality was observed in the laboratory data. Physical examination revealed that the medial side of his right ankle was swollen , and marked tenderness was present at the posterior of the medial malleolus. There was no ankle instability, as confirmed by the varus stress, valgus stress, and anterior drawer tests. The tibialis posterior tendon was dislocated and reduced manually with local anesthesia (1% xylocaine) around the medial malleolus . No neurological deficit was seen.
Standard radiographs showed a normal ankle appearance . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated an anterior subluxated tibialis posterior tendon that laid on the medial malleolus. Signal changes shown in the transverse plane of T2-weighted MRI scans revealed suspected fluid or bleeding at the retromalleolar groove .
We diagnosed a dislocation of the tibialis posterior tendon based on the above-mentioned examination and performed surgical treatment at 4 days post-injury. Intraoperatively, the flexor retinaculum was detached from the medial malleolus, and a tendon sheath tear was noted. The tibialis posterior tendon was dislocated anteriorly from the medial malleolus groove. The tendon was torn longitudinally and sutured using 4-0 nylon. Drill holes were made in the medial malleolus using a 1.8-mm-diameter Kirschner wire following the Das De procedure . The flexor retinaculum was attached to the bone at the medial malleolus, and the tendon sheath was repaired.
A below-the-knee cast kept the foot immobilized for 2 weeks. At 3 weeks, range-of-motion exercises for the ankle were started, and the patient was allowed to walk with an ankle-foot orthosis at 8 weeks. Subsequently, jogging was allowed at 12 weeks.
At 1 year postoperatively, MRI showed that the tibialis posterior tendon was located at its normal anatomical position , and the patient returned to work as a karate coach. The patient scored 100 on the Japanese Society for Surgery of the Foot ankle-hind foot scale (JSSF ankle-hind foot scale) . No abnormal laboratory data or neurological deficit was present at 1 year postoperatively.