A 62-year-old man of Bangladeshi origin was brought to the emergency department with lethargy and fever. Over the previous 2 weeks, he had developed a productive cough and weight loss. His past medical history included ulcerative colitis (diagnosed in 1999), which was quiescent on surveillance colonoscopy 2 days prior to admission. A suspicious rectal lesion was, however, biopsied. He had coronary artery bypass grafting in 1999, type 2 diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidaemia and chronic hepatitis B. His medication included prednisolone, 10 mg daily (which he had been taking for 15 years), azathioprine 150 mg daily, Asacol (mesalazine) 2 mg daily, tenofovir and allopurinol 100 mg daily. His family acknowledged he had been taking prednisolone at greater than the prescribed dose for approximately 2 months prior to admission.
The patient was born in Sylhet, Bangladesh, and had moved to the UK aged 14. 6 months previous to the admission, he had travelled back to Sylhet for a 1 month family visit. He had not been unwell during the trip or until presentation. There was no unusual exposure history. There was no other significant or relevant travel history during his lifetime.
On examination he had a temperature of 34.8 °C, a non-tender erythematous left calf overlying a saphenous vein harvest site. His haemoglobin was 116 g l−1, white cell count 6.2x109 per litre and C-reactive protein 138 mg l−1. Initial management included empirical intravenous flucloxacillin 1 g four times daily for presumed cellulitis. A lower limb ultrasound excluded deep vein thromboses, and a computed tomography scan of chest, abdomen and pelvis demonstrated a rectal mass and a right basal pneumonia. Antibiotics were changed to intravenous benzylpenicillin 1.2 g four times daily and oral clarithromycin 500 mg twice daily.
Over the initial week, his condition deteriorated with fever to 40 °C, rising C-reactive protein and erythema spreading up the left leg to the scrotum, abdomen, left flank and right leg. The skin became tender and warm to touch. Dermatologists reviewed the skin on day 6 . A differential diagnosis of multifocal cellulitis, panniculitis or migratory thrombophlebitis, in the context of possible malignancy was made. The patient developed a tender, swollen right testicle. An ultrasound showed epididymo-orchitis. Empirical treatment with oral ciprofloxacin 500 mg twice daily and oral doxycycline 100 mg twice daily was added.
The infectious diseases team suggested changing the benzylpenicillin to intravenous ceftriaxone 2 g daily, and adding oral linezolid 600 mg twice daily and intravenous amikacin 1.2 g once daily. Vasculitic, auto-immune and sexual health (HIV, chlamydia, gonorrhoea) screens and mycoplasma serology were negative. A trans-thoracic echocardiogram showed no signs of endocarditis. Blood cultures were negative.
On day 12, the patient was transferred to critical care for ventilation and noradrenaline (dose titrated to blood pressure within the standard critical care range of 6–13 µg min−1) for septic shock, considered secondary to cellulitis. He remained febrile at 40 °C and had developed a coagulopathy and bloody diarrhoea. His antibiotics were changed to meropenem 1 g three times daily and linezolid 600 mg twice daily. Plastic surgeons and urologists did not suspect necrotizing fasciitis.
The erythema spread to his flanks. No papules, nodules or umbilicated lesions were noted. In view of the diagnostic uncertainty, a skin biopsy was performed on day 15. A rectal biopsy showed CMV inclusion bodies and the plasma CMV DNA viral load was 15 304 copies ml−1. Intravenous ganciclovir 375 mg twice daily was initiated on day 19 to treat suspected disseminated CMV disease with evidence of colitis, epididymo-orchitis and panniculitis. CMV DNA was detected in skin, urine and throat samples.
Due to worsening leucopenia and thrombocytopenia, the ganciclovir was changed to foscarnet 4.5 g three times daily. Fluconazole 400 mg daily was added empirically on day 27 given the lack of clinical improvement, due to the presence of Candida albicans in the urine on day 24. The skin biopsy was reported on day 28 as showing septal/lobar panniculitis. To exclude necrotizing fasciitis, a scrotal incision was performed, which was sterile. Examination of the rectum showed no inflammation.
The fluconazole was switched to micafungin 100 mg daily on day 31, due to the growth of Candida glabrata from urine culture on day 30. Following a methenamine silver stain, the histopathologists reported the first skin biopsy as showing small, round yeasts of 3–5 microns within well-circumscribed areas of inflammation in the dermis and subcutaneous fat . A skin biopsy was repeated the same day with samples sent for microbiological and fungal culture and molecular testing. On day 34, the pan-fungal PCR confirmed DNA from H. capsulatum. The micafungin was changed to AmBisome (amphotericin B) 320 mg daily.
A bone marrow biopsy was performed on day 33, which showed pancytopenia with increased macrophage activity, without evidence of malignancy, acid-fast bacilli or fungi. Ferritin and triglyceride levels were raised (47 798 µg l−1 and 2.45 mmol l−1, respectively) supporting a diagnosis of HLH. Immunosuppression was considered, but due to the patient's extremely poor clinical condition was not given. The bone marrow culture subsequently grew H. capsulatum. The patient continued to deteriorate and died on day 36 of admission.