A 50-year-old male presented in emergency with a history of fall from electricity pole with pain in left hip and an inability to bear weight on his left lower limb. On examination, there was tenderness on the left greater trochanteric region and inability to actively raise the left lower limb. The radiographs confirmed the presence of comminuted intertrochanteric fracture with posterior dislocation of the hip. CT scan with 3D reconstruction was also done . We applied skin traction. The patient did not have any comorbid conditions. An attempt of closed reduction was taken in emergency, but it failed. The patient was planned for surgery within 12 h of injury. The patient was taken under general anesthesia in a lateral position. Closed reduction was attempted with Schanz pin inserted into the neck of femur under c-arm guidance and manipulated to reduce the dislocation . The dislocation was not getting reduced, so we decided for open reduction through posterior approach. We found that the head had buttonholed through a small rent in the posterior capsule and the short external rotators and greater trochanter were also fractured. The femoral head was successfully reduced by gentle traction and manipulation with Schanz pin inserted into the proximal fragment along with pushing the femoral head from the posterior aspect towards the acetabulum . Post reduction, inter-trochanteric fracture was reduced and reduction was held with sharp reduction forceps. Since it was the unstable type of intertrochanteric fracture with associated greater trochanteric fracture, we did proximal femoral nailing in lateral position and fixed fractured greater trochanter with the ethibond no.5 . On post-operative day 1, X-rays were done and the patient was allowed bedside sitting . The patient was allowed non-weight bearing walking with the help of a walker on day 2 and was discharged on postoperative day 5. At 2 weeks’ follow-up, suture removal was done. The patient was on regular follow-up for 1 year after the surgery. The patient was allowed partial weight bearing 3 months after surgery and full weight bearing was started at 6 months. At every follow-up, we did a radiological evaluation to look for union and also evaluated Harris’’s hip score. The patient was followed up for 3 years at which there was complete union and there were no signs of AVN on X-ray . Also at 3 years’ follow-up, the patient can squat and sit cross-leg comfortably and do adduction and internal rotation at the hip joint of operated side without any difficulty .