A 70-year-old female patient was referred to our hospital for "hematemesis for 10 days". The volume of hematemesis was about 150 ml. The patient had melena, but no fresh blood in the stool. Gastroscopy showed there were two wide-base polyps in the greater curvature of gastric body/antrum junction (about 50 cm from the incisor teeth). The larger one was 2 × 1.8 cm in size, with a papillary or gyrus-like appearance in the surface; the smaller one was 1 × 1 cm in size and was slightly flat . And there was another wide base polyp sized 0.8 × 0.8 cm in the minor curvature of the cardia (about 41 cm from the incisor). The gastric body-antrum mucosa showed no atrophic gastritis appearance.
The patient had no history of gastrointestinal polyps and Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) eradication therapy. She had no family history of tumors and six offspring were in good health.
The patient underwent endoscopic mucosal dissection (ESD) on the larger polyp at the junction of the gastric body/antrum and endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) on the other smaller polyps. The operation process went smoothly, and the patient's postoperative condition was stable.
The ESD specimen of the larger polyp at the junction of the gastric body/antrum showed a broad-based protruding lesion with a size of 2.3 × 1.3 × 1.3 cm. There were no ulcers and necrosis on the surface. The cut surface was solid, gray-pink, and soft in texture. The lesion was confined to the mucosal layer and the nearest distance to the mucosal lateral margin was 0.5 cm. The smaller polyp at the junction of the gastric body/antrum and the polyp in the subcardia area were both sessile polyps, the size of which was 0.8 × 0.5 × 0.3 cm and 0.5 × 0.4 × 0.2 cm, respectively.
The larger polyp at the junction of the gastric body/antrum was a 0-Is protruding type lesion . The tumor consisted of dysplastic columnar epithelia arranged in a tubular-villous pattern. The surface glands were densely proliferated while the basal glands were expanded . The tumor cells were mainly columnar, and the nuclei were of the same size and located at the basal part of the gland with rarely stratified structure. Folded papillae could be seen in some expended glands. Compared with the surrounding normal gastric foveolar epithelium, the tumor cells were enlarged and the nuclei were elongated and densely arranged. There were apical mucin caps in the cytoplasm . High-grade areas and an invasive component were not seen. There were infiltrating inflammatory cells but no edema and proliferation of smooth muscle bundles in the stroma. The basal dilated glands were covered with low columnar, cubic, or flat epithelium without any dysplasia, locally pushing to the muscularis mucosa without stromal reaction. The surrounding mucosa showed the morphology of pyloric glands, with a few main cells scattered in a small number of glands, lack of parietal cells . There was no atrophy, intestinal metaplasia, H. pylori infection, or active inflammation in the mucosa.
The immunohistochemistry staining of MUC5AC showed diffuse cytoplasmic staining , while MUC6 showed focal cytoplasmic staining . There was a small amount of CDX2 staining in the superficial area of the tumor. No staining of MUC2 was observed. PAS (Periodic acid-Schiff) staining of the larger polyp showed that there were purple apical mucin caps in the cytoplasm, although being reduced compared with the surrounding normal gastric foveolar mucosa . The Ki-67 index was higher on the surface of the tumor (10% +), but lower in the expanded glands at the base. Gastrin staining showed no positive expression in the tumor and tumor basal mucosa, but a few gastrin-positive cells were seen in the mucosa around the tumor .
A diagnosis of gastric foveolar-type adenoma with low-grade dysplasia was rendered; the base of the tumor was accompanied by gastritis cystica profunda (GCP).
The other two polyps at the junction of the gastric body/antrum and the subcardia area were similar in morphology. They were composed of foveolar epithelium without dysplasia, arranged with enlarged and twisted glands accompanied by stroma edema and inflammatory cell infiltration. The morphology of these two lesions was consistent with gastric hyperplastic polyps.
A somatic genetic test was performed on the larger polyp at the junction of the gastric body/antrum. We analyzed 20 genes related to gastric tumors and polyps through next-generation gene sequencing (NGS) and found APC and KRAS gene mutations in the adenoma tissue. See “Appendix” for the list of genes tested and specific mutation forms.