A 37-year-old male Caucasian patient had a history of microscopic polyangiitis (MPA) for 5 years. He had no history of cardiac involvement secondary to MPA. He had received various immunosuppressive therapies, including Rituximab (RTX) and cyclophosphamide as remission induction/relapse therapy, followed by multiple immunosuppressive drugs including azathioprine and mycophenolate mofetil. Maintenance therapy with RTX had been started 3 years before his current admission. Since then, he had been stable without any major relapses with RTX (500 mg every six months) and low-dose prednisolone therapy (1 mg per day).
His medical history included arterial hypertension (without evidence of secondary causes), hypothyroidism, hyperuricaemia (treated with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, L-thyroxine, allopurinol), and severe obesity (body mass index 42 kg/m2). Initially, he presented to the emergency department of a different hospital with general fatigue, palpitations, and shortness of breath for 1 week. Then, after a newly diagnosed severely reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), he was transferred to our hospital. Echocardiography, performed 1 year before, as a baseline due to his MPA and use of immunosuppressive agents such as cyclophosphamide, had shown a normal LVEF.
On admission, he was severely dyspnoeic (New York Heart Association IV), afebrile, and tachycardic (heart rate of 123/min) with blood pressure of 95/55 mmHg (without inotropic support). Clinical examination indicated normal heart and lung sounds and no relevant oedema. Chest X-ray revealed moderate cardiomegaly and marginal costophrenic angle effusions. The electrocardiogram (ECG) showed atrial fibrillation with T-wave inversion in the inferior, anterior, and lateral leads. Blood gas analysis indicated O2 saturation of 95% and pO2 pressure of 62 mmHg (8.3 kPa; without O2 insufflation). Laboratory analysis showed slightly elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) levels at 9 mg/L (NR < 5 mg/L) without leucocytosis. NT-proBNP was markedly elevated at 1884 ng/L (NR < 125 ng/L) and normal creatinine of 1.0 mg/dL (NR 0.7–1.2 mg/dL). The initial echocardiography revealed a dilated LV (left ventricular end diastolic diameter 62 mm) with a severely reduced LVEF of 10% with global hypokinesia, and a normal left atrium (35 mm) in PLAX view. Transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) on Day 2, revealed a left atrial thrombus and the considered electrical cardioversion was not performed. A cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed on Day 4. It showed visually normal dimension of the left and right ventricle (LV and RV) with global LV hypokinesia, acute oedema of the LV and RV, no late gadolinium enhancement, no myocardial scars, and confirmed a severely reduced LVEF (in which image quality was reduced due to severe obesity and arrhythmia). Coronary angiography excluded coronary heart disease. Endomyocardial biopsies were obtained from the LV revealed acute lymphocytic myocarditis, as illustrated in . As illustrated by haematoxylin–eosin (HE) stain, necrosis of many myocytes is detected in association with numerous CD3+ T cells and CD68+MHCII+ macrophages as visualized by immunohistochemistry. Nested PCR revealed the presence of Borrelia DNA in the EMB (, see arrows for the presence of Borrelia DNA of the patient’s EMB and corresponding positive control). Direct sequencing of the Borrelia product revealed the presence of B. afzelii. Subsequently, antibody testing performed showed positive IgG on Enzyme-linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA) and Immunoblotting. The patient had no clinical signs of a tick-borne infection, nor did he remember a tick bite.
Whilst undergoing the various investigations mentioned above, the patient was concurrently being treated for heart failure which medical therapy (with angiotensin receptor neprilysin inhibitor, aldosterone antagonist, diuretic), and a rate control therapy with a beta-blocker and digitoxin. After anticoagulation (using therapeutic doses of heparin IV) for 11 days, the thrombus had resolved (indicated by repeated TOE), and electrical cardioversion was performed to achieve sinus rhythm reliably, and now on the 12 lead ECG there was no AV block and a normal PQ interval was present. Amiodarone was added (in the context of the cardioversion with 1 g per day for 5 days), which led to a stable sinus rhythm. Subsequently, antiarrhythmic therapy with digitoxin and amiodarone was stopped to avoid AV block. Later, heart rate control was achieved with ivabradine (10 mg per day) to decrease the risk for AV block, a typical complication of Lyme carditis. The LVEF continued to be severely reduced in the short term (as indicated by recurrent echocardiography). Once we received the results from the EMB, antibiotic therapy with intravenous ceftriaxone (2 g per day) was commenced for 14 days, followed by oral doxycycline (200 mg per day) and in addition to heart failure therapy, the LVEF recovered to 25%. Thus, the patient could be discharged with a life vest (an antiarrhythmic medication was avoided due to the risk of AV block) in a clinically improved condition.
Three months later, the LVEF recovered nearly completely (50%), no relevant arrhythmia was detected by the life vest. Nine months later, another EMB revealed no myocyte necrosis anymore or severe fibrosis in HE stains. Furthermore, a dramatic regression of lymphocytic inflammation was noted. Only a few CD3+ T cells and some CD68+MHCII+ macrophages were identified in the myocardium . Borrelia afzelii DNA nested polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was negative in the follow-up EMB. After 1 year of follow-up, the patient remains clinically asymptomatic, immunosuppressive therapy with RTX was re-started, and his LVEF normalized to >55%.