A 40-year-old male not known to have any chronic medical illness, presented complaining of epigastric and left upper quadrant pain for 1 month, associated with intermittent nausea and vomiting, and aggravated by fatty meals, with no other associated symptoms. He had frequent visits to the emergency department where he was managed with analgesia and antacids with mild symptomatic improvement. Clinical examination was unremarkable with no evidence of jaundice or abdominal tenderness. His blood test results showed a normal complete blood count, kidney function, and liver function. Chest X Ray revealed dextrocardia with stomach fundic gas shadow on Right side . Abdominal ultrasonography revealed transpositioning of the solid organs with a left sided liver and gallbladder with a solitary stone and mild wall thickening. We elected to perform a Magnetic Resonance Cholangiopancreatography to delineate the anatomy and to rule out any anomalies within the biliary tree. It confirmed the previously noted findings, showed no evident anomaly within the biliary tree, and confirmed the diagnosis of situs inversus totalis (, ). The patient was Scheduled for an elective laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
The Operating room equipment arrangement was adjusted as Mirror Image of Routine Laparoscopic cholecystectomy . The Monitor was placed on left side of the patient. The surgeon with the camera assistant were on right side of the patient and the first assistant was on left side of the patient. The abdomen was scrubbed and draped in the standard aseptic technique. The first infraumbilical 11 mm trocar introduced and pneumoperitoneum induced using the open technique. Three 5 mm trocars were placed, at the xiphisternum which was used for the surgeon’s left hand, at the left midclavicular line 2 cm below the costal margin which was used as working port for the surgeon’s right hand and at left anterior axillary line 5 cm from the costal margin which was used for retraction of the gallbladder fundus by the second assistant, respectively. Inspection of the abdominal cavity confirmed the presence of situs inversus totalis, with the liver and the gallbladder positioned in the left side . The Calot’s triangle was identified. The peritoneum overlying the gallbladder infundibulum was then incised and the cystic duct and cystic artery identified and circumferentially dissected, till the critical view was obtained. The cystic duct and cystic artery were then doubly clipped and divided, through the subcostal port using the right hand. The gallbladder was dissected from its peritoneal attachments using electrocautery and was retrieved using Endoscopic bag through the infraumbilical port. The total operative duration was 80 min, which was longer than the conventional laparoscopic cholecystectomy performed in patient without underlying anatomical variation. It can be attributed to the modification in the technique required to adjust to the mirror image anatomy.
The patient had an uneventful postoperative course and was discharged on postoperative day 1. Pathological examination of the gallbladder confirmed the presence of gallstones with chronic cholecystitis. No postoperative complications were noted during his follow up in the outpatient department.