A 66-year-old woman with a history of hypertension and parkinsonism was brought into the outpatient department of a tertiary care hospital. She had a surgical history of 6 procedures performed in the lower left extremity due to trauma-related fracture. Initial surgery was performed due to the appearance of inter- and sub-trochanteric extension fracture of the left femur as a result of trauma related to a fall at her residence. This surgery entailed the placement of proximal femur nailing (PFN) in August 2013 . 4-month post- operatively, it was determined that the PFN surgery had failed , and therefore, the patient underwent a second surgery for implant removal and fixation of a custom-made bipolar hemi-replacement hip . Post- operatively, the patient had a fall and incurred a peri-prosthetic fracture and bending of the implant, which was later treated with a cemented bipolar hip hemi-replacement with plating and cerclage wires . 6-month post- operatively, the implant got infected and culture showed Gram-positive cocci which proved to be very difficult to eliminate, and hence, the patient underwent surgery for the fourth time, which entailed implant removal and placement of an antibiotic cement spacer to ensure clearance of the infection .
Post-operatively, the patient required one debridement procedure and further intravenous antibiotic coverage for 2 months. After testing, blood culture was shown to be negative, and inflammatory markers including complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, and procalcitonin were in their normal physiological range. These tests allowed surgeons to carry out the sixth surgery which entailed long stem constrained cemented total hip arthroplasty . After this surgery, no signs of inflammation or infection were observed. The surgeon determined that the range of movement was satisfactory and the patient had found it comfortable to perform daily routine activities such as sitting on the chair and standing and walking without any support. However, post-operatively after 8 months, the patient started complaining of pain in the left thigh, there was apparent swelling in the mid- thigh region, and she was unable to bear her full weight on that leg. On clinical examination, a bony protuberance was observed in the middle of the left thigh, and the patient complained of painful movement. Radiographic examination showed cemented femoral stem and severe bone loss . A test for blood inflammatory markers was performed again and was shown to be normal. The patient was also advised above knee amputation or disarticulation of the hip joint.
At this time, the author of this paper determined that the patient required a seventh surgery and after careful deliberation determined that it would be a TFA. Although the surgical technique involving a direct lateral approach which is used to expose the entire femur and proximal tibia, utilizing a lateral parapatellar approach at the knee and the posterior approach at the hip has been demonstrated, the author preferred to use the dual approach which involves a medial parapatellar approach at the knee and a choice of extendable approach at the hip (, ) .
The patient was shifted to the intensive care unit post-operatively for cardiovascular, respiratory, neurological, and post-operative pain monitoring. The patient was kept in abduction with an abduction pillow, was allowed to remain in weight-bearing postures as tolerable, and was also allowed to walk with a long knee brace, a walker, and some assistance from the nurses. Postoperative radiographs showed no immediate complications such as fracture, dislocation, or an inappropriate alignment. 2 days post-operatively, the patient was asked to perform bed exercises with assisted knee bending of 20°-30°. 5 days post-operatively, the patient was mobilized with a long knee brace and walker. The patient progressed well and was discharged from the tertiary care hospital 9 days post-operatively. Regular follow-ups were planned for this patient. For evaluation of functional scores, the lower extremity function scale (LEFS) was used before and after the surgery . Pre-operatively, the patient was confined to a wheelchair and reported a LEFS score of 0, and after 12- month follow-up, the patient reported a LEFS score of 31.
Before surgery, it is essential to explain the complexity of the surgery to the patient, including alternative treatments and the risks involved, such as the need for revision of their total femur prosthesis. Patients should understand that this procedure will not return them to a normal status and that they may require an assistive device, such as a walker or crutch for the remainder of their lives. Before surgery, it is necessary to perform a pre-operative evaluation to medically optimize the patient for surgery. The patient positioned in semi- lateral position.
Begin the surgery with midline incision over the knee for knee arthroplasty. All tibial preparation according to constrained knee joint and long stem was done first. Another the skin incision over the previous scar which was taken for previous total hip replacement (THR).
During the dissection to reach the hip, a lot of fibrosis was observed around the hip joint. We were unable to observe any normal anatomy. With the help of electrocautery and careful dissection, we were able to completely expose the acetabular margin of the femoral component. All muscular and soft tissue attachments of the femur were cleared circumferentially with careful attention to the neurovascular structures. Now, meticulous dissection started from the second incision for the distal femur. All anterior, posterior, medial, and lateral attachments were cleared by subperiosteal dissection with special care to structures around the popliteal fossa. The proximal and distal incision was connected by making a tunnel around femur. The previous THR was constrained and acetabular cup radiologically and intraoperatively seemed to be stable, no loosening of implant was found so only femoral implant along with the head and liner was removed. After stem and distal femur removal, we found that the distal femur bone was only around 10 cm long and the long femoral stem was fixed by bone cement only.
The total length of implant was calculated by pre-operative X-rays and again confirmed intraoperatively by comparison with removed bone and implant. Trial was performed by passing the endoprosthesis through a tunnel. Acetabular liner was fixed for the constrained hip. Stability of both joints and length of endoprosthesis were checked. After trial, the tibial component was fixed with cement, the femoral head was reduced, liner ring was impacted for constrained hip, and then, the constrained knee joint with a rotating platform was fixed. Again stability of both joints and stretching of the neurovascular structure was assessed. After pulse lavage, abductor muscular tissue was attached to the hole given in the trochanteric area of the endoprosthesis; then, closure was performed with two drains.
Post-operative radiographs showed no immediate complications such as fracture, dislocation, and appropriate alignment. 2 days after surgery, the patient was given in bed exercises with assisted knee bending to 20°-30°. Moreover, 5 days after surgery, the patient was mobilized with long knee brace and walker with the help of nursing staff and physiotherapist. The patient progressed well and was discharged from hospital 9 days after surgery with proper instruction including those of physiotherapy exercises as well as general follow-up advice. 3 months postoperatively, the patient is clinically well and ambulating with the help of a walker.