A 63-year-old woman with a history of hepatolithiasis for more than six years was suffering from intermittent low back pain. She was followed up in a local hospital for a long time, though the treatment was not effective. The patient was reexamined in the local hospital 20 days ago. The upper abdominal enhanced CT revealed intrahepatic bile duct stones with extrahepatic bile duct dilatation, atrophy of the left lobe of the liver, cholestasis of the left lobe of the intrahepatic bile duct and no sign of portal hypertension . She was admitted to Sichuan Provincial People’s Hospital for further diagnosis and treatment. Clinical history documented hypertension in the patient. The patient also denied drug use, trauma, surgery, alcohol abuse, and blood transfusion and claimed no history of other systemic diseases, no recent travel history, no mushroom ingestion, no family history of similar hepatolithiasis or any liver disease.
No obvious abnormality was reflected in her laboratory findings during admission . Viral serological testing was reported negative for hepatitis A, hepatitis C, and HIV, and the patient was immune to hepatitis B. Serological screening tests for autoimmune diseases were also negative. Atrophy of the left lateral lobe of the liver, hepatolithiasis with dilatation of the bile duct, thickening of the bile duct wall was obtained from abdominal MRI . The patient was diagnosed with left hepatolithiasis, left extrahepatic lobe atrophy, and high-risk hypertension. The liver function reserve of the patient was determined to be Child–Pugh class A. The patient voluntarily gave consent and signed a written informed consent form for elective surgery. Under general anesthesia, the patient underwent successful laparoscopic left lateral hepatectomy and bile duct exploration. Histology reported dilated bile duct epithelial hyperplasia, infiltration of inflammatory cell infiltrate, necrosis of hepatocytes, formation of the lymphoid follicle, and local liver fibrosis . The patient received smooth postoperative treatment.
The patient’s liver function significantly deteriorated on the second day after the operation , coagulation function test showed PT 38.7 s (9.8–12.1 s), activated partial thromboplastin time 42.8 s (23.3–32.5 s) and D-dimmer 35.33 mg/L, indicating acute liver injury. Coagulation dysfunction developed following operation was managed with administration of 3 units of Fresh-frozen plasma (FFP) to supplement coagulation factors. However, the patient’s clinical condition progressively worsened at POD4, and the patient suddenly became manic, gibberish, and subsequently confused. Physical examination revealed severe icterus of the sclera and skin, disturbances in consciousness in the patient, and Babinski’s sign was positive in the right limb. There was continuous regression in the patient’s clotting function and liver biochemistry ; Additional blood tests showed lactate 5.9 mmol/L (0.5–1.7 mmol/L), blood ammonia 328.9umol/L(18-72umol/L), PH 7.452, PO2 104.2mmhg, PCO2 24.2mmhg, HCO3− 20.4 mmol/l, base excess -2.9 mmol/l, K+ 2.6 mmol/L. Consequently, the patient was admitted to the Intensive care unit (ICU) with the diagnosis of ALF and grade II liver encephalopathy. Symptomatic treatment included prophylactic antimicrobial therapy, FFP, human serum albumin, platelet transfusion, and nutritional liver support. For the management of hyperammonemia and hypokalemia, lactose enemas in combination with intravenous infusion of potassium chloride and a mixture of aspartic acid, ornithine, and arginine were administered.
To identify the etiology of ALF, detailed medical history of the patient was recorded by the patient and her family, whereby they admitted that the patient had taken the GS (Tusanqi) 2–3 g every 24 h for one and a half years. A liver biopsy was conducted for diagnosis. CD34 immunostaining of liver biopsy (200 ×) revealed that positive CD34 was present in the subendothelial space of central veins and perivenular zones . Hematoxylin–eosin staining of liver biopsy (200 ×) results showed highly dilated hepatic sinusoid, disappeared hepatic plate atrophy and some portal inflammatory . Further, the central venous lumen was irregular and became smaller, the branches of which were fibrosis and occlusion, and its wall was thickened . Biopsy results, laboratory findings, and clinical course confirmed the diagnosis of DILI.
Five days after the operation, an emergency contrast-enhanced ultrasonography confirmed a slight delay in the portal vein perfusion phase, absence of hepatic artery-portal vein fistula, and absence of thrombosis in the portal vein . Broadly heterogeneous hypo-attenuating areas observed by abdominal CT indicated massive liver necrosis . The patient was in a shallow coma. The patient underwent one session of Double plasma molecular absorb system treatment, an ALSS, combined with symptomatic treatment. Following therapy, significant improvement was noted in her clinical signs and symptoms, which was substantiated by the laboratory parameters , and follow-up CT also demonstrated that the degree of liver injury was greatly alleviated, the heterogeneous hypoattenuating areas disappeared, and liver volume also recovered . Finally, in the third week post operation, the patient got discharged from the hospital and followed up at the outpatient clinic. The patient was in a generally good condition, and no recurrence of DILI and development of liver cirrhosis was reported as of the last follow-up visit at two years after the discharge.