A 71-year-old hispanic man with severe depression, type II diabetes mellitus complicated by gastroparesis and peripheral neuropathy, as well as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, presented to the hospital with diffuse weakness, inattentiveness, and suicidal ideation. On admission, he described feeling unwell for the prior 3 weeks and admitted to daily consumption of more than 4 gal (> 15 L) of bottled water in addition to sugar-sweetened beverages (primarily soda). As a result of nausea, he stopped eating solid food 4–5 days prior to admission and also discontinued his home medications including metformin, glargine and lispro insulin, lisinopril, amlodipine, metoclopramide, pantoprazole, and trazodone. There was no family history of hyponatremia.
On physical examination, vital signs were notable for a temperature of 36.4 °C, heart rate of 94 beats/minute, blood pressure of 158/103 mmHg, respiratory rate of 18 breaths/minute, and a peripheral capillary oxygen saturation of 97% on room air. He was noted to be a well-developed man with truncal obesity. He exhibited a flat affect and had frequent hiccups. His cardiac examination was unremarkable; lung auscultation revealed decreased basilar inspiratory breath sounds and expiratory wheezing without a prolonged expiratory phase; neurological examination was unremarkable; axillary membranes were moist, capillary refill, skin turgor, and tearing were normal; his extremities were warm and well-perfused with normal pulses but without pretibial edema.
Initial laboratory investigations including serum , urine, and endocrine studies were most striking for a low serum sodium concentration (Na) of 120 mEq/L associated with a serum osmolality of 263 mOsm/kg, a urine osmolality of 155 mOsm/L, and a urine sodium of 38 mEq/L. A chest radiograph, electrocardiogram (showing normal sinus rhythm a rate of 86 BPM) and computerized tomography (CT) study of the brain were unremarkable. Screening tests for thyroid and adrenal disorders were unremarkable.
Review of his early admission data revealed that the patient’s blood pressure was elevated (that is, not reduced as in patients with hemodynamically significant hypovolemia) and his heart rate remained below 100 bpm. The elevated blood pressure was associated with recent discontinuation of home antihypertensive medications due to nausea. His volume examination remained normal during the entire hospitalization and his chest radiographs showed no evidence of hypervolemia. His urine output consistently measured between 1.5 and 3.2 L per day. The admission urine sodium of 38 mEq/L did not suggest high renal sodium avidity.
Due to his suicidal ideation and overt polydipsia, he was placed under direct, continuous supervision and fluid restriction was strictly enforced for the first 24 hours of admission. His Na improved but failed to normalize . As his serum sodium concentration rose, the hiccups, altered sensorium, and anorexia improved. Although a minimally elevated osmolal gap (12 mOsm/kg) was detected on admission, the patient denied exposure to commonly encountered intoxicants (for example, ethanol, methanol, or ethylene glycol). Since the serum osmolality was not obtained until 2 hours after admission, we assumed that the unexpected osmolal gap measurement reflected a serum sodium concentration that had modestly increased above the initial value of 120 mEq/L (shown below).
Over the next 2 days, direct supervision was withdrawn, and fluid restriction was no longer reinforced. His serum sodium concentration again fell to 119 mEq/L and was associated with recurrent hiccups and new onset confusion. With worsening hyponatremia and hypo-osmolality, the patient’s urine osmolality fell to 88 mOsm/kg (that is, maximally dilute), indicating an intact urinary dilution system. To partially correct symptomatic hyponatremia, the patient received an intravenous bolus of 100 mL of 3% hypertonic saline over 1 hour, followed by 500 mL over the next 8 hours as calculated from the Androgue–Madias formula . After his serum sodium concentration reached 126 mEq/L, both his confusion and hiccups abated, yet hyponatremia and hypo-osmolality persisted. The term “osmostat” refers to the regulatory neuronal osmoreceptor cells in the anterior hypothalamus that detect changes in blood osmolality, resulting in the either suppression or activation of antidiuretic hormone (ADH) release from neurosecretory cells. A reset osmostat (RO) is defined by an altered threshold for ADH release (either reduced or increased) associated with a serum sodium concentration that is persistently abnormal (also termed “chronic dysnatremia”). This definition perfectly fit our patient’s laboratory values.