A 25-year-old male caucasian patient presented with a 1-week history of left-sided weakness, preceded by general fatigue and progressive forgetfulness in the previous two months. His medical history comprised a kidney transplantation 12 years earlier for end-stage renal failure due to focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis, a longstanding well-controlled hypertension (RR 130/85 mmHg in the previous months), mild pancytopenia with a previous diagnosis of a hypoplastic bone marrow with presumed toxic cause. At admission, his therapy included cyclosporine A 35 mg b.i.d, prednisolone 7.5 mg, valsartan 160 mg b.i.d and 40 μg darbepoetin alfa every two weeks. Arterial blood pressure at admission was 129/90 mmHg and body temperature was normal. The strength of the left-sided limbs was mildly decreased (4+/5). Initially, leucocytopenia and mild thrombopenia, a haemoglobin concentration of 11 g/dl and normal C-reactive protein were present . The serum creatinine concentration was 156 μmol/l (equaling an eGFR of 47 ml/min) which was in line with values of the preceding years. Actual and previous values for lactate dehydrogenase were normal (238 U/l).
A cranial MRI showed right-sided temporo-parietal and thalamic lesions . Correspondingly, MR angiography revealed a missing flow signal of the right middle cerebral artery . Cardiac thromboembolism was excluded by transesophageal echocardiography. By Doppler ultrasonography and MR angiography, arterial occlusive disease, vasculitis and aneurysms of the extracranial brain-supplying arteries and of the aorta were excluded. Vasculitits was further excluded by negative results for anti-nuclear antibodies, ANCA, anti-mitochondrial antibodies, anti-cardiolipin antibodies, cryoglobulins/HCV and HIV status. Acetyl salicylic acid was prescribed and the patient was discharged.
Four weeks later he was admitted again because of listlessness and mutism. At this admission leucopenia had progressed to 0.7 thousand/μl, the haemoglobin concentration was 11.1 g/dl and the thrombocyte count 200 thousand/μl. The serum creatinine concentration was 161 μmol/l and the cyclosporine A trough level (measured by mass spectrometry; LC-MS/MS) was below the detection limit (15 μg/l) . A bone marrow examination revealed hypoplasia with dysmature haematopoiesis. An electroencephalogram displayed left-sided fronto-temporal intermittent rhythmic delta-activity without epileptiform discharges. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was normal including virology (CMV, HSV, VZV, EBV, enterovirus and JCV). Moreover, repeatedly negative results of CRP and normal body temperature argued against an infection.
At the 5th day, he was discovered having bilateral blindness accompanied by moderate to severe loss of conscious (Glascow coma scale of 8) within the next two days. At the onset of these symptoms cyclosporine A was paused. A follow-up cranial MRI revealed new ischemic lesions of the left-sided thalamus and both occipital regions. Brain biopsy was decided and the histology showed extensive necrosis and arteriolar hyalinosis. No findings of vasculitis, inflammatory, infectious (negative tests for CMV, HSV, VZV, EBV and JCV) or neoplastic processes were detected. In the next two days the patient increasingly developed severe hypertension with systolic values above 220 mmHg. Three days after the brain biopsy thrombocyte count rapidly declined to 25 thousand/μl. Schistocytes remained negative and ADAMTS-13 activity and C3c, C4 and CH50 complement titers were normal but lactate dehydrogenase increased to 550 U/l. A cranial CT-scan demonstrated bilateral infarct lesions in the posterior circulation territory. The patient was transferred for anti-hypertensive treatment to the ICU, where he died after developing further cerebral infarctions of the brain stem. Post-mortem examination revealed disseminated thrombotic microangiopathy in the brain, the lungs and the renal allograft .