A 34-year-old, para 1, Korean woman underwent emergent cesarean section at 34 weeks of gestation in the Korea University Medical Center Anam Hospital in March 2012 because of preterm premature rupture of the membrane and breech presentation. Her body mass index (BMI) was 22.1 kg/m2. She was diagnosed with a uterus didelphys and vaginal septum but had no other medical or surgical history. A transverse suprapubic (Pfannenstiel) incision was performed during the cesarean section. A 2.42-kg male baby was delivered, without perioperative complications. After closure of the subcutaneous layer, the skin was closed with subcuticular running sutures by using a 3-0 nonabsorbable monofilament nylon suture (AILEE Inc., Busan, South Korea). The distal part of that string was snapped during the wound dressing on postoperative day 4, and the resident ordered the discharge of the patient on the next day without removal of the remaining string. Five months after the patient was discharged, she presented to the outpatient clinic with a fine, blue object visible on the left lower quadrant of her abdomen. A 10-cm thread-like foreign body showed through her skin. It was situated transversely; the medial end was located approximately 5 cm horizontally from the scar of the previous cesarean section, and the lateral end reached the upper lateral margin of the anterior superior iliac spine . No pain or any other sign of inflammation was observed around the region. We discovered that the foreign body was the nonabsorbable suture material that had not been removed completely during the hospital stay. We thought that the remnant suture material had migrated laterally approximately 15 cm in dermis layer during the previous 5 months without any symptoms. Under local anesthesia with lidocaine, the material was removed easily through a 2-mm incision (Additional file : Video 1). The nylon suture material was confirmed, without the knot portion . The patient was discharged without any complications.