A 70-year-old man was transferred for out-of-hospital cardiopulmonary arrest due to ventricular fibrillation and received an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) 8 years ago. He was referred for palpitation to our hospital with a VT of left bundle branch block (LBBB) configuration and inferior axis deviation with a heart rate of 115 b.p.m., which was below the VT zone of the ICD. The VT was recurrent, so he had 1st radiofrequency catheter ablation (RFCA). Two types of VTs with right bundle branch block (RBBB) and LBBB morphologies originating from the LV summit were recognized (; VT1 and VT2). The cycle length of two VTs was ∼500 ms. The VT1 was terminated with RFCA at the left coronary cusp (LCC). However, 9 months later, the VT recurred, so he had 2nd RFCA. The cycle length of the VT was 640 ms with some changes of the LBBB morphology (VT3) .
Two decapolar catheters were positioned in the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) and in the His bundle-Right ventricular apex (RVA), respectively. Another decapolar catheter with an inner lumen was inserted from the internal jugular vein and placed in the coronary sinus, and a 2 Fr micro-catheter was positioned in the anterior intraventricular vein (AIV) through the lumen. The electrograms in the AIV catheter showed fragmentation (Fg) that preceded the QRS onset by 47 and 30 ms during the VT3 and VT2 ( and ). Pacing from the RVA entrained these two VTs with constant and progressive fusion . During the entrainment pacing with a stimulus interval of 560 ms, the fragmented potentials in the AIV catheter were activated orthodromically and those in the His bundle were activated antidromically . During the VT2, a far field potential, which appeared to be intramural potential, was recorded 138 ms later than a near field potential in distal electrodes of the RVOT , whereas during the VT3, the sequence of these potentials was reversed with a conduction time of 110 ms between two potentials , indicating intramural VT substrate. Moreover, a similar potential was observed during the VT1 in the distal electrodes of a catheter placed in the LCC at the 1st session . These observations indicated the two VTs originated from the LV summit with a re-entrant mechanism, the exit of which was the right ventricle for VT2 and left ventricle for VT3.
Radiofrequency catheter ablation was neither effective at the LV endocardium just below the aortic sinus cusp, where the electrogram occurred 35 ms earlier from the onset of QRS complex during the VT3 (, left), nor at the RVOT, where a good pace-map of the VT2 was obtained (not showed). So, an irrigated ablation catheter was inserted to the AIV, where the electrogram preceded the onset of QRS by 46 ms (, right). At this site, RFCA with an energy of 25 W terminated the VT3. However, the VT3 was still inducible. We thus applied bipolar radiofrequency ablation between the LV endocardium and AIV. We used the T-cable to create a bipolar radiofrequency ablation circuit using the standard unipolar ablation equipment: A 3.5 mm tip irrigated catheter (FlexAbility™, SE, Abbott) in the LV endocardium that was connected to the ground/impedance port, and another 3.5 mm tip irrigated catheter (ThermoCool SmartTouch, Biosense-Webster, CA, USA) in AIV, which was connected to the active/ablation port. The impedance in the AIV catheter was high. Therefore, we raised the upper limit up to 250 Ω and increased an irrigation flow rate (from 15/min to 28 mL/min). We then delivered an initial energy of 15 W and gradually increased it up to 25 W with careful monitoring in case of sudden impedance drop. Decrease in the impedance during the energy delivery for 75 s was 25 Ω . After three bipolar RF applications, the VTs became non-inducible.