A 16-year old girl from a remote village in Sri Lanka is described.
She was referred from the Paediatric Cardiology Unit to the University Unit of Lady Ridgeway Hospital for Children (LRH) for further evaluation of jaundice. She was the only child born to non consanguineous healthy parents and was well till 14 years of age, when she sought medical advice from the local hospital for exertional dyspnoea. At presentation to the local hospital she was detected to have central cyanosis and clubbing but otherwise clinically normal. Her haemoglobin was 18 g/dl and the packed cell volume was 54%. Her platelet count was 73 × 109/l and SpO2 82%. The echocardiogramme revealed a pulmonary arteriovenous malformation (AVM). The ultra sound scan (USS) of the abdomen showed a normal liver and no splenomegaly.
She was referred to the cardiology unit of LRH for further evaluation. At LRH contrast echocardiogramme was performed which showed evidence of pulmonary arteriovenous fistula. The finding at cardiac catheterization was compatible with bilateral diffuse pulmonary AVMs. Due to the diffuse nature of the pulmonary AVM she was managed conservatively.
Two years later, at the age of 16 years she developed spontaneous recurrent epistaxis. She was also noted to have jaundice. Examination revealed deep jaundice, plethora, central cyanosis and clubbing. There were no other peripheral stigmata of chronic liver disease. She had coarse facial appearance. There was no cutaneous telangiectasia. Abdominal examination revealed a firm hepatomegaly of two cm, but no splenomegaly or ascites. Rest of the abdominal examination was normal. Cardiovascular system examination revealed a systolic murmur best heard over the pulmonary area. Blood pressure was normal. Rest of the examination including respiratory system and central nervous systems were clinically normal. Ultra sound scan examination of abdomen at sixteen years revealed heterogeneous linear (Liver) echo texture, increased peri portal echogenicity with splenomegaly and varices compatible with chronic liver disease and early portal hypertension. A focal lesion was seen in segment Vl of the liver. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a dilated splenic vein draining separately through the diaphragmatic hiatus between the inferior vena cava and the aorta possibly into the superior vena cava through the azygous vein. She continued to be managed conservatively.
At nineteen years of age she remained jaundiced. There were telangiectases over the oral mucosa and conjunctiva. Eye referral revealed telangiectatic vessels in the right optic disc. Hepatomegaly was unchanged.
She had attained menarche at 16 year of age but had amenorrhea for several years, and now has her menstrual periods infrequently. Although she has a masculine habitus her secondary sexual characteristics were feminine. There was no clitoromegaly. Endocrinological evaluation was done to investigate for her masculine built and irregular menstruation. There was no family history suggestive of polycystic ovarian syndrome. At 19 years of age, she had an elevated serum testosterone level of 15.97 nmol/L (normal adult female range 0.52–2.43), but serum DHEAS (dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate) level were low (1.0 μmol/L, normal range 1.7–13.4). Serum 17 OHP, FSH, LH and serum estradiol levels were normal. She also had marginally low free T4, with normal TSH. USS abdomen repeated at 19 years of age was compatible with chronic liver disease with early portal hypertension. She had normal uterus and normal ovaries with no evidence of poly cystic ovaries.
MRI abdomen showed changes of chronic parenchymal liver disease with multiple nodules in both lobes of the liver. The nodules were hyperplastic with low T2 signal intensity. A 47 × 45 mm size nodule was seen in the right lobe of the liver. A liver biopsy was not done due to the risk of bleeding in the presence of multiple AVMs. MRI brain done to identify any cerebral vascular malformation was normal.
A diagnosis of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (Osler–Weber–Rendu syndrome) was made based on the presence of three out of four Curacao criteria . The three criteria she fulfilled were recurrent spontaneous epistaxis, visceral (pulmonary) arterio venous malformation and telangiectasia in the oral mucosa . The patient along with the family was counselled regarding the diagnosis and the prognosis.