A 64-year-old female patient was admitted with the complaints of pain in the right upper quadrant and the epigastric region. The patient's history revealed an abdominal pain for 24 hours with an increasing severity, as well as nausea and vomiting. Physical examination suggested peritoneal irritation with a systolic blood pressure of 100/70 mmHg, pulse rate of 140 bpm, and body temperature of 38.5°C. Laboratory test results showed a leukocyte count of 17,000/mm3 (4000–10,000/mm3). Serum chemistry tests and electrolyte measurements did not indicate any pathology related to acute abdomen. In addition, CA19-9, CEA, CA-125, and AFP tumor biomarkers were normal. The air under diaphragm demonstrated was by posteroanterior X-ray, one of the radiographic diagnostic tools and also abdominal ultrasonography demonstrated intra-abdominal reactionary fluid along with a heterogeneous mass localized in the falciform ligament. Abdominal computed tomography showed a mass lesion originating from the gallbladder extending to the periportal region and surrounding the falciform ligament without opaque-medium enhancement . Based on these findings, the patient was immediately scheduled for laparotomy with the preliminary diagnoses of generalized peritonitis secondary to duodenal ulcer perforation or mesenchymal tumor perforation. Exploratory laparotomy revealed a necrotic mass of the falciform ligament with 1000cc reactionary fluid in the abdomen. The duodenum and other intestinal segments were normal. Intra-abdominal solid organs and gallbladder were also found to be normal. No other pathology responsible for falciform ligament necrosis was observed. The falciform ligament was resected. The histopathological examination of surgical specimens revealed a 10 × 13 × 4 cm falciform ligament necrosis with hemorrhagic regions, fibrin, and massive polymorphonuclear infiltration . The postoperative period was uneventful. A patient was discharged on the seventh postoperative day and also after 18-month follow-up, no complaints were found out.