A 70-year-old Hispanic female was brought to the emergency department after a syncopal episode, following 2 days of progressive weakness, polyuria, and elevated blood glucose. Syncope occurred upon standing and was witnessed by her family. The patient regained consciousness immediately. She denied fever, chills, sore throat, cough, chest pain, or dyspnoea. Initial blood pressure was 84/55 mmHg, pulse 72 b.p.m., oxygen saturation 88% on room air, respiratory rate 16/min, and temperature 36.6°C. Physical exam was unremarkable, including no jugular venous distension (JVD), normal heart and lung sounds, and no peripheral oedema.
The patient had a history of hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, diabetes, and supraventricular tachycardia treated successfully with ablation. She denied recent travel or contact with a known COVID-19 patient.
Blood pressure and oxygenation improved rapidly with intravenous fluids and supplemental oxygen. She was admitted to telemetry and treated with hydration, insulin, antibiotics, and prophylactic dose anticoagulation. Droplet precautions and contact isolation were ordered for suspected COVID-19 infection.
The differential diagnosis included hypovolaemia due to diabetic ketoacidosis and sepsis. Syncope and hypoxaemia in a patient with a normal lung exam raised the suspicion for acute PE. Other causes of syncope and transient hypotension such as myocardial infarction, arrhythmia, and heart failure were also considered. Underlying COVID-19 was also suspected, given it was the peak of the COVID-19 pandemic in New York City (NYC), when the clinical behaviour of the virus was still mostly unknown.
Chest X-ray and head computed tomography were unremarkable. Electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm at 80 b.p.m. with an S1, Q3, T3 pattern, prolonged QTc, and T-wave inversions across the precordium . Initial laboratory testing revealed hyperglycaemia (580 mg/dL), elevated anion gap, serum creatinine (1.6 mg/dL), lactate (7.5 mml/L), D-dimer (2,153 ng/mL), C-reactive protein (8.6 mg/L), and pro-BNP (14 042 pg/mL). INR was 1.2. Serial troponin T-tests were negative. Urine was positive for ketones and white cells. Initial nasopharyngeal swab for COVID-19 was negative. Other findings are presented in .
Bedside echocardiogram revealed a moderately dilated right ventricle with mild hypokinesis, without thrombus, and elevated right ventricular systolic pressure (67 mmHg). Patient remained comfortable and haemodynamically stable with a saturation of 98% on 3 L of oxygen. The next morning dyspnoea and desaturation ensued (93% on 3 L). Pulse was 80 b.p.m. and blood pressure 132/78 mmHg. Computed tomography pulmonary angiogram showed a saddle PE and bilateral filling defects involving all lobes with notable thrombus in the right atrium extending into the right ventricle . Repeat echo revealed a highly mobile CIT (, Video 1). Repeat nasopharyngeal swab for COVID-19 was positive.
Therapeutic dose anticoagulation with intravenous heparin (5000 unit bolus followed by 1260 units per hour) was started and the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU). She was evaluated by the multidisciplinary institutional Pulmonary Embolism Response Team (PERT) and given concurrent illness and comorbidities, percutaneous aspiration thrombectomy with adjunctive intra-pulmonary and catheter-directed thrombolysis was recommended. Foregoing general anaesthesia which has known risks in this setting, an AngioVac device (Angiodynamics, Latham, NY, USA) was advanced on suction from a femoral venous approach. The patient was given a total of 13 000 units of heparin intravenously to achieve an activated clotting time above 300. The patient decompensated after initial successful aspiration. Despite further rescue thrombectomy with the Inari FlowTriever device (Inari Medical, Irvine, CA, USA) and administration of intra-pulmonary and systemic thrombolysis the patient arrested and eventually died.