Our patient was an 86-year-old Caucasian male, without relevant previous medical history, who was diagnosed in October 2019 with acute myeloblastic leukemia secondary to myelodysplastic syndrome by refractory anemia with excess of blasts type-II (RAEB-II). He was treated with monthly cycles of decitabine and venetoclax with interruptions due to complications of lymph node tuberculosis and COVID-19 infection. In March 2022, he was admitted to hematology for febrile neutropenia associated with methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia without apparent focus. Subsequently, nephrology consultation was requested for non-oliguric acute kidney injury (Cr 3.56 mg/dL and urea 148 mg/dL), uncontrolled arterial hypertension (180/90 mm Hg), progressive edema with nephrotic proteinuria (3.7 g/24 h), and micro-hematuria (25 red blood cell per high power field with dysmorphic cells). The physical examination revealed a respiratory rate of 24 breaths/min, an oxygen saturation of 96% while breathing ambient air, pulmonary rales, peripheral pitting edema 3+, and purpura skin associated with burning pain in the lower limbs (skin biopsy not performed). There was no lymph node involvement, splenomegaly, arthralgia, bone pain, or Raynaud´s phenomenon. Complementary tests showed the following: hemoglobin of 9 g/dL, severe thrombocytopenia (43 × 109 L), LDH 385 U/I, normal haptoglobin, reticulocytes 2.53%, blood smear without schistocytes, negative Coombs test, negative RF, and normal ADAMTS-13. The rest of the study showed hypoalbuminemia (2.3 g/dL) without hypercholesterolemia. The 24-h urine protein excretion was 3.7 g with a spot urine protein-to-creatinine ratio and urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio of 4,300 and 3,300 mg/g, respectively. Serum protein electrophoresis with immunofixation (IFE) revealed a polyclonal distribution with hypergammaglobulinemia IgG (1,810 mg/dL) and IgA (406 mg/dL). Urine IFE was negative to monoclonal bands. Serum free light chain kappa (FLCκ) and lambda (FLCλ) were 47.2 mg/dL and 36.1 mg/L, respectively, with kappa/lambda free light chain ratio of 1.31. Complement 3 (C3) was 10.3 (90–180 mg/dL), and complement 4 (C4) was 18.9 (10–40 mg/dL). Other laboratory results included negative antinuclear antibody, negative antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, and negative serum CGs in up to 4 studies. Serology was negative human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and HCV. The rest of laboratory test results are shown in . Abdominal sonography revealed normal-sized kidneys.
A renal biopsy was performed, and 24 glomeruli were examined under LM, 1 of which (4%) was globally sclerotic. The rest showed mesangial expansion, associated with endocapillary and mesangial proliferation with the presence of double contours in the methenamine silver staining (a–d). Focally, the glomerular capillary lumens were occupied by large intraluminal PAS-positive material without platelet aggregates (CD61-negative), compatible with pseudothrombi (a–c). A mild degree of interstitial collagen fibrosis (20%) and tubular atrophy, accompanied by minimal inflammatory infiltrate, predominantly lymphoid without atypia, with patchy distribution and nonspecific histological appearance, was observed. Congo red and thioflavin stainings were negative. The immunohistochemistry technique for DNAJB9 was negative. The frozen tissue immunofluorescence (IF-F) was positive for IgA (3+), IgG (1+), C3 (3+), C4d (3+), lambda (3+), and kappa (3+) light chains without restriction, localized segmentally to the capillary walls with more intense staining in pseudothrombi (a, b). IF-F was negative for IgM, C1q, and fibrinogen. IgG subtyping was not performed. The IF on pronase-digested paraffin-embedded sections showed similar results to that obtained by IF-F. EM showed amorphous subendothelial and mesangial deposits and organized electrodense deposits within capillary loops (pseudothrombi) with microtubular substructure measuring 20–40 nm in thickness (c, d). These findings are compatible with a membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (MPGN) pattern of injury, with intravascular microtubular atypical IgA-dominant immune deposits with features consistent with CGs.
In a bone marrow biopsy specimen, the proportion of plasma cells was 1.1%, therefore excluding plasma cell myeloma and monoclonal gammopathy of unknown significance. Based on the characteristic LM, IF, and EM findings of the renal biopsy and the clinical characteristics of the patient, seronegative CryoGN with atypical IgA-dominant deposits (IgA-IgG MC) associated with staphylococcal bacteremia was suspected. However, Staphylococcus infection-associated glomerulonephritis (SAGN) with cryoglobulinemic features was considered in the differential diagnosis. Antibiotic treatment was continued according to antibiogram, and later, chemotherapy for acute myeloblastic leukemia was initiated. The patient evolved with a progressive decline of kidney function and poor hematological response despite the established treatment, and hemodialysis was initiated. The patient died 9 months later, due to extrarenal infectious causes.