A 48-year old woman (weight 52 kg, height 152 cm, ASA II) was admitted in Sept 18th 2016 because of a ground glass opacity (GGO) which had been detected in the right lung 2 years ago. She had her left pneumonectomy through uniportal VATS owing to the left upper lobe adenocarcinoma invasive to the left main bronchus in Mar 2014. Her pre-operative diagnoses were GGO in the right upper lobe, suspect for malignancy and left postpneumonectomy . No abnormal findings were detected among other tests, and some of the important figures in the arterial blood gas test were showed as follows: pH 7.44, PaCO2 37 mmHg, PaO2 84 mmHg, SaO2 97.7%. Her pulmonary function test showed FEV1 46.9%, FEV1/FVC 83.3%, and her predicted postoperative FEV1% would be close to 44.7%. Although other tests of evaluating cardiopulmonary reserve function and lung parenchymal function were not performed, her regular 3-floor climbing activity was not compromised. The operation was scheduled as right anterior segmentectomy through uniportal VATS under general anesthesia. Routine monitoring was applied and the first data were recorded as follows: body temperature 36.7 °C, blood pressure 123/70 mmHg, heart rate 86/min and Sp02 98% when the patient was placed in a supine position in the operation room. After the insertion of an 18-gauge intravenous cannula and the right internal jugular vein catheter, intravenous induction was carried out with an injection of midazolam 0.03 mg/kg, sufentanil 0.6 μg/kg, propofol 1 mg/kg, and rocuronium 0.8 mg/kg. Intubation preparation: the patient was scheduled to have the right anterior segmentectomy through VATS after the left pneumonectomy, which entailed us to make a good balance between ventilation and collapse on the right lung only, to make good use of ventilation in the lower and middle lobes, and to produce an effective collapse in the upper lobar. After a prudent study of the following parameters, the diameter of the narrowest part of the tracheal is 11.9 mm, the length of right upper lobe bronchus is 6.2 mm, the angle of the right main bronchus and right upper lobe bronchus is close to 90 degree, the diameter of the bronchus intermedius is 8.8 mm, and the length of bronchus intermedius is about 15 mm, a 32 Fr left-sided DLT was chosen and adapted . Permission was granted by our hospital ethical committee to adapt the DLTs. The cutting edge of the tube should be smooth and clean, only in this way can we make sure that it won’t do any harm to the airways. One cut (cut just for once) would be best in adapting. Whether the cutting edge is qualified or not can be detected by our sensitive finger tips. And this technique has been proved safe from our experience in tracheal and bronchial operations. The 32Fr left-sided DLTs have been used among short women for left thoracic operations in our facility, and its external diameter is about 10.7 mm, the bronchial internal diameter is about 3.5 mm. But it’s our first time to insert the left-sided DLT to the right for the right lung surgery. As we can see from Fig. , the mediastinum has shifted to the left, the intubation should be gentle and carried out by an experienced anesthesiologist in case of any possible injury or even perforation to the former carina. After induction, we performed a FOB (3.0 mm diameter) guided endobronchial intubation with the bronchial cuff into the right bronchus intermedius, and the tracheal cuff’s orifice up against the upper bronchial port , in this way, the ventilation of the dependent right middle and lower lobes and the collapse of the upper lobar were guaranteed , thus an appropriate balance between surgical field and oxygenation was achieved, and the blood and sputum from the upper lobe bronchial port can be sucked out. An automatic infusion of propofol and sufentanil combined with manual administration of rocuronium maintained the anesthesia for the operation. And a lung protective mechanical ventilation strategy was taken, positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) 5 cmH2O, tidal volume (Vt) 4–6 ml/kg, frequency 15–18/min. In the meantime, end tidal CO2 and arterial blood gas analysis were recorded to adjust ventilation. The lung recruitment, air leak test and sputum suction went well throughout the operation and the surgery was completed as planned. The patient recovered well after the surgery, so she was extubated in the operation room and sent to the postanesthesia care unit (PACU) for transition, where a routine oxygen supplementation was applied. Oxygenation, ventilation, and circulation were all strictly monitored and no adverse events were recorded in the PACU. She recovered better on the next day follow-up and was discharged from the hospital 6 days later. The pathological diagnosis was invasive adenocarcinoma.