A 20-year-old black African male from Sudan presented to Omdurman teaching hospital Emergency department complaining of acute onset colicky abdominal pain the patient passed flatus and feces 48 h prior to his presentation. also had vomiting and abdominal distension. He had a clear medical background with no history of operation before. After the initial assessment positive findings were abdominal distension, hyper-resonance in percussion, and exacerbated bowel sound, all blood lab results were normal. Management was started at the emergency department with a nasogastric tube and urinary catheter insertion. Intravenous fluids, broad-spectrum antibiotics. Abdominal X-ray showed multiple air-fluid levels and dilated loops of the bowel. Chest X-ray did not show air under the diaphragm.An emergency computed tomography (CT) scan was obtained which demonstrated dilated caecum was located in the left upper quadrant and small-bowel volvulus . There were also a few dilated loops of small bowel in the upper abdomen. The decision was made to emergency laparotomy.
The findings of the operation included dilated small bowel in the upper abdomen and a dilated caecum found on the left side of the abdomen, DJ flexure on the right side . There was also necrosis of 155 cm of the small bowel just 56 cm from DJ flexure with one degree of twisting. Loops of small bowel occupying the right paracolic gutter and the right iliac fossa. There were fibrous bands over the distal part of the duodenum, on the right side of the abdomen, confirming midgut malrotation. The twisted necrotic small bowel was resected and anastomosis was performed, the congenital band was divided, the mesentery was broadened and an appendectomy was carried out with correction of the anatomical malrotation. The operation was carried out by a consultant and senior registrars who were exposed to malrotation surgery during the pediatrics surgery shift.
The patient had an uneventful postoperative recovery. He was followed up one month later in the outpatient department and he had no complaints and returned to his normal baseline.