A 10-year-old boy presented to our tertiary children hospital with a history of nausea, vomiting, and tea-color urine, since 1 day before admission. His parents were not relatives. His father was suffering from insulin dependent diabetes mellitus. The patient was icteric and had an ill looking appearance, with not toxic facial traits. Clinical examination revealed body temperature 37°C, blood pressure 100/60 mmHg, heart rate 100 beats/min and respiratory rate 20/min. The spleen was not palpable, although mild hepatomegaly was detected. Findings in favor of chronic liver disease, such as spider angioma, caput medusa, palmar erythema and ascites were absent in abdominal examination. Laboratory investigations revealed mild anemia, abnormal coagulation profile, direct hyperbilirubinemia and liver enzymes and also, reversed albumin globulin ratio (albumin = 3 g/dL and globulin = 4.9 g/dL). Laboratory investigations are summarized in . Serologic testing for viral hepatitis A virus, hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus and herpes simplex virus were negative. An advanced laboratory investigation, including antinuclear antibody and other autoantibodies, serum ceruloplasmin, serum copper, and 24-hour urine copper was performed. Results were summarized in . There was no specific key point in his past medical history or his familial history that would guide our investigation for a specific diagnosis. Therefore, we evaluated him for WD, AIH and viral hepatitis, in primary investigation.
Liver span was about 120 mm, on ultrasonography, with no space-occupying lesion and homogenous echo pattern parenchyma. Spleen size was in the upper limit of normal, with normal parenchyma. Hydrops of gallbladder was seen. In slit-lamp examination by ophthalmologist, the Kayser-Fleischer ring was seen in upper and lower parts of cornea. Finally, liver biopsy was performed and histopathologic studies revealed fibrous bands encircling clusters of hepatocytes and regenerative nodules. Moderate to severe lymphocyte infiltrations and mild infiltration of eosinophil and neutrophils resulted in interface hepatitis. Binuclear and multi-nuclear hepatocytes were seen, with feathery degeneration in several cells. In specific staining of tissue, no finding in favor of copper rich cells was seen. Histochemical analysis with rhodamine and orcein was negative ( and ). However, the amount of copper in dry liver tissue was about 20 times the upper limit of normal. Scoring system for this patient was done and the score of 7 was reached for him, in both of WD and AIH scoring systems [according to the international scoring system, the score ≥ 7 are diagnostic for AIH and the score > 4 is considered positive for WD (, )].
By considering concomitant WD and AIH, we started oral prednisolone (1 mg/Kg/day) and azathioprine (1 mg/kg) and d-penicillamine for the patient, and an acceptable response was reached. Liver enzymes declined dramatically, after 20 days of treatment, and changed to near normal levels, after 6 months of medical therapy (aspartate transaminase = 54 mg/dL and alanine transfersase = 57 mg/dL). Prothrombin time and international normalization ratio changed to 17.5 seconds and 1.6, respectively, after administration of treatment and, at the end of 6 months of treatment, they were 14 seconds and 1.23, respectively. Also, the total and direct bilirubin changed to 0.7 and 0.2 mg/dL, at 6 months.