A 25 years old, married, para III, Ethiopian Somali woman presented with an insidious onset of lower abdominal pain, offensive vaginal discharge and intermittent fever of 1 month duration. She had associated anorexia, vomiting & episodic diarrhoea which were followed by progressive weight loss and drenching night sweats. Two weeks prior to her presentation she developed progressively increasing abdominal distension with urgency, frequency, dysuria and straining at micturition. The woman had smooth vaginal delivery at a health centre 2 months back and claimed to have uneventful pregnancy. She was lactating & didn’t see any menses after delivery. She had no cough and didn’t report any known medical illnesses. She lived with 2 relatives in the same room who were being treated for pulmonary tuberculosis 2 years ago. All her previous pregnancies and deliveries were uneventful. She was repeatedly treated with unspecified antibiotics at local health facilities with no improvement.
On Physical examination the woman was acutely sick looking. The pulse rate was 112 per minute; temperature 38 oc and she had pale conjunctive. The remarkable findings were on abdominal and pelvic examinations. Abdominal examination revealed distended abdomen with lower abdominal tenderness and rebound tenderness. There was a 14 cm by 12 cm sized, firm, tender, pelvic mass with limited mobility. Shifting dullness & fluid thrill were negative and bowel sounds were normal. Speculum examination showed hyperaemic otherwise normal looking cervix. Digital vaginal examination findings were: smooth & firm cervix; bulging pouch of Douglas; firm 18 cm by 18 cm sized pelvic right adnexal mass with adnexal and cervical motion tenderness.
Laboratory tests revealed anemia (Hgb = 9 g/dl), leukocytosis with left shift, raised ESR and Pyuria. Organ function tests, chest x-ray & plain abdominal films were normal. Ultrasound showed a hypoechoic, well outlined, thick-walled pelvic mass in the right adnexa extending to the pouch of Douglas with internal echoes . Doppler revealed normal flow & resistance pattern of ovarian vessels. The uterus was normal sized with thin endometrial slit. The conclusion was a right adnexal (ovarian) tumor with possible differential diagnosis of tubo-ovarian abscess.
The mother was counselled on the presumptive diagnosis and informed consent was obtained for emergency laparotomy which revealed matted omentum obscuring the pelvic cavity & filmy adhesions (involving the uterus, right adnexa, intestines and bladder). Careful dissection and adhesiolysis, revealed thin offensive fluid extruding from the right adnexa; right ovarian 14 cm by 14 cm sized cystic to firm mass located between the ovarian fossa & pouch of Douglas . There was no grossly identifiable ovarian tissue. Both tubes appeared normal except for presumably oedematous serosal surface of the right fallopian tube. The uterus and appendix were normal in size & appearance. Procedure was completed after performing right oophorectomy (complete excision of the mass) and securing omental & peritoneal biopsies. Incision of the wall of the mass revealed thick (caseating) pus with no mass in the cavity of the sac. Postoperatively she was having recurrent high grade fever for more than 1 week despite potent antibiotics administration.
The histopathology examination revealed chronic inflammation with caseation and histocytes granuloma formation which was consistent with tuberculous lesion. But culture and immune-histologic analysis were not done because of facility constraints The woman was then put on anti-Tb regimen (category-I) containing INH, Rifampicin, Pyrazinamide and Ethambutol and showed dramatic improvement at her follow up visit after completing the intensive phase.