A 35-year-old Moroccan man presented with intermittent left flank pain and macroscopic hematuria of 10-year duration. He had no relevant medical history apart from passing out stones on two occasions. He had taken only ibuprofen occasionally to relieve his pain.
A physical examination revealed that he was in a very good general condition. He was afebrile. His blood pressure was 120/80 mmHg. He had a slight left flank pain with no palpable mass. His body mass index (BMI) was 27 kg/m2. No other clinical signs were found after a complete physical examination.
A blood test revealed the following data: hemoglobin (Hb) 13.4 g/dl, white blood cells (WBC) 7500/mcL, C-reactive protein (CRP) 20 mg/L, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 0.36 g/L, creatinine 11 mg/L, sodium 140 mEq/L, and potassium 3.8 mEq/L.
Urine analysis revealed the following data: pH 5, glucose negative, proteins negative, leukocytes 320,000/ml, red blood cells (RBC) 10,000/ml, and crystals negative. A urine culture tested positive; it grew Proteus mirabilis. A kidney, ureter, and bladder (KUB) X-ray showed two giant ureteral stones and a left renal stone .
Abdominal ultrasonography (US) showed severe hydroureteronephrosis. An intravenous pyelogram (IVP) showed no concentration and excretion at 1 hour from his left kidney consistent with a nonfunctioning left kidney .
Computed tomography urography objectified an advanced hydroureteronephrosis associated with two giant stones in the abdominal and pelvic ureter respectively and another stone in the left inferior renal calyx . The ureteric stones measured 7×3 cm and 3×3.5 cm respectively. These stones had densities between 780 and 850 Hounsfield units (HU).
We established the diagnosis of nonfunctioning left kidney secondary to urolithiasis. Surgery was indicated. Our patient had a left nephroureterectomy. The distal segment of the ureter close to the ureterovesical junction appeared narrow suggestive of POM. Histopathologic examinations of the specimen confirmed our suspicion.
Gross examination of the specimen (left nephroureterectomy): the left kidney measured 13×7×4 cm; the left ureter appeared dilated and measured 18×2.5 cm containing multiple stones. A cut section of the left kidney showed multiple cystic lesions in the renal parenchyma. Microscopic examination of the specimen: the renal parenchyma showed fibrosis of the glomerular, a pseudo-thyroid appearance of the tubules, and interstitial lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate. There were metaplastic changes in the urothelium of the ureter with no dysplasia. No lesions of malignancy were found.
His postoperative course was unremarkable. He had no complaints after 6 months of follow-up. His renal function is stable (BUN 0.45 g/L, creatinine 10.5 mg/L).