A 50-year-old Caucasian man presented to our emergency room with chest pain lasting for 6 hours associated with palpitations and stage III New York Heart Association (NYHA) dyspnea. The patient’s cardiovascular risk factors included active smoking at 30 pack years. The patient had no past medical history, no coronary artery interventions, no history of illicit drug use or alcohol consumption, and he had never received any medication before this episode. There was no family history of ischemic heart disease or sudden cardiac death. The initial examination found a confused patient with a Glasgow Coma Scale at 14 without any sensory motor deficit. He was hemodynamically unstable, with blood pressure at 84/55 mmHg, heart rate of 200 beats per minute, respiratory frequency of 26 breaths per minute, and unremarkable cardiac auscultation.
The initial electrocardiogram (ECG) showed ventricular tachycardia at 200 beats per minute reduced by an external electric shock at 200 J .
The post-reduction ECG showed a regular sinus rhythm with anterolateral ST elevation . Upon diagnosis of ST-elevation acute coronary syndrome, the patient was thrombolyzed with 50 mg of tenecteplase, as the patient was more than 120 minutes away from a percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI)-capable site. In addition to thrombolysis, the patient was also administrated intravenous heparin and oral dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) (aspirin 300 mg, clopidogrel 300 mg). The ECG carried out on post-thrombolysis observed the resolution of ST segment with negative T waves on the apicolateral derivations with a resolution of chest pain .
His laboratory tests showed a normal hemoglobin level at 15.8 g/dL, platelet count at 56,600, normal white blood cells (WBC) at 7.59 × 103/µL, and lymphocytes at 1.25 × 103/µL.
Biochemistry analysis revealed troponin I of 5.08 μg/L, C-reactive protein (CRP) at 72 mg/L, total protein of 69 g/L, albumin 35 g/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 82 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 168 U/L, triglycerides 0.66 mmol/L, and low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol 2.19 mmol/L. Serum electrolytes were normal.
Serum creatinine was normal and the estimated glomerular filtration rate [eGFR, calculated with the Modification of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) formula] was 89 mL/minute/1.73 m2. Urine culture was sterile.
The echocardiogram demonstrated a severely reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 30% with severe global hypokinesis and a dilated left ventricle at 60 mm (indexed at 33 mm/m2).
Coronary angiography demonstrated non-obstructive diffusely ectatic coronary arteries with no thrombus visualized and an insignificant lesion of the circumflex artery ostium .
Tests in search of systemic inflammatory diseases and connective tissue disorders were carried out and came back negative.
A workup for viral serology [coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), cytomegalovirus (CMV), Epstein Barr virus, coxsackie, herpes, Lyme disease, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and so on], for vasculitis, systemic disease, and bacterial infection (syphilis) was initiated and came back negative.
A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in this context was requested, showing a dilated cardiomyopathy with diffuse enhancement of the myocardium, evoking myocarditis.
During hospital stay and on discharge after 20 days, the patient was prescribed orally aspirin 100 mg daily with perindopril 2.5 mg daily, bisoprolol 2.5 mg daily, and spironolactone 12.5 mg daily for the management of heart failure with reduced ejection fraction with a view for uptitration to maximum tolerated dose. Faced with the alteration of the LVEF < 35% and the history of ventricular tachycardia, a single chamber implantable cardiac defibrillator was placed in our patient.