A 33-year-old Chinese woman came to our department for not being able to run for 10 mo.
The patient felt tired when standing up from squatting and walking downstairs 10 years ago, but daily life was not affected at that time. After that, she had increasingly more difficulties in these actions in the following days. Five years ago, she could not walk steadily even on a level road. Ten months ago, she realized that she could not run anymore. No muscle atrophy or fasciculation was found.
The patient had no previous history of neurological disorders, and she did not suffer any significant injuries in these years.
The patient was born in Beijing and had no remarkable family history. Her parents and sister were clinically healthy .
On physical and neurological examination, the patient had an unsteady walk and an ataxic gait. Other cerebellar signs, such as nystagmus, nose-finger test, and heel-shin slide, were normal. Additionally, she could not stand up when squatting. Her tendon reflexes were hyperactive in the lower limbs. Bilateral Babinski signs, Hoffmann signs, and a Rossolimo sign in the left hand were also observed. There was no problem with muscle strength or sensory examination.
There were increases in the levels of anti-CCP, anti-Ro52, and ANA. However, we could not determine what type of immune system disease that the patient had even with the help of physicians in the Department of Rheumatology because she did not have any related symptoms. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis was normal.
Electroneuronography showed reduced amplitude of sensory potentials in the right median nerve. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain showed no obvious abnormality, and lumbar MRI showed only mild hyperostosis.
To explore the underlying genetic patterns, we communicated with the patient and obtained informed consent for whole exon sequencing. We collected venous blood samples from the patient and her family at Peking University Third Hospital. We identified a novel compound heterozygous pathogenic mutation, c.3288delA (p.Asp1097ThrfsTer6; RefSeq NM_015378)/c.12485C>A (p.Thr4162Asn; RefSeq NM_015378), in the VPS13D gene in this patient. Her father was found to be heterozygous for the c.3288delA frameshift mutation, and her mother was found to be heterozygous for the c.12485C>A missense mutation in the VPS13D gene . Her parents reported no symptoms, which suggested that the disease was inherited in an autosomal recessive mode. Although there was also a c.6575C>T (p.Thr2192Ile; RefSeq NM_001376) missense variant in the DYNC1H1 gene in this patient, but this variant may be clinically irrelevant.