An athletic 24-year-old military man was surgically treated for an unstable and painful patella by performing a flat TTO associated with a medialization and distalization shift. The pre-operative knee injury and osteoarthritis outcome score (KOOS) were 72. The TT–trochlear groove distance (21 mm) and the Caton-Deschamps index (1.24) were normalized by the osteotomy. The chondral lesion present on the medial patellar facet was repaired using bone marrow-derived cells covered by a collagen membrane . Fixation of the TT was achieved with two lag screws (4.5-mm diameter).
Postoperative care was simple. Weight-bearing was prohibited for 6 weeks. A removable knee extension splint and 2 crutches protected both the TTO and patellar cartilage repair.
During the 1st month, the knee’s range of motion was gradually recovered, without exceeding 90° flexion. Isotonic knee locking exercises were postponed during 3–4 weeks while isometric contractions were encouraged. On his own initiative, the patient performed multiple isotonic locking exercises and frequent knee extension postures in addition to his rehabilitation program, for several weeks and months after surgery. The evolution was favorable both clinically and radiologically with a comeback to normal knee function at 3 months. However, a consolidation delay of the distal osteotomy cut was observed at 2 months . 7 months after surgery, while walking around, the patient experienced severe pain at the operation site without sustaining apparent trauma. Weight-bearing was impossible.
An emergency X-ray of the knee confirmed a spontaneous fracture of the proximal tibia below and arising from the TTO site. The fibula remained intact . A plating osteosynthesis of the proximal tibia was carried out to avoid cast immobilization and to maintain knee’s function . Weight-bearing was completely prohibited for 8 weeks while the range of motion was gradually recovered and completed after 2 weeks. A removable knee extension splint and 2 crutches protected the osteosynthesis for 8 weeks. Full weight-bearing and normal gait were obtained at 3 months. Both the proximal tibial fracture and the osteotomy distal cut were consolidated at 10 months after plating osteosynthesis . KOOS score was, at that time, evaluated at 90.5.
12 months after the medial cartilaginous facet repair, axial MR imaging revealed restored cartilage. However, the surface was slightly irregular with an hyperintense signal in comparison with the native adjacent cartilage one . At 24-month post-implantation, the osteosynthesis plate was removed.
Seven years after TTO, the patient had a full range of movement. The clinical results were good without limitations in daily activities; KOOS score was evaluated at 89.9.