A 32-year-old female patient was admitted to hospital with somnolence, aggravation of her chronic diarrhea and fever. The patient had a complicated medical history of intestinal neuronopathy with recurrent pseudo-obstructions due to myenteric ganglionitis. The patient had therefore undergone a hemicolectomy and permanent jejuno-rectostomy. She then developed chronic diarrhea (3 to 4 times per day), which led to a chronic hyponatremia (125 mmol/l, normal value between 135–145 mmol/l). Less than a month prior to hospital admission, anti-Hu antibodies were detected associated with paraneoplastic neurological syndromes [, ]. An anti-Hu syndrome with sensory neuronopathy was diagnosed. Despite extensive diagnostics, no underlying malignancies could be found. Immunosuppressive therapy had not yet been initiated.
One week before the current presentation at the hospital, she developed fever, chills, abdominal pain and an increased stool frequency (up to 10 times a day). The diarrhea was of watery consistency without blood or mucus. She had no contact to animals and did not consume contaminated food. None of her social contacts had signs of infectious gastroenteritis. At the emergency room, she was febrile (39.5 °C) and abdominal examination revealed increased bowel sounds without tenderness on palpation. She was somnolent without focal neurological deficits. The laboratory studies showed elevated inflammatory markers (157 mg/L C-reactive protein, CRP, normal value < 5 mg/l), and a severe hyponatremia of 107 mmol/l (normal value between 135–145 mmol/l). No pathological findings were seen on the computed tomography scan of the abdomen, especially no abscess or perforation. The results from a lumbar puncture were inconspicuous and ruled out an infection or inflammation.
The severity of the diarrhea as well as inflammatory markers (CRP max 543 mg/L, procalcitonin, 84.88 µg/L, normal value < 0.1 µg/L) increased quickly despite management in the intermediate care unit. The patient now lost up to 12 L stool per day and was admitted to the intensive care unit for further treatment. On gross examination, her stool was brown and watery. Cultures of the blood, urine and stool were collected and an empiric antibiotic treatment was initiated. With a suspected gastrointestinal focus antibiotic treatment consisted of piperacillin-tazobactam i.v. (4.5 g every 8 h) and vancomycin p.o. (250 mg every 6 h). The blood and urine cultures did not detect any bacterial growth. A molecular multiplex real-time RT-PCR test for detection of numerous gastrointestinal pathogens (QIAstat-Dx Gastrointestinal (GI) panel, QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) performed directly from the stool was negative . The Clostridioides difficile glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH) antigen in the stool was positive, as tested by VIDAS C. difficile GDH assay (bioMerieux, France), but the toxin genes remained negative as tested by real-time PCR (GeneXpert, Xpert C. difficile BT assay, Cepheid, USA).
After 3 days of treatment without any improvement in the patient’s condition, the piperacillin-tazobactam and vancomycin was stopped and meropenem i.v (1 g every 8 h) and metronidazol i.v. (500 mg every 8 h) was started instead.
For bacterial culture, the stool was incubated on MacConkey’s agar (Oxoid, UK), Columbia 5% sheep blood agar (bioMérieux, Marcy l’Etoile, France) and deoxycholate citrate agar (DCA, Oxoid, UK) at 37 ºC. After 24 h, bacterial growth appeared on the plates showing yellow sucrose fermenting colonies on the DCA plate. The colonies were non-lactose fermenting on DCA and MacConkey’s agar. On the sheep blood agar, bacterial colonies showed a remarkable β-hemolysis. The catalase and oxidase tests both were positive.
The bacteria were identified as A. hydrophila by the matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS, Bruker Daltonik, Bremen, Germany; using the MALDI Biotyper version 7.0). The antimicrobial susceptibility testing was performed by disk diffusion test on Mueller–Hinton agar plates (MH, Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ) and revealed susceptibility to meropenem, cefepime, piperacillin-tazobactam, ceftriaxone, nalidixic acid, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and amikacin . The strain was resistant to amoxicillin and amoxicillin-clavulanate Interpretative criteria according to the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute guidelines, M45 3rd edition, were applied.
After the identification of A. hydrophila, metronidazol was stopped and following a 10-day treatment with meropenem and intravenous fluid substitution, the patient recovered slowly and hospital discharge was possible. During the next visit, four weeks after discharge, the patient presented without fever or abdominal pain and the frequency of stool was again 3 to 4 times per day.
To demonstrate whether the clinical A. hydrophila strain produced an enterotoxin, the A. hydrophila culture supernatant was analyzed for enterotoxic activity in cell cultures [, ]. The bacterial strain was cultivated in trypticase soy broth media (Becton Dickinson, USA). The culture supernatant was sterile filtered and inoculated in a confluent monolayer of Vero (African green monkey kidney) cell lines cultivated in tissue culture tubes with Eagle’s minimum essential medium (MEM, Dulbecco’s, bioswisstec AG, Schaffhausen, Switzerland). Then the tube was incubated at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 incubator. Trypticase soy broth and MEM medium were used as negative controls. Cell monolayer morphology was observed using an inverted microscope. After 1 day, morphological alterations in Vero cells were observed inducing rounding, detachment, cellular vacuolation and monolayer destruction . These observations were consistent with the alterations found in previous reports [–]. The negative culture controls did not show these modifications and displayed a confluent monolayer . The presence of an enterotoxin with cytotoxic activity was suggested.