A 62-year-old male patient was admitted to our hospital because of epigastric pain for 3 months. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy was performed and a superficial esophageal lesion was found in the middle esophagus. White light endoscopy revealed a flat lesion with a gentle rising slope at the periphery of the lesion. There were scattered leukoplakia in the surface of the lesion and normal vascular network could not be seen in the lesion . Narrow-band imaging (NBI) under endoscopy revealed that the lesion exhibited an indistinct brownish area . Magnifying endoscopy with NBI (ME-NBI) showed that there were abnormal intra-papillary capillary loops with small-sized avascular area in the lesion which was then classified as type B1 according to the classification of the Japan Esophagus Society (JES classification) . Iodine staining (1%) revealed a less-stained lesion . A histopathological diagnosis of squamous cell carcinoma was obtained by an endoscopic biopsy. Endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) for the lesion was performed. Histopathological examination showed that the component of squamous cell carcinoma was seen in the superficial section of the mucosa. The surface of squamous cell carcinoma was covered by a small amount of non-neoplastic squamous epithelium. Meanwhile, basaloid hyperchromatic proliferated tumor cells were seen mainly in the mucosal lamina propria. The tumor cells formed solid nests and lobule structures with ribbon-like arrangement of sparse cytoplasm and round to ovoid hyperchromatic nuclei cells . Immunohistochemically, Ber-EP4 which is a monoclonal antibody to epithelial cells and a sensitive marker of basal cell carcinoma was positive. Chromogranin A which is a well-established marker of gastrointestinal neuroendocrine neoplasms was negative . In addition, some squamous cell cancer cell nests with globose expansile characteristics growing underneath the non-neoplastic squamous epithelium were found. Abnormal intrapapillary capillary loops were observed around the solid cancer cell nests . The lesion was histopathologically confirmed as BSCCE limited within the mucosal lamina propria and completely resected. There were no lymphovascular and neural invasions of cancer cells, and no cancer cells to be seen in the lateral and vertical margin of the resected specimen (the distance of the lesion to the closest margin of the resected specimen was 3.044 mm .