The patient was a 62-year-old female who was referred to our clinic in December 2008 because of a 10-day history of abdominal distention and concomitant nausea and vomiting. She had no family history of ovarian or breast cancer. Physical examinations revealed abundant ascites. Gastrointestinal endoscopy and colonoscopy identified no neoplastic lesion. Abdominopelvic CT scan showed massive ascites, slight bilateral pleural effusions, an omentum lumppartially encasing the intestinal tract, and peritoneum thickening. No evidence of ovarian involvement was found (Fig. ). Laboratory studies indicated an elevated serum CA-125 level (6222.4 U/ml, normal range 0–35 U/ml). Cytology study of ascites revealed malignant cells. Exploratory laparotomy found a large omentum cake (20 × 10 cm) displacing the stomach, transverse colon, and small bowel. Numerous peritoneal implants scattered subphrenic space, mesostenium, and pelvic floor peritoneum (maximum 3 × 2 cm). The uterus, ovaries, and fallopian tubes appeared macroscopically uninvolved, and no hepatic metastasis was seen. An intraperitoneal infusion pump was embedded subcutaneously, followed by intraperitoneal chemotherapy with docetaxel (80 mg/m2) and carboplatin (AUC 6), and intravenous neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) with paclitaxel (80 mg/m2) and cisplatin (60 mg/m2) on the third postoperative day.
After two cycles of the bi-directional neoadjuvant chemotherapy, the serum CA-125 level was significantly dropped and ascites decreased remarkably. A cytoreductive surgery (CRS) + hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) procedure was performed as previously described 40 days later when the general conditions of the patient improved significantly. The peritoneal carcinoma index (PCI) was evaluated as 19. The surgical procedures involved omentectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, parietal peritoneotomy, and electrical fulguration of the nodules on the intestinal surface. The completeness of cytoreduction (CCR) was 0, indicating an optimal debulking. Cisplatin 120 mg and mitomycin 30 mg was continuously perfused with 12,000 ml normal saline at 42 °C in 90 min. The patient had uneventful recovery after the operation and the clinicopathological examination of mass specimen denoted a diagnosis of PPPSC (high grade, stage IIIc) .
Adjuvant intraperitoneal chemotherapy was commenced 22 days after CRS + HIPEC, with docetaxel (60 mg/m2) plus carboplatin (AUC 6), every 3 weeks for six cycles. The patient had complete clinical remission (CR) at the completion of the chemotherapy. Pleural effusion completely disappeared. Thereafter, the patient was followed up on a regular basis, which included serum CA-125 levels monitoring at every follow-up visit . One year later (Feb. 2010), the serum CA-125 elevated again without sign of relapse. The seventh cycle of aforementioned intraperitoneal chemotherapy was given. Five months later, the patient was hospitalized because of progressing dyspnea. The CT scan showed massive left pleural effusion and atelectasis of the left lower lobe . No abdominal recurrence was detected and serum CA-125 level increased further . Thoracentesis was performed with malignant cells revealed by cytologic examination. The CA-125 level in effusion was >10,000 U/ml. The pleural effusion was not well controlled with intravenous docetaxel-cisplatinum or intrapleural cisplatin, as indicated by progressively increase in CA-125 levels and continuous positive cytologic finding in effusion. Grade II myelosuppression and grade IV gastrointestinal reactions were soon developed, which remained unchanged even with modified dose of chemotherapeutic agents. When the patient recovered from the SAE, a television-assisted thoracoscopy and intrapleural hyperthermic perfusion chemotherapy were performed. Biopsies of the parietal pleura and small nodules on both the visceral pleura and the diaphragm revealed lung metastasis by serous papillary carcinoma . Two months after the biopsy, one cycle of intrapleural chemotherapy (oxaliplatin 50 mg) was administered. Thereafter, the patient declined further chemotherapy but adopted traditional Chinese medicine. She has been followed up on a regular basis. By the time of preparation of the manuscript, patient has been survived over 7 years with performance score 1 and an intermediate encapsulated effusion on the left chest, which did not interfere with her daily life.