A 38-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with clinical acute pulmonary edema and overload volume. His laboratory results showed proteinuria and a remarkable increase in serum creatinine level (11.4 mg/dl). After throughout investigations, he was finally diagnosed with idiopathic ESRD. The patient had undergone intermittent hemodialysis three times a week for 4 years and was hospitalized for scheduled living kidney transplantation. Preoperative evaluation of the iliac vessels of the recipient with MRI and Doppler ultrasound showed moderate stenosis of the right common iliac artery, severe stenosis of the right internal iliac artery, and moderate stenosis of the right femoral and popliteal floors. On the left side, there were mild stenosis of the left internal iliac artery and severe stenosis of the left femoral-popliteal floors . However, the patient experienced no symptoms.
He underwent a kidney transplant using a donated kidney from his 63-year-old mother. The right kidney was extracted, and the transplanted organ contained a solitary artery that exhibited no signs of atherosclerosis or stenosis. In this case, we chose to take the right kidney from the donor because the left kidney function was better on renal scintigraphy.
Due to substantial stenosis in the left femoral-popliteal artery, we decided against doing the surgery on the upstream external iliac artery. Therefore, the decision was made to select the left internal iliac artery instead. The transplanted artery and vein were anastomosed to the internal iliac artery and external iliac vein, respectively. The surgeon noted that there were atherosclerotic and calcified lesions in the left internal iliac artery at the anastomosis site, which made the surgical suture difficult. After releasing the artery clamp, the grafted renal artery pulsed weakly with lower amplitude compared to the internal iliac artery. Three bleeding points were detected at the site of venous anastomosis after releasing of vein clamp so the artery was clamped for another 30 min. Cold and warm ischemia time of kidney transplantation was 92 min and 86 min, respectively. Blood loss volume was 900 ml.
On the first postoperative day, the patient developed oliguria, and a Doppler ultrasonography (US) of the renal vessels was performed, following the hospital protocol of kidney transplantation. Ultrasound showed significant stenosis at the grafted renal artery–internal iliac artery with a peak systolic velocity of 198 cm/s and an intrarenal impedance index in the upper third, the middle, and the bottom at 0.51, 0.57, and 0.63, respectively. After the interdisciplinary consultation, digital subtracted angiography (DSA) was indicated to confirm the diagnosis. We approached from the right brachial artery with a Slender 7F size sheath. Pigtail imaging revealed moderate stenosis of the ostium internal iliac artery and anastomosis site. There was a suspected dissection of the graft renal artery just distal to the anastomotic site as well. IVUS was used (, ), with a JR 4.0 7F Launcher guide (Medtronic), a 0.014-inch run-through wire (Terumo), and OptiCross 18 3.5F 135 cm IVUS (Boston Scientific). Ultimately, we identified a non-significant lesion at the ostium of the internal iliac artery and a significantly reduced vascular area compared to the midsegment. Additionally, at the midsegment where the anastomosis was, there was atherosclerotic plaque resulting in moderated lumen stenosis and dissection flap immediately distal to the junction with an arc 180° and 4.5 mm long, and 61% stenosis of the artery was not an absolute indication for intervention. But with the dissection and acute kidney injury that came along, the indication became clear.
To prevent the progression of dissection and improve perfusion of the transplanted kidney, we decided to deploy a 5.0 × 22 mm Resolute Onyx stent crossing over the narrowing anastomosis and dissected site, followed by balloon angioplasty with 5.0 × 12 mm Pantera LEO balloon at 20 atm pressure. A DES was chosen to address two problems at a time, which were atherosclerosis lesions with 61% plaque burden and the dissection complication. The 5.0 × 22 mm Resolute Onyx stent was the most appropriate choice regarding the length and diameter based on the lab availability at that time. The 20 atm pressure was chosen because, with the above IVUS images, 18 atm pressure would not fit the vessel wall. The dissection was covered by one stent, and the minimal lumen area was improved to 23 mm2 on the IVUS image. The fluoroscopy time was 14 min, and the used contrast was 120 ml of Visipaque 320. Post-intervention IVUS is presented in .
After the intervention, Doppler US revealed that the blood flow of the renal artery was adequate without an increase in systolic blood velocity, resulting in sufficient blood flow supplied for the allograft. Kidney function improved after 3 weeks, and the patient was discharged after 4 weeks from the transplantation. Normal urine output returned after 3 weeks, and serum creatinine level decreased to 1.19 mg/dl after 2 months. The cause of slow recovery was attributed to acute tubular necrosis.
Postprocedural medications included dual antiplatelet with aspirin 81 mg and plavix 75 mg for 1 month followed by maintenance of a single antiplatelet with aspirin 81 mg. An immunosuppression regimen with tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil, and methylprednisolone was prescribed. He was closely monitored at an outpatient clinic and continued to be in stable condition after 4 years.