A 55 year-old male with HIV presented to the HIV clinician’s office with several non-painful lumps appearing under the skin for the past 1 month . Upon physical exam he had a total of 12 firm rubbery nontender mobile lesions on both upper extremities and ventral abdomen ranging in size from 1 to 4 cm.
He had no history of fevers, chills, sweats, or fatigue. His family history was negative for lipomatosis. He had a history of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura requiring plasmapheresis from hematology/oncology 17 years prior, and 5 years before was diagnosed with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis resulting in hypothyroidism. His weight at this visit had been stable at 73 kg for at least 3 years. His concurrent medications included tenofovir alafenamide/emtricitabine/bictegravir (TAF/FTC/BIC), levothyroxine, and albuterol inhaler as needed.
He was diagnosed with HIV over 15 years ago and his known antiretroviral exposure included tenofovir disoproxil fumarate/emtricitabine/efavirenz (TDF/FTC/EFV) for at least 8 years before switching to TAF/FTC/BIC ∼ 19 months ago. His CD4 at this appointment was 519 (36%) cells/mm3 and a HIV RNA < 20 copies/ml. Patient had been virologically suppressed for at least the past 14 years, no HIV RNA data was available before then. His CD4 nadir was 108 (9%) from 14 years prior. After the switch to TAF/FTC/BIC a slight increase in urine protein/creatinine ratio was seen.
The patient underwent diagnostic biopsies of two of the lesions which resulted as non-encapsulated angiolipomas. Given the clinical history of HIV and multifocal masses, an HHV-8 immunostain was performed which was negative for nuclear staining, consistent with the diagnosis of angiolipoma. Due to concerns for changes in fat redistribution, a Fibroscan was performed showing no evidence of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease.
Within 10 months of initial lesion appearance, 5 more lesions appeared . There was a slight increase in his weight from 73 to 77 kg with a concurrent shift in his lipid panel as noted in Table . Through shared decision making with the patient and surgical team, it was decided to monitor all lesions. Twelve months after the last lesion appearance no new lesions have manifested and no prior lesions have increased in size.