A 57-year-old man, non-smoker, came to our observation. He worked as an industrial machinery mechanic. The patient was not exposed to inhalation of chemicals and there were no changes in respiratory symptoms away from the workplace. In May 2018, due to persistent dry cough, dyspnea and wheezing he was sent by his general practioner for a respiratory clinical assessment. On the physical examination of the chest, rhonchi and wheezing were detected. Respiratory function tests showed moderate bronchial obstruction (Forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) 62% of predicted) with a significant response to the bronchodilation test (+ 18%; + 480 ml). Skin prick tests were negative for inhalant allergens while blood tests showed eosinophilia (790 cells/ul, 8%). Body mass index (BMI) was 24. Therefore, bronchial asthma was diagnosed and therapy was started with high dose salmeterol / fluticasone, salbutamol spray as needed and prednisone 25 mg 2 tablets a day for 5 days, with gradual reduction. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the paranasal sinuses showed mucosal thickening in the right maxillary sinus with osteomeatal engagement and initial mucosal thickening in the left maxillary sinus and both frontal sinuses. Sinonasal Outcome Test 22 (SNOT-22) score was 51.5. For persistence of cough and bronchospasm, the patient referred to an otolaryngologist, who evidenced mucosal secretion with post-nasal drip, edema of the right meatus and bilateral polyposis. He also hypothesized gastroesophageal reflux due to typical physical examination findings, including arytenoid erythema and edema. An esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) was then performed, revealing grade A reflux esophagitis. A therapy with a proton pump inhibitor (PPI) was then set up, with esomeprazole 40 mg per day. Then, the patient repeated a pulmonology examination in July 2018 due to poor improvement in respiratory symptoms. An assessment of medication adherence had been made, and was appropriate. Consequently, the therapy was modified by stopping salmeterol/fluticasone and starting high dose of beclometasone/formoterol spray and adding tiotropium bromide. Prednisone 25 mg per day was also included due to recurrence of asthma symptoms after an attempted withdrawal of OCS. Blood tests performed in September 2018 showed eosinophilia (4790 cells/ul, 27%), Antineutrophil myeloperoxidase cytoplasmic antibodies (MPO-ANCA) level was 17.9, whilst proteinase 3 (PR3- ANCA), antinuclear Antibodies (ANA), extractable nuclear antigen (ENA) were negative. Total immunoglobulin E (IgE) were 113 IU/mL (v.n. <100) and fractional exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO) value (ppb) 43. Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis and intestinal parasites infection were ruled out. The patient then underwent a high-resolution chest CT scan, that showed parenchymal centrilobular nodules and the presence of multiple, faded, bilateral ground glass areas. Skin lesions on the back of the hands were detected and they were compatible with vasculitis according to the dermatologist’s diagnosis and a skin biopsy showing leukocytoclastic vasculitis with several eosinophils in the dermal infiltrate. In suspicion of vasculitis, the patient underwent a fibrobronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) and transbronchial biopsies; histological findings showed necrotizing small vessel vasculitis associated with eosinophil infiltrates and perivascular and extravascular granulomas. BAL demonstrated macrophages and rare lymphocytes with neutrophilic granulocytes and alveolar eosinophilia (35%). Doppler echocardiography was normal. The patient was seen by a rheumatologist, who confirmed the diagnosis of EGPA but did not indicate add-on immunosuppressive therapy with azathioprine/mycophenolate or rituximab/cyclophosphamide, also considering the absence of mononeuritis multiplex in our patient. Mononeuritis multiplex predicts the need for immunosuppressive or immunomodulatory drugs for EGPA, and its absence reduces the need for these add on drugs burdened with important side effects . On January 2019, due to the persistence of poor asthma control with the need for daily therapy with OCS, after a pulmonology evaluation, the patient began therapy with mepolizumab 100 mg subcutaneously (SC). Four months later, asthma symptoms persisted unchanged and, in an attempt to improve respiratory symptoms, the patient underwent Functional Endoscopic Sinus Surgery (FESS) for CRSwNP. The patient had a temporary improvement in nasal and bronchial symptoms, with a SNOT-22 score of 44.3, compared to the baseline of 51.5. Subsequently he returned to previous symptoms. Blood eosinophils were 280 cells/ul (3%) and FeNO was 18 ppb. In August 2019 a new pulmonology examination was carried out, due to suboptimal asthma control without the possibility of reducing OCS dosage. Therefore, it was decided to discontinue mepolizumab after seven administrations due to lack of efficacy. After a 3- month washout period the patient started benralizumab 30 mg sc once every 4 weeks for the first three doses, then once every 8 weeks. We excluded mepolizumab 300 mg once every 4 weeks because it was not approved in Europe for EGPA therapy yet and our local ethics committee hardly grants approval to the higher dose since an alternative therapeutic option such as benralizumab is available. In contrast, the standard dose (30 mg) of benralizumab was very effective and in the literature there are studies that confirm the great efficacy of benralizumab in EGPA thanks to profound antieosinophilic effect in different tissues. These could be potential advantages of this biologic in the treatment of EGPA . Respiratory symptoms progressively improved after just 3 months. The patient was reassessed by a respiratory physician in March 2020, recording excellent asthma control and an improvement in symptoms related to CRSwNP (SNOT-22 score improved to 34.6). The dosage of prednisone was then reduced to 8 mg per day, then subsequently reduced to 4 mg per day and finally withdrawn 6 months after starting benralizumab therapy . Regarding blood tests, an important reduction in MPO-ANCA and blood eosinophils was found (0 cells/ul, 0.1%). FeNO value was 13 ppb. Since the start of benralizumab therapy 12 months before, the patient has not presented any asthma exacerbation and respiratory function tests have improved, returning to normal levels (FEV1 pred., FVC 91%pred., FEV1/FVC 105%) ( and ). High-resolution chest CT no longer showed groundglass opacities and centrilobular nodules present at baseline control and also the skin lesions on the back of the hands present before the start of biological therapy had disappeared. Another fundamental aspect was the absence of side effects with the use of benralizumab during the whole observation period.