A 59-year-old male was admitted to our emergency department with worsening dyspnoea and palpitations. Lung auscultation revealed pulmonary crackles. There was no sign of shock. He had no previous medical history or treatment on admission. After the clinical examination and chest X-ray, laboratory test showed NTproBNP at 2185 pg/mL, and troponin was negative. A diagnosis of pulmonary oedema was made, and an electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed atrial fibrillation (AF). The patient responded well to treatment with diuretics, vasodilators, and non-invasive ventilation. Atrial fibrillation was treated with anticoagulants and slowed as a rate control strategy. Five days after admission, the patient was stable and transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed severe mitral regurgitation (MR) caused by rupture of the posteromedial papillary muscle with complete prolapse associated with a myxoid degeneration aspect (see , ). The left ventricle was dilated, and the left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was 40%. Right ventricular (RV) systolic function was preserved. The tricuspid annulus was dilated to 49 mm, and mild TR was detected. Coronary angiography showed normal left and right coronary arteries ( and ). The patient was transferred to cardiac surgery after a normal preoperative workup.
Ten days after admission, the patient underwent conservative mitral valve surgery with a 32 mm mitral valve annuloplasty coupled with a 30 mm tricuspid valve annuloplasty. No perioperative complications occurred. The patient’s haemodynamic status was stable, and amines or inotropes were not needed after removal of the cardiopulmonary bypass. Scope monitoring showed no changes in ECG. An immediate post-operative trans-oesophageal echocardiogram revealed severe biventricular dysfunction (LVEF 25%) and favourable functioning of the mitral and tricuspid valvuloplasties, without MR or TR.
The ECG performed on arrival at the intensive care unit showed an ST-segment elevation systematized in the inferior leads with an anterolateral mirror image . Due to the acute coronary syndrome with ST-segment elevation, the patient was treated with loading doses of aspirin and clopidogrel, and he was transferred to the cardiac catheterization laboratory to rule out a surgery-related coronary injury. Injection of the RCA revealed a hazy lesion extending from the upper to lower knee (, white arrows). Coronary kinking was suspected (, red arrow).
Intracoronary optical coherence tomography (OCT) showed the aspect of the coronary twist (, red arrow), supported by the OCT 3D image (, red arrow), confirming the diagnosis of right coronary kinking, which was probably secondary to the tricuspid annuloplasty (see , ). The obstruction was partial, and it was possible to cross the lesion using the wire; therefore, percutaneous revascularization was feasible. Based on the signs of acute ischaemia, two long drug-eluting stents (DES) (both 4 × 38 mm) were placed in the lower knee and the upper knee of the RCA (see , ). A mild malposition of the second stent was corrected by post-dilatation with a 5 mm semi-compliant balloon (see , ). After percutaneous coronary intervention, the ECG showed a regression of the ST-segment elevation and inverted T waves in the inferior leads.
Ten days later, coronary angiography showed TIMI 3 flow in the RCA. An ostial hazy lesion was detected and treated with OCT-guided implantation of a 4.5 × 8 mm DES (see , ). The angiographic result was favourable , and OCT showed loss of kinking at the sites of angioplasty ( and , red and white arrows).
Transthoracic echocardiogram at discharge showed a dilated left ventricle with severe left ventricular dysfunction (LVEF 25%). The right ventricle was dilated and hypokinetic without TR. He was transferred to the cardiovascular rehabilitation department with heart failure drugs combining bisoprolol, ramipril, spironolactone, and dapagliflozin. Due to AF, an association of clopidogrel and apixaban was given for 1 year. Cardiac and coronary computed tomography angiography (CCTA) was performed 3 months after angioplasty to check the permeability of the implanted stents and clarify the anatomical relationship between the right coronary injuries and the tricuspid annulus. The CCTA showed the proximity between the tricuspid annulus and RCA, suggesting that the origin of the kinking was due to a traction mechanism (, red arrow). At the 6-month follow-up, the patient showed excellent recovery and was asymptomatic, with an LVEF of 30–35%, and there had been no ischaemic recurrence.