A 31-year-old man, with longstanding allergic rhinitis and asthma, presented with facial edema, chest tightness and dyspnea on exertion for 1 week. He had experienced one episode of generalized urticaria about 1 month prior, which subsided after he took an unknown Chinese herbal medicine for 2 weeks. The physical examination was unremarkable. Laboratory tests showed an increased white blood cell count (13,880/mL) with 67.7% neutrophils, 15.9% lymphocytes and 8.5% eosinophils (absolute eosinophil counts 1180/mL), and increased levels of C-reactive protein (2.31 mg/dL, normal range < 0.3 mg/dL), creatine phosphokinase (CPK, 398 U/L, normal range 10–160 U/L) and troponin-I (2.52 ng/mL, normal range < 0.034 ng/mL). Chest radiography revealed mild cardiomegaly and electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed sinus tachycardia, left axis deviation, poor R wave progression, and diffuse Q waves in the inferior and precordial leads. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed left ventricle (LV) wall thickening (septum/posterior wall: 2.0 cm/1.4 cm) with mild systolic dysfunction (LV ejection fraction: 46%) . Based on the suspicion of myocardial infarction, cardiac angiography was done and revealed non-stenotic coronary arteries, and the left ventriculography showed mild systolic dysfunction.
Under the impression of acute myocarditis, right ventricular endomyocardial biopsy was performed. Histopathological examination revealed myocarditis with increased eosinophilic infiltration , compatible with eosinophilic myocarditis. Follow-up laboratory test showed a moderate increase of absolute eosinophil counts up to 2577/mL (white blood cell count 9910/mL with 26.0% eosinophils). On the other hand, serum CPK decreased to 291 U/L. Follow-up ECG revealed normalization of R wave progression and disappearance of the Q waves in the precordial leads.
To rule out other etiologies of hypereosinophilic syndrome, several tests were performed. Bone marrow biopsy, testing for the lymphoma phenotype and FIP1L1-PDGFRA gene mutations, and abdominal computed tomography (CT) all revealed no evidence of solitary or hematological malignancies. Testing for serum antinuclear antibodies was negative, and the patient did not meet the diagnostic criteria for immunological diseases.
Based on the patient’s medical course and testing results, acute eosinophilic myocarditis caused by a hypersensitive drug reaction was diagnosed. The patient was treated with low dose prednisolone (10 mg per day), combined with angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors and beta-blockers. Three days after beginning treatment, follow-up TTE showed dramatic improvement of LV wall thickening (septum/posterior wall: 1.1 cm/1.1 cm) with complete recovery of systolic function (LV ejection fraction: 61%) . In addition, the peripheral blood eosinophil count decreased to normal range (absolute eosinophil count 273/mL). Because of the improvement in symptoms, eosinophil count, and LV hypertrophy in echocardiography, we tapered of the prednisolone to 5 mg QD 1 month later, and then discontinued prednisolone after another 2 months. After 6 months of follow-up, the patient was symptom free and did not received any further steroid treatment.