A 55-year-old woman was referred to the orthopaedic department with a 2-year history of mild right thigh pain exacerbated by long walks or running and a CT scan showing a well-defined lesion in the midshaft of her right femur. She was initially seen by the haematology services when she was diagnosed with neutropaenia (0.9 × 109/L) following a viral illness. Further immunological assay testing measured high IgG levels and subsequent serum protein electrophoresis revealed two clonal bands, band 1 IgG 15.5 g/l and band 2 IgA kappa 5.2 g/l (including beta 2 band). These paraprotein levels have remained stable over 12 months. Her 24-hr urine light chain assay was normal. Assessment of plasma cell infiltration of the bone marrow by biopsy was deemed unnecessary at this time as our patient was diagnosed with IgG type monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) with a stable paraprotein level. However, CT skeletal survey was ordered as part of the work-up for her thigh pain and showed the lesion in the midshaft of the right femur .
On exam, the femur appeared normal, the overlying skin was intact and there was no warmth, erythema or induration. The right hip and knee had normal movement with a full range of motion. There was no evidence of lymphadenopathy in the groin or popliteal fossa. Her only contributary past medical history was IgG MGUS. Her family history includes a sister with congenital hypothyroidism and a brother who passed away aged 18 from neuroblastoma of the kidney.
Her initial laboratory investigations showed: Total WCC 2.7, Neutrophils 0.9–1.2 × 109/L, monocyte count 0.19, Platelet count 283 × 109/L, ESR 37. CRP 1. Urea, Creatinine, Electrolytes, TFT, B12, Folate, Ferritin were all within normal parameters. Subsequent FBC at 3 months follow-up showed her neutrophil level had returned to normal ranges. LDH (186 u/l) was also normal at this time.
CT demonstrated evidence of a lytic lesion with surrounding sclerosis eroding the cortex of the femoral diaphysis . Subsequent magnetic resonance imaging detailed a well marginated, low T1 and high T2 signal, eccentrically located and marginally expansile lesion with a homogeneous consistency .
She underwent simultaneous excision biopsy of the lesion and prophylactic cephalo-medullary nailing based on her Mirel score of 8. Her operation was successfully performed under consultant supervision and she was discharged day 4 post-operatively after receiving care from the inpatient physiotherapy department .
Histology with immunochemistry results exhibited variable cellular spindle cell proliferation and with verocay bodies consistent with schwannoma. No atypical infiltrate or evidence of malignancy was seen. Immunohistochemical staining detected that the lesional cells were positive for S100 and negative for SMA and Desmin .
Our patient has recovered full mobility after an uncomplicated post-operative period. She has been discharged from orthopaedic follow-up after 3 months. She attends the haematology annually to ensure her paraprotein levels remain stable.