We report a 24-year-old Saudi male patient who was previously healthy. His history dates back to April 2018 when he developed a superficial abscess in the inferior para-dorsal region with dry cough, fatigue, and profuse sweating but no fever or chills. He was living in the southern part of the state of Kentucky in the USA where he studied for about three years. He was examined at a local surgical clinic and received incision and drainage of the abscess followed by oral antibiotic therapy. After partial improvement, the abscess recurred within three months, and he underwent a second incision and drainage followed by another course of oral antibiotics that brought only partial improvement. He returned to Saudi Arabia a few months later. Shortly after his arrival, abscess formation recurred for the third time in the same region. He was treated at an internal medicine clinic and received prolonged treatment with oral antibiotics plus I&D for the third time. The abscess did not subsequently recur, but his respiratory symptoms and excessive sweating worsened with additional exertional dyspnea and a weight loss of approximately 8 kg. He was admitted to another hospital in our region in October 2019 where he had some worrisome findings on imaging; he was referred then to our hospital for further diagnostic workup.
He presented as thin but not in distress with normal oxygen saturation on room air. His vital signs were stable. Auscultation of the chest showed decreased air entry at both lung bases especially on the right side. There were also multiple scars from previous I&D in the left para-dorsal area. The rest of the physical examination was unremarkable. Laboratory tests revealed a leukocyte count (WBC) of 8.2 × 109/L, hemoglobin of 10.8 g/L, MCV of 73.2 fL, platelet count of 375 × 109/L, C-reactive protein of 248 mg/L, erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 92 mm/H, and alanine aminotransferase of 53 U/L. Serum electrolytes, renal function, albumin levels, and aspartate aminotransferase were all normal. Serology for Brucella and HIV was negative, and a skin test with purified protein derivatives (PPD) was also negative. A chest radiograph showed pleural effusion on the right side while a chest CT showed bilateral effusions higher on the right side, segmental infiltrates in the right lower lobe, and multiple localized paraspinal collections . An MRI of the dorsal and lumbar spine showed abnormal medullary signal intensity and enhancement in multiple vertebral bodies and posterior elements that included the T8 to L1 vertebrae with multiloculated paravertebral abscesses predominantly on the left side. There was a large left (and a smaller right) psoas muscle abscess . MRI showed no intradural extension or compression of the spinal cord. The patient underwent right ultrasound-guided thoracentesis with a pigtail catheter through which approximately 900 mL of purulent fluid was drained. Pleural fluid analysis indicated pH 7.0, glucose 60.1 mmol/L, protein 105 g/L, lactate dehydrogenase 1456 U/L, and WBC 26,000 cells/µL of which 84% were neutrophils. Cytology showed no malignant cells. Gram staining of the pleural fluid showed no bacteria; bacterial and fungal cultures were negative, and a smear of pleural fluid with acid-fast bacilli and a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test for tuberculosis (TB) were negative. A tuberculosis culture (TB) was not performed.
Given the clinical findings without a confirmed diagnosis, the patient was offered a trial of four-drug therapy for TB (rifampicin 600 mg, isoniazid 300 mg, ethambutol 800 mg, and pyrazinamide 1 g orally once daily, and pyridoxine 100 mg daily) until the TB cultures were completed. He was discharged to his referring hospital. He was readmitted to the referring hospital within a month for treatment of liver toxicities associated with the anti-TB drugs. Anti-TB therapy was continued for approximately two more months and discontinued after final TB culture results showed no growth. The patient's waxing and waning symptoms persisted and due to the re-accumulation of pleural fluid and left psoas abscess. A second drainage was performed, but cultures and cytology were again negative. The patient was treated with linezolid (600 mg i.v.) and ceftriaxone (2 g daily i.v. for 2 weeks) followed by linezolid (600 mg p.o. twice daily for three weeks). This led to only partial improvement. In April 2020, the patient was referred to our hospital for the second time because of recurrent pleural effusions and persistence of para-vertebral collections and left psoas abscess. Here, he underwent another CT-guided drainage but this time with a pleural core biopsy. All culture results from the fluid and tissue showed no growth, but the pleural fluid was positive for yeast and tissue histopathology showed granulomatous inflammation and multiple, broad-based, budding yeast structures consistent with blastomycosis . A diagnosis of multifocal blastomycosis was made, and the patient was offered treatment with liposomal amphotericin B in view of the multifocal and extensive bone and tissue involvement in the chest and abdomen; however, he refused to prolong his hospital stay and declined this treatment.
His symptoms began to improve 2 to 3 weeks after starting treatment with itraconazole 200 mg orally twice daily with marked improvement in his respiratory symptoms and cessation of excessive sweating; he began to gain weight. The patient tolerated itraconazole well, and close monitoring of liver enzymes revealed no increase over time. The patient did not require any additional drainage procedures over the next few months. Approximately four months after initiation of therapy, the patient underwent a repeat CT examination of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis, which showed complete resolution of pleural effusions, pulmonary infiltrates, and psoas abscesses . The patient received itraconazole (200 mg orally twice daily) for 12 months due to vertebral involvement; he then completed itraconazole therapy on April 23, 2021 with complete clinical and radiological recovery.