A 27-year-old formerly healthy athlete male was presented to the emergency department with a chief complaint of acute-onset pressure-like pleuritic chest pain. His chest pain started in the morning of the presentation, worsened gradually, and was aggravated by lying supine. He denied any history of fever, cough, sputum production, shortness of breath, myalgia, arthralgia, diarrhea, or headache in the preceding days. On physical examination, he was hemodynamically stable, not dyspneic but preferred leaning forward. His heart rate was 80 bpm with blood pressure of 110/60 mm Hg, respiratory rate of 18 breaths/min, O2 saturation of 95% on room air, and temperature of 36.7. Physical examination, including the cardiovascular system, was unremarkable, with no pericardial friction rub.
The primary laboratory results were white blood cell count of 9000/mm3 with 25% lymphocytes, platelet count of 165000, ESR: 7 mm/hour, CRP: 10 mg/L, and D-dimer: 350 ng/ml. The liver and kidney function tests were normal. His creatine phosphokinase (CPK) was 1013 U/L, and cardiac troponin T (hs-cTnT) on admission and at 6 hours was 0.04 ng/mL and 0.03 ng/mL, respectively. The electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a slight diffuse ST elevation in most leads, a reciprocal ST depression, and PR segment elevation in AVR, with PR segment depression in other leads . Chest radiograph showed no pathology. Chest Computerized Tomography (CT) scan and Computerized Tomography Angiography (CTA) revealed no lung involvement, pneumothorax, pericardial effusion, or pulmonary embolism. Transthoracic echocardiogram showed normal structure and function, with no regional wall motion abnormalities and no pericardial effusion. Based on European Society of Cardiology (ESC) guidelines, acute pericarditis is diagnosed in the company of two of the following four criteria: pleuritic chest pain, pericardial friction rub, ECG findings suggestive of pericarditis, pericardial effusion [, ]. Clinical judgment of acute pericarditis in our patient was based on his clinical presentation (pleuritic chest pain) and typical ECG findings. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic situation, despite the inconclusive report of the chest CT scan, samples of nasopharyngeal swabs were sent for SARS-CoV-2 RT-PCR testing, which was reported as negative. The complete set of rheumatologic, endocrine, and serological viral marker tests was within the normal range. The patient was admitted to CCU and received 8-hourly Ibuprofen (400mg) and Aspirin (325mg), as well as 4 L/min oxygen supplement via mask.
On the 9th day of admission, the patient developed dyspnea and fever of 38.1. His oxygen saturation decreased to 86% on room air, and his respiratory rate increased to 24 breaths/min, with a blood pressure of 100/65 and a heart rate of 98 bpm. His lung auscultation revealed coarse breath sounds and coarse crackles bilaterally. A repeated chest CT scan revealed bilateral multi-lobar consolidation with peripheral distribution, suggestive of COVID-19 infection . A repeat nasopharyngeal swab was sent for SARS-CoV-2, which came back positive. Concurrently, he reported symptoms of acute and progressive bilateral distal extremity weakness, predominantly involving the left lower limb. On neurologic examination, the sensation was reduced in both lower limbs, and muscle power was decreased to 2/5 in the left distal lower limb, 3/5 in the right lower limb, and 4/5 in both upper limbs. Deep tendon reflexes were reduced in both the upper and lower extremities. He had difficulty walking with an unsteady gait; his plantar reflexes were normal. No urinary retention nor spinal sensory level was noted. Repeated laboratory examination revealed leukopenia and lymphopenia (WBC count of 2900/mm3 with 15% lymphocytes) as well as thrombocytopenia (platelet count of 95000). Other lab tests were as follows: CRP: 80mg/L, LDH: 455 U/L, Ferritin: 460 ng/mL, CPK: 174 U/L, and elevated D-Dimer level of 250 ng/ml. Other laboratory findings were unremarkable.
An Electromyography/Nerve Conduction Study (EMG/NCS) revealed decreased amplitude of tibial and peroneal sensory and motor action potentials. Both latencies and nerve conduction velocity were normal, as were the F-wave and H-reflexes. A nerve conduction study in the upper limbs showed no abnormalities. EMG study of both upper and lower limb muscles showed mild denervation potential in lower limb muscles and the distal muscles of the upper limbs. These findings revealed an acute, mild, mainly axonal peripheral polyneuropathy, with symmetric sensorimotor involvement, suggestive of a subtype of Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS), namely the Acute Motor and Sensory Axonal Neuropathy (AMSAN). The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination was performed on the 7th day of hospitalization and showed a white blood cell count of 4/ml and protein of 50 mg/dl. The whole spine MRI reported insignificant findings. The diagnosis of AMSAN was made in accordance with the Brighton Collaboration GBS Working Group criteria, based on the presence of bilaterally reduced lower extremity muscle strength and findings of motor and sensory damage on his Nerve Conduction Studies (NCS) .
The patient was transferred to COVID-19 ICU and received 10 L/min of saturated oxygen via a non-rebreather mask. Remdesivir 200mg was administered on day 1, followed by a 100mg daily dose for a further 9 days. He was given Enoxaparin (40 mg SC daily), Hydroxychloroquine (400 mg on day one, followed by 200 mg BD), and dexamethasone 8 mg BD for 10 days. Other treatments included: Synairgen: Interferon-beta-1a (44 units SC BD), and intravenous immunoglobulin 0.4 g/kg/day for 5 days. By the 21st day of the hospital stay, the patient had significant improvement in his clinical state, including his motor deficit and was discharged home.