A 67- year-old female Japanese was undergoing treatment for interstitial pneumonia, diabetes mellitus, and hypertension at her local doctor. About two months ago, she had a low-grade fever, tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 antigen, and was diagnosed with COVID-19. After that, she went to a hotel for treatment, and her condition improved. However, after COVID-19 infection, the patient had a low-grade fever for more than a month, and newly developed general malaise and dysesthesia in the left upper extremity. Despite treatment with azithromycin 500 mg daily, her condition did not respond to the medication. Therefore, she visited Yodogawa Christian Hospital in Osaka, Japan, requesting an alternative treatment. The reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction was negative. She had no history of smoking. On physical examination, her vital signs were stable, with a blood pressure of 109/61 mmHg, a heart rate of 101 beats per minute and a temperature of 98.6℉. Her neck was supple. Her cardiovascular examination was regular, her lungs were clear to auscultation, and her abdominal examination was unremarkable, with no hepatosplenomegaly. A neurological examination showed dysesthesia in her distal left upper extremity and an inability to sense vibration. Skin findings were purpura on the right sole. She was admitted to the hospital for further examination and treatment.
Laboratory findings revealed an elevated white blood cell count of 215 × 102/μL and elevated C-reactive protein 15.82 mg/dL, and elevated d-dimer 5.73 μg/mL . Chest computed tomography (CT) showed no new pneumonia image, although there were still signs of interstitial pneumonia. Head CT, head magnetic resonance imaging, contrast-enhanced CT of the trunk, and echocardiography showed no abnormal findings. A skin biopsy was performed for purpura on the right sole but showed no abnormal results. A nerve conduction study was conducted for dysesthesia in the left upper extremity, but no abnormal findings were found.
After admission to the hospital, her temperature ranged between 98.6 ℉ and 100.4 ℉. Initially, we suspected infection as the cause of the inflammation, but since there were no significant findings on various imaging tests, we suspected autoimmune disease and measured different antibodies by blood tests; since high perinuclear-ANCA titer with a specific anti-myeloperoxidase antibody (MPO) titer of 31.7 units/mL, we suspected ANCA-related vasculitis and performed a renal biopsy. Renal biopsy showed evidence of crescentic glomerulonephritis , which was consistent with ANCA-associated vasculitis. The patient was referred to the Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology for steroid pulse and cyclophosphamide treatment. Steroid and cyclophosphamide pulses were initiated as induction remission therapy, and azathioprine 25–50 mg/day was added as maintenance therapy. During treatment, type 2 diabetes worsened with steroid administration and required insulin induction. These treatments improved inflammatory findings, MPO-ANCA decreased to 1.1 units/mL, and CT showed improvement in interstitial pneumonitis.