A 64-year-old woman had undergone video-assisted lobectomy for lung cancer and developed elevation of systolic blood pressure up to 300 mmHg. Although an adrenal mass was not detected, thoracoabdominal CT revealed a 2.0 × 2.1-cm soft tissue mass protruding from the posterior aspect of the bladder . Multiparametric MRI of the abdomen and pelvis demonstrated a 2.0 × 2.1-cm soft tissue mass in the same place. The lesion had a high T1-weighted intensity and low T2-weighted signal intensity . Hormone analysis revealed elevation of plasma noradrenaline (670 pg/mL), urinary noradrenaline (321 g/day), urinary dopamine (2100 μg/day), and urinary metanephrine (0.38 mg/day) levels. 131I-MIBG scintigraphy revealed uptake of 131I-MIBG by the tumor . No additional lesions to support metastases were found on performing CT scan or 131I-MIBG scintigraphy. Cystoscopy revealed a solitary submucosal mass on the posterior aspect of the bladder, with a grossly normal mucosa . From these results, a diagnosis of paraganglioma of the bladder was made, and we decided to perform surgical resection of the tumor.
Under general anesthesia, we first performed en bloc TUR. Briefly, we made circular incisions around the tumor using a needle electrode under a transurethral scope . Careful dissection of bladder muscle layers was performed using pull incision not to rupture the bladder . Next, using a three-port (5–10 mm) triangular arrangement at a 15° Trendelenburg position, we performed transperitoneal laparoscopic partial cystectomy. We cut the peritoneum and bladder serosa and removed the specimen using a laparoscopic sac . We confirmed that both ureters were intact and sutured the bladder wall using a 3-0 monofilament polyglyconate suture . Distension of the bladder at the completion of the repair showed no leakage . A drain was placed in the pelvis, and a 16-Fr Foley catheter was indwelled into the bladder through the urethra. During the operation, blood pressure was stable (systolic blood pressure range: 80–130 mmHg without drastic fluctuation). The total surgical time was 137 min. The drain was removed 5 days after surgery.
The tumor extracted was 1.8 × 1.6 × 1.2 cm in size . Pathological analysis revealed polygonal tumor cells with fine granular cytoplasm present in the submucosa and muscularis propria on performing hematoxylin and eosin staining . These findings were consistent with the diagnosis of paraganglioma of the bladder. Lymphovascular invasion was not observed. Surgical margins were free of tumor.
One month after surgery, her endocrine panel was normal. There was no evidence of residual tumor, local recurrence, or distant metastasis during 2-year follow-up.