A 42-year-old woman who had undergone twice cesarean sections presented with hematochezia and was evaluated by CT scan in August 2011. A CT only detected an enhanced abdominal wall mass near the abdominal scar, which was thought to be desmoid at the time . As the hematochezia continued, a further endoscopic workup was performed, and well-differentiated adenocarcinoma was detected at sigmoid colon. The whole body CT scan detected no other distant metastasis. She underwent elective open sigmoidectomy with D3 lymph node dissection for sigmoid colon cancer with mid-line incision in May 2012. Histology of the sigmoid colon showed well-differentiated adenocarcinoma invading to subserosa with 8 out of 20 regional lymph nodes involved. The sigmoid colon cancer was classified as pT3N2b, according to the TNM classification of the Union for International Cancer Control Eights Edition . Molecular analysis showed KRAS mutation and microsatellite-stable. Postoperative course after sigmoidectomy was uneventful and the patient was treated with 12 cycles of FOLFOX regimen as adjuvant chemotherapy. The patient entered a scheduled clinical follow up program which included: regular physical examinations and CEA test every 3 months, and whole-body CT every 6 months. CT after adjuvant chemotherapy revealed the lesion on the abdominal wall had decreased in size and inguinal lymph nodes were all normal in size . In April 2014, a routine follow-up CT scan revealed enlarged left inguinal lymph nodes as well as a growing enhanced mass lesion on the abdominal wall at the site of cesarean section scar . 18F-fluorodeoxy glucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) revealed significant accumulation at both lesions . A CT showed no distant metastases were detected in other organs and laboratory data showed serum CEA level was within the normal range (1.3 ng/ml). Although metastases to both inguinal lymph nodes and the abdominal wall from colon adenocarcinoma are clinically uncommon, needle biopsy of those lesions was performed with the suspicion of inguinal lymph node recurrence and abdominal wall metastasis from colon cancer. Histopathological findings indicated well-differentiated adenocarcinoma, and immunohistochemistry revealed positive expression of CDX-2, substantiating its gastrointestinal origin . Thus, under the diagnosis of sigmoid colon cancer recurrence in left inguinal lymph nodes and synchronous abdominal wall metastasis, because abdominal wall mass was exist when primary tumor resection, we performed left inguinal lymph node dissection and resection of the abdominal wall with reconstruction using an anterolateral thigh flap, with a curative intent. Intraoperative findings showed no evidence of dissemination, distant metastasis, or other non-curative clinical factors. Pathology revealed well to moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma in both lesions. Three of the eight retrieved inguinal lymph nodes showed involvement of adenocarcinoma. The patient had a favorable postoperative course and was discharged from the hospital without any complications.
Follow-up CT one year after the inguinal lymph node dissection showed multiple distant lymph node metastases, including some in para-aortic lymph nodes. The patient received FOLFIRI as palliative chemotherapy, but died due to disease progression 51 months after inguinal lymph node dissection (Additional file ).