A 15-year-old male with history of chronic, progressive and bilateral visual loss accompanied by nyctalopia, first noticed at age 6 presented for ophthalmologic evaluation. He had been previously diagnosed with retinal dystrophy. Upon examination, his best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was counting fingers at 1 m in both eyes. Intraocular pressure was 11 mmHg in the right eye (OD) and 13 mmHg in the left eye (OS). Ocular motility was normal. Anterior segment examination was unremarkable and the lens was transparent. Fundus examination revealed fine pigmented dust in the vitreous gel, hyper and hypopigmented retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) changes forming ‘bone spicules’ scattered in the posterior pole up to the equator and pigment clumping in both macular zones. Arteries and veins were slightly narrow or attenuated .
Electroretinogram (ERG) showed diminished b-wave amplitudes in both photopic and scotopic phases with a marked reduction in the amplitude of all waves, implicit time delay of the flicker response and flattening of oscillatory potentials . The electrooculogram showed an abnormal RPE response. Automated visual fields registered a generalised decrease in sensitivity and profound central scotomas. Fluorescein angiography evidenced central hypofluorescence due to contrast blockage in the areas with pigment accumulation and patchy hyperfluorescence due to window defects in RPE atrophy areas .
The patient denied using any medication and had no relevant medical history for infectious or systemic diseases. Fundus changes and abnormal scotopic and photopic ERG responses made the diagnosis particularly difficult. The absence of nystagmus, strabismus or photophobia along with an older age of presentation and slower rate of progression made a diagnosis of Leber’s congenital amaurosis less likely, progressive CRD can have a very similar clinical presentation with ERG photopic responses initially more affected than scotopic traces, a difference that becomes more subtle as the disease progresses until it becomes negligible.
Severe affection of both rods and cones in ERG made a diagnostic distinction difficult. The presence of nyctalopia, no history of photophobia and characteristic appearance of bone spicules oriented the diagnosis towards a case of inverse RP, although CRD with macular hyperpigmentation could not be discarded completely.
The patient started follow up in the retina clinic and was instructed on the use of visual aids and genetic counseling was provided. Regular consultations were scheduled every 6 months without worsening of symptoms or BCVA; all examinations were reported as stable.
On a follow-up visit, 3 years after initial consultation, examination of the OD revealed a white asymptomatic eye with fine translucent ‘stellate’ keratic precipitates scattered over the entire endothelium and mild cellular reaction in the anterior chamber with no synechiae, iris nodules or heterochromia but subtle stromal atrophy of the iris crypts in comparison with the OS . BCVA was unchanged and IOP was 16 mmHg OD and 12 mmHg OS. Dilated fundus exam did not show any sign of vasculitis, retinitis or choroiditis. The OS showed no signs of inflammation thus matching the criteria for unilateral Fuchs’ heterochromic iridocyclitis (FHI) Visual Fields were severely affected .