A 70-year-old male patient was admitted to the emergency department with confusion and vomiting. He had no antecedent chronic disease in his past medical history. He had not been taking any prescribed medications. His complaints had started 2 weeks ago. First, a neurologist had examined him for headaches and insomnia. Any remarkable disorder had not been detected in the first physical examination. Only increased blood pressure (155/95 mmHg) had been observed. Any significant lesion had not been determined in the central nervous system imaging. Also, the major abnormality had not been detected in laboratory assessment, and the serum creatinine level had been 0,8 mg/dl. Only a salt-free diet had been recommended to him for new-onset hypertension. However, the clinial status of the patient had deteriorated over time at home. Afterward, he had been transported to the hospital by ambulance due to impaired consciousness.
On physical examination, he was confused, tachypneic (24/minute), tachycardic (106/minute), and hypertensive (170/95 mmHg). The mouth was dry; a respiratory sound decreased on the lower right side, the abdominal examination was usual, and palpable purpura with pitting edema was observed on the lower extremities.
The second laboratory results were as follows; BUN:154 mg/dl, creatinine: 19,2 mg/dl, sodium: 138 mEq/L, potassium: 6,2 mEq/L, calcium: 9,5 mg/dl, phosphorus: 9,9 mg/dl, uric acid: 12 mg/dl, glucose: 82 mg/dl, protein: 5.6 g/dl, albumin: 2,8 g/dl, ALT: 25 IU/L, AST:13 IU/L, LDH: 201 IU/L, bilirubin: 0,4 mg/dl, CRP: 164 mg/L, leukocyte:14.2 103/μl, hemoglobin: 8.2 g/dl, platelet: 390 103/μl. The urine output was less than 100 ml. Emergency dialysis (two hours) was performed promptly due to hyperkalemia and uremic symptoms. Afterward, treatment and etiological investigation were maintained in the nephrology service.
The urine sediment analysis detected isomorphic erythrocytes, pyuria, granular cast, and leukocyte cast. The urinary protein-to-creatinine ratio was 0.8 mg/g. Any pathogen was not isolated in urine cultures. On ultrasonographic examination, kidney size and echogenicity were normal. The ophthalmologic examination has not shown signs of hypertensive retinopathy and uveitis.
His clinical condition improved after the second dialysis session. Blood pressure was controlled, and the confusion resolved. Moreover, he restarted oral feeding. However, urine output did not increase and oliguria sustained. Afterward, hemoptysis onset on the third day of hospitalization. The chest imaging was performed promptly with thoracic computed tomography (CT). CT images revealed minimal pleural effusion and bilateral interstitial fibrotic areas; the image is shown in Fig. . These findings were reported in accordance with pulmonary involvement of vasculitis attack. Bronchoscopy was planned, however, the patient refused the intervention of the lung.
The immunoassay laboratory resulted in as follows; anti-glomerular basal membrane (GBM) antibody was negative, anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA) was positive with 1 /100 titer (granular pattern), anti-double-stranded DNA antibody was negative, anti-SSA / anti-SSB were negative, C3 / C4 levels were in the normal range, cytoplasmic ANCA (C-ANCA) was negative, P-ANCA was positive (formaline resistance). The ELISA test confirmed the positivity of perinuclear staining, with high titers MPO-ANCA (> 200 RU/ml). Lastly, serum protein electrophoresis did not show monoclonal gammopathy, and a serum-free light chain ratio (K/λ) was in a normal range.
A kidney biopsy was performed after several dialysis sessions. The kidney biopsy was reported as acute tubulointerstitial nephritis, and the biopsy sections are shown in Figs. and . The kidney biopsy findings were reported as follows. The five glomeruli have been detected in light microscopy. The two glomeruli have been globally sclerotic, and the others appeared intact. The damaged tubular epithelial cells and tubular atrophy have been observed. Also, erythrocytes have been observed in tubular lumens. Hyaline arteriosclerosis has been detected in the vessel wall. Interstitial areas have been infiltrated by inflammatory cells, including neutrophils, eosinophils, lymphocytes, and plasma cells. The glomerular staining has not been shown in the immunofluorescence examination. Only tubular cast material has been abundantly stained with IgA, IgM, Kappa, and Lambda. Congo Red staining has resulted in negative.
Consequently, we have decided to the MPA as a diagnosis. We preferred to a treatment similar to crescentic glomerulonephritis due to the life-threatening vasculitis. The induction regimen consisted of a combination. Pulse steroid therapy (500 mg methylprednisolone for 3 days) was administered and continued with an oral dose of 1 mg/kg/day. The parenteral cyclophosphamide (15 mg/kg for every 3 weeks) therapy was administered. We planned the duration of the cyclophosphamide regimen as 6 months. Seven plasmapheresis sessions were performed with Fresh Frozen Plasma (FFP). The patient was 72 kg, so approximately four liters of FFP were used for each session. The plasmapheresis was performed on an every-other-day basis. Clinical and radiological improvement was observed in the lung and skin lesions after induction therapy, although the dialysis requirement has remained.
Dialysis therapy continued three times a week after being discharged home. A total of 3 cycles of cyclophosphamide were administered. Despite the increased urine output, approximately 1 liter daily, estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) was still below 10 ml/min/1.73 m2. Afterward, the patient was infected with SARS-CoV-2. He was hospitalized in the intensive care unit due to severe disease. Finally, acute respiratory failure led him to death. The exact duration between the diagnosis of AKI and the patient’s death was 92 days.