A 48-year-old man, who was born with spina bifida and paraplegia waist downward, had been managing his bladder using a long-term indwelling urethral catheter. In January 2014, he developed a temperature of 39°C. Urine microbiology revealed Pseudomonas aeruginosa sensitive to ciprofloxacin; he was prescribed ciprofloxacin 500 mg twice a day for 7 days. Ultrasound examination of urinary tract revealed bilateral renal calculi, with the largest calculus in the right kidney measuring 1 cm and a large staghorn calculus in the left kidney; no hydronephrosis was observed. Isotope renogram revealed a divided renal function of 70% for the right kidney and 30% for the left kidney. There was a persistent obstructive pattern in the left kidney with a slightly reduced tracer uptake in the left upper moiety of the duplex kidney. The left upper moiety accounted for 11% of function, while the left lower moiety 18% of function. On the static scan images, however, only the left upper moiety appeared obstructed for 30 minutes with persistent retention of tracer. CT revealed large staghorn calculus in the left kidney with moderately severe left hydronephrosis, pronounced in the upper pole. The left staghorn calculus measured ~4 cm at its maximum diameter. A 13 mm calculus was noted in the left upper ureter. The left kidney measured 9.5 cm with diffuse mid- and upper-pole cortical thinning. Multiple calculi were present in the mid and lower poles of the right kidney; however, no bladder calculi were seen. Flexible uretero-renoscopy was performed rather than percutaneous nephrolithotomy because of the difficult anatomy secondary to spina bifida. It was made clear to the patient preoperatively that he would need multiple procedures.
In October 2014, left ureteroscopy with laser lithotripsy followed by insertion of left ureteric stent were carried out. A very tight stricture was found at the left ureteropelvic junction; the stricture was dilated sequentially and access sheath of size 12/14 French was used. After laser lithotripsy, 40%–50% of stones were fragmented; large amounts of stones were left behind at the end. The ureter, however, was clear and was stented with 8-French stent. In January 2015, repeat left ureterorenoscopy and laser lithotripsy were performed with a flexible ureteroscope (time taken was 3 hours). The majority of stone fragments were retrieved, while some fragments were left to pass; fragments were left in lower pole; the ureter was clear, and a 4.8-French stent was inserted in the left ureter. Ureteroscopy and laser lithotripsy were performed on both these occasions by the same senior and experienced urologist; there were no intraoperative or postoperative complications.
CT of kidney, ureters, bladder, performed 3 weeks after the second ureteroscopy, revealed some generalized shrinkage of left kidney with multifocal scarring and irregularity of its outline; there was a ureteric stent in situ on this side. There were three lower pole stones in individual calyces, two of them quite large, the largest measuring about 19 mm in diameter . There was some dilatation of the upper pole pelvicalyceal system despite the presence of the ureteric stent . There were no stones in the left ureter, but calcification was noted in the prostate, and small stone fragments were seen in the base of the bladder. The right kidney was of normal size with a small area of upper pole cortical scarring, but cortical thickness was otherwise reasonably maintained. There were, however, multiple upper and lower pole calyceal stones, the largest at the lower pole measuring about 14 mm and also a 1 cm stone in the renal pelvis.
Left JJ stent was removed easily 4 weeks after ureteroscopy. Stone analysis revealed struvite.
In April 2015, this patient’s blood pressure was recorded as 143/97 mmHg. Recording of 24-hour blood pressure was not done, and no treatment was instituted. A sample of urine was sent for microbiology; the report was “mixed growth”; antibiotic sensitivity was not reported.
In June 3, 2015, left rigid ureterorenoscopy was performed by a urological trainee. Patient received gentamicin 240 mg intravenously. The ureter was normal. A size 13/15, 46 cm access sheath was used, and flexible ureteroscopy and laser lithotripsy were carried out. Fragments were removed with a basket. It was difficult to negotiate the scope into calyceal diverticulum; vision was poor because of bleeding; some fragments remained there. Then, right rigid ureteroscopy was performed. The ureter was normal. A size 13/15, 46 cm access sheath was used. Laser lithotripsy was performed and fragments were removed with a basket. There was a possible intrarenal mucosal perforation, and so a 4.8-Fr, 26 cm, JJ stent was inserted in both ureters. Surgery lasted for 2 hours and 40 minutes. During the beginning of surgery, blood pressure was 80/40 mmHg, then blood pressure remained stable at 90/50 mmHg. Patient developed frank hematuria and sinus tachycardia and was admitted to the critical care unit. He was hemodynamically stable, with a temperature of 39°C. Hemoglobin: 116 g/L (133–167); white blood cell count: 24.5×109/L (4.0–11.0); neutrophils: 22.6×109/L (1.8–7.5); INR: 1.2 (0.9–1.3); APTT: 32 seconds (20–30); APTT ratio: 1.3 (0.8–1.2); C-reactive protein: 137 mg/L (0–10); creatinine: 64 μmol/L (0×120). He was prescribed cefuroxime intravenously nocte and mane and transferred to the spinal unit the following day. In the spinal unit, this patient had a temperature of 38°C; urine was dark red. Blood tests: INR: 1.1; hemoglobin: 120 g/L; white blood cell count: 20×109; neutrophils: 17.9×109; C-reactive protein: 168.1 mg/L. He was prescribed gentamicin for 5 days. Hematuria subsided and he was discharged home. A week later, both ureteric stents were removed; gentamicin 160 mg was administered prior to the procedure. Three days later, this patient developed temperature. CT of kidneys was requested. Hemoglobin: 128 g/L; white blood cell count: 9.6×109; C-reactive protein: 133.4 mg/L. Urine culture: P. aeruginosa. He was prescribed ciprofloxacin 500 mg twice a day for 5 days.
CT of urinary tract, performed 4 weeks after ureteroscopy, revealed a 9×7 cm subcapsular collection on the left kidney compressing the underlying parenchyma ( and ). Minor perinephric fat stranding noted. A few residual stones/fragments were seen in the lower pole calyces, the largest measuring 19 mm in size . Multiple residual stones were seen in the mid and lower pole calyces of the right kidney, the largest about 9 mm. No ureteric or bladder stones. Chest X-ray revealed elevated left hemidiaphragm and minimal atelectasis in the left lower zone. Radiologist reviewed the CT images for the purpose of percutaneous drainage of subcapsular hematoma of the left kidney. The patient had severe curvature of spine, which made percutaneous access extremely difficult. Percutaneous access was made even more challenging because the spleen was located in the path. Therefore, percutaneous drainage was not carried out; the patient was managed conservatively by monitoring the body temperature, C-reactive protein, and white blood cell count.
He was prescribed ciprofloxacin 500 mg twice a day for 5 days on empirical basis, as the laboratory did not carry out antibiotic sensitivity in the urine sample sent for culture. However, urine sample, which was sent 3 days later, showed the growth of Pseudomonas aeruginosa resistant to gentamicin and ciprofloxacin; therefore, ciprofloxacin was discontinued. The patient remained well in himself. He was prescribed ferrous sulfate 200 mg daily.
Isotope renogram, performed 8 weeks after the ureterorenoscopy, revealed deterioration in the left renal function because the study performed 7 months prior to the first ureteroscopy; the left kidney now contributed only 17% compared to the normal-looking right kidney, which contributed 83%. Renographic analysis, however, showed both kidneys were draining spontaneously without obstruction; renographic drainage curve was normal on the right, with good drainage on the left – this being an improvement over the previous study.
Ultrasound scan of left kidney, performed 9 weeks after ureterorenoscopy, showed a residual hematoma 3.3 cm in depth. CT of kidney, ureters, bladder, performed 14 weeks after ureterorenoscopy, revealed left renal subcapsular collection to be much reduced in size, now measuring about 3×2 cm along the outer posterior aspect toward the upper renal pole . There was still some inflammatory stranding in the left perinephric fat, but no hydronephrosis. Several residual calculi still present in both kidneys.
Blood pressure was 146/93 mmHg; 24-hour mean blood pressure: 130/91 mmHg. This patient was prescribed ramipril 1.25 mg daily. Four months after the third ureteroscopy, hemoglobin had increased to 157 g/L. Ethical approval for this case report was deemed not necessary by the Southport and Ormskirk Hospital NHS Trust.