Abdominal pain and fullness.
The patient was a 52-year-old Asian woman, who was diagnosed with liver dysfunction during a medical examination in her twenties. A diagnosis of autoimmune hepatitis was made at 40 years of age. When the patient was 46 years old, the patient developed ascites, which improved with oral steroids. However, with disease progression, she developed decompensated cirrhosis at 51 years old that was resistant to medical management. She was then referred to our department.
There was no other significant medical history.
The patient was a nonsmoker and had stopped drinking socially 5 years prior. Her occupation was a housewife. There was no relevant family history.
According to the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Performance Status, her performance status was 2. At the physical examination, the patient’s height was 155 cm, her weight was 47 kg, and her vitals were stable; yellowish bulbar conjunctivae, ascites, and bilateral pedal edema were observed.
The Child-Pugh score was 11 points in class C, and the Model for end stage liver disease score was 11 points. The serologic tests for CMV showed that the patient was IgG positive (+), IgM negative (-), and AG negative, which is indicative of past CMV infection. A PCR test for CMV was not performed routinely before transplantation at our facility and was not performed in this case.
Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed liver cirrhosis with ascites before LDLT.
A blood-type compatible LDLT was performed using a left lobe graft, with the patient’s second son as the donor (20 years old, CMV IgG+/IgM-, which is indicative of past CMV infection). The graft-to-recipient weight ratio was 0.73, the operation duration was 849 min, and the bleeding volume was 822 mL. At our facility, in accordance with the protocol of CMV monitoring and treatment after a liver transplantation, CMV-AG is tested twice a week, but a CMV-PCR test is not performed routinely. In addition, prophylactic ganciclovir (GCV) is not administered, but GCV is initiated when the patient becomes CMV-AG positive or in the case of a seropositive donor.
Initially, cyclophosphamide (CyA), prednisolone (PSL) and mizoribine (MIZ) were used as the postoperative immunosuppressants, in accordance with the protocol of our facility[,], however, for this patient, MIZ was replaced by mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) due to pancytopenia, and CyA was replaced by tacrolimus (FK) due to renal failure. As the patient had jaundice and persistently elevated aspartate transaminase and alanine transaminase levels, a liver biopsy was performed on the 10th day after transplantation. The histopathological examination was negative for both acute cellular rejection (ACR) and CMV hepatitis, so her condition was suspected to be drug-induced or caused by cholestasis.
Starting on the 12th day after transplantation, the patient’s anemia worsened, and she required frequent packed red blood cell transfusions. Further investigations confirmed thrombocytopenia, jaundice, and renal failure. We suspected thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA), even though the peripheral smear was negative for fragmented red blood cells, and a fresh frozen plasma transfusion and FK dose reduction were carried out. The CMV-AG remained negative, and there were no clinical findings that were characteristic of a CMV infection, but prophylactic GCV administration was initiated. Thereafter, the thrombocytopenia gradually improved. On the 20th day after transplantation, the patient reported abdominal pain and black-colored stools, so upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was performed, which showed multiple gastric ulcers . A biopsy tissue sample, taken from an ulcer, showed large cells with intranuclear inclusions with hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining , and CMV-positive cells were observed through immunostaining . Once the diagnosis of CMV gastroenteritis was confirmed, GCV, which had already been initiated, was continued, and the dosage of all 3 immunosuppressants, FK, PSL, and MMF, was reduced.
On the 26th day after transplantation, the patient had frequent, watery diarrhea, for which a lower gastrointestinal endoscopy was performed, and a deep ulcer was observed in the transverse colon . The biopsy tissue diagnosis of the ulcerative lesion revealed large cells with intranuclear inclusions with HE-staining and CMV-positive cells with immunostaining . On the 28th day after transplantation, we noted the findings of abdominal pain, fever and an increased inflammatory response. A plain abdominal CT scan revealed intraperitoneal free air adjacent to the transverse colon and hemorrhagic ascites in the pelvis .
The patient was diagnosed with gastrointestinal perforation, and an emergency surgery was performed. When the abdomen was incised, contaminated ascites were not observed. In the transverse colon, an impending perforation with a thinned serous membrane was confirmed.
The rejection activity index score of the liver tissues collected during the surgery was found to be P2, B1, and V1 during the histopathologic examination, indicating ACR.