A 32-year-old, gravida 2, para 1, woman was referred to our hospital at 32 weeks of gestation. During her routine antenatal checkups, frequent premature ventricular contractions were identified before her referral. Her medical and family histories were unremarkable. Fetal ultrasound revealed a maximum vertical pocket of 6.4 cm, an amniotic fluid index of 20 cm, and an mean estimated fetal weight of 2035 ± 1.1 g (standard deviation). Although fetal ascites was noted, no structural anomalies were detected. On fetal Doppler, the umbilical artery pulsatility index was 1.18; the middle cerebral artery pulsatility index and peak systolic velocity were 1.84 and 30.4 cm/s, respectively. Intermittent ductus and pulmonary venosus retrograde flow and pulsatile umbilical venous flow were detected, and the preload index changed from 0.49 to 1.0. The cardiothoracic area ratio was 29.3%, moderate tricuspid and mitral regurgitation was confirmed, the ventricular filling was biphasic–monophasic, and the left and right Tei indexes were 0.44 and 0.52, respectively. On cardiotocography, the fetal heart rate at baseline was 120 bpm with minimal variability; moreover, accelerations and decelerations were not noted. Although premature ventricular contractions were occasionally observed and fetal heart movement had an abnormal impression (Additional file ), we diagnosed the patient with premature restriction of foramen ovale (PRFO) based on the diameter of the fetal foramen ovale (FO), which was 3 mm. The FO-to-atrial septal length was 0.2, and the right-to-left FO Doppler velocity was 0.5 m/s. A hypermobile atrial septum was detected, and blood flow through the FO was bidirectional. Postnatally, we observed that the abnormal heart movement impression implied AV dissociation.
After corticosteroids were administered for fetal lung maturation, cesarean section was indicated due to a right heart overload, which was characterized by fetal ascites and abnormal fetal venous Doppler velocity caused by the PRFO. The female neonate weighed 1956 g, with an Apgar score of 8 and 9 at 1 and 5 min, respectively. Her umbilical arterial blood pH was 7.360. She was admitted into the neonatal intensive care unit for respiratory and circulatory management. In the neonatal intensive care unit, a surfactant was administered for respiratory distress syndrome, and she remained stable with directional positive airway pressure. She was diagnosed with PRFO because an FO diameter of 2 mm was restrictive, and severe tricuspid regurgitation was confirmed. Furthermore, a diagnosis of JET was made because the 12-lead electrocardiogram revealed a neonatal heart rate of 158 bpm with narrow QRS and AV dissociation .
Postnatally, the fetal M-mode ultrasound examination revealed AV dissociation , which could not be noted prenatally. Her heart rate increased to 250 bpm, and amiodarone was administered; however, this was discontinued because of decreasing blood pressure. Thereafter, she was treated with flecainide, which controlled the JET rate from 120 to 150 bpm. The neonate responded well to the treatment.