A 72-year-old white Caucasian man, without prior history of heart disease was admitted with symptoms of weakness, dizziness and chest discomfort for several hours. Physical examination revealed low blood pressure (85/50 mmHg) and a weak, regular and rapid pulse. The electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a wide-complex tachycardia with LBBB morphology and left axis deviation. Because of continuing hemodynamic instability, the patient was cardioverted to sinus rhythm with a single 300 J shock.
The ECG during the episode of the tachycardia was consistent with sustained VT of right ventricular origin. Post-cardioversion ECG showed negative T-waves at the inferior and precordial leads with a QRS duration of 110 ms and the presence of an epsilon wave in V1 .
Chemistries were normal with the exception of troponin I which was positive. The patient was subsequently started on metoprolol. Continuous ECG monitoring revealed multiple episodes of non-sustained VT. Cardiac ultrasound examination showed a normal left ventricle and a slightly enlarged right ventricle with local dyskinesia and diastolic bulging of the free wall .
As a diagnosis of ARVC was most likely, the patient underwent simultaneous cardiac catheterization and electrophysiological study. His coronary arteries and left ventricle were normal. Right ventriculography in the right anterior oblique view confirmed the local hypokinesia of the free wall with diastolic bulging. During the electrophysiological study, a sustained VT was provoked with identical morphology to the one on admission. The VT responded to antitachycardia pacing and the defibrillation threshold was 17 J.
A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan that followed revealed diffuse areas of fat tissue at the right ventricular wall especially localized at the free and lateral segments, while multiple small aneurysms were also present . Right ventricular ejection fraction was 30%. Left ventricular free wall and intraventricular septum were free of disease. Finally, a signal-averaged ECG was positive for late potentials. Based on the clinical presentation and subsequent work-up, a definite diagnosis of ARVC was made. The patient was treated with an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) and discharged on sotalol.