A 34-year-old right-handed Hispanic male presented initially to an another hospital after a new-onset generalized seizure while driving. He emigrated from Mexico 15 years prior to presentation and has not returned for 6 years. He traveled to many states around the US for work, including Texas, Louisiana, Virginia, Florida, and Nebraska, but has lived in Alabama for the last 11 years. On admission to an outside hospital, he underwent CT head and subsequent MRI brain, which revealed a multi-lobulated cystic lesion of the left fronto-temporal region. A lumbar puncture was performed with cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) labs, culture, cytology, and flow cytometry; all of which were unremarkable. He was evaluated by an outside neurologist and started on oral phenytoin for seizure control. He was subsequently discharged with follow-up at our facility for further management.
Upon evaluation in clinic, he had no focal deficits on neurological examination. Imaging from the another hospital was reviewed. The CT head non-contrast showed a large left fronto-temporal multi-lobulated cystic lesion ~6.5 cm × 4.5 cm × 4 cm in size and primarily centered around the sylvian fissure, causing significant mass effect and 0.5 cm midline shift. Calcifications were present in the central confluence of the cysts. The largest cyst cavity was in the left temporal lobe and did not appear to communicate with the temporal horn. The MRI brain, with and without contrast with T2-weighted sequences, revealed high intensity within the cyst, similar to CSF . FLAIR sequences showed minimal increased signal in the cyst walls. Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) sequences showed no increased diffusion restriction. Contrast-enhanced imaging showed no peripheral enhancement of the lesion. Serology for serum cysticercosis IgG antibodies was positive.
The patient was treated with dexamethasone 8 mg intravenously every 8 hours on the day prior to surgery and his home phenytoin dose was continued. The CT of his chest, abdomen, and pelvis with contrast were obtained to rule out other possible diagnoses on the differential, including metastatic disease and hydatid cysts; this was unremarkable. The patient was taken to the operating room the following day for surgery and pre-treated with 10 mg of dexamethasone intravenously. A large left pterional craniotomy was performed to sufficiently expose portions of the left frontal and temporal lobes, as well as the sylvian fissure (see ). Upon opening the dura, discoloration was noted in the superficial pia and arachnoid layers, consistent with chronic inflammation. Stealth navigation was used to plan a trajectory into the anterior and inferior portion or the large temporal cyst and a Touhey needle was inserted through the middle temporal gyrus to aspirate cyst contents, of which 6 mL of clear fluid was obtained. This was performed prior to further dissection to allow for relaxation of the brain. A sylvian dissection was performed, during which the cyst began to evaginate on its own [Figure and ]. Gentle traction was applied to the cyst, which resulted in intra-operative rupture, spilling the cyst contents within the subarachnoid space . Copious irrigation was used to clear the cyst fluid and the patient was administered a second dose of 6 mg dexamethasone intravenously. With completion of the sylvian dissection, the cyst complex was removed en bloc with no intra-operative evidence of residual lesion . A post-operative neurological exam revealed no neurologic or speech deficits. Non-contrast CT head and MRI brain with and without contrast were obtained on post-operative day 1, which showed expected encephalomalacia surrounding the resection cavity, with no evidence of residual lesion .
Post-operatively, the patient was started on a 14-day course of oral albendazole 400 mg twice daily. He was discharged from the hospital on post-operative day 5 without complications. He was treated with dexamethasone while undergoing oral anti-parasitic therapy and discharged on a slow steroid taper. He remained on his admission dose of phenytoin at discharge. On scheduled outpatient follow-up, he felt well. Surveillance CT head revealed stable left fronto-temporal encephalomalacia and no evidence of recurrence .
Neuropathology was consistent with neurocysticercosis in racemose cyst formation . Grossly, the specimen consisted of tan-white membranous tissue measuring 3.7 cm × 2.5 cm × 0.6 cm. Microscopic examination demonstrated a cyst structure larger than a classic cysticercus cyst, exhibiting multiple convolutions and foldings with rounded protusions at the surface of the tegument. The surface lining exhibited relatively well-preserved microtriches resembling microvilli. Within the inner reticular layer, several small oval or circular calcified bodies (calcareous corpuscles) were present. Scolices and rostellum (hooklets) were not present within this specimen, which is consistent with the racemose cyst variant.