We report the case of a 36-year-old Chinese woman with an 18-year history of PD. The extrapyramidal diseases were negative in her family history, but her parents had a consanguineous marriage (Her mother's grandmother and her father's great-grandfather were shared parents). There was no history of drug, alcohol or tobacco consumption, poisoning, or head injury. Her symptoms started at the age of 18 years with a slow progression, and resting tremors, bradykinesia, and rigidity developed later. Her initial symptom was dystonia of the left lower limb, which was characterized by the toes being stiff and flexed during walking. She was diagnosed with dopamine-responsive dystonia at the age of 24 years and given levodopa/benserazide (50/12.5 mg/day) treatment, and consequently, she obtained considerable therapeutic benefit. Her symptoms improved significantly and progressed slowly, she did not return to the department for further consultation, and she self-adjusted her medications according to her symptoms.
At the age of 30 years, she was confirmed as being pregnant and referred to our department. Her motor symptoms were well-controlled by taking levodopa/benserazide 100/25 mg two times a day. The neurological examination revealed clear symptoms of PD (“off” periods), including mild hypomimia, mild rigidity of the bilateral limbs, bradykinesia, resting tremor (predominant on the left), and dystonic posture of her left leg. Other neurological examinations were normal. Her total score on the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale motor section (UPDRS III) was 16, and the Hoehn and Yahr (H-Y) staging was II. Her laboratory results (including routine blood examination, ceruloplasmin, and thyroid-related hormones) and the brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings were normal. According to the Movement Disorder Society's clinical diagnostic criteria for PD, the patient was diagnosed with PD.
During the first trimester of her pregnancy, her PD symptoms were similar to the preconception period. However, in gestation week 16, the patient refused to continue taking levodopa/benserazide because her PD symptoms improved for no apparent reason, with the UPDRS III being 6. At 32 gestational weeks, she gave birth to a healthy baby boy with an Apgar score of 9 through an uneventful vaginal delivery without complications. The infant was fed milk formula to avoid exposure to antiparkinsonian (anti-PD) drugs. Two weeks after her pregnancy, the PD symptoms of the patient became aggravated; therefore, she continued to take levodopa/benserazide (100/25 mg two times a day) and achieved a good curative effect. The child was followed up for 6 years, and his general neurological examination and the routine blood tests were normal.
To further define the diagnosis and identify the causative variant, at the age of 34 years, we recommended complete exome sequencing monitoring of the patient and her parents. Genomic DNA was extracted from the peripheral blood leukocytes using standard procedures. High-throughput sequencing and exon capture technology were performed. A homozygous mutation of p.G284R (chr6-162,206,825, c.850G > C) in exon 7 of PRKN, which was inherited from her unaffected father and mother, was detected. The sequencing results are shown in . This mutation was demonstrated to be a pathogenic mutation for PD. All these results confirmed the diagnosis of autosomal recessive YOPD due to the PRKN homozygous mutation. At present (age 36 years), the patient is taking rasagiline 1 mg/day, in addition to levodopa/benserazide 100/25 mg two times a day, and her neurological status is currently stable. To show the patient's onset and treatment process more intuitively, an illustration of this patients clinical history has been drawn and is shown in .