In this case presentation, approval from the Nagasaki University Hospital review board was not required and written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report.
A 30-year-old woman was referred to the department of special care dentistry at Nagasaki University Hospital for dental treatment because she had experienced frequent episodes of nausea and unconsciousness during dental treatment after the administration of widely used amide-type local anesthetics at dental clinics. When the patient visited the department of special care dentistry at the Nagasaki University Hospital, a medical examination and screening test were required to identify an available non-allergic local anesthetic through the algorism of clinical guidelines for patients with a history of allergic reactions because the possibility of allergic reaction to local anesthetics could not be completely ruled out. However, as she refused to undergo screening tests using any of the amide-type local anesthetics she had been administered previously, procaine hydrochloride, which is an ester-form local anesthetic, was the only agent tested on her at the department of dermatology. At the completion of the test, she was informed that the test with 1% procaine hydrochloride had not shown any abnormal reaction. After obtaining informed consent, she was scheduled to undergo a drug challenge test using minimum test dose (0.1 mL) for gingival mucosa and dental treatment using 1% procaine hydrochloride under careful monitoring of vital signs.
Because of the lack of commercially available prefilled cartridges of the desired agents, we consulted with the hospital pharmacy on the method of preparation of procaine hydrochloride 10 mg/mL with 0.005 mg of adrenaline (adrenaline equivalent to a concentration of 1:200,000). As suggested by the pharmacy staff, we added 1 drop of adrenaline to 1 mL of procaine hydrochloride (10 mg/mL) using a 27-G needle to add 5 μg of adrenaline immediately before administering it. After confirming no side-effects of the drug challenge test using a minimum test dose (0.1 mL) for gingival under mucosa topical anesthesia using ethyl aminobenzoate, 5 minutes later, we provided an infiltrated initial dose of 0.5 mL of procaine hydrochloride into the gingival mucosa for resin restoration of the anterior teeth. Treatment was started after confirming the analgesic effect, and if pain was reported, an additional dose was planned to be added as appropriate. However, dental treatment was completed because the first initial dose of total 0.6 mL provided a sufficient analgesic effect.
Blood pressure, heart rate, and arterial oxygen saturation were monitored to evaluate her overall general status during the treatment. No abnormalities of the vital signs were evident 10 minutes after inducing local anesthesia. No abnormalities were identified before the end of the treatment, and the sensation of paralysis in the anesthetized region lasted for 55 minutes. The patient was subsequently scheduled for approximately ten treatments under anesthesia with procaine hydrochloride to complete the initial treatment plan .
At the 6-month follow-up of the treatment at the outpatient center of the department of special care dentistry, the patient complained of the failure to conceive as a result of the inability to use local anesthesia for possible surgical treatments. We explained the mechanisms of allergic reactions to local anesthetics and recommended that she undergo another intradermal test at the dermatology department. She understood that amide-type local anesthetics could be used for the allergic screening test because ester-type local anesthetics, such as procaine hydrochloride, which we had used, are generally considered more likely to cause allergic reactions based on medical reports.
One year after the initial treatment, the patient requested a screening test using Patch test and scratch testing at the dermatology department of the hospital. Lidocaine hydrochloride (Xylocaine cartridge®; lidocaine hydrochloride 36 mg/1.8 mL with adrenaline [0.0125 mg/mL] 1:80,000) and propitocaine hydrochloride (Citanest Octapressin®; prilocaine 30 mg/mL with feripressin [0.045 unit]) and Methyl 4-hydroxybenzoate showed only mild erythema on scratch testing, but adrenaline did not show erythema symptoms. Therefore she was informed that lidocaine hydrochloride (lidocaine injection as a single agent) without any vasoconstrictor plus preservative or procaine hydrochloride would be safe for her. The dermatologist also pointed out that she showed hypersensitivity to pain because of vagotonia during the test.
Seven years later, she re-visited our hospital for the treatment of pain in the mandibular right second molar. At the time, an improved form of lidocaine hydrochloride was prepared after removing the preservative methyl-4-hydroxybenzoate (methylparaben) had become available. Therefore, we conducted screening tests for four types of lidocaine hydrochloride among amide-type local anesthetics. All results from scratch and intradermal tests for lidocaine hydrochloride, except prilocaine hydrochloride, were negative. After she acquired sufficient information on the features of each agent, she opted to undergo local anesthesia using mepivacaine hydrochloride. However, infiltration of 7 mL of mepivacaine hydrochloride failed to provide a pain-free condition. After obtaining her consent, we added 2 mL of the new type of lidocaine hydrochloride (ORA injection cartridge®), allowing successful hemi-section of the mandibular right second molar.