An 84-year-old Japanese male was presented with left abdominal pain, and CT scan findings revealed a tumor of the left ureter and hydronephrosis. The patient underwent a laparoscopic left radical nephroureterectomy, and a pathological examination indicated urothelial carcinoma with invasion of periureteric fat and metastasis of lymph nodes in the renal hilum. Four months later, a chest CT scan showed multiple lung metastases, and chemotherapy (gemcitabine and carboplatin) was then given as first-line therapy. After 10 courses, the areas of lung metastasis were increased and the treatment was changed to pembrolizumab (200 mg, every 3 weeks). Following the second cycle of pembrolizumab infusion, acute pain and swelling in the shoulders, elbows, wrists, and finger joints developed, accompanied by edema in both hands . Laboratory tests revealed elevated inflammatory markers (CRP, 7.61 mg/dL; matrix metalloproteinase-3, 330.1 ng/mL), whereas the rheumatoid factor and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody were negative. Ultrasonography showed increased vascularization in symptomatic joints, while X-ray analysis of the hands did not show any osteoclastic lesion. Based on the symptoms and laboratory findings, the diagnosis was the RS3PE syndrome. The medical history of the patient included early-stage gastric cancer and thyroid cancer, which had been treated surgically and were in remission. There was no past medical or family history of connective tissue disease or inflammatory arthritis.
Pembrolizumab treatment was suspended and prednisolone, an oral corticosteroid, was started at 0.25 mg/kg/day (15 mg/day). The next day, joint pain began to improve quickly, while the other symptoms showed gradual improvement. After 2 weeks of treatment, all symptoms had disappeared and inflammatory markers returned to normal. Thus, pembrolizumab therapy was resumed and prednisolone gradually tapered to 9 mg/day at 2 months after beginning administration. After 6 months of pembrolizumab retreatment, prednisolone was tapered to 3 mg/day. The lung metastasis did not show progression during the cessation of pembrolizumab or after its beginning, and the patient has remained stable after resumption without RS3PE syndrome flare-up or other irAEs. The present strategy for this case is further reduction of prednisolone medication and eventual termination in the absence of a flare-up of symptoms.