An 80-year-old woman with two previous surgical aortic valve replacements (SAVRs) was admitted with decompensated heart failure. In 2002, she required SAVR because of severe degenerative aortic valve stenosis, and a bioprosthesis was implanted (the type and size of the prosthesis were unknown because the surgery was performed in another hospital). In 2012, due to degeneration of the bioprosthesis (severe stenosis), the patient required a new SAVR. In this case, a 19 mm Mitroflow™ biological valve (Sorin Group, Canada) was implanted, which failed in 2021 because of severe intraprosthetic regurgitation (mildly dilated left ventricle with normal ejection fraction).
The case was evaluated by the heart team, and valve-in-valve (ViV) TAVI was selected to avoid the high surgical risk (Society of Thoracic Surgeons score of 7.8%; Euroscore II score of 8.2%). Computed tomography (CT) before TAVI showed a high risk of coronary obstruction [high implantation of previous prosthesis and short distance to the origins of both coronary arteries: 3 mm for the left main (LM) and 5.8 mm for the right coronary artery (RCA), and a small virtual transcatheter heart valve to coronary distance (<4 mm)].
A 23 mm self-expandable Navitor™ valve (Abbott, IL, USA) was implanted following the usual technique with chimney stenting of both coronary arteries (using a 4 × 23 mm and a 3 × 23 mm drug-eluting stents for the LM and the RCA, respectively). Valve post-dilation with a non-compliant (NC) balloon (and kissing balloon with both stents) was necessary because of the high residual gradient (30 mmHg), but it was insufficient. Therefore, a high-pressure NC balloon was used to fracture the Mitroflow™ prosthesis ring, which led to the disappearance of the gradient, but the balloon ruptured unfortunately, and a small shunt between the left and right side was observed (; , ).
An iatrogenic VSD was suspected and confirmed by transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) . The VSD was small, restrictive (6 × 4 mm septal defect, 0.23 cm2 area, estimated peak velocity of 4.95 m/s, peak gradient of 94 mmHg, Qp/Qs of 1.4:1, and mildly elevated pulmonary artery systolic pressure of 39 mmHg by TTE), and well tolerated by the patient (the clinical exam revealed a new holosystolic murmur with a preserved second sound, without heart failure); therefore, initial conservative management was deemed appropriate. During her hospital admission, the patient required a permanent pacemaker because of a third-degree atrioventricular block. She was discharged from the hospital 4 days after TAVI.
During the follow-up, the patient developed severe haemolytic anaemia requiring blood transfusions. Heart failure occurred again (dyspnoea at rest, bibasal crackles, and elevated N-terminal pro B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) 19 790 pg/mL; to rule out heart failure with a negative predictive value of 94–98%, the NT-proBNP value should be <300 pg/mL for acute heart failure and <125 pg/mL for chronic heart failure) for which she was readmitted to the hospital, and percutaneous closure of the iatrogenic VSD was scheduled (see , ). A hydrophilic wire and a Judkins right catheter were used to retrogradely cross the defect (from the left to the right side; previous failed antegrade crossing from the right side). The wire was snared with a gooseneck snare, exteriorized from the femoral vein, and an arteriovenous circuit was created. The Amplatzer™ (Abbott, IL, USA) sheath was advanced over the wire from the femoral vein to the ascending aorta. The selected device for VSD closure (6 mm Amplatzer™ muscular VSD occluder) was advanced to the tip of the sheath, and the entire system was withdrawn to the left ventricular outflow tract. The left disk was opened against the membranous septum, a gentle traction of the device was then performed, and the right disk was finally deployed, without any interaction with the leaflets (; , ).
An acceptable result was achieved without immediate complications, but a residual shunt persisted after the procedure. Due to the high risk of aortic, mitral, and tricuspid valve interactions, it was decided to end the procedure and wait for proper endothelialization. However, after 2 weeks, the patient was readmitted to the hospital with the same symptoms (haemolytic anaemia and heart failure), so a second attempt was warranted.
In the second procedure, the defect was retrogradely crossed again and a smaller device (12 × 9 mm Amplatzer™ Vascular Plug II) was used, without complications (; , ). A negligible shunt still persisted, but we decided to end the procedure. Subsequently, the patient’s recovery was uneventful, and she was discharged after 4 days (; , ). She did not require new hospital admissions or blood transfusions during follow-up. The last cardiology visit was in May 2023 and the patient was asymptomatic.