A 29-year-old obese male, who lives in the coastal town of Limon, who originally consulted on the 2nd of May for right lower quadrant pain, who was documented to have signs of peritoneal irritation, a positive McBurney and Rovsing sign, and who intraoperatively was diagnosed with an acute appendicitis with perforation and released from the local hospital after an open appendectomy and abdominal cavity washout the day after in stable condition. On May 5th, the patient consults due to cough, mild dyspnea and fever. He was tested for SARS-COV-2 and told to self-isolate in his home until the results from the nasopharyngeal swab were obtained. On May 9th, the results come back positive. Two days later, due to continuing fevers and general malaise, the patient is started on hydroxychloroquine at a dose of 400 mg q/12 h for 5 days.
On May 21st, the patient is seen in the ER of Limon hospital where he is evaluated for fever, moderate dyspnea, tachypnea, right lower quadrant pain and general malaise. An abdominal, pelvic and chest computerized tomography (CT) are performed. Imaging shows low grade bilateral atelectasis, unilateral pleural effusion and an abdominal fluid collection of approximately 570 cc . Laboratory test show a leukocytosis of 18.070 white blood cells per field with increased ferritin, D dimer and reactive thrombocytosis. A nasopharyngeal swab was collected and was positive. The patient is started on Cefotaxime and enoxaparin and transferred to the National COVID Center in capital city of San Jose.
On May 22nd, the general surgery service in the adjacent Hospital Mexico is consulted due to the abdominal collection and it is determined that surgical drainage is required. The patient had an exploratory laparotomy which retrieved approximately 500 ccs of haemopurulent fluid in the interloop space of the caecum and ascending colon which culture a multisensitive E. coli and E. Faecalis. The procedure had an operating time of 34 min. The patient was returned postoperatively to the National COVID Center where his antibiotics were modified to include metronidazole and vancomycin. The transfer time from the COVID center to the OR was not measured.
On May 23 and 26th the patient had two negative nasopharyngeal swabs and was declared cured of COVID-19. On the 27th, he once again presented with fevers, abdominal pain and vomiting, he was therefore discharged for the COVID center and transferred to the surgical service of Hospital Mexico where on abdominal CT another fluid collection of approximately 500 cc was observer. On May 29th (pod#27 appendectomy, pod#7 infected hematoma drainage) a diagnostic laparoscopy that was converted into an open laparotomy yielded an interloop adhesion as well as a ceacal plastron with an additional turbulent hematic fluid collection in the paracolic space. The patient was managed with an open abdomen and negative pressure wound therapy. His antibiotic coverage was updated to ertapenem and ampicillin. On June 3rd the patient is taken once again to the OR for abdominal washout and fascia closure. The patient finished his IV antibiotics on the 7th of June and was discharged in good condition the following day.