A 56-year-old male patient underwent treatment at the clinic of faculty surgery of Sechenov University for complaints of pain and discomfort in the epigastric region, general weakness and difficulty in passing food through the esophagus. The physical status of the patient was consistent with ASA II. On esophagogastroduodenoscopy: the mucous membrane of the esophagus was gray. The mucous membrane of the stomach was pale pink. In the cardiac region, a voluminous neoplasm was detected, dense, bleeding during a biopsy and spreading to the cardiac part of the esophagus. The neoplasm made it difficult to insert an endoscope into the stomach. The histological examination allowed to diagnose a low-grade adenocarcinoma of the stomach. On computed tomography (CT) and x-ray examination of the abdominal organs with intravenous contrast: the wall of the stomach in the proximal region, along the lesser curvature over a large area, was unevenly thickened to 27 mm; actively accumulating the contrast drug. The outer contour of the wall in this area was clear, paragastric lymph nodes were detected with a size of 14 mm (in a large number and size along the lesser curvature). The neoplasm extended to the esophagus up to 17–20 mm (invasion?). The aortic diameter at the level of the renal arteries was 18 mm; in the infrarenal region, 20 mm lower than the main renal arteries. An expansion of up to 60 mm was visualized, with parietal thrombosis particularly pronounced along the anterior wall, 20 mm thick; a thrombus with diffusely uneven calcification. The length of aneurysm was 105 mm extended to the bifurcation.
The patient underwent laparotomy. During the check-up of the abdominal cavity, no ascites, distant metastases were detected. The liver was macroscopically unchanged. Regional lymph nodes enlarged to 12–16 mm, were identified along the vessels of the celiac trunk paracardiacally. In the cardiac region of the stomach spreading to the bottom and to the middle third of the stomach body, mainly along the lesser curvature with transition to the anterior and posterior walls and spreading to the abdominal esophagus, a tumor of 10 × 5 cm in size was identified , sprouting the serous cover, growing into the left crus of the diaphragm.
No changes in the large and small intestine were detected. The gall bladder was not enlarged, its walls were unchanged, it did not contain concrements. In the infrarenal section of the aorta, aneurysmal expansion of up to 10 cm long was detected, aortic diameter up to 65 mm, not extending to the iliac vessels. A gastrectomy was performed with a resection of the abdominal and lower thoracic esophagus with the application of a manual double-row Roux-en -Y esophagojejunal anastomosis, as well as cholecystectomy and D2 lymphadenectomy. Abdominal cavity was lavaged with 2 L of antiseptic solutions. The parietal peritoneum was dissected. The infra-renal section of the aorta was up to 7 cm in diameter . The aneurysm neck was 2 cm. The aorta under the renal arteries and the initial sections of the common iliac arteries were mobilized. The aorta was pinched immediately under the renal arteries and 1 cm above the bifurcation. Thrombectomy was performed. Four lumbar arteries were stitched. The proximal anastomosis between the aorta and the synthetic linear prosthesis of 18 × 9 × 9 mm in the end-to-end type was formed by a continuous winding suture with the “Prolene” 5-0 thread. The prosthesis was clamped, and the aortic clamp was removed. The end-to-end distal anastomosis of the prosthesis and aorta branch was formed by continuous winding suture with the “Prolene” 6-0 thread . Before the start of blood flow, heparin 5000 units is injected intravenously to prevent thrombosis.
Histological results: the detected morphological signs corresponded to a low-grade mixed adenocarcinoma of the stomach according to Lauren’s classification, with invasion of subserous tissue . In 8 of 29 distant lymph nodes, cancer metastases were present (pT3N3aM0 R0 stage IIIB TNM 8).
The postoperative period proceeded without features and complications. After the control x-ray on the 5th day after the surgery, the patient began to eat through the mouth in full. On the 7th day after the surgery, the patient was discharged home in satisfactory condition. The patient received 8 courses of chemotherapy (FOLFOX) and there were no local or distant recurrence by CT of the abdomen and upper gastrointestinal tract endoscopy during 1 year follow up.