A 24-year-old man came to our dermatology outpatient office with a 1-week history of asymptomatic skin lesions which had developed densely on his face, neck and upper anterior chest. Physical examination revealed multiple cuticolor follicular papules with or without central umbilication, nodules and acne-like lesions. Some of them were covered with reddish brown crusts . Based on his clinical symptom, the presumptive diagnosis of this patient was syringoma. Differential diagnoses including steatocystoma multiplex and trichoepithelioma were also under consideration. The dermatoscopic features of these diseases have been demonstrated to be different [–]. Therefore, dermatoscopy examination has the potential to help in diagnosing this patient. A dermatoscopy examination was performed randomly on 17 papules on his face. Surprisingly, the dermatoscopic images of twelve (12/17, 70.6%) papules showed circular or quasi-circular whitish amorphous structure with a central brownish keratin plug . This dermatoscopic pattern is the typical“white jade coin pendant” sign which we have observed in another patient of T. marneffei infection before . The dermatoscopic characteristics of four (4/17, 23.5%) papules showed irregular whitish amorphous structure with hemorrhagic area of reddish brown color . One papule (1/17, 5.9%) presented an irregular homogeneous whitish amorphous structure . Because the dermatoscopic images provided the diagnostic clues of T. marneffei infection, further relevant examination was performed.
A few days later, the skin scrapings culture grew fungi. The fungi grew as fluffy whitish colonies that produced red-wine colored diffusible pigment on Sabouraud dextrose agar . Staining with lactophenol cotton blue revealed the hyphae were highly branched and these branched hyphae had already undergone arthroconidiogenesis . Histopathology of a skin biopsy sampling from a papule on upper anterior chest revealed abundant yeast-like organisms in the cytoplasm of histocytes by periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) stain. The organisms were spherical to oval, about 3–8 um in diameter and occasional contained septum . For serological detection of HIV, the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was used as screening test followed by Western blot for confirmation. The patient’s blood specimen was repeatably reactive by ELISA and was also positive by Western blot for anti-HIV-1 antibody. The final diagnosis of this patient was T. marneffei and HIV co-infection.
After the 2-week treatment with intravenous amphotericin B and antiretroviral therapy (ART), the patient’s condition improved. Thus, he was discharged with oral itraconazole (200 mg twice daily). During 3-month follow-up, his cutaneous lesions were substantially improved, while the oral itraconazole were continuously used to prevent relapses of T. marneffei infection.