The pregnancy of a 34-year-old, Caucasian fourth gravida was uneventful until 27 + 6 weeks of gestation, when the mother was admitted to a regional hospital with respiratory infection. The woman suffered from H1N1 influenza and experienced respiratory insufficiency. She was transferred to a central hospital intensive care unit. While the mother was ventilated and sedated for ten days, fetal condition was monitored closely by ultrasound examination every other day. At 28 + 1 weeks, the female fetus showed adequate growth (estimated fetal weight: 1116 grams, P50) and Doppler measurements. Of interest, a fetal megacystis was evident (bladder sagittal length: 6.2 cm), but no malformations were evident. At 28 + 2 weeks, the megacystis was less pronounced. In addition, moderate, isolated ascites was present. Two days later the fetal urinary bladder was small, ascites was moderate, and cyst formation was seen adjacent to the bladder and the abdominal wall; in the following week, the cyst was no longer present. Both bladder size and ascites quantity remained constant. At 29 + 4 weeks the amount of the fetal ascites had doubled. Doppler ultrasound and cardiotocography measurements indicated deterioration of fetal condition. The infant was thus delivered via caesarean section. At birth the girl presented with respiratory distress and a severely distended abdomen. APGAR scores were 3/7/8, and umbilical cord arterial pH was 7.27. Birth weight was 1570 grams (P65) and head circumference was 27.5 cm (P50). After initial stabilisation, intubation, and surfactant treatment, high-frequency oscillation was commenced. At bedside, an abdominal ultrasound examination was performed. The ultrasound showed extensive, isolated ascites, a small urinary bladder normal in appearance, and an unremarkable female genitourinary tract. The subsequent treatment was ascites drainage. Biochemical analysis of the drained clear yellow fluid indicated its urinary nature (creatinine level: 2.17 mg/dl). Because of anuria despite normal blood pressure, an in-out urinary catheter was inserted six hours after birth. The patient remained oliguric and the ascites recurred until a Foley catheter was inserted. As we suspected a connection between the bladder and the peritoneal cavity, we instilled blue dye intravesically. Leakage of dye from the ascitic drain confirmed the connection . With the blocked catheter in place, urine production immediately normalised. Fourteen days later the catheter was removed and spontaneous micturition was unremarkable. A micturating cystourethrogram at age 5 weeks was also without pathological findings. After an uneventful further clinical course, the patient was discharged home at the age of 39 + 3 weeks. Follow-up examinations until the age of 1 year were uneventful.