A 43 year-old right-handed woman with medical history of episodic depression presented with transient memory and attentional deficits after an episode of a gastric bleeding. She also reported episodes of lacunar amnesia and another kind of episode with sudden loss of consciousness and hypotonia, lasting for 3 or 4 min, which looked like sleep attacks.
Three months after symptoms-onset, one of these transient episodes induced a car accident with a minor head trauma (normal score in the initial Glasgow Coma Scale). The day after the accident, partial visual loss of the left eye, left tinnitus, partial left hearing loss and weakness of the left arm occurred. and two months later, she developed a speech disorder. She was then referred to the Neurology Departement of Besançon.
She worked in the ordering service of an optician. She was divorced 3 years ago and she lived alone with her two children (14 and 18 years-old). She had a twin brother who committed suicide at 22 years old and one healthy older sister. Her grandmother also committed suicide (hung herself). Neurological examination showed visual deficit mimicking cerebral visual impairment (see below neuropsychological testing), slurred-speech, non anatomical sensory loss including the left face and the left lower limb, and a left weakness with positive clinical signs; Hoover sign and drift without pronation [, ], as well as in-coordinate limb movements that were both variable and distractible.
Language examination (by a speech therapist) showed a language disorder with anomia, dysprosodia, spasmodic dysphonia, and stuttering. Picture-naming tests were impossible due to visual impairment which was discordant with the fact that reading and writing were not affected. Neuropsychological assessment showed attentional fluctuation (especially in the visual domain), memory impairment and dysexecutive syndrome with working memory impairment, flexibility disorders, and sensitivity to interference. A complex and atypical cerebral visual impairment was observed with a simultanagnosia, a left unilateral spatial neglect and mental imagery deficit. She only processed local information when presented with a visual scene. As a compensatory strategy, she followed the line of Rey’s figure point by point with her finger and hid some parts of the figure to limit visual interferences to perform the copy. Although during the copy of the Rey complex figure she was not able to process the global information, her reproduction did not display any spatial disorganization.
Psychiatric evaluation showed elements of histrionic personality disorder, such as seduction and immature behavior. Emotional numbing and affective discordance was reported, but no personality test was performed. No depression, hallucination or delusion was observed. She described anxiety symptoms in relation to her accident.
Cerebrospinal fluid (including 14-3-3 protein, oligoclonal bands, Beta-amyloid and Tau protein), blood examination, electroencephalogram, electroneuromyogram, CT, MRI and positron emission tomography (PET) of whole body showed no significant abnormalities. Sleep explorations found an obstructive sleep apnea syndrome with an apnea-hypopnea index of 21.6 per hour. Ophthalmologic and ENT showed no abnormalities.
Based on the clinical history (abrupt onset after gastric bleeding, waxing and waning illness course with periods of remission) variable neurological symptoms and “positive” clinical signs sush as Hoover, drift without pronation, non-anatomical sensory loss, inconsistence in visual impairment, we made diagnosis of FND according to the DSM-5 criteria. Furthermore, risk factors were present, such as psychological and physical trauma (brother’s suicide and car accident) or elements of personality disorder (immaturity, seduction). The disorder was not attribuable to other rarer entities as an extensive workup was negative, including looking for paraneoplasic and neuroimmunological disorders. A first cerebral single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT, 99mTc-hexamethylpropylene-amineoxime) showed a hypoperfusion of the right thalamus .
One year after the symptoms onset, the patient presented with atypical ‘blind’ behaviors. She used a cane, but she was able to apply make-up correctly and cleaned her apartment without assistance.
Ophthalmologic assessment with visual acuity, pupil reaction, ocular and fundoscopic examination, optical coherence tomography (OCT) of macula and optic nerve were normal. Static and kinetic visual field perimetric examinations were non interpretable because of the attention deficit. Neurological examination differs from the first one with disappearance of the left sensory loss and the left weakness. A minim subjective left clumsiness persists but very fluctuant. Visuoperceptive impairment was confirmed by speech and neuropsychological assessment. An atypical letter alexia without any deficit for words or sentences reading was observed. To recognize objects, she sometimes needed to manipulate them or she identified them from a detail (identification of the match box when seeing matches). Copying of geometric figure (Rey complex figure test) and tests involving visuospatial and graphomotor skills (crossing of test, Trail Making Test or BEC’s triangle) were not assessable because she reported an unbearable visual discomfort. She avoided seeing some objects, such as a striped shirt, because she reported a too “aggressive” feeling, which is suggestive of a visual intolerance to complex visual patterns and visual fatigability.
A second SPECT 2 years after the symptoms-onset, while she presented with episodes of blindness and atypical cerebral visual impairments, showed hypoperfusion in the right temporo-occipital junction, right inferior parietal lobe, explaining the spatial and attentional deficits, and left superior frontal lobe .
At our last follow-up (6 years after onset), the visual impairments persisted, as well as a clumsiness of left upper and lower limb. The rest of the examination did not show new clinical signs, which supported our initial hypothesis of FND rather than a progressive neurological disorder.