A 49-year-old woman, gravida 0, was referred to our hospital with severe acute lower abdominal pain and AUB. Her general physical examination was normal apart from pelvic pain and a distended abdomen due to an enlarged uterus. She had never undergone a medical assessment. Therefore, we first performed sampling cytology of the cervix and endometrium. Ultrasonography showed multiple leiomyomas in the bicornuate bicollis uterus with hydrosalpinx in the left tube. The work-up revealed anemia, a high level of D-dimer, and inflammation. The patient’s laboratory results are summarized in Table . A high level of serum CA-125 was also observed. No apparent deep vein thrombosis was observed in the legs. She refused hospitalization for further examinations; thus, we allowed her to rest at home with oral prophylactic antibiotic administration. MRI revealed a bicornuate bicollis uterus with multiple leiomyomas from the cervix to the fundus, which were up to 11 cm in size. Additionally, we detected adenomyosis, multiple hematomas in the uterus, and hydrosalpinx in the left tube, possibly induced by endometriosis . To summarize, severe benign conditions were observed; however, no malignant lesions were detected on gynecologic examination.
Based on these examinations and because her symptoms and laboratory data were improving compared to her first hospital visit, except for the continuous AUB with pelvic pain, we presented her with the treatment options (surgical or non-surgical) to cure her severe symptoms induced by leiomyoma and adenomyosis. Because her enlarged uterus had grown up to the xiphisternum, we presented hysterectomy as the first option. However, she refused and opted for non-surgical treatment. We prescribed oral relugolix (40 mg/day) as maintenance therapy. We assessed her condition within a month during the therapy and confirmed that her symptoms induced by the leiomyoma and adenomyosis were relieved, and she remained amenorrheic. Two months after the initial relugolix administration, she suffered from a hot flush with a slight headache, which was considered to be induced by relugolix. We discussed with the patient about discontinuing the relugolix therapy and recommended surgical treatment. After 6 months of treatment with relugolix, we evaluated her hip and spine bone mineral density measured by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry, and the results were normal. We found that the uterine volume had significantly decreased on MRI, and the adenomyosis had mostly disappeared compared to the baseline image . We continued follow-up with gynecologic examinations via ultrasonography, and after another 6 months, she experienced AUB recurrence; however, the bleeding was less compared with the baseline. The patient still desired continued alleviation of symptoms by relugolix therapy with the addition of kamishoyosan at a dose of 7.5 g/day before each meal. Undesirable reported adverse events, such as itchiness, rash, nausea, constipation and gastric discomfort, were not found. Nothing was quantified in a QOL analysis, however, kamishoyosan clearly improved the adverse vasomotor effects induced by relugolix. Therefore, we repeated the workup, including sampling cytology from the uterus, and retreated her with oral relugolix and kamishoyosan for 6 months, which is the duration confirmed in clinical studies. The patient is currently asymptomatic.