A 77-year-old man with fever and malaise was referred to our hospital. He had undergone transurethral resection of a bladder tumour on the right wall 1 month before admission. Because the pathological diagnosis was malignant cancer, he had received an 40 mg of intravesical injection of BCG 1 day before the admission for the first time. His medical history included hypertension, diabetes, dyslipidaemia and subclinical IP, which had been diagnosed 5 months ago at a medical check-up. He had smoked around 20 cigarettes a day until 14 years ago.
On the first admission, his vital signs were as follows: body temperature 38.6 °C, heart rate 102 beats/min, and blood pressure 138/87 mmHg. His oxygen saturation was 94% on room air. Physical examination revealed fine crackles in the bilateral chest. Laboratory examinations revealed slightly high serum levels of hepatobiliary enzymes (AST 84 IU/L, ALT 39 IU/L, γ-GTP 116 IU/L, LD 268 IU/L, T-Bil 2.00 mg/dL) and C − reactive protein (CRP; 6.7 mg/dL). The white blood cell (WBC) counts were within the normal ranges. Sputum culture, urinary culture and two sets of blood cultures were negative for bacterial, mycobacterial, and fungal cultures. Mycobacterial cultures were performed by using BD BACTEC MGIT960® (Becton, Dickinson and company, New Jersey). A chest computed tomography (CT) scan revealed bilateral ground-glass shadow, unchanged compared to 5 months prior .
Because his fever occurred soon after the intravesical BCG injection, infection with BCG was suspected. The patient received antituberculosis drugs including rifampicin (RFP), isoniazid (INH) and ethambutol (EB). His fever, serum levels of hepatobiliary enzymes, and CRP immediately decreased to normal ranges within 4 days. He was discharged home on the sixth day with continuing antituberculosis drugs.
However, he was referred to our hospital again because of a high fever 5 days after discharge. On readmission, his vital signs were as follows: body temperature 39.9 °C, heart rate 115 beats/min, and blood pressure 166/74 mmHg. His oxygen saturation was 93% on room air. Fine crackles on the bilateral chest remained. He also showed rice grain–sized red papules on broad areas of his face, and red bean–sized erythema with pruritus and infiltration over his trunk and limbs . No other abnormal findings were noted on physical examination.
Laboratory examinations revealed high serum levels of hepatobiliary enzymes (AST 57 IU/L, ALT 41 IU/L, γ-GTP 552 IU/L, LD 390 IU/L, ALP 653 IU/L, T-Bil 1.89 mg/dL) and CRP (5.2 mg/dL). Other blood examinations, including WBC, were within the normal ranges. T-SPOT.TB (a type of interferon-gamma release assay) was negative. We took sputum culture, urinary culture and two sets of blood cultures again. However, they were negative for bacterial, mycobacterial, and fungal cultures.
A chest CT scan revealed bilateral ground-glass shadow, unchanged since the last hospitalisation. We could not detect the inflammatory focus by CT scan, so we presumed three possibilities for his fever: 1. initial aggravation of the BCG treatment: an allergic reaction against antigens of dead mycobacterium, 2. exacerbation of infection: inadequate treatment, 3. antituberculosis drug–induced fever. To make the correct diagnosis, we stopped the antituberculosis drugs. Skin biopsy of the exanthema revealed a drug eruption . The exanthema had regressed on the 20th day of hospitalisation after discontinuing antituberculosis drugs.
On day 20 from the first admission, a contrast-enhanced CT scan revealed hepatosplenomegaly . Liver biopsy revealed multiple epithelioid cell granulomas with Langhans giant cells . Caseous necrosis was not observed. Furthermore, Mycobacterium was not detected on Ziehl–Neelsen stain or the rabbit polyclonal anti-BCG antibody (Dako)–based immunohistochemistry (IHC; Fig. h).
Leukopenia gradually proceeded after hospitalisation (day 12: 3900/μL, day 13: 5410/μL, day 18: 2110/μL). The blood level of haemoglobin decreased following the leukopenia. Bone marrow biopsy revealed multiple epithelioid granulomas . In the epithelioid cell granulomas, neither caseous necrosis nor Mycobacterium was detected with Ziehl–Neelsen stain and anti-BCG IHC . Berlin blue stain was negative . The bone marrow infection of BCG was suspected to be responsible for the leukoerythropenia. However, bone marrow, sputum and blood PCR for Mycobacterium (COBAS® TaqMan® MTB, Roche Diagnostics, Tokyo) were negative.
On day 20, the follow-up CT scan demonstrated a new ground-glass shadow on the bilateral upper lobe . The patient’s oxygen demand gradually worsened at this point (oxygen saturation was 94% on 2 L/min of oxygen). On day 27, his oxygen demand worsened drastically, and the ground-glass shadow had expanded on the CT scan. Moreover, the serum levels of KL-6 (1020 U/mL) and SP-D (330 ng/mL) were high, suggesting acute exacerbation of IP. The serum level of adenosine deaminase (ADA) was also high (183.2 U/L). From the high levels of ADA, KL-6, SP-D and the pathological findings of the biopsies, we diagnosed an acute exacerbation of IP associated with Mycobacterium bovis infection or hypersensitivity. We restarted antituberculosis drugs immediately. Because the antituberculosis drugs were suspected of causing drug eruption, we changed RFP to rifabutin (RFB). Furthermore, we used INH at a desensitisation amount and gradually increased. For IP, high-dose methylprednisolone (500 mg/day × 3 days intravenously) was also commenced. Prednisolone (50 mg/day [1 mg/kg] orally) was administered after the high-dose methylprednisolone.
Although no allergic symptoms occurred, including exanthema, the patient’s respiratory condition gradually worsened, and he died on day 35. The results of a drug-induced lymphocyte stimulation test on day 20 were negative for RFP, INH and EB.
On haematoxylin–eosin (HE) staining and anti-CD68 (Kp-1, DAKO) IHC, a diffuse appearance of multiple epithelioid cell granulomas with Langhans giant cells was observed in the liver , spleen and bone marrow . Small numbers of epithelioid cell granulomas were observed in the heart . They were variously degenerated through post-mortem changes. In the wall of the urinary bladder, aggregations of Langhans giant cells were observed, but epithelioid cell granuloma was not detected . Anti-BCG and anti-lipoarabinomannan antibody–based IHC were negative in all of the above. We could not detect Mycobacterium histopathologically. No remaining carcinoma cells were found in the urinary bladder.
The left lung weighed 710 g and the right lung weighed 880 g . Patchy interstitial fibrosis with remodelling of the lung architecture resulting in formation of cystic spaces and honeycombing was observed in a subpleural and paraseptal distribution, alternating with areas of structurally preserved lung . Mild interstitial lymphocyte infiltration was seen. These observations were compatible with the pattern of chronically developed usual interstitial pneumonitis (UIP). The structurally preserved area showed diffuse involvement by alveolar oedema with hyaline membranes in the upper lobes , and by intra-alveolar plugs of organising connective tissue mainly in the lower lobes. These findings suggested diffuse alveolar damage from the exudative phase to the organising phase occurring over 1–3 weeks. From the observations of diffuse alveolar damage with UIP, we diagnosed acute exacerbation of UIP. We also performed PCR for Mycobacterium on liver, spleen, lung, ileum, stomach, and cerebrospinal fluid on autopsy specimens, however, the results were all negative.