A 49-year-old Asian female visited our emergency department due to acute vision loss within 2 days. She had no prior medical history and denied any recent trauma. She had bilateral, extraocular pain while rotating her eyes. Examination revealed that the best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) in the right eye was 20/30 and in the left eye was 20/200. Intraocular pressure OU was normal, and the anterior chamber was unremarkable. The swinging light test showed a positive relative afferent pupillary defect in the left eye. The Ishihara color vision test revealed 15/15 OU. Fundoscopy showed bilateral disc edema with the left eye more prominent than the right eye (A). She had had her first inoculation with the ChAdOx1 COVID-19 vaccine around 2 weeks prior, after which the acute vision loss occurred.
Under suspicion of post-vaccine ON, we performed emergent orbital MRI. T2-weighed MRI revealed significant enhancement of the bilateral optic nerve, more obvious on the left side than on the right side (B). No parenchymal lesions were observed. Fluorescein angiography showed bilateral disc leakage in the late phase (C). The patient’s blood tests, including serum glucose, complete blood count, and kidney and liver function test returned normal. CRP and ESR were 2.2 mg/L and 26 mm/h, respectively. Immunological assessment covering ANA, anti-DNA, ANCA, anti-Ro, anti-La, and antiphospholipid antibodies returned negative, as did the serum anti-aquaporin-4 (AQP4) antibody test. Unfortunately, a serum anti-myelin-oligodendrocyte-glycoprotein (MOG) antibody test was not commercially available. The PCR test for SARS-CoV-2 based on nasopharyngeal swab was negative. The patient refused lumbar puncture at that time, and therefore, no CSF-related data are available.
The patient was given high-dosage IV steroids (methylprednisolone 1 g/day for 3 days) with subsequent improvement in visual acuity from day 2, followed by oral prednisolone (1 mg/kg), tapering over 2 weeks. Seven weeks later, the patient’s best-corrected visual acuity in both eyes was 20/20 and the papillitis was resolved. The timeline of the clinical course is shown in .