A 34-year-old female with no medical history consulted us for crown restoration of the right upper molars (teeth #16 and #17) after successful endodontic treatment. The patient stated that these teeth were painful when biting even soft food. The distal surface of #16 and medial surface of #17 had undergone composite resin restoration. Both teeth were mildly painful on percussion, but were not loose. The gingiva was healthy, exhibiting a normal colour and gingival sulcus depth. There was no bleeding on probing. We obtained a panoramic radiograph and periapical films before operations .
Crown preparation proceeded smoothly until the occlusion face of #17 was ground; the patient reported a sudden transient pain at this point. The operation was stopped and we immediately examined the patient. She was alert and complained of a bump in the right retromandibular angle that gradually hardened, but was not in pain and spoke in full sentences.
There is no past illness.
There is no personal and family history.
The tissue around the right retromandibular was obviously swollen, but was non-erythematous and non-tender. On palpation, there was a sensation of crepitation. The patient did not experience much pain, and had no difficulty with mouth-opening or breathing .
As crepitations were noted during palpation, we diagnosed subcutaneous emphysema. The operation was immediately interrupted; the patient’s blood pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate, temperature, and oxygen saturation were normal. No deep periodontal pocket was found around the tooth .
We performed cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) after the emphysema developed, which revealed obvious swelling and thickening of soft tissue on the masseter muscle and a discrete region of emphysema in the layer between the masseter muscle and subcutaneous fascia .
The treatment plan was close observation of the airway, and dexamethasone (10 mg/d) and antibiotics (cefuroxime 1.5 g/d) for 3 d. This approach aimed to manage inflammation and reduce the risk of infection. Ice bag compression was quickly applied and medication was prescribed to alleviate discomfort and promote healing.
The patient was not admitted but visited our outpatient clinic daily for intravenous drip therapy. After 3 d of treatment, the swelling had completely disappeared and there were no complications .
After 2 wk of observation, the swollen tissue in the right retromandibular angle had recovered well. As tooth preparation had not been concluded, the patient again visited our outpatient clinic to finalise the prosthodontic procedure prior to crown placement on the right upper molars. On this occasion, we proceeded with great care. When gently and slowly grinding the occlusion surface of the medial-buccal cusp of #17 with a low-speed turbine and normal water and air flow, the patient again reported a sudden pain in the right retromandibular angle.