A 35-year-old male presented with complaint of mild grade, intermittent fever without chills and rigor and diurnal variation for last 2 months along with occasional dull aching pain in left hypochondriac region. Ultrasonography revealed multiple abscesses in spleen. He was managed on antibiotics for 21 days but fever continued. Computed tomographic (CT) scan of abdomen showed multiple abscesses in spleen without any other significant findings in abdominal organs. Around 200 ml of pus was aspirated under guidance, which was negative for bacteriological examination. He was kept on parenteral antibiotics but did not have any relief.
Color Doppler of heart excluded any possibility of infective endocarditis. X-ray chest was normal. Montoux test was positive up to 11 × 11 mm and he was put on antitubercular treatment to which he did not respond in 6 weeks. Surgical consultation was done and it was decided to proceed with splenectomy.
At laparotomy, there were dense adhesions between the spleen and the adjacent structures and the diaphragm. The patient went into shock after 2 hours of surgery and was resuscitated and taken back to operation theatre for reexploration. Exploration revealed generalized ooze from the area and hemostasis was achieved but again after 2 hours, the patient went into shock and was reexplored again but the patient succumbed to the continued hemorrhage.
Gross specimen measured 18 × 12 × 6 cm and cut surface showed multiple lobulated, solid, well-circumscribed nodules of variable sizes 1 cm to 7 cm diameter with areas of hemorrhage and cystic degeneration replacing most of splenic parenchyma . The microscopic examination on Hematoxylin & Eosin stain showed dilated, sinuous vascular channels surrounded by oval to spindle tumor cells having scanty cytoplasm and hyperchromatic nuclei, mitotic figures were occasional . There were areas of hemorrhage and cystic degeneration. The Reticulin stain showed intricate reticulum laid down around tumor cells and dilated vascular channels suggestive of hemangiopericytoma .