A 67-year-old woman presented to the hospital complaining of fever, shortness of breath and dry cough during the previous month. She had been treated for presumed bronchitis with wide-spectrum antibiotics without response and her complaints had gradually worsened. Her past medical history was significant for bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy, which was incidentally diagnosed on a routine chest radiograph 8 years previously, a finding that was confirmed, together with right paratracheal node enlargement, by a chest computed tomography (CT) scan. She had then undergone a non-diagnostic bronchoscopy and was advised to repeat the chest CT scan after 6 months, advice she ignored. She had never smoked and she had not taken any medication in the past. She had no environmental or occupational history of beryllium or other metal exposure. She had never traveled outside Greece. She had never had a tuberculin test.
On physical examination, the patient appeared to be in good condition, mildly dyspneic with 22 breaths per minute, a temperature of 39.4°C, blood pressure of 110/70 mmHg and a heart rate of 100 beats per minute. Apart from mild bilateral inspiratory fine crackles in the lower lung fields, no other physical abnormalities were observed. There was no skin involvement. Laboratory investigations showed normocytic normochromic anemia (hemoglobin 11.8 g/dl), white blood count 6370/mm3 (neutrophils 67%), erythrocyte sedimentation rate 95 mm and C-reactive protein 90 mg/l (normal value <3 mg/l). Serum electrolyte levels and renal function indices were normal. A mild decrease in albumin levels was observed on serum protein electrophoresis. Serum concentrations of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) were normal, as was a 24-hour urinary calcium excretion analysis. Arterial gas testing (while the patient was breathing in room air) indicated PaO2 70 mmHg, PaCO2 31 mmHg, pH 7.47 and bicarbonate 22.2 mmol/l. The tuberculin skin test was positive (20 mm). A chest X-ray on admission disclosed bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy together with bilateral interstitial lung densities in the lower lung fields . A chest CT scan that was performed 3 days after her admission disclosed bilateral interstitial opacities in the middle and lower lung lobes and mediastinal lymphadenopathy, which was unaltered compared with that observed 8 years ago .
An ophthalmologic evaluation was normal. The patient underwent bronchoscopy, which revealed slight mucosal edema in the bronchial tree. All endobronchial biopsies disclosed non-specific inflammation. Transbronchial biopsies were not performed because of the patient's intolerance. The bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) cell differential count was total cell count 37 × 104/ml, neutrophils 2.8%, lymphocytes 61.2%, macrophages 34.5% and eosinophils 1.3%. The CD4 to CD8 ratio was 2.25 while the number of CD4 and CD8 cells was within normal levels. Multiple blood and urine cultures as well as bronchial washing cultures were negative for bacteria and fungi. Results from sputum, gastric fluid and BAL Ziehl-Neelsen staining were negative. Serology studies for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), Brucella species, Legionella species, Coxiella burnetti, Chlamydia species, Mycoplasma species, Leismania species and Toxoplasma species were negative. A venereal disease research laboratory test was also negative. Antinuclear antibodies were 1/80 positive while anti-double-stranded DNA antibodies, anti-RO, anti-LA, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies and antimitochondrial antibodies were all negative. The patient underwent mediastinoscopy, and histological examination from the biopsy of a right paratracheal lymph node showed a non-caseating granuloma formation compatible with sarcoidosis. Routine tissue bacterial, fungal and acid bacilli cultures were negative.
The patient received broad-spectrum antibiotic treatment without any response, while her dyspnea progressively increased and she was supported with oxygen therapy. A chest X-ray disclosed extended interstitial lung densities in both lungs as well as consolidation in the left lower lung field . As she was clinically and radiologically deteriorating, treatment with the standard anti-TB drug regimen (isoniazid 300 mg daily, rifampin 600 mg daily, pyrazinamide 2 g daily and ethambutol 1 g daily) was started in addition to prednisolone 1 mg/kg daily. The patient's symptoms moderately improved but her fever continued to spike. During the second week of anti-TB therapy, initial BAL cultures turned out to be positive for M. tuberculosis and glucocorticoids were stopped. During the fourth week of treatment the fever declined and the patient became apyrexial 1 week later. After 2 months of therapy, pyrazinamide and ethambutol were stopped and a 7-month continuation regimen with isoniazide and rifampin was administered. During a 9 month period of follow-up, the patient continued to have the same chronic mediastinal lymphadenopathy with no parenchymal involvement and normal pulmonary function tests.