A 64-year-old male with a past medical history of benign prostate hypertrophy that was managed using intermittent self-catheterization due to benign prostate hypertrophy was admitted to our hospital with fever, right scrotal pain, and swelling that had manifested 4 weeks prior to admission. He was diagnosed with pyogenic epididymoorchitis and was treated with ceftriaxone 1 g intravenously every 24 h. Urine culture was negative and scrotal ultrasound revealed a hyperechoic testis. Two weeks prior to admission, a follow-up scrotal ultrasound had shown a hypervascularity of the testis and epididymis with hydrocele but no findings of testicular torsion. Since his clinical symptoms had gradually improved, we switched to oral cefpodoxime 200 mg every 12 h. However, as he developed a scrotal abscess and his scrotal skin was torn, he was admitted to our hospital for further treatment. On admission, vital signs were as follows: clear consciousness; temperature, 36.0 °C; respiratory rate, 16 breaths per min; blood pressure, 140/78 mmHg; and pulse rate, 67 beats per min. On physical examination, a scrotal ulcer with exudate, swelling, and redness was observed. He did not have any costovertebral angle tenderness or tenderness of the prostate. Laboratory data revealed 7000/μL (neutrophils 54.9%, lymphocytes 5.6%, monocytes 5.0%) of white blood cells and 0.21 mg/dL of C-reactive protein. Urinalysis revealed neither white nor red blood cells. Urinary Gram staining and culture results were negative. Scrotal ultrasonography showed a hypoechoic, avascular lesion without testicular torsion. Computed tomography showed fluid correction with contrast effect in the capsule of the right scrotum .
We changed the antibiotic to cefepime 1 g every 8 h. The abscess in the necrotic tissue was drained by surgical incision, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa was detected in the pus culture by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF Biotyper [Bruker Daltonics, Germany]) and VITEK2 Compact (bioMérieux Inc.). Pathological examination showed inflammatory cell infiltration and necrosis in the testicular parenchyma . The minimum inhibitory concentrations measured by MicroScan WalkAway 96 Plus and NC-NF2J panel (Beckman Coulter Inc.). Based on the susceptibility results of the pus culture , the patient was treated with oral ciprofloxacin 400 mg three times a day. The vital signs and subjective symptoms had stabilized, but the necrosis of the testes was extensive, suggesting that functional preservation was not applicable. Because of the necrosis, his scrotal contents were surgically removed under aseptic conditions 2 months after the resolution of the infection. Pathological examination showed no inflammation of testis and epididymis . Ciprofloxacin was discontinued 1 month postoperatively. He did not have any evidence of recurrence or urological complications at follow-up 6 months after discharge.