A 34-year-old gentleman with history of renal stones and migraine presented to the rheumatology clinic with recurrent oral and genital ulcers, extensive folliculitis, epididymitis, and polyarthritis for six months. There was no history of uveitis. A recent colonoscopy done for a symptom of rectal bleeding was normal. Physical examination showed multiple oral and genital ulcers, folliculitis on the neck and back, and tender and swollen wrists and knees. Blood tests for anti-nuclear antibody (ANA), and anti-extractable nuclear antigens (anti-ENA) were negative. Complements 3 and 4 (C3 and C4) were normal. Human leucocyte antigen (HLA) B51 was positive and HLA B27 was negative. HLA A26 was not performed. Ophthalmologic assessment showed no features of uveitis. He was diagnosed with Behcet’s disease (BD) according to the International Study Group (ISG) criteria for Behcet’s and treated with prednisolone 30 mg and azathioprine 50 mg daily. Colchicine 0.5 mg daily had also been started but was stopped due to intolerable diarrhea. After a month on azathioprine, he developed deranged liver enzymes with alanine transaminase (ALT) and aspartate transaminase (AST) greater than three times the upper normal limit of normal. Azathioprine was switched to adalimumab (anti-tumor necrosis factor [anti-TNF], Amgevita) 40 mg once every 2 weeks. Despite two months of combination therapy of steroid and adalimumab, he had persistently active arthritis that impaired daily functioning. Adalimumab was switched to secukinumab (an anti-interleukin [IL] 17a) 150 mg once per week as loading dose after a course of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) therapy (24gram for 5 consecutive days, a total of 2gram per kilogram). The oral-genital ulcers, folliculitis, and polyarthritis resolved. However, after the third dose of secukinumab, he developed acute right lower abdominal pain that required hospital admission. There was no fever, oral ulcers, diarrhea, rectal bleeding, joint pain or new folliculitis. Physical examination showed tenderness and guarding at the right lower quadrant of the abdomen. Investigations showed increased white cell count of 12.3 × 10^9/L (normal 3.7-9.2 × 10^9/L) and neutrophils 10.67 × 10^9/L (normal 1.70-5.80 × 10^9/L). Liver and renal function tests were normal with serum albumin decreased to 31.7 g/L (normal 35.0-52.0 g/L). Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was increased from 2 mm/hr to 38 mm/hr. Urine culture, chest x-rays and procalcitonin were normal. Abdominal x-rays showed no fluid level or dilated loops of bowel. Urgent computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen showed mild fatty stranding at right lower quadrant, anterior to the caecum and adjacent to the distal ileum – features suspicious of active colitis . Stool culture was negative. Colonoscopy with caecal biopsy showed mild increased number of inflammatory cells in lamina propria .
He was diagnosed with active gastrointestinal (GI) BD. Secukinumab was stopped. Three days of pulsed methylprednisolone (250 mg IV once every 24 h) were followed by the resumption of prednisolone 30 mg daily. Abdominal symptoms were resolved one week later. He was started on golimumab (an anti-TNF) 50 mg once per month with slow taper of prednisolone. His condition remained stable with no recurrence of abdominal pain, and ESR normalized to a value of 21. He continued to follow up in the rheumatology clinic to monitor treatment progress.