A 57-year-old woman with RA was referred to the Department of Nephrology for abrupt worsening of renal function. The initial physical examination revealed the following: height, 161.7 cm; weight, 53.6 kg; blood pressure, 120/85 mmHg; and heart rate, 75 b.p.m. There was no cardiac murmur. She had pitting pedal oedema. The electrocardiogram (ECG) did not reveal low voltage or evidence of left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) . Echocardiography revealed ventricular septal wall (13 mm, normal value; 8–12 mm) and posterior wall (PW; 14 mm, normal value; 8–12 mm) thickening . Although the LV ejection fraction (EF) was decreased to 46%, the LV end-diastolic diameter was 48 mm (normal value; 39–55 mm). The parasternal long-axis view revealed increased luminance, also called ‘granular sparkling appearance’, in the ventricular septum and PW . The E/A ratio of the LV transmitral flow (TMF) was elevated to 2.0 (normal value; E/A ≦ 0.8 and E ≦ 50 cm/s), and deceleration time shortened to 127 ms (normal value: 160–240) . In addition, a dominant D wave was noted in the pulmonary venous flow, and the E/E’ was 18.8 (normal value: <10) , indicating impaired LV diastolic function. Global longitudinal strain (GLS) exhibited an apical sparing pattern . Cardiac amyloidosis was suspected. All the subsequent echocardiographic examinations were performed with the same echo gain and depth settings using the Philips iE33 ultrasound system.
Blood test results revealed mild normocytic anaemia and severe renal dysfunction. With respect to the course of renal impairment, the patient’s serum creatinine level was 2.6 mg/dL (female normal range: 0.46–0.79 mg/dL) at the initial presentation, and she was treated by a family doctor. Nine months later, her renal function deteriorated suddenly with a serum creatinine level of 9.5 mg/dL; the nephrologist established an arteriovenous fistula for dialysis. Ten months after initial presentation, dialysis was initiated and maintained thereafter. No increase in monoclonal γ-globulin was observed in a serum proteinogram. Urine samples tested negative for the Bence Jones protein.
To confirm a diagnosis of amyloidosis, gastric mucosal biopsy was performed. Haematoxylin and eosin staining showed amorphous eosinophilic materials confirmed by Congo red staining. Subsequent cardiac biopsy revealed AA deposition confirmed by immunostaining. The patient was diagnosed as having systemic AA amyloidosis with cardiac involvement.
Atrial flutter occurred at 10 months after the initial presentation. One month later, catheter ablation was performed.
Because the patient was undergoing haemodialysis, biologic therapy using a soluble TNF-alpha receptor (etanercept) was initiated at an initial dose of 25 mg every 7 days. Forty-four months later, the dose was decreased to 25 mg every 10 days because of improvements in RA symptoms. Forty-nine months later, the etanercept dose was further decreased to 25 mg every 14 days. Although β-blocker treatment was attempted for heart failure, drug-induced hepatopathy contraindicated its continuous use.
Four and a half years after the initial presentation, echocardiography showed that the E/A ratio of the TMF and the D-wave height of the pulmonary venous flow had both decreased , indicating improvements in diastolic function. Both the interventricular septum (IVS) and PW thicknesses in the left ventricle had decreased . Each mean gain during the entire phase was measured offline with custom software (QLAB, Philips Healthcare, Andover, MA, USA) in the myocardium at the IVS and LV PW, compared to that of left atrial cavity as a reference . We confirmed the decrease in the myocardial gain quantitatively after etanercept treatment, particularly in the PW . Taken together, these results suggested that the granular sparkling appearance diminished remarkably . Moreover, LV systolic dysfunction improved in terms of GLS .
Although the patient’s serum C-reactive protein (CRP) had been maintained under 1.0 mg/dL (normal range: ≦0.14 mg/dL) up until that time, it gradually increased to >1.0 mg/dL thereafter. Five and a half years after the initial presentation, echocardiography showed recurrence of LVH , and ECG showed deteriorating down-sloped ST depression in several leads, especially in leads V4–6 . Six years after the initial presentation, joint pain was exacerbated, and articular destruction was observed through radiography. The patient’s serum CRP level was elevated to 10 mg/dL. Increasing the etanercept dosage did not ameliorate the arthritis. The biologic was changed from etanercept to abatacept—a cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated antigen 4 immunoglobulin fusion protein. No dialysis-associated complications have been reported during these 6 years.