A 64-year-old African-American man with a past medical history of hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, bilateral above knee amputation, prostate cancer post radical prostatectomy in 1999, quadraparesis secondary to cervical spine fracture of C4, neurogenic bladder with an indwelling suprapubic catheter and recurrent urinary tract infections was transferred from a nursing home to Howard University Hospital in June 2009 because of lethargy, fever and low blood pressure (BP). There was no history of cough, chest pain, vomiting, diarrhea or headache.
His admitting temperature was 101.4°F and blood pressure 61/34 mmHg, which responded to intravenous fluid boluses. His initial white blood count (WBC) was 14.4×109/L. His chest radiograph showed mild left lung base ateclectasis, but the rest of the lung fields were clear. Urinalysis showed large amounts of red cells, white cells and numerous bacteria. He was admitted to the medical intensive care unit (MICU) and started empirically on vancomycin and levofloxacin.
Over the following five days his condition improved, with normalization of his mental status, temperature, BP and WBC. His initial blood culture bottle grew gram-positive cocci, identified as Coagulase-negative staphylococci, thought to be a contaminant. Both urine cultures were sterile.
He was transferred to the medical floor for further care. 24 hours later he developed a low grade temperature of 95.9°F, his BP decreased to a systolic of 75 mmHg and WBC increased to 13×109/L. There was no change in his mental status. He was given boluses of intravenous fluids. Meropenem was immediately added to his antibiotic regimen. A gram stain of his repeat blood culture revealed gram negative rods which were later identified as K. ascorbata. The isolate was susceptible to amikacin, tobramycin and imipenem, but resistant to ampicillin, piperacillin, cefazolin, cefuroxime, cefotaxime, ceftriaxone, ceftazidime, aztreonam, ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin. Species identification and antimicrobial susceptibility testing was performed using Microscan panels (Dade Behring). He was placed on contact isolation and levofloxacin was discontinued. Over the next five days he maintained a normal temperature, BP and WBC. Repeat blood cultures and a urine culture were negative for growth. He was discharged back to the nursing home after 13 days of hospitalization for continued care.