The patient is a 63-year-old man with a history of smoking, COPD, and stage 1 urothelial cancer who presented with a 3-month history of epigastric abdominal pain, early satiety, fatigue, and 12-pound weight loss. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) demonstrated a large posterior body gastric ulcer , and biopsies revealed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma based on microscopic features. Differential included metastatic urothelial cancer versus a more likely primary gastric cancer. Negative stains for CK20, PSA, PSAP, Uroplakin II, chromogranin, synaptophysin, CK7, and CD56, a weak GATA-3 stain and positive stains for AE1/AE3 confirmed a diagnosis of a new primary gastric cancer . Endoscopic ultrasound revealed many abnormal lymph nodes in the celiac region (level 20), peripancreatic region, and porta hepatis (largest measuring 9 mm by 5 mm) such that he was staged as a T3N3M0 by EUS criteria. PET scan revealed an FDG avid gastric mass. CT chest, abdomen, and pelvis and PET were negative for distant metastasis .
Given the presumptive clinical stage T3N3M0, staging laparoscopy with 1 L peritoneal lavage was performed. There was no evidence of any occult peritoneal metastasis at the time of surgery. However, washings were positive for extraluminal mucin, suggestive of a cytology positive lavage. He was presented at our multidisciplinary tumor board conference where the decision was made to proceed with neoadjuvant FLOT chemotherapy followed by restaging. He underwent four cycles of FLOT, followed by a restaging PET CT (positron emission tomography-computed tomography), which was negative for metastatic disease. A second staging laparoscopy with peritoneal washings was performed in the aforementioned fashion and lavage was negative for malignant cells, suggestive of conversion from cytology positive to cytology negative. Repeat EGD and CT imaging showed no significant changes in tumor size. Given the change in his cytological status, the patient was taken to the operating room for a planned gastrectomy, D2 lymphadenectomy, and placement of a feeding jejunostomy tube placement. On exploration of the abdomen, there was no evidence of diffuse metastatic disease. The tumor invaded through the posterior gastric wall and into the pancreatic body and transverse colon. An en bloc resection was performed which included a total gastrectomy, distal pancreatectomy, with splenectomy and transverse colon resection with end colostomy. A stapled Roux-en-Y esophagojejunostomy was constructed and a feeding jejunostomy tube was placed distal to this.
Pathology revealed an 8.3 cm, poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with invasion into the pancreatic parenchyma and histologically negative margins. Thirty-one regional lymph nodes were negative for metastasis making his final stage ypT4b N0 M0, Stage III. His post-operative course was uneventful. There was evidence of treatment effect related necrosis on final pathology indicating response to his neoadjuvant chemotherapy .
According to NCCN guidelines, surveillance was planned with a history and physical exam every 3–6 months for the first 2 years, and every 6–12 months for the subsequent 3 years, and finally annually thereafter. Surveillance imaging was also planned according to NCCN guidelines with a contrast CT chest, abdomen, and pelvis every 6–12 months for the first 2 years and then annually for 5 years . Approximately 3 months after surgery, the patient developed a rapidly enlarging right lateral forearm mass. MRI revealed a 7-cm heterogeneously enhancing intramuscular mass within the brachioradialis muscle. This mass was found to be FDG avid on PET (SUV 12) and several right axillary lymph nodes were noted to have mild uptake with SUV 2.9 . Core biopsy revealed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, consistent with metastasis from his gastric primary. We discussed with the patient that resection of this mass would not improve his survival and that extremity metastasis has shown to be a poor prognostic sign in the literature . Next generation sequencing was performed on this extremity metastasis, which included a gene profile of at least 500 genes. This was positive for PDL1, suggesting a benefit from immunotherapy. Positive PDL1 was defined by a Combined Positive Score, which is calculated by the number of PDL1 staining cells divided by the total viable tumor cells multiplied by 100. Somatic mutations were also noted in MSH2, MSH6, and PDL1 and were negative in HER2. However, genetic testing revealed no germline mutations such that a diagnosis of Lynch syndrome was not supported. Our recommendation was to initiate systemic therapy with a PDL1 inhibitor (pembroluzimab) prior to resection of this metastasis as a means to evaluate the tumor response to treatment. However, the patient strongly desired upfront resection of the tumor as it was symptomatic, so a successful metastasectomy was performed. Surveillance was continued with a thorough physical examination and PET scan every 3 to 6 months. Surveillance PET scans showed response to immunotherapy with resolution of the FDG avidity in his right axilla, as well as a decrease in the size of the previously FDG avid right axillary node . EGD performed at 11 months following initial resection did not demonstrate any signs of local tumor recurrence at the esophagojejunostomy anastomosis . The patient remains disease free at the time of this publication, 20 months from the time of diagnosis and 1 year after the diagnosis of metastatic disease.