A 52-year-old woman who has been living as a countryside resident of the Anhui province in China since her retirement developed a fever on 1 February 2023. The patient visited a local hospital, where she was prescribed antibacterial treatment using piperacillin/tazobactam and levofloxacin. However, two days later, her symptoms worsened, and she experienced shortness of breath and decreased blood pressure. The patient was immediately transferred to the emergency department of the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University. According to records, the patient had no history of smoking, hypertension, or diabetes upon admission.
The examinations performed at admission revealed a body temperature of 39 °C, worsening shortness of breath, a blood pressure of 104/67 mmHg, a heart rate of 103 bpm, and PaO2/FiO2 of 86 mmHg. The laboratory examination results revealed elevated C-reactive protein levels, procalcitonin lymphocyte count, and D-dimer levels . The throat swaps for COVID-19 were negative. The coronal CT of the lung depicted multiple patchy shadows . In the axial imaging, air bronchogram was predominant in the upper lobe and the right middle lobe, along with lung consolidation and bilateral pleural effusion . Without delay, the patient was placed on a non-invasive ventilator and methylprednisolone (40 mg once daily) for the management of the severe acute respiratory distress syndrome. Subsequently, sputum samples were collected from the patient and analyzed. The culture, bacterial PCR, and fungal PCR of these sputum samples were negative. The immunological tests for tuberculosis and common respiratory pathogens were also negative. Thereafter, on the night of 7 February 2023, the patient appeared irritable and was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU).
In the ICU, the patient was placed on intratracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation. BALF samples were retrieved and subjected to metagenome next-generation sequencing (mNGS). The mNGS results were obtained three days after admission to the ICU, and the results were positive for H5N1 (Supplementary material). Therefore, a PCR analysis of the sputum and BALF samples from the patient was conducted for further identification of the virus, which confirmed the presence of the H5N1 influenza virus and presented a positive result for SARS-CoV-2. Accordingly, co-infection of H5N1 and SARS-CoV-2 was identified as the etiology of severe pneumonia in this patient. The patient was then administered Peramivir (0.6 g once daily) and nirmatrelvir-ritonavir (300 mg/100 mg, every 12 h) for the next 5 days.
After treatment with the above antivirals, the inflammation indices and the temperature of the patient improved. Thirteen days after admission to the ICU, the pulmonary inflammation had reduced, as evidenced by the CT images . Accordingly, mechanical ventilation was withheld, and the corticosteroid was discontinued. Twenty-seven days after admission to the ICU, the patient tested negative for both H5N1 and SARS-CoV-2 and was, therefore, discharged from the hospital.