A 5-year-old girl presented to the outpatient department of our tertiary care hospital with complaints of foul smelling, non-blood stained right ear discharge of one-month duration. There was a deviation of angle of mouth to the left side of 15 days duration. She did not have a history of decreased hearing, ear pain, itchiness, tinnitus and vertigo. The child did not have any other neurological deficit. There was no history of fever. On examination of the right ear, a pale polyp was visualised in the right external auditory canal with mucopurulent ear discharge without visualisation of the tympanic membrane. There was House Brackmann Grade 6 lower motor neuron paralysis of the right facial nerve. Rest of the otolaryngological and systemic examination was within normal limits. HRCT of the temporal bone revealed a soft tissue density in the right external auditory canal and middle ear with osteolysis. It also revealed erosion of the horizontal segment of the facial canal with thickening of the nerve distal to the second genu . A provisional diagnosis of chronic otitis media, squamosal type, active stage was made and a differential diagnosis of other erosive disorders of bone like granulomatous diseases and tumors was also considered. Pure tone audiometry revealed right-sided moderate conductive hearing loss.
The child underwent mastoid exploration under general anaesthesia. Intraoperatively, it was noted to be a friable mass with no evidence of cholesteatoma . Biopsy from the mass in the middle ear and mastoid was taken. Subsequently, a canal wall down masto- idectomy with facial nerve decompression was done .
Histopathological examination revealed a subepithelial tumor composed of small round hyperchromatic, pleomorphic nuclei, inconspicuous nucleoli, abundant mitosis and spindle-shaped cells arranged diffusely in a fibromyxoid stroma with congested vessels, areas of haemorrhage and necrosis. Occasional cells with eccentric nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasm (rhabdomyoblasts) were also visualized .
Immunohistochemistry was positive for desmin and myogenin suggestive of embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma .
The child was advised to undergo PET-CT to evaluate the extent of disease and metastasis. PET-CT revealed low-grade metabolic activity in the right mastoid and petroclival region. There was thrombosis of the right internal jugular vein and adjacent sigmoid sinus without any intracranial extension.
There was no evidence of distant metastasis. The child underwent 14 cycles of chemotherapy with Vincristine, Actinomycin D and Cyclophosphamide. The initial five cycles of chemotherapy were followed by external beam radiation therapy of 50.4 Gy divided into 28 fractions administered over five and a half weeks. Following the radiation therapy, she underwent nine more cycles of chemotherapy with Vincristine, Actinomycin D and Cyclophosphamide over six months. Facial function improved and was normal six months after therapy. PET-CT done one year following treatment revealed no evidence of residual/recurrent tumor. The patient is on regular follow-up and PET-CT done two years after definitive chemoradiation showed no evidence of tumor . Pure tone audiometry, however, revealed a profound hearing loss and she was suggested a hearing device.