A male patient, 22 years old well oriented in time, place and space, resident of Lahore District, presented to us from an outdoor patient department (OPD) with pallor, yellowish discoloration of sclera for the last four years, and recent onset of pain in the right hypochondrium. Blood transfusions have been given every sixth month for the last four years. The patient was referred to the hematology section from surgical OPD for an opinion regarding cholecystectomy and management of persistent anemia with mild splenomegaly. He had history of three to four transfusion in last 5 years. He was a product of non-consanguineous marriage with two elder sisters, which were both normal. His complete blood count (CBC) results are shown in . The laboratory tests were carried out in a specialized laboratory of the tertiary care hospital in which patient presented. The tests were verified and inter-observer difference was minimized by two independent experts (having an experience of five years) viewing the reports and smears on two different occasions.
His peripheral blood and reticulocyte images are shown below: (see ) (see )
The patient had no history of drug intake other than hematemics, including vitamin B12 and folic acid. He had a history of three to four transfusions in last five years. However, even with the provided treatment, patient had persistent anemia. There was no history of thalassemia in the family. Keeping in mind the presentation of the patient with anemia, high reticulocyte count, and mild splenomegaly, the possibility of autoimmune hemolytic anemia, enzymopathies, membranopathies, and genetic defects of hemoglobin was considered. The Direct and Indirect Coombs Tests were negative. Urine Examination showed no free hemoglobin or RBCs in urine. The absence of spherocytes and osmotic fragility test showed no increased osmotic fragility of RBCs. The patient was tested for Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) assays after the reticulocyte count was back in a normal range and the acute episode was settled. G6PD assays came out to be 17.7 U/gHb and were within the normal range. The electrophoresis showed HBA 48.5%, HBF 47.2%, and HBA2 4.3%.(see )
Analysis for genetic mutations i.e., IVSI-1, IVSI-5, IVSII-1, del 619, Fr 8–9, Fr 16, Fr 41–42, Cd 5, Cd 15, cd 30, Cap+1, IVSI-25, Fr 47–48,-88, cd 39, Hb-S, Hb-C, Hb-E, and Hb-D (Punjab), that are commonly seen in Pakistan was done and none of these mutations were detected in the patient. Analysis of the rest of the family was also done for genetic mutations. The mother and father showed indices like thalassemia trait, with the father showing slightly raised HbA2 on High-performance Liquid Chromatography. Molecular analysis of common Beta-Thalassemia mutations was done for both parents, and they also did not carry any of the common Beta-thalassemia mutations. The patient was tested for alpha thalassemia, too; however, there was no alpha gene deletion or duplication found in the patient.
A whole general sequencing was then carried out. Mutation in this patient was identified by genetic analysis as −88(C > A)[HBB:c.-138C > A]. The patient was homozygous for the mutation. The genetic analysis of the parents showed that both parents were carriers of the same mutation −88(C > A)[HBB:c.-138C > A]. Thus, the patient being homozygous for the mutation was labeled as thalassemia major. However, clinically he was found to have thalassemia intermedia.