The patient was a 77-year-old right-handed Caucasian man who developed confusion, word-finding difficulty, and slurred speech in early 2020. These symptoms include making phone calls to his wife and asking her non-sensible questions. He lost his words intermittently and forgot names of his family members on several occasions. He recounted old stories as if he were perseverating and answered questions in the affirmative without hearing the question. His mood also became more irritable. His past medical history was notable for a skull fracture after a fall from horseback riding when he was a teenager. As a result, he had undergone a neurocognitive evaluation at age 75 from a memory disorder clinic in a major academic medical center in 2017, and he was diagnosed with a non-specific memory disorder that did not affect his activities of daily living. A non-contrast head CT, obtained in July 2020 after 3 months into his progressive symptoms, showed a hypodense mass in the left temporal lobe of the brain. On the following day, a CT of the torso was unremarkable, but a gadolinium-enhanced head MRI revealed a cystic enhancing mass with central necrosis, measuring 2.5 × 2.4 × 2.7 cm, together with mild cerebral atrophy globally. The mass was associated with extensive T2 and FLAIR signals extending from the inferior left temporal lobe to the insular cortex as well as the internal capsule and the peri-ventricular white matter near the occipital horn on the left side. There was a 6 mm rightward midline shift together with mild effacement of the ambient cistern. The patient underwent a gross total resection of the mass without complication 4 days after obtaining the MRI. Pathology revealed glioblastoma with histological features notable for dense cellularity, moderate to severe atypia and easily identified mitoses. Immunohistochemical staining was negative for the IDH-1 R132H mutation but positive for ATRX, GFAP, Olig-2 and p53. The Ki-67 index showed 20–25% positivity indicating a moderate proliferation rate. Methylation study for the promoter of O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase was not performed. Three weeks after surgery, the patient started involved-field radiotherapy and concomitant daily temozolomide, but only 2 weeks of chemotherapy was administered due to thrombocytopenia, and 6 weeks of radiation treatment was eventually completed 2 months after diagnosis .
Standard external beam radiotherapy was delivered using volumetric modulated arc therapy (VMAT) to a total dose of 6,000 cGy over 30 fractions or 200 cGy per fraction delivered in 2 courses. Target volumes were delineated on a planning CT, which were anatomically co-registered with MP-RAGE and FLAIR MRI images. The first course of radiation consisted of 4,600 cGy delivered over 23 fractions to the surgical cavity, gadolinium-enhancing tumor and FLAIR hyperintensity, plus a margin of 2 cm cropped to anatomic barriers with an additional 3 mm planning margin (target volume named PTV_46Gy) . The second course or boost was delivered sequentially, with an additional 1,400 cGy in 7 fractions to the surgical cavity plus gadolinium enhancement and a margin of 2 cm cropped to anatomic barriers with an additional 3 mm planning margin (target volume named PTV_60Gy) . Over 96% of the PTV_46Gy received the prescription dose of 4,600 cGy in the first treatment course, and over 95% of the PTV_60Gy received 6,000 cGy in the second. The left temporal postsurgical cavity as well as the ipsilateral putamen and globus pallidus were included in the maximum 6,000 cGy isodose line. The brainstem was covered in the 3,000 cGy isodose line while the contralateral putamen and globus pallidus received up to 1,800 cGy of radiation.
His cognitive status rapidly deteriorated after radiation and temozolomide. He became more forgetful and developed imbalance. He required 24-h supervision for his daily activities. A trial of dexamethasone did not help. Lumbar puncture was performed 4 months after glioblastoma diagnosis and showed 1 white blood cell/μL, 1 red blood cell/μL, 50 mg/dL protein, 66 mg/dL glucose, 18 IU/L lactate dehydrogenase, negative VDRL, no detectable immunoglobulin on immunofixation, negative PCR for HSV-1, HSV-2 and VZV, and negative cytology for malignant cells. Phospho-tau was not elevated at 29.6 pg/mL (normal < 54 pg/mL).
He died unexpectedly from sudden death 2 months after completion of radiation or 4 months after establishment of his glioblastoma diagnosis. Post-mortem examination of the body revealed atherosclerosis of multiple coronary arteries, including (i) 25–50% narrowing of left main artery, (ii) 25–50% narrowing of the left anterior descending artery, and (iii) focal 75% narrowing of the right coronary arteries with a proximal stent. His lungs had emphysematous changes, but there was no evidence of pulmonary thromboembolism. His brain autopsy revealed slight loss of myelin in the brainstem . Both neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions and Lewy bodies immunohistochemically stained positive for α-synuclein were identified in the midbrain, pons, amygdala, putamen and globus pallidus. At the left temporal pole, there were small lymphocytes , tumors cells with atypical nuclei and a low Ki-67 proliferation index , but no amyloid plaques and only rare neurofibrillary tangles in the cortex adjacent to the hippocampi.