A 21-year-old Caucasian woman living in Marseille, France, weighing 27.7 kg and measuring 1.63 m with a 10.4 kg/m2 body mass index (BMI) was admitted to the intensive care unit. The patient suffered from a severe form of anorexia nervosa with severe malnutrition. The investigation of patient dietary habits indicated that she usually drank tea, nonfat milk and fruit juice; ate cereals, a piece of bread and a few fruits for breakfast. For lunch or dinner, she ate vegetables, like zucchini, carrots and beans, few noodles, rice or grilled bread, fish, turkey, vegetarian steaks, nuts, milk products. She regularly drank tea and fruit juices. She flavored meals with cinnamon, fennel seeds, curry and brewer’s yeast. The patient provided her written consent to participate in the present study. The agreement of the local ethics committee of the Institut Fédératif de Recherche 48 was obtained for this study (Agreement number 09-022, Marseille, France). One stool sample collected aseptically the first day of hospitalization was preserved as 1 g aliquots in sterile microtubes stored at -80°C until use. The patient had no antibiotic or antifungal treatment during the month prior to the stool collection.
Before being used, the deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) extracted using the Qiamp® stool mini kit (Qiagen, Courtaboeuf, France) as previously described, was stored at -20°C . A set of 35 eukaryotic polymerase chain reaction (PCR) primer pairs retrieved from the literature were used to amplify the 18S ribosomal ribonucleic acid (rRNA) gene and the internal transcribed spacer (ITS rRNA) of fungi, protozoa, helminthes, arthropods and plants . Potential stool PCR inhibitors were tested by mixing Acanthamoeba castellanii DNA with DNA from stool specimen prior to PCR, as previously described . Distilled water was used as negative control in all PCR reactions. PCRs were performed using the 2720 thermal cycler (Applied Biosystems, Saint Aubin, France). PCR products purified using the Nucleo- Fast® 96 PCR Kit (Marcherey-Nagel, Hoerdt, France) were cloned separately using the pGEM® -T Easy Vector System Kit (Promega, Lyon, France). PCR amplification using M13 forward (5’-GTAAAACGACGGCCAG-3’) and M13 reverse (5’-AGGAAACAGCTATGAC-3’) primers (Eurogentec, Seraing, Belgium) were performed on white colonies to confirm the presence of the insert. Purified PCR products were sequenced using M13 primers and the Big Dye® Terminator V1.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit on ABI PRISM 3130 automated sequencer (Applied Biosystems). Sequences were compared with those available in GenBank database using basic local alignment search tool (BLAST). Seven of 35 (20%) pairs yielded a PCR product with the stool specimen as did control A. castellanii DNA. The analysis of 348 clones identified 28 eukaryotic species consisting of 17 (61%) Viridiplantae species, eight (29%) fungi S. cerevisiae, P. solitum, C. bruhnei, C. capitatum, Sclerotium sp., M. pachydermatis, M. restricta and M. globosa; two metazoa M. trossulus and M. galloprovincialis and one protozoan Tetratrichomonas spp. . Original sequences here reported have been deposited in GenBank database with accession numbers from JX132667 to JX133078.
In addition, one gram of stool was diluted in 9 mL sterile phosphate-buffered saline and then spread in duplicate on potato dextrose agar (PDA) (Sigma-Aldrich, Saint-Quentin Fallavier, France), Czapeck dox agar (Sigma-Aldrich) supplemented with 0.05 g/L chloramphenicol and 0.1 g/L gentamycin and Dixon agar supplemented with 0.05 mg/mL chloramphenicol and 0.2 mg/mL cycloheximide . Plates were incubated aerobically at room temperature (~25°C) in the dark, except for Dixon agar plates, which were incubated aerobically at 30°C. The phosphate-buffered saline solution was spread on the same media and incubated in the same conditions as negative controls. Growth was observed for two weeks. DNA extracted from colonies as described above was amplified with the fungal primers ITS 1 F/ITS 4R. Purified PCR products were sequenced as described above. While negative control plates remained sterile, six fungi including A. ruber, A. flavus, C. capitatum, M. globosa, M. restricta and M. pachydermatis grew in the two media .