Our patient is a 66-years old male Caucasian patient known for active smoking (~ 60 pack years), hypertension and dyslipidemia, who presented with severe hyperthyroidism induced by amiodarone (given for the treatment of atrial fibrillation). At the time of diagnosis, he presented with tachycardia but no hemodynamic instability, NYHA stage 2 dyspnea and unexplained weight loss. Initial laboratory work-up showed suppressed TSH < 0.05 mUI/l, free T3 13.9 pmol/l and free T4 72 pmol/l. Anti-TSH antibodies were negative. Thyroid ultrasound showed a hypovascular thyroid and the absence of thyroid nodules. Thyreostatic treatment with Carbimazole tablets 60 mg/day was initiated. After 3 weeks, the patient was still hyperthyroid, so prednisone tablets 40 mg/day were added.
Meanwhile, the patient displayed obliterative arteriopathy of the lower limbs, stage IIA Fontaine in the left lower limb, with distal embolization of a tight stenosis of the homolateral common iliac artery, stage I Fontaine in the right lower limb. Although left limb ischemia was not critical, it required a rapid endovascular revascularization. Thyroid normalization is essential prior to vascular intervention, due to the procoagulant state associated with hyperthyroidism.
In the absence of response to drug treatment after three weeks, thyroidectomy was discussed. In this context, and due to a high cardiovascular risk associated with dyspnea, a transthoracic echocardiogram showed inferobasal hypokinesia and a cardiac PET-CT was performed, showing suspected inferobasal and inferoapical ischemia .
After multidisciplinary discussion involving cardiology, anesthesiology, angiology and endocrinology, it was decided to perform coronary angiography as soon as possible to rule out cardiac ischemia. Coronary angiography showed no abnormalities requiring revascularization.
Following the various cardiac investigations and the related delay, the evolution of his thyroid function was resolved after more than a month (TSH 0.91mUI/l, free T4 14.2pmol/l, free T3 3.2pmol/l) without surgery, and the patient underwent successful endovascular revascularisation for his peripheral arterial disease.