A 62-year-old right-handed man with a past medical history of hypertension noticed a hand and finger drop and shaking finger movements on his right side upon awakening one morning . The patient did not take any medication, had no clinical history of neurological disorders, including recurrent entrapment neuropathy, and had no family history of neuropathy or dystonia. Before falling asleep, he was able to move the individual fingers well without any involuntary motions. The patient seemed to develop muscle weakness and posture- or action-induced involuntary movements in the right hand almost simultaneously while sleeping. The patient came to our hospital seeking medical attention. On neurological examination, the strengths of the extensor indicis proprius (EIP), extensor digitorum communis (EDC), extensor pollicis brevis (EPB), abductor pollicis longus (EPL), extensor digiti minimi (EDM), and extensor carpi ulnaris (ECU) muscles were weak (Medical Research Counsil Scale for Muscle Strength [MRC] grade 2/5) with sparing of the brachioradialis, biceps, triceps, deltoid, and median- and ulnar nerve-innervated muscles on the right side. The muscle weakness was distributed in the innervated region of the right posterior interosseous nerve. No sensory impairment was detected. The deep tendon reflexes in the upper and lower extremities were decreased. The Trömner and Hoffman reflexes were absent. Involuntary flexion of the ring and little fingers and jerky movement of the wrist were observed on the right side while the patient was extending the bilateral arms forward with all fingers extended and abducted . When the patient repeated extension and flexion of the right fingers, brief involuntary flexion of the right little finger was observed. At rest, subtle quick movement was observed in the right fingers. The patient had slight difficulty extending and flexing the right individual fingers sequentially. While the patient flexed the index and middle fingers sequentially with the thumb flexed, involuntary extension and abduction of the thumb occurred briefly on the right side . There was no sensory trick or null point to suppress involuntary movements.
Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain showed no causative lesions. Computed tomography of the neck showed no occupying lesions within the cervical canal or around the brachial plexus. A nerve conduction study revealed decreased amplitude of the right radial nerve compound muscle action potential (CMAP) recorded from EIP and a conduction block between the forearm and elbow . There was no significant difference in the amplitude, distal latency, nor duration of the radial nerve CMAP between the right and left sides (1.1 mV and 1.4 mV, 2.1 ms and 2.4 ms, and 6.9 ms and 6.6 ms, respectively). As the muscle strength of the left EIP was normal, we considered that the low value of the radial EIP CMAP on the left side had no pathological significance. On the right side, a small axonal loss may be present with a conduction block in the posterior interosseous nerve. Considering the subsequent rapid recovery, a conduction block between the right forearm and elbow appeared to be the major pathological finding. The sensory nerve action potential (SNAP) of the superficial radial nerve was normal . There were no abnormal findings in the median nerve CMAP and F wave recorded from the abductor pollicis brevis and median nerve SNAP or the ulnar nerve CMAP and F wave recorded from the abductor digiti minimi and ulnar nerve SNAP. Although the cause of the entrapment was unclear, the right elbow joint might have been transiently compressed by his body during sleep. The patient did not take sedative medications or alcohol the night before the possible compression. The patient was diagnosed with PIN.
On the following day, the muscle weakness was slightly ameliorated. The muscle strength of the EDC was MRC grade 2, while that of the EIP, EPB, EPL, EDM, and ECU was MRC grade 3. Thus, an incomplete “sign of the horn” was observed while the patient extended all of the fingers . Involuntary flexion of the right ring and little finger persisted . However, the range of motion of the involuntary movements was decreased compared with that on the previous day. Involuntary extension and abduction of the thumb occurred briefly while the patient flexed the index and middle fingers sequentially with the thumb flexed . Postural jerky movement of the right wrist and subtle quick movement of the right fingers at rest did not occur. Within 2 weeks after symptom onset, the patient completely recovered with conservative management . Involuntary extension and abduction of the right thumb during flexing the right fingers was persistent but asymptomatic . Because the patient did not undergo a neurological examination before visiting our hospital, the timing of the onset of residual involuntary movement of the right thumb was unclear.