On October 2019, a 28-year-old female patient was referred to the Department of General, Transplant and Liver Surgery of the Medical University of Warsaw due to an incidental tumor finding in the right liver. At admission, laboratory test results were found to be normal. She presented mild discomfort in the upper-right quadrant of the abdomen throughout the previous 6 weeks. A core needle biopsy was performed. Pathologists diagnosed an intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma tumor. Due to inadequate future liver remnant (tumor size of 200 × 180 × 150 mm with right hepatic vein involvement) the tumor was claimed unresectable at that stage. The patient was referred to the oncologist for systemic therapy. A second core needle biopsy was performed, but this time a different tumor was diagnosed (CNSET).
Given an alternative diagnosis, the patient did not receive chemotherapy and was re-evaluated for surgical treatment. Multiple imaging was performed which presented local progression of the disease, increase in tumor size, diaphragmatic infiltration, right and middle hepatic vein obstruction, and right portal vein obstruction. Due to this tumor progression, she was once again disqualified from resection.
Throughout the course of consecutive months, the patient's quality of life suffered following increasing abdominal pain, uncontrollable hiccups, slight peripheral edema, and the emergence of paraneoplastic erythematous skin lesions. Yet, she did not receive systemic treatment. In August 2020, a control Computed Tomography Scan revealed tumor volume growth occupying the right liver along with segment IV and segment I with the obstruction of intrahepatic inferior vena cava . Positron Emission Tomography (PET) gave no evidence of metastases. Due to symptomatic tumor progression, no evident signs of extrahepatic disease, and no other surgical treatment options available, the patient was approved for liver transplantation. Preceding LT, her liver enzymes were elevated (alanine transaminase 331 IU/ml, aspartate transaminase 1,615 IU/ml), with total serum bilirubin 7.54 mg/dl, gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase 65 U/L. Tumor markers remained negative.
The patient underwent LT on 19 November, 2020, with the use of veno-venous bypass and end-to-end cavo-caval anastomosis. During hepatectomy, a 65 × 30 × 10 mm part of the diaphragm was excised en-bloc with the liver due to tumor infiltration, excised specimen weighed 4,800 g. A standard immunosuppression regimen of tacrolimus, prednisone, and mycophenolate mofetil was maintained.
Histopathological examination presented a well-circumcised tan-white tumor of a maximum size of 26 cm and another 6 mm infracapsular tumor . Microscopic examination revealed typical morphological features of CNSET. The tumor was composed of well-defined nests surrounded by desmoplastic stroma and areas of ossification. These nests were composed of short fascicles of bland looking spindle cells and inside the desmoplastic stroma neocholangioli were observed . A characteristic feature of this tumor is the nuclear and cytoplasmic immunohistochemical reaction with beta-katenin , which corresponds with previously reported histopathological characteristics of CNSET . In our case, two additional tissue structures were found: 1st—spindle-cell high-grade sarcoma, 2nd—primitive high-grade plasmacytoid sarcoma. The first tissue architecture was found in a 6 mm satellite tumor, which, therefore, should be treated as an intrahepatic metastasis, these cells were also found forming an embolus in one of the segmental hepatic veins. As far as we know, the histological findings that we described in this study have not been previously reported in patients diagnosed with CNSET.
The patient experienced a 10-min asystolic cardiac arrest on a post-operative day (POD) 6, most likely attributed to sudden hypoxemia caused by an iatrogenic diaphragmatic injury that subsequently led to respiratory failure with the need for mechanical ventilation and sedation until POD 23. The prolonged intubation led to a Serratia Marcescens infection confirmed in blood and bronchoalveolar fluid cultures, infection was treated according to antibiogram with a good outcome.
The patient was discharged on POD 42 in good general condition with normalized laboratory liver parameters.
The last outpatient follow-up was in January 2022 , where liver enzymes remained normal and apart from Ca125 (210 U/ml), tumor markers remained normal. Multiple diagnostic imaging carried out throughout the year showed no signs of recurrence .
Stenosis of the upper cavo-caval anastomosis with the reversed flow in renal veins was identified and managed with a series of percutaneous transluminal angioplasty using EverCross and Atlas Gold balloon catheters with an adequate outcome. The patient throughout the entire course of treatment did neither receive chemotherapy nor radiotherapy.