A 79-year-old woman was referred to the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology with an abdominal mass discovered on a computed tomography scan (CT) performed following right iliac artery angioplasty. The scan revealed a 16 × 11 cm mass resembling a fibroid with a haemorrhage .
Her history included type 2 diabetes, hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, glaucoma, hypothyroidism, and stage III chronic obstructive arteriopathy of the right leg, and she underwent a left carotid thromboendarterectomy 1 year prior to admission. Her gynaecological history was negative. She complained only of abdominal distension and pressure. A transvaginal and transabdominal ultrasound examination revealed a multicystic mass resembling an ovarian tumour arising from the pelvis and extending up to the abdomen. Three weeks later, a laparotomy was performed, and a peritoneal mass arising from Douglas peritoneum was found and resected. The uterus and adnexa appeared normal, and a supra-cervical hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy was performed. On frozen sections, the mass was identified as a primary sarcoma of the peritoneum with areas of chondroliposarcoma and rhabdomyosarcoma differenzation. No macroscopic residual disease was present (R0). Final pathology diagnosed a malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors with divergent differentiation (osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, angiosarcoma rhabdomyosarcoma, glandular component), grade 3 according to the French Federation of Cancer Centers Sarcoma Group (FNCLCC) grading system.
Adjuvant chemotherapy was planned. Four weeks later, a pre-chemotherapy CT scan revealed a new, multicystic mass (27 × 15 cm) with impregnation of the wall, strictly adhering to the inferior side of the sigmoid colon and cecal profile and to the superior side of the bladder. The mass protruded into the left inguinal canal by 2 cm. The patient presented with bilateral hydroureteronephrosis, fever due to wound infection, loss of appetite and weakness. Antibiotic therapy, bilateral stents, and support therapy were administered. Due to the progressive poor condition, the patient died 4 months after diagnosis. Histological slides were reviewed by two external independent expert pathologists (A.P. Dei Tos, Chief of Department of Pathology, Treviso Regional Hospital, Treviso, Italy. C.D.M. Fletcher, Chief of Surgical Pathology, Brigham And Women’s Hospital, Boston, USA) and the final diagnosis was of extra-genital AS with sarcomatous overgrowth .