A 30-year-old woman visited the nephrology clinic because of proteinuria and hematuria. The patient presented with generalized edema, and her urine had been foamy for 2 months. Her medical history was unremarkable. Her blood pressure was 112/60 mmHg, and pitting edema was observed during her physical examination. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed that both kidneys had a normal size and echogenicity. In our initial laboratory tests, the following values were found: hemoglobin level, 11.6 g/dL; platelet count, 322 × 103/μL; total protein level, 5.1 g/dL; serum albumin level, 2.01 g/dL; serum creatinine level, 1.14 mg/dL (corresponding to an estimated glomerular filtration rate [eGFR] of 64.9 mL/min/1.73 m2); and total cholesterol level, 395 mg/dL. Urinalysis revealed proteinuria (2+) and hematuria (2+; red blood cell count, > 20/high-power field). The spot urine protein-to-creatinine ratio (UPCR) was 7.32 g/g, and the spot urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio was 5.24 g/g, with nonselective glomerular proteinuria detected by urine electrophoresis. The results of other serological tests were positive for the antinuclear antibody (1:160), and negative for a speckled pattern and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA); additionally, her serum complements were within their reference ranges. All viral serological markers were negative. Kidney biopsy was performed. Twenty of 30 glomeruli showed cellular or fibrocellular crescents with mesangial proliferation. There was focal mild to moderate acute and chronic inflammatory cell infiltration with mild interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy, mainly along the crescentic glomeruli. There was occasional fibrinoid necrosis in the crescentic glomeruli, but there was no vasculitis in the interstitium. Some glomeruli showing mesangial proliferation or segmental sclerotic change without fibrinoid necrosis were observed. The immunofluorescent study revealed diffuse global immunofluorescent activity for IgM (1+), immunoglobulin G (IgG) (trace), and complement 3 (C3) (trace) in the mesangium. The corresponding electron-dense deposit was confirmed by the electron microscopic (EM) examination . A diagnosis of immune complex-mediated crescentic GN, possibly IgM nephropathy, was made.
As a treatment regimen for crescentic GN, three pulses of intravenous methylprednisolone (750 mg/day) were administered, followed by daily oral prednisone and intravenous cyclophosphamide (500 mg/m2 every 3 weeks). Her serum creatinine level continuously increased to 1.66 mg/dL (eGFR, 36.5 ml/min/1.73 m2) after admission and then decreased to 1.09 mg/dL (eGFR, 59.3 ml/min/1.73 m2) when she was discharged on the eighth day of admission. Three months later, her serum creatinine level was stabilized at 1.11 mg/dL (eGFR, 57.7 ml/min/1.73 m2), and microscopic hematuria completely disappeared. However, she steadily complained of generalized edema, and considerable nephrotic-range proteinuria persisted at a spot urine UPCR of 7.73 g/g. Given the tendency of resistance to cyclophosphamide treatments, rituximab was administered intravenously (375 mg/m2 per week) for 4 weeks alternatively. After the first dose of rituximab, her UPCR decreased to 0.27 g/g. However, after 4 weeks of rituximab therapy, the UPCR increased again to 5.59 g/g.
A second kidney biopsy was performed to make a precise diagnosis and to evaluate the change in glomeruli after the former treatment. Ten of 13 glomeruli showed segmental sclerosis with occasional mesangial proliferation, and most of them showed fibrous crescents. Mild interstitial fibrosis with tubular atrophy and minimal lymphoplasma cell infiltration were found. Diffuse global immunofluorescent activities for IgM (1+), IgG (trace), and C3 (trace) were observed, with electron-dense deposits in the mesangium, like in the first biopsy . A diagnosis of IgM nephropathy with a resolving phase of crescentic GN was made. After the second renal biopsy, cyclosporine was administered to treat the nephrotic-range proteinuria, and the UPCR in a spot urine sample decreased from 5.59 g/g to 2.24 g/g. The patient also reported an improvement in edema. Two months after the cyclosporine therapy, the serum creatinine level was 1.37 mg/d (eGFR, 51.6 ml/min/1.73 m2) and spot urine UPCR was 1.49 g/g. Owing to the risk of nephrotoxicity, we replaced cyclosporine with tacrolimus. At the recent follow-up, renal function and proteinuria were stabilized with a serum creatinine level of 1.23 mg/dl (eGFR, 58.8 ml/min/1.73 m2) and UPCR of 0.88 g/g, without symptoms of edema .