A 58-year-old man presented to our hospital with a painful and progressively enlarging mass in the right lower leg. The patient noted a soft tissue mass in the anterolateral aspect of his lower leg seven years before. He had no family history, no medical history and had not any severe trauma or irradiation to the region. One month prior to presentation, his discomfort became obvious and he began experiencing pain and tenderness. The pain was dull-aching in nature and did not radiate to other regions.
On physical examination, a giant mass that was ovoid, firm, tender, well demarcated, and relatively fixed was palpated in the right peroneus muscle upper area and size was about 10 cm length and 2 cm width. The knee movements was normal. The neurological examination was within normal limits, and no lymphadenopathy was present. Laboratory data showed normal values including calcium, phosphorus, and alkaline phosphatase.
A plain X-ray and computed tomography (CT) scans revealed a large homogeneous, low-fat density mass containing an oval shape calcification from fibula neck to fibula shaft about 11 cm length and 2 cm width. Continuity between a tumor and fibula was not found. . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a circumscribed mass in the peroneus muscle with a large calcified component .
An excisional biopsy was undertaken. During the operation, a well encapsulated tumor mass was found to be located in the peroneus muscle . There was no continuity between the mass and the adjacent bone. The tumor mass was removed surgically, and the incision was closed without a drain. The wound healed well, and the patient returned to daily activity after 2 days without complications.
Grossly, the resected specimen is a well demarcated, diffusely yellowish adipose tissue mass measuring 11 × 3.5 × 2 cm and 43 g in weight. Outer surface is diffusely smooth because of a thin fibrous capsule. On sectioning, the cut surface consists of deep yellowish fat admixed with multiple scattered calcified white or brown bone .
The microscopic analyses revealed osseous trabeculae inside a mature adipose tissue. No cellular atypia or increased of mitotic figures were observed. These findings led us histopathological diagnosis of benign osteolipoma .
The definitive pathological diagnosis was intramuscular osteolipoma without evidence of malignancy. No recurrence was observed at six months follow-up.