A 27-year-old Caucasian woman was referred to our Surgery Department from the Endocrinology Department for surgical treatment of ACTH-independent CS considered to be caused by an adrenocortical adenoma.
The patient reported a three-year history of hirsutism, acne, menstrual disturbances and mood disorders. On clinical examination, skin atrophy, buffalo hump, moon facies, proximal muscle weakness and elevated blood pressure (145/90 mmHg) were documented. Our patient's history and clinical signs were suggestive of hypercortisolism and she was further evaluated.
Hormonal investigation revealed elevated morning cortisol levels (702, reference range (RR): 130-690 nmol/L) with suppressed ACTH levels (3.6, RR: 9-52 pg/mL), elevated urinary free cortisol (UFC) levels (221, RR: 20-90 μg/24 h), loss of circadian rhythm of cortisol secretion (plasma cortisol (16:00): 693 nmol/L, (00:00): 694: 694 nmol/L) and failure to suppress endogenous plasma cortisol following low dose dexamethasone suppression test (LDDST) (plasma cortisol after LDDST: 800 nmol/L) .
A 2 cm adenoma of the left adrenal gland was identified in the adrenal computerized tomography (CT) scan, whereas the right adrenal appeared normal in size and architecture.
The hormonal and radiological findings led to the diagnosis of ACTH-independent CS due to an adrenocortical adenoma of the left adrenal gland and our patient underwent left laparoscopic adrenalectomy. On surgery, both adrenals had macroscopically a pigmented, micronodular appearance . Histology revealed adrenal hyperplasia with small, pigmented cortical nodules establishing the diagnosis of PPNAD.
In order to exclude the presence of CNC, our patient underwent a chest CT scan, pituitary magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan, ultrasound (US) of the genitals and heart, and all were unremarkable. Her family history was negative.
Six months later recurrence of hypercortisolism was documented and a right laparoscopic adrenalectomy was performed. Histology confirmed the initial diagnosis of pigmented micronodular adrenal hyperplasia.
Our patient's post-operative course was uncomplicated and she received replacement therapy with hydrocortisone and fludrocortisone. On one-year follow-up, all signs and symptoms of CS resolved and nine years later there is no evidence of hypercortisolism or CNC.
We prefer the trans-peritoneal lateral decubitus approach as the best for maximal exposure of the gland and adjacent organs and vessels. In the right, we use three 10 mm trocars, introducing a fourth 5 mm at a later stage. In the left, we use two 10 mm trocars and two 5 mm trocars.
The right triangular ligament and the retroperitoneal liver attachments are cauterized and divided in order to allow liver retraction and expose the upper limits of the adrenal gland. After dividing the retroperitoneum, the inferior vena cava (IVC) is identified and dissected from the gland. The periadrenal fat is gently pushed upwards with endo-peanuts. The adrenal vein is subsequently identified, dissected, double-clipped and divided. The inferior and superior adrenal vessels are cauterized or clipped. Ultrasonic scissors are used after the ligation of the adrenal vein.
The left colonic flexure is occasionally mobilized and the left upper renal pole is exposed. The splenic attachments are cauterized and divided, and the tail of pancreas is identified. The spleen is further mobilized until the stomach is visualized. Gerota's fascia is then opened, the adrenal gland identified and the adrenal vein dissected, double clipped and divided. The upper adrenal vessels are either cauterized or clipped.
The specimen is placed in a bag and extracted after minimally extending the 10 mm port-site incision.