A 56-year-old Chinese female with primary angle closure glaucoma, underwent bilateral LPI one year ago. Her eyes were treated with topical timolol 0.5% twice daily and topical latanoprost 0.005% at night. During her last clinic visit, the IOPs were 20 mm Hg (right) and 21 mm Hg (left). She presented with three days’ history of sudden left eye pain, redness, lacrimation and blurring of vision associated with headache. The episode occurred spontaneously. Visual acuity was 0.17 (decimal notation). Ocular examination showed marked ciliary flush, corneal edema and mid-dilated pupil (Figure
). The anterior chamber was very shallow (Figure
).
Retro-illumination revealed a patent peripheral iridotomy (Figure
). The IOP was 60 mm Hg. Relative afferent pupillary defect was absent. The crystalline lens was cataractous with grade 2 nuclear sclerosis. Ultrasonographic biomicroscopy showed peripheral iridocorneal touch and forward rotation of the ciliary body (Figure
). B-mode ultrasonography showed a normal posterior segment.
The diagnosis of malignant glaucoma was made. She was treated immediately with intravenous mannitol 20%, oral acetazolamide 250 mg, topical atropine 1%, topical timolol 0.5% and topical latanoprost 0.005%. The IOP came down to 26 mm Hg after 2 hour, but subsequently rose to 36 mm Hg with persistent shallowing of the anterior chamber. An emergency anterior vitrectomy was performed via the pars plana, followed by phacoemulsification cataract extraction, primary posterior capsulotomy, and posterior chamber intraocular lens implantation.
Postoperatively the anterior chamber depth increased (Figure
) and the IOP came down to 20 mm Hg. Ultrasonographic biomicroscopy on the fifth postoperative day showed backward displacement of the ciliary body and iris with opened drainage angle (Figure
). She was discharged after a week with topical atropine 1% daily, topical timolol 0.5% twice daily and topical latanoprost 0.005% at night for both eyes. After 6 month, her best corrected visual acuity was 0.67, IOP was 18 mm Hg.