A 30-year-old woman visited our hospital with a chief compliant of palpitations and fatigue. No significant abnormal findings were found on physical examination. Electrocardiography (ECG) revealed that the rhythm was sinus with frequent VPCs. Holter ECG demonstrated that the VPCs comprised 43% of the total heart beats. Echocardiography indicated no evidence of clinically overt structural or organic heart disease. Because she had no particular medical history, bisoprolol 2.5 mg daily was started. However, since bisoprolol did not either alleviate her symptoms or reduce the frequency of VPCs, the drug was discontinued and radiofrequency (RF) catheter ablation was instead recommended. The clinical VPCs had an inferior axis and left bundle branch block morphology with a precordial transition between V4 and V5 .
Radiofrequency catheter ablation was performed in accordance with our protocol for VPC ablation . In brief, under local anaesthesia, a 20-polar electrode monorail catheter (Inter-Nova, Tokyo, Japan) was positioned percutaneously through the coronary sinus (CS) into the anterior interventricular vein (AIV) using a 0.014 guidewire. Since the surface ECG morphology suggested that the clinical VPCs were of an RVOT origin, the VPC mapping was first obtained at the RVOT using a THERMOCOOL SMARTTOUCH® ablation catheter (Biosense Webster, Irvine, CA, USA). We prefer to use the ablation catheter for RVOT VA mapping because of its manoeuvrability and lower incidence of catheter-induced VPCs compared with multipolar catheters. The earliest activation was recorded at the septal side of the RVOT and preceded surface ECG by 11 ms. However, no good pace mapping was obtained at the RVOT (8 of 12 leads were identical to the clinical VPCs, ). Therefore, the VPC mapping was performed at the LVOT using a multi-electrode catheter PENTARAY® (Biosense Webster) after aortic angiography . The geometry of the aortic cusp was reconstructed by CARTOSOUND® (Biosense Webster) . Three-dimensional mapping by the CARTO 3 system (Biosense Webster) demonstrated that the earliest activation was at the RCC and preceded surface ECG by 28 ms (, and ). Pacing at the earliest activation site provoked a waveform similar to the target VPCs, but no perfect pace mapping was obtained (10 of 12 leads were identical to the clinical VPCs, ). Radiofrequency energy was applied at the earliest site of the RCC with a maximal temperature of 42°C, a maximum power of 35 W, and an irrigation rate of 12 mL/min for 120 s. The VPCs were suppressed in 3 s but recurred after the cessation of RF energy application. After the third energy application, the VPCs were finally eliminated.
However, the VPCs recurred 24 min after the last energy application. Although the morphology, QRS transition, and rate of the recurrent VPCs were almost the same as the target VPCs, additional ablation from the RCC did not diminish the recurrent VPCs. Remapping of the recurrent VPCs using CARTO3 system indicated that the earliest activation site was not at the RCC but below the aortic valve , where the His potential was recorded during sinus rhythm. The earliest activation preceded surface ECG by 16 ms. Mapping of the RVOT revealed that the earliest activation site was in the His region , where local potentials preceded surface ECG by 34 ms during VPCs, and a clear His potential was recorded during sinus rhythm . To avoid the risk of atrioventricular (AV) block, we preferred to apply energy from the aortic valve cusps. Because RF energy application at the RCC had failed to diminish the VPCs, RF energy was delivered from the NCC where the His potentials were neither sharp nor split . Because far-field His potentials were recorded at the NCC, CS pacing (120 b.p.m.) was continued during RF energy application to monitor AV conduction. Although the local potentials at the NCC preceded surface ECG by only 22 ms , RF energy delivery from the NCC successfully eliminated the VPCs within 5 s. Energy application for 120 s was repeated several times to secure the elimination of the VPCs. The session was finished without any complications. The total procedure time was 2 h 48 min.
Echocardiography after ablation indicated no evidence of either aortic valve injury or regurgitation. Holter ECG at 1 month after catheter ablation revealed no recurrence of the VPCs. The patient never complained of either palpitations or fatigue after undergoing catheter ablation.