A 21-year-old male, who previously suffered only from intermittent asthma, was admitted to the emergency room in March 2018 with a one-day history of headache, nausea, sore throat, and generalised muscle ache. An initial consultation with the family physician had diagnosed influenza but shivers, photophobia, and testicular pain appeared 24 h later. Subsequent physical examination found new purpuric lesions on the trunk and upper limbs leading to admission to hospital.
At admission, the patient’s blood pressure was 121/47 mmHg, heart rate was 116 bpm, oxygen saturation was 94% in room air, and his temperature was 38.4°C. He was slightly drowsy with a Coma Glasgow Scale score of 13, with left parietal headache, nausea and neck stiffness. Cardiovascular, pulmonary and abdominal examination was normal. Laboratory analysis of blood samples revealed high levels of C-reactive protein (106 mg/L), hyperleukocytosis (24 × 109 white blood cells/L, of which 94% were neutrophils), and acute non-obstructive renal failure (3.46 mg/dL serum creatinine, corresponding to creatinine clearance of 24 mL/min).
Blood cultures were taken and a lumbar puncture was performed, followed immediately by intravenous (IV) administration of 2 g cefotaxime. The CSF was crystal clear and no hyper-pressure was observed upon puncture of the dura mater. Biochemical analysis of the CSF revealed normal glycorrachia (3.0 mmol/L, with 4.8 mmol/L glycaemia), normal protein content (0.22 g/L) and elevated levels of lactate (5.8 mmol/L). Cyto-microbiological analysis found no CSF pleiocytosis (6 leukocytes/mm3) and the absence of bacteria as determined by Gram staining.
The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) with a diagnosis of purpura fulminans with uncertain meningitis. During the following 12 h, multiple organ dysfunction syndrome progressively appeared with the following features: disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) [elevated prothrombin time (PT) (26%), elevated activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) (2.54), low fibrinogen (1 .4g/L), thrombopenia (62 × 109 platelets/L), elevated D-dimers (> 10.000 ng/mL) and low factor V (21%)]; severe hypotension resistant to 20 mL/kg fluid resuscitation and requiring treatment with 0.4 μg/kg/min norepinephrine; non-obstructive acute renal failure; acute lung injury with mild pulmonary oedema upon chest X-ray and no cardiac failure upon the first echocardiographic examination (left-ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) 70%), requiring oxygen delivery through a mask up to 9 L/min flow, and metabolic acidosis (pH 7.28, lactate 6.4 mmol/L). In addition, plasma procalcitonin (PCT) levels were very high (521 μg/L). Encephalic computerised tomography (CT) scan and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) ruled out the presence of a pharyngeal or cerebral abscess, cerebral thrombophlebitis, sinusitis, mastoiditis, and ethmoiditis. The patient was treated IV with 250 mg/kg/day cefotaxime.
Neisseria meningitidis was first identified in the blood cultures after 15 h, confirming the diagnosis of meningococcemia with purpura fulminans and shock. Numerous N. meningitidis colony-forming units were then identified in the CSF cultures 24 h after sampling. Furthermore, pathological examination of skin biopsies taken from purpuric areas revealed thrombosis of all the dermal capillaries associated with the presence of cocci in several vessels . The N. meningitidis strain isolated belonged to serogroup C and was fully susceptible to penicillin (minimum inhibitory concentrations for penicillin, amoxicillin and ceftriaxone of 0.047, 0.125, and < 0.016 mg/L, respectively). The patient had never been vaccinated against meningococcus. Human immunodeficiency virus serology was negative.
Organ failure improved by the second day after admission. Oxygen delivery was decreased to 4 L/min and the norepinephrine infusion rate reduced to 0.2 μg/kg/min. Creatinine serum levels decreased to 2.1 mg/dL (estimated clearance of 40 mL/min), haemostasis parameters improved (PT 42%, aPTT 1.85, fibrinogen 4.5 g/L), and the blood lactate concentration decreased to 5.7 mmol/L . A recurrence of hypotension, however, led to the diagnosis of acute myocarditis upon echocardiography, with decreased LVEF (40%), diffuse left-ventricular hypokinesia, and low left-ventricular output (2.4 L/min/m2 with aortic velocity–time integral of 13.5 cm). An electrocardiogram revealed an elevation of the ST segment in the infero-lateral area . Blood levels of hypersensitive troponin Ic increased rapidly to reach a peak of > 13,000 ng/L 44 h after admission, and then decreased and normalized within 14 days. Hypotension was corrected by IV infusion of 10 μg/kg/min dobutamine for 36 h until left-ventricular function was completely restored. A myocardial MRI scan performed at day 8 showed no residual segmental or global left-ventricular dysfunction, no perfusion defect, and no abnormal contrast enhancement after injection of gadolinium.
All organ dysfunctions resolved during further treatment in the ICU. Nevertheless, distal hypoperfusion remained, in particular, in the distal phalanges of both hands. To avoid necrosis of the fingers, the patient was treated for 9 days with systemic (Iloprost 2 ng/kg/min by continuous IV) and local (Trinitrine patches 10 mg/day applied to all distal phalanges) vasodilators. Dermal necrosis occurred only on the pulp of the left index finger, bilaterally on the pulp of the big toes, the left ear lobe and the foreskin. Cefotaxime was discontinued after 7 days. The patient was transferred to the infectious disease ward 7 days after admission into the ICU. He was circumcised at day 12 to treat the foreskin necrosis and was finally discharged from the hospital at day 22 after favourable evolution of all necrotic lesions.