Mrs. S., a 46-year-old woman from Azerbaijan who had lived in Germany for the past eight years, had always been healthy and had never been under the care of a general practitioner. In November she visited a general practitioner complaining of right upper abdominal pain with no radiation. The pain, which was described as pressing in character, had been present for about three months and was intermittent. There was no nausea, vomiting, weight loss, melaena, change in bowel habit, urinary symptoms, or fever. The patient denied alcohol abuse and said that she was a nonsmoker and took no regular medication.
Blood pressure 140/80 mmHg, weight 75 kg, height 170 cm. Heart and lungs normal to percussion and auscultation. No lymph node enlargement. Abdomen slightly obese and soft. Tenderness present in the right upper abdomen. Bowel sounds normal. Renal angles clear. The clinical findings did not indicate a need for immediate hospital admission. On the basis of the history and the findings at the initial consultation, a series of laboratory tests and an ultrasound scan of the abdomen were ordered.
Relevant abnormal laboratory test results: C-reactive protein 108 mg/l (normal range < 5 mg/l), erythrocyte sedimentation rate 91 mm after two hours (normal range < 20 mm). The following values were within normal limits: blood count, aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, gamma-glutamyltransferase, alkaline phosphatase, creatinine, bilirubin, serum electrolytes. Sonography showed an irregularly echogenic, partially calcified septate cystic structure in segment VIII of the liver . No other abnormalities were apparent. In view of the sonographic findings, the radiologist arranged for the immediate performance of a contrast-enhanced computed tomographic scan of the abdomen. This showed a circumscribed rounded lesion measuring 5.8 × 4.7 × 5 cm in hepatic segment VIII . The lesion showed a thick rim of calcification and a suggestion of fine septa with no affinity for contrast medium. The liver was otherwise homogeneous and of normal appearance. The other parenchymal abdominal organs appeared normal and there were no enlarged lymph nodes.
Additional laboratory tests showed an antibody titre of 1:512 for E. granulosus and the presence of anti-E. multilocularis IgG. A western blot analysis was positive for Echinococcus granulosus and negative for Echinococcus multilocularis. After being informed about possible treatment options, the patient was referred to the university hospital. There she underwent hepatic segmental resection and cholecystectomy. Histological preparation of the material removed at operation showed caseating necrosis with a moderately severe, partly giant-cell, inflammatory reaction at the margin of an echinococcal cyst. There was no evidence of malignancy. The histological appearance was consistent with Echinococcus granulosus infection. Moderately severe chronic cholecystitis with moderate fibrosis of the gallbladder wall and cholecystolithiasis were also present. The skin sutures were removed on the tenth postoperative day. As a result of wound dehiscence, the wound healed partly by second intention. The patient was free of symptoms. Follow-up treatment with Eskazole® 400 mg (active ingredient: albendazole) b.i.d. was given. The patient's subsequent progress was without complication.