A 77-year-old male with a past medical history of hypertension, osteoarthritis, and ulcerative colitis on infliximab presented to an outside hospital after an unwitnessed mechanical fall. There was no noted preceding prodrome. He was retired and volunteered frequently at animal shelters with extensive animal contact. On presentation, he endorsed a headache as well as posterior neck pain and was found to be hypertensive (systolic blood pressure 208 mmHg) with leukocytosis (21,100/μL; ref. range 3500-10,000/μL). A head-and-neck computed tomography (CT) scan revealed small subdural hematomas, mild traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage with small intraventricular component, and a nondisplaced fracture of the sphenoid sinus.
He was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) for management of hypertensive emergency and was treated empirically with a 7-day course of intravenous ampicillin-sulbactam for presumed aspiration pneumonia. Sputum cultures were not obtained. On hospital day 8, he developed serosanguinous nasal drainage, confirmed to be CSF rhinorrhea by beta-2-transferrin testing, which subsequently resolved without intervention. While on the floor, he was ambulating and functioning at baseline per family members, but developed mild dizziness and new headache on hospital day 10. The following morning, he exhibited altered mental status with a temperature of 39.2 °C and blood pressure of 230/110 mmHg. His markedly elevated blood pressure was attributed to agitation, suspected seizure, and poorly-controlled hypertension at baseline. Laboratory studies revealed new leukocytosis (16,000/μL). Blood cultures were drawn and returned negative. A repeat CT scan was stable without findings suggestive of herniation or significant cerebral edema, and CSF cultures were collected via lumbar puncture. Intravenous meropenem was empirically started, and he was readmitted to the ICU for neurological monitoring and blood pressure control. Blood cultures were again drawn on hospital day 12 and returned negative.
B. bronchiseptica eventually grew on CSF culture, and meropenem was continued. Table lists the isolate’s susceptibility profile. On hospital day 17, he had worsening encephalopathy, a repeat CSF analysis showed resolving pleocytosis, and a repeat CT scan showed stable communicating hydrocephalus. He was transferred to Yale New Haven Hospital the following day. On hospital day 19, temporary CSF diversion was achieved by a lumbar drain due to concern for communicating hydrocephalus. CSF cultures were collected at the time of lumbar drain placement and returned negative. Three subsequent CSF cultures were also negative. On hospital day 20, sensitivity data for B. bronchiseptica cultures were received from the outside hospital, and antibiotic therapy was deescalated to intravenous ceftazidime. Three days after its placement, the lumbar drain was removed and replaced with an external ventricular drain since the patient’s neurological exam failed to improve. A CT scan demonstrated persistent ventriculomegaly, and obstructive hydrocephalus was suspected. His mental status dramatically improved over the following days, and the external ventricular drain was removed 7 days after placement. Notably, ventriculomegaly persisted on a repeat CT scan. Guided by CSF profile and culture data, ceftazidime was discontinued at that time. In total, he received 10 days of meropenem and an additional 9 days of ceftazidime. He was at his baseline neurologically when discharged to a rehabilitation facility after a 32-day hospital stay.