A 69-year-old Japanese man was admitted to our hospital in July 2009 because of 1 week of episodic headaches, palpitations, and chest pains. He had a family history of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) in his mother. The patient drank 360 mL/day of sake. He had a smoking history of one pack of cigarettes/day from 20 to 60 years old. Our patient was diagnosed with T2DM at the age of 60 years at our hospital and started treatment with diet therapy (1600 kcal/day). He was started with the oral antidiabetic drug nateglinide (90 mg/day) at the age of 63 years, and subsequently had fair glycemic control with a mean glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) of 7 % (reference range: 4.6–6.2 %) with no diabetic retinopathy. He had never had hypertension and had normal blood pressure (BP), with a systolic and diastolic BP of around 120 mmHg and 70 mmHg, respectively. He showed acute-onset episodic headaches, palpitations, and chest pains at rest in June 2009, which lasted for 10 to 20 minutes and occurred several times per day, and was admitted to our hospital.
On physical examination performed at presentation with no symptoms, he was 161 cm tall, weighed 55 kg, and his body temperature and blood pressure were 36.2 °C and 106/58 mmHg, respectively. No thyroid struma, chest rales, heart murmurs, abdominal tenderness or mass, or peripheral edema was detected. An electrocardiogram showed a normal sinus rhythm, with a heart rate (HR) of 65 beats/minute and no abnormal wave form. Chest X-ray showed no abnormalities with a cardiothoracic ratio of 46 %. Laboratory findings showed a normal complete blood count, normal liver and renal functions, normal balance of serum electrolytes, and high HbA1c value (7.6 %).
On day 2 of admission, our patient again experienced episodic headache, palpitation, and chest pain. During the episode, an electrocardiogram showed nonsustained ventricular tachycardia. His symptoms resolved within 20 minutes after sublingual administration of nitroglycerin (0.3 mg), which was administered as diagnostic therapy for ischemic heart disease, but it was unclear whether the drug was responsible for the observed improvement. Although an electrocardiogram did not show significant changes in the ST-T segment, the possibility of acute coronary syndrome remained because of his noticeable chest symptoms, and our patient received cardiac catheterization on the same day. Coronary arteriography showed no significant coronary artery lesion, and left ventriculography showed normal ventricular function with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 69 %. However, during the test, he again experienced episodic headache, palpitation, and chest pain accompanied by marked fluctuations of systemic BP (ranging from 40/25 mmHg to 300/160 mmHg). Catecholamine levels (noradrenaline 10.8 ng/mL, reference range: 0.10–0.50 ng/mL; adrenaline 8.8 ng/mL, reference range: 0–0.10 ng/mL) in his plasma taken during the attacks of alternating hypertension and hypotension were high. Neck, chest, and abdominal computed tomography (CT) performed following cardiac catheterization showed a 4-cm left adrenal tumor without any other mass lesion. He was believed to have possible pheochromocytoma, and treatment with an alpha 1 adrenergic blocker, oral doxazosin, (2 mg/day) was begun.
Urinary excretion of catecholamines (noradrenaline 2592 μg/day, reference range: 26–230 μg/day; adrenaline 2032 μg/day, reference range: 1.0–29 μg/day) and metanephrines (normetanephrine 3.5 mg/day, reference range: 0.10–0.28 mg/day; metanephrine 6.0 mg/day, reference range: 0.04–0.18 mg/day) in a 24-hour urine sample collected from days 2 through 3 of admission were high. An iodine-123 metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) scan detected no pathological accumulation in the patient’s whole body, including the region of the left adrenal gland. Gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) indicated altered intensity in a 4-cm left adrenal tumor, and an area of high intensity was found along the periphery of the tumor, which persisted until the delayed phase . Taken together, our patient was diagnosed with left adrenal pheochromocyroma containing a large necrosis. Our patient no longer experienced episodic headaches, palpitations, chest pains, or labile BP by day 5 of admission. Plasma levels of noradrenaline (0.38 ng/mL) and adrenaline (0.10 ng/mL) measured on the morning of day 7 were normal. In preparation for adrenal surgery , the dose of doxazosin was titrated to 12 mg/day, and he was discharged on day 19 after admission.
Our patient underwent laparoscopic left adrenalectomy in September 2009. The histopathological features of the tumor were consistent with those of intra-adrenal paraganglioma (pheochromocytoma) . The tumor had a large area of coagulative necrosis in the center. The necrotic material was immunohistochemically positive for cytoplasmic components, such as synaptophysin and tyrosine hydroxylase, and was markedly positive for the neuroendocrine granule component, chromogranin A. Numerous hemosiderin-laden macrophages and histiocytes accompanied by vascular proliferation were detected in the region around the area of necrosis. The viable areas located at the periphery of the tumor contained numerous cells undergoing pyknosis, and the cytoplasm of these tumor cells was immunohistochemically positive for synaptophysin, tyrosine hydroxylase, and chromogranin A. The tumor cell nuclei were positive for SDHB. The Ki-67 labeling index was 2 % in the hot spot. The Pheochromocytoma of the Adrenal gland Scaled Score (PASS) was 2 (two factors, nuclear pleomorphism and hyperchromasia, were met) out of a maximum score of 20. No embolus or thrombus formation, atherosclerosis, or vasculitis was found in the resected specimen harboring the whole tumor.
The patient discontinued oral doxazosin just after surgery and had no recurrent episodic headache, chest symptoms, or labile BP. His T2DM was treated with continued oral nateglinide, with a mean HbA1c of 7 %. His postoperative course during close follow-up for > 7 years has been uneventful without local or distant recurrence of pheochromocytoma.