A 78-year-old man has affected by abdominal pain, vomiting and weakness and has evaluated at June 2013. Studying his medical history, he had hip joint replacement surgery, then in initial physical examination has shown no significant finding, except a few tenderness on the middle abdominal quadrant. In laboratory assessment, complete blood count, renal function tests-alkaline phosphatase and lactate dehydrogenase were normal, but hemoglobin and transaminases were abnormal as follows: Hb = 9.1 mg/dl, AST = 71 u/lit, ALT = 656 u/lit.
In abdominal CT scan, there was a 71 × 61 mm mass at the aortic bifurcation in favor of tumoral lesion or adenopathy.
Surgery has recommended and in pre-operative evaluation he has referred to cardiologist. ECG had no significant and specific changes and in echocardiography, a large mass with diameter of 74 × 60 mm has seen in right atrium and LV ejection fraction was 65%. Also, in thoracic sections of CT scan, an intra-cardiac mass has seen .
Bases on these new findings management of the patient has changed to cardiac surgery and open heart surgery has recommended and performed at August 2013. Pathologic examination of removed cardiac mass has reported as below after immunohistochemistry study: HMB 45 and CK: negative; CD20: positive. Compatible with non-Hodgkin lymphoma in favor of B-cell origin ( and ). He has referred to oncologist after recovery of heart surgery (September 2013).
In evaluation of medical history and further physical examination, he had no history of fever and sweating, but weight loss of 2 - 3 kg during recent weeks. Karnowsky performance status was 80%. At physical examination, he had an adenopathy of 2 × 1 cm at left jugulodigastric chain, and the another of 3 × 1 cm at left supraclavicular area and physical exam was normal otherwise.
In bone marrow biopsy, BM was hyper cellular, and involved with lymphoma infiltration. The patient has planned to treat by R-CHOP chemotherapy regimen (Rituximab-cyclophosphamide-Doxorubicin-vincristine-prednisolone).
He could not provide Rituximab due to economic problems, therefor he has received only CHOP regimen. After first cycle of treatment, cervical adenopathies have disappeared and at the end of seventh cycle, imaging of the neck , chest and abdominopelvic cavity by CT scan had no positive finding of disease but the patient has not satisfied to undergo BM biopsy for second time.
Patient treatment has completed after eight cycles of CHOP chemotherapy regimen at February 2014, but he was in good condition, without any evidences of disease after six months of follow up.