A 50-year-old premenopausal Japanese woman was admitted to our hospital with a 3-year history of anterior chest squeezing lasting 5 min that occurred every morning when she washed her face and brushed her teeth immediately after waking up. The squeezing radiated to the left axilla and was sometimes associated with diaphoresis. One month before admission, chest pain attacks began to occur during the day in addition to those occurring early in the morning. The patient had no history of tobacco, alcohol, or illicit drug consumption. Her medical history was unremarkable.
Her vital signs were as follows: temperature, 37.0°C; pulse rate, 84 b.p.m.; systemic blood pressure, 130/84 mmHg; and respiratory rate, 16/min. Physical examination findings were unremarkable. Blood tests revealed normal lipid profile and glucose levels and no inflammatory reaction. Serological test results for syphilis were negative. Chest radiography, electrocardiography, and echocardiography findings were also unremarkable.
Unstable angina, mainly due to CAS, was suspected, and nisoldipine (10 mg once daily), isosorbide mononitrate (20 mg twice daily), and aspirin (81 mg once daily) were prescribed. No angina attacks occurred after admission. Coronary angiography (CAG) was performed after nisoldipine and isosorbide mononitrate were discontinued. A control angiogram showed only non-significant stenoses in the bilateral coronary ostia. Therefore, a provocative test for CAS was performed with acetylcholine, as reported previously. After an intracoronary injection of 20 μg acetylcholine into the LCA , severe vasoconstriction, accompanied by the usual chest pain and ischaemic electrocardiogram (ECG) changes (, left and middle), occurred in the entire LCA, including the ostium, with delayed contrast washout in the left anterior descending artery. When acetylcholine-provoked CAS in the LCA subsided after intracoronary isosorbide dinitrate (4 mg) injection, incremental doses of acetylcholine (20, 50, and 80 μg) were injected into the RCA. Finally, a severe vasoconstriction of some segments, including the ostium , occurred with chest pain and ischaemic ECG changes (, left and right). After intracoronary isosorbide dinitrate (4 mg) injection into the RCA, acetylcholine-provoked CAS subsided. Final angiography showed intermediate stenoses in the bilateral coronary ostia .
The patient was diagnosed with multi-vessel CAS, and nisoldipine and isosorbide mononitrate were reinitiated. Duplex ultrasonography of the carotid and renal arteries to determine the aetiology of ICOS showed no findings suggestive of FMD. The patient’s angina was considered secondary to CAS but not to ICOS. Although a physiological examination using a pressure wire to guide the decision for revascularization was not performed, the severity of the bilateral ICOS was considered low; thus, it was not indicated for surgery. Subsequently, the patient was prescribed calcium channel blockers (CCBs) at another clinic for 24 years since the first presentation, and the VSA attacks disappeared.
At 74 years of age, 24 years after the first presentation, the patient presented to our hospital with atypical chest pain. Coronary computed tomography angiography (CTA) showed no luminal narrowing throughout the epicardial coronary arteries, including the bilateral ostia . Systemic CTA showed no involvement of the major aortic branches .