A 43-year-old woman, of Moroccan origin, was admitted in August 2005 for seizure, an 8 kg loss of body-weight, slowly increasing dyspnea, productive cough, and fever lasting for 4 months. She had been known to be infected by HIV since 1996, but lost to follow-up. Physical examination revealed left lower limb palsy, pulmonary ronchi, hepatomegaly and oropharyngeal candidiasis. Cerebral computed tomography (CT) imaging demonstrated multiple abscesses. Cerebral toxoplasmosis was suspected and treatment with pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine was initiated. Biological results were: C-Reactive Protein (CRP) 19 mg/L, leukocyte count 3940/mm3, hemoglobin 11,1 g/dL, aspartate aminotransferase 88 U/L, alanine aminotransferase 40 U/L, gamma glutamyl transferase 310 U/L, alkaline phosphatases 210 U/L, lactico deshydrogenase 268 U/L. Her peripheral blood CD4+ cell count was 110/mm3 and HIV viral load was 6.39 log copies/mL. Serological tests for hepatitis B and C were positive. A chest radiograph demonstrated diffuse bilateral pulmonary infiltrates . The thoracic CT-scan showed mediastinal lymphadenopathies, numerous diffuse pulmonary nodular infiltrates with a cavitation in the left upper lobe . Bronchial endoscopy did not show abnormalities. Three sputa were smear positive for acid-fast bacilli (AFB). Broncho-alveolar lavage (BAL) fluid cytological analysis confirmed the presence of AFB but was negative for other microorganisms. Isoniazid, rifampicin and pyrazinamide were therefore started. Despite the anti-tuberculous regimen, fever persisted and respiratory symptoms progressively worsened requiring continuous nasal oxygenotherapy. After 10 weeks, mycobacterial culture from the respiratory specimen grew M. genavense. The initial anti-tuberculosis treatment was changed for a multidrug regimen with moxifloxacin (400 mg/d), clarithromycin (500 mg b.i.d), ethambutol (20 mg/kg/d) and amikacin (15 mg/kg/d, during 3 weeks) and HAART (tenofovir, emtricitabine, efavirenz) were introduced. Clarithromycin was increased to 1000 mg b.i.d after 2 weeks of treatment because the treatment was well-tolerated and optimal treatment recommendations were sparse. HIV viral load decreased to 3 log copies/mL after 1 month without increase in CD4+ count (60 cells/mm3). Despite 3 months of this antimycobacterial treatment, the patient's clinical course worsened and infiltrates in the upper lobes on chest X-ray increased. A second bronchoscopy was performed and BAL fluid cytologic analysis showed the persistence of 20 to 30 AFB/field, which were again identified as M. genavense, without other pathogens. Then gamma interferon (IFN-γ) was started (50 μg/m2 sub-cutaneously 3-times a week). The HAART therapy was continued with undetectable viral load but a persistent CD4 lymphopenia (50/mm3). The patient's general condition gradually improved within 1 month of IFN-γ treatment with oxygen weaning, radiological improvement and negative respiratory specimens mycobacterial culture. The CD4 cell count reached 300/mm3 after twelve months of antimycobacterial treatment, so IFN-γ was withdrawn. The anti-mycobacterial treatment was withdrawn after 2 years. We decided to continue the treatment more than 6 months after immune reconstitution and 12 months after negative culture of respiratory specimen because chest radiograph demonstrated continuous regression of pulmonary infiltrate until 24 months, with minimal sequelae at the end of treatment . At the last medical visit in June 2011, the patient remained in good health, without relapse of the mycobacterial disease.