A 28-year-old male with a history of chronic low back pain described his pain as constantly present, 4–8/10 in intensity, shooting down both legs with any movement, and with associated tingling and numbness. His exercise tolerance had decreased to walking a quarter of a mile/day over a period of 6 months, and he ended up quitting his job due to his debilitating pain.
Besides the low back pain, for which the patient frequently visited the emergency room, he also had left testicular pain. He was diagnosed with orchitis, and was started on oral antibiotics. Despite the treatment, his testicular pain worsened, and he was prescribed additional antibiotics. The infection resulted in left groin pain that extended to his mid-back, buttock, and radiated down the hamstring and lateral aspect of leg, correlating with L5-S1 dermatomes.
His electromyography (EMG) showed decreased sural nerve signals. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his lumbar spine demonstrated central canal stenosis at the L3-4-5 levels and disc herniations at L3-4 and L4-5 levels. His hip X-ray, computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen, ultrasound of the testicles, and urinalysis were within normal limits.
He was first started on nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and then acetaminophen/hydrocodone and muscle relaxants were added to his treatment regimen without any relief. The next step was physical therapy and two lumbar epidural steroid injections, which provided no relief. He refused to get a third lumbar epidural steroid injection, and was referred to a neurologist for further evaluation. He was then started on gabapentin 300 mg three times per day, a dose that was gradually increased over 4 weeks to 1600 mg/day by his orthopedic surgeon in conjunction with muscle relaxants and NSAIDs.
The patient and his fiancé stated that they noticed personality changes in him; he became more depressed and aggressive. They attributed the changes in his behavior to gabapentin. His pain and mood had progressively deteriorated to the point where he attempted to commit suicide by hanging himself by the neck using his belt and a door jam. He was immediately found by his fiancé who emergently took him to the hospital. While he was hospitalized, all his medications were stopped, including gabapentin, and he was started on mood stabilizers. He noticed that his personality had changed back to normal and his suicidal ideation had subsided, after which he was discharged home.
At this point, after being on a multimodal pain medication regimen including lumbar epidural steroid injections without significant relief, the patient visited our clinic for a second opinion about his back pain. On examination, his vital signs were normal. However, he had an antalgic gait with a forward leaning posture of 15–20 degree, and was unable to stand on his toes or heels without support. Palpation also elicited mild tenderness over the lower lumbar region. His motor strength was 5/5 in both upper extremities and 4/5 in both lower extremities. Extension of the lower extremities was limited to 0 degrees, whereas range of flexion was 70 degrees with improvement in pain. Patellar reflexes were absent bilaterally, ankle reflexes were 1(+) bilaterally, Babinski's sign was negative, and the straight leg raise test was positive, left > right, 1(+) at 60 degrees. The remainder of the examination, including cranial nerve examination, respiratory, cardiovascular and abdominal was normal. Based on the clinical picture, he was recommended conservative treatment in a tertiary center.