A 65-year-old woman was admitted to the department of psychiatry of a large German university hospital with referral from her general practitioner. The patient had worked as a community worker for several years, until she was signed off a few years ago. She complained about severely depressed mood, rumination, and restlessness. During the initial clinical assessment, she also reported thoughts of guilt and a possible addiction to benzodiazepines. Furthermore, subjective concentration deficits, loss of appetite, fear of failure, and feelings of inadequacy became obvious. The patient claimed that she felt “internally dead“ and “not belonging to this world“, suggesting delusional nihilistic ideation. With regard to these delusional contents, the patient was incorrigible. In addition, pronounced psychomotor agitation became apparent during the examination. The patient and her sons (one of whom acted as the patient’s legal guardian) reported an extensive history of depressive episodes; the last episode had occurred approximately 20 years ago. The mother of the patient had been diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease at the age of 64 years and had died at the age of 73 years. Further somatic diagnoses of the patient comprised arterial hypertension, tachycardic atrial fibrillation, and status post myocardial infarction four years ago. Except for the mother of the patient, no other family members had been afflicted with neurological or psychiatric diseases. Taken together, a depressive episode with psychotic symptoms was assumed and the patient was transferred to an open ward of the department of psychiatry.
Pharmacological antidepressive treatment with sertraline and mirtazapine was initiated and well tolerated. Before, a treatment trial with duloxetine and moclobemide had led to increased restlessness and was therefore discontinued. An additional antipsychotic medication—initially with quetiapine and subsequently with amisulpride—resulted in akathisia and drowsiness and was stopped later. Finally, a combination of sertraline and mirtazapine with the antipsychotic agent olanzapine led to a mild improvement of depressive symptoms, while agitation and restlessness declined under treatment with lorazepam. However, therapeutic success remained insufficient, particularly because nihilistic ideation persisted, and pessimistic rumination continued over the following months. Due to psychotic symptoms and therapy resistance to conventional antidepressive drugs, electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) was considered. The patient was clinging, contacted the physicians and the nursing staff several times per day and expressed her despair and fears. She frequently complained about somatic symptoms such as constipation or abdominal pain without corresponding somatic correlate. Medication attempts with lithium and trazodone remained without substantial clinical effect. In addition, cognitive deficits frequently became apparent. Hence, we suspected an organic cause of the neuropsychiatric symptom complex.
Laboratory investigations revealed a mild chronic renal failure. Besides, hyponatremia was identified, and sodium chloride tablets were administered. No abnormalities were detected in the complete blood count. Deficiencies of folic acid, vitamin B12, and ceruloplasmin as well as infection with human immunodeficiency virus, Borrelia burgdorferi, and Treponema pallidum could also be excluded.
Further neurological examination neither revealed signs of Parkinsonism nor motoric nor sensory deficits. Solely concentration, attention, and short-term memory appeared to be reduced. Global cognitive function was assessed with the aid of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), in which the patient scored 15 out of 30 points, indicating moderate to severe cognitive deficits . In addition, the Consortium to Establish a Registry on Alzheimer’s Disease neuropsychological assessment battery (CERAD-Plus) was utilized, which detected an impairment in several sections, especially in verbal recognition and visuospatial abilities . By contrast, the frontal assessment battery (FAB), where the patient scored 12 out of 18 points, was inconspicuous . The Inventory of Clinical Personality Accentuations (ICP) displayed unspecific results with regard to a possible personality disorder, while 61 out of 63 points in the Beck Depression Inventory II (BDI-II) demonstrated a severe depressive symptomatology [, ]. ICP and BDI-II were performed as self-questionnaires, whereas MoCA, CERAD-Plus, and FAB were conducted by a healthcare professional.
Although FAB had remained inconspicuous, we suspected bv-FTD due to repetitive stereotypic behavior and social disinhibition with accompanying depressive-like symptoms.
To expand the diagnostics, an electroencephalogram was conducted, which demonstrated a physiological alpha rhythm without signs of epileptiform potentials. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed bihemispheric, supratentorial T2 white matter hyperintensities depicting moderate leukoencephalopathy according to Fazekas grade 2 . A lumbar puncture with examination of CSF parameters including tau and beta-amyloid protein and its ratios was unremarkable. Moreover, intrathecal immunoglobulin synthesis and the presence of autoimmune encephalitis antibodies and protein 14–3–3 in CSF were excluded. In summary, we assumed a neurodegenerative process as the cause of the patient’s symptoms and initiated an examination of cerebral glucose metabolism by 18F-FDG PET/CT. Herein, glucose uptake was bilaterally reduced in the frontal, temporal, and parietal cortex, while it was relatively higher in sensomotoric and occipital regions . This specific pattern of glucose hypometabolism clearly pointed to neurodegeneration in the sense of FTD. Therefore, in synopsis of all findings and symptoms, the diagnosis FTD was established according to ICD-10.
Since the patient continued to present as helpless and desperate and required a substantial amount of help and care by the nursing staff, admission to a residential home for patients with chronic neuropsychiatric diseases was discussed with the patient’s caregiver in light of the diagnosis of FTD and the lack of response to various medications. However, due to several encouraging case reports in the literature, we decided to attempt ECT with 10 sessions (instead of the usual 12 sessions) to minimize the risk of cognitive impairment [, ]. Bifrontal electrode placement and brief pulse ECT were applied two times per week for ten serial treatment sessions using a Thymatron IV device (Somatics, Lake Bluff, IL, USA). Anesthesia was performed with propofol, remifentanil, rocuronium, and sugammadex (the latter was used to antagonize the effects of rocuronium). Initially, stimulation intensity was 30 %, but ad to be increased during the course of ECT to 70 % due t insufficient seizures (motoric response shorter than 20 seconds), which required restimulation during ECT sessions. Hypertensive crises occurred repeatedly during ECT sessions, which complicated the procedure.
After the fourth ECT session the patient reported a considerable improvement in mood. Overall, the patient’s contact behavior appeared much more sorted and less clinging. Fears and general anxiety declined substantially during ECT treatment. Moreover, nihilistic ideation disappeared. The patient was able to organize her daily routine on the ward much more independently. After completion of the ECT series (10 sessions), the patient achieved a total score of 11 out of 63 points in the BDI-II, which almost corresponded to remission of depressive symptoms. However, a certain restlessness with repetitive actions could still be observed. Results in neurocognitive testing by different versions of MoCA remained stable over the course of the ECT treatment.
To document the success of the therapy, we performed another 18F-FDG PET/CT after two further maintenance sessions of ECT, four months after the first examination. The follow-up 18F-FDG PET/CT showed a frontally accentuated glucose hypometabolism, albeit with a clear improvement compared to the previous images . The Standardized Uptake Value (SUV) peak in the central nervous system was 7.0 before therapy and 9.7 thereafter. In the tomograms scaled to the maximum of the follow-up examination, the lower uptake before therapy could be seen virtually throughout the brain (cerebral cortex, basal ganglia, cerebellum). Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM) comparison of the respective studies to the same control population showed a significantly more extended, contiguous cluster of suprathreshold voxels before therapy (p < 0.001) with significant hypometabolism (total of almost 50,000 voxels). In contrast, after therapy there were four non-contiguous, significantly smaller (> 1,000 voxels) clusters of 5,700, 7,000, 5,600 and 1,000 voxels (i.e., a total of approximately 19,000 voxels). In addition, a higher Tmax value of 7.57 before therapy vs. 6.30 after therapy (peak height) was found as a significance maximum of hypometabolism.
We were finally able to discharge the patient back to her home environment after several months of stay at our university hospital. At home, the patient currently receives a low level of support from a nursing service. In our hospital, the patient continued regular ECT maintenance sessions for almost 6 months to maintain the success of the therapy, initially weekly. Over time the interval was gradually extended to 4 weeks.