In July 2008, a 50 year-old white male was referred to us for evaluation of the decision by his primary care physician to maintain him on life-long anticoagulation, a decision based on the findings of deficiencies of both protein C and protein S. He is in good health and has no known family history of DVT or coagulation abnormalities. In June 2006, he fell from a tree at work, and a fracture of his right femur was redressed by insertion of a titanium rod. One week after surgery, he complained of pain in his right calf. DVT was confirmed by Doppler ultrasonography and he was anticoagulated with heparin and Coumadin and maintained on 9 mg Coumadin and 325 mg aspirin until June 2007 when he began noticing spontaneous bruising and large hematoma appearing without provocation. He requested that his primary care physician re-evaluate the basis for his anticoagulation. Blood drawn while he was taking a therapeutic Coumadin dose was sent to a regional laboratory for a thrombophilia work up. Results of laboratory tests were significant for protein S activity levels 36% [normal range 54-130%] and protein C activity levels 10% [normal range 70-130%]. Protein C and protein S antigen levels were not performed, and the test results were interpreted as a protein C and protein S deficiency. In our laboratory we drew a blood sample while the patient was taking Coumadin and we prepared citrate platelet poor plasma from blood with the results shown in . We report a normal coagulation profile and normal response to the prescribed Coumadin dose, with no evidence of thrombophilia. There was no evidence of elevated fibrinogen levels or abnormal fibrinogen variants. Antithrombin levels were 100% as would be anticipated in a patient on Coumadin for such a long period of time. Protein C and protein S were within range expected for the degree of anticoagulation. He was returned to his primary care physician with recommendation that, although he did not have a protein C or protein S deficiency he should remain on Coumadin until resolution of the venous obstruction that occurred consequent to the surgery is confirmed by Doppler ultrasonography. In a healthy male with a first DVT occurring after surgery or trauma, the calculated risk of DVT recurrence is 0.27 very low . It is estimated that 10% of recurrences occur at 2 years and 23% at 5 years post anticoagulation therapy . Unresolved DVT may lead to post-phlebitic syndrome and to a 2.6% annual, 12.4% at 5 years and 16.5% at 7 years increased risk of recurrent DVT .
Oral anticoagulation was discontinued based on a clotting profile negative for thrombophilia and Doppler ultrasonography pattern consistent with normal blood flow in the deep veins of the right calf and thigh predicting a minimal calculated risk for DVT recurrence.