A 24-year-old male Caucasian was first diagnosed with FD in June 2010. FD was genetically and biochemically confirmed (hemizygote mutation of α-galactosidase A (α-Gal A), chromosome Xq22, exon 2 (IVS2+1G>T); ). Until that day, he suffered from acroparesthesia triggered by physical stress and exogenous heat since childhood, hypohidrosis, and classical angiokeratomas of the umbilical and genital area. Urine diagnostics and transesophageal echocardiography were inconspicuous. The patient regularly received enzyme replacement therapy with agalsidase alfa since 2011, leading to a significant improvement of neuropathic symptoms. Symptomatic treatment consisted of pregabalin and duloxetine. In April 2014, microalbuminuria (albumin/creatinine ratio 218 mg/g) and mild concentric myocardial hypertrophy (interventricular septum thickness of 11 mm) were detected. Therapy with angiotensin receptor blockers was initiated.
The patient’s mother with genetically and biochemically confirmed FD also suffered from acroparesthesia triggered by physical stress and exogenous heat. She is also treated with agalsidase.
In February 2016, the patient presented to our clinic with a complete spinal cord syndrome with paraplegia, loss of all sensory modalities below Th9, and loss of bowel and bladder function. The symptoms developed within one day.
Cranial MRI during hospitalization was unrevealing. Spinal MRI demonstrated a pronounced T2 hyperintense lesion of the thoracic spinal cord that did not enhance after gadolinium administration . The diffusion-weighted imaging showed no signal loss in the apparent diffusion coefficient map. Lumbar puncture revealed a mild pleocytosis (19 lymphocytes/µl and 1 granulocyte/µl), elevated total protein (1,580 mg/L) and lactate levels (3.37 mmol/L; reference value 1.5–2.1 mmol/L), and decreased cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)/blood glucose ratio (0.43; reference value 0.6–0.9). Oligoclonal bands were negative. Infectious disorders were excluded as possible causes . A detailed antibody screening was negative, as well as blood tests for vasculitis and autoimmune rheumatic systemic diseases.
Under the suspicion of autoimmune disease, high-dose intravenous methylprednisolone (2 x 5 g), eight cycles of plasmapheresis, intrathecal methylprednisolone (120 mg), and five times intravenous immunoglobulins (150 g overall) were administered. Immunosuppressive therapy with cyclophosphamide was initiated. Due to a lack of improvement, the patient had a diagnostic re-evaluation one month later. Spinal MRI demonstrated unchanged findings, and whole-body 18F-FDG-PET/CT to exclude malignancies revealed no clarifying results. Repeated lumbar puncture showed persisting elevated total protein levels (1,040 mg/L) but no more pleocytosis and still negative oligoclonal bands. The patient received another eight cycles of plasmapheresis, which did not lead to clinical improvement. Finally, a biopsy of the thoracic lesion was performed by hemilaminectomy for further clarification. The histological examination revealed necrotic tissue consistent with previous spinal cord ischemia . Therefore therapy with aspirin and statin was initiated. Extensive diagnostic work-up, including computed tomography of the thorax, long-term ECG, and transthoracic echocardiography, was carried out to clarify the stroke etiology but was unrevealing. Two years onward, the patient suffered from a pontine infarction with vertigo and weakness of the left arm, and one month later, a transient ischemic attack with latent right-sided hemiparesis occurred. Long-term ECG and transesophageal echocardiography were inconspicuous. The spinal cord syndrome persisted so that the patient remains wheelchair-bound and catheterized. The patient is regularly examined in our clinic.