A 51-year-old woman with no relevant medical history presented with pain in the upper part of her back for 2 weeks. There was no neurological deficit in either the trunk or the lower extremities at her first visit.
A plain radiograph showed a radiolucent zone in the spinous process of the second thoracic spine (T2). CT revealed osteolytic changes not only in the spinous process but also in the vertebral body, pedicles, and lamina of T2, which expanded into the spinal canal. The changes were not accompanied by cortical destruction . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an area with low intensity on T1-weighted imaging (T1WI) and high intensity on T2-weighted imaging (T2WI) and short inversion time inversion recovery imaging that compressed the spinal cord from the posterior and the right sides, which was assumed to be a hypervascular tumor. The area had an extraosseous region on the right . Blood tests did not reveal any abnormal findings. A CT-guided percutaneous biopsy did not yield a histological diagnosis. Over the 2-week course of these examinations, the patient developed a walking disability with motor weakness in her right leg. Therefore, we performed an open biopsy along with T2 laminectomy, and posterolateral fusion from C7 to T4 levels . Histological examination revealed that the tumor was a venous hemangioma.
We adopted the second surgery for ethanol sclerosis therapy with an open approach as a curative technique for the tumor at 17 days after the initial surgery. Transcranial motor-evoked potential (MEP) monitoring the lower extremities was applied throughout the surgery to evaluate spinal cord function. The same skin incision was made as in the initial surgery. A 14-gauge cannulated needle for biopsy was inserted through the left pedicle.
Before the ethanol injection, 3 mL of a water-soluble contrast medium (Omnipaque240®) was injected into the vertebral body through the needle, and the absence of leakage into the epidural space was confirmed. The contrast disappeared within 2 min, which indicated that the tumor was hypervascular. Next, a mixture of 7.5 mL of 100% ethanol and 2.5 mL of a lipid-soluble contrast medium (Lipiodol®) was used to visibly identify the expansion of ethanol, that is, 75% of ethanol was prepared in a 10 mL syringe with a lock. The dura mater was covered with thick gauze to protect it from drops of ethanol. Ethanol was injected intermittently: a series of ethanol injections (0.5-mL ethanol injection followed by 2 min of rest) was administered carefully with fluoroscopy and MEP monitoring until a total volume of 10 mL was administered. At the end of the injection, the contrast agent filled the vertebral body and extraosseous region without epidural infiltration , and the amplitudes of MEPs in the lower extremities did not decrease. Next, 3 mL of a water-soluble contrast medium was injected again 2 min after the final 0.5-mL ethanol injection to identify sclerosis of the vertebral body. The contrast did not disappear for over 3 min, indicating that the sclerosis was complete. However, the amplitudes of MEPs in all bilateral lower extremities disappeared simultaneously.
The patient presented with incomplete paralysis in the right leg immediately after extubation. The manual muscle testing (MMT) scores of the iliopsoas, quadriceps, tibialis anterior, and gastrocnemius on the right were 2/5, 2/5, 0/5, and 2/5, respectively. Post-operative CT showed no leakage of the mixture of ethanol and the lipid-soluble contrast medium into the spinal canal. MRI performed immediately after the surgery showed no spinal cord compression and no intensity change in the spinal cord. MRI also showed intensity changes of the tumor, which now showed high intensity on T1WI and low intensity on T2WI, indicating completion of sclerosis (, , ). The patient’s paralysis gradually improved, and the MMT scores of the muscles were 4–5 in 4 weeks. However, a persistent abnormality of sensation, especially in proprioception of the right leg, resulted in delayed recovery of the patient’s walking ability. She could walk with a walker at 6 weeks and without any assistance at 5-month postoperatively. Moreover, while she was unable to urinate herself or feel the urge to urinate after surgery, dysuria improved at 2 weeks and fully recovered at 4 weeks after surgery. Post-operative MRI at 2 weeks after surgery revealed expansion of the high-intensity area on T2WI in the spinal cord (, ), which reduced and was limited to the posterior funiculus as time passed. The area remained in the post-operative MRI performed 6 months after surgery (, ).