In a 57 years old female patient a screening for FD has been carried out due to painful neuropathy. A genetic analysis confirmed the diagnosis of FD (c.424T > C, [C142R]) . An extensive subsequent work-up revealed an advanced organ manifestation including the eyes, kidneys, peripheral and central nervous system and the heart. Consequently an enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) was established.
Two years after the onset of ERT, the patient described an episode of dyspnea during physical activity. The symptoms resolved at rest. A subsequent cTNI assessment revealed a value of 0.46 ng/ml (normal range <0.05 ng/ml). The patient was hospitalised and treated based on the regimen on an acute coronary syndrome. The actual coronary angiography revealed regular findings , while the cardiac MRI showed a remarkable left ventricular hypertrophy. Furthermore a late Gadolinium enhancement imaging indicated a focal parenchymal fibrosis, which is a common finding in FD patients with cardiac involvement . In line with findings depicted in the coronary angiography the electrocardiogram (ECG) did not show typical changes suggestive to an acute myocardial ischemia. A sinus rhythm (78/minutes), a normal cardiac axis and no pathological intervals were observed. The single obvious abnormality was an ST segment depression with a preterminal negative T wave in the leads I, II, aVL, aVF and V3-V6. In comparison, the ECG performed one year prior to the actual event revealed similar findings. On exercise ECG no cardiac symptoms occurred whereas the ECG morphology remained unchanged. The Holter ECG showed no relevant arrhythmias. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed left ventricular hypertrophy without any regions of wallhypokinesis or valves insufficiencies. On discharge a cTNI value of 0.67 ng/ml was measured. A therapy with aspirin 100 mg daily was established.
Apart from slight palpitations after intensive exercise during the following 4 weeks, no further relevant cardiac symptoms occurred. The hospitalisation did not lead to an interruption of the enzyme replacement therapy. Over a period of 5 months the cTNI value was assessed at least twice monthly. Apart from slight fluctuations, the cTNI remained increased over this period . The ECG performed two months thereafter revealed findings consistent with previous examinations; in particular no inferior Q waves were evident in the subsequent ECG. A relevant deterioration of the renal function could not be observed following the diagnosis of FD, thus a significant renal insufficiency responsible for the elevated cTNI could be ruled out. Prior to enzyme replacement therapy the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) was 37.3 ml/min, the current measurement revealed a value of 53.4 ml/min (both values measured per 24-h urine/1.73 body surface area). The serum creatinine level did not exceed 1.1 mg/dl. As there was no evidence for an acute myocardial ischemia explaining the cTNI increase, the measurements of cTNI in short intervals was ceased.