A 39-year-old woman who had been receiving medical treatment for CTEPH for 2 years was referred to our institute for surgical treatment. She had been suffering from hypoxia without chest pain. She had been receiving daily medications including warfarin, riociguat, and eplerenone, and was on home oxygen therapy at 2 L/minute. She had also been diagnosed with Sjögren’s syndrome. She was married, but had never been pregnant. She did not have other risk factors related to atherosclerosis.
The patient’s preoperative laboratory data were as follows: hemoglobin, 11.5 mg/dL; platelet count, 2.1 × 105/μL; D-dimer, 0.26 μg/mL; prothrombin time -international normalized ratio, 2.0; activated partial thromboplastin time, 68 s; and N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide, 32 pg/mL. Although deficiencies in antithrombin III, protein C and protein S and the hyperhomocysteinemia were not demonstrated, antiphospholipid antibodies were mildly elevated: anticardiolipin antibodies, 43 U/mL; lupus anticoagulant, 1.3 s; and anti-beta2-glycoprotein I antibody, 12 U/mL. The chest radiograph and chest computed tomography scan showed cardiomegaly involving the right cavities with notable enlargement of the pulmonary arch. The electrocardiogram showed right heart strain and no remarkable ischemic changes . Echocardiography showed left ventricular compression due to dilated right ventricle and mild hypokinesis of left ventricular anteroseptal wall. In echocardiography, the right ventricular function was normal and the estimated pulmonary artery pressure was 79 mmHg. Lung perfusion scintigraphy demonstrated multiple perfusion defects in both lungs . The pulmonary angiogram showed intimal irregularities and abrupt narrowing of both pulmonary arteries . The coronary angiogram demonstrated severe stenosis in the mid left anterior descending artery . The rest of the coronary branches showed no significant atherosclerotic changes. The cardiac scintigraphy revealed incomplete reperfusion on the anteroseptal wall. The right heart catheter examination showed severe pulmonary hypertension, with the pulmonary artery pressure, 80/25 mmHg (mean, 45 mmHg) and a pulmonary vascular resistance of 544 dynes/sec/cm− 5.
Standard PEA for CTEPH using intermittent circulatory arrest under deep hypothermia and concomitant coronary artery bypass grafting to the left anterior descending artery using a great saphenous vein graft were performed. At surgery, pulmonary artery lesions were approached through a median sternotomy. Cardiopulmonary bypass was established with ascending aortic cannulation and bicaval venous drainage. After left ventricular venting, the patient was cooled down to 18 °C. PEA was performed using a cycle of 15 min of deep hypothermic circulatory arrest followed by 10 min of systemic reperfusion, similar to the techniques established by Jamieson et al.
. Endarterectomy specimen was multiple organized thrombi from bilateral pulmonary arteries .
During rewarming, coronary artery bypass grafting was performed. The weaning from cardiopulmonary bypass was uneventful and pulmonary hypertension improved to almost within normal range. Strict treatment with anticoagulant and antiplatelet agents was started from the day after surgery. The postoperative course was uneventful and the postoperative examination showed dramatic improvement of her pulmonary hypertension, with a mean pulmonary artery pressure of 15 mmHg and a pulmonary vascular resistance of 207 dynes/sec/cm− 5. Echocardiography revealed improvement of left ventricular wall motion. The postoperative coronary angiogram showed a patent bypass graft . Throughout the postoperative period, she was free from any thromboembolic and bleeding complications. Home oxygen therapy was completely weaned in 1 year, and the patient has remained free from any cardiovascular events for 3 years after surgery.