A 7-year-old neutered female Boxer was presented for evaluation of paroxysmal acute loss of muscle tone and consciousness with rapid recovery to normal mentation, precipitated by strong positive emotions such as the owner’s arrival and playing. The first episode was observed 1 week prior to presentation (at least 5 episodes per day). These events lasted from a few seconds to one minute, during which the limbs were mainly flaccid; sometimes the animal was able to stand and walk normally immediately after. On the day of presentation, physical examination was normal, including the respiratory evaluation and the neurological exam. The main differential diagnoses considered were syncope, seizures, and narcolepsy-cataplexy. The results of the complete blood count, serum biochemistry panel (urea, creatinine, alanine aminotransferase, alkaline phosphatase, glucose, total proteins, albumin, globulins, albumin/globulin ratio and amylase), urinalysis, arterial blood pressure, echocardiography, abdominal ultrasound, 24 h Holter monitoring, and ECG were all within normal limits. Additional exams included thoracic radiographs, head and thorax CT, bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL), and a CT-guided cytology.
Ventrodorsal, left and right lateral radiographs of the thorax were performed (Philips Optimus 50, Philips Portuguesa S.A., Porto Salvo, Portugal, 86 kVp and 78 kVp respectively, 6 mAs) using a computed radiography system (Fujifilm FCR Prima, Fujifilm Europe GmbH, Vila Nova de Gaia, Portugal) (day of presentation). Thoracic examination evidenced micronodular mineral opacities predominantly localized in both cranial lung lobes, with a sandstorm appearance . Multifocal bridging thoracic spondylosis deformans was also observed. The remaining intrathoracic structures were within normal limits.
Computed tomography (8-slices General Electric LightSpeed, General Electric Healthcare, Carnaxide, Portugal) of the head and thorax was acquired before and after intravenous injection of iodinated contrast medium (Iopramide, Ultravist 370, Schering, Berlin, Germany, at 2 ml/kg; 769 mgI/ml) administered manually via cephalic vein catheter (dual phase protocol). The animal was pre-medicated with methadone (0.2 mg/kg, intramuscular administration), anesthetized with propofol (4 mg/kg, intravenous administration) and maintained with isoflurane supplied with oxygen and positioned in sternal recumbency. Images were acquired using the helical scan mode, with 1.3–2.5 mm slice thickness, bone, soft tissue, and lung algorithms. Other CT technical parameters were 120 kV tube voltage, 190 mAs tube current, 0.8 s tube rotation time, and reconstructions interval with 50% overlap for the thorax and head. The displayed field of view was 32.5 cm, and the image matrix was 512 × 512. Multiplanar reconstructions, as well as maximal intensity projection (MIP) and minimal intensity projection reconstructions were also performed. Numerous mineral attenuating (average 600 HU), non-contrast enhancing nodules were noted spread throughout the pulmonary parenchyma, more pronounced in both cranial lung lobes . We could also observe a diffuse reticular pattern and thickening of the pleural lining. A ground glass opacity with clear bronchial and vascular margins was visible in the caudal right, caudal left, and accessory lobes . Mineral deposition was not observed in any other organ or tissue scanned. A BAL (direct smears and cytospin) and a CT-guided cytology were performed evidencing a nonspecific inflammation with increased mucus production; the pulmonary parenchyma highlights the increase of macrophages that can translate an immune response to a foreign agent/body/substance/cell (maybe mineralization/calcification). Head CT scans were unremarkable. Accordingly, treatment was initiated to rule out acquired narcolepsy-cataplexy with imipramine (4 mg/kg once daily, oral administration). No treatment plan for the pulmonary disorder was established. After day 20, the clinical condition deteriorated, with increased frequency and severity of syncopal episodes. After day 27, cyanosis, tachypnoea, and exercise intolerance were reported by the owners. While they were absent, the animal died at home 30 days post presentation.
After the owner’s consent, post-mortem examination was performed. Chronic respiratory disease was confirmed, revealing lung firmness with reduced elasticity, and showing a pale grey-pink colour and patchy emphysema . Numerous diffuse palpable foci of mineralization were detected in the lungs, giving the organ a fine grainy consistency. A gritty texture was evident on the cut section. No major pathological abnormalities were found in any other organ.
Lung samples were collected for histological diagnosis. Samples, routinely processed and paraffin-embedded, were fixed in 10% buffered formalin, sectioned at 3 µm, and stained with haematoxylin and eosin (HE) for routine microscopic examination. Selected areas of the lung were also stained with periodic acid-Schiff (PAS), Prussian blue, and Masson’s trichrome.
A distortion of the pulmonary architecture was observed under microscopic examination, characterized by marked thickening of pleura, interstitial tissue, and alveolar septa, along with a significant reduction of the alveolar space . Areas of alveolar emphysema, characterized by distension and destruction of the alveolar walls, were also found. Numerous circular to irregularly shaped, amorphous basophilic concretions (microliths) were detected widespread across the pulmonary parenchyma. These variably sized, PAS positive structures, which exhibited concentric lamination, were located at the alveolar walls or free within the alveolar space (intra-alveolar lamellar microliths) . Subpleural and interstitial fibrosis was evidenced by Masson trichrome stain. Prussian Blue stain was negative, excluding the hypothesis of iron deposition. No signs of an inflammatory response were detected.