A 34-year-old man was admitted to the emergency department due to abdominal pain and diarrhea for 1 d.
One day earlier, the patient had eaten raw and cold seafood with several friends. He reported the aggravation of abdominal pain for 6 h. He denied other symptoms including fever, vomiting, hematochezia, skin rash, as well as recent medication intake.
He had a history of recurrent iritis, spondylarthritis, and chronic viral hepatitis B. He denied a previous history of asthma and seasonal allergic rhinitis.
The patient had no special family history.
On physical examination, the patient’s temperature was 37.3 °C, heart rate was 98 beats per min, respiratory rate was 18 breaths per min, blood pressure was 128/80 mmHg, and oxygen saturation in room air was 99%. There was abdominal tenderness and no rebound pain. The cardiopulmonary examination was normal. The clinical neurological examination was also normal.
Blood tests revealed leukocytosis (14560/μL) with 15.6% of eosinophils (2270/μL), which was marginally elevated. C-reactive protein was only slightly elevated (8.13 mg/L). There was no elevation of hepatobiliary and pancreatic enzyme levels. His feces test was negative for occult blood and multiple enteric pathogens. The parasitological exams in his stool and blood were also negative. Serum IgE level was normal. T-spot test was within normal ranges. To exclude other systemic diseases, the rheumatological index, serum protein electrophoresis, and immunostationary electrophoresis were tested, which were negative. To rule out blood diseases, peripheral blood smear and FIP1L1-PDGFRa fusion gene qualitative test were performed, which were both negative. Laboratory test of ascitic fluid was suggested as exudate with a low serum albumin-ascitic gradient, as well as bacterial culture and tuberculosis was negative.
Computed tomography scan demonstrated extensive intestinal wall edema thickening in the duodenum, jejunum, ascending colon and transverse colon; multiple exudative effusion surrounding the intestinal tract; and ascites in the abdominal cavity .