We report the case of a 34-year-old infertile African woman with no medical or surgical history. She was referred to our hospital for intense abdominal pain associated with sepsis and fecaloid leukorrhea.
She had a surgical management of a symptomatic leiomyomatous uterus 20 days earlier in another clinic: preoperative selective uterine artery embolization (UAE) of both her uterine arteries was immediately followed by median laparotomy and ablation of a posterior interstitial leiomyoma of 70mm and an anterior subserous leiomyoma of 45mm; two hysterotomies were made to enucleate the leiomyomas and then sutured with absorbable thread (Vicryl®), and an anti-adhesion membrane (Seprafilm®) with epiploon interposition was used on her uterine sutures.Emergency biological tests revealed a C-reactive protein of 300mg/L. An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed intrauterine hydroaeric levels, which confirmed the diagnosis of a colouterine fistula .
Intravenous antibiotics were started immediately (third generation cephalosporins, metronidazole and gentamicin) and she was counseled about the risk of hysterectomy but she insisted on trying a conservative management.
An immediate laparotomy enabled us to isolate the fistula between her sigmoid and her uterine fundus, with feces inside her uterus associated with several lesions of myometritis but with no sign of fecal peritonitis; Hartmann’s procedure involved resection of 15cm of her sigmoid colon with creation of a protective abdominal colostomy, and was followed by abundant irrigation of her abdominal and uterine cavities; the uterine edge of the fistula was estimated to have a diameter of 8mm. It was not immediately closed, but used to place an irrigation system associated with a cervical drainage of the uterus. A drainage of her abdominal cavity was also placed. Antibiotic therapy was reinforced with Tazocilline® (piperacillin-tazobactam) and amikacin. Irrigation was stopped at day 3 and drainage removed at day 5 after surgery.
Histologic analysis did not show malignancy. She was then seen monthly for clinical examination and pelvic ultrasound by a referent gynecologist.At 3 months a pelvic ultrasound showed a heterogeneous myometrium, endometrial atrophy and a small uterine cavity. Her digestive continuity was reestablished at 5 months by the referent surgeon. At 12 months, she was still amenorrheic despite combined hormonal treatment (ethinylestradiol 0.03mg + levonorgestrel 0.15mg). Operative hysteroscopy showed a cavity length of 80mm, endometrial atrophy, and a fundal synechia that reduced her uterine cavity volume and prevented the visibility of both tubal ostia. The synechia was removed under ultrasound guidance . At latest news, menstrual cycles partially resumed 3 months later, but she did not become pregnant because of other personal problems.