A 15-year-old Persian boy was involved in a car accident 3 months prior. He underwent chest tube insertion owing to massive right-sided pneumothorax. The patient was taken to operation room (OR) for exploratory laparotomy for blunt trauma of abdomen. Surgery revealed a grade 3 liver laceration in segments VI–VII with massive hemoperitoneum. Pringle maneuver was performed to reduce bleeding from the liver. Furthermore, the laceration in segment VI was repaired with deep mattress sutures. However, the surgical team used an absorbable hemostatic agent (Surgicel) in the liver VII segment owing to severe liver contusion caused by blunt trauma to the abdomen. The Surgicel was placed in the anterior part of the liver VII segment, definitive hepatic repair was performed, and he was discharged 10 days later. However, the patient was referred to the clinic with complaints of persistent pleuritic chest pain, productive cough, weight loss, and fever for the last 2 months.
Upon arrival, the patient was hemodynamically stable without signs of respiratory distress. Past medical history was unremarkable except for the recent surgery due to MVA. Family history was unremarkable. Physical examination revealed mild right upper quadrant (RUQ) tenderness at site of previous surgery. Lung auscultation showed decreased breath sounds at the base of right lung. Laboratory data showed leukocytosis (WBC count 14,000) with marked elevation in the neutrophil count, and high C- reactive protein (CRP) levels. Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test was negative. Chest X-ray revealed hazy opacification of the right lower lobe. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) for acid-fast bacillus (AFB) came back negative. Thoracoabdominal computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a collection in segment VIII of the liver communicating with another 13 × 5 cm multiloculated collection in the lower lobe of the right lung, with air foci within the collection . After thoracoabdominal CT scan, sputum analysis was performed with suspicion of BBF. However, there was no sign of bile in the sputum.
The patient was scheduled for thoracotomy, and preoperative management was considered.
The surgery was conducted under general anesthesia. The patient was scheduled for thoracotomy with the purpose of complete drainage of lung abscess and resection of involved segments. In addition, a transdiaphragmatic approach was carried out for drainage of liver collection . Diffuse pleural thickening and parenchymal adhesion bands with collection formation were revealed during the operation. Drainage of hepatic collection with debridement and diaphragmatic repair were done. Furthermore, open decortication of lung followed by resection of involved segment of right lung was performed. Intercostal chest drains were placed. Histopathologic evaluation revealed abscess formation in pulmonary tissue with diffuse fibrosis. Many multinucleated giant cells were seen in most parts of inflamed tissues, which appeared to be due to remnants of nonabsorbed Surgicel (an absorbable hemostatic agent) particles used in previous laparotomy surgery .
The postoperative course was uneventful without any signs of short-term complications. He had no episodes of cough, fever, and bilioptysis after the surgery. The patient was discharged 4 days after surgery with the abdominal drain. The abdominal drain had 10 mL output after 1 week. On the second follow-up visit 14 days postoperation, abdominal ultrasound was unremarkable without any collection, and the drain was removed.