A 55-year-old male patient brought to our OPD with alleged history of slip and fall at home with trauma to the left thigh 1 day back. There was no other associated injury.
The patient got operated for the left short PFN 6 years back and for the right long femur nail with encerclage in 3 years back as seen on X-rays in .
He was a known case of seizure disorder, on medications.
Local examination revealed local pain and tenderness over mid-thigh with swelling and contusion. The range of motion was restricted at both hip and knee without any distal neurovascular deficit.
Plain radiographs revealed peri-implant fracture of the left femur distal third shaft, as seen in .
The patient was then planned for implant removal followed by long distal femur periarticular plating.
The patient was taken on operating table in supine position under all aseptic precautions and under epidural plus spinal anesthesia.
Scrubbing, painting, and draping done. Incision taken over previous surgical scar for distal locking site of short PFN. Distal locking screw removed followed similarly for proximal locking screws. Incision taken over entry site and entry site cleared of soft tissue, nail tip identified. Nail removal set attached and nail safely removed without any complications.
Incision for distal locking site extended distally till lateral knee joint. Subcutaneous fat cleared and tensor fascia lata incised, and vastus lateralis divided.
Fracture reduced with traction and reduction holded with reduction clamps.
A precontoured 13 hole 5 mm left distal femur locking plate selected and fixed on femur with preliminary k-wires. Reduction checked and confirmed under fluoroscopy. 4.5 mm lag screw was placed first for compression of anterior wedge fragment. Distal metaphyseal 5 mm locking cancellous is placed occupying 75% of locking holes. Followed by 4.5 mm locking screws proximally.
Corticocancellous allogenic bone graft harvested from ipsilateral iliac crest is placed in the palpable defects medially.
Above knee slab was given in immediate post-operative period which replaced by long rigid knee brace after suture removal for 3 weeks.
Immediate post-operative X-rays are shown in .
The patient was mobilized with toe touch weight-bearing walk using walker.
Passive assisted knee range on motion exercises was started after 3 weeks followed by active knee range of motion started at 6 weeks and quadriceps strengthening exercises after 12 weeks postoperatively.
Check dress done post-operative day 3 and 7 was found to be healthy. Suture removal done on post-operative day 12, as seen in .
X-rays at 1 year post-operative shows good bony union, as seen in .
The patient was able to walk full weight-bearing without any walking aids at 6 months follow-up with good range of motion at hip and knee, as seen in .
There was good union and remodeling at 1 year follow-up.
Pre-operative oxford knee score was 14.
Post-operative oxford knee score at 1 year follow-up is 36.