A previously healthy 7-year-old boy presented to a specialty pediatric orthopaedic regional referral center for evaluation of left midshaft radius and ulna fracture malunion . The patient sustained the injury from a ground-level fall 8 weeks before presentation, with initial nonsurgical treatment (closed reduction and long arm casting) managed by a local orthopaedic surgeon. On clinical examination, the patient had no tenderness at fracture sites and had limited pronation and supination with a firm mechanical block with an approximately 30° arc of motion. Radiographs demonstrated healing transverse diaphyseal fractures, with approximately 30° and 20° of apex ulnar angulation in the radius and ulna, respectively . Surgical intervention, including malunion takedown and open reduction and internal fixation of the left distal radius and ulna with intramedullary fixation, was recommended to address the unacceptable deformity and secondary pronosupination range-of-motion deficit.
In the operating room, closed manipulation of the fractures was first attempted. The ulna was acceptably reduced and stabilized with an antegrade 2.0-mm titanium elastic nail . Open treatment of the proximal radius was required. A standard volar approach was used over the radius malunion to allow for open takedown and anatomic reduction with clamps. A retrograde 2.0-mm titanium elastic nail was then placed using a mini radial styloid approach. Postoperative fluoroscopic images demonstrated excellent implant placement and stable fracture reduction with dynamic examination . Rods were cut and tamped to appropriate depth, and a long arm fiberglass cast was placed. The patient was discharged home after PACU recovery with plans for clinic follow-up in 5 weeks for cast removal and repeat radiographs. Four weeks after surgery, the patient had a syncopal event without a fall and was admitted to an outside hospital for expedited workup. He underwent a sedated brain MRI with and without contrast that revealed a Chiari malformation. Immediately after MRI, the patient reported new left elbow pain that was not present before the MRI. He was seen in pediatric orthopaedic clinic 4 days later. On cast removal, the ulnar nail was noted to have displaced proximally by approximately 1.5 cm, tunneling through the patient's skin . The patient was returned to the operating room later that day for removal of the ulnar intramedullary nail, irrigation and débridement of the left elbow wound, and repeat long arm casting. The patient was discharged home after PACU recovery with 1 week of oral antibiotic prophylaxis and plans for clinic follow-up in 2 weeks for cast removal and wound check and radiographs . The patient's forearm fractures healed uneventfully, without wound complications or malunion. His radius intramedullary nail was removed electively at approximately 1 year postoperatively . He regained full forearm pronosupination arc of motion that was symmetric to his contralateral forearm.