A 78-year-old man with the a chief complaint of a 3-month history of gradually increasing pain and numbness in the right ear, submandibular region, temporal region, and the right side of the tongue root and right-sided facial weakness was seen . Paroxysms of odynophagia triggered by swallowing lasted throughout mealtime. Depending on swallowing and stress, the pain intensity was rated a 9–10 on the numerical rating scale (NRS). The patient had been almost unable to take any food for several days. He complained of otalgia and hot flashes on the right side of the face and ear. He had not had symptoms of vertigo, tinnitus, nausea, or vomiting. Peripheral facial paralysis was classified as House-Brackmann grade III. The results of the audiogram were normal. Laboratory investigations and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were unremarkable. Medical therapy began with the application of ipsilateral lidocaine spray to the tonsillar branch of the glossopharyngeal nerve before mealtime. The second day after three lidocaine sprayed applications, the patient’s odynophagia intensity decreased from a score of 9 to 0 rating on the NRS. The recommended dosage was adjusted according to the response, gabapentin was initiated at a dose of 300 mg once daily, and then the dosage was increased by 300 mg every day until a therapeutic dose (600 mg three times daily) was reached.
The delivery of pulsed radiofrequency (PRF) to the Gasserian ganglion was recommended to alleviate the pain of the mandibular nerve division of the trigeminal nerve. A radiofrequency generator (ET-20S, Smith & Nephew, Massachusetts, USA) was inserted through the foramen ovale into Meckel’s cave under common fluoroscopic control guided by bony landmarks . Sensory testing at 50 Hz and motor testing at 2 Hz were performed to determine whether the needle was on the sensory target. The PRF was thermally coagulated at 42 °C for 120 s, at two bursts per second of 20 milliseconds duration. The first PRF application to the Gasserian ganglion produced some pain relief; then, the second PRF application to the Gasserian ganglion was performed a week later. Pain intensity was correlated with thermal imaging. Infrared thermography of the treated pain area did not reveal a higher temperature than that of the contralateral side at one week, one month, or three months ; Thermographic findings of the pain area showed a higher temperature than that of the contralateral side at three months when a dose of gabapentin was missed , whereas thermography showed a lower temperature image after gabapentin administration.
Peripheral facial paralysis was treated with linear-polarized near-infrared light irradiation (MINATO ALB-200H, Minato, Japan) under the following conditions: a power of 1.4 W, a cycle of 1 s on and 3 s off; and a duration of 10 min, once a day, and ten times in all. The House-Brackmann grade at one month indicated that the patient was healthy. The lesions were followed up by thermogram (IRIS-5000, Medicore, Seoul, South Korea) during combined therapy and after one week, one month and three months.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this case report and accompanying images.