A 29-year-old multipara, gravida 4, para 1, with 22-week singleton male pregnancy was referred to our center due to a family history of ED. Her primary concern was whether the fetus was diseased, and if so, she wanted to make the decision to induce labor based on the severity. An ultrasound performed in our center showed that the maxilla and the mandible were short and retrograde. In the axial view, no hypoechoic tooth germs were detected in both the upper and lower alveolar bones. The alveolar bone was obviously thin and hypoplastic . Three-dimensional imaging in the transparent mode did not show the abnormalities of the alveolar as the gray-scale images, and no unusual facial features were found in the surface mode. After genetic counseling, we learned that the pregnant woman’s older brother had abnormal maxillary and mandible development, no teeth, and thin hair. The pregnant woman’s nephew, seven-years old, also suffered from similar symptoms. The pregnant women’s first born is now a six-year old girl and completely normal. The second pregnancy resulted in spontaneous abortions in the first trimester. During the third pregnancy at 5 months, the women received a fetal genetic detection that confirmed a hemizygous variation of the EDA located in Xq12–13.1. The variation of the same gene was also detected in the pregnant woman’s diseased brother and nephew. This was consistent with the X-linked recessive inheritance characteristics . Due to the ultrasound findings and the genetic testing, the parents decided to terminate the third pregnancy. In this report, it was her forth pregnancy. After the ultrasound exam, the pregnant woman underwent diagnostic amniocentesis. The Sanger sequencing demonstrated the EDA gene mutation (C.896G > A, p.Gly299Asp), which is a known pathogenic gene . The parents decided to terminate the pregnancy based on the ultrasound findings and genetic testing. We performed a three-dimensional reconstruction CT of the induced labor fetus. The images showed that the upper and lower alveolar ridges were flat and straight. No tooth germs were detected. The maxilla and mandible were dysplastic . We collected five skin samples from different parts of the induced-labor fetal body. The pathological exams showed no hair follicles and sweat glands of the dermis in all five samples .