A 23-year-old woman presented with a persistent fever (up to 40.5°C) accompanied by cough and sputum for a week.
The symptoms began 1 wk before the onset of the disease with recurrent fever due to cold with cough and sputum.
No particular disease was noted for the patient history.
No personal or family history of infectious disease, genetic disease, or other particular disease was noted.
The vital signs were as follows: Body temperature, 38.0°C; blood pressure, 96/63 mmHg; heart rate, 130 beats per min; and respiratory rate, 20 breaths per min. No other positive signs except slightly coarse breath sounds as well as moist rales in both lower lungs were observed during auscultation.
Laboratory tests showed that the main inflammatory parameters and (1-3)-β-D-glucan test (G test) level increased significantly . Liver and kidney function, especially the lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels, deteriorated . The results of the galactomannan test (GM test), purified protein derivative test, initial screening test for HIV antigens/antibodies and tests for other common respiratory pathogens, such as Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydia pneumoniae, parainfluenza virus, Epstein‒Barr virus, and influenza A and B, were negative. Based on the positive results of the G-test, increased inflammatory indicators, and elevated LDH levels, we preliminarily considered that the patient might have fungal infection. However, we could not determine the cause of respiratory failure and the specific source of infection with routine testing. Treatment with broad-spectrum antibiotics and ventilators could not prevent disease progression. To diagnose and save the patient more quickly and accurately, we conducted bronchoscopy examination and collected BALF specimens for NGS with the PMseq pathogen high-throughput sequencing platform MGISEQ-2000 for metagenomic sequencing of RNA pathogenic microorganisms at Complete Genomics (BGI, Shenzhen, China). With a sequencing depth of 31 M, BALF-NGS identified one fungus, Pneumocystis jirovecii . The number of sequences was 12152.
Chest imaging suggested inflammatory infiltration in both lungs .