A 26-year-old male presented with dull aching pain with swelling around the knuckle of the left index finger of 1 month duration. The pain was insidious in onset and gradually increased on movements. This was the only site where the patient had pain in the body. There was no history of trauma, fever or any associated conditions. No one in the family had any osseous lesions.
On examination, there was a swelling of approximately 1x1 cm on the dorsal aspect of the left hand, proximal to the second metacarpophalangeal joint. The skin on the swelling was normal. The swelling was tender on palpation with no local rise of temperature. There was complete range of motion of all joints of the index finger. Radiographs showed well- defined, homogenous focal lesions in the epi-metaphyseal regions of all bones of the hand and wrist . The pelvis showed the well- defined homogenous lesions as well . This was consistent with osteopoikilosis. The left second metacarpal had a characteristic expansile lytic lesion in the distal metaphyseal-diaphyseal region with no cortical breach. The zone of transition was well defined. This was considered to be an enchondroma. His laboratory and biochemical parameters inclusive of serum alkaline phosphatase, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and complete blood count were within normal limits.
The patient was planned for surgery, and a dorsomedial incision was taken over the left second metacarpal. The periosteum was elevated, and the cortex was exposed. A cortical window was made, and the lesion was thoroughly curetted. Cortico-cancellous bone graft was harvested from the iliac crest and packed inside the cavity. There was no cortical breach apart from the cortical window. This was closed without any augmentation with implants. Postoperatively the patient was immobilized in a below elbow slab in a functional position for 3 weeks.
The histopathology confirmed an enchondroma, which showed lobules of cartilage arranged in sheets of bony fragments, fibrosis with areas of congestion. Focal areas showed cellular cartilage . On serial follow-up up to 4 years, there has been no recurrence of the lesion and patient has no pain or restriction of movements ( and ).