Early in the COVID-19 pandemic in the USA, a 26-year-old previously healthy Caucasian male initially presented to our pulmonary clinic with three months of symptoms including a productive cough, fever, night sweats, myalgias, anorexia, and weight loss. He was earlier treated with antibiotics prescribed by an urgent care clinic (facilities with providers who treat acute, non-life-threatening medical problems). Despite mild initial improvement, his symptoms persisted. He denied chest pain, pleurisy, hemoptysis, joint swelling or stiffness, Raynaud’s phenomena, or rashes. He denied recent travel or sick contacts, prior exposures to persons infected with active tuberculosis, or personal use of tobacco, alcohol, or illicit drugs. He had no chronic medical conditions. He recently enlisted in the US Navy.
He eventually established with a primary care provider (PCP) and underwent an initial chest X-ray (CXR) that showed a large right upper lobe cavitary lesion . Further evaluation with computed tomography (CT) of the chest demonstrated a right upper lobe 9 × 10 × 14 cm necrotic cavitary lesion with mediastinal adenopathy and compression of the superior vena cava and azygous vein by the right paratracheal extent of the lesion and lymph node conglomerate.
During his initial pulmonary clinic consultation, his physical examination revealed normal vital signs and oxygen saturation and good dentition. He had no oral lesions, facial plethora, jugular venous distention, or cervical or supraclavicular lymphadenopathy. On chest auscultation, his breath sounds were clear bilaterally. He had no palpable lymphadenopathy elsewhere. The remainder of his examination was unremarkable.
Antibiotic therapy was continued for an additional 2 weeks, first with amoxicillin–clavulanic acid, which was stopped on account of hives, and then with clindamycin. He again experienced mild symptomatic improvement, however, his productive cough returned following completion of therapy. A repeat CXR at 2-week follow-up showed the right upper lobe cavitary lesion had increased in size . He was then hospitalized to initiate empiric therapy and expedite work-up, including a CT chest/abdomen/pelvis study that demonstrated a larger cavitary pulmonary lesion along with several new smaller cavitary lesions in the right upper lobe , but no intra-abdominal masses, abdominal lymphadenopathy, or splenomegaly.
Given concern for infection and pulmonary abscess, intravenous antibiotics with clindamycin, vancomycin, and ciprofloxacin were started while awaiting serologic and microbiologic study results. Abnormal laboratory results included an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 86, C-reactive protein (CRP) level 13.7, ferritin 835, and d-dimer level 1. Fungal antigen testing revealed negative serum 1-3-β-d glucan, Aspergillus galactomannan, cryptococcal antigens, and urinary Blastomyces and Histoplasma antigens. Bacterial Gram stain and culture of sputum specimen were negative. Acid-fast bacilli (AFB) smears of sequential expectorated sputum specimens were negative. Interferon gamma release assay for Mycobacterium tuberculosis was negative with an appropriate mitogen response. His immunoglobulin levels were normal and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) test was nonreactive. Autoimmune serologies were unrevealing with a negative or normal anti-nuclear antibody test (ANA) panel, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) level, and rheumatoid factor.
In preprocedural testing prior to tissue biopsy via bronchoscopy and transbronchial biopsy, he tested positive for COVID-19 with the Integrity Laboratories qualitative real-time RT-PCR assay, which detected nucleic acids from SARS-CoV-2 in his nasopharyngeal swab specimen. His acute infection with SARS-CoV-2 prevented bronchoscopy. A CT-guided percutaneous needle biopsy of the lesion was performed by interventional radiology after the patient was intubated, sedated, and placed on mechanical ventilation by anesthesiology in a separate room under negative pressure with all involved healthcare workers observing strict enhanced airborne precautions. The procedure was uncomplicated, and the patient was successfully extubated in a negative pressure room.
Histopathologic evaluation of the core needle biopsy specimen demonstrated classic Hodgkin lymphoma with a mixed cellularity type showing typical Reed–Sternberg cells and immunohistochemical staining positive for CD15, CD30, and PAX-5 . The AFB and Grocott methanamine silver (GMS) stains were negative for mycobacteria and fungal organisms, respectively.
The patient received deep venous thrombosis (DVT) chemical prophylaxis with subcutaneous low molecular weight heparin injections that were temporarily held before his biopsy procedure. During his hospitalization, he never developed clinical signs or symptoms to indicate a new DVT, venous thromboembolism, or bleeding.
As complications from COVID-19 in the during treatment of his malignancy were feared, medical oncology postponed treatment until the patient tested negative for COVID-19, and he was discharged from the hospital with close follow-up. He continued to test positive for COVID-19 with two additional tests performed 1 and 2 weeks following discharge. As his disease was aggressive, after an empiric quarantine of over 20 days with no worsening of his condition, he initiated treatment with the first of six cycles of combined chemotherapy and immunotherapy under a study protocol including doxorubicin, dacarbazine, nivolumab, and brentuximab vedotin. He eventually tested negative for COVID-19 over 1 month following his diagnosis; and his treatment course remained uncomplicated. An interim positron emission tomography (PET) scan showed a favorable response with decrease in disease burden.