The patient, a 57-year-old woman, had no significant history of traumatic injuries or psychiatric or movement disorders. Involuntary movement of the right ear had gradually developed at 53 years of age, and involuntary movement of the left ear had developed two months later. Initially, the movements were intermittent; bilateral ear movements had developed gradually, and became continuous with significant pain in the right auricle and posterior neck. She was diagnosed with focal auricular dystonia and received oral medicines including clonazepam (3 mg), pain medications (NSAID and tramadol hydrochloride), repetitive botulinum toxin injections (5–10 IU) into the right posterior auricular muscles, and occipital nerve blockers (lidocaine). However, these treatments were not effective in reducing pain and involuntary movements of the ear. She discontinued anticholinergic drugs due to side effects including dry mouth, sleepiness, and dizziness. Although botulinum toxin injections into the anterior auricular and/or superior muscle were partially effective for involuntary movement of the right auricle, she discontinued botulinum toxin injections due to high associated costs and unpredictable effects. She was ultimately referred to our hospital for surgical treatment evaluation. Her ear movements were predominantly on the right side. Involuntary muscle contractions were confirmed in the right anterior and superior auricular muscles of the right auricle . In the left auricle, the main involuntary muscle contraction was confirmed to be in the superior auricular muscle . She exhibited no voluntary control over these ear movements, and could not suppress them; significant pain was only present in the right auricle. There were no synchronous and rhythmic movements between the two ears. Involuntary movements were not confirmed during sleep and were mild in the morning. Her brain MRI showed no abnormalities; electromyography was not performed. Before the onset of the auricular movements, she had not taken any oral medications. We diagnosed her with focal auricular dystonia. Although we suggested deep brain stimulation, the patient rejected the implantation of a mechanical device. Since involuntary movements and pain were predominantly present on the right side, we decided to perform left pallidothalamic tractotomy after the patient provided written informed consent for the surgery.
T2-weighted brain MRI was used to identify a potential surgical target, while brain lab elements were used for stereotactic planning. The target was 9 mm lateral, 0.5 mm posterior, and 3.5 mm inferior to the midpoint of the anterior and posterior commissures. The surgery was performed under local anesthesia. A Leksell neurogenerator and monopolar radiofrequency electrode (1 mm diameter, 4 mm insulated tip) were used to perform macrostimulation and lesioning. Macrostimulation at the target (100 µs, 133 Hz, and 1–3.5 mA) induced no abnormal sensory or motor responses. We made two contiguous lesions and a 3 mm withdrawn point at 70ºC/40 seconds. Immediately following lesioning (on the day of the surgery), bilateral ear movements had ceased . The right auricular pain was completely resolved, while that in the posterior neck was not. Post-operative brain MRI showed a coagulated lesion located on the intended target . There were no significant complications, although the patient continued to complain of discomfort in the left auricle despite no visual observations of involuntary movements 3-months postoperatively.