In March 2011, a fifty-year-old man underwent a THA with CoC bearings (BIOLOX, Smith & nephew, Switzerland) on the right side at our clinic because of femoral head necrosis after internal fixation for femoral neck fracture for 4 years. In this surgery, a titanium alloy size-5Standard Stem (Smith & nephew) was used, along with a 28-mm fourth generation ceramic head (Smith & nephew). The acetabular side consisted of atitanium alloy Shell (Smith & nephew) with a ceramic liner that had a ceramic bearing interface .
In September 2017, he presented at our clinic after an accidental fall on the right hip complaining of crunching noise but without pain, swelling, and disability. Examination of right hip showed normal range of motion. There was no pain during range of motion testing of right hip. He was diagnosed with ceramic head breakage by radiographic examination . Despite the surgeon’s strong recommendation based on the fracture of the ceramic head, the patient refused revision at that time.
Because of continuous crepitus in the right hip, a revision of the right THA was performed in November 2017. During revision, intraoperative findings included wear of the taper and neck of stem, a multifragmented head and intact ceramic liner. Considering the satisfied stability of stem and acetabular component, we performed revision of the head and liner with MoP with retaining the well-fixed stem and acetabular component . After aggressive debridement and thorough lavage, the incision was closed.
After 8 months, he was admitted to two hospitals consecutively complaining of low fever, loss of appetite and weight loss. Clinical examination revealed painless normal range of motion of the bilateral hips. No signs of infection were observed. X-ray showed huge soft tissue mass around right hip prosthesis. Computed tomographic (CT) scan at admission showed a mass extending to the pelvic without bone destruction. Laboratory analysis of inflammatory markers showed slightly elevated white cell count at 10.42 × 109/L (N: 87.6%), C-reactive protein at 46.92 mg/L, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate at 7 mm/h. Blood test for malignant tumors markers showed normal indicator. Based on his long history of THA and radiographic findings, clinical diagnosis of implants-associated chronic inflammatory mass was made. Thus, the patient was admitted to our clinic for further treatments.
X-ray and CT scan confirmed extensive muscle and soft tissue mass around the right hip prosthesis and in pelvis. Coronal T2magnetic resonance image showed significant artifact in the region of right hip joint and in the pelvis abutting the medial wall of the right acetabulum. Surrounding the prosthesis was extensive soft tissue and muscle edema affecting the adductor bundle, gluteus muscles, rectus femoris muscle and obturator externus. 99mTc-MDP bone scan indicated benign tumor without distant metastases in pelvis . A provisional diagnosis of necrotic pseudotumor was suggested. The patient’s serum C-reactive protein was 33.42 mg/L and erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 9 mm/h. His complete white cell count was elevated at 14.10 × 109/L (N: 81.0%). Serum ion analysis was conducted by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS, ThermoFisher, USA). Serum ion concentration was shown in Table . Serum cobalt, chromium, titanium levels were significantly elevated 5 days preoperatively (serum Co = 1065.39 μ g/L, serum Cr = 19.58 μg/L, serum Ti = 106.27 μg/L). Given the clinical and imaging findings and serum analysis, combined with a history of CoC to MoP revision THA, we deemed that this patient’s symptoms were likely due to severe metallos is caused by third particle wear when a fractured ceramic head and subsequent multiple pseudotumor formation.
Surgical exploration with re-revision THA for severe wear and multiple pseudotumor formation was discussed with the patient and he underwent a re-revision THA by a lateral approach. During re-revision, extensive metallos is and dark gray tissue was visible around the joint, suggestive of multiple pseudotumor. The total volume of dark gray drainage from surrounding synovial sacs was about 100 ml. The pseudotumors and surrounding synovial sacs around prosthesis were then excised. The cystic soft tissue swelling herniated out under the inguinal ligament into the right pelvis. The dark gray fluid from pelvis was debrided aggressively and lavaged thoroughly. The intraoperative frozen section of the excised mass revealed less than 5 polymorphonuclear leukocytes per high-power field in all the three specimens. The patient’s hip was dislocated. The acetabular shell and femoral stem were well fixed, and therefore, these components were retained. A severe wear was noted around the metal head and polyethylene liner . The taper exhibited wear without fracture. Thus, on the femoral side, a ceramic head (32/+ 3.5 mm) (Zimmer, Switzerland) was used, along with a titanium sleeve (Zimmer, Switzerland). On the acetabular side, the polyethylene liner (Smith & nephew, Switzerland) was exchanged. The components were verified as being stable and synovectomy and extensive debridement were conducted before closing the wound. For excised mass, the histopathology analysis supported inflammatory response to metal particles, indicated by the presence of perivascular lymphocytes and necrotic tissue with fibrosis, fibrin material .
Intraoperative metalion of periprosthetic tissue and dark gray fluid analysis was done, showing increased cobalt, chromium, molybdenum and titanium concentration . It indicated metal head and taper erosion and consequent metal toxicity. At 2 months, a repeat serum metal ion analysis revealed a decrease in Co and Cr ions levels with their values being 453.07 and 9.52 μg/L, respectively . X-ray at immediate and 2 months postoperatively were unremarkable, while CT scan still showed cystic wall compares the solid pseudotumor preoperatively in pelvis .