A 51-year-old Caucasian man with the cardiovascular risk factors of hypertension and smoking was admitted to our hospital because of chest pain and syncope during exercise. He had experienced intermittent chest pain for one week prior to presentation. Upon admission, his blood pressure was 110/70 mmHg and his pulse rate was 70 beats/minute. His physical examination was unremarkable. His routine biochemistry laboratory parameters and full blood cell count were normal. A chest radiograph did not show indications of left-sided cardiac failure. A 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) obtained without chest pain in the patient showed normal sinus rhythm at 63 beats/minute without Q waves and with a normal QRS width . The echocardiogram showed a normal left ventricular ejection fraction without regional motion abnormalities. The patient was referred for exercise testing using a standard Bruce protocol. The test was stopped at minute 10 of the protocol because the patient was experiencing fatigue, had an increasing heart rate of 148 beats/minute (87% of maximal predicted heart rate), had maximal blood pressure of 183/98 mmHg, and had a workload of 12.8 metabolic equivalents without clinical symptoms or ECG abnormalities. At minute one of the recovery phase, the ECG showed a giant R wave pattern in the inferolateral leads, including an increase of R wave voltage rising to 34 mm, loss of S wave, and merging of the QRS complex with the ST segment, causing a monophasic QRS-ST complex . A nodal rhythm was also observed . Clinically, the patient experienced chest pain and dizziness. His blood pressure was 183/98 mmHg, and we administered sublingual nitroglycerin, and the patient's ECG gradually returned to normal status . In Figure , we show the evolution in lead III during the episode. The maximal level of troponin I measured after the ETT was 0.1 ng/mL (normal 0.0 ng/mL to 0.2 ng/mL). Emergency coronary arteriography showed single coronary vessel disease with severe stenosis in a mid-dominant circumflex coronary artery . The patient was successfully treated with coronary percutaneous revascularization , and, two days later, he was discharged without further symptoms.