A 45-year-old man visited our hospital for an examination of a left kidney tumor, which was found asymptomatically during an examination for upper respiratory tract infection. He had a history of APS, chronic kidney disease (creatinine 1.79 mg/dL), deep vein thrombosis, and epileptic seizures and was taking aspirin, edoxaban, lamotrigine, and clobazam. Contrast-enhanced CT showed a well-defined, contrast-enhanced mass of 23 mm in the central dorsal aspect of the left kidney. Because renal angiomyolipoma could not be ruled out, CT-guided biopsy was performed, but no definitive diagnosis was made. Three months after the initial CT, the mass had increased to 27 mm on CT ; therefore, we diagnosed nonclear RCC cT1aN0M0 (RENAL nephrometry score: 1 + 1 + 1 + p + 2 = 5p). We planned RAPN because we considered that the advantages of partial nephrectomy outweighed those of radical nephrectomy, even under APS complications, based on age and renal function, in addition to the technical feasibility of the procedure. Two antithrombotic drugs were replaced with heparin. A minor decrease in platelet count to 51 000/μL was observed after the start of heparin administration. The patient had only minor gingival bleeding and no other bleeding tendency. Heparin administration was stopped 6 h before surgery. We started RAPN via the retroperitoneal approach using the da Vinci Xi surgical system® (Intuitive Surgical, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). We could selectively ligate the feeding artery without clamping the main renal artery trunk 6 (Only taping was performed in case of bleeding) because we were able to identify the posterior branch supplying the tumor, which had been identified on preoperative imaging using the SYNAPSE VINCENT® (Fujifilm Medical Co. Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) . Since there was little parenchymal defect, urinary release and arterial bleeding were not observed, we did not perform inner suture or outer suture, but only hemostasis of the resected surface of the renal parenchyma. The operating time was 251 min, the console time was 105 min, no warm ischemic time, and the blood loss was 150 mL. During the procedure, we transfused 10 units of concentrated platelet solution to prevent posterior bleeding. After surgery, the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit, and heparin administration was resumed. No bleeding tendency was observed after the restart of heparin administration. The patient restarted antithrombotic agents on postoperative day 1. Postoperatively, there were no signs of a tendency for bleeding or thrombus formation, and blood tests on postoperative day 7 showed a platelet count of 75 000/μL and creatinine of 1.86 mg/dL. Contrast-enhanced CT on postoperative day 8 showed no new thrombus or hematoma, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 10. The pathological result of the renal tumor was mucinous tubular and spindle cell carcinoma. One year after surgery, the patient's creatinine level was 1.6 mg/mL, and there was no recurrence of RCC or worsening of APS.