A 2-month-old boy initially presented with a left temporal mass following birth. Antenatal ultrasound at 36 weeks of gestation demonstrated that the biparietal diameter was 9.64 cm, the head circumference was 34.71 cm. The ventricles are in normal shape, with no signs of cerebral hernia. A hyperechoic signal was present in the left frontal lobe, with clear borders and irregular morphology. Low resistance blood flow signal was seen within the abnormal entity . Surveillance was recommended because it was difficult to have a definite pathological diagnosis before childbirth. The boy was delivered at 38 weeks gestation, and a slight bulge was observed at the left forehead and gradually increased with age . There was no family history of hereditary disease, malignancy, and other known neurologic conditions. On physical examination, the head circumference was 41 cm; the anterior fontanel was soft, there is an ~3.5 cm × 4.5 cm × 4.5 cm bony bump on the top of the left frontal area. There were no cutaneous abnormalities, such as ecchymosis, swelling, erythema, and other evidence of neurocutaneous lesions. There was no hepatosplenomegaly. Other neurologic examinations showed no abnormalities. No laboratory abnormality was identified, such as a coagulation dysfunction or evidence of systemic disease. Computed tomography (CT) scans suggested that a massive hematoma was noted under the left frontal skull plate, with a little subdural hemorrhage in the adjacent temporal area. The circumambient brain parenchyma is obviously compressed and the affected skull bulges outward. Hyperplasia, compression, and erosion are seen in the upper and lower part of the skull, respectively . The brain magnetic resonance (MR) examination found a huge epidural mass under the left frontal skull, with a heterogeneous internal signal, and multiple patchy low signals. The adjacent meninges enhanced and thickened on post-contrast T1 MRI .
In consideration of the contextual information of the patient and a multidisciplinary diagnostic assessment, the possibility of malignant tumors was considered. The blood was well-prepared to prevent profound intraoperative hemodynamic instability. A surgery was performed by the left frontotemporal craniotomy approach. During the operation, the seeping blood, worm-like changes were observed on the surface of the skull . When removing the skull, it can be seen that the skull was invaded seriously by the tumor and was getting significantly thinner. The bone flap was removed due to close adhesion to the tumor. The tumor presented with dark red color and was abundant with blood supply. It was firmly attached to the surface of the dura, partly destroyed the dura, and proceeded forward to the brain tissue. We completely removed the tumor, the involved dura and brain tissue were resected with the lesion in a piecemeal fashion. During the procedure, massive vascular abnormalities in the left lateral fissure area were observed, poorly demarcated with mass lesions. The estimated blood loss was 1,200 ml, 8 units of whole blood, 500 ml frozen plasma transfusion, and 1 unit of platelet were transfused intra-operatively. After the surgery, the patient was in a coma with pupillary asymmetry (left pupil 4 mm and right 2 mm). Then, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) for postoperative intensive care.
Pathological histology findings revealed that the tumor cells were arranged as flaky, exhibited a nodular scattered distribution. The tumor showed infiltrative growth with invasion to the surrounding cranium bone. Tumor cells showed oval- to short-spindle-shaped, possessed vesicular nuclei without division, and the weak staining of the tumor cell cytoplasm was observed. The interstitium between the tumor cells is fine with small capillaries and the vessel lumen was dilated. The neoplastic cells were focally arranged in a fascicular pattern in the context of infiltration of lymphocytes and histiocytes. This is accompanied by flake bleeding lesions, multifocal calcifications, and hemosiderin deposition .
Immunohistochemically, the neoplastic cells are diffusely positive for CD31 and CD34, partially positive for D2-40 and SMA. The Ki67 proliferative index was ~20%. These histopathological findings were consistent with the diagnostic criteria of KHE .
The patient was in intensive care for 4 days. As a result of the postoperative examination and the laboratory findings, the patient was diagnosed with temporal lobe uncinate herniation, hemorrhagic shock, coagulation disorders, and acute electrolyte imbalance. Pre- and post-operative thromboelastography revealing no coagulopathy was observed . Ramsay Sedation Score was 6, Glasgow Score was 3T (E1VTM1), FOUR score was 2 (E0M0B2R0). The patient lost spontaneous respiration and the invasive mechanical ventilator was needed. Due to the blood-loss anemia and thrombocytopenia, 2 units of whole blood and 100 IU prothrombin complex concentrate were transfused postoperatively. After multiple salvage treatments, the vital signs of the patient were within normal limits. Pupillary reflex returned to normal and an autonomous cardiac rhythm and respiration were restored. On postoperative-day (POD) 3 and POD 14, head CT re-examination revealed no tumor residues . The patient was discharged 15 days following surgery.
The patient was followed up over a duration of 13 months at the outpatient Department. Platelet and coagulation functions were monitored regularly . The brain MRI (6 months after operation) suggested ischemic and liquefaction changes in the part of left frontal and temporal lobes and basal ganglia. Wallerian degeneration was observed in the thalamus and cerebral peduncles. There are no signs of any tumor recurrence . The MRI of 12 months after operation showed no significant change compared with the previous, no local recurrence or metastasis was observed . The follow-up examination at 1 year after surgery, the mental status of patient was subsequently improved, but still had right-sided hemiparesis with the muscle strength of 2/5 in the right upper limb and muscle strength of 3/5 in the right lower limb. A large skull defect can be seen in the forehead, and the spontaneous facial expressions were symmetrical but involuntary salivation was observed . The cranioplasty was scheduled. Moreover, follow-up with pediatric neurology patient examination showed motor developmental and speech delays, with the Gross Motor Function Measure (GMFM) Score of 53/264. At the age of 15 months, the patient was able to ambulate with help , no language deficits were observed.