A 37-year-old woman was found with a right breast mass by a screening breast ultrasound. The solid oval-shaped mass was diagnosed as a fibroadenoma and the patient was followed up at the previous hospital. Two years later, when the woman attended a check-up at 10 months of pregnancy, the mass increased to a diameter of 50 mm. A needle biopsy was performed leading to a histological diagnosis of fibroepithelial lesion. Due to her pregnancy, the tumor excision was planned after delivery. Following childbirth, during lactation, the tumor grew further, and at 4 week postpartum, she expressed a desire for tumor excision and was referred to our hospital. She had a history of hyperthyroidism, managed through observation only, and there was no relevant family history. An overview of the clinical course is shown in Fig. .
Upon the initial visit to our hospital (5 week postpartum), an ultrasound revealed a well-defined lobulated mass with internal septations and fluid retention and the longest diameter was not measurable . A breast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at 8 week postpartum showed a 70-mm-sized smooth-margin mass with multilocular cystic components . Although hematoma, abscess and metastatic tumor are among the differential diagnoses for polycystic masses, the former two were discarded because signs suggestive of an accumulation of blood or pus were not found in the fluid area. Moreover, a metastatic tumor was also discounted as each septum was thin and had a smooth surface. The liquid component of the cystic structure contained a high-signal and fat-suppressed area on T1-weighted images, indicating a floating fat component , consistent with milk-like substance. There was a small solid part along the edge of the tumor. This area showed a fast-and-persistent contrast pattern and no diffusion loss (diffusion coefficient: 1.23), suggesting that this part was predominantly composed of stromal components. The histological findings of the biopsy conducted at the previous hospital are presented in Fig. . Marked proliferation of stromal cells with high cell density was observed. Thus, we diagnosed the mass as a phyllodes tumor of borderline malignancy, although the initial diagnosis at the previous hospital was a fibroepithelial lesion. Due to the histological diagnosis and the tumor's tendency to grow, it was excised 13 week postpartum.
The excised tumor was 85 mm in diameter and its interior was filled with fluid. An aspiration of the fluid revealed a milk-like substance . The size of the excised specimen was 110 × 80 × 32 mm and the cut surface revealed a thin-walled, multilocular cystic tumor . Histologically, there was only a mild increase in stromal cell density but degenerative and fibrotic changes were more prominent in the stromal component of the tumor, probably due to oppression . A phyllodes tumor is generally characterized by a particularly high cell density of stromal cells around the ducts, whereas in the present tumor, there were comparatively few stromal cells around the ducts due to the degenerative change . Taken together, the final diagnosis was benign phyllodes tumor with degeneration.