A 71-year-old woman presented to our department with a slow-growing semi-solid ground-glass nodule in the right lower lobe (S6) identified on follow-up computed tomography (CT) for oropharyngeal cancer after chemoradiotherapy. No lymph nodes or distant metastases were detected on positron emission tomography/CT. Thus, she was suspected to have primary lung cancer (cT1bN0M0, stage IA2). Preoperative three-dimensional (3D) CT angiography revealed an aberrant mediastinal A7 arising directly from the right main pulmonary artery, running between the superior and inferior pulmonary veins and entering the right lower lobe . Lung function tests revealed a vital capacity of 2.80 L (115.2% predicted), a forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) of 2.25 L (113.6% predicted FEV1), and a diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide of 13.36 ml/min/mmHg (87.3% predicted). Video-assisted posterolateral fifth intercostal thoracotomy was performed with a small 8-cm incision. During surgery, the interlobular fissure between the middle and lower lobes was found to be incomplete, without effusion or adhesion. A hard, elastic tumor measuring 2 cm with slight pleural change was found on the interlobar side in S6a. Aspiration cytology of the tumor revealed a class V adenocarcinoma. As A7 was located at the anterior hilum on preoperative CT, the operative procedure was performed on the dorsal and caudal sides. First, the interlobular main pulmonary artery was exfoliated. Then, A6 and A8–10 were dissected with ligation and autosuture, respectively, after interlobular incision between the upper and lower lobes. Subsequently, the inferior pulmonary vein was dissected after the division of the pulmonary ligament. A7 was identified at the anterior hilum, running between the middle lobe pulmonary vein and the inferior bronchus . Finally, an interlobar incision between the middle and lower lobes was safely made after A7 dissection with autosuture. The operative time was 153 min, and the total amount of blood loss was 25 g.
The patient received pleurodesis therapy with OK-432 for prolonged air leakage on postoperative day 8. The chest drain was removed on postoperative day 10, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 13. The final pathological diagnosis was lung papillary adenocarcinoma, pT1b (invasive diameter, 12 mm) N0M0 pStage IA2. There was no evidence of recurrence 6 months postoperatively.