We report a local recurrence of PARM in an 85-year-old female patient 5 years after the resection of the primary tumor.
Five years ago, the patient presented with fecal incontinence, anal pruritus and bleeding. A polypoid structure above the dentate line at 4 o’clock position was identified in the rectoscopy. In the endosonography, the lesion appeared as an ulcer of 1 cm diameter infiltrating the rectum wall. The biopsy result surprisingly confirmed a rare anorectal melanoma. No metastases were identified on the PET/CT and a dermatological examination did not find any other primary cutaneous tumor sources. The tumor was locally excised with a R0-resection. It had a thickness of 0.22 cm. The patient was followed-up 6 months postoperatively by her general practitioner and a rectoscopy 3 years postoperatively was uneventful. Unfortunately, the follow-up was discontinued thereafter. She was referred to us again by her gynecologist who was treating her for persistent dermatitis of the vulva due to fecal incontinence with suspicion for local tumor recurrence.
A new 1 cm large pigmented polyp at 6 o’clock, proximal to the dentate line, protruding into the anal canal was identified (see Fig. a). A punch biopsy of this lesion demonstrated malignant cells positive for tumor marker Melan A and S100 confirming the diagnosis of a recurrent malignant melanoma. The complete closure of the sphincter was obstructed due to the protrusion of the tumor into the sphincter apparatus explaining the fecal incontinence. A colonoscopy could not find any other pathologies and an MRI did not show any infiltration into the internal sphincter (see Fig. a). In the repeated PET/CT, an intensely hypermetabolic lesion centered on the lower rectum (standardized uptake value (SUV) = 16.2) was found without any evidence of regional lymph node or distant metastasis confirming a local recurrent Stage I tumor disease (see Fig. b). The multidisciplinary oncologic board decided to perform a WLE without adjuvant therapy. The operation was successful with an uneventful postoperative period (see Fig. ). The histology examination confirmed a R0-resection and the rare concurrent finding of a sessile serrated adenoma (see Fig. ). The tumor had a depth of 0.8 cm. The patient was asymptomatic after the surgery and was no more fecal incontinent. The preoperative Wexner score of 8 has been reduced to 2 postoperatively. According to the decision of the following oncologic board, the patient will be followed-up with physical examination and rectoscopy every 6 month in our pelvic floor unit.