A 28-year old man presented with a three month history of an asymptomatic scrotal swelling. He had previously undergone orchidopexy in childhood for a mal-descended right testis. There is otherwise no other significant medical or family history. The mid-scrotally located mass measured 4 × 7 cm and was nodular, hard and clinically separate from the testes. It was not attached to the scrotal skin or other underlying structures. Lymphadenopathy was not detected.
Initial ultrasonography showed a large extra-testicular and multinodular mass in the midline of the scrotum. The largest nodule, located behind the right testis was cystic. Both testes appeared normal. Subsequent staging Computer Tomography (CT) of the scrotum, abdomen and chest was performed, which identified a similarly localised heterogeneous mass of 6.9 × 3.7 cm, separate from the testes and did not extend into the tunica vaginalis. There was no evidence of distant or nodal metastases.
An initial diagnostic wedge biopsy indicated the lesion could be an ancient schwannoma. Curative surgical excision with partial scrotectomy was undertaken for removal of the mass and for definitive diagnosis. At resection, the tumour appeared to be superficial to the tunica vaginalis, testes and corpus spongiosum. Inferiorly, the tumour was attached to the bulbospongiosus requiring partial resection of the superficial muscle fibres.
The resected specimen was white and multinodular, with areas of cystic change and haemorrhage. Microscopically , proliferation of spindled shaped cells with fibrillary cytoplasm was seen, with dense fibrous bands arranging the cells into nodules. In some cells, marked nuclear hyperchromaticism and atypia were seen. Mitoses were not present. Within the lesion, cellular areas were interspersed with looser myxoid and cystic areas. Blood vessels with thickened hyalinised walls were noted. Staining for S100 protein was positive in the tumour cells. The histological features are that of an ancient schwannoma. The margins of this specimen were ragged and the completeness of excision was difficult to assess.