A 53-year-old man first visited our hospital because of liver dysfunction in 1992. The patient had no significant medical history other than diabetes. The patient was diagnosed with chronic hepatitis C genotype 1. His platelet count was 165,000/μL, and his albumin-bilirubin (ALBI) score was −3.07, which was classified as grade 1 . He refused IFN therapy due to severe adverse events and underwent regular follow-up blood tests and abdominal ultrasound sonography (US) every 3 months. The clinical course of the patient is shown in . His platelet count gradually decreased, and the ALBI score increased. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed the emergence of esophageal varices. In 2004, he first underwent contrast-enhanced CT to screen for hepatocellular carcinoma. The CT image did not reveal any tumor in the liver; however, there was an ovoid, homogenous, highly enhancing lesion with a diameter of 28 mm at the confluence of the splenic vein and superior mesenteric vein (a, b). Based on the CT image, the patient was diagnosed with PVA. At that time, abdominal US showed limited dilatation of the portal vein due to the PVA (c). As the patient did not present with any symptoms, no treatments were performed, and he was scheduled for a follow-up examination. In 2006 and 2007, the esophageal varices further enlarged, and combination therapies of endoscopic variceal ligation and endoscopic injection sclerotherapy were performed twice. His platelet count further decreased, and his ALBI score increased to −1.77, which was classified as grade 2b. In 2010, contrast-enhanced CT showed the PVA with a diameter of 38 mm and an internal thrombus (d, e). He was treated with intravenous administration of antithrombin III (1,500 units/day) for 10 days. The internal thrombus completely disappeared; however, the diameter of the PVA increased to 43 mm 1 year later. Oral administration of warfarin was initiated to prevent recurrence of thrombosis. The diameter of the PVA continued to gradually increase. In 2014 and 2017, radiofrequency ablation was performed for hepatocellular carcinoma in segments 6 and 7 that measured 17 mm and 15 mm, respectively. In 2017, the diameter of the PVA measured 52 mm. He then decided to undergo DAA treatment. The patient was treated with elbasvir-grazoprevir for 12 weeks . HCV disappeared at treatment week 4, and no adverse events were observed during the duration of elbasvir-grazoprevir therapy. The patient continued regular follow-up after DAA treatment. HCV did not relapse, and the viral response was sustained. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed no recurrence of esophageal varices. The platelet count increased, and the ALBI score decreased after achieving SVR. In 2021, his platelet count was 96,000/μL, and the ALBI score was −2.64, classified as grade 1. The diameter of the PVA remained at 52 mm (a, b). Abdominal US showed an anechoic lesion with no recurrence of thrombus (c). Using the color Doppler method, the blood flow in the aneurysm was seen as bidirectional due to the swirling of blood, which is the so-called yin-yang sign (d), while a flat venous flow was observed inside the aneurysm using the pulsed-wave Doppler method (e). Thus, the PVA did not enlarge 4 years after achieving SVR following DAA treatment. The CARE Checklist has been completed by the authors for this case report, attached as online supplementary material (for all online suppl. material, see ).