A 32 year-old woman with a history of ill-defined congenital heart disease presented to an outside hospital with hypoxia and pulmonary edema following the delivery of her fourth child. Echocardiogram revealed an initial left ventricular ejection fraction of 30–40%, significant mitral regurgitation, and multiple abnormal intracardiac shunts. A coronary angiogram was performed at the outside facility and noted severe aneurysmal coronary arteries but no obstructive coronary disease. The hospitalization was complicated by cardiogenic shock, acute hypoxic respiratory failure requiring multiple intubations and tracheostomy after failed extubation, and both atrial and ventricular tachyarrhythmias requiring cardioversion. The patient underwent dual-chamber implantable cardioverter defibrillator implantation and transoesophageal echocardiogram–guided MitraClip placement prior to being discharged to a skilled nursing facility.
The patient presented to our institution several days later with hypoxia and tachypnea. The patient’s medications on admission were amiodarone 100 mg daily, diltiazem 180 mg extended-release daily, furosemide 80 mg twice a day, apixaban 5 mg twice a day, and aspirin 81 mg daily. Physical examination was notable for a holosystolic murmur heard at the upper and lower sternal borders. Transthoracic echocardiography showed a left ventricular ejection fraction of 60–65%, enlarged left ventricular cavity with severe hypertrophy of the lateral wall, moderate mitral regurgitation, and a large circular structure in the atrioventricular groove with diastolic flow into the left atrium ( and ; , ). The left ventricular volume measured 262 mL with an end-diastolic volume/body surface area of 128 mL/m2, and overall comparable sizes of the ventricles also suggested that the right ventricle was severely dilated. The left atrium was severely dilated, and there was an interatrial septal defect with Doppler color flow suggestive of a left-to-right shunt (see , ). Cardiac computed tomography revealed these structures to be dilated coronary arteries with a left circumflex coronary artery measuring >10 cm in diameter communicating with the left atrium. There was also a large atrial septal defect seen on computed tomography ( to ; ; , and ).
Right heart catheterization demonstrated elevated right-sided filling pressures and post-capillary pulmonary hypertension. It showed a right atrial pressure of 15 mmHg, right ventricular pressure of 49/7 mmHg, pulmonary artery pressure of 43/25 mmHg with mean pressure of 33 mmHg, mixed venous oxygen saturation of 60%, pulmonary vascular resistance of 1.6 Wood units, and a cardiac output of 12.7 L/min and cardiac index of 6.9 L/min/m2 by Fick. The pulmonary flow to systemic flow ratio was >2.5 with significant step-up in oxygenation noted between the superior vena cava (60%) and right atrium (87%). A diagnosis of high-output heart failure with left-to-right shunting at the level of the right atrium was made.
Despite treatment with diuretics and attempt to optimize medical therapy with metoprolol tartrate and spironolactone, the patient developed cardiogenic shock and acute renal failure requiring continuous renal replacement therapy. The patient was presented to multiple tertiary care centers where intervention to close the coronary–atrial fistula was deferred given the risk of worsening pressure in the enlarged left circumflex coronary. She was ultimately referred for cardiac transplantation. The patient was declined for transplant candidacy due to extensive comorbidities and severe deconditioning. She passed away after being transitioned to comfort care.