A 51-year-old Caucasian male with the past medical history of type 2 diabetes mellitus of 2 years duration, hyperuricemia and gout, hypertension, and morbid obesity decided to implement intense lifestyle modification including both dietary and exercise measures 7 months prior to presentation. He had been on a strict diet consisting of 6 meals of spinach, kale, berries, and nuts. In addition, he started a regular aerobic exercise regimen 5 times a week. With all these interventions, he was able to successfully lose about 36 kg.
His gym trainer noticed that he had become pale and was more easily fatigued at which point he was referred to a primary care clinic. Vital signs were notable for blood pressure of 188/93 mm Hg and weight of 145 kg. Physical examination revealed sunken eyes and dry mucus membranes. Laboratory work up was notable for blood urea nitrogen of 122 mg/dL, creatinine of 12 mg/dL, and estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) of 4.4 mL/min/1.73m2. Patient was transferred to a nearby emergency department where he was started on intravenous fluids. Medications included daily aspirin, metoprolol and metformin. The patient denied any history of renal diseases or renal stone, or using tobacco, alcohol, ethylene glycol (antifreeze) or illicit drugs. He also denied taking any herbal products, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, or any type of “diet pills.” Family history was not remarkable for any renal or cardiovascular diseases. Patient was started on maintenance hemodialysis 3 times weekly.
Workup for renal failure included a renal ultrasound remarkable for kidneys 11-12 cm in length, increased bilateral parenchymal echogenicity compatible with chronic renal parenchymal disease, and no solid renal mass or hydronephrosis. Urine output throughout the course of the illness was around 1 to 2 L/d. Patient underwent a renal biopsy that revealed numerous polarized oxalate crystals in tubules and interstitium, interstitial inflammation, and mild mesangial expansion suggestive of diabetic nephropathy class IIA. Two out of 6 glomeruli showed global glomerulosclerosis with 30% tubular atrophy and 50% interstitial fibrosis. At this point the patient was instructed to adopt a low oxalate diet and to continue hemodialysis 3 times weekly.
Further workup to determine the etiology of oxalate nephropathy included abdominal imaging in the form of plain x-ray and computerized tomography (CT) scan which did not reveal any evidence of nephrolithiasis or nephrocalcinosis. A 24-hour urine collection for stone risk profile revealed: total urine volume of 1 L, pH 4.7, Ca 11 mg, Na 20 mEq, citrate <50 mg, oxalate 46 mg, uric acid 93 mg, phosphorous 580 mg, sulfate 13.4 mmol (reference range: 3.7-29 mmol/24 h), and creatinine 1240 mg. Importantly, serum oxalate level was undetectable.
A repeat renal biopsy 5 months later, while patient was still on maintenance hemodialysis, revealed mild mesangial expansion suggestive of diabetic nephropathy class IIA, and extensive oxalate crystal deposition in the tubules with associated interstitial inflammation and non-necrotizing granuloma. There was approximately 40% tubule atrophy and 70% interstitial fibrosis . Patient was referred for evaluation for renal transplantation.