A 78-year-old man with an intraventricular tumor diagnosed 7 years before had been suffering from gait disturbance for 2 years [, and ]. He also developed cognitive impairment below the Mini-Mental State Examination cutoff value (score <24) 1 year ago. Intraventricular tumors showed annual growth on imaging. The tumor did not lead to occlusion of the foramen of Monro, but ventricular enlargement had been observed 3 years before and had worsened, reaching an Evans index of 0.36 . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) T2*WI captured small intratumoral hemorrhages from the beginning of the follow-up [, and ]. Three years before, at the same time as the onset of ventricular enlargement, low intensity of the whole tumor and cerebral surface was observed on T2*WI . Subsequent follow-up revealed that this hemosiderin deposition had spread to the brain stem and cerebellar surface, and the ventricles had further expanded . A hearing test revealed bilateral sensorineural hearing impairment, which is a permanent symptom of SS.
The timed up and go test before and after the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) tap test in the presurgical evaluation showed improvement in gait disturbance, suggesting responsiveness to CSF diversion. On the other hand, CSF analysis demonstrated xanthochromia, a white blood cell (WBC) count of 154/μl (normal range 0–15/μL), and protein level of 596 mg/dL (normal range 10–40 mg/dL) [ and ]. The CSF opening pressure was 7 cmH2O (normal range 6–15 cmH2O). This result suggested that persistent bleeding from intraventricular tumors led to the development and exacerbation of SS and nonobstructive NPH. He was then advised to receive treatment for the tumor and was referred to our hospital after 7 years of follow-up of the tumor. The patient wanted to have the tumor surgically removed.
Tumor resection was performed through a right frontal craniotomy. Visual inspection revealed that the ventricular wall turned yellowish-brown, suggesting deposition of hemosiderin on the ependyma . The tumor surface was a mixture of yellow and red, suggesting the presence of hemorrhage at different times . The tumor was completely removed en bloc by dissection from the septum pellucidum.
Histopathological findings were consistent with those of subependymomas. Although the tumor surface color suggested that multiple hemorrhages in different phases and slight microbleeding changes were observed in the tumor, Elastica van Gieson staining did not reveal any significant disruption of the tumor blood vessels .
During the postoperative course, MRI revealed total tumor removal and no postoperative complications . Postoperative CSF was drastically improved, being crystal clear, WBC count of 1/μl, and protein level of 88 mg/dL . However, ventricular enlargement and NPH-related symptoms did not improve. Therefore, an LP shunt was performed for NPH 4 weeks after tumor removal. Unfortunately, he developed shunt malfunction and infections 3 weeks after surgery without any improvement. He also developed severe pneumonia and died a month after LP shunt placement.