We report the case of a 76-year-old woman (specific time points in ) diagnosed in December 2016 with stage IV RAS BRAF wild-type, poorly differentiated transverse colon adenocarcinoma with subcutaneous, pleural, left axillary, and abdominal lymph-node involvement . A colonoscopy sample was used to perform RAS BRAF analysis, adopting the Oncomine Solid Tumour panel on Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) Ion Torrent platform, with a limit of detection of 5%.
In January 2017, the patient began chemotherapy with mFOLFOX-6 plus panitumumab. After six cycles, she reported a mixed response for a partial remission on metastatic sites but progressive disease on the axillary node . During these first 3 months, the patient reported G1 skin rash, G1 peripheral neuropathy, and G2 neutropenia as side-effects, according to CTCAE 4.0.
This case was evaluated by a multidisciplinary team. Since disease progression only occurred at a single site, surgical excision of the left axillary node was scheduled (April 2017). Histopathological findings were compatible with metastasis from intestinal adenocarcinoma and the molecular assessment detected a BRAF V600E mutation that was probably the cause of resistance to panitumumab.
After surgery, the patient restarted chemotherapy with mFOLFOX-6 plus panitumumab for another six cycles and then continued with 5-FU/FA (De Gramont schedule) plus panitumumab as maintenance until March 2018. Afterwards, for persistent conjunctivitis (Grade 2, CTCAE 4.0) and considering the disease control, confirmed by a quarterly CT-scan, the patient began a treatment holiday period.
On June 2018, CT scan showed lung progression for evidence of two new lesions . Therefore, the patient resumed 5-FU/FA + panitumumab until March 2019. During this period, disease stability and response on the new lung metastases were achieved and treatment was stopped temporarily for ocular toxicity (Grade 2, CTCAE 4.0) that was particularly bothersome for the patient.
To date, with CT scan performed every two months, after 36 months since the last cycle and nearly 72 months since diagnosis, no evidence of disease progression has been observed and the patient’s clinical condition was also preserved.