An 18-year-old male patient was diagnosed with CIC::NUTM1-containing sarcoma in the soft tissues of the limbs by the Department of Pathology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University. The diagnosis was confirmed independently by two senior professional pathologists.
The patient experienced pain in the arms for more than 6 months prior to hospital readmission due to persistent pain with progressive enlargement of a mass. Computerized tomography imaging (CT) showed a soft tissue mass at the posterior part of the right distal humerus with smooth boundaries and no obvious destruction of adjacent bones . Magnetic resonance imaging (MR) showed soft tissue shadow signals behind the distal section of the right humerus and high intensity but uneven signals inT1-weighted and T2-weighted short tau inversion recovery imaging .
The tumor size was approximately 6.0 cm × 1.9 cm × 4.8 cm, and it contained irregular nodules. The boundary was clear from the surrounding fat space, and no bone erosion was noted, leading to it classification as a neoplastic lesion. Thoracic CT demonstrated multiple masses in both lungs, which were suspected of being metastatic lesions.
Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue blocks were cut into 4-µm-thick sections and stained with hematoxylin and eosin using a standard protocol.
Upon gross examination, resection specimens presented as a solid mass that was grayish-white with hemorrhagic foci. The tumor margins were clear with focal fibrous pseudocapsules, and a local push-like infiltration into the surrounding skeletal muscle tissue was observed.
Histologically, the tumor presented an obvious nodular appearance, with nodules separated by thick fibrotic septa . The tumor consisted of uniformed small to medium sized round-to-ovoid cells with nuclei that were typically monotonous. The cells were arranged in a variety of patterns, mainly solid sheets or nests, with microcystic foci or loose reticular patterns in the chondroid or myxoid stromal background; these areas were similar in morphology to myoepithelial carcinoma in terms of the presence of loose or discohesive tumor cells .
The tumor cells exhibited scant cytoplasm that was transparent or mildly eosinophilic. The nuclei harbored hyperchromatic chromatin and vesicular chromatin with distinct single nucleoli. Cells exhibiting mitotic activity and apoptosis were relatively common, mitosis with approximately 19 observed per 10 HPFs . Large patchy necrosis was common .
The local area was composed of spindle cells arranged in herring bone or storiform patterns with rough nuclear chromatin was rough . The tumor cells expressed NUT and ETV4 proteins in a diffuse but strong and homogeneous pattern, and they were stained positive for WT-1 with weak to moderate intensity . The cell membranes exhibited multifocal strongly positive staining for CD99. Staining for P40, AE1/AE3, EMA, NKX2.2, myogenin, and MyoD1 were all negative. The Ki67 proliferation index was approximately 40%.
Upon FISH examination of the tumors, CIC and NUTM1 gene break-apart signals.