A 73-year-old right-handed woman suffered from tinnitus, occipital headache, nausea, and anorexia since March 2009. She presented with a slowly worsening dementia, including disorientation to time and place as well as gait disturbance for 1.5 years. By September 2010, she was unable to walk, converse verbally, or perform any activities on her own; her family doctor referred her to a neurologist. T2-weighted MRI showed high intensity in the right middle cerebellar peduncle , the right globus pallidus , and the corona radiata. It also revealed remarkable flow void representing dilated cortical veins from the left cerebellum to the bilateral parieto-temporo-occipital lobes. These findings suggested dAVF. She was admitted to our hospital for a thorough examination regarding dAVF, and the patient received endovascular treatment.
On admission, she presented with severe cognitive impairment, including speech disturbance, memory impairment, lack of motivation and apathy. Scores of various neuropsychological tests on initial assessment are shown in table . Overall, her neuropsychological assessment showed a severe impairment of her cognitive functions, with a deterioration of her physical activity. Nevertheless, she exhibited no focal signs such as aphasia or hemiparesis.
The study of her cerebral angiography provided a definitive diagnosis for dAVF at the right transverse-sigmoid sinus with severe venous congestion. The right occipital artery, the middle meningeal artery, and the ascending pharyngeal artery were the main feeders . Although some anterograde blood flow still passed through the severely stenosed sigmoid sinus, most blood flow was in the right transvers sinus run-off retrograde over the confluence, through the straight sinus to the bilateral basal vein of Rosenthal and the inferior sagittal sinus and to the superior petrosal sinus. Especially the reflux of the dilated cortical veins was remarkable in the left cerebellum, medial deep cerebrum, and in the parieto-temporo-occipital lobes, suggesting severe venous congestion (Boden type II, Cognard type IIa+b, Larwani Grade 2; fig. ).
Transvenous embolization with platinum coils delivered through the right transverse-sigmoid sinus completely occluded the fistula , which was followed by a significant improvement of her cognitive function with a normalization of CBF. On the first post-treatment day, her cognitive function improved (Mini-Mental State Examination [MMSE] score: 7/30). One month later, her MMSE score had risen to 19/30, and her entire neuropsychological assessment significantly improved, especially in the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale III Verbal IQ (81) . She was able to walk for more than 150 meters without help and could climb and descend stairs. Three weeks after the embolization, three-dimensional 99mTc-ethylcysteine dimer single photon emission computed tomography imaging, using an easy Z-score imaging system analysis , revealed that the pretreatment reduction of CBF in the bilateral posterior cingulate gyrus, precuneus, and the left parieto-occipital cortex had improved to normal levels . On the 38th hospital day, she was transferred to another hospital that emphasized rehabilitation.
Cerebral angiography performed 3 months after embolization confirmed that the dAVF had completely disappeared and that there was no retrograde flow in the cortical veins, and also less venous congestion. Furthermore, 4 months after embolization, her cognitive function progressively improved (as indicated by higher scores on her neuropsychological assessments; table ).