A 37-year-old Indian male patient reported to the department of Conservative Dentistry and Endodontics with the chief complaint of history of throbbing pain in the lower left back tooth region for 5 days. Patient presented with night pain, which did not subside even after taking analgesics. Family history and medical history was non-contributory. Patient gave a history of an odontogenic keratocystic (OKC) lesion in the anterior mandible that was managed by surgical intervention and followed by rehabilitation with a removable prosthesis for aesthetic purposes Extra-oral examination disclosed normal mouth opening and no temporomandibular joint problems. The patient was healthy with no comorbidities.
On intraoral examination, a class II composite restoration was present with respect to tooth 36 . The tooth was tender on percussion. In addition, teeth 35 and 36 exhibited grade II mobility. Pulp sensibility testing gave an exaggerated lingering response. Radiographic examination revealed a well-defined radio opacity involving enamel, dentin, and pulp with periapical radiolucency , suggestive of deep restoration. Nonsurgical endodontic management was chosen as the treatment plan .
Radiographic examination included full mouth orthopantomogram (OPG) and intraoral periapical radiograph (IOPA) of tooth 36. A panoramic radiograph (OPG) was taken after surgical intervention depicted resected OKC in the anterior mandible reconstituted with reconstruction plates . Occlusion was assessed after obtaining diagnostic casts. A well-formulated treatment plan involving nonsurgical endodontic therapy was performed with respect to tooth 36. The mobility of the tooth (36) was reduced following endodontic therapy. The entire treatment plan was explained to the patient and informed consent was obtained. The initial phase of the treatment consisted of endodontic therapy. On the basis of the clinical diagnostic criteria for reduction in mobility, periodontic treatment was planned.
Treatment protocol: patient was asked to check on his diet to maintain oral hygiene. The patient was content with the anticipated outcome and the prognosis of the overall treatment plan was satisfactory. The subsequent rehabilitation plan was formulated.
Definitive treatment plan:Patient motivation for the treatment and maintenance of oral hygiene. Endodontic treatments of tooth 36. Periodic follow-ups at 6-month and 1-year intervals followed by augmentation of oral hygiene measures .
Endodontic treatment was performed with respect to tooth 36 under rubber dam and local anesthesia, and 3% sodium hypochlorite (Vishal Dentocare Pvt Ltd, India) was used as irrigant. The working length was obtained using hand K file (Dentsply Inc, Maillefer, Dentsply India), Root ZX II Apex locator (Morita, Irvine, CA), and finally confirmed using intraoral periapical radiograph. Cleaning and shaping of all the canals were performed with hand K files and Protaper rotary files (Dentsply Inc, Maillefer, Dentsply India) under copious irrigation with 3% sodium hypochlorite and enlarged up to F2 file size. Two rounds of triple antibiotic paste (TAP) as intracanal medicine (3Mix-MP), which is a combination of metronidazole, minocycline, and ciprofloxacin in the ratio of 1:1:1, was applied to tooth 36 for a period of 1 week. Triple antibiotic paste has the capacity to sterilize the pulp space from all microbes and also has regeneration potential to induce root development. The access cavity was given temporary seal dressing (cotton pellet and intermediary restorative material, Cavit G, 3 M ESPE GmbH, Neuss, Germany). Finally, the obturation was completed using F2 protaper gutta percha cone (Dentsply, Maillefer, Dentsply India) with AH Plus sealer (Dentsply, Sirona, Dentsply India).