A 58-year-old woman with a 30-year history of infection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was admitted to hospital for management of dysphagia secondary to esophageal stricture. The patient was diagnosed with a squamous cell carcinoma of the oropharynx 2 years prior and received treatment with an extended course of radiation therapy. She remained free of cancer recurrence but developed esophageal stricture as a late complication of radiation therapy. Her past medical history was complex; in addition to HIV infection, she was known to have HIV-induced immune thrombocytopenic purpura, hepatitis C infection, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, depression, recurrent facial cellulitis, and polysubstance use including opioid use disorder. Her esophageal stricture resulted in progressive dysphagia, and she was eventually unable to swallow any tablets including her anti-retroviral therapy.
She had been using injection drugs for several decades, including heroin, crack cocaine, and fentanyl. She was prescribed slow-release oral morphine (SROM) (60 mg three times a day) and immediate release oral morphine (10 mg four times a day) by her community addiction specialist as opioid agonist therapy (OAT). As the patient’s dysphagia progressed, she began to crush, heat, and inject her prescribed opioids. At the time of admission to hospital she also reported using crack cocaine 10–12 times per month.
Historically, the patient preferred to receive medical management in the outpatient setting. When hospital admission was required, she would often leave before treatment completion against medical recommendations. During previous hospitalizations, the patient experienced stigma surrounding her substance use and expressed frustration with practitioners who under dosed or delayed the administration of opioids because of her substance use history, thereby prompting patient-directed discharge.
The patient presented to her outpatient HIV clinic dehydrated and cachectic secondary to severe dysphagia. Her facial cellulitis caused periorbital edema resulting in extremely limited vision; despite this she was injecting her prescribed morphine with varied success. Outpatient care options had been exhausted and she required an urgent hospital admission for lifesaving therapies. In order to engage the patient with inpatient care, the team proposed a CADD pump to deliver opioids at a dose equivalent to her community prescription, and to offer the option of patient-controlled breakthrough dosing thus returning control to the patient. She agreed to present to the emergency department, with the hope that a CADD pump would alleviate the constant need to advocate for OAT in acute care.