A 71-year-old woman presented with a 33-year history of fixed adduction and infraduction in both eyes.
Esotropia fixus set in progressively during middle age. She had been diagnosed with esotropia 17 years earlier and had undergone three previous complicated strabismus surgeries: amputation of the left medial rectus (MR) muscle 17 years ago, amputation of the left MR with lateral rectus (LR) muscle recession (10 mm) 15 years ago, and amputation of the left MR muscle with LR muscle recession 13 years ago. However, after each surgery, the esotropia did not improve.
The patient suffered from high myopia for 60 years before the cataract surgery on her right eye 18 years ago. She has had hypertension for 40 years, coronary heart disease for 21 years and autoimmune hepatitis for 6 mo. She had a cesarean section 44 years ago and a stent placed in her left renal artery 19 years ago. She was allergic to sulfonamides and nitroglycerin for unknown periods of time.
The younger sister of the woman, who was 63 years old, had an 18-year history of progressive fixed adduction in both eyes. She also had high myopia in both eyes in childhood. Her best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 1.0 in the right eye and 0.6 in the left eye; the right eye was her dominant eye. She had primary position esotropia of 95∆ at both near and distance as determined by prism and alternating cover test. Both abductions were restricted . The axial lengths were 28.36 mm in the right eye and 29.28 mm in the left eye. Orbital computed tomography (CT) revealed an axially enlarged globe associated with obvious nasal displacement of the superior rectus (SR) muscle . She was also diagnosed with HES and underwent the Yokoyama procedure in her left eye and recession of the left MR muscle (5 mm) under general anesthesia. The forced duction test (FDT) was positive for abduction in her left eye. The patient had binocular alignment on follow-up at 6 mo with obviously improved abduction in the left eye .
The patient’s temperature was 36 °C, heart rate 95 bpm, respiratory rate 20 breaths/min, and blood pressure 150/83 mmHg.
Her BCVA was 0.2 in the right eye and HM/30 cm in the left eye. Her refraction before cataract surgery was about - 10.0 D cycle in both eyes. She had approximately 40° esotropia and 15° hypotropia in the left eye with right eye fixation and 30° esotropia and 15° hypotropia in the right eye with left eye fixation in the primary position by Krimsky test. Both abduction and elevation were restricted, so she was not able to bring her eyes to midline . As the right eye was her dominant eye, she turned her face to the right.
Serum bilirubin was increased at 25.35 μmol/L, (normal range 3-22 μmol/L).
Ultrasonography showed the axial lengths were 27.19 mm in the right and 26.9 mm in the left eye with obvious posterior scleral staphyloma in both eyes. Orbital CT scan revealed an axially enlarged globe associated with inferior displacement of the LR muscle and nasal displacement of the SR muscle . There was suspected reattachment of the left MR muscle to the globe , which was scar adhesion that was confirmed intraoperatively.