A two-day old female born at 39 week’s gestation was referred from a community hospital to a tertiary level neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) with the chief medical concern of bloody stools. Antenatal history was unremarkable. The infant was born after a relatively uncomplicated pregnancy to a 28-year-old G1P0 mother. Maternal serologies for rubella, herpes, HIV and syphilis were protective and group B Streptococcus testing was negative. Maternal cytomegalovirus status was not known. The only maternal medication was prenatal vitamins. There was no history of infections or diabetes. Gestational hypertension developed in the last month of pregnancy did not require intervention. There was no maternal or paternal family history of any gastrointestinal issues, no allergies and no family history of cow’s milk protein allergy (CMPA). Additionally, there was no history of familial bleeding disorders and parents were non-consanguineous. There was no major blood loss at the time of delivery, no bloody discharge from the mother’s nipples and there was no blood loss associated with a neonatal ankyloglossia release performed on the first day of life. The infant was born via spontaneous vaginal delivery with no instrumentation after an induction of labour for pre-eclampsia. Membranes were ruptured for twelve hours and active labour was under two hours. APGARS were 8 and 9 at one and five minutes respectively. The umbilical cord gas had a pH of 7.17 and a base excess of − 7.7 mmol/L. She received standard newborn care including a subcutaneous injection of vitamin K and did not receive any additional medications.
During the first twenty-four hours of life the infant was breastfeeding with latch issues and required an ankyloglossia release. She subsequently continued to breastfeed and was additionally given formula three times. The family recalled that the newborn had approximately ten dark green to black, loose, foul smelling bowel movements and gradually became less interested in feeding. This was brought to the attention of the physician later the following day. On day of life two initial vitals check at mother’s bedside showed a heart rate of 180 beats per minute and a temperature of 38.3 °C. Upon re-assessment in the nursey the heart rate was 130 beats per minute with a temperature of 37.3 °C and the remainder of her vitals within normal limits. On physical exam baby was reported to be less active but responsive and appropriate with handling, otherwise exam was consistent with a healthy newborn exam; bowel sounds were present, abdomen was soft and there were no hemangiomas present on the infant’s skin. There was a questionable anal fissure at the 12 o’clock position. Initial complete blood counts showed a white cell count of 8 × 109/L, hemoglobin of 19.2 g/dL, platelets of 258 × 109/L and there were no eosinophils present. From a capillary sample, gas and electrolytes were within normal limits; the C-reactive protein was 21.5 mg/L and plasma lactate was 4.2 mmol/L. Over the next ten hours the baby had approximately four moderately bloody stools with blood mixed throughout the stool. Additionally, a coagulation profile was performed and was within normal limits. Blood cultures were drawn (which were subsequently negative) and antibiotics were started. A single view abdominal X-ray was performed that showed a nonspecific bowel gas pattern, without pneumatosis, nor dilated bowel loops. The baby was subsequently transferred uneventfully to our tertiary NICU.
Upon arrival at the tertiary level NICU, at approximately 55 h of life, while hemodynamically stable on room air, the baby started to produce copious bilious emesis without exhibiting signs of discomfort. Abdominal x-ray showed pneumoperitoneum. Repeat blood work showed a white cell count of 8.8 × 109/L, hemoglobin of 16.4 g/dL, platelets of 200 × 9/L and a hematocrit of 46.2%, INR of 1.44, lactate 1.9 mmol/L and a CRP of 83 mg/L. The infant was urgently transferred to the operating room where laparotomy revealed a full thickness perforation of the anterior antimesenteric transverse colon that was two centimeters in diameter, in the mid transverse colon . There were patches of green-grey discoloration and suspected full thickness necrosis extending to the cecum and appendix suggesting the pathological epicentre was in the mid transverse colon with additional satellite lesions radiating outward. There was no evidence of intrabdominal calcifications to suggest a remote intrauterine perforation. There were no ischemic or necrotic lesions in the distal transverse colon, descending colon, or the sigmoid colon and rectum. Based on these findings, as the etiology was thought to affect the entire ileocolic vascular distribution, an extended right hemicolectomy was performed, with formation of an end ileostomy and distal transverse colon mucous fistula. During resection, no evidence of vascular malformation or anomalies was noted.
The pathological evaluation of the ileocolic resection specimen was consistent with classical features of necrotizing enterocolitis with perforation and acute peritonitis . The perforation site in the colon showed transmural necrosis with heavy acute inflammation as well as numerous empty, dilated spaces in the submucosa, consistent with pneumatosis intestinalis. The rest of the resected bowel showed patchy partial (in ileum and colon) to full thickness necrosis (in appendix), transmural acute inflammation and pneumatosis intestinalis in the terminal ileum and distal colon.
The infant had an uneventful postoperative recovery. Initially her nasogastric tube was placed to low intermittent suction then transitioned to straight drainage. When the nasogastric output was minimal, she was worked up of oral feeds of expressed breast milk. She progressively reached full feeds with breastmilk and was discharged home within 2 weeks. A contrast study was performed at 7 weeks, which revealed patency of the distal colon with no evidence of stricture. Five months after her first operation, the patient underwent uncomplicated elective laparotomy for reversal of both stomas and primary anastomosis. Mild adhesions were found at repeat laparotomy with no distal atresia. She was advanced to a full p.o. feeds on postoperative day 5. The resected end-ileostomy specimen submitted for histologic evaluation, showed an unremarkable bowel tissue with no evidence of fibrosis or scarring from the neonatal episode of NEC.