A 70-year-old female presented to our outpatient clinic with complaints of progressively increasing neck pain with a Visual Analog Score (VAS) of 7/10. Neck pain was radiating to the base of the occiput and aggravated by neck movements and prolonged sitting affecting Activities of daily living (ADLs). On clinical examination, there was axial tenderness at the base of the skull and upper part of the cervical spine, Paraspinal muscle spasm with terminal restriction of movements, especially rotation due to pain. Neurological examinations of sensory and power in all the limbs were normal. Systemic examination and laboratory parameters did not reveal any abnormality. Orthogonal view of X-ray Cervical spine revealed degenerative changes in the cervical spine with lytic lesion present in the body of C2 with detailed description difficult due to C1 atlas vertebrae overlap . Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) revealed a fracture of the odontoid process with associated marrow edema. Marrow signal abnormality in C2 also involves the right neural arch of the C2 with mild expansion and paravertebral soft tissue indenting the thecal sac (, ). MRI suggested the possibility of neoplastic etiology was likely although infective etiology could not be ruled out. Positron Emission Tomography (PET) scan was done for the search of primary. PET scan showed metabolically active soft tissue density heterogeneously enhancing irregular margin mass lesion in the left upper lobe of lung - likely primary. Scan also revealed metabolically active lytic sclerotic expansile lesion involving odontoid process and body of C2 vertebra- likely metastasis (, ). In view of the above clinical and radiological findings CT scan guided transpedicular C2 vertebrae and lung biopsy was performed (, ). The procedure was safe and uneventful. The duration of the procedure was 54 min. The patient was observed for 60 min in daycare and then discharged. There were no early or late complications noted. Histopathological examination of the biopsy revealed moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma from the lung with metastasis to C2 vertebrae . The patient was started on an appropriate Chemotherapy regimen as per the Immunohistochemistry (IHC) and Genomic studies with adjuvant radiotherapy.