A 54-year-old Japanese woman was diagnosed with right renal cell carcinoma, and she underwent right nephrectomy in the Department of Urologic Surgery at our hospital. The size of her tumor was 80mm. A diagnosis of T2N0M0 Stage II was made based on histopathological findings. The histological subtype of the renal cell carcinoma was clear cell. After 12 years she began to feel right abdominal pain and was examined at a local clinic. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed a massive liver metastasis occupying her right hepatic lobe, as well as a left renal metastasis. She was referred to the Department of Urologic Surgery at our hospital for treatment, and oral sunitinib was started. A pre-treatment abdominal CT showed a massive liver metastasis measuring 22cm × 17cm in her right hepatic lobe, and a left renal metastasis of which the largest diameter was 4cm. Neither ascites nor lymph node metastases were present (Figure ). The tumor markers carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 were both within normal limits. Sunitinib was administered with the standard regimen of 50 mg/day for 4 weeks followed by a 2-week drug holiday. According to the National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events version 4.0, adverse events during oral administration included grade 3 liver dysfunction, thrombocytopenia, and decreased hemoglobin during course 1; grade 2 neutropenia during course 6; and grade 2 renal dysfunction and hypothyroidism at the end of course 8. However, with the introduction of drug holidays, dose adjustments (37.5mg to 50mg/day, increased or decreased according to the severity of side effects), and changes in the administration method (from four doses/two holidays to two doses/two holidays), the patient was able to complete the eight courses. A CT scan after the completion of the eight courses of sunitinib showed that her liver metastasis had shrunk dramatically to a long diameter of 9cm. Her left renal metastasis had shrunk to a long diameter of 1cm (Figure ). According to the guidelines of the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumours
, a 73% decrease in the size of a tumor of the liver is defined as partial remission. The preoperative indocyanine green retention rate at 15 minutes was 18%. Based on these results, right lobectomy of her liver was performed to remove the renal cell carcinoma liver metastasis, which had been dramatically reduced by sunitinib. During surgery, laparotomy was performed using a J-shaped incision. Her right hepatic artery and the right branch of her portal vein were transected in that order, and hepatic parenchyma resection was performed using a combination of the liver hanging maneuver and an anterior approach. Next, her right hepatic duct was transected. Tumor thrombosis was present in her right hepatic vein, and this was excised as far as possible. Her liver was normal, showing no visible effects of chemotherapy. The excised specimen measured 92mm × 78mm. The tumor was covered by a capsule, and its interior showed widespread brownish coloration, indicating necrosis (Figure ).
Immunohistopathology showed that her tumor was CD10(+), cytokeratin (CK)7(+), and CK20(-), and a diagnosis of renal cell carcinoma liver metastasis was made. Hematoxylin and eosin staining of her non-tumorous liver tissue showed no sinusoidal dilatation, with a Rubbia-Brandt score of 0, and the nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) activity score was 1, with no obvious steatohepatitis (Figure ).
The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and she was discharged after 13 days. Radiofrequency ablation was performed on her left renal metastasis at 1 month after discharge. At the time of writing, 1 year after surgery, no recurrence has been observed in either her liver or her left kidney.