A 41-year-old male was in good health until 2 weeks ago when he developed a left-sided renal colicky type pain and was diagnosed to have a left mid ureteric calculus by radiography. He was reassured and requested to consume plenty of water. Two days before, he had consumed excessive amount of water, about 10 l per day, and developed polyuria. During these 2 days, he has had fever, dark urine, generalized weakness and altered level of consciousness. On the day of admission, he developed a single episode of self-terminating generalized tonic-clonic seizure lasting for 5 min followed by reduced level of consciousness. There was no previous history or family history of adult-onset seizures. There were no features suggestive of psychiatric illness like low mood, reduced sleep or overtalkative behaviour. The patient was never transfused with blood or blood products. There was no recent travel history. He is married and has a 10-year-old child. He is an accountant by profession. The patient has had good income and family support. He occasionally consumed alcohol and smoked cigarette, but denied any drug abuse. He was not on any long-term medication. On examination, he was disoriented in place, person and time. The Glasgow coma scale (GCS) score was 9 on admission (motor—5, verbal—2, eye—2). Except for a temperature of 101 °F and the generalized diminished reflexes, other vital signs and cardiovascular, respiratory, abdominal and neurological examinations were normal. Table outlines the timeline of this case report.
This is a previously healthy male who presented with fever for 2 days complicated with generalized tonic-clonic seizure and reduced level of consciousness. In the acute setting, the first working diagnosis was meningoencephalitis. It could be due to viral or bacterial aetiology. Moreover, he had dark coloured urine; therefore, falciparum malaria which can led to cerebral malaria was also suspected. Collateral history from the patient’s family revealed an excessive water intake of about 10 l per day for 2 days which led to an additional differential diagnosis. One possibility is psychogenic polydipsia which is the most common cause for excessive water intake. However, there was no history of psychiatric illness or any long-term drug history which can lead to polydipsia. The reason for his excessive water intake was to get rid of the unpleasant pain due to the ureteric calculus.
On admission, he was found to have hypoosmolar (242 mOsm/kg of water), hyponatraemia (119 mmol/L), hypokalaemia (2.9 mmol/L), hypoosmolar urine (195 mOsm/kg of water), mild leucocytosis (12.7 × 103 per microliter) with neutrophilia and myoglobinuria. His serum creatinine phosphokinase (10,000 U/L) was markedly elevated with a rise in aspartate aminotransferase (AST) (2316 U/L) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) (463 U/L) levels. Renal functions were within normal ranges. Blood for malaria parasite was negative. Non-contrast computed tomography scan of the brain was normal. Electroencephalogram done on the 5th day revealed generalized, continuous, slow activity suggestive of diffuse cortical dysfunction. This could be due to an encephalopathy preceded by hyponatraemia.
Hyponatraemia-induced generalized tonic-clonic seizure, altered level of consciousness and rhabdomyolysis were diagnosed in our patient. His hyponatraemia was most probably due to excess water intake. The patient was given a bolus of 3% hypertonic saline (100 mL over 20 min) for symptomatic severe hyponatraemia . The diagnosis of rhabdomyolysis was made because he had body aches, dark urine, elevated levels of creatine kinase and urinary myoglobin. His serum creatinine phosphokinase peaked to the highest level (54,841 U/L) by the 7th day. Also, the patient’s elevated AST and ALT could be due to the muscle damage. As there was rhabdomyolysis, hypokalaemia correction was done once (KCl 40 mmol over 12 h) and serum potassium level was assessed regularly. Further doses of potassium were not required. A strict fluid restriction was not followed as there was a high risk of developing acute renal failure due to rhabdomyolysis. The input per hour was decided by measuring the previous hours’ output and adding 20 mL for the first 5 days. He did not develop oliguria or features of acute renal failure. Considering the history of fever and seizure with altered level of consciousness, he was started on intravenous cefotaxime (2 g 6 hourly), intravenous acyclovir (500 mg 8 hourly) and intravenous dexamethasone (2 mg 6 hourly) after collecting blood and urine for culture. However, the patient’s family denied consent for lumbar puncture. Blood and urine culture revealed no growth, but the antibiotics were continued for a total of 10 days as we could not exclude central nervous system infection without a lumbar puncture. The magnetic resonance imaging of the brain was normal on the 11th day of admission.
GCS score improved gradually to 15, and serum sodium and potassium were normalized by the 3rd day of admission. The patient did not have any further episode of seizure. His fever settled, and serum and urine osmolality were normalized by the 5th day. He responded to the above management and did not develop any complications of rhabdomyolysis. On discharge, his serum creatinine phosphokinase (49 U/L), AST (66 U/L) and ALT (78 U/L) levels were near normal. He was discharged on the 15th day of admission with appropriate medical advice to prevent similar complications.