A 49-year old male patient self-reported to the hospital with strong piercing headaches, which were initially located at the front, but spread occipitally later, and were accompanied by photophobia. For the three previous days, the patient had suffered from severe nausea, vomiting, diarrhea and general sickness. The patient presented with normothermia, normal vital signs, no altered level of consciousness and a Glasgow Coma Scale of 15. Trauma or drug intoxication could be excluded by the history of the patient.
After clinical and laboratory examination a computed tomography scan was initiated and showed a mass in the sellar region. Subsequently, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed and revealed a haemorrhagic sellar mass, thus, the diagnosis of subacute pituitary apoplexy was made .
Laboratory workup on day five after admission showed that pituitary apoplexy was associated with insufficiency of the corticotropic, thyrotropic and gonadotrophic axis. Although a shift of the optic chiasm could be shown by the MRI scan, the ophthalmological examination showed only minor non-specific defects in the visual field but neither papilledema nor orthoptic abnormalities.
Based on the radiological findings, a pituitary apoplexy caused by haemorrhage of a hypophyseal macroadenoma was suspected. Surgical intervention was planned, but postponed when laboratory follow-up revealed severe acute kidney injury with a creatinine of 11.6 mg / dl and an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) < 20 ml/min on day 5 after admission .
The combination of kidney failure, thrombocytopenia and neurological symptoms prompted us to consider hantavirus-infection. In line with this possibility, the patient, who worked as a driving instructor, reported on digging out a bamboo hedge prior to hospitalization.
Further testing on day three after admission revealed hantavirus infection by detection of IgM and IgG antibodies against Puumala hantavirus using immunofluorescence assays and line immunoassays. Polymerase chain reaction for hantavirus was also positive. Specific amplification and subsequent sequencing of the partial L-Segment revealed an infection with a puumalavirus that circulates in the Middle Rhine region in Germany . The detection of IgM and viral RNA strongly suggested acute hantavirus infection. Therefore, we did not assess changes of antibody titers over time. In addition, infection by hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus and HIV was ruled out by serological testing. Because testing for hantavirus yielded positive results, we did not test for leptospirosis, which is quite rare in Germany in the absence of occupational risk factors.
In the meantime, the patient had been transferred to the nephrology department. He became oliguric. Since he complained of increasing nausea in association to rising blood urea levels, we considered haemodialysis, but kidney function started to recover in time to avoid renal replacement therapy. After symptomatic treatment and hormonal replacement, urinary excretion increased on day 3 and creatinine levels decreased from day 6 onwards . No specific antiviral treatment was applied.
Although the patient’s condition improved largely, diuretic medication was withheld from day 5 and a negative fluid balance with continuous weight loss was achieved every day, there was no decline in urine excretion (urinary volume 6.25 ml/kg/h) .
Initially, this was attributed to the polyuric phase of recovery from acute kidney injury. Since the plasma hyperosmolality associated with urine hypoosmolality persisted, central diabetes insipidus was suspected and a water deprivation test was carried out. Based on copeptin levels during thirsting (copeptin t0–4.3 pmol/l; copeptin t7–4.2 pmol/l) and response to desmopressin, we diagnosed central diabetes insipidus . The polyuria of up to 12 L / d was normalized during the following days by application of desmopressin.
The patient was discharged with substitution of L-thyroxine 100 μg per day, hydrocortisone (15–10-0 mg), desmopressin 10 μg bid and testosterone depot 250 mg.
Follow-up MRI after 3 weeks showed that the hemorrhage was consolidating with a regressive shift of the chiasma opticum .
When seen as outpatient in our endocrinological department at 6 – month follow-up, the patient reported to be in good general condition. Laboratory parameters were unremarkable except for a reduced serum level of LH (0.4 U/l; normal range: 1.7–8.6). Given the partial recovery of pituitary function at the 6-month follow-up, dosage of desmopressin and of hydrocortisone were reduced. Thyroid and testosterone replacement was continued unchanged.