A 65-year-old man presented with dyschezia and was admitted to a local hospital in Thailand.
Rectal examination indicated a prostate mass, and contrast-enhanced CT showed a contrast-enhanced, 62 × 40 mm2 mass with rectal invasion, mainly in the right lobe of the prostate . The PSA value was 1.95 ng/ml (normal range at <4.0 ng/ml).
Prostate biopsy showed a high concentration of nuclei, necrosis, and small atypical cells, as well as increased nuclear fragmentation in the right lobe. Staining was positive for vimentin, negative for CD34, PSA, desmin, cytokeratin, and CD117, and highly positive for Ki-67 (80%), indicating PSS. Whole-body CT showed no lymph nodes or distant metastases.
The patient was diagnosed with PSS.
Chemotherapy with GEM 1 g/m2 (days 1, 8) and DTX 70 mg/m2 (day 1) was administered. After two courses of CTh, MRI showed that the volume of the mass was reduced by 48% to 36 × 36 mm, indicating a PR to the CTh . T2-weighted MRI showed possible invasion of the rectal mucosa and serosa. After undergoing one more course of CTh, the patient returned to Japan for further treatment at our hospital.
Physical examination, all other routine blood tests, and urine tests were normal. Transrectal prostate biopsy was performed to evaluate the response to CTh. On pathological examination, coagulative necrosis of the tumor tissue, with surrounding fibrosis, histiocytic infiltration and hemosiderin deposition were observed, suggesting the effects of CTh. However, the histology was difficult to determine.
Based on the tumor shrinkage and the results of the prostate biopsy at our hospital, CTh with GEM and DTX was considered to be effective.
Another course was performed following the regimen for endometrial cancer in our hospital, a combination of GEM (900 mg/m2; days 1, 8) and DTX (75 mg/m2;days 1). Neutropenia [grade4 by NCI CTCAE] occurred on days 13–16 of treatment. MRI showed that the tumor had reduced by 75% from the initial examination . Total pelvic exenteration, an ileal conduit, and colostomy were planned.
After an incision in the middle lower abdomen, we observed no adhesions to surrounding organs, but the border between the tumor and rectum was indistinct. Since the length of the rectum from the pelvic floor to the tumor was found to be more than 3 cm, the anus was preserved, and a temporary small bowel stoma was created with combined resection of the rectum for a margin. Macroscopically, the right lobe of the prostate showed a 2.7 × 2.3 cm2, yellowish-white, smooth-surfaced ampullary area with necrosis and hemorrhage . Histopathological findings showed necrotic tissue in the right lobe of the prostate with a small tumor component in the center. There was complex growth of spindle-shaped cells with round to oval nuclei and narrow cytoplasm . Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were negative for desmin, CD34, C-kit, PgR, and ER, indicating sarcoma . The percentage of Ki-67 positive cells was 50% . Vitrification and fibrosis extended into the surrounding fat, suggesting that there may have been extraprostatic invasion prior to treatment. Based on the histopathological findings, the final Dx was PSS.
The patient was discharged on postoperative day 39. The small bowel stoma was closed 126 days after total pelvic organ resection, and there was no sign of recurrence or metastasis at 5 years after surgery.