A 41-year-old woman was referred for ocular pain, corneal opacity, and visual disturbance in her left eye. The corrected distance visual acuity (CDVA) in the left eye decreased to 20/1000, and the CDVA in the right eye was 20/25. She had a previous history of corneal perforation in the right eye, related to acute hydrops, treated by anterior lamellar keratoplasty (ALK) , and a postoperative corneal scar was observed . Slit-lamp and AS-OCT (SS-1000 CASIA, Tomey, Nagoya, Japan) examination of the left eye showed full thickness corneal perforation as well as rupture of Descemet’s membrane that means acute hydrops . Corneal topography using AS-OCT showed a distorted crab-claw sign indicating PMCD .
Conservative medical management was initiated, including therapeutic contact lens, occasional pressure patch, 0.3% ofloxacin ointment applied 4 times daily for 4 months. However, the acute hydrops did not resolve, rather the bleb grew. Slit-lamp examination showed that the corneal stromal edema had expanded into a massive cavernous crescent-shaped structure that extended 180 degrees along the limbus . AS-OCT images showed a large intrastromal cavity . A gonioscopic three-dimensional OCT view of the cornea and anterior chamber angle also clearly showed the large continuous corneal stromal cavity, whereupon the extent of the cavity could be properly appreciated .
Our indication for surgery is acute hydrops resistant to conservative medical treatment. Therefore, an intracameral injection of 20% sulfur hexafluoride was administered to prevent further aqueous humor from entering the corneal stroma and facilitate resolution. However, instead of regressing, the edematous cavity continued to expand two weeks after injection. A crescent-shaped ALK was performed because the remaining posterior corneal stroma of the cavern was considered sufficiently thick to perform ALK under OCT observation . After the anterior portion of the corneal stromal cavern was removed, a crescent-shaped corneal graft was sutured to the host cornea using 10-0 nylon during keratoplasty . There were two difficulties of performing ALK. One difficulty was optimization of graft thickness because depth of stromal cavern was different between places in the patient. Thus, graft was gradually and carefully cut, and the thickness was successfully determined to adjust stromal cavern. The other difficulty was avoidance of anterior chamber collapse because of full thickness corneal perforation. Viscoelastic material was used to maintain anterior chamber during ALK. One month postoperatively, slit-lamp and OCT examinations showed that the corneal stromal ventricle structure had resolved markedly . The CDVA recovered to 20/29. A gonioscopic view clearly showed postoperative resolution of the pathologic corneal structure compared to preoperatively, conclusively demonstrating the surgical results . Additionally, the 3d video allowed us to monitor the eye with greater precision in follow-ups.