A 30-year-old male admitted in our institute with complaints of severe pain in the right index finger with inability to extend the DIP joint for 5 days. There was a history of fall from the bike before this complaint. Radiographs revealed a bony mallet fracture at the distal phalanx, with fracture fragment involving more than one-third of distal phalanx articular surface. The patient was then planned for delta wiring fixation of the fracture. The procedure was performed using an image intensifier under digital block anesthesia without a tourniquet. Appropriate reduction is confirmed on lateral X-ray with slight flexion with suspension. Insert a Kirschner wire 0.8 mm through the bony fracture fragment attached with extensor tendon from the dorsal side and make a hook on dorsal end of Kirschner wire and advance the Kirschner wire through the distal phalanx with counter force. Cut the Kirschner wire saving 2 cm length at plantar end which is now come out from the skin of plantar side penetrated through the fracture fragment, distal phalanx and make another hook. Insert another Kirschner wire 1 mm along the long axis of distal phalanx intrameduallry. Make an acute angle and another hook leaving 5mm of distance from the previous Kirschner wire. Hang the two hooks and apply dressing over them to prevent further injury (-), allowing the DIP joint to have free movement. The patient’s was discharged on the day of surgery and requested to return for weekly review. After clinical and radiological confirmation of union around 7 weeks, the Kirschner wires were removed. For removal, the first step is to untie the hook, then axial intramedullary wire pulled out easily, then the first wire was just push back slight dorsally, and the hook was cut, then from plantar side the first wire pulled out. Lateral and posteroanterior plain radiographs were taken pre-operative, intraoperative, and weekly postoperatively . Active range of motion exercises was initiated immediately after the operation ( and ). Fracture union was defined as the X-ray presence of bridging trabeculae and a radiolucent line at the fracture gap and the clinical absence of tenderness at the fracture site. The active range of motion and extension lag of the DIP joint were measured with a goniometer. Full flexion was considered as achieved when the angle of the injured side reached that of the opposite side at follow-up. Functional outcomes were evaluated using Crawford’s criteria . At 1 year, the DIP had flexion of 75° and had extension deficit of 5°. According to Crawford’s criteria, the patient had good result. The patient does not have pain at the final follow-up with a VAS score of 1.There were no complications, such as comminution of the fracture fragment, nail deformity, volar subluxation, or dislocation of the DIP joint osteoarthritis.