A six month-old female infant was referred to our hospital with seizure disorder and pancytopenia. She is the first child of healthy parents who were not relatives. Perinatal and neonatal periods were without any serious problem except for a mild jaundice during the first month.
Birth body weight was 2950 gr and head circumference 34 cm. Growth and development of the patient were normal until the age of 4 months, when she started neuro-developmental regression. She lacked tonic neck and showed attention deficit.
She experienced seizure attacks as sucking and eye movement just 10 days before hospitalization in our center; she was treated with phenobarbital and phenytoin in another center, but was referred to our center for further follow-up as of increased frequency of seizures and pancytopenia. She was lethargic and pale at the time of admission; body weight was 6500 gr (10th percentile for age) and head circumference was 42 cm (50th percentile for age). Hepatomegaly was detected in physical examination, but the spleen was not palpable. The patient was febrile (axillary temperature 38.5°C).
Complete blood count (CBC) revealed pancytopenia: white blood cell (WBC): 1100/µL, polymorphoneuclear (PMN): 34%, red blood cell (RBC): 2870000/µL, hemoglobin (Hb): 8.8 g/dl, mean corpuscular volume (MCV): 91 fl, mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH): 30 pg, mean corpuscular Hb concentration (MCHC): 33 g/dl, Platelet count: 125000/µL, Reticulocyte count: 1.4%. Other chemical laboratory test results (blood suger, blood urea nitrogen, ctartinie, sodium, potassium, phosphor, calcium, liver function tests, triglyceride, cholesterol and lactate dehydoganase) at the first day of admission were normal. Arterial blood gas, serum lactate and pyrovate, serum and urine aminoacid chromatography, TORCH study, thyroid function tests, serum folate, and serum B12 levels were normal. Treatment with anticonvulsant drugs and antibiotics continued.
She experienced an episode of status epilepticus and loss of consciousness two days after hospitalization. The status epilepticus was controlled by midazolam. Brain computed tomography scan demonstrated marked brain atrophy, and visual evoked potential revealed bilateral cortical blindness. The cerebro spinal fluid analysis was in normal range.
Electroencephalography of the patient displayed slow background activity. Abdominal sonography revealed mild hepatomegaly, and mild osteopenia was reported in skeletal survey.
CBC, which was performed 7 days after hospitalization still showed bicytopenia: WBC:1600/µL, RBC: 2270000/µL, Hb: 7.2 g/dl, MCV: 95 fl, MCH: 31 pg, MCHC: 33 g/dl, Plt: 190000/µL. Bone marrow aspiration revealed a cellular marrow with marked vacuolization of erythroid and myeloid precursors .
The bone marrow cell differentiation and percentage of different developmental stages of the cells were as follow: myeloid/erythroid ratio 3/1, myeloblast 2%, promyelocyte 15%, myelocyte 20%, metamyelocyte 15%, band 10%, PMN 8%.
Iron staining of bone marrow showed markedly ring sideroblasts . Percentage of ring sideroblasts in iron staining of bone marrow was 22%. Patient received 100 cc packed cell transfusion and also Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) 5 µg /kg/day subcutaneously.
On the day of 15 after hospitalization, the results of her CBC were as follow: WBC: 4100/µL, PMN: 22%, Lymphocyte: 78%, Hb: 8.2 g/dl, Plt: 234000/µL. Blood transfusion was repeated.
Being suspicious to Pearson marrow syndrome, study on mitochondrial DNA from peripheral blood sample of the patient was performed, which indicated mtDNA deletion (8.5 kb deletion, 39.5% mtDNA deletion and 60.5% wild type). So, the diagnosis of PS was confirmed for this patient.