A 2-year-old girl of non-consanguineous Caucasian parents of Western European descent, developed the following clinical features over 12 months: hypoparathyroidism with hypocalcemia and borderline high serum phosphate (parathyroid hormone 20ng/L, normal 10 to 65; total calcium 1.98mmol/L, normal 2.2 to 2.6; phosphate 2.1mmol/L, normal 1.6 to 2.1); mucocutaneous candidiasis ; keratoconjunctivitis; sialoadenitis; vitiligo ; urticaria-like rash ; and alopecia. At age 2.9 years, she required intensive care admission and ventilation for aspiration pneumonia and significant respiratory compromise. During this admission, severe hypoparathyroidism with significant hypocalcemia was managed with high doses of intravenous and subsequently oral calcium and calcitriol. APECED was confirmed following identification of a homozygous 13 base pair deletion on AIRE exon 8; both parents were heterozygous carriers.
Previously, she had been investigated and treated for several episodes of aspiration pneumonia, frequent diarrhea, intermittent urticaria-like eruptions with lymphocytic vasculitis on biopsy and frequent fevers of unknown origin. Between diarrheal illnesses, she had severe constipation, including a partial small bowel obstruction at 1.3 years old.
Laboratory evaluation revealed: normal thyroid function tests; positive anti-thyroid peroxidase antibodies; normal glucocorticoid function following adrenal stimulation; positive anti-adrenal and anti-21-hydroxylase antibodies; normal electrolytes and mineralocorticoid function; intercurrent stress hyperglycemia; positive anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase antibodies but negative islet cell and anti-insulin antibodies. While ventilated, Candida albicans was cultured from her endotracheal tube; C. albicans and organic food material were isolated following closed lung biopsy.
Her diarrhea worsened, and became associated with deterioration of her hypoparathyroidism and hypocalcemia requiring prolonged parenteral calcium. Hypocalcemia was marked after discontinuing parenteral calcium for even a few hours. She then developed mineralocorticoid insufficiency, worsening sicca symptoms, and recurrent life-threatening respiratory tract infections.
After seven months of hospitalization, immunosuppression was commenced, first using high dose oral prednisone (two mg/kg), then azathioprine (1.5mg/kg). Calcium and diarrhea stabilized somewhat. However, repeated attempts to wean maintenance steroids failed due to exacerbations of diarrhea and hypocalcemia. Therefore, immunosuppression was changed to MMF monotherapy (900mg/m2). Prednisone was weaned successfully to physiological maintenance doses, and continued at these doses.
Her clinical response to immunosuppression was dramatic. Intravenous calcium was discontinued after one week; diarrhea began to resolve . Within one month of starting MMF, she was discharged home on oral calcium and calcitriol supplements. Linear growth, salivation, lacrimation and repigmentation of her eyelashes improved.
She is now seven years old, height 110.7cm (3rd centile) and weight 19.2kg (16th centile). She still has frequent episodes of fever, although not consistently related to infections. She has had documented throat and lower respiratory tract infections, but these have responded well to antibiotics without further support. Her lung function testing is normal. MMF was titrated to achieve target area under the curve of 40 to 60mg/hour/L. Notably, when MMF is held for even two to three days (for example during febrile illnesses), despite doubling or tripling steroids for stress dosing, diarrhea deteriorates, she becomes hypocalcemic, requiring increased calcium and calcitriol supplementation .