A 29-year-old military male basic trainee (71 inches, 200 pounds, BMI 27.89) presented with a one-month history of atraumatic bilateral leg pain. He reported pain within the first week of initiating running at basic training. He was diagnosed with bilateral proximal tibia stress fractures at three weeks with instructions to stop impact activities. After failure of his symptoms to improve, he was referred to our facility. On presentation, he had tenderness about the medial aspect of each proximal tibia. Radiographs obtained at that time demonstrated bilateral proximal tibia stress fractures with varus alignment about each knee and articular collapse of the left tibial plateau. Metabolic labs were obtained and significant for a low vitamin D (15), but the remainders of labs including calcium, thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), and testosterone were unremarkable. MRI of the left knee demonstrated a medial tibial plateau fracture with two millimeters of articular depression and extension of the fracture to the tibial spine . MRI of the right knee demonstrated a hypointense linear T2 signal surrounded by diffuse hyperintense signal suggesting a medial tibial plateau stress fracture with surrounding bone edema, without articular collapse or extension . These fractures were at the level of the physis, and there was surrounding sclerosis on plain radiographs. Given the collapse of the articular surface in his left knee, the patient was indicated for open reduction internal fixation with allograft bone. The patient underwent the aforementioned procedure without complication, and the patient remained nonweight bearing to his bilateral lower extremities . At the time of surgery, the bone at the fracture distal to the articular surface was softer and more friable in composition than expected for the stress fracture. It was easily debrided back to stable, healthy bone edges, and we were interested in analyzing its composition, so a biopsy was obtained and sent to the lab for analysis. Histology demonstrated nonossifying hyaline cartilage with admixed fibroconnective tissue consistent with a persistent physis .
At the six-week follow-up visit after the procedure on his left knee, the patient was still having significant pain in his right lower extremity and, after extensive counseling, elected to undergo the same procedure on the contralateral limb in an effort to return to running and continue his military career . We suspected that a similar pathology of a persistent physis was present in the right proximal tibia and that this was contributing to his slow healing progression. Similar intraoperative pathology specimens were again obtained at the fracture site distal to the articular surface , and these demonstrated fragments of purple to purple-gray staining matrix with chondroid metaplasia. This presence of cartilage distal to the articular surface was consistent with a persistent physis.
At four-and-a-half months from the index procedure (three months from the staged procedure), the patient was ambulating without assisted devices and had painless range of motion from 0 to 120° in each knee with well-healed incisions, maintained hardware and alignment, but had not returned to impact activities. Due to his status as a basic trainee, he was released from active duty at six months' time postoperatively and was lost to follow-up.