A 14-year-old female presented with progressively worsening difficulty in breathing over five months. She had associated change in voice for the same duration. The patient had a foreign body sensation in her throat with mild odynophagia. She did not have any cough during oral intake. She did not have any associated co-morbidities or any relevant family history. On initial evaluation with a chest and neck skiagram, significant upper airway narrowing was found. Due to the worsening stridor, the patient underwent an emergency tracheostomy. Direct laryngoscopy and evaluation was also done in the same setting under general anaesthesia. The findings revealed a circumferential smooth mucosa-covered bulge arising from the under-surface of bilateral true vocal cords extending up to 15 mm below its level, causing a near-complete subglottic obstruction .
Biopsy was taken from the subglottic mass and sent for histopathological examination. The supraglottic larynx was normal. Vocal cords mobility couldn't be assessed because of the near-complete stenosis. Contrast-enhanced computer tomography Neck and thorax was done, which showed an asymmetrical circumferential wall thickening with mild enhancement involving the subglottic larynx causing severe airway compromise. The histopathological evaluation of the mass reported lymphoid hyperplasia. The patient was then evaluated further to rule out lymphoma or other lymphoproliferative disorders.
Any granulomatous condition or auto-immune disorders were ruled out. The nasal endoscopic evaluation showed adenoid hyperplasia, and the rest of the systemic examination was normal.
The patient was given a course of oral and inhalation steroid therapy for six weeks. She responded well initially, with subsequent laryngeal endoscopies showing a 30-40% reduction in the size of the mass. Keeping in mind the patient's young age, a decision to taper and eventually stop the steroid therapy was taken.
However, over the next few weeks, the mass was found to again increase in size. As medical treatment didn't help, surgical intervention was planned. Coblation assisted removal of the glottis-subglottic lesion was done circumferentially preserving bilateral vocal cords. A Montgomery T- tube was placed as a stent to maintain the subglottic lumen and to prevent restenosis .
The excised mass was again analyzed histopathologically by two independent pathologists. The microscopic analysis shows fragments of mucosa lined by squamous epithelium, and sub-epithelium shows multiple foci of lymphoid infiltration with entrapment of mucosal glands .
The infiltrate was composed of both lymphocytes and plasma cells. There was no evidence of granuloma or malignancy seen. Thus, a diagnosis of ‘Idiopathic lymphoid hyperplasia’ was made.
Twelve weeks later, she was evaluated, and the glottic and subglottic airway seems normal on X-ray. Montgomery tube was removed, and tracheostomy tube was placed, and corking was done. On follow-up, the glottic and subglottic lumen were found adequate, and she was decannulated . She is asymptomatic at one year follow-up without any disease recurrence.