A 63-year-old Indonesian male presented with sudden-onset binocular horizontal diplopia for 1 week that was constant and worse in left gaze, also with weakness of his left facial muscles. There was no disturbance in visual acuity, no history of similar symptoms, other neurological deficits, or trauma. No history of similar symptoms in his family. Patient had history of hypertension for 10 years and regularly takes antihypertensive medicine. He also had history of anisometropic amblyopia of the left eye (LE). The patient is a retired civil servant with no history of smoking or recreational drug use.
On physical examination, the vital signs were within normal limit. Ophthalmic examination revealed best corrected visual acuities with Snellen chart were 0.8 on the right eye (RE) and 0.08 on the LE. His primary eye position was orthotropic; however, the red glass test revealed uncrossed diplopia. There was an RE adduction deficit and LE abduction deficit on attempted left gaze (shown in a), and no nystagmus during saccadic eye movements. Patient had normal eyelid position. The light reflex, color vision, and visual field examination were within normal limits in both eyes. No relative afferent pupillary defect was found. Anterior segment examinations were unremarkable. Posterior segment examinations revealed a myopic fundus and optic disc with defined margin on both eyes. Neurological examination showed left facial nerve palsy (shown in a). The patient had incomplete closure of the left eye, unable to raise the eyebrow on the affected side, and there is forehead involvement of facial nerve palsy. The remaining of neurological examination was unremarkable.
The patient’s blood glucose and lipid profile test were within normal limit. Brain MRI on T2-weighted (T2W) fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) demonstrated hyperintense lesions in periventricular white matter perpendicular to the ventricles (Dawson’s fingers) (shown in a), multiple small, round, hyperintense lesions the left and right cortex and juxtacortical cerebellar hemisphere with post-contrast enhancement of lesions (shown in b); also small hyperintense lesion in the left paramedian pontine reticular formation (PPRF) in dorsal of pons with post-contrast enhancement of lesion (shown in c–f), that met 2017 revised McDonald’s criteria of dissemination in time and space , suggesting the diagnosis of MS. Hyperintensity on diffusion-weighted imaging was not caused by restricted diffusion but rather T2 shine through, supported by normal apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) and ADC exponential not hyperintense (shown in ), rule out the common cerebrovascular etiology in this age group. We did not perform spinal cord imaging and the test of oligoclonal bands in cerebrospinal fluid because the test was not available in our center. The patient underwent brain MRI in other hospital in our city.
The patient was given oral methylprednisolone 1 mg/kg daily, as well as oral citicoline 1,000 mg daily. We planned a neurologist referral for a thorough neurological examination and management. Follow-up visit was scheduled every 1 to 2 weeks. Oral methylprednisolone tapered weekly (56-48-40-32-24-16-8-4 mg). On follow-up visit 5 weeks later, there was no complaint about diplopia with complete resolution of ocular motility (shown in b). Ipsilateral facial nerve palsy was fully resolved at the follow-up visit in week twelve after starting the treatment. (shown in b). There were no ocular or systemic side effects from the drugs.