A 50-year-old male patient with no known medical comorbidities underwent CWHTO for isolated medial compartment osteoarthritis of the left knee. He had the same surgery performed on the right knee3 years prior with excellent clinical outcome . The patient was positioned supine on the operating table, and a thigh tourniquet was applied. Knee arthroscopy with partial medial meniscectomy was performed. Next, a slightly curved skin incision was made starting posteriorly at the lateral joint line and directed distally midway between the tibia and fibula. The fascia was incised, andthe tibialis anterior muscle was detached and elevated off the proximal tibia and retracted laterally, exposing the proximal tibiofibular joint which was disrupted using 1 cm-wide osteotome. The periosteum over the proximal tibia was elevated, and a blunt retractor was inserted posteriorly around the bone. Under fluoroscopiccontrol, the proximal bone cut was made 1.5 cm distal and parallel tothe joint line above the tibial tubercle using an oscillating saw and broad osteotomes. The distal bone cut angled toward the first one was made similarly, removing a 10-mm bone wedge edge while preserving an intact medial cortical hinge. Valgus stress was applied to the knee to close the osteotomy, and stable fixation was achieved with a 4.5mm basic fragment L-plate ( and ). A suction drain was used but the tourniquet was not released before wound closure, as that was not standard practice in our institution. On the 1stpost-operative day, the patient presented with an active ankle dorsiflexion deficit but maintained active toe flexion and extension and showed no neurologic deficits. The capillary refill time was <2 s, and he had palpable distal pulses. The suction drain had collected 650cc of hematic fluid. He was diagnosed with partial common peroneal nerve palsy, and a Boxia-type ankle-footorthosis (AFO) was applied. On the 7th post-operative day, the patient complained of increasing pain and edema in is leg and de novo active toe extension deficit. Distal pulses remained palpable. Imaging studies revealed a pseudoaneurysm of the infra-articular popliteal artery just before the emergence of the anterior tibial artery at the osteotomy site(, and ). The pseudoaneurysm was subsequently excised and the vessel repaired using an interposed saphenous vein graft between the infra-articular popliteal artery and the tibioperoneal trunk. The anterior tibial artery was deemed irreparable and had to be ligated. Fasciotomy of the anterior leg compartment was performed at the same operative time. There was no observable section of the tibial or proximal common peroneal nerves. Six weeks after the previous vascular surgery, the patient had surgery again to correct another pseudoaneurysm that had developed in the infra-articular popliteal artery, 3mm proximal to the anastomosis. It was excised with no need for further revascularization procedures. This surgery was complicated by wound dehiscence and infection by methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus with the need for intravenous antibiotics and two further surgical debridements in the following months. Nevertheless, the osteotomy healed uneventfully and the infection resolved after removal of the osteosynthesis plate 4, 5months after index surgery ( and ). Basal electromyography performed 3 months after the index procedure revealed a complete lesion of the common peroneal nerve with a total denervation pattern. Serial electromyographic evaluations revealed severe compression neuropathy of the common peroneal nerve but showed neurophysiological signs of reinnervation, with the active voluntary activity of all the muscles (severe axonotmesis). At final follow-up (24 months), however, the patient maintained the foot drop with the need of an AFO for ambulation and chronic diffuse lower leg pain. The knee showed satisfactory function with no inflammatory signs and 0–120° range of motion. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate and serum C-reactive protein level were within normal values. The ankle–brachial index was 1.00 on the right, and 0.89 on the left and distalpulses were present.