A 12-month-old female with no significant medical history presented to the ED with listlessness four days following one day of resolved gastrointestinal symptoms. Her symptoms began after ingestion of birthday cake with rose-gold frosting from a local bakery ( and ).
Within 20 minutes of cake consumption, the patient experienced six episodes of non-bloody, non-bilious vomiting and several episodes of non-bloody diarrhea. Multiple other guests developed similar symptoms that resolved after several hours.
The patient saw her pediatrician, who suspected a foodborne illness or other toxic exposure and called the regional poison control center, which in turn involved the Department of Health (DOH). The DOH found that only guests who ate frosted cake developed vomiting or diarrhea. Guests who did not eat the cake or ate cake without frosting had no symptoms. The DOH did not report the discovery of bacteria or other infectious agents. The DOH conducted an investigation into the bakery. The cake had been frosted with a rose-gold luster dust labeled “non-edible non-toxic for decoration only” that was mixed into a butter extract and painted onto the cake.
Based on the material safety data sheet provided by the supplier, the luster dust contained elemental copper. Chemical testing of the luster dust and leftover frosted birthday cake was performed by the state health laboratory. The cake frosting contained 21.1 milligrams (mg) of copper per gram. Each cake slice was estimated to contain 40 grams of frosting. Thus, each slice contained approximately 900 mg of copper. For comparison, beef liver, a copper-rich food, contains 0.157 mg of copper per gram, or 17 mg of copper for a 4-ounce portion. The DOH reported that the symptoms, timeline of illness, and laboratory evidence were consistent with copper poisoning from cake frosting.
The investigation results were released four days after the patient’s exposure to the copper-contaminated cake. On the same day, she developed listlessness, poor oral intake, and what the parents thought was a facial droop. The pediatrician was concerned these symptoms could be due to ongoing copper toxicity. After consultation with the regional poison control center, the patient was referred to the ED.
The patient’s ED vital signs were temporal temperature 36.9 degrees Celsius; heart rate 130 beats per minute; respiratory rate 40 breaths per minute; blood pressure 93/77 millimeters of mercury, and oxygen saturation 95% on room air. Physical exam showed a happy, interactive child with normal pulmonary, cardiac, abdominal, neurologic (no facial droop or focal neurologic symptoms), and skin examinations. The regional poison control center was contacted to discuss management given the concern for copper toxicity. A comprehensive metabolic panel and complete blood count were normal. A nasal swab was positive for rhinovirus/enterovirus. Copper and ceruloplasmin levels were sent. Given the patient’s well appearance, normal vital signs, normal laboratory results, and the unlikely possibility of copper-related delayed neurologic effects, no chelation was started pending copper studies. The patient was admitted to the hospital for observation.
On hospital day two, the patient’s total serum copper level resulted at 97 micrograms per deciliter (mcg/dL) (reference range 85–185 mcg/dL) and her ceruloplasmin level was 22 mg/dL (reference range 20–60 mg/dL). Her calculated non-ceruloplasmin bound or free copper level was elevated at 31 mcg/dL (reference range 0–10 mcg/dL). Her physical exam remained normal. No chelation therapy or other interventions were initiated, and she was discharged home.
One month later, she was seen in the pediatric environmental health clinic. Her parents reported that the patient was back at her baseline. She had a normal physical examination and normal laboratory tests including total serum copper of 94 mcg/dL (reference range 70–150 mcg/dL) and free non-ceruloplasmin-bound copper <2.5 mcg/dL (reference range 0–10 mcg/dL).
The bakery was fined and prohibited from using the rose-gold luster dust and any other decoration unless specifically labeled as edible. The DOH visited additional establishments and issued guidance about these products to all bakeries in the state.