A 55 year old Caucasian male with no prior medical history, non-smoker, presented to the emergency department due to left flank pain that was located abruptly, 2 days ago, with progressive aggravation and malaise.
Initial vital signs showed a temperature of 40°C, heart rate of 88 beats per minute, blood pressure of 120/80 mmHg and a respiratory rate of 20 breaths per minute. Physical examination on admission revealed an ill-appearing man, with left-sided costovertebral angle tenderness; he appeared confused and slightly agitated. He had been anuric for 12 hours prior to admission, providing 500 ml of urine after catheterization of his urinary bladder.
Laboratory tests revealed a white blood cell count (WBC) count of 12,100/mm3 with 76% granulocytes, hemoglobin of 15.7 g/dl, platelet count of 173,010/mm3, creatinine level of 1.3 mg/dl and urea of 118 mg/dl. Urine analysis demonstrated numerous WBC and gram negative bacilli.
Ultrasound (US) examination of the abdomen revealed distention of the major calyces and the ureteric pelvis of the left kidney without evidence of urolithiasis. In the following hours the patient slowly deteriorated and became hemodynamically unstable. An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan took place and the patient was carried to the Intensive Care Unit. Free gas was detected in the intra-peritoneal, as well as, in the extra-peritoneal space (see Figure ). The extra-peritoneal collected gas was located mostly in the left side of the posterior peritoneal cavity. Moreover, gaseous extension was imaged in the collecting system of the left kidney, without obvious obstruction (see Figure ).
At laparotomy an extra-peritoneal abscess, located in the left perinephric area, was found and treated with drainage. The patient was treated with intravenous ticarcillin – clavulanic acid (5a+0.2b) g/vial (TIMENTIN/Smith Kline Beecham, Athens, Greece), 4 times per day, for 12 days. Cultures from the blood and urine sample showed the offensive microorganism to be Escherichia coli. The patient had an uneventful postoperative course and during his hospital stay his symptoms resolved completely.