A 63 year-old gentleman presented to the emergency department with non-specific periumbilical pain and nausea. He denied any vomiting, changes to his bowel habits, weight loss, fever or history of similar pain episodes. He was otherwise healthy and had no previous abdominal surgeries. On physical examination, there was some mild lower abdominal tenderness, but no mass was clinically palpable. A computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis with oral and intravenous contrast was done and revealed a heterogeneous appearing mass like lesion in the midline of the pelvis measuring 11.4 × 6.8 × 6.6 cm. It showed peripheral enhancement with central hypodensity. The mass appears to be intimately associated with multiple segments of small bowel in the lower abdomen with no associated bowel obstruction . The initial radiologist impression was suggestive of a possible gastrointestinal stromal tumor. A CT scan of the chest was performed as well and there was no evidence of metastatic disease in the abdominal or thoracic cavities.
The case was discussed in multidisciplinary tumor boards and the consensus was to proceed with surgical resection of the primary tumor. The patient was therefore taken to the operating room for a diagnostic laparoscopy, laparotomy and resection of the mass which was not found to involve the small bowel. During laparoscopic exploration, we did not identify any liver metastases or peritoneal deposits. The mass was occupying the middle portion of the lower abdominal cavity. We elected to convert to an open procedure due to concerns of disrupting the integrity of the tumor during laparoscopic dissection given its large size and weight. It was connected to the greater omentum with a vascular pedicle and slightly adherent to epiploic appendages of the sigmoid colon. An intraoperative flexible sigmoidoscopy was performed and was unremarkable. The mass was not invading any intra-abdominal structures and there was no evidence of metastatic disease. It was resected en bloc with adequate margin on the omental pedicle. The patient had an uneventful recovery and was discharged home on postoperative day three.
Pathology revealed an SFT arising from the omentum. It was described as a finely encapsulated bosselated mass with a rubbery texture and weighed 225 g . Microscopic examination showed a cellular lesion that was not invading the thin capsule with areas of necrosis, which likely represents infarction with a focal histiocytic reaction. The lesion was composed of plump spindled or slightly epithelioid cells in a small, storiform pattern. Nuclei appeared mildly atypical and relatively monomorphic. The mitotic count was less than 4 per 10 high-power fields and no abnormal mitoses were seen, so the lesion did not meet the criteria for a malignant SFT. However, given the fact that mitoses are not rare, it was best considered of unknown biological potential. The lesion was relatively vascular with abundant capillaries and background larger, thin-walled vessels . The pedicle was identified arising from the omentum and showed no evidence of tumor invasion. Immune histochemical staining demonstrated the tumor cells are negative from CD31, ASMA, S100, AE1/AE3, calretinin, desmin and CD117. The tumor was positive for vimentin, BCL-2 and CD34 . CD31 develops the vessels in the background. The very rare tumor cell was positive for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA).
Given the benign nature of the tumor histopathology and the completeness of the resection with negative margins, adjuvant chemo- or radiation therapy was deemed not indicated in multidisciplinary discussions. At 6 months follow-up, the patient remains asymptomatic with no clinical or radiologic evidence of recurrence or metastatic disease. The team agreed that routine surveillance may not be required and imaging and other investigations could be done as needed if the patient develops concerning symptoms or signs on examination.