A 67-year-old Caucasian woman was admitted to an acute inpatient unit of a university psychiatric hospital in February 2023 at the instigation of her son due to worsening psychosis. She has been treated for schizophrenia since she was 20 years old. She studied to be a teacher of German and Slovenian languages, worked as a bank attendant for 30 years, and retired due to chronic psychosis at 51. She had been admitted to a psychiatric hospital seven times prior due to worsening psychosis.
When she was 39 years old, she was admitted to the hospital after a suicide attempt with a gun because of visual and auditory imperative hallucinations with persecutory delusions. She was discharged with flupentixol depot 20 mg/4 weeks and clozapine 25 mg. Five years later, flupentixol depot was discontinued. She was in remission for 11 years, but after clozapine discontinuation, she developed auditory and visual hallucinations with nihilistic delusions of family members being dead. She was admitted to the hospital and discharged with aripiprazole, clozapine, and paroxetine. She was in functional remission (keeping social connections and performing household chores) until 2021 when she again discontinued medications and was admitted to the hospital due to worsening of positive symptoms. At this time, a computer tomography (CT) scan of the brain was performed that did not reveal any atrophy or other pathology. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the brain was not possible due to shrapnel in her body after the suicide attempt. Due to auditory hallucinations and persecutory delusions, clozapine was again introduced in combination with risperidone. Because of the negative symptoms (avolition, blunted affect, social isolation), escitalopram was introduced. She was discharged without positive or negative symptoms. She had regular appointments as an outpatient. Clozapine and risperidone were discontinued at the beginning of 2022 since she was in remission. Later, she was given olanzapine 5 mg due to insomnia. At the beginning of 2023, she abandoned her therapy with olanzapine.
At the current admission, she was admitted to the hospital with thought withdrawal and auditory hallucinations with persecutory delusions. Her mood was depressed with blunted affect. When in remission and on therapy, she was energetic and active, but after she discontinued the therapy, she became anergic, spent her days in isolation in her apartment, and became withdrawn. She was otherwise healthy with no concomitant diseases or treatments/medications. She never smoked or had any history of substance (mis)use.
During this hospitalisation, we repeated the CT scan of the brain, which was similar to that performed in 2021. When she was able to cooperate at neuropsychological testing, it revealed only cognitive symptoms with memory deficits in short and long-term recall and deficits in executive functions (planning) that were attributed to chronic schizophrenia. Blood and urine analyses were normal, and there were no signs of drug abuse. Oral olanzapine was reintroduced , starting at 5 mg on the first day and increasing to 10 mg the following day, along with oral lorazepam in three daily doses, titrated up to 2 mg/day. Four days later, olanzapine was increased to 15 mg, and lorazepam was increased to 3 mg/day. Three days after olanzapine was raised, she was still withdrawn and isolated. Hence, 1.5 mg of cariprazine was introduced. After three days, the dose was increased to 3 mg. Four days after the cariprazine introduction, she was found kissing and stroking another female patient in the ward. Hypersexuality was first considered a part of the disorganisation syndrome of schizophrenia; hence, cariprazine was raised to 4.5 mg. Afterwards, the patient was found masturbating naked in her bed and in the middle of the ward on several occasions. During her stay in the next few days/weeks, she was found naked in her room several times or even came out naked. Even reminded of the inappropriateness, she ignored the reminders and repeated the actions (stroking other patients and even medical stuff), taking her clothes off, walking around the ward naked, and compulsively masturbating.
Since the symptoms did not resolve with cariprazine and olanzapine, we cross-tapered olanzapine for risperidone, but the behaviour continued; consequently, after three days, cariprazine was paused and ended. The hypersexual behaviour stopped/resolved within 72 h. However, some delusions (and possibly auditory hallucinations that she did not confirm) persisted. Olanzapine was raised to 20 mg, however, due to persistent delusions, risperidone was titrated up to 3 mg. Psychosis gradually resolved while the hypersexual behaviour was never repeated. Since the symptoms resolved, no additional tests were warranted after cariprazine withdrawal. The patient was discharged in April 2023, stable, without prominent positive, negative, or disorganisation symptoms, and received olanzapine 20 mg and risperidone 3 mg. Since then she has had regular outpatient follow-ups and is in stable remission with the same treatment. After reviewing the patient’s medical history for past episodes of hypersexuality, we noticed the recurrence of depressed mood with nihilistic delusions and psychomotor retardation, and in addition to antipsychotic therapy, antidepressants were prescribed. Hypersexual behaviour or other ICSs were not described.