A 24-year-old postpartum Pakistani woman was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) of a well-equipped private tertiary care hospital through the emergency department. The presenting complaints were fever, severe abdominal pain with distension about 2 weeks after delivery, and altered levels of consciousness (ALOC) presenting 2 days before admission. She had a high-grade fever, undocumented, without chills and rigors, relieved with medications, and associated with severe generalized abdominal pain. Abdominal pain was sharp, constant, had no aggravating or relieving factors, and was associated with bloating and distension. Over the past 2 days she developed altered mentation in which she was talking inappropriately, not recognizing close family members, and getting drowsier. She was primigravida and had a spontaneous vaginal delivery 2 weeks before this hospital admission, after which she gradually developed the above symptoms. However, she did not have a significant medical history. Family history was also unremarkable. On physical examination, she was pale, tachycardiac (heart rate was 120 bpm), and tachypneic (respiratory rate was 32 breaths/minute). She had a Glasgow Coma scale score of 8/15, so was electively intubated. Her motor examination was unremarkable, while the rest of the neurological exam cannot be accessed due to low mentation. Her cardiovascular and respiratory examinations were insignificant. In the abdomen, examination revealed a soft, distended abdomen with hepatomegaly and positive shifting dullness. There was no tenderness in the abdomen. An investigation was then conducted to determine the cause of her symptoms. Her initial laboratory investigations are presented in Table . Based on her high polymorphic leukocytosis on cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis, it was suspected that she had acute bacterial meningitis. Hence, empirical antibiotics in meningitic doses were given. Despite treatment, her central nervous system examination showed no improvement. She remained comatose throughout her ICU stay.
Moreover, she developed generalized tonic–clonic seizures. Levetiracetam was initiated to control seizures. Her blood biochemistry showed a persistent rise in serum ammonia levels. Three ammonia level assessments showed a gradual increase from 695 µ/dL, 770 µ/dL, to 1300 µ/dL in 3 days . Ultrasound of the liver showed normal liver size, shape, and echo texture, with no evidence of chronic liver disease.
She was kept on a high protein diet to prevent hyperammonemia. A medication to neutralize ammonia was not offered because of nonavailability. She purged with 2–3 stools per day. Lactulose and l-carnitine were given. The nephrology team was taken on board and she had a session of hemodialysis. On the third day of admission, her pupil got fixed. A magnetic resonance imaging of the brain was then done that showed tonsillar herniation .
Despite conservative management and all efforts to control hyperammonemia, she suffered permanent brain damage. Postpartum examination was not performed. We did not perform any tissue biopsy. Genetic testing is not available at our institution. The patient’s family was informed about the guarded prognosis and they decided to withdraw support. The patient succumbed to death after being removed from the ventilator on 4th day of the hospital stay.