A 60-year-old Chinese woman presented with a two-month history of blurred vision and distortion. The patient had been diagnosed with hypertension for eight years and diabetes for two years, without limb or heart abnormalities. There was no history of trauma or eye surgery, and their family history was unremarkable. The best corrected visual acuity was 0.02 OD and 0. 6 OS, with intraocular pressure (IOP) of 23 mmHg OD and 21 mmHg OS. Slit-lamp microscopy showed a mild shallow anterior chamber of the right eye and normal anterior chamber depth of the left eye. Cataract was observed bilaterally, with a cloudy cortex and nucleus. Many pigmented, radially oriented lines on the anterior capsule were observed bilaterally, which were more obvious in the right eye than in the left eye . Therefore, we diagnosed this patient as LAZs.
Fundus examination revealed a right macular hole ( pupillary distance) and a bilateral cup-to-disc ratio of 0.4 without signs of glaucomatous damage. The course and proportion of the bilateral retinal arteries and veins were normal. Optical coherence tomography showed complete loss of the neuroepithelial reflex in the right fovea. Ophthalmic ultrasound biomicroscopy showed the following ocular biometric findings: anterior lens position, anterior rotation of ciliary body, shallowed anterior chamber, and peripheral iris bombe of the right eye .
We then performed vitrectomy combined with phacoemulsification and intraocular lens implantation surgery in the right eye for the diagnosis of macular hole and senile cataract (Additional file ). Many pigmented, radially oriented lines on the anterior capsule were observed bilaterally and the zonule-free zone (ZFZ) was 2.5–3.0 mm wide. During continuous curvilinear capsulorhexis, it was found that the tension and toughness of the capsule were poor. At some of the zonules, the capsule began to tear radially along the fibers. When the peripheral vitreous was removed after posterior vitreous detachment, many radial retinal stripes were found in the nasal peripheral retina . The left eye was carefully examined after the operation. In addition to anterior segment abnormalities similar to the right eye, several deep and shallow retinal stripes were also seen in the inferior and temporal sides of the peripheral retina. The intraocular pressure fluctuated from 19 to 22 mmHg in the three months following the operation.