We describe the case of a 16-year-old white French boy born to unaffected parents in late-1999 following a normal pregnancy and birth. He displayed normal psychomotor development up to 4 years of age, with autonomous walking at 13 months and speech in which he used words and sentences at 18 months.
At 5 years of age he began to show cognitive slowing and graphic difficulties (poor drawing) in kindergarten, as well as motor dyspraxia. Over the next 1.5 years his motor function deteriorated further with the development of cerebellar syndrome, and he began to experience partial seizures primarily affecting his right frontal lobe. These seizures were treated initially using oxcarbazepine, which was replaced after 5 months by lamotrigine due to the appearance of myoclonia. Laboratory analyses for a panel of metabolic diseases revealed normal urine ammonia levels, normal plasma acylcarnitine, normal leukocyte acid hydrolase activities (β-D-galactosidase, hexosaminidases A and B, arylsulfatase A, β-D-mannosidase), and normal copper levels. Chromatographic urine analysis showed normal levels of organic acids and oligosaccharides. G-band karyotype analysis showed normal findings, and an FMR1 gene study ruled out fragile X syndrome.
Follow up at 9 years of age showed further cognitive deterioration, categorized as a frontal syndrome (echolalia, behavioral perseveration) and progressive loss of expressive language. His cerebellar syndrome had worsened, with occurrence of an ataxic gait and dysmetria, and he displayed pyramidal syndrome. He was presenting several epileptic seizures daily. He had also begun to be incontinent for urine and feces.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) did not identify any abnormalities, but an ophthalmic examination revealed vertical supranuclear gaze palsy (VSGP), and analysis of peripheral blood and bone marrow biopsies identified vacuolated histiocytes. Together, these findings prompted biochemical and genetic testing for suspected NP-C in early 2010, which was approximately 5 years before this report. Filipin staining in cultured skin fibroblasts identified cholesterol-rich perinuclear vesicles. Plasma oxysterols (cholestan-3β,5α,6β-triol) have not been tested for this patient. Sequencing of the complete coding sequences and intronic junctions of NPC1 and NPC2 genes was done by Sanger method on genomic deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) extracted from his fibroblasts (used for the filipin test). Two deleterious heterozygous mutations in NPC1 (reference transcript NM_000271.4) were found: p.Arg934* (c.2800C>T) in exon 19 and p.Ile1061Thr (c.3182T>C) in exon 21 . The independent segregation of the two mutations was demonstrated by studying his parents’ DNA obtained from blood samples.
So, he had a typical compound heterozygote NP-C genotype: I1061T/R934X.
Soon after diagnosis he was hospitalized in early 2010 following two episodes of aspiration-related pneumonia. A speech therapist examination identified frequent aspiration of liquids, sialorrhea/frequent drooling, a weakened gag reflex, and slow swallowing and ingestion of solid food. A gastrostomy tube was placed approximately 1 month later. He scored 9/9 (restricted to a wheelchair) on the Hauser Standard Ambulation Index (SAI), 17 out of a possible maximal severity score of 18 on the NP-C disability scale proposed by Iturriaga et al. , and a maximal severity score of 1.0 on the modified disability scale reported by Pineda et al. . A follow-up ophthalmological evaluation was not possible as our patient had complete ophthalmoplegia. His brain MRI findings were normal.
Treatment with miglustat (Zavesca®; Actelion Pharmaceuticals Ltd) was commenced in February 2010, and he received approximately 2.5 years of uninterrupted therapy at a dose of 100 mg three times a day based on his body surface area (as per manufacturer’s recommendations) . At the commencement of therapy he experienced initial, transient abdominal pain and frequent diarrhea that were treated using loperamide 1 mg twice a day. He was initiated on a diet excluding disaccharides following consultation with a specialist dietician, and his feeding and caloric intake have since been monitored regularly by a gastropediatrician.
Electroencephalographic evaluation indicated infraclinical brain function abnormalities (spike waves) predominantly affecting his left temporal lobe. Motor and sensory nerve conduction velocities were normal. His epilepsy appeared to be well controlled in late-2010. He was at that time receiving a combination of sodium valproate (400 mg three times a day; 30 mg/kg/day) and lamotrigine (100 mg in the morning and 50 mg in the evening; 4 mg/kg/day for 16 months). He became seizure free in June 2010, 4 months after beginning the miglustat treatment.
At clinical assessment in May 2012 (approximately 3 years before this presentation), at 12.5 years of age, following approximately 2.5 years of miglustat therapy, a global improvement was recorded. His body weight had increased and he had not experienced an epileptic seizure for approximately 2 years (since May 2010), which seemed to coincide with the time at which good digestive tolerance to miglustat therapy was achieved. He showed improvements in cognition (reacquisition of a few words) and motor function, and was ambulating with a walker, scoring 5 on the SAI: he was able to walk 7.62 m (25 feet) in <20 seconds using a walker. He displayed ataxic, stop-start ambulation, dysmetria, and upper limb apraxia; his ophthalmoplegia remained unchanged. A repeat brain MRI examination showed bilateral atrophy of his cerebellar vermis and diffuse white matter hyperintensities in T2-weighted images . He was therefore scheduled for full clinical assessment in line with international clinical recommendations in order to reassess his miglustat dose based on a judgment of efficacy versus safety.
At further follow up he scored 14 on the Iturriaga et al. NP-C disability scale , and 0.7 on the modified disability scale published by Pineda et al. . Since his body weight had reached 40 kg, corresponding to a body surface area of 1.28 m2, the miglustat dose was increased from 100 mg three times a day to 200 mg three times a day according to the French recommendations for the use of miglustat in children with NP-C.