A 19-year-old male with no significant medical, drug, or family history was presented to the emergency room with the chief complaint of fullness and vague abdominal pain radiating to the pelvic region since 1.5 months ago. Vital signs were stable. There were no typical neurofibromatosis type 1 clinical manifestations such as café-au-lait spots, short stature, or Lisch nodules. Laboratory studies, including complete blood count, coagulative panel, SGPT, SGOT, ALK, were within normal range. A large well-defined retroperitoneal hypodense mass was discovered on the CT scan, causing a mass effect on the bladder wall, preventing the bladder from fully being enhanced after contrast administration (a & b). The patient did not suffer from deep vein thrombosis or other vascular complications on the lower limb ultrasound.
The patient was taken up for exploratory laparotomy. The operation was performed in a general hospital by the primary attending surgeon (with over 20 years of trainee). A well-circumstance lesion with a diameter of 8 cm was discovered anterior to aortic bifurcation and Pelvic splanchnic nerves, applying pressure on the left posterior side of the bladder, inverting into the sigmoid mesentery. Although the tumor adhered closely to the bladder and nerves (hypogastric plexus), it was encapsulated without invading the surrounding tissue allowing easy excision (a & b). Only one group of nerve fascicles entered the cyst, which could not be traced and isolated from the lesion. The cyst and the penetrating nerve fascicle were entirely excised.
Gross examination revealed a sharply circumscribed creamy and soft mass with a smooth external surface, measuring 8 cm in diameter. The cut section was predominantly cystic, filled by clear yellow fluid with an area of the solid component. (4 blocks).
Histopathological examination revealed a benign-appearing neoplastic lesion composed of bundles of cells having band-looking spindle nuclei without any atypical or mitotic activity. Cells bundles were arranged differently, creating palisading patterns in some regions. IHC study by S100 showed diffuse positivity. CD34, SMA-Desmin, CD117, H-caldesmon are negative. Ki-67 showed a low growth rate.
After a two-month follow-up, the patient unexpectedly complained of a sensation of ejaculation without any release of semen. Urine analysis revealed the presence of sperm. Ephedrine and pseudoephedrine were prescribed to the patient. In a three-year follow-up, the patient reported an increase in semen volume.