This is the case of a 23-year-old girl with a history of learning disability since childhood secondary to meningitis; who presented to a regional hospital emergency with a generalized abdominal pain that had been evolving for 2 days. At initial examination; the patient had a clinicobiological presentation of generalized peritonitis. Abdominal ultrasonography showed significant infiltration of the periappendicular fat with intraperitoneal effusion of low to medium abundance. As the patient had signs of septic shock, we decided to operate her through median laparotomy, peritonitis due to appendicular perforation was highly suspected.
Peroperative exploration showed a purulent effusion of average abundance with food debris secondary to a perfoartion of a voluminous tumoral mass of the ceacum. The tumor was fixed posteriorly. It invades the adjascent structures. The palpation of the liver and the right annexe did not find secondary lesions and there were no nodules of carcinomatosis. The right mesocolon was strewn with adenomegaly, the tumor adhered posteriorly to the second duodenum. A right hemicolectomy R2 was performed with ileostomy . The postoperative course was marked by a state of septic shock requiring her transfer to our university hospital and 12 days stay in Intensive Care Unit.
Pathological examination of the surgical specimen concluded to a mesenchymal tumor of stromal origin and the immunohistochemistry allowed the diagnosis of right colon schwannoma .
A thoracoabdominopelvic CT scan performed 2 months later showed a 3.5 × 2.5 cm tumoral residue at right iliac fossa and no secondary site .
This case was discussed in multidisciplinary meeting and the decision was to make a complementary resection of the tumoral residue when restoring continuity (after 3 months from initial surgery). This complement of resection was not feasible since the tumoral residue was invading right annexe; right iliac vessels and right ureter. We had only restore the digestive continuity.
The patient has been followed regularly at our outpatient clinic. Two years postoperatively CT scanning control showed a tissue mass involving the small bowel measuring 13 x 8 x 6 cm corresponding to mesenteric recurrence, with stablity of the old tumoral residue in the right iliac fossa .
Exploratory laparotomy was performed showing a voluminous mass invading the root of the mesentery and multiple parietal nodules . This mass was unresectable given the risk of compromising the residual small bowel’s vascularization. Surgical biopsies of the parietal nodules confirmed their neurofibrmatous nature.
No adjuvant treatment was indicated on multidisciplinary meeting, since the tumor was unresactable and since there is no based evidence medicine indication of raditherapy or chemotherapy.
Otherwise, neurofibromatosis was suspected in our patient, but she didn’t have oncogenetic investigation since lack of major criteria justifying the realization of such relatively expensive investigations.
The 4 year follow-up of the patient didn’t reveal any complications, rather then need to right nephrostomy due to ureter compression by the primary tumoral residue.