A 15-year-old girl was admitted to the People’s Hospital of Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region on July 2015 with symptoms of cardiorespiratory distress and hydrosarca. She had been complaining for 20 days of symptoms of congestive heart failure. On physical evaluation, her body temperature was 36.9 °C; respiratory rate was 24 breaths per min; blood pressure was 109/77 mmHg; and pulse rate was 113/min. She was conscious but showed a poor spirit, facial edema, pale conjunctiva and lips. On chest auscultation, thick breath sounds in both lungs and mild moist rales in both lower lung lobes were heard. On palpation, a precordial tremble and strong apex beat was noted, while listening found relative cardiac dullness and massive murmurs starting in the systolic phase and extending up to the end of diastole in the precordial area. Other findings included an enlarged liver, positive jugular vein reflux, and edema lower limbs.
Laboratory data showed albumin hypoproteinemia (29 g/L; normal reference range 40–55 g/L) and elevated plasma levels of N-terminal fragment of brain natriuretic peptide (NT-pro-BNP: 286 pg/mL; normal level < 80 pg/mL). Serum CA-125 (tumor marker) level was elevated (164.3 ku/L; normal level, 35 ku/L) . Electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm. Brain computerized tomography was unremarkable. Thoracic radiogram showed cardiac dilatation, right lower pneumonia and pleural effusion. Transthoracic echocardiogram revealed multiple cardiac masses; a large right ventricular mass (5 cm × 4 cm) arising from the right ventricle apex was seen to prolapse through the tricuspid valve into the right atrium during systole . Another small mass (1 cm × 0.8 cm) was located at the postcava near the right atrium. A third mass (1.5 cm × 1 cm) was located in the left ventricular outflow tract . The left ventricle was not dilated and showed normal ejection fraction. Mild pericardial effusion was also noted.
These findings were highly suggestive of multiple myxomas, although the diagnosis of vegetation or thrombus could not be excluded. Thoracic computerized tomography indicated a widened frontal film and pericardial effusion. Multiple low density well-delineated shadows were seen (size of the largest mass: 5.5 cm × 3.8 cm; Fig. ). Consistent with these findings, positron emission tomography (PET) also revealed widened heart outline, especially that of the right ventricle. An irregular low-density but well-delineated shadow was observed in the right ventricle. A fluorodeoxyglucose test revealed an enhancement pattern suggestive of a benign lesion , and likely a mucous tumor. No obvious malignant tumor was identified during the workup.
For about 2 weeks, the patient’s heart function and nourishment improved prior to the operation. Under general anesthesia, the chest was opened with a median sternotomy. The patient was placed on cardiopulmonary bypass; under cold blood cardioplegic arrest, the right atrium was opened widely. A massive red thrombus was seen clearly in the auricula dextra, pectinate muscles of the right atrium and postcava opening near the right atrium. A 60 mm × 45 mm red tumor was found in the right ventricle after removal of the thrombus. The tumor had prolapsed into the right atrium through the tricuspid valve . Examination of the left ventricular cavity through the aortic root revealed two small pedunculated tumors (1.5 cm × 0.5 cm and 0.6 cm × 0.4 cm) with narrow pedicles arising from the left ventricular outflow tract. The tumors were excised through an aortic valve approach with a 10 mm margin. All tumors were removed successfully and the tricuspid valve was repaired.
The combined size of all tumors approached approximately 6.5 cm × 4.5 cm × 3.0 cm; the gross appearance was that of a jelly like mass with hemorrhagic areas . Pathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of multiple cardiac myxomas . During the 10 months follow-up, the patient was asymptomatic and had normal blood pressure. There were no signs of echocardiographic recurrence or valvular insufficiency.