A 42-year-old man presented to our institution with left leg pain. His past medical and social history were unremarkable and he was not on any medicine. Two days prior, he sustained a bruise on his left lower leg after playing futsal. He had no other symptoms. The following day, he complained of pain in that area, leading to a consult and this admission.
On admission, compartment syndrome was suspected; he was then admitted to orthopaedics. His left gastrocnemius muscle was swollen and painful, and MRI showed inflammation and swelling of his gastrocnemius muscle. Orthopaedic surgeons judged that the muscle was injured and admitted the patient for follow-up.
On the third hospital day, he had exertional dyspnoea on ambulation, progressing to severe respiratory distress. His oxygen saturation was approximately 80%; pulse rate, 130 beats per minute; and blood pressure, 85/45 mmHg. shows his arterial blood gas analysis results. Pulmonary thromboembolism had been initially considered; however, computed tomography (CT) was negative. On repeat thorough physical exam, purpura and epidermal swelling were noted on his left thigh . He was transferred to the ICU for circulatory and ventilatory support, and continuous hemodiafiltration. shows his laboratory results on the 1st and 3rd hospital days.
Fascial biopsy and Gram staining demonstrated Gram-positive cocci. The patient was diagnosed with necrotizing fasciitis. Antibiotics were started as follows: piperacillin sodium 12 g/day and clindamycin phosphate 2.7 g/day. He also received immunoglobin 10 g/day. However, surgical management was postponed due to poor surgical tolerance.
On improvement, left hip transection and trunk debridement were done on the 7th hospital day. He was extubated on the 11th hospital day and withdrawn from CHDF on the 24th hospital day. Additional debridement and skin grafting were performed. The patient continued to improve clinically until he was discharged on the 157th hospital day. Follow-up is still ongoing.
Group A Streptococcus was detected in all of the specimens collected on the 3rd hospital day: left gastrocnemius fascia, blood, and pharyngeal ulcer. DNA was extracted from all cultures, cleaved with Sam I, and analysed with the pulse field (SRL, Inc.) electrophoresis . All bacterial isolates from the three specimens were genetically identical.