A 63-year-old asymptomatic man with a history of ulcerative colitis was referred to our hospital because of an abnormal ground-glass lung nodule. The ground-glass nodule had been detected by chest computed tomography (CT). During 2 years of close follow-up, the nodule had gradually increased in size. CT finally showed a part-solid ground-glass nodule measuring 19 mm (the solid component measured 8 mm) in the left lingular segment, which raised suspicion for malignancy . 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) showed hypometabolic activity (maximum standardized uptake value, 2.1). Distant metastases were not detected by whole-body CT or FDG-PET. The patient was suspected to have early-stage lung cancer (cT1aN0M0-IA1). Surgical resection was indicated.
Considering the tumor size and location, we decided to perform left lingular segmentectomy and lymph node dissection with the aid of a robotic system. The preoperative CT image suggested an incomplete interlobar fissure . The three-dimensional CT image was reconstructed by SYNAPSE VINCENT software (Fujifilm Medical, Tokyo, Japan). The lingular pulmonary artery (A4 + 5) completely branched from the interlobar pulmonary artery . The patient had a common trunk of the pulmonary vein . We adopted a fissureless segmentectomy technique to minimize persistent air leakage. We planned to sequentially dissect the pulmonary vein, segmental bronchus, and pulmonary artery from the anterior hilum. After division of the vascular and bronchial structures, we planned to finally divide the interlobar fissure and intersegmental plane with mechanical staplers.
The surgery was conducted via four incisions and one assist incision. Four robotic ports were placed in the eighth intercostal space. The assist port was placed in the fifth intercostal space on the anterior axillary line. Prior to docking of the robotic system, we initially confirmed no pleural effusion, pleural dissemination, or adhesion under thoracoscopy. We also identified the tumor location using finger palpation. The da Vinci Xi Surgical System (Intuitive Surgical, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) was docked. We dissected the anterior hilum and exposed the pulmonary veins. Although this patient had a common trunk of the pulmonary vein, we were able to identify V4 + 5 based on the tumor location . V4 + 5 was exposed. V3 was partially exposed and taped to confirm both V4 + 5 and B4 + 5. V4 + 5 was dissected by a robotic stapler (Additional file ). Because we knew that B4 + 5 branched immediately behind V4 + 5 based on the preoperative CT image, we exposed and taped B4 + 5 . To confirm that the taped segmental bronchus was indeed B4 + 5, the console surgeon performed bronchoscopy and correctly identified B4 + 5 (Additional file ). In addition to endobronchial confirmation of B4 + 5, we were also able to recognize B4 + 5 from the surgical field with the aid of the Firefly fluorescence image mode (Intuitive Surgical) . Under the Firefly mode, the light at the tip of the bronchoscope turned green . B4 + 5 was dissected by a robotic stapler (Additional file ). We then carefully exposed A4 + 5 branching from the interlobar pulmonary artery . A4 + 5 was also transected by a robotic stapler (Additional file ).
The resection line was designed to obtain a surgical margin . In the area around the tumor, we planned to concomitantly resect part of the anterior segment of the lower lobe (S8) to secure a surgical margin because the tumor was near the interlobar fissure . After division of part of the interlobar fissure, 4 mL (10 mg) of indocyanine green (ICG) was injected intravenously to identify the interlobar fissure and intersegmental plane. The surgical field was visualized with the Firefly fluorescence image mode . The interlobar fissure line and intersegmental line were identified as the border separating the green lung parenchyma (remaining parenchyma) from the dark lung parenchyma (resected parenchyma) . The lung parenchyma was divided by mechanical staplers as planned (Additional file ). The main branch of V3 was preserved. We achieved extended lingular segmentectomy using the fissureless approach. We obtained a surgical margin of more than 2 cm. The frozen section diagnosis of the resected specimen was adenocarcinoma. We subsequently conducted systematic lymph node dissection. The whole surgical time was 218 min, and the console time was 134 min. Only slight blood loss occurred. The chest tube was removed on postoperative day 3, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 7.
The patient developed no complications such as persistent air leakage. The final pathological diagnosis was invasive adenocarcinoma with an invasion size of 8 mm and total size of 15 mm. The pathological stage was p-T1aN0M0. The patient was alive without recurrence 1 year postoperatively.