A 57-year-old male patient was admitted to the hospital with complaints of malaise, poor appetite, and epigastric pain with black stools. Physical examination of the patient revealed that he was pale, abdominal palpation revealed epigastric tenderness and cardiac murmurs could be heard on cardiac auscultation. He had a previous history of H. Pylori infection and gastric ulcer for more than a year and was treated with standard anti-H. Pylori treatment for a fortnight. Laboratory tests: RBC 2.57 × 1012/L, hemoglobin 50 g/L, C-reactive protein 41.5 mg/L, mean corpuscular volume (MCV) 73.7 fL, mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH) 22.3 pg, mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC) 303 g/L, albumin 28.40 g/L, transferrin 15.5 µmol/L, and iron 6.33 µmol/L. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed a spherical/flat mass in the left atrium growing convexly into the left atrium , together with a cauliflower-like mass–like thickening of the gastric wall of the lesser curvature of the stomach growing into the gastric cavity . 18 F-Fluorodeoxyglucose (18 F-FDG) positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) showed (1) an enlarged left atrium with a faint mass of increased metabolism, the nature of which was to be determined ; and (2) a mass at the junction of the gastric antrum and body growing toward the lumen of the stomach, with increased metabolism in the adjacent gastric mucosa, which we considered a highly differentiated gastric cancer or benign lesion . Cardiac ultrasound showed a hypoechoic mass of undetermined nature at the top of the left atrium . Electronic gastroscopy showed a polypoid mass with a surface erosion of approximately 3 × 4 cm in size at the lesser curvature of the gastric body ; the mucosa was seen to be red and white at the gastric sinus, and its mucosal elevation near the greater curvature of the stomach was approximately 2.0 × 1.5 cm in size . Gastroscopic biopsies of the gastric body’s polyps and the gastric sinus’s mucosa were taken five times each, revealing the presence of inflammatory necrotic material and chronic superficial inflammation of the gastric mucosa. A multidisciplinary team consultation was carried out on this patient. Based on the PET/CT results, it was inferred that the cardiac mass, whose nature was currently unclear, was considered to be homologous to the gastric mass, while distant metastases to other vital organs of the body, such as the lungs, liver, and brain, could be excluded. Temporary anticoagulation with 4000 U low-molecular-weight heparin calcium subcutaneously q12h was given to prevent thrombosis. As the patient had gastrointestinal bleeding symptoms and anemia was considered grade 4 according to the World Health Organization classification, we finally decided to deal with the gastric mass first, then the cardiac mass after the patient’s anemic state had recovered after the gastric surgery.
The patient underwent laparoscopic Billroth II subtotal gastrectomy and Braun’s gastrointestinal reconstruction under general anesthesia. Microscopically , scattered spindle-shaped tumor cells with cellular anisotropy and abundant, red-stained cytoplasm were observed, with a sporadic mitotic figures (1–2 per 10 HPF). The tissue was infiltrated with inflammatory cells, mainly lymphocytes, with a mucus-rich and hemorrhagic interstitium. Immunohistochemistry showed that the tumor cells were positive for Desmin and β-catenin but negative for Actin, S-100, EMA, ALK, CD68, Dog-1, and CD117. The Ki-67 proliferative activity index of tumor cells was 5%. The mouse double minute 2 (MDM2) fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) assay was positive for tumor cells, that is, MDM2 gene amplification. Taking these results together, we considered the patient’s stomach tumor IMT. The patient recovered well after surgery.
To avoid more serious complications, such as thrombosis and inflow obstruction, we performed cardiac tumor removal under general anesthesia on the 46th day after gastric surgery due to the continued growth of the cardiac mass. During the surgery, we found that the tumor was broad basally and could not be eradicated, so we had to excise as much of the mass as possible along the tumor’s root and cauterize the cut edge with an electrotome. Postoperative review of contrast-enhanced CT of the chest showed an oval tumor (4.8 × 3.2 cm) in the left atrium with a broad base in close contact with the posterior wall. Postoperative pathology showed large, round, polygonal, and spindle-shaped tumor cells with thin and coarse nuclear chromatin, cellular pleomorphism, and a higher density of mitotic images (30 per 10 HPF) than that observed in stomach-derived masses. Immunohistochemistry showed that the tumor cells were positive for Vimentin , MDM, SMA, Bcl-2, Ki67, and CD99 and negative for TLE1, S-100, STAT6, CD34, ALK, CK-Pan, CD68, and ERG. The Ki-67 proliferative activity index of tumor cells was 10%. Therefore, the patient’s heart mass was also diagnosed as IMT. The patient was discharged from the hospital with an average postoperative recovery.
The patient has treated with doxorubicin 70 mg of D1 chemotherapy two months after cardiac surgery. He had a repeat chest CT 3 months after cardiac surgery, which showed an oval-shaped hypodense tumor in his left atrium that was larger than before (5.5 × 3.8 cm). Finally, he refused further treatment and died one month after the review.