A 46-year-old male psychiatric patient presented to the emergency department in septic shock and diffuse abdominal pain from a suspected intra-abdominal source. His past medical history revealed schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, poor compliance with medications, poly-substance abuse, and chronic back pain on outpatient opioid therapy. Symptoms started about 1 week prior to arrival. The septic shock manifest with tachycardia and hypotension. His abdomen was diffusely tender without distension. On digital rectal exam no masses, objects, or blood was appreciated. His white blood cell count was found to be 27,000/μL. CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis revealed a rectal perforation with pneumoperitoneum and the presence of air in the perineum and right buttock tissues [, , , ]. He had a foreign object, consistent with a screwdriver in his rectum. Fluid resuscitation was started along with broad-spectrum antibiotics and taken to the operating room. He underwent attempted digital rectal and proctoscopic removal of the foreign object but it was unsuccessful. Blood was encountered in the rectal vault with extensive hard feces during proctoscopic examination. An exploratory laparotomy was then performed which revealed that the sharp metallic shank end of the screwdriver had perforated the rectosigmoid junction and entered the right perineum and buttock. Resection of the perforated rectum with removal of the screwdriver, was performed . Due to the septic shock state of the patient, as he required vasopressor medication support and ongoing volume resuscitation during the case, and also had extensive fecal contamination of the abdomen, he was left in intestinal discontinuity and a abdominal wound vacuum dressing was placed. An incision and drainage of a large right buttock abscess was also performed. The patient had ongoing resuscitation in the SICU. He stabilized and was taken back 2 days later for a planned second re-laparotomy, and a proximal end diverting colostomy was performed. The right buttock wound had further necrotizing soft tissue infection was again debrided and another vacuum wound dressing was placed in this cavity.
Our case is unique as intraoperatively we identified a perforation at the rectosigmoid junction from the working end of the screwdriver. This lead to a necrotizing right gluteal infection with subsequent surgeries for debridement and irrigation. The patient recovered and was discharged to Behavioral Health for inpatient treatment of his psychiatric disorders. At 2 weeks follow up the patient was doing well with a functioning ostomy and ostomy reversal was planned.