A 70-year-old man, who did not have any history of diabetes mellitus, long-term steroid use, abnormalities in the immune system, or long-term urinary catheter use and a normal digital rectal examination result, had elevated serum prostatic specific antigen (PSA) level of 13.3 ng/mL. Because of the elevated serum PSA level and stomach cancer, the patient underwent a transrectal ultrasound needle-guided prostate biopsy and a pylorogastrectomy on the same day. Before the procedures, the patient received a rectal enema and an oral fluoroquinolone antibiotic.
The transrectal ultrasonography indicated a gland weighing 60 g without any abnormalities. The patient underwent an uneventful 12-core prostate biopsy. However, after 4 days, the patient developed a fever (body temperature, 101°F) associated with gross hematuria. The patient was noted to have a white blood cell count of 10500 cells/mm3, a hemoglobin level of 9.7 g/dL, a platelet count of 17.8 × 104/mm3, and a C-reactive protein level of 14.8 mg/dL. The urinalysis result demonstrated more than 50 white blood cells/h.p.f. Urine and blood culture specimens were obtained. On a bladder scan, a post-void residual urine volume of 350 mL was noted. Acute prostatitis was diagnosed, and intravenous meropenem therapy was initiated. Despite the administration of the antibiotic, the patient’s body temperature was still 104°F. Subsequently, a plain radiograph of the abdomen and a computed tomography (CT) image of the abdomen and pelvis (with and without intravenous contrast) were obtained. The plain radiograph of the abdomen revealed a nonspecific gas pattern and a small amount of air in the true pelvis in the shape of the bladder (Figure ).
The diagnosis of EC was confirmed on the CT image, which revealed the presence of extensive gas within the wall of the urinary bladder (Figure ).
The blood and urine cultures were positive for pan-sensitive Escherichia coli. A urinary catheter was then inserted for draining the bladder. Despite these maneuvers, the patient developed disseminated intravascular coagulopathy (DIC) and acute respiratory distress syndrome, requiring transfer and monitoring in the intensive care unit. The patient’s antibiotic treatment was changed from ciprofloxacin to vancomycin. In addition to the standard supportive procedures, patient therapeutic regimen of danaparoid sodium and sivelestat sodium hydrate was initiated. After 20 days of conservative management, the patient’s condition improved, and on hospital day 28, the patient was discharged to home in a stable condition. After 1 year, the patient did not report any sequelae from the EC.