A 64-year-old man with a history of hypertension and structurally normal heart was referred to our center for the treatment of persistent atrial fibrillation refractory to Class Ic antiarrhythmic drug. RF ablation procedure was performed with a 3.5 mm irrigated tip catheter (Navistar Thermocool, Biosense Webster, Diamond Bar, CA, USA) via nonsteerable transseptal sheath, navigated by electroanatomic imaging (CARTO 3, Biosense Webster) and facilitated by intracardiac echocardiography (AcuNav, Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen, Germany). Pulmonary veins were isolated and extensive LA ablation was performed including roof line, MI line and ablation of complex fragmented atrial electrograms in LA and CS. Atrial fibrillation converted to a clockwise perimitral flutter. However, we were not able to terminate flutter by further ablation and also the attempt to achieve electrical block at the MI after DC cardioversion failed when using our standard RF setting of 30–35 W with the irrigation flow of 20 ml/min (Cool Flow pump, Biosense Webster) at LA endocardium and 20–25 W with the irrigation flow of 30 ml/min within the CS with a temperature limit of <40 °C (EP Shuttle, Stockert, Freiburg, Germany).
Three years after the index procedure, the patient started to suffer from the recurrence of persistent atrial tachycardia. At the second ablation procedure, durable isolation of all pulmonary veins was confirmed and the mechanism of the atrial tachycardia was established as a double-loop reentry with a counter-clockwise circuit around the mitral annulus and clock-wise circuit around the left pulmonary veins. After a significant effort we succeeded to finalize a bidirectional block at both LA roof and MI lines.
Despite this result, the patient experienced a recurrence of persistent atrial tachycardia one year later . The LA roof was reablated and the conduction block was easily restored. Based on electroanatomic activation and entrainment mapping, a residual atrial tachycardia was clockwise perimitral flutter. Ablation of posterior portion of the MI from both the endocardium (with very low-voltage fragmented far-field electrograms) and within the CS (with virtual absence of local signals) with cumulative RF time exceeding 800 s only slightly prolonged the cycle length of tachycardia . There was a considerably large non-accessible space between LA endocardium and CS according to electroanatomic map which indicated a significant bulk of interposed tissue (with estimated endo-epicardial distance of minimum 11 mm, Fig. ). This anatomy prevented elimination of deeply embedded slow conducting channel, probably around the vein of Marshall. The distance of 11 mm might have been even underestimated due to anatomy distorsion because of contralateral tissue compression/dislodgement by the mapping catheter. At this stage of the procedure, we decided to convert to bipolar RF ablation.
We used a second 3.5 mm irrigated tip ablation catheter (Celsius Thermocool, Biosense Webster) which replaced the diagnostic decapolar CS catheter. It was connected to a purpose-made switchbox in order to display the local electrograms and to connect catheter tip as a return electrode to the RF generator instead of dispersive patch. The catheter was visualized in real time by impedance-based method of CARTO 3 system, navigated via CS to the MI level and deflected toward the LA wall. The Navistar Thermocool was positioned endocardially to the posterior portion of the MI where low-voltage fragmented far-field electrograms were tagged prior to unipolar ablation . Of note, no local signals were visible at both ablation sites due to prior extensive ablation at the MI and development of local edema . We set the RF power to 30 W with the single-pump irrigation flow of 60 ml/min which was equally distributed to both ablation catheters with an assumption of identical resistance of the irrigation systems.
After 25 s of RF energy delivery (with an impedance drop of 30 ohms), the tachycardia terminated and sinus rhythm was restored . At the same time, bidirectional conduction block was achieved as assessed by differential pacing criteria. Safety bipolar burns (cumulative RF time of 100 s) were applied to the close vicinity of the success site. After waiting time of 20 min, conduction block persisted and other arrhythmias were not inducible by atrial burst pacing up to the cycle length of 200 ms. Patient did not experience the recurrence of atrial tachycardia during the follow up of 10 months.