Our patient was a 9-year-old Arab boy who had had SDNS since the age of 5 years. Because of several relapses over the previous 4 years, and in an effort to spare steroid use and its long-term use complications, the patient was treated with levamisole. His family history revealed that his parents are nonconsanguineous and his father works as a taxi driver. Levamisole was initially well tolerated except for mild isolated and persistent neutropenia (absolute neutrophil count of 1400 cell/mm3), which had occurred 6 months after levamisole introduction. The patient had no history of cocaine exposure. Viral infections were ruled out (cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, and parvovirus B19). Because the patient’s neutrophil count remained stable and he was in sustained remission, levamisole was maintained at the same dosage (2.5 mg/kg every other day). Six months later, he developed nonspecific lichenoid eruptions on both ears and the left cheek, compatible with cutaneous vasculitis [Fig. ]. Upon a physical examination, the patient was found to be alert, with vital signs of blood pressure 100/50 mmHg and body temperature 36.7 °C. His heart sounds were regular and rhythmic with a heart rate of 80 beats/min. The result of a neurological examination including sensory and motor responses, especially reflexes, was normal. The boy’s lungs were clear and resonant. His liver and spleen were moderately enlarged. He had lichenoid eruptions on both ears and his left cheek. Ultrasound of the abdomen revealed HSM with liver and spleen lengths of 14 cm and 13 cm, respectively. Mild anemia (hemoglobin 9.7 g/dl) was detected 3 months prior to the appearance of skin lesions. The patient’s kidney function was normal with a creatinine level of 60 μmol/L. Liver function tests reflected by aspartate aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase showed slightly elevated levels of 120 IU/L (normal range 5–60 IU/L) and 50 IU/L (normal range 7–40 IU/L), respectively, and a normal alkaline phosphatase level of 60 IU/L.
Immunological investigation revealed an increased positive ANCA count of > 1/640, with negative antinuclear antibodies. Serum complement levels (C3, C4, and CH50) were normal. At this point, levamisole was discontinued. He remained in remission, and his skin lesions disappeared 1 week later. His neutrophil count and hemoglobin levels normalized concomitantly. Furthermore, HSM decreased within 1 month following the withdrawal of levamisole, with liver and spleen lengths becoming 11 cm and 8 cm, respectively. His ANCA levels, however, remained positive (> 1:640) for 12 months after drug cessation. Six months after levamisole withdrawal, the patient remained in remission, with normal white and red blood cell counts and absence of HSM . One year after levamisole withdrawal, the patient started to develop frequent relapses requiring the combination of steroids and mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) to ensure remission. The patient was never hospitalized and had ambulatory management. Our patient’s clinical course is illustrated in Fig. , denoting the relationship between levamisole use, discontinuation, and its marked effect on the neutrophil/hemoglobin levels.