Herein, we reported a case of a 57-year-old male patient diagnosed with spondylolisthesis who underwent PLIF at the local hospital. On day 7 after the operation, the patient experienced pain in the right lower limb. On day 17, he consulted the hospital due to abdominal pain and severe pain in the right lower limb. Abdominal distension and ecchymosis in the right side of the waist were observed after a physical examination, whereas the incision was healed in the lower back . On day 20, the patient underwent further examination. A physical examination of the patient showed a positive right leg elevation test results; yet, the abdominal pain persisted. The patient's lumbar X-ray and lumbar CT showed no complications , yet the abdomen CT revealed the formation of psoas hematoma . Coagulation tests indicated the following: PT 16.7 s, INR 1.36, APTT 45.8 s, FIB 4.84 g/L, D-dimer 4.61 mg/L; Blood routine indicated the following: WBC 39.8*10^9/L, RBC 1.88*10^9/L, and Hb 55 g/L. The HR was 121 times per minute, Bp82/47 mmHg, which further suggested a hemorrhagic shock. Doctors did not use any hemostatic drugs in the emergency room. In addition, the patient had abdominal tenderness and rebound pain, and thus was immediately treated with 1 million units of vancomycin as prophylactic anti-infective treatment. Moreover, he received 4 IU/mL allogeneic blood transfusion due to anemia symptoms. Subsequently, a massive mass appeared in the abdomen, as well as signs of bruising at the waist; the patient had a history of lumbar fusion surgery. The abdominal purulent infections and intestinal obstruction were then excluded, after which the patient underwent DSA that indicated the injury to the segmental vessel on the right side of the lumbar vertebral body. The patient then underwent lumbar segmental vessel embolization .
The patient reviewed blood routine and biochemical tips that suggested a poor function of liver and kidney. The doctor suggested the following: (1) considering that his heart rate was 130 times per minute and the blood pressure was 72/45 mmHg, allogeneic blood transfusion was recommended; (2) the combination of insulin and 50% glucose (Option A) or hemodialysis (Option B) injections were recommended to reduce blood potassium (6.7 mmol/L); (3) renal drugs were recommended for his creatinine levels that were 406 μmoI/L; (4) the patient's ALT was 129μ/ L and AST was 132μ/ L, which indicated poor liver function, condition that should be treated; (5) considering that the abdominal swelling in patient was obvious, and the peristalsis was poor, the enteral nutrition trough nasal feeding tube should be increased; (6) based on the abdominal CT results, puncture hematoma drainage under ultrasound was not recommended.
The patient agreed to follow doctors’ recommendations. After receiving treatment, kidney and liver function improved, blood potassium was reduced (4.3 mmol/L); DSA vascular embolization stopped the lower lumbar segmental artery active bleeding. Consequently, 1 million units of vancomycin were used to prevent potential infection. On day 10 after admission, the WBC was 4.2 * 109/L, and the albumin was 23 g/L. The patient then received 10 g human serum albumin as daily supplementation and the albumin levels returned within the normal range. Consequently, the back and leg pain were gradually reduced, and the ecchymosis on the lower waist disappeared. On day 32 after admission, the patient's waist and leg pain were significantly relieved.
At six month after discharge, the patient was reexamined. The abdominal MRI showed that the abdominal hematoma was not completed absorbed ; pain in waist, leg and abdomen disappeared, and the abdominal distension and the right lower limb pain were decreased.