A 54-year-old male was admitted to the hospital for left far-lateral craniotomy and microsurgical clipping of a left posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) aneurysm. He initially presented with vertigo, headache, and intermittent blurry vision. He subsequently underwent a computed tomography scan of his head followed by computed tomography angiogram which revealed an unruptured left PICA fusiform aneurysm measuring 3.9 mm x 3.7 mm. x 3.7 mm.
The patient had a history of well-controlled hypertension, was able to participate in 7–10 metabolic equivalents of task, had a body mass index (BMI) of 28.1 kg/m2, and had an American Society of Anesthesiology (ASA) score of 2. He had no known adverse reactions to anesthetic agents in the past. In the operating room, the patient was induced with fentanyl, lidocaine, propofol and succinylcholine. Succinylcholine was used as a paralytic because its short half-life would enable it to be quickly metabolized to allow for IONM. Orotracheal intubation was successfully performed with a 7.5 mm endotracheal tube and a soft bite block was placed. The patient was maintained under total intravenous anesthesia using propofol and remifentanil and was mechanically ventilated. Following induction and intubation but prior to the procedure start, the patient was placed in the ¾ prone position with the left side up and his head affixed in a three-point head holder. His neck was flexed approximately 10 degrees. He then underwent placement of subdermal needle electrodes for IONM. Electrodes were placed into the left frontalis, orbicularis oculi, orbicularis oris, and mentalis muscles for electromyography (EMG) of the facial nerve. Additional electrodes were placed in the left trapezius muscles for EMG of the accessory nerve, soft palate for EMG of the glossopharyngeal nerve, and tongue for EMG of the hypoglossal nerve. A single 12 mm long electrode was inserted at an approximately 45-degree angle on the left lateral side of the tongue. Additional IONM included somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEP) of the median nerve and brainstem auditory evoked potentials. The surgery lasted approximately 523 minutes, was completed without complication, and IONM demonstrated no apparent injury to the neurological structures.
The patient was extubated successfully and without any evidence of lingual swelling. Approximately 30 minutes later however, the patient was noted to have mild, non-obstructing lingual swelling in the post anesthesia care unit. At that time, he was able to maintain his airway and swallow secretions. On physical exam, there was mild excoriation noted on the left side of the tongue in the area of electrode placement without any obvious trauma, laceration, or bleeding. Approximately one hour later, however, upon transfer to the Neuroscience Intensive Care Unit, the patient experienced progressive difficulty breathing secondary to massive lingual edema . Stridor was not appreciated and there was no swelling noted in the patient’s submandibular or neck area. The patient’s airway was obstructed, and he required emergent placement of a nasotracheal tube. An atomizer was used to anesthetize the right naris, pharynx, vocal cords, and trachea with 7.0-cubic centimeters of 4% lidocaine. A 7.0-millimeter nasotracheal tube was placed in the right naris and was guided without complication into the trachea using a fiberoptic bronchoscope. Correct placement of the nasotracheal tube was confirmed by visualizing the tube above the carina.
Following emergent stabilization, the patient was unable to move the tongue or swallow secretions due to the massive lingual edema. The patient was seen by otolaryngology and fiberoptic examination of the oropharynx revealed the tongue completely occluding the extent of the oropharynx without any visible laceration or bleeding from the tongue. The scope was unable to be advanced to visualize the posterior tongue or vocal cords. He required treatment with eight milligrams of dexamethasone every six hours. Over the following days, the patient was able to regain movement of his tongue and better manage his secretions as the edema decreased. On post-operative day 3, he was successfully extubated, and the dexamethasone dose was tapered and eventually discontinued. No further treatment of the lingual edema was required, and the patient otherwise did well post-operatively.