Due to placenta previa and suspected placenta accrete, a 35-year-old pregnant woman was admitted to the labor and delivery unit of this hospital at the 34 weeks and 5 days of gestation for a planned repeat cesarean section. The patient once underwent a cesarean section for premature rupture of fetal membranes, and the baby was delivered at the 41st week without complications. Afterwards, the patient was diagnosed of “autoimmune disease” because of positive anti-ro-52 anti-body. Dhydroxychloroquine, methylprednisolone and enoxaparin sodium were taken until the 34 weeks and 1 days of gestation, during which the patient's pregnancy was in vitro fertilization. At the 7th week of gestation, the patient had to be sent to a hospital prenatal care center because of a positive pregnancy test. Obstetrical ultrasonography with fetal survey performed after 24 weeks and 2 days of gestation revealed a normal fetal structure, sail-shaped placenta and low placenta situation. Besides, the patient was suggested not to have strenuous exercise and to seek immediate medical attention if vaginal bleeding were to occur. At the 28 weeks and 3 days of gestation, a normal 75 g oral glucose tolerance test result was confirmed. At the 34 weeks of gestation, obstetrical MR with uterus survey revealed a placenta that was positioned anteriorly with complete placenta previa, and possible placenta adhesion or placenta accrete were to occur. At the 34 weeks and 5 days of gestation, at about 03:50 am when the patient was sleeping, a massive blood flow through the vagina occurred without abdominal pain and vaginal fluid. At the same moment, the fetal movement was normal. Finally, the patient came to this hospital and was admitted to labor and delivery. From the examination in the labor and delivery unit: the pulse was 94 bpm (bpm), the oxygen saturation was 99%, the blood pressure was 130 mmHg over 90 mmHg and other vital signs were normal. Fetal heart rate became 145 bpm in a normal and regular rhythm. A speculum examination revealed a closed cervical and a small amount of bright red blood without pooling fluid and active bleeding.
Afterwards, the patient was admitted to the labor and delivery unit for observation. Notably, the patient felt well, but she is obese (weight: 87 kg, height: 156 cm) and is allergy to tinidazole. During daily life, she keeps away from alcohol, tobaccos and any illicit drugs. On the 3rd day after hospitalized, she continued to vagina bleeding, thus, plans were made immediately for a scheduled cesarean delivery considering the fetal and maternal safety. The blood type was B, Rh-positive with negative antibody testing. Hemoglobin level was 12.4 g/dL (reference range, 12.0–16.0), while the hematocrit was 33.9% (reference range, 36.0–46.0). Other laboratory test results were provided in Table .
That morning, the patient had to undergo cesarean section under general anesthesia due to placenta previa, suspected placenta adhesion or placenta accrete. The vital signs were normal under general endotracheal intubation anesthesia with rapid sequence intubation. A total of 175 mg of propofol with 50 mg of rocuronium and remifentanil 80 μg were rapidly infused. Meanwhile, with the help of direct laryngoscopy with clear view of tube passing the vocal cords, a size of 7.0 endotracheal tube was placed. Afterwards, the mechanical ventilation was initiated. Finally, 5% desflurane were inhaled and 0.1 μg/kg/min remifentanil were intravenously injected to guarantee anesthesia maintenance. Under ultrasound guidance, a central venous catheter and a radial artery catheter were inserted. To avoid uterine haemorrhage, bilateral ureteral catheterization under ureteroscopy were positioned. During the surgery, a vertical uterine incision was made through the placenta previa. At the 60 min after injection of the general anesthetic agent, a healthy boy was delivered, and the 1 min and 5 min Apgar scores were 8 and 9, respectively. Twenty units of oxytocin was drip administered immediately, then the placenta previa was removed completely. Luckily, operation went well leaving a structure-completed uterine. Thus, the obstetrician began to shut the abdomen, during which the bleeding was approximately 1500 ml and the hemoglobin level was 9.9 g/dL.
However, at the 84 min after delivery of the infant, as the abdominal fascia was being closed, the patient suddenly behaved ventricular tachycardia up to 196 bpm, and then turned to ventricular fibrillation. At the same time, the patient’s systolic blood pressure drastically fell to 32 mmHg over 22 mmHg, and the pulse became 0 bpm. Besides, oxygen saturation was as low as 60–70%. We immediately adopted cardiopulmonary resuscitation and intravenous lidocaine. Meanwhile, we compressed the chest continuously, and injected epinephrine to boost circulatory system together with using an icecap to protect the brain. About 10 min later, the blood pressure and electrical rhythm were restored, but this condition just maintains for ~ 5 min, and a repeated ventricular fibrillation occurred again surprisingly. Then, we implemented transthoracic echocardiography, while the patient was undergoing active resuscitation, and it revealed acute right ventricular failure, right ventricular dilatation and hypokines, and the EF is only 22%. Considering the marginal hemodynamic status and the severe cardiac dysfunction, together with 30 min cardiopulmonary resuscitation after the cardiac arrest, and large dose of inotropic agents, we chose to perform extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) to support the cardiopulmonary circulation. ECMO is widely utilized in Covid patient with severe pulmonary dysfunction, it provides a new approach for clinical practice [, ]. Meanwhile, after continuous chest compressions and multiple electrical de-fibrillation, on many occasions, the patient can recovery to normal sinus arrhythmia, but few minutes later, ventricular fibrillation repeated occurred alternately. 144 min after delivery of the infant, cardiac arrest recurred again, the pulse decreased to 0 bpm, and oxygen saturation decreased to 60% accompanied by lowered blood pressure to 42/24 mmHg. However, even under continuous chest compressions and multiple electrical de-fibrillation, the heart rhythm was difficult to recover, and the cardiopulmonary circulation was even worse. At that time, patient ventricular fibrillation repeatedly, cardiopulmonary resuscitation had been carried out over 1 h after the first cardiac arrest, and myocardial damage from ischemia was increasing. Moreover, the maternal obesity, physiological anatomy changes in pregnancy with the diaphragm moved up and breast enlargement, resulting in worse and ineffective effect on cardiopulmonary resuscitation. For those reasons, an open chest cardiac massage had to be performed on the patient. After a 5 min administered intrathoracic cardiac compression, the sinus arrhythmia was restored. At the same time, the ECMO equipment started to run successfully, and most of the vasoactive agents could be discontinued, and the vital signs of the patient became stable gradually.
Unluckily, we found that the vaginal bleeding from the uterus were increasing, and the surgical incision began ozzing. The patient’s laboratory results (draw blood from 40 min after the first cardiac arrest).
demonstrated that thrombocytopenia, prolongation of prothrombin time (PT) and activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), hypofibrinogenemia and d-dimer were all significantly extended or increased . The patient was in a disseminated intravascular coagulopathy (DIC) situation. Considering the acute cardiopulmonary failure and disseminated intravascular coagulation which potentially resulted from AFE, and to control the massive haemorrhage and to improve coagulopathy, a hysterectomy was decided rapidly finally. Two hours later, the bleeding was finally controlled gradually.
After 4 h and 40 min of active resuscitation, the vital signs of the patient became stable gradually. By the end of this 8 h surgical procedure, the estimated blood loss was approximately 4800 ml. The blood products the patient received consisted of red-blood-cells-concentrated (24 units), fresh-frozen plasma (600 ml), normal frozen plasma (1600 ml), cryoprecipitate (10 units) and contractinogen (6 g).
The patient was then transported to the intensive care unit (ICU) for further monitoring with intubate and ECMO. Postoperative echocardiography did not indicate any evidence of pulmonary embolism (PE), but the left ventricular systolic function was decreased. Lower extremity Doppler ultrasound showed no deep venous thrombosis (DVT). The laboratory blood returns showed that PT and APTT were prolonged significantly, d-dimer was markedly elevated and platelets were decreased significantly. Chest X-ray was done to find patchy shadow in the left lung field .
Gradually, the patient’s condition continued to improve under the advanced life support with ECMO and continuous renal replacement treatment (CRRT). 1 day after post-operation, the patient recovered her consciousness and could simply give a sign, but the circulatory function was still bad requiring continue to maintain the circulation with ECMO.
Under the support of ECMO, PT, APTT, and INR returned to normal levels gradually. The transthoracic echocardiography showed good recovery of right ventricular function. Fortunately, the ECMO was evacuated on postoperative day 4, and the tracheal catheter was pulled out on postoperative day 6. The patient was subsequently transferred out of the ICU to the medical center after the surgery 30 days, and she went back home without any cardiac complications and neurological sequelae after 90 days of hospitalization.