A 31-year-old Jewish, Mexican woman [body mass index (BMI) = 21.76 kg/m2] and her husband, a 32-year-old Jewish, Mexican man (BMI = 24.5 kg/m2) decided to attend the INGENES Institute in Mexico City for selection of a healthy embryo for a second pregnancy, as her first pregnancy produced a child with LS.
Both parents were presented as fully developed adults with healthy sexual development. Upon the diagnosis of LS, the borne-child mutation in the GHR descendant as deletion of exons 5 and 6 (del5-6) of GHR. Subsequent clinical and molecular analysis of the parents confirmed that they were carriers (heterozygotes) of the del5-6. We proposed an in vitro fertilization (IVF) protocol, complemented with pre-implantation genetic diagnosis (PGT) using monoplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR) targeting the del5-6 mutation present in GHR, as an intervention for healthy embryo selection.
The only relevant history is five years before attending INGENES, the mother had one previous pregnancy, which resulted in a child with LS. Afterward, both patients underwent genetic testing, not at our facility, and were diagnosed as carriers for mutations in GHR that could develop LS.
The mother had no additional medical complications, nor was not taking any medications. For the father, no causes of male infertility were suspected; furthermore, he was healthy. Both parents are Jewish.
IVF and embryo isolation: IVF, embryo biopsy and PGT were performed according to the standard protocols of the INGENES Institute as previously described (Cedillo 2016; Schaeffer 2017). The mother underwent two standard courses of controlled ovarian stimulation (Depot GnRH antagonist, Cetrotide 0.25 mg daily dose, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). Stimulation was prolonged until the diameter of leading follicles was > 18 mm. Afterward, recombinant human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG, Choragon 1000 IU, Ferring Laboratories, Saint-Prex, Switzerland) was administered; then, after 36 h, the oocytes were retrieved with ultrasound guidance. All 14-18 mm follicles were aspirated, and 35 ova were collected (summed total for both stimulations). It was decided to proceed with fertilization and culture.
The ova were fertilized by intracytoplasmatic sperm injection, and 25 embryos were produced. Only morphologically optimal embryos were considered for this study, using the criteria established by the Istanbul consensus Workshop on Embryo Assessment. Eleven embryos presented as good quality (AB/BB) embryos by Embryo day 5 and were biopsied. Using micromanipulation, 10-15 trophectoderm cells per embryo were isolated and placed into a 0.2 μL PCR tube; afterward, the embryos were frozen.
Embryo transfer and pregnancy test: For day 5 biopsied embryos, the resulting blastocysts were cryopreserved using the vitrification technique. The endometrial preparation was carried out with the transdermal application of 17-β-estradiol (Evorel 50; 150 μg/subcutaneous/every 48 h) and the luteal phase support was carried with Utrogestan (300 mg/day/vaginal). Clinical decisions about which and how many embryos to transfer were determined by the Physician and Specialist in Reproductive Medicine with the patient’s approval. Embryo implantation was confirmed on day 14 by β-hCG serum levels >10 mUI/mL or the presence of a fetal heartbeat by ultrasound at 6.5 to 8 wk. All the patient´s demographics, IVF cycle, PGT results, implantation rate, and IVF outcomes (pregnancies and miscarriages) were recorded by the Specialist.
Whole genome amplification and next-generation sequencing: Biopsies were taken from trophectoderm from at-risk LS embryos. For each sample, the whole genome was amplified (WGA) using the SurePlex amplification system (Illumina San Diego, CA, United States) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. WGA products were quantified using Qubit 3.0 Fluorometer (Life Technologies). The library preparation was carried out with the VeriSeq PGS Library Prep Kit (Illumina Inc.). DNA indexing was performed to simultaneously analyze samples from different embryos using the Nextera XT 96-Index Kit (Illumina, Inc.). For library preparation, 5µl (0.2 ng/µL) of each WGA product from each sample were tagmented (tagged and fragmented) by the VeriSeq PGS transposome using the manufacturer's protocol and neutralized by adding 5 µL of neutralization buffer. The tagmented DNA was amplified with Index 1 primers (N701 and N712) and Index 2 primers (S503 and S504) to become the next-generation sequencing (NGS) library via a limited cycle PCR program. Each sample’s NGS library was purified to remove short fragments and primers. Finally, NGS libraries were pooled, denatured with HT1, and loaded to the VeriSeq PGS (Illumina Inc.) sequencing cartridge following the manufacturer's protocol. NGS library was sequenced with a MiSeq apparatus using the MiSeq Reporter Software. Chromosome composition was determined as indicated above.
Determination of GHR mutations presence: Successful WGA was verified by agarose electrophoresis, which revealed an optimal DNA concentration to carry-out the PCR amplification of a 186-bp specific fragment of the deletion breakpoint of exons 5 and 6 of the GHR gene (NM_000163.4, 5p13-p12, MIM+600946) using the primers “5606” and “5662” and according to conditions previously published. These primers would amplify a 186-bp fragment in both homozygous and heterozygous del5-6 genotypes, but not in normal wild-type samples. To distinguish the homozygous (affected) from heterozygous (carrier) del5-6 GHR genotype, a second end-point PCR assay was performed simultaneously with the primers “4947” and “5077” (19)to obtain a 269-bp fragment that evaluates the integrity of exon 5, which is present both in heterozygous del5-6 and wild-type GHR genotypes. These PCR assays were previously validated in genomic DNA samples derived from peripheral blood leukocytes from the unaffected obligate del5-6 heterozygous parents, as well as in their affected homozygous child with LS. All PCR assays were done in duplicate using 60 ng of WGA-derived DNA per reaction from at-risk LS and normal control, embryos (n = 3), the two heterozygous parents and the homozygous LS-affected child (DNA samples were isolated by standard genomic DNA isolation from blood), and water as a control. Amplicons were resolved by agarose gel electrophoresis stained with ethidium bromide and visualized and photographed under ultraviolet light .
Confirmation of implantation and fetus GHR mutational status: Embryo implantation was confirmed on day 14 by β-hCG serum levels > 10 mUI/mL or the presence of a fetal heartbeat by ultrasound at 6.5 to 8 wk. The genomic composition of the fetus was verified and confirmed by applying the same techniques (WGA obtained from amniotic cells and PCR) using amniocytes extracted after 21 wk of the ongoing pregnancy .