A 30-year-old female gravida 2, para 2 + 0, with a prior IUCD placement four years earlier, presented with a six-month history of intermittent abdominal pain of mild intensity, devoid of accompanying nausea, rectal bleeding, or other GI manifestations. The patient reported no history of dysuria, hematuria, dyspareunia, vaginal discharge, or other gynecological symptoms. She experienced regular menstrual cycles and had a cesarean section during her second pregnancy, succeeded by IUCD insertion six months postpartum. The IUCD insertion, executed by an adept practitioner, was without complications. The patient's medical, familial, and social history was uneventful.
The patient was afebrile with normal vital signs. Upon abdominal examination, a mild tenderness was palpable in the left lower quadrant. A vaginal examination yielded no visible IUCD device thread.
Laboratory analysis indicated mild leukocytosis (white blood cell count of 12 × 10 /L) and mild anemia (hemoglobin level of 12.2 g/dL). Other laboratory test results were within normal ranges, and a negative pregnancy test was obtained. A plain abdominal x-ray revealed the presence of the IUCD in the left pelvic region . Abdominal ultrasonography (US) showed no IUCD device within the intrauterine cavity but detected abnormal echogenicity in the peritoneal cavity. Subsequently, an abdominal pelvic computed tomography (CT) scan with contrast was conducted, revealing a hyperattenuating T-shape structure penetrating the posterior wall of the uterus and extending into the ileal wall. Upon discussing the possibility of migrating IUCD with the patient, a decision was made to surgically retrieve the IUCD.
Open surgical repair was performed, revealing a IUCD that had perforated the uterus and partially intruded the ileal wall, approximately 12 cm from the ileocecal valve with the vertical portion exiting through the intestinal wall . The site of perforation was irritated, yet, no evidence of infection or adhesions. The IUCD was cautiously removed, followed by edges limited resection. The opening of the fistula in the proximal and distal ileum segment was about 1 cm in diameter. These were primarily closed with interrupted serosubmucosal sutures in two layers . The uterine perforation site did not require repair.
The patient's postoperative recovery was uneventful, leading to her discharge after 3 days of postoperative recovery without complications. During a 12-month follow-up, there was no recurrence of symptoms. The patient elected for an alternative contraceptive method, and administration of a contraceptive pill was initiated.