A 23-year-old male presented to the Emergency Department of our hospital after a car accident with a low-impact collision. He was of African descent (born in Cameroon) and his past medical history was unremarkable; he did not use any medication, was in good clinical status and conducted an active life, playing in a football team.
At the first medical evaluation, the patient was alert, oriented, and collaborative (Glasgow Coma Scale—GCS 15), eupnoeic, and haemodynamically stable (arterial blood pressure 110/60 mmHg). The physical examination revealed tenderness at palpation of the thorax, cervical processes, left pulmonary base, where the breathing sounds were reduced, and left hypochondrium; he also complained pain on the left knee. The neurologic examination was unremarkable.
The first electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm and normal QRS, S-T segment, and T waves .
The initial lab tests revealed moderate arterial hypoxaemia (PaO2 72 mmHg) and mild anaemia (haemoglobin 12 g/dL); troponin values were in the normal range (TnI < 0.02 μg/L).
The patient underwent an immediate thoraco-abdominal computed tomography (CT), which unexpectedly revealed a large ascending aortic aneurysm (AAA) with a maximum diameter of 61 mm in the suprabulbar portion, accompanied by aneurysmatic deformations of the coeliac trunk (maximum diameter 18 mm) and superior mesenteric artery (19 mm) . Signs of an acute aortic syndrome were excluded. As collateral findings, numerous confluent lymph nodes were observed in the prevascular space, along the internal and external left mammary chains, in paratracheal, infra- and subcarinal regions and at the pulmonary hilum . A small traumatic pulmonary contusion was also noticed at the left infero-posterior lobe, with limited associated pleural effusion.
Complete blood tests revealed previously unknown renal failure (serum creatinine 1.89 mg/dL), and elevation of creatine phosphokinase (674 U/L) and myoglobin (200 ng/mL) levels, with persistently normal TnI values (0.01 μg/L). Complete blood count was normal, with stable Hb values at repeated evaluations, and inflammation markers were unremarkable (procalcitonin 0.06 ng/mL; C-reactive protein < 9 mg/L).
Transthoracic echocardiography confirmed the presence of aortic root dilatation (40 mm at the sinuses’ of Valsalva level), AAA (63 mm in the proximal ascending aorta), and mild-to-moderate aortic regurgitation through a tricuspid aortic valve . Dimensions and function of the right and left ventricles were normal.
Given the stability of the clinical presentation, the patient was admitted to a medical ward for further evaluation.
In the suspicion of aortitis, a complete evaluation of the aorta using magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) was performed, including the cerebral district. At the thoracic level, MRA revealed a homogeneous circumferential thickening of the ascending aortic wall (∼5 mm), without oedema nor signs of dissection; bulbar ectasia, suprabulbar AAA, and mild aortic regurgitation in a tricuspid aortic valve were confirmed. The intracranial vascular system was normal .
A coronary CT angiography showed normal epicardial vessels .
The patient also underwent a functional evaluation through positron emission tomography with 18-fluorodeoxyglucose, which exhibited moderate hypermetabolism in the ascending aortic wall and mild hypermetabolism in carotid, subclavian, iliac, and femoral arteries, compatible with an inflammatory process involving vessels, though no longer intensively active. On the other hand, intensely hypermetabolic areas were highlighted corresponding to lymph nodes, particularly at the right pulmonary hilum .
Main autoimmunity markers (Anti-Neutrophil Cytoplasmic, Antinuclear and Extractable Nuclear Antigen antibodies) were negative and also extensive serological research of possible infectious agents (including Hepatitis-B and -C viruses, Human Immunodeficiency Virus 1–2, Treponema pallidum, Chlamydia trachomatis, Borrelia burgdorferi, Rickettsia conorii, and Rickettsia mooseri) did not show any positivity, with the exception for Quantiferon test (deposing for a previous exposition to Koch Bacillus, without signs of active disease). Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) levels were in the normal range (ACE 55.6 U/L, with reference range 42–138 U/L).
The investigations on renal failure (creatinine levels stabilized in a range of 1.8–1.9 mg/dL) suggested a pattern of tubulointerstitial injury, with high β2-microglobulin levels (3.1 mg/L); morphologically, the kidneys appeared structurally subverted with poor corticomedullary differentiation and diffuse cortical hyperechogenicity at an abdominal ultrasound scan, suggesting a non-recent onset of renal failure. A mild polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia (22.8%) was also highlighted, with increased levels of IgG (17–1 g/L), without monoclonal components at serum immunofixation.
Eventually, the patient underwent a fibrobronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage and transbronchial needle aspiration of the enlarged lymph nodes: the cytologic examination revealed lymphocytes and granulomatous epithelioid cells, organized in non-caseous granulomas. The diagnosis of sarcoidosis with nodal, renal, and vascular involvement was therefore established.
The patient electively underwent valve-sparing aortic root replacement with a vascular prosthesis (straight vascular prosthesis no. 26) and aortic valvuloplasty with remodelling of the sino-tubular junction. Systemic steroid therapy was started just after surgery. The timing of this therapy was a challenging decision: on one side, the unfavourable disease characteristics would recommend a prompt start of steroid therapy, even before surgery; on the other hand, there was no evidence of current active inflammation. Thus, the risk of surgical wound complications under steroid therapy was considered more dangerous and the treatment initiation postponed after surgery (the patient was given methylprednisolone 40 mg daily starting from the 7th postoperative day). The postoperative clinical course was complicated by pericardial effusion, which required subxiphoid drainage. Eventually, the patient was discharged in good clinical status and with a tapering program of steroid therapy on the 13th postoperative day.