A 30-year-old male presented with pain and swelling with 3 discharging sinuses over medial aspect of left ankle of size 15 cm × 10 cm × 10 cm in the past 1 year ( and ). A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography scan of left ankle were done, which showed large expansile lytic lesions with thin bony septations in lower end of tibia extending into medial malleolus and sub-articular region with cortical break in medial cortex and showing adjacent soft tissue extension measuring overall about 12.6 cm × 9.1 cm × 8.1 cm. It was suggestive of a fungating ABC, multiple blood fluid levels in lesion within bone, and adjacent soft tissue component. Few thin bony septations involved soft tissue component. Lower end of fibula appeared normal. No fracture/lytic or sclerotic lesion was noted. Ankle joint appeared normal. Tarsal bones appeared normal; no fracture, lytic, or sclerotic lesions were noted. Talonavicular joint appeared normal. Lateral malleolus appeared normal. The impression was as follows: large ABC in lower end of tibia with cortical break in medial cortex and showing adjacent soft tissue extension. After obtaining a written informed consent from the patient, he was prepared for surgery. Excision of fungating soft tissue with curettage with cementing was done ( and ). The histopathological examination showed multiloculated locules separated by bony septae, irregular cysts, variable in size (0.8–3 cm) filled with blood ( and ). Few solid gray, white areas, hemorrhagic areas, and friable dirty necrotic yellowish white areas were also seen. Sections studied showed tumor composed of solid sheets of ovoid-to-plump spindly mononuclear cells with uniformly distributed osteoclast type giant cells. Stromal cells have vesicular nucleus, prominent nucleoli, less to adequate eosinophilic cytoplasm, and high mitotic activity (18\10 hpf). Nuclear features of osteoclast giant cells are like the background stromal cells. At places, reactive bone formation was noted; large areas of hemorrhage and multiple congested dilated blood vessels with few hemosiderin-laden macrophages were seen. Tumor was reaching up to the overlying skin which was ulcerated. Post-operatively, the patient had undergone vacuum-assisted closure dressing. On post-operative day 1, ankle range of motion exercise was started with full weight bearing walk with walker from day 2. After achieving healthy granulation tissue, the patient was further transferred to plastic surgery department for further wound management in which the patient got a skin grafting done over granulation tissue.