This 77 year old woman was being prepared for an aortic valve replacement and tandem aorto-coronary bypass graft surgery. Under general anesthetic, the anesthetist used a Site-Rite 3 (Bard Access systems, Salt Lake City, UT, USA) ultrasound unit while attempting to access the right internal jugular vein for venous sheath placement. This attempt failed.
The anesthetist then used the same ultrasound unit attempting to access the right subclavian vein for venous sheath placement. Following what was presumed to be successful ultrasound guided venous access, an 8.5 F sheath was implanted. The anesthetist noted an arterial wave-form arising from the sheath tracing. It was presumed that the subclavian artery, beneath the mid-portion of the clavicle, had been inadvertently catheterized. The sheath was left in situ due to concerns about uncontrollable arterial bleeding if it was extracted without the ability to directly compress the arterial puncture site.
The cardiovascular surgeon performed aortic valve replacement and aorto-coronary bypass surgery. Consultation with a peripheral vascular surgeon was sought. The peripheral vascular surgeon suggested that rather than perform a complicated surgical procedure to extract the sheath, i.e. an extensive anterior chest wall dissection and resection, that interventional radiology be consulted about angiography and the possible placement of a stent-graft in the infraclavicular subclavian artery. The cardiovascular surgeon consulted the interventional radiology team.
The patient was transferred to the angiography suite directly from the operating room and remained under general anesthetic. Consent for the procedure was obtained from the patient's family.
Right femoral artery access was achieved and a 6 F groin sheath was placed for angiographic imaging. Injections of the right innominate artery demonstrated a normal infra-clavicular subclavian artery. The 8.5 F sheath was situated with the tip just downstream from the origin of the right common carotid artery within the proximal right subclavian artery. Further angiographic images were obtained in other projections. In addition, the 8.5 F sheath was directly injected with contrast agent in order to determine the exact location of the sheath. Early and delayed angiographic images were acquired.
It was determined that the 8.5 F sheath had actually entered via the ventral aspect of the right subclavian artery just downstream of the origin of the right common carotid artery and had not punctured the more distal infra-clavicular subclavian artery as suspected by the clinical team. There was no evidence of spasm or extravasation of contrast at the site of the catheter entrance into the subclavian artery, or elsewhere. Despite the very proximal entry point of this catheter into the subclavian artery the cardiovascular surgeon had not been able to directly visualize it, or palpate it, during the surgical exploration of the mediastinum.
Right sided pelvic angiography was performed to ensure that the pelvic arterial anatomy would accommodate the placement of a stent-graft. There were no pelvic or distal aortic impediments to stent-graft placement.
The 6 F right femoral artery sheath was removed and a 12 F right common femoral artery sheath was implanted to accommodate the stent-graft. An exchange length Amplatz guide wire was situated with the tip in the right axillary artery. A 70 mm long/12 mm diameter Wallgraft endoprosthesis (Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA) was successfully implanted in the right subclavian artery while the 8.5 F sheath in the subclavian artery was simultaneously extracted.
Immediate post-implantation angiography demonstrated a patent stent-graft and acute occlusion of the right internal mammary artery and the right vertebral artery. There was no evidence of contrast extravasation and no clinical evidence of subclavian artery bleeding. The patient remained hemodynamically stable. The right groin sheath was extracted and groin hemostasis was achieved. The patient was transferred to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) for further care. Right arm and right leg pulses were all palpable and there was no clinical evidence of hemorrhage.
The patient spent 3 days in the ICU and was then discharged to the ward. She recovered with no evidence of peripheral vascular or neurologic sequelae. She was discharged from hospital to further convalesce 3 days after leaving the ICU.