In December 2017, a 57 year-old male was referred to the Oral Medicine Department of Dental Faculty of Babol University of Medical Sciences. The chief complaint was a massive and rapidly growing swelling in his left maxillary alveolar ridge after tooth extraction a month before. The lesion was a sessile exophytic mass with lobular surface which was erythematous in some areas. He also complained from spontaneous bleeding and tenderness. The whole lesion measurements were approximately 5cm x 5cm. The involved teeth including left maxillary canine and lateral incisor had mobility grade III .
Based on his own statements, the patient was considered as a heavy smoker who had been smoking for a long time and reported a history of having a lung malignancy since December 2016. A complete evaluation of his medical history was performed by exploring the documents of his previous hospitalization. First, after consulting with a lung specialist, a core needle biopsy from right lung mass was done and microscopic examination of sections revealed harboring neoplastic proliferation of epithelial cells with sheet and alveolar pattern. Neoplastic cells had large hyperchromatic nuclei, clear to granular eosinophilic cytoplasm and prominent nucleoli. Inflammatory cell infiltration and multifocal necrosis were observed . Immunohistochemistry showed strong positive reaction to CK7 and there was no response to CK20, TTF1 and CDX2. The pathologist determined it as non-small-cell carcinoma, probably TTF1 negative lung carcinoma.
No remarkable finding was shown by brain MRI taken in January 2017. Whole body bone scan was performed which showed abnormal increased uptake in the right first rib. The scan pattern suggested either a lung tumoral mass with the involvement of the first rib or radiotracer uptake by the soft tissue tumoral mass only (without bone involvement), therefore CT scan was recommended. The rest of skeleton was unremarkable. In February 2017, spiral CT of chest without contrast showed a mass lesion with ill-defined margins in the right lung apex with a maximum diameter of 62x30 millimeters in favor of a malignant process. Diffuse bilateral patchy nodular densities were noted in both lungs. There was no evidence of pleural effusion and chest wall was normal. According to all of those diagnostic procedures, the final diagnosis was unresectable Pancoast tumor. Therefore, the patient was referred to oncology service where appropriate treatment was commenced utilizing chemo-radiotherapy followed by adjuvant chemotherapy with cisplatin. Exploring the panoramic view disclosed an ill-defined radiolucency in the left maxillary area extending superiorly to the orbital floor together with cortical perforation of the alveolar ridge ipsilaterally. Left maxillary canine showed floating in air appearance, and widening of periodontal ligament was obvious in left incisors .
Numerous specimens were taken from different parts of the lesion for histopathologic examination. Microscopic slides showed malignant neoplastic proliferation of polygonal cells in sheets and islands pattern. Most of tumoral cells had atypical hyperchromatic nuclei, and many clear cells were observed within tumoral sheets. Cellular and nuclear pleomorphism, abundant atypical mitoses, vascular invasion and large multifocal necrosis were seen .
According to patient’s medical history, metastatic nature of the lesion was almost decisive, but because of existing undifferentiated malignant cells, immunohistochemistry staining was recommended to confirm the origin of metastasis. Since there was no reaction to HMB45 and S100 protein, melanoma and neural crest tumors were excluded. The response to CK 5/6 was strongly positive and also positive reaction to CK7 was noticed but no response to P63, CK20, CD5, CD117, WT1 and EBV were observed .Considering the whole findings, the metastatic lesion was designated as a squamous cell carcinoma with pulmonary origin. The consultant maxillofacial surgeon determined on not performing a surgical intervention not only because the jaw lesion did not seem to be operable due to its enormous size, but basically for the primary site of tumor which had not been eradicated appropriately. Therefore the patient was referred back to oncologist to give his advice concerning the proptitious options of chemotherapy. As the tumor was in stage IV, it was declared that chemotherapy might exacerbate the patient’s general condition. So symptomatic treatment was opted just for relieving the probable excruciating pain. Three months after commencing the case evaluation, the patient was still alive and no progression of the disease was noted.