A 73-year-old right hand-dominant female patient was admitted to the emergency department of our hospital with severe pain in the right upper extremity following a fall at her home. Clinical examination determined painful and restricted range of motion of the shoulder, crepitus from the fracture fragments and extensive ecchymosis to the elbow on her right shoulder. No neurovascular impairment was found. From her history, we learned that she had only hypertension which is under control. Anteroposterior, lateral radiographs and computed tomography (CT) scanning of the right shoulder revealed a four-part fracture-dislocation of the proximal humerus . The fracture type was graded using Neer’s original classification .
Her arm was stabilized in arm slings, and surgical intervention was planned. Three days after admission, she underwent HA surgery. After proper induction of general anesthesia, the patient was placed in the beach chair position. A standard delto-pectoral approach was used to access the proximal humerus. Bone cement was used to fix the nine mm humeral stem and then an artificial 44/17 m m humeral head prosthesis (Bio-modular® Shoulder System; Biomet Inc, USA) was positioned in approximately 20° of retroversion. The head was impacted and after it was checked with full manual effort for the security. The artificial head of the humerus was fitted into the glenoid cavity of the scapula, secured by the tendon of the long head of the biceps brachii. The rotator cuff was realigned using 1.0 vicryl sutures. A hemovac drain was used and the wound was closed in anatomic layers. The operation was successfully performed, without any intraoperative complications . The affected limb was suspended in a shoulder sling for six weeks. In first 3 weeks, only passive shoulder-joint activities (eg: pendulum exercises) were carried out, and active functional exercises of the ipsilateral hand, wrist, and elbow were initiated concurrently. After 3 weeks from the operation, under physiotherapist control, slightly active ROM exercises were started. Upper extremity lifting was avoided during the first six weeks . Also these are our routine physiotherapy program after HA in our institution.
The patient was discharged from hospital one week postoperatively. After 20 days, she was re-admitted to our hospital suffering pain and deformity in the right shoulder. From the history, we learned that during physical therapy, she had experienced pain, discontinued the daily program and returned to hospital. On radiographic examination an unusual disengagement of the humeral head component of the prosthesis was detected . We know that this complication has occurred in the first 20 days. This means, the patient was under passive ROM program. We could not learn from the physiotherapist that what maneuver is caused to this unusual disengagement. But we think that, during physiotherapy maybe a forceful activity was done and this unusual complication has occurred. The patient underwent a second surgical operation. A deltopectoral approach was repeated using the previous incision. During the operation, in addition to the disengagement of the component, hypertrophic biceps tendon was determined. We do not have any idea because of hypertrophic tendon, only we have seen it. The humeral stem was seen to be well-fixed into the bone so the humeral head was changed for a new one of the same size. No relevant complications were encountered during surgery. When the patient was discharged, resistance rotation exercises were not allowed during the first postoperative six weeks. The patient was followed-up at one, three, six and ten weeks postoperatively and at three-month intervals thereafter. After the second surgery, the patient used a shoulder immobilizer for a period of four to six weeks with the arm kept in a neutral position. Passive motion was started four weeks later with active motion commencing after six weeks. At two years, the dominant right side had active, painless ROM of 120° of forward flexion, 90° of internal rotation, 90° of abduction, and 60° of external rotation in abduction. This was equivalent to the contralateral side, which had also undergone HA five years previously in our institution. The shoulder prosthesis had not failed .