A 64-year-old woman with a 5.5-cm tumor in the left upper lobe and lymphadenopathy of #6 and #12u was referred to our department . She was diagnosed with cT2b N2 M0 adenocarcinoma and underwent induction therapy with carboplatin and paclitaxel weekly for 5 weeks and concurrent radiotherapy of 50 Gy in five weekly fractions. The tumor was reduced in size by 35 % by Response Evaluation Criteria In Solid Tumors (RECIST) criteria, and surgical resection was planned.
A left posterolateral thoracotomy was performed. The tumor was located in the S1 + 2 segment and had invaded the interlobar pleura to involve the S6 segment. There was extensive hilar lymph node infiltration of the PA beginning at the first branch to the lingular artery. Because there was no invasion of the bronchus, we felt that conduit interposition between the PA would avoid anastomotic tension. We opened the pericardial sac and isolated the root of the main PA. The PA was clamped proximally and distally, without intravenous heparin administration, and resected. Actually, we tried to isolate the PA after the PA was clamped, but the hilar lymph node was not separated. While left upper lobectomy and wedge resection of the lower lobe were being performed, the superior PV was sutured intrapericardially, using a linear stapler, as close as possible to the left atrium. The PV was cut distally intrapericardially, and the length of PV microscopically free of cancer was 1.5 cm. After dissection of the pulmonary ligament, the PV was of sufficient length to compensate for the PA defect. We interposed the autologous PV between the proximal (left main PA) and distal (A6, A. basalis) PA and performed end-to-end anastomoses with 5-0 monofilament non-absorbable suture material . The bronchial stump and PA anastomoses were separated with an intercostal muscle flap. Operative duration was 4 h 12 min and blood loss was 490 mL.
Histologic examination of the tumor revealed ypT2a N1 M0 invasive adenocarcinoma. The patient was discharged on the ninth postoperative day without complication and has remained healthy. Brain metastases appeared 18 months after the operation, but there was no local recurrence. The patient has been treated with crizotinib for 6 months and has had no progression.