A 10-year-old boy presented with a 10-day history of pain in the right lower limb following a trivial fall. The pain was severe in intensity and an aching type which progressively worsened so that he was unable to walk. There was no history of fever, weight loss, pain, or swelling in other parts of the body. History, birth history, and family history were not significant. His immunization was appropriate for age. On examination of the right lower limb, there was tenderness and swelling over the right knee. General physical examination and systemic examination findings were within physiological limits.
Hematological investigations showed low hemoglobin (10 g/dl) and platelet count (67,000/dl). Serum alkaline phosphatase and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) were markedly elevated (9587 U/L and 3414 U/L, respectively). Parathyroid hormone level was at the upper limit of normal for age (169 pg/ml); serum calcium and other biochemical parameters were normal. Serological tests for human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B surface antigens, and hepatitis C virus were negative.
Radiograph of the right knee showed a sclerotic lesion involving the lower metadiaphyseal region of the right femur with a wide zone of transition, a mild spiculated type of periosteal reaction, and cortical breach along the medial epicondyle with a soft-tissue component showing calcific foci within. Another sclerotic lesion with a wide zone of transition was noted involving the upper metadiaphyseal region of the tibia with the cortical breach at diaphysis . X-rays of the pelvis with visualized bilateral femori, dorsolumbar spine, cervical spine, and ribs showed multiple similar sclerotic lesions (-). Only skull bones, bones of the forearm, and small bones of hands and feet were spared.
Chest X-ray and computed tomography scan of the lungs showed no evidence of metastasis; bone window images were suggestive of diffuse sclerotic lesions involving cervical, thoracic, and visualized lumbar vertebrae, sternum, ribs, and bilateral humeri (, ). Bone scan with Technetium-99m showed abnormally increased radiotracer uptake at multiple sites .
Biopsy from the lower end of the femur showed pleomorphic neoplastic cells in cords and nests with tumor osteoid composed of acellular coarse lace-like unmineralized bone rimmed by neoplastic cells having vesicular nuclei with prominent nucleoli (, ). Bone marrow biopsy from the posterosuperior iliac spine showed intertrabecular spaces replaced by an infiltrating neoplasm displaying similar morphology . Histomorphology was suggestive of osteosarcoma; however, immunohistochemistry was done in view of the unusual presentation of this case and to exclude other clinical/radiological differential diagnoses such as lymphoma and histiocytic neoplasm. However, the neoplastic cells were immunonegative for LCA, CD1a, and CD68 with high Ki67 (50–60%) . The final diagnosis of MFOS was rendered as the child had multiple bony lesions at presentation.
The case was discussed at the institutional tumor board meeting and multidrug chemotherapy was planned with doxorubicin and cisplatin. The patient received one cycle of chemotherapy but unfortunately succumbed due to progressive disease.