This is a 68-year-old male from New Jersey who immigrated from South Asia 41 years ago, who works as a small business owner. His medical history before hospital admission in March was significant for lifestyle-controlled diabetes mellitus (admission HbA1c of 6), hyperlipidemia (previously on Atorvastatin), and L4-L5 radiculopathy. One month before admission, he underwent uncomplicated decompressive laminectomy for his herniation. He has not had other surgeries. Home medications include 81 mg Aspirin. He is a non-smoker, who does not abuse alcohol or drugs, and his BMI was 24.2 on admission.
His symptoms first began on March 23, with non-specific complaints of fatigue, dyspnea, cough, chills, and fever (Tmax 101oF). His symptoms progressed over 3 days and he developed frank hematuria at home on March 26, prompting a visit to the emergency room. There, he was found to be hypoxic (SpO2 high 80s), febrile, and tested positive for COVID-19. Hematuria was attributed to acute kidney injury (AKI) and self-resolved. On admission, the patient was started on 200 mg twice daily hydroxychloroquine and 500 mg twice daily azithromycin. On day 2, he developed progressive dyspnea and hypoxia despite non-invasive ventilatory support with high-flow nasal cannula. He was urgently intubated in the setting of severe hypotension with blood pressures documented as low as 60/40. Central access was gained through common femoral artery and he was transitioned to the intensive care unit.
On March 28, the patient’s clinical course worsened with increasing pressure requirements, persistent fevers (Tmax 103.5oF), and hypotension. His symptoms were concerning for cytokine storm and he was given a single 400 mg dose of IL-6 inhibitor, Tocilizumab. He stabilized hemodynamically and remained on pressure-support before self-extubation on April 1. He was placed on supplemental oxygen through high-flow nasal cannula, which was eventually weaned to room air. On April 9, he was discharged to inpatient rehabilitation following a negative COVID-19 test result.
Several days after admission to the rehabilitation center, routine lower extremity Doppler found asymptomatic deep venous thrombosis in the patient’s common femoral vein. He was subsequently transitioned from prophylactic heparin to therapeutic Enoxaparin sodium. On April 20, he developed acute pain in the right knee while practicing stairs with physical therapy. He had limited range of motion and ultimately could not bear weight. His knee was swollen and painful. Ultrasound found a 7 cm suprapatellar joint effusion in the setting of low-grade fever (100.8oF) and a warm, and erythematous knee. He was transferred back to the emergency room for evaluation, where he underwent knee arthrocentesis. Orthopedic surgery was consulted for possible septic arthritis; 80cc of synovial fluid was drained with mild improvement in pain.
The patient was admitted back to the hospital on April 23, and his vitals consisted of blood pressure of 121/68, heart rate of 68 beats/min, respiration rate of 20 respirations/min, and temperature of 98.4oF. He was immediately started on empiric antibiotics (Vancomycin 1 g IV twice daily and Zosyn 3.375 g every 6 h) while awaiting laboratory testing of synovial fluid. Readmission laboratories revealed high white blood cell count, with high lymphocytes and low monocytes. IL markers were elevated as well. Microscopic review of the aspirate showed cloudy yellow synovial fluid with neutrophilic predominance of 87% (normal 0–25%), but did not reveal any crystals, and bacterial culture showed no growth to date times 5 days. A full workup of the patient’s readmission laboratories and aspirate is listed in .
He was transitioned from intravenous antibiotics to oral cephalexin 500 mg every 6 h for 9 days (to complete a 14 day course) and started on a 5-day Prednisone taper given suspicion for IL aseptic arthropathy in the setting of COVID-19. He was transferred back to inpatient rehabilitation for weakness and poor endurance secondary to hospitalization for severe illness. He was ultimately transitioned from therapeutic Enoxaparin sodium to oral Apixaban 5mg twice daily and discharged home on May 12.