A 48 year-old Caucasian male presented with an 18-month history of progressive right-sided otalgia, nonpulsatile tinnitus, bouts of vertigo, and unilateral hearing loss. He had no previous history of recurrent otitis media, ototoxic medication exposure, loud noise exposure, or chemotherapy. On physical examination, he was found to have narrowing and inflammation of the external auditory canal (EAC), as well as tenderness of the mastoid bone to palpation without fluctuation. The tympanic membrane was not visualized due to the chronic inflammation and narrowing of the EAC. There was no evidence of cervical lymphadenopathy.
A dedicated computed tomography (CT) scan of the temporal bones demonstrated diffuse opacification throughout the right temporal bone, with airspace coalescence and lytic destructive changes involving the mastoid portion of the temporal bone. The destruction involved the outer cortex of the mastoid bone with surrounding thickening and sclerosis of the mastoid air cells. The opacification extended throughout the middle ear cavity into the epitympanum, Prussak’s space, facial recess, and sinus tympani. There was soft tissue thickening surrounding the EAC, causing near-complete stenosis .
Enhanced brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a right-sided mastoid lesion with dural thickening superior and posterior to the petrous temporal bone, as well as some minor enhancing disease in the inferior skull base around the right styloid process. There was also abnormal enhancement seen in the vestibular aqueduct, which extended inferiorly to involve the dura, and about the medial margin of the sigmoid sinus. A nonenhancing/hypoenhancing plug of soft tissue was noted within the medial EAC that abutted the tympanic membrane, along with abnormal enhancement of the middle ear cavity .
The initial trans-external canal biopsy was inconclusive, showing only granulation tissue keratinizing squamous epithelium. Subsequent open mastoid biopsy was performed during which squamous debris was found filling the medial ear canal. There was also a significant area of mastoid cortical breach, with granulation-like tissue extending through the mastoid cortex and filling the visualized mastoid cavity. The squamous debris and granulation tissue within the mastoid ear cavity was debrided. Pathology showed lymphohistiocytic infiltrate surrounding residual bony trabeculae. The lymphoid cells were polymorphic and consisted primarily of T cells, with admixed B cells and plasma cells. The histiocytes contained abundant eosinophilic granular cytoplasm and ovoid nuclei. Nucleoli were inconspicuous, mitotic rate was low, and no necrosis was identified. The sample histiocytic component showed positivity for CD68 and S100 by immunohistochemistry, and lack of CD1a expression . A tentative diagnosis of Rosai–Dorman disease was made.
The patient remained symptomatic, with headaches, nonspecific visual changes, and histiocytosis. A trial of oral corticosteroids (prednisone 1 mg/kg for a week followed by a taper) was prescribed after consultation with the rheumatology and hematologic oncology services, with no overall impact on the patient’s symptoms. The patient agreed to another surgical intervention. A cortical mastoidectomy was performed under general anesthetic. The mastoid air cells, mastoid antrum, and epitympanum were filled with granulation-like tissue without evidence of abscess or cholesteatoma. Pathology confirmed Rosai–Dorfman disease.
The patient recovered without complications and noted a significant improvement in his headache, visual field changes, and histiocytosis at his 1-week postoperative visit. At his most recent follow-up 6 months post-mastoidectomy, the patient had returned to work and was functioning at a near-normal level. Rheumatologic investigations to assess other sites of extranodal disease were performed, but none was found.