A 29-year-old healthy male, who was a former professional volleyball player, presented himself in our outpatient clinic. The patient reported of a delayed diagnosis (3 years after initial trauma) of a proximal hamstring injury due to a soccer injury as a 15-year-old adolescent. Similar to previous case reports , the patient reported of numerous previous consultations with physiotherapists, general practitioners, and sports physicians. A gradual increase in daily pain underneath the buttock with any kind of sports, longer walking, and while sitting led to a pronounced desire for surgical therapy. Additionally, increased impairment in the athlete’s performance with muscle weakness of the hamstrings accentuated by hamstring stretching led to severe restrictions in the patient’s daily life. The patient’s family history and previous medical history were unremarkable. The initial physical examination revealed a significant tenderness along the proximal hamstring tendons and at the ischial tuberosity with no clear palpable defect at the hamstring insertion at the ischial tuberosity. Active and passive range of motion (ROM) of hip and knee were unremarkable. No neurological deficit was present, but a slight hamstring strength deficit (4/5) was evident. Evaluation of the contralateral limb was normal.
Plain radiographs and computed tomography (CT) of the pelvis showed an ischial tuberosity apophyseal fracture with a 7 × 3 centimeter (cm) large, displaced fragment (< 1 cm) . Magnet resonance imaging (MRI) of the pelvis showed nonunion and displacement of approximately 1 cm, with fluid accumulation between the avulsed fragment . All proximal hamstring tendons were attached to the avulsed fragment.
Due to daily complaints we decided to try to combine the excision of the large bony fragment with repair of the proximal hamstring tendons with the risk of not being able to re-attach the tendons at the ischial footprint because of the delayed diagnosis.
Fourteen years after the initial trauma, an open excision of the large bony fragment and an open repair of the proximal hamstring tendons was performed. The patient was placed in a prone position. A 10 cm incision was made in the gluteal fold, and a subgluteal approach was performed. With special attention to the sciatic nerve, the large bony fragment was identified and an excision, followed by debridement of local fibrous tissue and mobilization of the hamstring tendons, was performed. To reduce excessive strain on the tendons, the mobilization was extended distally. Then refixation of the proximal hamstring tendons was performed with 3 suture anchors (Titan-Corkscrew 5.5 mm (mm), FiberWire, Arthrex, Naples, USA) at the ischial tuberosity. Radiographs confirmed the correct position of the anchors .
Postoperatively, the patient was mobilized on crutches without load for 6 weeks. A hard frame hip and knee brace (Newport, DJO, Lewisville, USA) fixed in 30° of hip flexion was used for 6 weeks (24 h per day). After six postoperative weeks, full weight-bearing was allowed and a supervised physical therapy program was started for 12 weeks. Nine months postoperatively, the patient had returned to playing volleyball on a semi-professional level. Twelve months postoperatively, the patient was extremely satisfied with the surgical outcome and was able to perform all kind of desired sport activities (volleyball, beachvolleyball, hiking, kite-surfing, climbing, and skiing) and activities of daily living without difficulty or pain. At final follow-up, Perth Hamstring Assessment Tool was 94/100 points.