A 77-year-old Chinese woman visited our hospital with epigastric discomfort for more than 4 years and worsened for 1 month.
Her medical history was notable for chronic atrophic gastritis.
She had a longstanding history of chronic atrophic gastritis in January 2014 with gastroscopy. According to the Kimura/Takemoto classification, atrophy of the gastric mucosa was classified as C-2. She had received recommended dose of H. pylori eradication therapy twice, once 7 d for omeprazole + amoxicillin + clarithromycin and once 14 d for pantoprazole + bismuthate + tetracycline + metronidazole. She was followed up with annual gastroscopy and had not taken any PPIs since then. In addition, she had a history of myoma of uterus for more than 40 years, without operation.
On physical examination upon admission, she was 1.54 meters in height and 60 kilogram in weight. She had a blood pressure of 117/68 mmHg with pulse rate of 65 beats per minute. Her jugular venous pressure was not elevated. She had clear lungs and normal heart sounds with no murmurs or gallops on auscultation. There were no other pathognomonic signs during physical examination, except for slight tenderness in the upper abdomen.
After admission, the patient was thoroughly evaluated with routine blood tests, routine urine tests, routine fecal tests and occult blood test, blood biochemistry, and infection indexes. No significant abnormal laboratory results were recorded in this patient.
Gastroscopy revealed a 6 mm submucosal tumor (SMT)-like slightly elevated lesion in the anterior wall of the lower part of the gastric body, which had faint yellow discoloration . Atrophy of the gastric mucosa was classified as C-2, yet the local background mucosa of the lesion showed no apparent atrophy, after eradication of H. pylori. No fundus gland polyp (FGP) was found in other sections of the stomach.
A biopsy of the SMT-like lesion was obtained, and histopathological findings showed numerous cells with basophilic cytoplasm and mildly atypical nuclei-like chief cells of the fundic gland, which were arranged in irregular branching and anastomosing tubules in a layer of the lamina propria mucosae .