A 65-year-old Caucasian man with a history of PAF was referred to our hospital for further evaluation of a mass located in the apex of his left ventricle. The mass was discovered incidentally after a transthoracic echocardiographic (TTE) examination during hospitalization for paroxysmal atrial fibrillation.
Our patient’s medical history was unremarkable apart from an unsuccessful pulmonary vein ablation for PAF, which took place 12 months previously. On admission, our patient had a heart rate of 80 beats/minute in sinus rhythm, blood pressure of 130/68mmHg, normal carotid pulse, and absence of murmurs or extra-cardiac sounds. A physical examination was normal and our patient was asymptomatic.
A two-dimensional TTE was performed, which showed a large, pedunculated, mobile mass sized 15 × 18mm located at the apical interventricular septum of his left ventricle, with a normally contracting adjacent myocardium . His left ventricular systolic function and the morphology and function of his cardiac valves were normal. His previous TTE performed 12 months previously at the same laboratory and by the same sonographer did not demonstrate any left ventricular mass . Further evaluation with cardiac computed tomography (CT) confirmed the presence of a nodular pedunculated mass (14 × 10mm) with radiographic evidence of myxoma that was not evident in the examination performed 12 months earlier . The previous TTE and chest CT were performed before our patient underwent pulmonary vein ablation. Magnetic resonance imaging showed a nodular mass of 15mm with a 5mm stalk located at the anterior apical segment of his intraventricular septum. The intensity of the mass was higher than that of the myocardium, with no signs of infiltration of the endocardium.
Our patient underwent urgent cardiac surgery. Under cardiopulmonary bypass and cardioplegic protection, a left apical 2.5cm longitudinal ventriculotomy was performed, which exposed the mass in full view . The defect was closed in a linear fashion and reinforced with felt strips .
Resection of the tumor was performed through the ventriculotomy with macroscopically uninvolved margins. A pathology examination demonstrated the typical features of a myxoma . Apart from two self-terminated episodes of PAF, our patient had an uneventful postoperative course and was discharged eight days after the procedure.
Echocardiographic follow-up has not shown evidence of recurrence eight months after the resection of the myxoma.