A 16-year-old male presented with abdominal pain, and subsequently underwent a laparoscopic appendicectomy for acute appendicitis. During this admission, a routine chest X-ray (CXR) showed cardiomegaly . Following this he was referred to cardiology outpatients for routine assessment. When reviewed 4 months later, he reported 4 months of night sweats and intermittent chest pain while lying flat. His cardiovascular examination was unremarkable; he had no murmurs and there was no evidence of heart failure. He had no past medical history or family history of note and took no regular medication.
Given the persistence of cardiomegaly on repeat CXR, a transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) was requested. This showed a large, heterogeneous, pedunculated mass in the right atrium measuring approximately 50 × 30 mm, which appeared to attach to the region of the fossa ovalis. In addition, there was apical displacement of the tricuspid valve (11.2 mm/m2 from mitral annulus) in keeping with undiagnosed Ebstein anomaly (EA) . The mass prolapsed through the tricuspid valve without causing obstruction (, ), and there was severe tricuspid regurgitation. The peak tricuspid regurgitant velocity was 2.2 m/s suggesting normal pulmonary artery pressure. There was no concomitant ASD. Qualitatively, the right ventricle was significantly dilated with radial impairment. Blood tests were unremarkable. His electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus rhythm with right axis deviation and ‘Himalayan’ P waves of large amplitude, suggestive of right atrial enlargement and typically seen in association with Ebstein anomaly . There was no evidence of pre-excitation on ECG or on telemetry. A computed tomography (CT) pulmonary angiogram showed a subacute right middle lobe pulmonary embolus, as well as more chronic, calcified emboli throughout the right pulmonary tree, for which he was commenced on low molecular weight heparin in anticipation of surgery. A CT chest, abdomen and pelvis showed no evidence of malignancy.
Given the complexity of the case, our patient was referred to a specialist Ebstein surgical unit and was accepted for definitive surgery the following week. Operative appearances were suggestive of a calcified myxoma, which inserted at the foramen ovale, and this was removed along with all of the calcium on the atrial septum (, ). The tricuspid valve had a virtually absent septal leaflet, which was not delaminated, and very limited fenestrated tissue, which was not usable for the repair. The anterior and posterior leaflets were also small. The Cone repair was used; this involved detachment of the anterior and posterior leaflets from the annulus, extensive division of the sub-valvular muscle bundles and elongation of the papillary muscle, plication of the atrialized portion of the right ventricle and of the tricuspid annulus, and use of autologous pericardium to patch enlarge the anterior and posterior leaflets. Thereafter, a post-operative trans-oesophageal echocardiogram demonstrated good biventricular function with a small amount of residual tricuspid regurgitation and mild flow acceleration through the tricuspid valve (, ). Histology of the right atrial mass confirmed a 50 × 50 × 35 mm myxoma with prominent calcification . He had an uncomplicated post-operative course and, once haemostasis was achieved, anticoagulation was switched to rivaroxaban for ongoing treatment of pulmonary emboli.
His post-procedural TTE demonstrated mild tricuspid regurgitation; however, given the anatomical leaflet deficiencies, the tricuspid valve orifice was elongated and quite oblique resulting in a mean gradient, residually, of 4.8 mmHg.
At outpatient review 8 weeks later, he was asymptomatic. A repeat TTE showed a stable mean tricuspid valve gradient of 4.5 mmHg, with mild residual tricuspid regurgitation. Given that he has undergone repair of complex congenital heart disease in adulthood, he will require lifelong clinical and imaging-based evaluation to assess for long-term complications, in particular tricuspid valve dysfunction and arrhythmia.