We present the case of a 66-year-old Caucasian female patient who consulted her general practitioner (GP) during a heatwave owing to worsening fatigue over the past 3–4 days. During the consultation, she was found to be hypotensive (80/40 mmHg) and bradycardic (28 bpm), prompting immediate referral to the emergency department (ED). The patient had a medical history of Osler Weber Rendu syndrome, characterized by pulmonary arteriovenous malformations, and had undergone a left mastectomy for breast cancer 7 years prior, with subsequent negative follow-ups. Moreover, she had a platelet function deficit, resulting in a slight prolongation of prothrombin time (PT) with normal values of activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) and was experiencing frequent epistaxis. Her medical history also included hypertension, atrial fibrillation—treated with percutaneous occlusion of the atrial appendage 2 years earlier—mitral valve prolapse, pulmonary hypertension, iron deficiency anemia, recent eradication of Helicobacter pylori infection, hepatic cirrhosis, and ascites secondary to congestive hepatopathy attributed to cor pulmonale.
Pharmacological history included digoxin at 0.25 mg once per day, bisoprolol at 5 mg twice per day, ramipril at 2.5 mg once per day, spironolactone at 25 mg once per day, furosemide at 25 mg once per day, and pravastatin at 40 mg once per day. Upon her initial evaluation in the ED, she confirmed adherence to her medication regimen, noting that her last doses of digoxin, ramipril, and bisoprolol were taken 2 hours before arrival. At the objective examination, she exhibited mottled skin, slight hypotension (90/45 mmHg), bradycardia (28 bpm), respiratory distress (respiratory rate of 40 breaths/minute), and an oxygen saturation of 89% on room air. She appeared confused. Additionally, she disclosed being anuric for the past 3 days and experiencing visual phenomena such as “flashing lights and sparkles around objects” over the previous week.
The results of the arterial blood gas (ABG) test revealed metabolic acidosis with a pH of 7.10, a pCO2 of 32 mmHg, a pO2 of 69 mmHg, a bicarbonate level of 10 mmol/L, normal lactate levels, and severe hyperkalemia with a potassium level of 8.9 mmol/L. The initial 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) showed an idioventricular rhythm . She was promptly transferred to the shock room, and treatment was initiated with 10 mL of 10% intravenous calcium chloride, 10 mg of nebulized salbutamol, an infusion of isoproterenol at a rate of 2.5 μg/min, 150 mL of 8.4% intravenous bicarbonate, and 250 mL of 10% dextrose in water (DW10%) with 10 units of insulin.
A subsequent ABG test showed no significant improvement despite potassium-shifting therapy, with potassium remaining high at 9.3 mmol/L. The antikalemic treatment was repeated without success, leading to an urgent consultation with a nephrologist for emergency dialysis. The patient remained bradycardic (30 bpm) and hypotensive (75/50 mmHg) despite isoproterenol infusion. Therefore, the isoproterenol infusion was titrated up to 4 μg/minute aiming to achieve a heart rate of 45–50 bpm. Given the suspicion of concomitant digoxin toxicity, empirical treatment with digoxin immune fab was initiated, administering 40 mg via two vials. Nevertheless, no improvement was observed. Laboratory tests disclosed a serum digoxin level of 13.7 μg/L, a creatinine level of 8.11 mg/dL, and a potassium level of 8.64 mmol/L. After administering an additional five vials of digoxin immune fab, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU), where continuous venovenous hemofiltration (CVVH) was promptly initiated, leading to an improvement in serum potassium levels to 4.96 mmol/L the following day. The serum digoxin levels gradually decreased to 1.38 μg/L over 17 days. No further digoxin immune fab administrations were required. The ECGs showed progression, with the normalization of potassium levels and the gradual decrease in serum digoxin. On day 1, the ECG displayed a junctional rhythm with ventricular bigeminy; on day 3, atrial fibrillation with ectopic ventricular beats was observed; and by day 14, the ECG returned to atrial fibrillation (the patient’s baseline; Figs. , , ). The corresponding serum digoxin levels are presented in Table . After 2 days in the ICU, the patient was transferred to the cardiology ICU, where she continued with CVVH until day 9; the isoproterenol infusion was ceased on day 8. The hospitalization was further complicated by pneumonia and multiple episodes of epistaxis, necessitating blood transfusions.
The patient was discharged after 35 days in good condition, albeit still requiring intermittent dialysis. High doses of furosemide (250 mg once per day) were also prescribed. Kidney function gradually improved over 3 months, during which the frequency of dialysis was reduced from three times per week to two and then discontinued. At 6 months of follow-up, the patient was diagnosed with stage IIIb chronic kidney disease, had not been hospitalized for renal or cardiological complications, remained in chronic atrial fibrillation (with an average heart rate of 90 bpm), was on therapy with furosemide 250 mg once daily, but did not receive antiarrhythmic or antihypertensive treatment.