A 54 year-old African-American man with no significant past medical history was transferred to our institution with right sided abdominal discomfort for 1 week. On admission, he noted recent onset of polyuria, anorexia, fatigue and dyspnea. Physical examination was notable for right upper quadrant abdominal tenderness and absence of lymphadenopathy or splenomegaly. An electrolyte panel revealed hypercalcemia (14 mg/dL) in the setting of an elevated creatinine level (3.2 mg/dL). He had a white blood cell count of 135,000/μL, hemoglobin concentration of 8.4 g/dL, and platelet count of 76,000/μL. Peripheral blood smear revealed an increased number of leukocytes that consisted of a population of atypical-appearing lymphoid cells of variable size and appearance with numerous cytoplasmic hairy projections and deeply basophilic cytoplasm . The cells did not show microscopic features characteristic of mature plasma cells. A core biopsy revealed a hypercellular bone marrow (90%) that was replaced by a population of atypical cells similar to the ones seen in peripheral blood. Flow cytometry and immunohistochemistry (IHC) studies of the cells revealed a population that was deficient in B and T cell specific markers but strongly expressed CD38, CD138 and cytoplasmic lambda light chain. Serum protein electrophoresis revealed an M-spike that was identified as free lambda chain on immunofixation. Serum lambda free light chain level was correspondingly elevated. The combined clinical and laboratory findings supported the diagnosis of plasma cell leukemia.
Additional prognostic studies included the following: beta-2 microglobulin, 6893 ng/mL (normal range: 609–2366); serum albumin, 3.8 g/dL (3.5–5.0); and lactate dehydrogenase, 191 U/L (<240). Serum immunoglobulin levels of all isotypes were low. A skeletal survey was negative. Conventional cytogenetic and interphase FISH analysis revealed a CCND1/IGH gene fusion rearrangement mediated by an unbalanced t(11;14)(q13;q32). This translocation brings the cyclin D1 oncogene in close proximity to the powerful Eμ enhancer of the IgH locus . Cyclin D1 expression was correspondingly strong on IHC staining.
After normalization of his calcium and creatinine levels with aggressive fluid resuscitation, induction chemotherapy with bortezomib, doxorubicin, and dexamethasone was initiated. Chemotherapy was administered over the course of 5 cycles which resulted in a rapid suppression of the white blood cell count in association with a more gradual recovery of hemoglobin concentration and platelet count to near-normal and normal levels, respectively . The serum free kappa to lambda light chain ratio normalized after one cycle of chemotherapy and remained normal for the remaining cycles . A restaging skeletal survey revealed no interval development of bony lesions. A repeat bone marrow aspirate and biopsy showed hypocellularity (<5%) with no morphologic, cytogenetic, or immunophenotypic evidence of disease. The patient was in stringent complete remission based on the International Myeloma Working Group (IMWG) criteria . At the time of publication, the patient is undergoing evaluation for either an autologous or allogeneic bone marrow transplant to consolidate treatment.
Chemoinduction was complicated by significant treatment related toxicities to the lung and peripheral nerves. After the first dose, the patient developed a non-productive cough without dyspnea, hypoxia or respiratory compromise. Computed tomography imaging of the chest demonstrated bilateral pleural effusions with extensive upper-lobe ground-glass opacities. Transbronchial biopsy and bronchoalveolar lavage failed to show any infectious organisms or malignancy. The pulmonary finding was therefore felt to be secondary to bortezomib which has been reported in the past . The patient received a high-dose dexamethasone taper over a 4-week period which resulted in significant resolution of his cough and imaging abnormalities with no subsequent recurrence.
The patient also experienced grade 2 to 3 peripheral neuropathy which is a well documented side effect of bortezomib therapy . Bilateral numbness, tingling, burning pain, and sensory loss in his toes and feet occurred soon after the first cycle. His symptoms worsened to involve motor weakness and progressed proximally to involve his lower extremities to the level of the knee after the second cycle necessitating dose reduction or deletion of bortezomib on cycles 3, 4, and 5. Trials of gabapentin, pregabalin, mexiletine, duloxetine, topiramate, amitriptyline, and methadone were attempted but all with either significant side effects or lack of symptomatic control.