A 71-year-old Caucasian man with osteoarthritis underwent an elective total right hip joint replacement. He had a history of ischemic heart disease with a drug-eluting stent deployed to an 80% lesion in his left anterior descending artery in 2007; the indication was stable angina. At this stage there was a residual 50% to 60% lesion in his right coronary artery. Stress echocardiography one year prior to the hip replacement was negative for ischemia at 90% of maximum predicted heart rate. Other co-morbidities included hypertension, dyslipidemia, type 2 diabetes and epilepsy.
His intra-operative course was uncomplicated. A posterior approach was taken. A 52mm acetabular component with a ceramic liner was press-fitted in place; the stem was also press-fitted and a ceramic femoral head used. Immediately after the operation, however, our patient experienced chest pain and was hypotensive with a blood pressure of 90/70mmHg with associated tachycardia and hypoxia. A cardiorespiratory examination was unremarkable and there were no neurological or dermatological changes seen at this time. Results of an electrocardiogram were normal; chest radiography showed a possible left lung base opacity. A high-sensitive troponin-T assay detected a rise in troponin T from 29ng/L to 528ng/L. Therapy for acute coronary syndrome was instituted and our patient recovered. A subsequent in-patient coronary angiography revealed a patent left anterior descending artery stent, minor left circumflex artery disease, and a 60% lesion in his right coronary artery. This was felt to be the culprit lesion and a drug-eluting stent was deployed. His subsequent post-operative recovery was unremarkable.
Our patient attended a routine review at two months. He was asymptomatic at this time. A treadmill stress echocardiography was performed. At peak exercise, an extensive shower of small echodense bubbles in his right heart was seen, consistent with fat emboli (Additional file : Video 1, Figure ). Our patient remained asymptomatic. Directly after this, repeat stress echocardiography was undertaken on a supine exercise bicycle, allowing isolated exercise of each leg. Small bubbles were reproduced with exercise of his right leg but not his left (Additional file : Video 2, Figure ). A technetium-99m colloid scan confirmed pulmonary fat emboli . Computed tomography pulmonary angiography showed no thromboemboli. Similar findings were found on stress echocardiography at four months, although diminished, with resolution at six months.
Our patient has recovered fully and has subsequently undergone elective left total hip joint replacement with a cemented prosthesis. There were no further clinical events or echocardiographic findings to suggest fat embolism after this second operation. Our patient remains well.