Our patient was a 43-year-old Caucasian woman reported a lump in her left breast and presented to her gynecologist in 2015. Notably, she had routine screening mammograms in 2014 and earlier in 2015 that were notable for dense breast tissue but otherwise unremarkable . Her physical examination revealed this mass to be “cystic” in nature but of fair size, measuring approximately 3 cm. She thereafter underwent a left breast ultrasound that showed three masses within the upper outer quadrant of the left breast. The 1:00 mass measured 3.7 × 2.2 × 4.0 cm; the 12:00 mass measured 3.4 × 1.8 × 2.7 cm; and the 2:00 mass measured 0.8 × 0.4 × 1.2 cm. Ultrasound-guided biopsy of all three lesions was performed. Three postbiopsy clips were present within the lesions .
Pathology revealed the following: (1) 1:00 spindle cell neoplasm, p63 (transformation-related protein 63), cytokeratin 5/6, and pan-keratin negative; (2) 12:00 fibroadenoma with prominent epithelial elements in uniform bland myxoid stroma; and (3) 2:00 fibroadenoma. Biopsies of the spindle cell neoplasm did not display significant cytologic atypia or mitotic activity. Differential diagnoses included mucoid hamartoma, myofibroblastoma, solitary fibrous tumor, and spindle cell lipoma. Malignant phyllodes tumor was less likely, owing to the low-grade nature of the patient’s lesions.
After a multidisciplinary evaluation, the patient underwent left breast nipple-sparing mastectomy due to multiple large lesions in that breast with immediate expander placement and eventual implant. Pathology demonstrated an 8.8-cm, white-gray, rubbery mass in the upper outer quadrant consistent with a malignant phyllodes tumor showing some areas of leaflike proliferation but with infiltrative borders and sarcomatous stromal overgrowth with increased mitotic activity . The superior surgical margin was positive. Mismatch repair protein immunohistochemical staining showed intact protein expression for MLH1, MSH2, and PMS2 with partial loss of protein expression for MSH6 . Molecular testing for microsatellite instability (MSI) was performed and was found to be stable.
The patient then underwent left chest wall radiation therapy from late 2015 in 25 fractions, which was complicated by an admission for cellulitis. Due to positive margins and extensive disease, adjuvant chemotherapy was administered. She had three cycles of doxorubicin and ifosfamide for 2 months in early 2016, complicated by chemotherapy-induced nausea/vomiting, thrombocytopenia, and leukopenia.
Genetic counseling was initially completed to help inform surgical decisions for her newly diagnosed breast cancer. On the basis of the size of her breast tumor, unilateral mastectomy was suggested. The patient wanted information on the risk for a contralateral breast cancer in order to decide whether she should have prophylactic mastectomy of the contralateral breast. At the initial counseling session, the patient reported a very strong maternal family history of colon, uterine, ovarian, stomach, and brain cancers suggestive of Lynch syndrome . The patient underwent Myriad myRisk Hereditary Cancer® genetic testing in 2015. This panel was chosen on the basis of her young age of diagnosis of breast cancer and multiple family members with cancer diagnoses.
Although the patient was not found to carry a mutation in any of the genes associated with an increased risk for breast cancer, she was found to have an MSH6 pathogenic mutation associated with Lynch syndrome/HNPCC. She underwent extensive counseling regarding her diagnosis. Her family was offered cascade testing for the identified mutation. As suggested by the family history, her mother had a positive test result for the MSH6 mutation. Although her mother carries the MSH6 mutation, she was cancer-free at age 65 after having had prophylactic total abdominal hysterectomy/bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (TAH/BSO) at age 52, and had been undergoing screening with colonoscopy and endoscopic gastroduodenoscopy (EGD) based on her family history. The patient’s two brothers and daughter were also found to carry the identified MSH6 mutation and were recommended to follow National Comprehensive Cancer Network guidelines for Lynch syndrome screening.
The patient underwent a prophylactic TAH/BSO a few months after completion of therapy in 2016, and the pathology was found to be benign. She is currently followed in a high-risk program and undergoes colonoscopy/EGD, capsule endoscopy, urine cytology, and skin examinations for screening.