In March 2019, a 25-year-old Chinese female patient was admitted to the endocrinology department of Nantong University Affiliated Hospital with hepatosplenomegaly for more than 20 years and vomiting for 4 days. At the age of 4, the patient was examined in the hospital because of repeated epistaxis, anemia and developmental delay and was observed to have hepatosplenomegaly. At the age of 10 years, the patient underwent liver biopsy due to abdominal distension, and the results suggested GSD1a. Since then, the patient was advised to consume uncooked cornstarch as a staple food. The patient’s blood was sent to Shanghai Xinhua Hospital for genetic testing at the age of 20. Compound heterozygous mutations, namely, 727G>T(L216L) and 674T>C (L225P), were detected in exon 5 of the G6PC gene (Additional file : Figure S1). The patient’s father and mother were heterozygotes who were found to carry 727G>T and 674T>C, respectively. In addition, the results of other biochemical examinations showed that the patient also suffered from hypothyroidism, hyperlipidemia, and osteoporosis and received further treatment accordingly.
The patient’s parents were healthy and had no family history of consanguinity. Menarche was reported to be at 14 years old with normal succeeding afterward.
Physical examinations showed that the patient was 155 cm in height and 40 kg in weight, below the average values of the patient’s peers (BMI = 16.64 kg/m2). Additionally, the patient’s secondary sex characteristic had developed normally. The patient’s abdomen was distended, and the liver was firm and palpated 10 cm below the right costal margin. Additionally, the spleen was palpated 4 cm below the left costal margin with hard and blunt edges. No obvious percussion tenderness was observed over the liver region.
Laboratory examinations showed slight anemia (hemoglobin 93 g/L), increased liver enzymes (AST 50 U/L), increased serum lipid levels (TC 8.7 mmol/L, TG 15.83 mmol/L), increased serum amylase (340 U/L), and disordered serum electrolytes (K+ 2.9 mmol/L, Na+ 137 mmol/L) (Additional file : Table S1). The patient’s fasting plasma glucose was 11.4 mmol/L, and her HbA1c was 5.5%. Islet cell autoantibody, insulin autoantibodies (IAA), antibody against glutamate decarboxglase (GAD-Ab), tyrosine phosphatase-like IA-2 autoantibody (IA-2A), and zinc transporter 8 antibody (Znt8) were all negative. Combined with the results of the islet function test , the patient was diagnosed with T2DM. The patient’s thyroid function showed FT3 levels of 5.15 pmol/L, FT4 of 8.47 pmol/L, and TSH of 14.99 mIU/L.
Imaging studies demonstrated some evidence supporting hepatomegaly and space-occupying lesions. Abdominal ultrasound showed several hypoechoic space-occupying lesions, with the largest size at 88 × 76 mm, showing clear boundaries and regular shapes. Abdominal MR showed that the liver was enlarged, with a smooth capsule and multiple round-shaped space-occupying lesions. The larger lesion was located in the right posterior lobe of the liver, with an approximate size of 8.0 × 6.4 cm (Additional file : Figure S2 a, c, e, g).
The patient was treated with corn starch treatment. In terms of blood glucose control, we first administered a subcutaneous injection of insulin aspart before three meals (6 u before breakfast, 4 u before middle, 4 u before dinner). Capillary blood glucose monitoring showed that the blood glucose was well controlled at night, while glucose fluctuated greatly during the day (Additional file : Figure S3). Therefore, we opted to switch to Humula 50R (10 u before breakfast) combined with insulin aspart (4 u before dinner) to provide a better blood glucose control. Oral levothyroxine sodium was used to regulate thyroid function. Additionally, we administered other adjuvant treatments such as liver protection, lipid-lowering, and calcium supplement.
Upon re-examination of abdominal MR, the size and number of the space-occupying lesions were shown to have increased (Additional file : Figure S2 b, d, f, h). Therefore, the patient was admitted to the Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University in March 2020. The postoperative pathological results suggested hepatic adenoma and steatosis. PAS staining demonstrated increased glycogen deposition in the liver tissue than that in the tumor tissue .
After using insulin for 2 months, we discontinued insulin aspart and retained only Humula 50R (8 u before breakfast) to control blood glucose. According to the follow-up results, the patient’s blood glucose levels were well controlled (Additional file : Figure S4). The patient’s weight also gradually increased (Additional file : Table S1). However, after treatment, liver function and blood lipids were not observed to improve. Renal function examination revealed that uric acid and urinary albumin concentration also gradually increased .
Recently, after informing the patient and family, and obtaining the signed informed consent, we collected the peripheral blood of the patient and her parents, and sequenced the entire exome of them to find the mutant gene, and then used first generation of sequencing to verify the mutation in the patient and her families. The result of exome sequencing suggests that there were heterozygous mutations on exon 5 of G6PC gene, c.648G>T (p.L216 L, NM_000151.4, rs80356484) from her father and c.674T>C (p.L225 P, NM_000151.4, rs1555560128) from her mother (Additional file : Figure S5, Additional file : Figure S6). Gene Reviews indicate that G727T is an alias for c.648G>T . c.648G>T is a well-known splice-site mutation and the most prevalent mutation (54% of the alleles) in Chinese patients , which causes CTG changing to CTT at protein 216 and creates a new splicing site 91 bp downstream of the authentic splice site, though both codons encode leucine [, ]. c.674T>C is a known missense mutation in GSD1a patients [, ] that causes TGC to become CGC at protein 225, thereby changing from coding for leucine to coding for proline. Furthermore, we predicted the protein structures of wild-type and two mutant G6PC proteins using I-TASSER and PyMOL software, respectively .