A 4-year-old girl with no previous comorbidities is admitted to the emergency room for 2 months, presenting with asthenia, weight loss, neck pain, difficulty in walking, and frequent falls for 2 months, evolving for 1 week with fever and progressive tetraparesis in all four limbs. On neurological examination, the patient had Glasgow 15, isochoric and photoreactive pupils, dysbasia, axial and appendicular ataxia, as well as alterations of the upper motor neuron syndrome (spastic tetraparesis, bilateral Hoffmann and Babinski signs, and global hyperreflexia).
In the diagnostic investigation, neuroaxis magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed, which showed multiple intramedullary expansile formations with diffuse leptomeningeal enhancement of the structures and spinal cord, as well as intraparenchymal enhancement in the brainstem, suggesting areas of cerebritis . Given the lack of specificity of the imaging examination in defining the etiology of the lesion, several diagnostic possibilities arise, such as infectious, inflammatory, and neoplastic causes. Therefore, to define the type of injury, the patient in question had, surgical treatment was proposed with the aim of decompressing the spinal cord and biopsying the injury.
On the 11th day of hospitalization, the patient underwent microsurgery for the resection of an expansive intramedullary lesion by C4-C6 posterior laminectomy, a procedure that occurred uneventfully. However, on the 6th postoperative day, the child evolved with a worsening level of consciousness, vomiting, and prostration. An urgent cranial computed tomography was performed, which showed acute hydrocephalus, and an external ventricular drainage (EVD) was then indicated for resolution of the condition. After the EVD procedure, the patient showed a significant improvement of the sensorium and the intraoperative cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed erythrocytes 220, leukocytes 12.5 (72% lymphocytes; monocytes 3%; and neutrophils 25%), glucose 58, and proteins 29.
On the 20th day of hospitalization, the anatomopathological result of the spinal cord lesion compatible with histoplasmosis was obtained . In view of this diagnosis, we started treatment with liposomal amphotericin 50 mg/day for 42 days. After clinical and laboratory improvement, ventriculoperitoneal shunt was performed for definitive treatment of hydrocephalus. The patient was discharged using fluconazole 100 mg/day in maintenance treatment for another 12 months.
An outpatient investigation for immunodeficiencies was carried out. The HIV test was negative, but the measurement of immunoglobulin A, complement, and CD4/CD8 suggested a probable diagnosis of primary immunodeficiency . After 2 years of the surgical procedure, the patient presents neurological evolution, maintaining Grade 4 tetraparesis, improvement in spasticity, and motor coordination, being able to walk with support. Neuroaxis MRI after 6 months of treatment does not show evidence of residual damage.