A 51-year-old female presented to the oculoplastic clinic with a 20-day history of gradual protrusion of the left eye, which was accompanied by ocular pain. The patient had been diagnosed with MM 2 years previously but was otherwise systemically well apart from hypertension and controlled on medication. The patient had been undergoing chemotherapy for 8 months since the diagnosis of the disease until the bone marrow transplant. The patient was in remission 1 year after the transplant, until she presented with left eye protrusion. Because of previous amblyopia, her best corrected visual acuity was 1/10 in the right eye and 7/10 in the left eye. Ocular examination showed proptosis and a moderate fullness of the left eye with no dystopia or ptosis (a, b). Limitation in adduction and limitation in inferonasal gaze (−1) were detected. Pupils were equal and reactive with no relative afferent pupillary defect. The slit-lamp examination and dilated fundoscopy were normal. The corneal sensation was normal in both eyes. Optic nerves were normal in both eyes. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the orbits showed no evidence of bone involvement. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and orbits (d–f) demonstrated a mass in the left superior oblique muscle belly with relatively homogenous contrast enhancement.
In order to obtain a definitive diagnosis, an anterior superonasal orbitotomy was performed through an extended incision at the medial end of the upper lid crease. After tissue dissection, we realized that the mass was within the superior oblique muscle belly. For this reason, it was not possible to completely excise the mass, and the mass was subjected to debulking and biopsy. After controlling the bleeding and placing a drain, the wound was sutured with nylon 6-0 (c).
Histopathologic examination revealed fibromuscular tissue containing a neoplasm composed of sheets of plasmacytoid cells in a varying degree of differentiation with intervening scantly vascularized stromal components. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) revealed that the plasmacytoid cells were diffusely positive for a cluster of differentiation 138(CD138). Thus, histopathology and IHC confirmed the diagnosis of plasma cell myeloma involving extraocular muscle and soft tissue of orbit (a–d).
The patient underwent palliative external beam radiotherapy. On systemic workup, positron emission tomography-computed tomography scan (PET-CT) revealed evidence of extramedullary disease (soft tissue density) on the left side of the pelvic cavity and left calf, compatible with active MM. The patient underwent an intensive chemotherapy regimen. The patient’s ocular symptoms resolved over a follow-up period of 6 months, with no sign of tumor activity in the orbit. Seven months after presentation, despite augmented chemotherapy, recurrence of plasmacytoma in the pelvic region and subsequent pressure on the pelvic veins resulted in progressive edema of the left lower limb and secondary thrombosis in Doppler ultrasound reports. Although the patient underwent intensive antibiotic and anticoagulant therapy, she succumbed to her illness due to severe sepsis and cardiogenic shock.