A 72-year old female melanoma patient attended our department in disease stage IV (pT2a, N3c, M1d; AJCC 2017) with a bulky ulcerated tumor mass on the right proximal upper leg, an asymptomatic singular brain metastasis, and further suspected tumor lesions pectoral, iliacal, inguinal and pulmonal. Serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) was elevated with 566 U/l (135–214 U/l) and S100B with 0.63 μg/l (< 0.2 μg/l). BRAF, NRAS, and KIT mutation analysis revealed gene wild-types. Based on tumor board recommendation we initiated ipilimumab (3 mg/kg body weight) and nivolumab (1 mg/kg body weight) combination therapy which was granted with accelerated approval by the FDA in 2015 for the treatment of patients with BRAF V600 wild-type, unresectable or metastatic melanoma. Radiotherapy for the brain lesion (stereotactic) and bulky mass on the right upper leg was also planned. Prior to initiation of treatment she had normal blood leucocytes and mild C-reactive protein elevation (CRP).
Two days after initiation of systemic immunotherapy she attended again our department with worsened pain on the right upper leg. Apart from her leg pain she was in good condition without history of chills, fever, weight loss or malaise. However, blood collections revealed a massive leucocytosis (68.970/μl; normal range: 4.600–9.500/μl) with neutrophilia (63.420/μl; normal range: 1.800–7.200/μl). CRP was elevated with 53 mg/l (< 0.5 mg/l). Wound swabs taken from the ulcerated tumor on right upper leg revealed Staphylococcus aureus. Hence we administered intravenously 600 clindamycine 3 times daily over 10 days. Blood smears did not reveal signs of leukemia. A bone marrow biopsy was refused by the patient. Procalcitonin was within the normal range. Repeated cultures from blood, urine, and sputum were sterile. Magnetic resonance tomography of the brain and thorax and abdomen computed tomography did not reveal evidence for an infectious focus but demonstrated progress of her tumor condition, including tumor infiltration of musculature on the right upper leg, new pulmonal lesions, and disseminated subcutaneous metastases. LDH and S100B were increased with 588 U/l and 1.27 μg/l, respectively. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) was elevated with 33 pg/ml (cut-off: < 21 pg/ml). Granulocyte macrophage-colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) was within the normal range. During 2 weeks after initiation of the systemic immunotherapy she developed hyperleucocytosis of 122.360/μl with massive neutrophilia (115.300/μl) as also demonstrated in Fig. . Because of her tumor progress and significant spontaneous improvement of her hyperleucocytosis we decided to carry on with nivolumab (fix dosage: 240 mg as approved by the EMA in 2018) monotherapy about 5 weeks after the initiation of the combination immunotherapy. Within the following week her leucocytes even dropped down to 9.600/μl. Since she remained in good condition we continued nivolumab monotherapy and local radiotherapy for the bulky tumor mass on the right leg. Nevertheless, after the second application of nivolumab monotherapy her general condition worsened and she refused further treatment. Two weeks after the last nivolumab infusion she died due to her progressive metastatic disease . Interestingly, hyperleucocytosis did not reoccur under her nivolumab monotherapy - her leucocytes were only mildly elevated up to 12.200/μl.