A 39-year-old Chinese female noted a round-shaped floater in the left eye 7 years ago and had experienced frequent visual disturbances for 3 months. Her medical history was unremarkable except for a surgery of laser in situ keratomileusis on both eyes 17 years ago. Her best corrected visual acuity was 20/20 OU. Axial length was 24.4 mm OD and 24.8 mm OS. A free-floating pigmented vitreous cyst was observed in the anterior vitreous of the left eye under the slit lamp. Except for the cyst, her bilateral ocular examination was unremarkable. No degeneration of the peripheral retina was detected in both eyes.
The color of the pigment clumps on the vitreous cyst was yellowish-brown as revealed by anterior segment photography . The vitreous cyst was confirmed to be cystic without scolex and non-lobulated by AS-OCT (Visante™ OCT, Carl Zeiss) . No cyst or mass in the iris and ciliary body was detected by ultrasound biomicroscopy that was performed in twelve meridians . No connection between the vitreous cyst and ocular structures was detected by B-scan ultrasound . Fundus examinations were performed to further testify the nature of the cyst . The cyst showed scattered and well demarcated pigmentation by fundus photograph . Fundus fluorescein angiography (Spectralis, Heidelberg Engineering) ruled out the presence of persistent hyaloid artery. The pigment clumps in the cyst wall lacked autofluorescence by blue-light autofluorescence imaging but appeared hyperreflective in the corresponding infrared image (Spectralis, Heidelberg Engineering). Auxiliary tests were done to rule out other possible pathogenies. Results of the blood tests were normal. Serum tests for cysticercoids, sparganosis and toxoplasma were negative. Stool examination showed no parasite ova.
The above mentioned medical history, ophthalmic examinations, and auxiliary tests ruled out other possibilities such as parasitic infection and led to the diagnosis of an idiopathic pigmented vitreous cyst. The cyst has been followed up for one year without giving any interventions. At the latest follow-up, the cyst sank to the inferior part of the vitreous and the patient’s visual acuity remained stable with less frequent obscurations.