A 2-year-old female patient was brought to our institution after a wringer injury to the distal forearm by a sawing machine. She sustained a near-total amputation at the distal forearm level with total disruption of the tendons, muscles, vessels, and nerves, as well as a fracture of both forearm bones at the distal one-third level. Just a 2-cm-sized skin tag was connected to the stump . There were no other injuries.
Replantation started 4 hours after the injury. Preparation of the stump and the amputated forearm was performed. After massive debridement, identification of the vascular, nervous, and muscular structures was performed. The radius and ulnar fractures were fixed with Kirschner and roll wires. Radial and ulnar arteries were anastomosed and three veins were anastomosed too. The median, ulnar, and radial nerves were managed by epiperineurorrhaphy. Muscles were readapted, flexor tendons were performed tenorrhaphy each by each, and extensor tendons were performed grouping tenorrhaphy.
Post-operatively, the patient tolerated the procedure well. Post-operative recovery was excellent and rehabilitation therapy was initiated.
At 2 years after replantation, motor and sensory functions were successfully recovered. She displayed wrist extension which was mildly reduced .
Ten years after the injury, she had gradual difficulty with wrist supination and shortening at the replanted limb . On the follow-up X-ray, the previous fracture site was healing but synostosis between the radius and ulna was found at the amputated level . Wrist supination motion was important for competent hand movements. So, she underwent surgery for ulnar shaft osteotomy for pseudoarthrosis-like Sauve-Kapandji procedure . Three months after the surgery, she recovered wrist supination at 80°, and social function like holding a pencil had much improved .
The last follow-up was 30 years after the replantation, and she showed an excellent range of motion and sensibility in two-point discrimination, pain, and temperature . She has no trouble with her daily living and is satisfied with the outcome.