We report the case of a 74-year-old white woman who was hit as a pedestrian by a car moving at approximately 40 to 50 km/hour. The initial emergency physician started treatment according to standard protocols. Her cervical spine was immobilized with a stiff collar and a pelvic compression belt was applied anticipating a pelvic injury. With a Glasgow Coma Scale of 14 at that time, there was no need for an emergency intubation. Her vital signs were documented; she had an arterial blood pressure of 160/100 mmHg and a heart rate of 86 beats per minute, indicating a negative shock index.
During transport she received 2×500 ml of crystalloid fluids (Sterofundin; B. Braun Melsungen, Germany). At our emergency department a multidisciplinary team of trauma surgeons, anesthesiologists, a neurosurgeon, a visceral surgeon, and a radiologist was awaiting the patient. At the time of her arrival, she was still awake and responsive with a Glasgow Coma Scale of 14. A physical examination according to the guidelines of Advanced Trauma Life Support showed no signs for an airway, breathing, or circulation problem (ABC-problem). Her thorax was stable and there were no indications for deterioration in gas-exchange. The pelvic splint applied by the emergency physician was left in place. An abdominal examination by a trained visceral surgeon showed no signs of tension or muscular defense. There were no visible abdominal contusion marks. Numerous fractures of her extremities were suspected, which were immediately repositioned and splinted. A focused assessment with sonography for trauma indicated no pleural effusion or pericardial effusion, and no free abdominal fluid, air, or hints for organ lacerations. A thoracic X-ray showed no signs of a pneumothorax or rib fractures. After a pelvic X-ray, non-dislocated fractures of the left ramus superior and inferior of her os pubis were suspected. The first blood gas analysis in our emergency room revealed a hemoglobin (Hb) level of 10.6 g/dl and a lactate level in physiological range (1.4 mmol/l). After initial assessment of our patient, a full body trauma computed tomography (CT) scan with the application of a radiocontrast agent was performed and the following diagnoses were stated using fracture classifications according to the Association for the Study of Internal Fixation (AO):Traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage Tripod fracture on the right side with orbital floor affection Three-part fracture of her proximal humerus on the left side (AO 11 C3) Two-part fracture of her proximal humerus on the right side (AO 11 C2) Small intracapsular hematoma of her spleen Pelvic ring fracture (AO type B)○ Fracture of the left ramus superior and inferior of her os pubis ○ Longitudinal fracture of her right sacrum Pertrochanteric femur fracture right (AO 32 A1) Fracture of her left proximal tibia (AO 42-C3)
There were no signs for free abdominal fluid or air, no signs for the extravasation of the radiocontrast agent in her thoracic, abdominal, or pelvic cavity (indicating a vascular injury), and no signs for a greater hematoma in the small pelvis. Her medical history revealed several internal comorbidities but no signs of coagulopathy or anticoagulant medication.
During the diagnostic phase she remained awake and neurologically adequate with stable hemodynamics. According to the concept of damage control the indication for external fixation of her pelvis and her lower extremity was made and she was transferred to our intensive care unit (ICU) before early operative treatment. In the course of the preoperative preparations she presented signs of respiratory exhaustion with increasing hypoxia and had to be intubated. During the intubation her clinical condition worsened dramatically due to aspiration and hemodynamic decompensation. Stabilization was only achieved after a period of approximately 5 minutes of mechanic cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) and continuous infusions of catecholamines. A physical examination of her abdomen showed no signs of tension. An immediate blood gas analysis revealed an Hb level of 5.7 g/dl; her lactate level was still in physiological range (0.5 mmol/l). An additional CT scan of her thorax, abdomen, and pelvis was performed due to the suspected diagnosis of anemic shock in order to rule out new sources of bleeding after the CPR. However, the second CT scan showed no new findings; explicitly, no free abdominal fluid or air, no signs of extravasation of the radiocontrast agent in her thoracic, abdominal, or pelvic cavity, and no signs for a progressing hematoma of her spleen or in her small pelvis .
She had received 5×500 ml of crystalloid fluid (2.5 liters) and 2×500 ml of colloidal fluid (1 liter) so far. According to clinical transfusion protocols, from this point of time on she received packed red blood cells (PRBCs), platelets, and fresh frozen plasma (FFPs) to compensate for the sudden drop in her Hb level. Within 25 minutes the first six PRBCs were transfused. In addition, she required high doses of catecholamines .
After the second CT scan, she was brought immediately to our operating room to stabilize her pelvic ring fracture. At the start of the operation, her ventilation situation worsened dramatically, with hypercapnia, hypoxia, and an increasing peak airway pressure of up to 60 cmH2O . In parallel, she presented an upper venous congestion with subsequent hemodynamic decompensation, necessitating mechanic CPR. Her abdomen appeared increasingly rigid and tense. Her lactate level was now increasing to 6.8 mmol/l . Bilateral chest drainages were applied to rule out a hemopneumothorax, but pulmonary ventilation became almost impossible. At the same time, a cardial tamponade was excluded by transesophageal echocardiography, and bronchoscopic evaluation of her airways showed no pathological findings. Under ongoing CPR, a pelvic clamp was applied to her dorsal pelvic ring for mechanical stabilization before performing a decompressive laparotomy. After opening her peritoneum, 2 liters of clear ascites-like fluid could be removed. After opening her abdomen widely, her ventilation situation immediately improved and her peak airway pressure was lowered to 35 cmH2O. After a total of 12 minutes of CPR a sinus rhythm and hemodynamic stabilization could be retained again. Catecholamine doses could be reduced extensively. She received 12 PRBCs, eight FFPs, and four platelets prior to the decompressive laparotomy. Combined with crystalloids and colloids, this equals a total volume of 10.5 liters of resuscitation fluids.
A detailed inspection of her abdominal cavity by a specialized visceral surgeon revealed no major bleeding or organ injury. Her spleen showed a small intracapsular hematoma, but no signs of greater injury. Her liver appeared to be congested. Her bowel looked edematous and showed signs of the beginning of ischemia. An inspection of her small pelvis showed no signs of bleeding. As a precaution, her pelvis was packed and the laparotomy was temporarily closed with a low-adherent wound contact layer, consisting of a flexible polyamide net coated with soft silicone.
In the postoperative course of treatment, additional operations followed. Her abdomen was closed 23 days after the decompressive laparotomy. She was transferred from our ICU to our intermediate care unit 40 days after trauma. She was transferred to a neurological rehabilitation center 8 weeks after trauma.