This is a 70-year-old female who is a known case of diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and coronary artery disease. She presented to our clinic in February 2013 with debilitating back pain secondary to degenerative lumbar scoliosis with a multilevel lumbar spinal stenosis. She had posterior spinal fusion from T12 to pelvis with a decompression of the stenotic levels. Two months following her surgery, she presented to our clinic complaining of disabling back pain after a history of falling on her back. This pain was exacerbated by activity and relieved by rest. However, she had no change in her neurological status. Clinical and radiographic findings confirmed T11 and T12 compression fractures. As the patient was symptomatic, the decision has been made to proceed with vertebroplasty and in this way avoid a more extensive surgery with rods and screws. Following general anesthesia, she was positioned in a prone position. Then, under direct fluoroscopy, the correct levels were confirmed followed by a standard percutaneous insertion of trocars into T11-T12 pedicles. High viscosity bone cement was injected into T11 and T12 vertebral bodies under fluoroscopic guidance. At T12, the bilateral trocars were placed using an in-out in technique aiming the tip of the trocar just under the pedicle screws at T12. A bipedicular approach was also used at T11 to inject bone cement. High viscosity bone cement was injected into T11 and T12 vertebral bodies under fluoroscopic guidance. The total volume of injected cement was 4 cc in each level. The patient tolerated the procedure and was discharged uneventfully. Six months following her vertebroplasty, she presented to our clinic with a history of trauma causing back pain, diminishing her ability to ambulate, and worsening neurological symptoms. On clinical examination, she had tenderness over the thoracolumbar spine and generalized weakness of the lower extremity. Radiographs demonstrated a significant 45-degree junctional kyphosis at T11-T12 with a loss of sagittal balance. Subsequent CT-scan showed an incidental finding of a cement pulmonary embolism in the pulmonary trunk and right and left main pulmonary arterial systems . Patient's spine sagittal imbalance was treated surgically by extending her spinal fusion up to T2 to restore her sagittal alignment. Nine months following her vertebroplasty, the patient started to have a new onset of shortness of breath. Pulmonary embolism was the main working diagnosis. For this reason, a complete cardiorespiratory work-up was carried out. CT pulmonary angiogram demonstrated an unchanged cement embolus within the pulmonary trunk extending to both main pulmonary arteries. Echocardiography revealed an ejection fraction of 60% and a pulmonary artery systolic pressure of 35 mmHg, which is considered normal. Pulmonary function testing was normal. Dobutamine cardiac echocardiography was also unremarkable. There was no physiological explanation for her shortness of breath, and her cement embolism is just an incidental finding. Moreover, her shortness of breath was mainly after exertion and responds very well to nitroglycerine. Because there is no interval change in the patient's pulmonary or cardiac function tests, the respirology and cardiology consultants recommended close monitoring for any signs and symptoms suggestive of worsening embolism. Serial cardiac and pulmonary assessments will be carried out looking for increased pulmonary artery pressure as an indicator for the removal of the cement embolus with the aid of an interventional radiologist.