A 6-month-old female infant was admitted to the nephrology department of Tianjin Children’s Hospital, China, on July 21, 2018. Physical examination revealed anasarca, cardiopulmonary examination showed no obvious abnormality or abdominal bulge, liver and spleen were not enlarged, and epileptic seizure, ataxia or facial deformity were present. Serological examination presented with massive proteinuria (5.657 g/d), hypoalbuminemia (serum albumin 18 g/L), hypercholesterolemia (serum total cholesterol 8.23 mmol/L), and lactic acidosis (4.32 mmol/L). The child’s parents are cousins and sisters, both of whom are Han, and they are in good health. Their first child was a girl who was diagnosed with mucopolysaccharides at the age of 6 and died at 11 years old. The second child was a 12-year-old healthy girl. The third girl was diagnosed with nephrotic syndrome at 8 months old; treatment was halted, and the child died. The fourth child was aborted at 5 months. The fifth is the child in this report. The mother had no pregnancy complications and was not on any special medication. The child was treated with methylprednisolone. There was no remission trend in proteinuria, showing hormone resistance. The patient rapidly developed acute renal failure within 1 week and underwent peritoneal dialysis. Renal pathological and gene examinations were performed over time. Light microscopy images showed 48 glomeruli, 4/48 as immature glomeruli, 17/48 of glomerular mesangial cells and matrix hyperplasia with different levels of insert appearance (glomerular collapse, did not see open capillary lumens), 15/48 of the glomerular balloon expansion, the expansion of multiple focal proximal convoluted tubules, sliced renal tubular epithelial lesions and interstitial oedema, and the small arteries did not show obvious pathological changes. Immunohistochemical testing of 4 glomeruli results include IgG(−), IgA(−), IgM(−), C3(−), C1q(−), and Fn(−) . Electron microscopy showed no obvious changes in the glomerular basement membrane, extensive fusion of epithelial cells, vacuolar degeneration of podocytes and no deposition of electronic dense matter. The renal tubular epithelium showed obvious vacuolar degeneration with varying sizes. There were flocculent/granular electronic dense substances in the vacuoles, some with core particles, increased lysosomes, partial shedding and partial atrophy of microvilli, and a small number of mononuclear lymphocytes infiltrating into the renal interstitium, showing vacuolar structure . The COQ2 gene has a homozygous mutation for c.832 T > C (p.cys278arg), and both her parents and sister were heterozygous . In addition, another likely pathogenic mutation was detected in the patient’s ARSB gene, which was c.1213 + 1G > A, which was a single base homozygous (Hom) mutation. Both parents were carriers of a heterozygous mutation in the ARSB gene, which her sister did not have . SIFT software was used to predict the function of c.832 T > C (p.cys278arg) protein, and the results were harmful . After several days of peritoneal dialysis, her parents eventually gave up treatment, and the child died 2 weeks later.