The patient was a 51-year-old woman on previous medical follow-up with NF1. A pelvic mass was noted on follow-up PET–CT. She was referred to our hospital for close examination and treatment due to slowly progressive radiating pain in the right lower extremity. The patient had no contributory family history, but had undergone several previous tumor resections associated with NF1. Contrast-enhanced CT showed a heterogeneous mass 75 mm in diameter in the right greater sciatic foramen . Pelvic MRI showed a heterogeneous, signal-hyperintense mass on T2-weighted imaging , and PET–CT showed an area of high uptake (SUVmax 12.7) consistent with the pelvic mass identified on MRI . Surgery was performed under a presumptive diagnosis of slowly increasing intrapelvic neurofibroma. The surgical approach was determined in consultation with an orthopedic surgeon before surgery. The plan was to use an open approach with the option of adding a posterior approach depending on tumor mobility and the state of the visual field near the sciatic foramen. Open surgery was initiated through a midline incision in the lower abdomen. The tumor located in the right lateral region was elastic and firm. The internal iliac vein was exposed and seen to be pushed up by the tumor, and was partially ligated and dissected. The obturator nerve and sciatic nerve were identified dorsally. A partial connection was apparent between the caudal side of the tumor and the sciatic nerve. A portion of the sciatic nerve was resected in combination with the tumor, preserving the sciatic nerve trunk. The obturator nerve was preserved with no connection to the tumor. The excised specimen was a yellowish-white mass with elastic hardness, 80 mm in diameter and with a solid part on the cut surface . Histological examination showed a coarse, dense pattern of cells with bundles of spindle-shaped cells with atypia and hyperplastic nuclei with darkly stained pleomorphic swelling . No clear necrotic foci were evident in the tumor, but scattered fission images were seen in areas of high cell density. Immunostaining showed that the atypical cells were S100-positive, so MPNST was diagnosed . Postoperatively, the patient developed mild and temporary bowel obstruction, which resolved with conservative treatment. As of the time of writing, 8 months postoperatively, no evidence of recurrence has been seen.