This case presents a 61-year-old male known to the retina clinic with progressive, severe vision loss secondary to RP. The patient has a self-reported history of “experimental vitrectomy” OU in Cuba in 1996, CE/IOL in the right eye (OD) in 2006, and cataract surgery and intraocular lens implant (CE/IOL) in the left eye (OS) in 2010 followed by pars plana vitrectomy (PPV) and removal of retained lens material in 2014, after which the patient was doing well. However, the patient's VA continued to deteriorate to NLP OD and LP OS. Therefore, he elected to have the Argus II implantation, which was done in his better seeing left eye in December 2017.
The following is the procedure details: first, we placed the external electronic case superotemporally and the band was passed under the muscles and secured with Watzke's sleeve in the superonasal quadrant. In order to do so, a 360-degree conjunctival peritomy was performed. The sub-Tenon space was opened in a blunt fashion in all quadrants. The four rectus muscles were identified with the muscle hook and isolated with a 2-0 silk suture. The muscle capsule was cleaned off with Q-tips. Two partial thickness scleral flaps were created inferonasally and superonasally to secure the strip. Electronic case with 2.5 mm silicone strip was passed under the muscles and belts and secured with a silicone sleeve superonasally. The case was tested with a central processing unit under sterile conditions, was secured with two 5-0 mersilene sutures superotemporally and one 5-0 mersilene sutures inferotemporally. Silicone strip was held in inferonasal and superonasal quadrants 12 mm behind the limbus with one 6-0 mersilene. Second, a 23-gauge pars plana vitrectomy with peeling of the posterior hyaloid face was performed. The infusion cannula was inserted at 5 o'clock and confirmed visually to be properly located in vitreous cavity inferotemporally. Two 23-gauge sclerotomies were placed at 10 and 2 o'clock. A 25-gauge chandelier-light source was placed inferiorly with a trocar system. The light pipe and vitrector were inserted in the vitreous cavity. Then after core vitrectomy, the posterior hyaloid face was stained with Kenalog and detached. It was excised successfully up to the periphery. Third, we extended the sclerotomy and passed the electronic array and filament intravitreally by extending the sclerotomy 5 mm superotemporally with a sharp blade 4 mm behind the limbus. The case was tested again with a CPK unit under sterile conditions, and an electronic array with filament was passed through it into the vitreous cavity with silicone sleeve-coated forceps. The sclerotomy was then closed with 5-0 mersilene sutures at the edges of the filament. Next, we placed the microelectrode array and perform transretinal and transchoroidal tacking of the array by placing the array on the surface of the macula holding from the manipulating knob with Eckhardt's forceps. It was orientated 45 degrees correctly to the transverse plane of the macula with the left inferior corner at the edge of the optic nerve. At 4 o'clock, 19-gauge sclerotomy was fashioned with an MVR blade. Then, retinal tack was loaded in the tacker, and bimanually, tack was passed through retina and choroid and tacked onto the posterior sclera, while keeping the microarray plate in position. Then, the donor-processed scleral patch was fashioned and secured with 7-0 vicryl. Similar patch was used to cover the coil inferotemporally and secured with 7-0 vicryl. Finally, we closed all sclerotomies and peritomy with 8-0 nylon and 7-0 vicryl, respectively.
The surgical implantation of the Argus II was successful, and the surgery was without complication . On postoperative day one, the patient's VA was LP OS, with elevated intraocular pressure (IOP) of thirty, which returned to normal one week later. At postoperative month one, the vision was stable at LP, with an IOP of seven. The eye was quiet, and the implant was working well; most importantly, the patient was satisfied with his ambulatory vision.
Four months after surgery, the patient presented complaining of aching pain; he was found to have preseptal cellulitis and was started on antibiotics. This cellulitis resolved over two weeks, but when the patient returned, he had a two mm hyphema associated with mild ocular inflammation without an inciting event or neovascularization on exam. The intraocular lens (IOL) was in the bag, and there was no reason for developing spontaneous hyphema. The hyphema was treated, and two weeks later, it had resolved without apparent incident. However, one month after the hyphema resolved, at postoperative month 6, the patient's VA OS diminished to NLP. In addition, the patient demonstrated phthisical changes, including hypotony (IOP 0 mmHg), Descemet membrane folds, and a vascular sheet posterior to capsular membrane. At no point in the patient's postoperative care, any posterior inflammatory or retinal issues were apparent, including retinal detachment or Argus dehiscence. There was no bleb formation or conjunctival dehiscence. Unfortunately, the phthisical progression affected the Argus II implant, which stopped transmitting the superior field.
The patient was started on steroids, but the eye remained hypotonus, and the patient's phthisical changes continued to progress despite therapy. Exploration of the device was offered to the patient, but the patient refused as it did not have any prognostic value in the setting of advanced retinitis pigmentosa.