A Japanese male, aged 64 years, presented with pain during urination lasting for 1 month. Abdominal CT showed a uniformly enhanced thickened right wall of the bladder but no suspected metastatic lesions . MRI revealed diffuse low intensity on T2-weighted images and uniform high intensity with focal strong intensity on diffusion-weighted images. These findings suggested advanced T-stage bladder cancer . Various serum tumor markers were found to be within normal range including serum CEA levels (3.6 ng/mL). After informed consent, a transurethral resection of the papillary lesion was performed; histopathological findings diagnosed a high-grade urothelial carcinoma . Therefore, laparoscopic radical cystectomy with urinary diversion was performed. Macroscopic pathological findings revealed a wide range of erosive protruded lesions with a post-resection scar but no papillary tumor remnants. Microscopically, urothelial carcinoma was observed in a small portion of the epithelium . Atypical cells with tubular formation were partially observed but most were occupied by infiltrating signet ring cells in a solitary manner . Signet ring cells invaded into the surrounding fatty tissue and seminal vesicles (pT4a). These results indicated invasive urothelial carcinoma with glandular differentiation of a signet ring cell–type with pT4aN0M0. Nineteen months after the radical surgery, serum CEA became elevated to 7.4 ng/mL (normal range: 0.1–5.0 ng/mL), and CT revealed a circumferential wall thickness with edema from the sigmoid colon to the rectum. Pathological findings in specimen obtained by colon fiber revealed atypical cells, therefore, the patient was diagnosed with mSRCCU. After informed consent, induction chemotherapy of a combination regimen of S-1 and CDDP was performed. After 7 cycles, diagnosed as a partial response, a switch maintenance therapy with avelumab was undertaken. However, the sudden emergence of right leg edema emerged and CT revealed an irregular thickness of subdermal and muscle tissues in the right thigh . A biopsy specimen of the percutaneous route revealed signet ring cells in the adipose tissue around the skeletal muscle . The serum CEA became elevated to 18 ng/mL and, therefore, third-line EV treatment was administered. After 3 cycles of treatment, the ascites disappeared, and both symptoms and CT images of the right thigh improved in addition to a decline of the serum CEA level to 8.6 ng/mL. Though AEs occurred, including grade 1 taste disturbance, a grade 1 localized rash, and grade 1 blurry vision, these were controllable. In total, the patient underwent 9 cycles of successful treatment of third-line EV. However, the patient developed pleural effusion, finally, he died of cancer after palliative therapy 29 months after the initiation of induction treatment for mSRCCU.