A 14-year-old boy with a diagnosis of autism and pathological demand avoidance with severe dietary restriction, presented with their parents to the local Children’s Assessment Unit with acute swelling of the left foot following a two month history of progressive immobility. The patient denied specific pain in the left lower limb but did complain of generalised muscle aching.
The progressive immobility was first thought to be psychosomatic, having had a similar episode two years prior trigged by illness of a pet and resolved following physical therapy. The patient had been seen by physiotherapy and orthopaedic teams prior to this admission.
Doppler ultrasound examination of the lower limbs demonstrated extensive deep vein thrombosis in the left superficial femoral vein extending into the left common femoral vein, the proximal extent was not seen [Fig. , Fig. ]. More proximal assessment of the distal external iliac veins was not possible because the patient declined examination of this intimate region. Treatment with low molecular weight heparin, subcutaneous injection of enoxaparin 1 mg/kg twice daily was commenced and then titrated based on anti-Factor Xa activity. Ultrasound examination of the abdominal organs was normal. There was no apparent cause for the deep vein thrombosis, although it was considered that the immobility could be a contributing factor.
Physical examination was difficult so further investigations were requested. Radiographs of the upper and lower limbs were initially interpreted as normal, the metaphyseal findings typical of scurvey were recognised during a second review for the pediatric multidisciplinary meeting [Fig. , Fig. ]. Laboratory testing demonstrated a severe anaemia with microcytosis and low ferritin in keeping with a severe iron deficiency anaemia. The patient also had folate deficiency, a mildly increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate and c-reactive protein but normal white cell counts. A serum autoantibody and rheumatology screen was negative [Table ].
MRI of the head, spine, pelvis and hip was performed. The brain and spinal cord were normal. In the pelvis there were large collections, lentiform in shape, along the medial margin of the iliac wings bilaterally. The collections showed mixed high and intermediate T1 and high STIR signal. They measured approximately 9 × 6 × 4 cm (anteroposterior x craniocaudal x width) and displaced the iliacus and psoas muscles medially to compress the external iliac vessels. The signal characteristics and location were in keeping with subperiosteal hematomata. A similar smaller subperiosteal hematoma was seen on the lateral aspect of the left iliac wing, deep to the gluteal muscles. Small bilateral hip joint effusions and high signal in the adductor muscles was also seen. There was no significant bone marrow oedema. [Fig. , Fig. ] Following discussion in the pediatric multidisplinary meeting, scurvy was suggested as the unifying diagnosis after review of the clinical history, blood results, radiograph and MRI findings. It was at this second review that the radiographic features of scurvy were recognised. A reducing regime of oral vitamin C replacement was commenced, starting at 1000 mg once daily, reducing to 500 mg, 200 mg, 100 mg and stopping at 2 weekly intervals.
In the two months prior to this presentation, the patient’s parents reported a significant reduction in the variety of his already narrow diet, mostly eating cheese sandwiches and crackers. Prior to this he was eating jam and toast which would have been a source of vitamin C. His admission weight was 36.45 kg, significantly lower than the 45 kg weight recorded at an outpatient clinic visit two months earlier. During this period, the patient had been complaining of ‘pain all over’ and his mobility had steadily declined from walking to being wheelchair bound. Following subsequent scrutiny of the clinical history, the patient and his family did remember a rash on the lower legs around the hair follicles and some bleeding when brushing his teeth. These features had all resolved by the time of the MRI, probably because the patient had been prescribed a multivitamin on admission, Forceval 1 capsule once daily one hour after food, whichcontains vitamin C.
Serum vitamin C levels prior to vitamin C replacement had not been measured but considering the clinical history, imaging findings and improvement of symptoms following commencement of vitamin C replacement, scurvy is the presumed underlying cause of the spontaneous hematomata. This would also explain the iron deficiency anaemia, both follow blood loss and as a direct effect of vitamin C deficiency on iron metabolism. Compression of the left external iliac vein due to the hematomas was the reason for development of DVT in this child.
Severe anaemia was treated with blood transfusion, 3 units of packed red cells, seeing improvement in hemoglobin from 4.8 to 9.2 g/dL. High dose vitamin C replacement, Forceval one capsule once daily one hour after food, was commenced along with intensive physiotherapy and dietician input. The patient’s mobility improved during his two-week inpatient stay but he did remain dependent on his wheelchair, struggling to extend his legs fully. His physical health and mood also improved during this time. Enoxaparin was changed to oral rivaroxaban, 15 mg once daily, on discharge.
Follow-up doppler ultrasound of the lower limbs demonstrated resolution of the DVT at 12 weeks, a repeat haemoglobin was normal at 12.7 g/dL and the patient’s ESR and CRP had normalised. Serum vitamin C was normal at this time.
Follow-up MRI scan 4 months following the initial presentation demonstrated a significant reduction in subperiosteal iliac hematomata with only thin residual collections along the medial and lateral iliac margins. [Fig. ] The patient continues to take the multivitamin daily and will do so indefinitely to prevent future vitamin deficiencies. Rivaroxaban was discontinued at 4 months post initiation. The patient’s mobility has continued to improve, and he is now mobilising short distances.