This is the case of a 37-year-old, primigravid woman who underwent spontaneous vaginal delivery. She was deemed to be well before labour with an uncomplicated pregnancy having walked to the delivery unit that morning. She had a normal blood pressure throughout pregnancy as well as in the postpartum period.
During labour, it was noticed that the patient was becoming increasingly confused but hours later she underwent normal vaginal delivery. She was however noted to be still confused by her husband. Twenty-five minutes after delivery, her first generalised tonic-clonic seizure occurred, lasting about 5 minutes before spontaneously resolving. Despite being given magnesium sulphate for possible eclampsia at that time, she remained confused and had a further seizure within 3 hours. A further infusion of magnesium was administered unsuccessfully, thus the patient was given intravenous anti-convulsants causing a decrease in consciousness requiring subsequent intubation for airway protection. She had a one-off elevated blood pressure of 160/102 during fitting, and at all other times she was normotensive. Her urinalysis showed a trace of protein after delivery. Eclampsia was subsequently thought to be unlikely. At the time of the mother's second fit, the newborn baby also had a seizure. Further information from the partner suggested that the couple normally drank a lot of water between them, with the mother drinking up to 4 litres of water a day. The mother had recently been drinking more than this because of the recent hot weather. She also continued to drink increasing amounts of water in the run-up to labour due to a feeling of thirst, after being taught to avoid dehydration in antenatal classes. Liberal fluid intake is encouraged to counter the fluid losses and energy expenditure during childbirth . There was no other medical or drug use history. The patient had an otherwise normal healthy diet.
Her immediate blood tests showed a metabolic acidosis, likely to have been caused by the two fits, as well as low serum sodium of 111 mmol/litre, low urea of 0.8 mmol/litre along with low chloride and potassium levels. Urinalysis revealed a urine osmolality of 67 mosmol/kg and urinary sodium of 10 mmol/litre. A paired serum osmolality of 228 mosmol/kg was consistent with a dilute serum and urine, suggesting water overload. Neurological examination before intubation showed normal fundi and no focal neurological abnormality other than the marked confusion. The newborn baby also had low serum sodium of 108 mmol/litre, urine osmolality of 46 mosmol/kg, urinary sodium <10 mmol/litre and serum osmolality of 225 mosmol/kg. The mother was subsequently managed on the intensive care unit and the baby on the special care baby unit. A maternal lumbar puncture was normal as was subsequent cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showing no venous sinus thrombosis or evidence of central pontine myelinolysis.
The maternal sodium was initially corrected at a rate of 1 to 2 mmol/l/hour with hypertonic saline. This rapid correction was done due to her ongoing seizure risk and stopped when the serum sodium reached 125 to 130 mmol/litre or the patient deemed to be no longer at risk of life-threatening manifestations of severe hyponatraemia with cessation of seizure activity. Too rapid a correction of serum sodium can trigger demyelination of pontine and extrapontine neurons to occur after one or up to several days after the correction. This causes neurological dysfunction, including quadriplegia, pseudobulbar palsy, seizures and death. Most reported cases of osmotic demyelination have occurred after rates of correction exceeding 12 mmol/litre per day . A correction rate of up to 8 to 10 mmol/litre per day is recommended to reduce the risk of osmotic demyelination but can be cautiously exceeded if severe symptoms do not respond [,]. Due to the acute and life-threatening nature of her illness, hypertonic saline was chosen to raise the serum sodium rather than fluid restriction which may be more appropriate in more chronic conditions. The amount of hypertonic saline needed is estimated by calculating the sodium deficit using the following equation:
Total body water is estimated as lean body weight times 0.5 for women or 0.6 for men.
This gave us an estimate in mmol/litre of sodium required, thus allowing a suitable volume of hypertonic saline to be infused to achieve the above rate of correction . Another equation can also be used to see the effect of 1 litre of any intravenous solution on serum sodium.
Frequent sodium measurements are still required to assess the efficacy of treatment. Blood tests in both mother and baby subsequently slowly normalised. This improvement allowed the mother to be extubated the next morning. It was noted that the mother had fractured her left neck of femur as well as having a right shoulder fracture dislocation, both of which were subsequently repaired without incident. Bone densitometry and biopsy showed osteoporosis. A short synacthen test was normal ruling out primary adrenal failure as a possible cause for the hyponatraemia and osteoporosis. Parathormone and thyroid function testing was also normal. The osteoporosis could be associated with the pregnancy, as no other cause was identified in this young primigravid woman. The mother subsequently made a full neurological recovery with no further episodes of confusion or fitting.