A 77-year-old Cantonese speaking female patient with a vague history of “back tumor” 15 years ago that was never biopsied, presented to the emergency room with a new onset of left-sided low back pain shooting down the leg associated with weakness, numbness, and inability to walk. She was also complaining of nausea and dizziness. The patient was hemodynamically stable (blood pressure 125/65 mmHg; pulse rate, 70/min) although her work-up revealed a hemoglobin of 7.8 g/dL. On physical examination, there was a notable left paraspinal swelling with a harsh bruit audible in the same area associated with tenderness in the thoracolumbar junction, left flank ecchymosis and a positive straight leg raising test. The patellar and Achilles tendon reflexes were normal and symmetric. There was no sensory disturbance. With a consideration for internal bleeding, fluid resuscitation, blood transfusion, and oxygen supplementation were administered. The patient received transfusion of 4 units of packed red blood cells and 1 unit of platelets. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed a large retroperitoneal hematoma , and computed tomography angiography (CTA) revealed several large, dilated vascular structures in the left retroperitoneum . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spine confirmed a large hematoma in the left psoas muscle extending from the T12 to L4 vertebral levels and numerous flow-voids in the left paraspinal muscles [Figures and ]. No abnormal signal of the spinal cord was noted.
The patient was taken urgently to the angiography suite. From a right femoral artery access, a spinal angiography was performed. It demonstrated a large left paraspinal high-flow arteriovenous malformation (AVM), with large arterial aneurysms at the left T11, T12, and L1 segmental arteries . The segmental arteries, and then the aneurysms were selectively catheterized and embolized. The left L1 aneurysm was embolized using three Axium coils (ev3; Irvine, CA), followed by injection of Onyx-34 (Micro Therapeutics Inc.; Irvine, CA). The left T11 and T12 aneurysms were embolized with intra-aneurysmal injection of Onyx-34 . The postoperative course was uneventful, and there was no recurrence of hemorrhage. The patient was seen for clinical follow-up 1 month after treatment and had no residual back or leg pain. Six months following the procedure, the patient underwent an MRI and a conventional spinal angiography . The angiogram showed no residual or recurrent aneurysms, but persistence of the AVM in the left T11-L1 paraspinal region. We decided not to perform embolization of the residual AVM itself because we estimated that the risk of hemorrhage was low as long that the aneurysms were occluded. The patient will be followed with yearly MRIs.