A 70-year-old female visited our neurosurgical outpatient clinic with a two-year history of right painful sciatica at the dorsal aspect of the right foot with coexisting affected limb soreness and clumsiness, which was compatible with a right L5 dermatome, and worsened over the last two months, necessitating the prescription of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).
Her neurological presentation further aggravated to become an intractable right buttock pain accompanied with lower limb weakness, and she was even referred to the emergency department because of an inevitable injury due to an accidental fall that occurred as a consequence of her unsteady gait. Careful assessments revealed a positive straight leg raising test on the right at 70 degree; however, this test was negative on the left. On laboratory examination, patient’s complete blood count, C-reactive protein, and urinalysis were normal. Biochemistry reports including uric acid (4.1 mg/dL) and electrolytes were all within normal ranges. Plain radiographs showed neither bony fracture over her right hip nor the pathognomonic chondrocalcinosis of the lumbar spine. Axial-sagittal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed extradural cystic tumors causing moderate indentation and displacement of the L4-5 thecal sac and cauda equina, together with an extension into the corresponding right neuroforamen ( and ). The lesion showed in the MRI was low intensity on T1 weighted and high intensity on T2 weighted, which implied a fluidic content. Further gadolinium enhanced survey revealed a weak rim enhancement of the structure.
A posterior laminectomy approach for tumor removal was then arranged. One main huge tumor was identified around the right L4-5 juxta-facet joint while the other minor was part beneath the spinal lamina. All tumors were excised intraoperatively with preservation of the neural structures. The masses were macroscopically extradural, tophaceous, and soft . Microscopically, the specimen consisted of countless weakly positive birefringent rhomboid shaped crystals when examined under polarized light ( and ). Her symptoms were relieved, and she experienced adequate functional recovery after the operation without recurrence for four years till now.