A 64-year-old female presented with central chest pain on a background of hypertension, and previous lung malignancy (adenocarcinoma staged as T2a, N1, and M0) for which she had a video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) lower lobectomy in 2014 and adjuvant chemotherapy followed by radiotherapy. On presentation, there were no positive cardiovascular examination findings, and no significant electrocardiogram (ECG) changes . However, serial high sensitivity troponin I (hs-TnI) were elevated at 10 ng/L and then 84 ng/L (normal range <16 ng/L), and a diagnosis of non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndrome was made. As per our hospital protocol, the patient was started on dual antiplatelet therapy (aspirin—loading dose of 300 mg followed by 75 mg once a day and ticagrelor—loading dose of 180 mg followed by 90 mg twice daily), high dose statin (atorvastatin 80 mg once daily), and low molecular weight heparin (fondaparinux 2.5 mg subcutaneously once daily).The patient was admitted to the cardiology coronary care unit and a transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) was performed while awaiting a coronary angiogram. Transthoracic echocardiogram revealed normal left ventricular (LV) systolic function and no valvular pathology. Specifically, there was no AR (see S).
The following day, the patient was taken to the catheter laboratory and underwent invasive coronary angiography via the right radial approach using 6F JR4 and JL3.5 catheters. This revealed an unobstructed left coronary artery system with a severely calcified ostial right coronary artery (RCA) disease which was felt to be the culprit of the presentation (see , ). Initial balloon dilatation required a 2.0 × 15 mm NC TREK balloon (Abbott, USA) but this showed incomplete expansion. Therefore, rotational atherectomy with an Amplatz left (AL) 0.75 guide (Boston Scientific, USA) and a 1.5 mm rota-burr was utilised. Initial wiring through the lesion was challenging but successful using a Fielder FC wire (Asahi Intecc Medical, Japan). Subsequent rotablation required four ‘passes’ of the burr to ablate the calcium. This was challenging and despite the use of a relatively supportive guide, there was ‘backing out’ guide. Repeat angiographic images after rotablation raised the suspicion of perforation in ostium of the RCA due to dye extravasation. Balloon tamponade of the area was successful with subsequent PCI being performed successfully from the ostium to mid vessel using two overlapping 3.5 × 29 mm BIOMATRIX drug eluting stent (Biosensors International, Singapore) with post-dilation using a 3.5 × 20 mm NC TREK balloon—Abbott, USA (see , ). The final angiographic result appeared satisfactory. A TTE following the procedure revealed moderate AR with preserved LV size and function (see , ), and a computed tomography (CT) angiogram performed ruled out aortic root dissection.
Given the patient remained clinically well, she was discharged on dual antiplatelet therapy, atorvastatin 80 mg, bisoprolol 2.5 mg, and ramipril 2.5 mg with plan to follow up in outpatient clinic. Upon 6-week review in clinic, the patient complained of breathlessness and a subsequent outpatient transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) showed evidence of severe eccentric AR some mobile leaflet tissue attached to the ventricular side of one of the cusps, likely relating to cusp perforation (see , ). Ejection fraction (EF) was quantified as 62 ±5% by 3D volume method. Transoesophageal echocardiogram was delayed due to significant pressures because of the Sars-CoV2 pandemic. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging confirmed severe AR with left ventricular dilatation (see , ). Repeat angiogram 6 months from the time of the index procedure showed in-stent restenosis at two focal points in the proximal and mid RCA (see , ). The patient was presented and accepted by heart multidisciplinary team for aortic valve replacement (AVR) and grafting of RCA. This was uncomplicated, and following discharge was reviewed in outpatient clinic where she had an improving exercise tolerance, and follow up TTE revealed a stable AVR with no AR and normal EF (65%). Medications at this stage included dual antiplatelet therapy, atorvastatin 80 mg, ramipril 2.5 mg, and omeprazole 40 mg.