Mr. G is a 69-year-old male who presented to his general practitioner with a 2-month history of anxiety, sadness, lack of pleasure in usual activities, fatigue, difficulties falling asleep and waking up early in the morning, reduced appetite, and significant weight loss. He has been working as a transport manager but had retired 1 month prior to presentation due to his current health problems. He was living alone in the countryside. The patient denied a past history of psychiatric or somatic disorders and was not taking any medication at the time of presentation. Physical examination revealed no abnormalities. Routine blood work that included clinical blood count and blood chemistry was evident for dyslipidemia.
The patient was referred for neurology and psychiatry consultations. On psychiatric interview, the patient was alert, oriented, and was noted to have symptoms of psychomotor retardation, tearfulness, depressed mood, feelings of worthlessness, and pessimistic thoughts about the future. The patient denied suicidal thoughts. Neuropsychological testing demonstrated mild cognitive impairment due to concentration difficulties, and moderately severe depressive symptoms as well as mild anxiety symptoms. The patient's symptoms were mostly consistent with major depressive episode, and antidepressant treatment with mirtazapine 15 mg once daily was initiated. Neurological examination did not reveal any cranial nerve deficits. Non-contrast computed tomography (CT) of the head was ordered to rule out organic brain lesions. Rather unexpectedly, non-contrast head CT demonstrated hypointense oval-shaped lesion of 0.9 cm in diameter within the projection of the anterior communicating artery that was mostly consistent with a saccular aneurysm . On head CT scan, there were also multiple lacunar ischemic lesions and signs of chronic ischemic encephalopathy. There were no signs of subarachnoid bleeding. Subsequent CT angiography confirmed the diagnosis of 0.8 × 0.6 cm saccular aneurysm originating from the anterior communicating artery and from the A2 segment of the left anterior cerebral artery . The patient underwent microsurgical clipping of the aneurysm. Postoperative period was uneventful without postoperative complications. On psychiatric assessment 10 days after the surgery, the patient reported improved sleep quality and reduced anxiety and fatigue symptom severity. Depressive symptoms were not identified, and only mildly increased emotional lability and mild distraction were noted. Mirtazapine treatment was discontinued. On neurological assessment, the patient was alert and oriented, without any neurological signs or symptoms. During the psychiatrist consultation 1 month after the surgery, the patient reported improved mood symptoms. He enjoyed his everyday activities again. On neuropsychological assessment, cognitive functioning was within age limits, and he did not express mood and anxiety symptoms. There were no neurological signs and symptoms. On follow-up 1 year after the surgery, the patient did not report mood and anxiety symptoms.