A 35-year-old man was admitted to the urology emergency department, in Imam Reza Hospital of Mashhad in Iran, with a chief complaint of an enlarged testicle on the left side. He had one child and no history of undescended testis in childhood. Initial physical examination revealed swelling of the left testis and the presence of a painless mass within the testis. Preoperative assessment of tumor markers revealed a significant increase in alpha-fetoprotein (AFP: 685 ng/mL) (normal range, <40 ng/mL) and human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG: 2240 mIU/mL) (normal range, <2 mIU/mL). In addition, preoperative diagnostic computed tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis showed no distant metastases. The patient then underwent radical inguinal orchiectomy in July 2018. Pathologic examination revealed the presence of a 13-cm mass consisting of a yolk sac tumor (40%) and an immature teratoma component (60%). The neoplasm was confined to the testis and the tunica albuginea was free of tumor. No lymphatic invasion was noted. Five weeks after surgery, AFP and HCG had decreased to 132.6 ng/mL and 5.9 mIU/mL, respectively, and LDH levels were within the normal range (pathologic T1b, clinical N0 S1, AJCC prognostic stage: IS). The patient was referred to the oncology department. However, he refused further consultations.
In September 2019, the patient was admitted with persistent nonproductive cough, left flank pain, and low back pain. Serum levels of AFP and HCG were 543 ng/mL and 329 mIU/mL, respectively. In addition, a whole-body CT scan revealed multiple mediastinal adenopathies, a mass with lobulated borders in the middle lobe of the right lung, and a 6-cm left para-aortic adenopathy that extended into the hilum of the left kidney along with a renal mass, which was suggestive of renal metastasis . The case was discussed by a multidisciplinary team, and chemotherapy with BEP every 21 days (bleomycin 30 U, days 1, 8, 15 + etoposide 100 mg/m2, days 1–5 + cisplatin 20 mg/m2, days 1–5) was initiated. After four cycles, serum levels of tumor markers normalized, renal and lung masses and para-aortic lymphadenopathy decreased, but a new ground-glass opacity appeared in the posterior segment of the left lower lobe, raising the differential diagnosis of recent pneumonia or a new metastatic lesion (December 2019) . With the diagnosis of teratoma-predominant metastatic disease, the BEP regimen was replaced with VeIP (vinblastine sulfate 2 mg, days 1, 2 + ifosfamide 1200 mg/m2, days 1–5 + cisplatin 20 mg/m2, days 1–5) and surgical consultation was requested for resection of the metastases.
After 3 cycles, the size of the lung lesions decreased significantly, the mass lesion in the left lung disappeared, and para-aortic lymphadenopathy and renal mass were stable. Tumor markers were also normal.
However, for personal reasons, the patient did not adhere to surgical advice and did not visit the clinic for 12 months. In December 2020, he was hospitalized for worsening symptoms, and further examination revealed that all metastatic lesions had progressed significantly, in addition to a new lesion in the right renal medulla and an erosive lesion in the T12 vertebral body . Whole-body bone scan also showed increased uptake of T12. Four cycles of chemotherapy with TIP (paclitaxel 250 mg/m2, day 1 + ifosfamide 1500 mg/m2, days 2–5 + cisplatin 25 mg/m2, days 2–5) were prescribed and completed in February 2021. After whole-body CT scan showed partial response of both lung mass and para-aortic lymphadenopathy, the patient underwent radical nephrectomy and retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy (RN + RPLND) in June 2021. RN and RPLND were to be performed first, followed by thoracic metastatic resection and radiotherapy or surgery to remove the bone tumor if successful.
During the operation, renal vein thrombosis was detected by exploring the peritoneum. Therefore, radical nephrectomy was planned along with thrombectomy. First, the renal artery was cut, and then the renal vein was cut at the distal point of the tumor site. During the operation, the cartilaginous consistency of the renal vein thrombosis was noticed. Finally, the right kidney with a thrombosed renal vein was completely excised along with bilateral RPLND . Pathological findings revealed a solid cystic tumor mass measuring 4.5 × 3.5 × 2.5 cm located in the hilus of the left kidney and extending into the renal medulla, and microscopic examination revealed a metastatic germ cell tumor (teratoma: 70%, yolk sac tumor 25%, seminoma 5%) . In addition, resection of the left para-aortic mass (size 8 × 4.5 × 3 cm) revealed necrotic tissue surrounded by a fibrohistiocytic reaction supporting necrotic lymph nodes. There was no viable tumor in the resected mass. After surgery, the patient's performance deteriorated and further surgery was not possible. He received T12 palliative radiotherapy (30 Gy/10 fractions) for pain control. Subsequently, three cycles of palliative chemotherapy with GemOx (gemcitabine 1000 mg/m2, days 1, 8 + oxaliplatin 130 mg/m2, day 1) were prescribed. Unfortunately, the response to treatment was not favorable, and the patient died after 3 months in January 2022.