A 77-year-old man, with a background of hypertension and diabetes mellitus, underwent pylorus-preserving PD for suspected distal bile duct cancer. He developed a pancreatic anastomotic leakage on postoperative day (POD) 6, which was draining from a drain placed at the pancreaticojejunal anastomosis during surgery. Sentinel bleeding from the drain was noted on POD 8, and an immediate contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan revealed no obvious bleeding points. However, a massive hemorrhage from the drain suddenly developed on POD 9, and emergency angiography detected a pseudoaneurysm at the CHA, which had caused the bleeding . The right hepatic artery (RHA) independently branched from the origin of the CHA. Based on the general condition of the patient and the likelihood of postoperative adhesions, the placement of a stent graft was the treatment of choice. A 6-F sheath was passed through the celiac trunk via the femoral artery. A 6 mm × 5 cm Viabahn stent (W.L. Gore, Flagstaff, Ariz) was placed from the CHA and the distal part of the replaced RHA to the left hepatic artery (LHA) with heparinization . Angiography following stent graft placement revealed the absence of a pseudoaneurysm and preserved hepatic arterial blood flow. His vital signs were stable after the intervention, and antiplatelet therapy was initiated using aspirin 100 mg/day. However, re-bleeding from the drain appeared on POD 12. Angiography was immediately performed, and contrast extravasation from an aneurysm at the RHA was detected . A 5 mm × 5 cm Viabahn stent was placed into the RHA with heparinization. Subsequent angiography showed the occlusion of the latter Viabahn stent, while the patency of the former Viabahn stent was maintained . Due to sufficient hepatic arterial blood flow through the RHA, by retrograde flow via the LHA, no additional intervention for the stent graft occlusion was performed, and the patient was carefully observed. A biliary fistula appeared on POD 15, which might be caused by the occlusion of RHA and compression of massive hematoma around the biliary anastomosis. An abdominal abscess around the biliary anastomosis was detected, and percutaneous CT-guided drainage was performed on POD 28, and antibiotic therapy based on a bacterial culture was initiated. These pancreatic and biliary fistulas were considered to be a refractory complication. On POD 85, the patient’s general condition worsened, and the CT scan revealed the presence of air within the latter occluded stent graft, which indicated that the stent graft had become infected . Escherichia coli was confirmed by blood culture, and the patient died on POD 91 due to sepsis caused by the graft infection. This study was approved by the ethics committee of our institution, and informed consent was obtained from the patient’s next-of-kin.