A 26-year-old gravida 2 para 0, was referred to Princess Christian Maternity Hospital, Freetown, Sierra Leone, with amenorrhea of three months duration a three day history of worsening pelvic pain. She had a prior history of right salpingectomy performed 3 years before presentation as a result of ruptured right tubal EP. On examination, there was moderate tachycardia and lower abdominal tenderness; the pregnancy test was positive, and the transabdominal ultrasound scan revealed a 12-weeks left adnexal EP with a vital fetus and no free fluid collection in the pouch of Douglas . In this public academic hospital No other hematological diagnostic or imaging investigations were available, and they were not included in the free healthcare guaranteed by the national program. Blood tests and magnetic resonance imaging are carried out in other private institutions. A rapid test for hemoglobin was performed and the result was within the normal range. In the presence of the husband, the patient was offered detailed counselling for the management of her condition. Considering the vital fetus, the global consensus indicates the surgical removal of the pregnancy. As a symptom, pain could indicate impending or initial tubal rupture, and the consequent bleeding potentially threatens the patient’s survival. Therefore, emergency exploratory laparotomy was proposed for suspicion of the imminent rupture of the EP.
Considering the previous salpingectomy and subsequent fertility implications, the patient outrightly refused both surgery and hospital admission, even after the proposal to only be hospitalized and remain monitored without immediate intervention. Analgesics and hematinics were then prescribed and a short-term outpatient follow-up was then advised. She defaulted on antenatal follow-up visits, and she avoided responding to repeated attempts of the medical staff to contact her. She only came to the hospital at 26 weeks of gestation. An ultrasound scan was then repeated . The fetus was still vital and growing within the normal range, with adequate amniotic fluid and normal umbilical flow at the Doppler ultrasound assessment. She was then admitted for close monitoring and expectant management. Fetal lung maturation was induced by maternal intramuscular injection of corticosteroids at 28 weeks of gestational age, in order to reduce the risk of severe neonatal respiratory distress syndrome.
Eventually, a healthy baby girl weighing 1.9 kg was delivered by laparotomy at 34 weeks of gestational age, with an APGAR score of 8 in one minute and 9 in five minutes, and was referred to the special care baby unit. No major anatomical abnormalities of the newborn were noted, with the exception of mild contractures of the lower limbs. The placenta was firmly adherent to the left lower abdomino–pelvic wall, the annexus, the broad ligament and the sigmoid colon on the same side. Therefore, a decision was made to provide essential hemostasis and leave it in situ in order to prevent a potentially dramatic hemorrhage. Total estimated blood loss was 1200 mL and 2 units of whole blood were transfused. Tranexamic acid and broad-spectrum antibiotics were therefore prescribed and 12 h after the surgery, when the patient was hemodynamically stable, anti-thrombotic prophylaxis with low molecular weight heparin was introduced. The mother and the baby recovered well and were discharged home 2 weeks later.