A 20-year-old male presented with a 5 months history of gradually progressive pain in the right hip region. The pain was dull aching in nature and aggravated on standing from a sitting posture. There was no radiation of pain, no history of trauma, fever, or night pains.
On examination, the patient had no evidence of any systemic illness. Local examination revealed painful hip movements. There was no wound, sinus, swelling, or discharge found. There was no raised local temperature, lymphadenopathy, and neurovascular deficit. The blood workup showed normal hemogram, renal, and liver functions. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, and parathyroid hormone levels were within normal limits.
Anteroposterior radiograph of pelvis with both hips showed a well-defined geographic, predominantly lytic lesion in the head of the femur, anteroinferior in location, with a small amount of calcified matrix, with a narrow zone of transition . It revealed no periosteal reaction, cortical destruction, and soft-tissue involvement. Computerized tomography (CT) impression was a 2×2.5 cm lytic lesion in the femoral head, with mild expansion. There was no obvious adjacent cortical breach to suggest pathological fracture. Findings were suggestive of benign bone lesion .
After careful pre-anesthetic evaluation, the patient was taken up for “safe surgical dislocation of hip , curettage, and excision biopsy with autogenous iliac crest bone graft with Herbert screw fixation” . A biopsy specimen was collected intraoperatively and sent later for histopathological examination, which revealed lobules of mature cartilage, separated by fibrous septa and bony spicules, features suggestive of enchondroma .
Postoperatively, the patient was advised bed rest with a derotation boot and restricted weight bearing. Static exercises were started on 2nd day. The patient was discharged on the 10th day and bed rest with a derotation boot was advised until 3 weeks. On follow-up, the patient was subjected to partial weight bearing after 6 weeks. At 6 months follow-up, the patient was able to bear complete weight, was symptom-free, and was able to perform activities of daily living . No local recurrence was noted on repeat radiological examinations . No further treatment was required.