A 29-year-old otherwise healthy woman who had frequently suffered from tonsillitis was admitted for tonsillectomy. The preoperative physical examination revealed no other abnormalities. Tonsillectomy was performed under general anaesthesia with orotracheal intubation. The tonsils were removed by electrodissection with bipolar scissors, and haemostasis was achieved using bipolar cautery. There was no remarkable bleeding during the procedure. There were some adhesions between the tonsils and tonsillar beds that were more remarkable on the left side. After the procedure, the patient was monitored in the recovery room and she was discharged a few hour later.
About 14 hours after the procedure, the patient telephoned the emergency department because some swelling had suddenly appeared on the left side of her face, some two hours earlier. She was advised to come to the emergency department immediately. The patient felt some pressure in the facial region and had a sore throat. She had neither a cough nor difficulty in breathing, and she was able to swallow normally. Physical examination by the on-call otolaryngologist revealed left facial swelling and crepitus that extended to the temporomandibular joint region on the same side and also in the upper neck region (see Figure ). There was neither redness nor signs of cellulitis in the swollen area. Inspection of the tonsillar fossa revealed neither mucosal tear nor other abnormal findings. In indirect laryngoscopy, the larynx and hypopharynx appeared normal. In blood tests, the value of the white blood cells (WBC) was 12.7 × 103/μL and the value of C-reactive protein was 5.1 mg/l. The body temperature was 37.2 degrees Celsius. A chest x-ray was taken the same night and no pathological findings were found. Based on clinical examination, there was no suspicion of abscess or serious infection, and therefore neck computer tomography (CT) imaging was not carried out. Although there was no radiological confirmation the patient was thought to have facial subcutaneous emphysema that developed after the tonsillectomy (see Figure ).
Treatment was started with a cephalosporin antibiotic (cephalexin 750 mg ×2 per os) and the patient was admitted to the ear and oral diseases ward. The following day, the swelling had extended slightly to the left orbital and frontal areas. The clinical examination of the neck and larynx did not, however, reveal any deterioration. Crepitus was still apparent in the cheek area and also on the mandibular angle. The patient did not have any general symptoms. In blood tests, the WBC was 9.3 × 103/μLand the C-reactive protein was 18.1 mg/l. The antibiotic treatment was continued and the patient was also given oxygen 2 l/min through a nasal cannula for about 24 hours, although she did not have problems with breathing at any point during her stay in hospital.
The next day, the swelling had decreased slightly. The patient was feeling well, and she was therefore discharged. The cephalosporin antibiotic was continued for a week. The patient was also forbidden to smoke.
In the follow-up examination five days after the onset of symptoms, the crepitus and swelling were resolved. In addition, normal post tonsillectomy status was revealed in the pharynx examination without any pathological findings.