A 37-year-old woman presented with a sacrococcygeal mass that had been increasing in size over the previous 6 mo.
The patient inadvertently found a sacrococcygeal mass 6 mo prior, which was approximately the size of a pigeon egg at first, without pain or other discomfort. The mass gradually increased in size, accompanied by lumbosacral distension. No definite diagnosis was made after an examination at the local hospital; thus, the patient was transferred to our hospital for further diagnosis and treatment.
The patient had no previous medical history.
The patient and family histories were negative.
A digital rectal examination revealed a large solid mass in the anterior rectal wall, with a hard texture and fixed position. The mass boundary could not be palpated.
The results of laboratory examinations were normal, including routine blood analysis, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19-9, and CA125 results.
Preoperative MRI showed a paracervical mass in the pelvis, measuring approximately 9.5 cm × 8.1 cm in size . T2-weighted imaging (T2WI) presented stratification changes with alternating high and low signals that were clearly demarcated from the surrounding tissue, and the uterus was pushed and displaced cephalad. Preoperative contrast-enhanced CT (CECT) demonstrated a pelvic mass between the cervix and rectum with nonenhanced areas . The mass pushed against and displaced the anterior vagina and the right posterior rectum.
Preoperative transrectal ultrasound (TRUS) was performed with the MyLab Twice ultrasound system (Esaote, Genoa, Italy) equipped with a biplane endoscopic probe (TRT33, linear frequency of 4-13 MHz, convex frequency of 3-9 MHz). Grayscale ultrasound showed that the left pelvic mass had an irregular shape . The internal echo of the mass presented a layered appearance with alternating hyperechoic and hypoechoic patterns, and the boundary between the mass and rectum wall was clear. Color Doppler flow imaging (CDFI) showed some blood vessels scattered in the tumor , and the dispersed intratumoral blood vessels were consistent with the layered appearance of the tumor on grayscale ultrasound. Then, transrectal CEUS was performed with a bolus injection of 2.4 mL of SonoVue (Bracco, Milan, Italy) through the elbow vein . A laminated distribution of the contrast agent was observed within the mass, which was also consistent with the layered appearance of the tumor on grayscale ultrasound.
Transperineal core needle (16G) biopsy (CNB) was performed under the guidance of TRUS . The probe was switched to linear mode, and puncture sampling was performed under real-time monitoring by TRUS, avoiding the nonenhanced areas of the tumor. No complications occurred during the biopsy.