A 76-year-old Indian woman with a long-standing history of poorly controlled diabetes mellitus and dementia was visiting her family in the USA from India, when she presented from an external hospital with worsening confusion over a period of 4 weeks and falls toward her left side over a period of 1 week. At baseline, the patient was forgetful and confused, with intermittent visual hallucinations, but was able to carry a conversation. On presentation, her family reported she had an inability to carry a conversation, more frequent hallucinations, and new falls to the left side. Review of systems was notable for a dry cough, which had started 1 month prior to presentation, after arrival to the USA.
Physical examination was notable for orientation only to self, which her family reported was changed from baseline. She had left-sided neglect, 5/5 strength in the right upper and lower extremities, 2/5 strength in the left upper extremity, and 3/5 strength in the left lower extremity. Otherwise, sensory exam and cranial nerves were intact. Her lungs were clear to auscultation bilaterally. Laboratory studies showed serum glucose of 268 mg/dL and white blood cell count (WBC) of 6200 cells/µL with 87% neutrophils. Hemoglobin A1c was 11.2%. Computed tomography (CT) of the head revealed a subacute right subdural hematoma and multiple right-sided intracranial ring-enhancing lesions. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed multiple right parietal abscesses .
She was started on intravenous antimicrobials including vancomycin, ceftriaxone, and metronidazole, as well as levetiracetam for seizure prevention. A lumbar puncture revealed a low opening pressure, glucose level of 79 mg/dL, protein of 105 mg/dL, and WBC of 225 cells/µL that was predominately neutrophilic. Due to concern for tuberculosis (TB), CT scan of the chest and thoracic and lumbar spine were obtained. Chest CT showed a necrotic mediastinal soft tissue mass involving the esophagus and multiple bilateral upper lobe pulmonary nodules. She was placed on airborne precautions for suspected active TB infection and collection of three sputum samples for TB smear, culture, and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing was attempted. She was unable to produce adequate sputum samples and therefore underwent bronchoscopy with lavage and transbronchial fine needle aspiration. Bacterial and fungal cultures, cytology, acid-fast bacilli (AFB) smears, and TB PCR testing failed to reveal the etiology of the pulmonary lesions. Pulmonary lymph node aspiration samples were negative for malignant cells. Blood cultures and serology for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), Histoplasma antigen, cryptococcal antigen, and Echinococcus antibody were all unremarkable. Cerebrospinal fluid cultures were also unrevealing for the etiology of her brain abscesses. Consulting neurosurgeons then performed a right parietal craniotomy and partial resection of the largest abscess. Due to continued high suspicion for disseminated TB, she was empirically started on treatment with rifampin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol immediately after surgery. AFB smear and Mycobacterium tuberculosis polymerase chain reaction testing from the brain abscess were all negative for TB. However, one of four dura mater tissue samples obtained during surgery subsequently grew Nocardia farcinica. Further tissue PCR testing at an external institution also revealed Nocardia farcinica.
Tuberculosis therapy was stopped after she had received it for five days, and based on our institution’s Nocardia susceptibility patterns, the patient was started on intravenous linezolid, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and meropenem. Seven days later and 3 weeks after presentation to our hospital, she was transferred back to the hospital she first presented at to be closer to her family, receiving oral linezolid, oral trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and intravenous imipenem with recommendations to her treating physicians of follow-up susceptibilities of Nocardia to guide further treatment. Repeat MRI brain and a CT chest scans in 2 weeks, as well as antimicrobial therapy for at least 12 months, were recommended. On discharge from our hospital, she remained confused, but her agitation had improved, and she no longer exhibited weakness in the left upper and lower extremities. Susceptibilities of Nocardia farcinica resulted two days after her transfer. Results were communicated to the external hospital and she was switched to amikacin, levofloxacin, and linezolid. One month later, she presented to an external hospital for abdominal pain and was found to be suffering a myocardial infarction. CT scan of the head at the time showed resolution of posterior superior right parietal lobe abscesses with near complete resolution of associated vasogenic edema. Her family opted to transition her to comfort care and she died 3 days later.