A relatively healthy 72-year-old woman, weighing 49 kg and with a height of 143 cm, received ESD for a gastric tumor under general anesthesia. She had only a history of hypertension and took medication regularly. Preoperative examinations, including white blood cell count, platelet count, coagulation system and electrocardiogram (ECG), were all normal. Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) showed a 3.1 × 3.5 cm hypoechoic, well-defined mass at the junction of the antrum and body of the stomach on the greater curvature, originating in the muscularis propria layer. The pathology of biopsy specimens included a large number of red blood cells, a small number of spindle cells and proliferative epithelial cells, which did not rule out the possibility of neurogenic cells; severe chronic inflammation of the mucosa with a lymphoproliferative aspect was also detected. After discussion with the patient and her relatives, endoscopic resection was conducted, and written informed consent was obtained from the patient before the operation.
Before the procedure, the patient’s vital signs were normal. Mechanical ventilation (volume controlled and FiO2 was 50%) was performed after induction of general anesthesia; anesthesia was maintained with propofol and remifentanil. Based on gastroscopy, there was a protuberant lesion with a size of approximately 3.1 × 3.5 cm, with a central depression and soft touch . A lesion mass was seen after mucosal incision with a dual knife. When the submucosal mass was stripped, it was found to be closely adhered to the muscular layer and serosa layer, and a full-thickness incision was performed. The gastric perforation is shown in Fig. b. The abdominal cavity was gradually filled with carbon dioxide gas, and the peak airway pressure gradually increased to 30–35 cm H2O. Another surgeon performed abdominal puncture to reduce the high intra-abdominal pressure. The mass adhered to the greater omentum, and there was more bleeding during the operation. First, foreign body forceps and hot biopsy forceps were used for hemostasis. After the bleeding stopped, the lesion was completely removed. The wound was sutured with a titanium clip and nylon ring double-layer purse . The whole operation lasted nearly 9 h, and total blood loss was 800 ml.
During recovery in the postanesthesia care unit (PACU), the patient was found to have a fast respiratory rate (40–45 bpm) and low tidal volume (120–170 ml), even after intravenous administration of neostigmine and atropine to recover breathing. PetCO2 was 45–55 mmHg and SpO2 100%. Venous blood gas analysis showed that the pH was 7.24 and PCO2 64.3 mmHg. From lung auscultation, the breath sounds of both lungs were thick, and scattered moist rales were heard. Considering that the operation time was too long, long-term intra-abdominal hypertension (IAH) and mechanical ventilation had caused obvious damage to the patient’s lung function, she was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) with an endotracheal tube for further improvement. Bedside chest X-ray on the day after surgery revealed scattered inflammation in the lung . The patient was diagnosed with pulmonary infection and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Four days later, chest computed tomography (CT) still showed scattered inflammation in both lungs, especially in the lower lobes, and a small amount of pleural effusion was found on both sides . After 7 days of anti-inflammatory and gastric protective treatment in the ICU, the tracheal tube was removed, and the patient transferred back to the general ward on the 8th day.