A 35-year-old Thai woman presented with a history of pain and swelling at the dorsum of the left foot in November 2012. She noticed that the pain occurred when walking or standing. The symptoms were severe when she walked a long distance or engaged in strenuous exercise. She had been suffering from recurrent pain for 5 years. Her symptoms did not improve with medication and got worse in a month period. Musculoskeletal evaluation showed mild swelling and a tender mass located at the 2nd and 3rd metatarsal bones of the left foot. Results of vascular, neurologic, and dermatologic examinations of the lower extremities were normal .
A plain radiograph showed bone destruction in the base of the 2nd and 3rd metatarsal and cuneiforms bones surrounded by soft tissue calcification . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a lobulated mass in the midfoot, measuring 4 × 3 × 3 cm and containing tangles of tortuous blood vessels and dark foci characteristic of phleboliths. The mass appeared bright on T2-weighted images and was enhanced parallel to blood vessels in a postcontrast study. The mass involved the middle and lateral cuneiforms and the base of the 2nd and 3rd metatarsal bones as well as insinuates in the surrounding muscle. Based on the imaging feature, the diagnosis was cavernous hemangioma . Regular laboratory data showed no abnormalities.
The surgical operation was performed in February 2013. After longitudinal skin incision, a wide resection of the tumor including the 2nd and 3rd metatarsals and the intrinsic and extrinsic muscles of the toes was performed. A curved iliac bone graft was harvested and fitted into the resection space of the midfoot. Multiple Kirschner wire fixation to the adjacent bones was accomplished. Subcutaneous tissue and skin were closed with a redivac drain. A short leg cast was applied for 2 months, allowing non-weight bearing ambulation .
The pathology report revealed a mass of lobulated hemorrhagic lesions. The tumor involved soft tissue, cortical bone, and medullary bone. Histologically, there were variable sized blood-filled vessels, some of which were dilated and thrombosed. In the spaces between the blood vessels, there were cellular areas consisting of bland spindle cells. Epithelioid endothelial cells containing cytoplasmic lumens were observed .
At 4 months after the reconstruction, the patient could walk without pain but could not bear full weight. At 48 months after surgery, the patient could ambulate well without limitations during daily activities. The plain radiographs showed no evidence of recurrence or metastasis .