A 35-year-old lady, not known to have systemic illnesses, presented to the emergency department (ED) at our institute complaining of pain in her left eye. The patient had a history of retinal surgery done at age of 5 years following blunt trauma with post- traumatic dislocated crystalline lens. The patient underwent a secondary intraocular lens (IOL) implantation in the affected eye as planned shortly after her retinal surgery. Fifteen years later, at the age of 20, trabeculectomy was performed at a different center and remained stable for about 9 years. Upon presentation to our hospital, the patient was using brimonidine 0.15 % twice daily, dorzolamide 2 % twice daily and timolol 0.5 % twice daily eye drops. Her vision in the affected left eye was hand motion with 38 mmHg intraocular pressure (IOP) that responded to stat medications including brimonidine 0.15 %, dorzolamide 2 % and timolol 0.5 % given in our ED and dropped to 10 mmHg. The slit lamp examination of the left eye showed a flat bleb, decompensated cornea with significant corneal edema, mid-dilated pupil, mild dislocated IOL and advanced optic nerve cup to disc ratio. The patient was discharged from the ED on full topical antiglaucoma agents in addition to oral acetazolamide and was seen after 2 weeks in the outpatient department (OPD). The patient was compliant on her drops, yet her IOP measured 40 mmHg at the time. She was booked for micro pulse- cyclophotocoagulation (MP-CPC) under local anesthesia. The procedure was conducted with MP3 micro-pulse probe (IRIDEX Inc.) where it was placed at the limbus with the notch facing the limbal side and the probe was perpendicular to the surface of the globe. The laser settings were 2000 mW power with a duty cycle of 31.33 % treating 360 degrees sparing three and nine O'clock areas. Each hemisphere is treated with 5 passes over 90 s. After the procedure, prednisolone acetate 1 % initiated every 2 h and tapered weekly over 6 weeks along with Atropine 1 % twice a day and prophylactic ofloxacin 4 times a day for one week. The IOP was controlled postoperatively with the same baseline topical medication, and she was followed up in OPD regularly. In her 1-year follow up visit the patient presented with pain and inability to close her left eyelids fully due to a protruded white corneal mass which has been increasing in size with time. The vision of the left eye was only light perception with good projection and her IOP was estimated to be 30–40 mmHg digitally. On examination, she had a large pedunculated whitish corneal mass (A). Ultrasound Biomicroscopy (UBM) showed a cystic mass over the cornea localized to the anterior space without invasion and the anterior segment Optical Coherence Tomography (AS- OCT) revealed a hyper-reflective lesion within the sub-epithelial space with cystic space (B & C). Initially, the provisional diagnoses were either corneal keloid or acquired corneal sub-epithelial hypertrophy. To reach definitive diagnosis, the patient was counseled to undergo surgical excision for therapeutic and diagnostic purposes. The patient was referred to a cornea specialist and after obtaining the patient's consent, the procedure was carried out in the minor treatment room under topical anesthesia. After sterilization and surgical preparation, the edge of the corneal lesion was found to be adherent to the underlying tissue. A crescent blade was used to dissect the edge to the resistance-free level. After releasing the edge, the whole lesion was successfully removed in one piece by peeling it using toothed forceps. It was found to be confined to the subepithelial space and separated from the underlying stromal bed in the center . After full excision, a bandage contact lens was applied (D) and the patient received prophylactic topical ofloxacin 0.3 % eye drops four times a day for one week and topical ophthalmic prednisolone acetate 1 % eye drops in a tapering dose for one month. Histopathological examination of the excised tissue showed irregular thin elevated corneal epithelium with bullous changes at the periphery of the lesion (A). Bowman's layer was absent and the subepithelial lesion consisted of stellate-shaped and spindle cells within loose myxomatous background that is rich in glycosaminoglycans that was stained using Alcian blue (B, C & D). The tissue diagnosis was consistent with a corneal myxoma. The patient was seen on the first postoperative day and one week following the procedure. Visual acuity, intraocular pressure, and the corneal epithelial defect at the bed of the excised lesion were checked at follow-up. The patient showed total healing of the corneal epithelial defect after one week and did not develop recurrence over 6 months of follow-up. Later, she asked for cosmetic options and eventually underwent corneal tattooing with regular follow up visits to our OPD and a stable course.