A 52-year-old woman with diabetes presented with chronic stable angina and a strongly positive treadmill test with normal left ventricular function. She underwent coronary angiography, which revealed the mild disease of the left system with severe long-segment mid-right coronary artery (RCA) disease . She was taken up for a robotic Precision PCI of RCA with physiology and imaging optimization. This would enable precise stent positioning and improve the accuracy for better patient outcomes.
The RCA was a dominant vessel with an initial shepherd-crook and proximal tortuousities with multiple side branches in the mid-segment. The RCA was engaged with a JR 3.5 guide catheter, and a Pressure Wire™ X (Abbott Vascular, USA) was introduced into the guide catheter for physiology assessment and also for performing the PCI procedure (see , ). We used the Pressure Wire™ X system for assessing flow ratios (resting Pd/Pa) and resting full-cycle ratio (RFR) as it is the only wireless system and would be more suitable for use in R-PCI. The zeroing of the pressures was done keeping the Pressure Wire X flat on the table, the transmitter switched on, and the wire was then introduced into the guide catheter that was already secured to the robotic drive. Further advancement of the pressure wire was done robotically using the guidewire joystick ( and see , ).
Once the pressure wire sensor was in the normal proximal RCA, the wireless transmitter was connected to the proximal end of the wire jutting out of the robotic drive cassette with the cath lab nurse supporting it with her hand ( and see , ), making sure there was no lag in the wire, and then equalization was done. After equalization, the pressure wire was advanced robotically; the Rotate-on-Retract (ROR) feature facilitated easy negotiation of the pressure wire across the mid-RCA and placement of the wire in the distal vessel.
The resting Pd/Pa and RFR were measured and the wireless transmitter was disconnected (without putting the transmitter off) for carrying out further steps of the PCI procedure on the same wire. The resting Pd/Pa was 0.93 and the baseline RFR was 0.81, suggesting significant ischaemia.
A 2.5 × 15 mm balloon (NC Trek; Abbott Vascular, USA) was robotically advanced into the lesion and pre-dilatation was done at 12 atm. The same balloon was used to precisely measure the needed stent length, which measured as 32.5 mm. A 2.5 × 33 mm Xience Xpedition® drug-eluting stent (Abbott Vascular, USA) was then robotically advanced into position and deployed at 14 atm. The stent boost revealed a well-expanded stent while angiography revealed a well-deployed stent with the good angiographic results ( and see , ).
After the stent balloon was removed, the pressure wire transmitter was reconnected to the end of the wire, with the cath lab nurse supporting it with her hand as before ensuring there was no lag in the wire. The post-stenting measurements were then recorded; Pd/Pa was 1.0 and RFR was 0.99. Since the initial equalization was done in the same way, and as the pressure wire transmitter was not switched off during the entire procedure, the elevated placement of the transmitter did not affect the accuracy of pressure measurement.
The OCT image was then acquired after manually loading the OCT Dragonfly Optis catheter to the desired position distal to the stent. The OCT run revealed a well-opposed, well-expanded stent (minimal stent expansion 89%; minimal stent area 4.89 mm2). There was no evidence of edge dissection, thrombus, tissue prolapse, or geographic miss ( and ).
Finally, the Pressure Wire X was robotically retracted to check for pressure drift and there was no pressure drift. This also reassured that the physiology assessment was not impacted by the modified steps performed to adapt it to R-PCI.
The procedure was successfully completed, and the patient was asymptomatic in the first-, third-, and sixth-month follow-up.