A mother of a 2- year-old male child brought her son to our outpatient department when she noticed her son complained of left forearm pain when she had to hold his forearm while changing his clothes. She was not sure of any fall or trauma to the forearm. No history of fever or other constitutional symptoms was present. On examination, there were no swelling, deformity, or skin color changes. No scars or sinuses. Palpation revealed tenderness over the dorsomedial aspect of the left mid forearm without any palpable defect, or any change in the bony consistency of the ulna over the area, and the skin was non-adherent. The wrist and elbow range of movement were full and painless. There was no lymphadenopathy. A plain radiograph revealed an oval solitary lytic lesion over distal one-third ulna diaphysis with the permeative pattern of bone destruction and narrow zone of transition. The lesion was expansile with cortical thickening and solid periosteal reaction without cortical breach or soft-tissue extension . On magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), patchy altered marrow signal intensity in the form of T1 hypointense, showing mild heterogeneous post-contrast enhancement in the distal one-third ulnar diaphysis, with associated mild cortical thickening and thick linear sclerotic periosteal reaction . Basic hematological workup such as complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and C-reactive protein (CRP) was within normal parameters. Fine-needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) was performed under fluoroscopic guidance and the specimen obtained was <1cc of hemorrhagic fluid which was sent for bacterial culture sensitivity, cytological examination, and GeneXpert MTB/RIF. The GeneXpert detected tuberculosis without RIF and eventually cultures for bacteria yielded no growth and cytological examination was inconclusive. No further tests were required and the child was started on antitubercular therapy (ATT) which included four drugs (isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol) for 2 months, followed by three drugs (isoniazid, rifampicin, and ethambutol) for 7 months. The dose of these drugs was based on the weight of the child. Emphasis was laid on optimal nutrition in the form of a high protein diet and was assessed by gain in weight, every month. A Radiograph of the forearm at 6- month follow-up revealed a decrease in the size of the lesion and resolution of sclerosis . A Radiograph at 1- year follow-up showed complete healing without any symptoms .