The patient was a 50-year-old man who presented to our outpatient department with the complaints of pain and swelling in the left knee associated with functional incapacity . The pain was insidious in onset, gradually progressed over a year and aggravated by activities of daily living and relieved by rest. The patient complained of locking experiences of the left knee since the past 3 months. The medical and surgical history is not significant. On examination, the knee was diffusely swollen with restricted range of motion 0° to 110°. The medial and lateral joint line tenderness was positive with patellofemoral joint crepitation. McMurray circumduction test was positive. There was no sagittal or coronal plane instability. The overlying skin over the knee was normal with marked muscle wasting of left thigh. Routine hematological investigations were within normal limits. Radiographs showed multiple, generalized calcified nodules in and around knee joint . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated diffuse proliferation of synovium with mild effusion displaying multiple nodules with intermediate to high signal intensity suggesting calcific nature . The clinicoradiological correlation suggested the diagnosis of synovial chondromatosis.
The management includes removal of loose bodies along with radical excision of hypertrophied synovium. Open or arthroscopic synovectomy is bit controversial. Arthroscopic synovectomy allows the vital structures to be accurately identified and decreases the associated morbidity. Removal of loose bodies in the anterior compartment by arthroscopy is relatively easier. However, arthroscopic radical synovectomy in cases of generalized knee involvement or predominant posterior involvement is technically challenging and carries the risk of damage to the neurovascular structures. Considering the circumferential involvement of knee, we planned a single stage, open radical synovectomy through a combined approach.
The patient was positioned laterally under tourniquet. A standard anterior midline approach was used with a median parapatellar approach. Multiple white colored loose bodies were found embedded inside the hypertrophied synovium and few lying loosely in the joint. The synovium was excised and the loose bodies were taken out. After clearing the anterior pathological structures, we took a lazy “S”-shaped incision posteriorly in the popliteal fossa. The clinical picture posteriorly was similar, with hypertrophied synovium and multiple loose bodies. The posterior vital structures were dissected meticulously and the synovium was radically excised . The hypertrophied synovium and the loose bodies were sent for histological confirmation. Histopathological examination revealed well-demarcated, disorganized cartilaginous nodules with hypertrophied synovium permeating in between. The nodules were variable calcified and ossified. The size and shape of cartilaginous nodules varied significantly. The histological findings confirmed the diagnosis of synovial chondromatosis.
The patient was mobilized full weight-bearing on a walker for 2 weeks till suture removal. The patient followed the standard physiotherapy protocols for the strengthening of quadriceps and hamstrings and to gain range of motion. Three months after surgery, the patient regained full range of motion with no pain while doing daily activities. The patient was last reviewed at 4 years follow-up with no clinicoradiological signs of recurrence .