This woman is 51 years old, with type 1 diabetes of 16 years duration, and a history of hypertension, obesity, obstructive sleep apnea, and hypothyroidism. She had been using an insulin pump for more than 10 years, most recently with U-200 lispro insulin. She presented to her endocrinologist for a follow-up visit with complaints of weight gain and bilateral lower extremity edema which had started about two weeks after a change in her insulin delivery system. Seven weeks before this visit she had transitioned from using the Accu-Chek Spirit Combo insulin pump without CGM to the Medtronic 670G with the Guardian sensor which she was using in Auto Mode.
She had a history of poor glycemic control with HbA1c levels continuously above 9.4% over the past 10 years. At her last office visit before the pump upgrade, she had a HbA1c of 11.7%. A change in insulin pump technology was recommended in hopes of improving her glycemic control . When she subsequently transitioned to the Medtronic 670G pump with the Guardian sensor, she continued the use of insulin U-200 lispro and had automated basal insulin delivery (Auto Mode feature) enabled.
In addition to insulin, her medications at week 0 (Auto mode started) were aspirin, atorvastatin, calcium carbonate, esomeprazole, levothyroxine, lisinopril, norethindrone, and cholecalciferol with occasional use of ibuprofen as needed.
At her week 7 visit, her weight was over 7 kg higher than baseline . Physical exam revealed pitting edema in the lower extremities bilaterally up to the mid-shin. No abnormal lung sounds or jugular venous distension was noted. Further evaluation included a comprehensive metabolic panel (creatinine 0.81 mg/dL, albumin 3.6 g/dL, ALT 12 U/L), TSH (normal), ACTH and cortisol (normal), and an echocardiogram that did not show any evidence of congestive heart failure or abnormalities that could be associated with weight gain or edema. She had preexisting albuminuria with a urine albumin of 593.1 mg/L seven months prior and 166.8 mg/L at the time of presentation with edema. With a normal serum albumin level (as reported above) she did not meet diagnostic criteria for nephrotic syndrome.
Point-of-care testing at the visit revealed a HbA1c of 8.4% which was a reduction of 3.3%, and the lowest HbA1c recorded over the previous 10 years. Insulin pump data showed that she was using Auto Mode 98% of the time and had been receiving an average of 152 units of insulin daily for the 27 days prior to the office visit. Glucose time in range (70–180 mg/dL) was 85% with 15% of the time in the 180–250 mg/dL range and no hypoglycemia. Mean blood glucose was 146 mg/dL. For comparison, her mean blood glucose on her glucometer download at the visit 4 months earlier was 281 mg/dL (SD 106 mg/dL) based on average testing rate of 3.1 readings per day. Review of pump download data for the previous year shows that the total daily insulin doses were between 80 and 90 units a day. Therefore, the total daily insulin dose on the hybrid closed-loop system was significantly higher .
With the exclusion of other causes of acute edema, the patient was diagnosed with insulin edema and started on hydrochlorothiazide by her primary care provider. At follow-up visits with her endocrinologist, her HbA1c continued to improve, with an A1c of 7.5% at week 19. Her lower extremity edema resolved and her weight stabilized, although she failed to lose any of the weight that she gained upon initiation of the hybrid closed-loop system. Her urine albumin levels remain elevated after resolution of edema; she was seen by a nephrologist who diagnosed diabetic nephropathy.