A 5-year-old boy was scheduled for intrapulmonary lymphatic embolization through percutaneous catheterization. He underwent Fontan surgery at the age of 2 and frequently developed respiratory failure due to plastic bronchitis thereafter. His family history was unremarkable and the course of pregnancy was uneventful. Heart abnormalities were detected by fetal echocardiography. He was delivered transvaginally at 38 weeks 4 days with a weight of 2696 g. Diagnoses of a double outlet right ventricle, aortic valve atresia, aortic coarctation, and atrioventricular septal defect were made immediately after birth. Norwood surgery, Blalock-Taussig shunt, and Glenn surgery were performed 6 days, 1 year, 5 months, and 2 years after birth, respectively. Fenestrated Fontan surgery was performed 2 years 3 months after birth. Although surgery was completed uneventfully and Fontan circulation was successfully established, he developed dyspnea with decreased SpO2 30 days after surgery. He discharged white-colored bronchial casts and a diagnosis of plastic bronchitis (PB) was made 44 days after surgery. His respiratory condition was refractory to conservative treatment such as low-fat diet, respiratory physiotherapy, as well as to medications including bronchodilators, expectorants, and pulmonary vasodilators, therefore, intrapulmonary lymphatic embolization through percutaneous catheterization was scheduled.
Preoperative findings were as follows: height, 115.2 cm (+ 1.0 SD); weight, 16.1 kg (− 1.0 SD); body temperature, 36.8 °C; heartbeat, 100 beats per minute; blood pressure, 98/50 mmHg; and SpO2, 87–89% (nasal oxygen 1 L/min). Jugular venous distention and a systolic murmur of grade I/IV on the Levine scale at the third intercostal space along the left sternal border were observed. Auscultation revealed normal respiratory sounds. The chest X-ray demonstrated cardiomegaly and pulmonary congestion. The electrocardiograph revealed a right bundle branch block and right ventricular hypertrophy. Echocardiography revealed fenestration and trivial common atrioventricular valve regurgitation without stenosis of IVC conduit. Chest CT was not performed because of the patient’s age. Resting SpO2 was 88–89% which decreased to 85% during exercise, accompanied by shortness of breath and cyanosis. Mucus plugs were discharged every 4–5 days.
On the morning of the surgery, a mucus plug was discharged; however, the patient had no fever and was active. To identify the site of lymphatic leakage by temporarily increasing lymph production, the patient ingested 3 peanuts 3 h before surgery. Upon entering the operating room, SpO2 was 73% under room air as the patient was crying. Standard monitoring and invasive arterial pressure measurement were started.
After starting dopamine (3 μg/kg/min), anesthesia was induced using midazolam 1 mg, rocuronium 15 mg, fentanyl 30 μg, and sevoflurane 1.5%. During laryngeal deployment, a large amount of secretions was accumulated in the upper airway and mucosal swelling around the glottis was observed. After a 4.5-mm cuffed endotracheal tube was inserted, a slightly sticky, pale yellow, translucent mucus leaked out of the endotracheal tube, necessitating frequent suction. Five minutes after the intubation, expiratory CO2 became undetectable and mechanical ventilation became difficult, necessitating manual ventilation at a maximum inspiratory pressure of 50 mmHg or greater. Respiratory tract obstruction due to mucus plugs was suspected, and surgery was postponed. End-tidal CO2 (EtCO2) reached 120 mmHg, and SpO2 temporarily decreased to 60–70%, while mean blood pressure was maintained between 50 and 80 mmHg. Direct removal of the mucus plugs was attempted using a flexible bronchoscope, but it was impossible to observe the peripheral airways due to abundant mucus secretions. Moreover, the diameter of the endotracheal tube was too small, to allow manipulation of the bronchoscope, and the mucus plugs could not be adequately removed. Sugammadex 50 mg, naloxone 0.02 mg, and flumazenil 0.1 mg were administered to promote self-expectoration through cough reflex. Six million units of recombinant tissue-type plasminogen activator (rtPA) and 200 μg of salbutamol sulfate were administered intratracheally, and hydrocortisone sodium phosphate ester 50 mg was administered intravenously. Frequent intratracheal suction and postural drainage were performed. Subsequently, the cough reflex was triggered and a mucus plug in the form of a bronchial cast (approximately 5 cm in length) was discharged through the endotracheal tube. The patient resumed spontaneous breathing and his respiratory conditions stabilized after the expectoration.
As extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) for young children was unavailable in our hospital, the patient was transferred to another institution for safety, where airway obstruction recurred and ECMO was introduced temporarily. Six days later, the patient was weaned from the ventilator and discharged with no signs of neurological sequelae.