A 35-year-old woman was initially diagnosed with asthma at the age of 16 years. The patient presented to our hospital 3 years ago with a 1-month history of an asthma exacerbation. The diagnosis of asthma was confirmed based on a clinical history of episodic symptoms with airflow limitation and variation in pulmonary function evaluated by forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1), in accordance with the Asthma Prevention and Management Guideline 2015, Japan . She required a daily dose of 1000 μg fluticasone propionate (ICS), 40 μg formoterol (LABA), 5 μg tiotropium (muscarinic antagonist), 10 mg montelukast (leukotriene receptor antagonist), 400 mg theophylline (methylxanthine), and 5 mg oral prednisolone to manage her severe persistent asthma. Despite the high dose of ICS-LABA with daily OCS, her asthma control test (ACT) score was less than 20, which is defined as uncontrolled asthma, and she needed an increase in systemic corticosteroids for a month. She met the criteria of the European Respiratory Society (ERS) and the American Thoracic Society (ATS) for the diagnosis of severe/refractory asthma . Her peripheral blood eosinophil count was 117 cells/μL, total immunoglobulin E (IgE) level was 639 IU/mL, and specific IgE against house dust mites (Dermatophagoides farinae) was positive (chemiluminescence enzyme immunoassay class 4). Her repeated exacerbations of asthma, blood eosinophil count, and serum IgE level under maintenance treatment with daily OCS made us consider starting her on anti-IL-5 and anti-IgE treatment. To avoid the excessive use of systemic corticosteroids, she agreed to receive her first subcutaneous administration of 100 mg mepolizumab 2 years ago. She opted for mepolizumab treatment every 4 weeks over omalizumab treatment every 2 weeks, from the perspective of work convenience (benralizumab was not yet available at that point). Her FEV1 and ACT scores before treatment with mepolizumab were 1.99 L and 8 points, respectively, which increased to 2.61 L and 24 points, respectively, 3 months after treatment with mepolizumab. Her clinical symptoms of uncontrolled asthma disappeared; hence, the dose of oral corticosteroids was tapered off and discontinued completely after 9 months of treatment with mepolizumab. However, she occasionally experienced asthma exacerbations, which required systemic corticosteroid administration, although mepolizumab was partially effective in alleviating her symptoms for 1.5 years. To avoid the repeated exacerbations of asthma, she expressed an interest in trying a different therapy after the 19th administration of mepolizumab and agreed to receive 30 mg benralizumab subcutaneously. Within 10 min of administration, she developed a skin rash, throat discomfort, dyspnea, and wheezing without any gastrointestinal symptoms. Her blood pressure was 127/68 mmHg, pulse rate 65 beats/min, and oxygen saturation (SpO2) 98%. These symptoms resolved prior to the administration of any treatment, however, she was subsequently given intravenous antihistamines and corticosteroids as per our institute’s protocol. She did not develop a late-phase anaphylactic reaction.
Two weeks after this episode, she again developed marked symptoms of an exacerbation of severe asthma. Her symptoms did not improve despite the use of systemic corticosteroids. Owing to her persistent symptoms of asthma, a severe response to benralizumab, and a desire to avoid oral corticosteroid treatment, she requested the resumption of mepolizumab treatment. Although bronchial thermoplasty was suggested as the next treatment option, she preferentially chose treatment with biologics over bronchial thermoplasty, since hospitalization for the latter procedure would impair work life. It also came to light that she had a history of allergic contact dermatitis, which was possibly triggered by polysorbate, an excipient in a milky lotion that she had used. Since benralizumab and mepolizumab formulations contain polysorbate , a skin-prick test (SPT) to evaluate her sensitivity to polysorbate 20 was performed. After her result was confirmed to be negative , she received her 20th subcutaneous administration of 100 mg mepolizumab. However, 2 h after administration, an anaphylactic reaction was observed; she developed skin rash, throat discomfort, dyspnea, and wheezing without gastrointestinal symptoms. Her blood pressure was 120/68 mmHg, pulse rate 55 beats/min, and SpO2 97%. These symptoms subsided without epinephrine injection, however she was again treated with intravenous antihistamines and corticosteroids per our protocol. She again did not develop a late-phase anaphylactic reaction.
Although there was an improvement in the anaphylaxis induced by the mepolizumab injection, she required hospitalization for a month owing to the exacerbation of her asthma. To reduce the dose of administered systemic corticosteroids, she requested that her therapy be changed to omalizumab. Accordingly, she was administered a subcutaneous dose of 450 mg omalizumab, while the corticosteroid therapy was tapered (intravenous administration of 4 mg betamethasone). No anaphylactic reaction was observed. After the first administration of omalizumab, she was discharged without any indicative symptoms of asthma. Two weeks later, she was re-hospitalized for her second dose of omalizumab. However, the second dose caused anaphylaxis, and she experienced itchy skin, throat discomfort, dyspnea, wheezing, and transient loss of consciousness without gastrointestinal symptoms. Her vital signs within 30 min of this episode were as follows: a drop-in blood pressure to 86/54 mmHg, a pulse rate of 80 beats/min, and an SpO2 value of 88%. Oxygen was administered by nasal prongs at a rate of 3 L/min. Subsequent intramuscular epinephrine injection resulted in her regaining consciousness and an immediate improvement of hypotension. Her general condition improved within 50 min of receiving epinephrine. She was also treated with an intravenous drip of 40 mg methylprednisolone and chlorpheniramine maleate (histamine H1 receptor antagonist). Six hours after omalizumab administration, she experienced a late-phase anaphylaxis, which was not observed during therapy with mepolizumab and benralizumab. She experienced itchy skin, throat discomfort, dyspnea, and transient loss of consciousness without gastrointestinal symptoms. An intramuscular injection of epinephrine and an intravenous drip of 40 mg methylprednisolone were administered; her symptoms improved immediately.
She required systemic corticosteroids (oral prednisolone 5 mg/day) for severe persistent asthma and an intermittent high dose of corticosteroids for repeated severe exacerbation of asthma for 6 months after the anaphylaxis following omalizumab administration. She was also treated with bronchial thermoplasty, and no adverse events were experienced. After the third bronchial thermoplasty, she is currently being treated without systemic corticosteroids and her condition has been stable for 4 months. Moreover, her FEV1 and ACT scores have increased to 2.79 L and 25 points, respectively.