A woman, born in 1998 and unmarried, presented with neurologic symptoms including limb tremor and salivation that started when she was 21 years old (2019). She consulted a doctor at a local hospital and was diagnosed with WD based on her clinical examination results. Her genetic analysis showed a homozygous ATP7B gene missense mutation (c.2333G>T, p.R778L) and her parents were found to be carriers of this mutation. Then, the patient was regularly treated with D-penicillamine (DPA) and vitamin B6 combined with glucuronide at a local hospital. She was referred to our clinic with complaints of worsening neurologic symptoms in October 2020.
Physical examination of the patient revealed a visible upper limb tremor with involuntary dance-like movements and lower limb gait stiffness with x-walking posture. The patient had difficulty chewing and swallowing, accompanied by obvious salivation, especially when eating or drinking. When walking faster, the patient began to experience wheezing. Her Unified Wilson’s Disease Rating Scale (UWDRS) score was 72 , and the patient also had moderate anxiety symptoms as assessed by the Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale (HAMA). The Kayser–Fleischer (K–F) rings at the corneal limbus were observed under slit-lamp lights. An ultrasound examination revealed diffuse changes in liver parenchyma, indicating early liver cirrhosis. Laboratory tests revealed lightly elevated transaminase and alkaline phosphatase, and lower levels of total protein (54.8 g/L) and albumin (33.5 g/L) levels . The above findings pointed to hepatic functional impairment. Serum ceruloplasmin was almost undetectable (<20 mg/L) and 24-h urinary copper excretion was 170 μg, which was much higher than the normal level . In addition, laboratory tests of the blood revealed pancytopenia . Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) further demonstrated impairment of the central nervous system, which manifested as increased Falir/T2 signals in the pons, bilateral putamen, and thalamus .
Considering that available drugs had failed to alleviate neurological and psychiatric symptoms, we decided to administer allogeneic amniotic fluid to the patient. The patient signed an informed consent form. The experimental treatment was approved by the ethics committee of Qiaoxi Tongxinglong Western Medical Clinic. Informed consent forms for collecting amniotic fluid were obtained from pregnant women who underwent induced labor at local hospitals. The inclusion criteria included gestational age ≤ 26 weeks; absence of family genetic history; absence of organic disease; no abnormal findings in laboratory examination and no viral infection; and no signs of fetal malformations. Before using induced abortion drugs, a conventional puncture needle was used to collect amniotic fluid (<25 mL). Amniotic fluid having only a light yellow color and transparent appearance was collected; the fluid without these characteristics was discarded. After transportation within 1 h at room temperature, amniotic fluid was incubated at 37°C in the presence of 5% CO2 in an incubator. After 2 h, it was gently blown several times with a dropper and filtered with a 300-mu nylon mesh. We have previously shown that the number of AFSCs remarkably increases after fresh amniotic fluid is cultured for a short time . Similarly, microscopic observation revealed a significant increase in AFSCs with a small, round, and shiny appearance after 2 h of culture . Before the infusion of amniotic fluid, the patient first received an IM infusion of low-molecular-weight heparin calcium (5,000 IU) to prevent possible blood clotting and then an IV infusion of 15 mg dexamethasone in 30 mL saline to prevent allergic reactions. The prepared amniotic fluid was then administrated by IV infusion at a rate of 50–70 drops per min.
From October 2020 to the end of November 2021, the patient received a total of 12 applications of amniotic fluid from different pregnant women at a gestational age of 19–26 weeks . The treatment interval depended on the availability of amniotic fluid, varying approximately from 20 to 45 days except once (twice a day). A total of 175 mL of amniotic fluid with each dose of 6–19 mL was administrated to the patient. The number of AFSCs in the prepared amniotic fluid varied from 2.8 to 5.5 × 104/ml. The total number of transplanted AFSCs was 732.1 × 104. The patient stopped taking anti-copper agents including DPA after six applications of amniotic fluid and did not receive any symptomatic neurological treatment during the course of amniotic fluid treatment in our clinic.
The treatment with amniotic fluid resulted in significant clinical outcomes. With the increase in treatment times and the extension of time, the patient began to experience a gradual resolution of neuropsychiatric symptoms, manifested by a decrease in the UWDRS score . Eighteen months after 12 administrations of amniotic fluid, the upper limb tremor and dance-like movements disappeared and the fingers were able to perform fine movements. The grip strength of both hands returned to normal. The patient was able to eat normally, along with a significant improvement in speech and pronunciation clarity. Bilateral ankle clonus significantly resolved, leading to an obvious correction of X-shaped walking posture. The HAMA self-evaluation scale showed no anxiety symptoms. Consistent with the resolution of neuropsychiatric symptoms, brain MRI showed a significant improvement in central nervous system degeneration, manifested as a reduction in lesion area and the alleviation of damage, even with a partial lesion recovery to the normal state at 18 months after treatment . The K-F ring in the eye became less obvious at 3 months and disappeared altogether after 18 months of treatment. In addition, diffuse changes in liver parenchyma detected by ultrasound were improved after the treatment. Meantime, the serum albumin level, reflecting hepatic synthetic function, returned to normal . Evaluation of copper metabolism parameters also showed improvements; the serum ceruloplasmin level was elevated from undetectable to 30.8 mg/L and total serum copper concentration was increased from 5.47 to 8.48 μM/L. The 24-h urinary copper excretion decreased from 171 to 37 μg. In addition, laboratory examination of the blood showed that the IV infusions of amniotic fluid significantly improved the patient’s cytopenia. Significant increases in red and white blood cell counts and platelet counts were observed after six applications of the amniotic fluid. It was observed that the therapeutic effect remained after the treatment, indicating the long-term efficacy of amniotic fluid . Eighteen months after treatment, red and white blood cell counts, hemoglobin content, and total protein reached normal levels, along with an increase in the platelet count from 34 × 109/L to 80.2 × 109/L. Moreover, the menstrual cycle, which was interrupted for 1.5 years before the treatment, also resumed every 1–3 months. At present, the patient is working as a supermarket cashier and is fully capable of living independently.
As regards the safety of amniotic fluid infusion, there were no adverse reactions and abnormal conditions except for a pollen allergic reaction that occurred during the treatment period. The patient experienced allergic asthma in the spring of 2021. After receiving anti-allergic agents for 25 days, the allergic reaction was completely relieved and the administration of the amniotic fluid was not discontinued during this period.