A 53-year-old male patient was admitted to the hospital with abdominal pain for two weeks and weakness in the lower extremities for one day.
This patient was admitted to the local hospital because of epigastric pain after alcohol consumption. He described the pain as intermittent, non-radiating and worsening with food consumption. The patient denied nausea, vomiting, constipation, fever or progressive weight loss. Based on abdominal pain, elevated levels of serum amylase, and findings of peripancreatic exudation and effusions by computed tomography (CT), the patient was diagnosed with acute pancreatitis. The patient was treated with antibiotics, proton pump inhibitors, fasting and short-term intravenous feeding and fluid therapy, and the abdominal pain was alleviated slightly. Unfortunately, on the 14th d of hospitalization, this patient developed a sudden onset of aconuresis and paraplegia. He was referred to our hospital for further examination.
The patient reported no remarkable history of past illness.
There was no family history of malignant tumors.
The patient’s vital signs were stable. No superficial lymphadenopathy was palpable. Regarding the pulmonary and cardiac examination, no obvious abnormality was observed. The abdomen was flat and soft. Physical examination revealed epigastric tenderness without rebound tenderness or Murphy’s sign. No jaundice or palpable masses were observed. Neurologic examination revealed no abnormality in his cranial nerves. The muscle strength of the upper limbs was normal, while it was grade I in the lower limbs. Deep tendon reflexes in the affected limbs were diminished or absent. Bilateral Babinski signs were positive. Hypoesthesia beneath the T8 sensory dermatome was observed. Meningeal irritation signs were negative. He also showed bladder-urinary dysfunction.
The auxiliary examination at admission showed that the white blood cell count was 14.68 × 109/L (normal range, 3.5 × 109/L - 9.5 × 109/L), RBC count was 3.95 × 109/L (normal range, 4.3 × 109/L - 5.8 × 109/L), HGB was 136.0 g/L (normal range, 130-175 g/L), PLT count was 324 × 109/L (normal range, 100 × 109/L-350 × 109/L), C-reactive protein was 34.64 mg/L (normal range, 0-6 mg/L), procalcitonin was 0.12 ng/mL (normal range, 0-0.05 ng/mL), serum amylase was 266 U/L (normal range, 0-125 U/L), lactic dehydrogenase (LDH) was 526 U/L (normal range, 71-231 U/L), and uric acid was 799 μmol/L (normal range, 71-231 μmol/L). Laboratory tests showed no abnormalities in liver function or electrolytes. His carbohydrate antigen 19-9 was 461.28 U/mL (normal range, 0-35 U/mL), and carbohydrate antigen 12-5 was 126.90 U/mL (normal range, 0-35 U/mL). Other tests revealed normal tumor marker levels, including carcino-embryonic antigen and alpha fetoprotein levels of 0.56 ng/mL (normal range, 0-5 ng/mL) and 2.6 ng/mL (normal range 0-8.1 ng/mL), respectively.
A CT scan at admission showed a swollen pancreas and gallbladder, with peripancreatic exudation and liquid collection, indicating a diagnosis of acute pancreatitis and acute cholecystitis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the abdomen and lumbar spine at the 14th d after admission showed a swollen pancreas and gallbladder, with less peripancreatic exudation and liquid collection, indicating the remission of acute pancreatitis and acute cholecystitis. Additionally, MRI showed abnormally thickened lesions of the gastric wall, multiple enlarged retroperitoneal lymph nodes and a well-demarcated, posterolateral extradural mass lesion between T9 and T12, with extension through the spinal foramen and definite bony destruction . Whole-body positron emission tomography-CT (PET-CT) was then performed and showed multifocal malignant lesions in the stomach, pancreas, gallbladder, bone, bilateral supraclavicular fossa, anterior mediastinum, bilateral axillary and retroperitoneal lymph nodes , indicating multiple metastases of malignant tumors. Gastroduodenal endoscopy revealed massive involvement of the gastric body and duodenum with tumors . Histology and immunohistochemistry of gastric biopsies were suggestive of BL .