A 28 years old, moderately built male student, presented to the orthopedic outpatient department of a tertiary care center with a sudden increase in pain and inability to use the right hip for about 5 days. He complained of chronic pain in both hips and gluteal region associated with progressive limp for 1 1/2 years. He was previously investigated in our hospital and diagnosed to have ONFH of bilateral hip for which he had refused to take any further treatment and discontinued follow-up. After 1 year, he presented with above complaints. He had worsening of symptoms following a squatting event and required assistance to get up and walk thereafter. He was an alcoholic for the past 8 years. He denied any history of bleeding disorder, trauma, steroid intake, or family history. Limb was in the attitude of flexion, adduction, and external rotation. Clinical examination of the right hip revealed deep tenderness on anterior joint line, thump tenderness on greater trochanter, and wasting in thigh and gluteal muscles. Greater trochanter was at higher level as compared to the left side. There was true shortening of 2 cm, painful hip movements with 20° flexion deformity and 10° adduction deformity in right hip. His left hip was also symptomatic. Harris hip score was 17.1. Previous X-rays showed increased sclerosis and lyticlesions in both hips, suggestive of ONFH. X-ray was done after patient had inability to walk, which revealed increased sclerosis with decreased joint space, loss of contour with subcapital femoral neck fracture.Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) pelvis with both hips revealed osteonecrosis involving both heads and pathological subcapital fracture on the right side. Presentation of ONFH with subcapital fracture has not been included in the commonly used classifications. It makes classifying or staging the avascular femoral head changes difficult. After discussing the treatment options with the patient, we planned for a right total hip arthroplasty (THA) since the patient wanted stable and mobile hip. Our intraoperative findings revealed that margins of the fracture were irregular with no capacity to bleed.Cemented THA was done. Gross necrosis in the marrow and lipid infiltration was reported in histopathology of the femoral head which is consistent with osteonecrosis . In the post-operativeperiod, patient was mobilized full weight-bearing from 1stday and rehabilitation was continued as per protocol. The other hip was operated for cemented THA after 2 weeks . At 6-month follow-up,Harris hip score was 83.5.