A 54-year-old woman presented to the neurology department of our hospital on 29 October 2019 complaining of headache, blurred vision, vomiting and paraphasia. This patient had had rheumatoid arthritis and osteoporosis, and taken the drugs irregularly over the past decade. She broke her right femur 5 years ago and right leg 2 years ago. She underwent fracture repair surgeries successively and sustained the plate internal fixation in her right leg. The surgical wounds had healed without obvious infection. Accidentally, she cut her left leg over 40 days ago and smeared Chinese herbal ointment to promote healing. However, the treatment effect was poor and she had not paid enough attention to protect against infections. Ultimately, she left an unhealed and purulent wound visibly. Family and psycho-social history including relevant genetic information was normal.
At the time of admission, the patient’s vital signs were normal without fever. She was confused and had simple language reaction to painful stimuli. She did not cooperate to complete neurological examination which showed a stiff neck and positive right pathological sign.
Laboratory tests of blood taken at admission showed a white blood cell (WBC) count of 14.61 × 109/L with 84.5% neutrophils. High-sensitivity C-reactive protein was 256.59 mg/L and procalcitonin was 4.89 ng/mL, both far above normal values. Lumbar puncture was then performed after excluding contraindications, in especial brain shift on computed tomography (CT) plain scanning. A lumbar puncture yielded cloudy cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) with initial pressure over 400mmH2O. CSF analysis revealed an elevated total nucleated cell count of 1210 × 106/L (90% multiple nuclear cells), an increased protein concentration of 1.58 g/L (normal value, 0.01 ~ 0.45 g/L) and a decreased glucose concentration of 0.39 mmol/L (blood glucose 5.44 mmol/L). Considering the available information, we empirically made a diagnosis of purulent meningitis and immediately treated with intravenous vancomycin (1 g every 12 h) and meropenem (1 g every 8 h) to cover all common causative microorganisms until culture results were known.
After a 24-h incubation period, gram staining of the cloudy CSF demonstrated the presence of gram-positive bacteria . After 72 h of treatment, the patient had a marked improvement in health conditions and laboratory tests. She became alert, correct-replied and well-cooperated. In the meantime, her headache gradually relieved. Blood WBC count, high-sensitivity C-reactive protein and procalcitonin were all decreased. Total nucleated cell count of CSF for reexamination decreased to 110 × 106/L, and CSF culture yielded no bacterial growth. Five days later, the first bacterial culture was subsequently identified as Corynebacterium striatum (C. striatum). Susceptibility testing was not performed by our laboratory department due to a lack of drug sensitivity guidelines for this kind of bacteria in our country. Intravenous vancomycin and meropenem therapy was continued. Blood culture taken before the start of antibiotic therapy remained negative. The CSF and blood levels of vancomycin were not measured.
However, head and chest CT with contrast enhancement examinations (unable to complete magnetic resonance imaging, MRI) showed intracranial and pulmonary abnormal lesions, which were considered as abscesses . After 9 days from admission, her conditions were deteriorating rapidly with coma and anisocoria. Dehydration therapy to decrease intracranial pressure was used immediately and the patient progressed smoothly to complete additional tests. A head CT was rearranged promptly and detected that the previous lesion was enlarged questionably. Considering that no definite brain shift was shown, we performed the lumbar puncture again to confirm CSF changes on the premise of the patient’s conditions and her family’s full consent. We followed the operating guidelines to reduce and slow the release of CSF. The lumbar puncture revealed cloudy CSF with initial pressure of 350mmH2O, an increased total nucleated cell count of 536 × 106/L and protein concentration of 1.40 g/L. In the next day, this patient had respiratory and circulatory failure gradually. In spite of giving cardio-pulmonary resuscitation and mechanical ventilation, this patient eventually died. As far as available information was concerned, we speculated that the intracranial abscess ruptured and formed cerebral hernia. In the course of the hospitalization, the patient’s family firmly refused any surgical operations because of the costs and risks.