A previously healthy 62-year-old woman living in a rural area developed fever, headache, and fatigue starting on July 27, 2018. She also had gastrointestinal symptoms, such as anorexia, nausea, and diarrhea later, and visited a local clinic on July 30. She was prescribed antipyretic analgesics and returned home. The following day, she developed a mild consciousness disorder and visited a local clinic again accompanied by her family. She underwent a magnetic resonance imaging examination, but no abnormality was noted. However, laboratory data showed leukocytopenia, thrombocytopenia, and increased aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and creatine kinase (CK) levels. She was transported to Kagoshima University Hospital.
On admission, she had a slight disturbance of consciousness [Glasgow Coma Scale of 14: E3, V5, M6], a body temperature of 37.4 °C, a respiratory rate of 22/min, blood pressure of 109/73 mmHg, heart rate of 97/min, SpO2 of 99% (room air), normal heart and respiratory sound, no swelling of the superficial lymph nodes, crusty bite wounds in the left inguinal region, although there was no tick. Laboratory testing showed leukocytopenia (total white blood cell count of 910 cells/mm3); thrombocytopenia (platelet count of 63,000 cells/mm3); mildly elevated AST (68 U/L), lactate dehydrogenase (364 IU/L), and CK (317 U/L) levels; elevated ferritin level (1947 ng/mL); and normal CK-MB fraction (CK-MB) (4 U/L) and C-reactive protein (CRP) level (< 0.02 mg/dL). A urinary general examination showed protein (4+) and occult blood (3+). Electrocardiography (ECG) and chest radiography findings were normal on the day of admission (day 1).
Because of these clinical findings, she was suspected of having SFTS and transferred to the intensive care unit. Several hours after admission, SFTSV RNA was detected in her serum samples by RT-PCR, so she was definitively diagnosed as having SFTS.
Her clinical course is shown in Fig. . Her blood pressure gradually started to decrease from day 2 evening. Fluid resuscitation (100 ml/h for 10 h; crystalloids 500 ml, colloids 500 ml) was performed until day 3 morning because hand-held ultrasound on day 2 midnight showed collapsed IVC (inferior vena cava). Then, repeat hand-held ultrasound showed recover from collapsed IVC; nevertheless, her blood pressure had not recovered and administration of low doses of dopamine and norepinephrine was started. To exclude cardiogenic shock, trans-thoracic echocardiography was performed and showed diffuse left ventricular (LV) wall motion depression (with an EF: ejection fraction of 34.4%), diffuse LV wall thickening, and small amount of pericardial effusion. Further, ECG showed ST elevation in the II, III, aVf, and V2–6 leads and a low-voltage complex in all leads , and the level of troponin I was elevated (120.9 ng/mL), but that of CK-MB was not. She did not have any chest symptoms. She met several diagnostic criteria for clinically suspected myocarditis , which include unexplained cardiogenic shock, elevated level of troponin I, abnormal ECG and echocardiographic findings. In addition, she also met criteria for fulminant myocarditis , which include acute illness (history of < 2–4 weeks since the onset of symptoms), hemodynamic instability due to cardiogenic shock, and need for hemodynamic support (inotrope). Therefore, she was suspected of having fulminant myocarditis caused by SFTSV. However, we did not perform coronary angiography (CAG) or endomyocardial biopsy because thrombocytopenia and leukocytopenia greatly increased the risk of an invasive procedure. We screened for other viruses, including enterovirus, adenovirus, and influenza viruses that may cause myocarditis, but none of them were detected in nasal swab samples.
On day 5 of hospitalization, repeat echocardiography showed further LV dysfunction (with an EF of 27.9%), diffuse LV wall thickening (septum/posterior wall: 14.7 mm/13.5 mm), and narrowing of the left ventricular cavity . On the basis of these results, administration of low doses of dobutamine and milrinone was added. On day 6 of hospitalization, repeat echocardiography showed cardiac tamponade findings of the dilated IVC without respiratory variations and right ventricular diastolic collapse . However, no surgical pericardial puncture was performed, because there was no safe puncture space and a circulation agonist was able to maintain blood pressure. After that, echocardiography showed steady improvement of LV function (EF) and wall thickness, the urine output also continued to increase and the water balance gradually leaned toward negative as a result . Additionally, the pericardial effusion gradually decreased and the cardiac tamponade findings naturally disappeared. On day 11 of hospitalization, her mild disturbance of consciousness from admission had improved, and she no longer needed a circulatory agonist. On day 13 of hospitalization, ECG showed improvement of ST elevation in the II, III, aVf, and V2–6 leads. She was eventually transferred to a general ward on the same day. On day 17 of hospitalization, repeat echocardiography showed normal LV function (with an EF of 70.3%) and wall thickness (septum/posterior wall: 8.9 mm/9.4 mm) .
On day 20 of hospitalization, laboratory testing and ECG showed no abnormal findings. After exercise rehabilitation, she was discharged home on day 28 of hospitalization.
She had no history of cardiac diseases, allergy, or use of drugs that may cause myocarditis. During 28 days of hospitalization, CRP and bacterial culture were always negative, and there was no evidence of eosinophil elevation. Viruses, other than SFTSV, were not detected by virus isolation test. Based on these results, she was clinically diagnosed as having fulminant myocarditis caused by SFTSV.