A 67-year-old Japanese man was diagnosed with stage IV non-small-cell lung cancer with malignant pleural effusion in June 2015. His kidney function was normal at that time (creatinine 0.78 mg/dl, estimated glomerular filtration rate 76.2 ml/min/1.73 m2). His medical history included atrial fibrillation and gastroesophageal reflux disease. He had no known history of food or drug allergy. He did not drink but had smoked 40 cigarettes per day since at the age of 20 years. His family history was unremarkable. Despite receiving first-line chemotherapy (bevacizumab combined with pemetrexed plus cisplatin followed by maintenance pemetrexed infusion), the lung cancer progressed. Thus, nivolumab was initiated at a dose of 3 mg/kg every 2 weeks in April 2016. His baseline serum creatinine level before nivolumab therapy was 1.2 mg/dl, and red or white blood cells were not noted in urinalysis. Owing to general fatigue and appetite loss, 10 mg oral prednisolone daily was initiated in July 2016. Four months later, when the oral prednisolone treatment was tapered to 5 mg daily, sterile pyuria was noted and the creatinine level increased to 1.64 mg/dl. Since his creatinine level continued to increase, nivolumab was discontinued (a total of 19 cycles had been performed), and the patient was referred to the nephrology department in January 2017.
His medications at the time of referral included aspirin 100 mg, warfarin 1.0 mg, prednisolone 2.5 mg, and lansoprazole 15 mg per day. He also used indacaterol/glycopyrronium inhaler once-daily. He had been receiving lansoprazole for more than 4 years without significant adverse effects, including kidney injury. He denied using non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or other nephrotoxic agents. His weight was 49.9 kg, height was 168 cm, body temperature was 36.7 °C, pulse rate was 84/min with an irregular rhythm, and blood pressure was 102/60 mmHg. Breath sounds were reduced in the left lower lung field. His heart sounds were normal without audible murmurs. The liver, spleen, and kidneys were not palpable. Tenderness in the costovertebral angle was unclear. Skin rash, joint pain, or swelling was absent, and the oral mucosa was intact. No neurological abnormalities were noted. Laboratory investigations showed blood urea nitrogen value of 23.2 mg/dl, creatinine level of 2.39 mg/dl, and urinary beta-2 microglobulin level of 21,398 μg/l. Urine microscopy revealed numerous white blood cells (100–999 cells/high-power field) along with white blood cell casts. Blood and urine cultures were negative. Other laboratory findings are summarized in Table . Computed tomography (CT) revealed no possible focus of infection. A kidney biopsy was performed to clarify the cause of the acute kidney injury (AKI). The biopsied specimen contained 17 glomeruli. Two of the glomeruli were globally sclerosed but the remaining 15 showed no apparent mesangial proliferation, hypercellularity, or crescent formation. The infiltration of lymphocytes and plasma cells was conspicuous in the interstitial space and it was accompanied by mild edema and fibrosis. Tubulitis was frequently observed with mild to moderate tubular atrophy in the cortical area, but granuloma formation was not noted. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated no significant immune deposits in the glomeruli or tubules. Inflammatory cells were predominantly composed of CD4-positive cells . A diagnosis of ATIN was made. As anti-PD-1 therapy could disrupt the immune tolerance to medications that had been safely used for a long time by enhancing T-lymphocyte activation, we reassessed the patient’s current medications. PPIs have been recently recognized as important offending drugs in the development of drug-induced ATIN, so lansoprazole was discontinued. His creatinine level showed rapid improvement in 3 days (decreasing from 2.74 to 1.82 mg/dl), and the sterile pyuria disappeared. The patient then received steroid therapy (500 mg intravenous methylprednisolone for 3 days followed by 1 mg/kg/day oral prednisolone), and his creatinine levels eventually stabilized around 1.7 mg/dl. DLST for lansoprazole was positive. The detailed methodology for the DLST has been described in a prior publication . The patient’s clinical course is shown in Fig. . Since the size of the lung cancer and serum carcinoembryonic antigen level remained unchanged, the patient was followed up carefully without re-initiating nivolumab. Urinary beta-2 microglobulin level remained within normal range.