We report the case of a 60-year-old female patient, with a history of hypertension under a well-controlled calcium channel blocker, admitted to the emergency room with exertional dyspnea associated with an influenza-like illness that had been evolving for a week. The general examination, on admission, found a conscious patient, dyspneic with a SpO2 = 92% at AA, polypneic with a respiratory rate at 22cpm, without cyanosis or signs of respiratory distress, hemodynamically stable with a PAS at 140mmhg and a PAD at 79mmhg and a heart rate at 88 bpm, afebrile with a temperature at 38.2°, with a weight of 85 kg and a height of 168 cm as well as a BMI = 35 kg/m2.
The pleuropulmonary examination found asymmetric basithoracic crackling rales. The rest of the examination was normal.Considering the pandemic specific circumstances, a PCR was performed and came back positive. The CT scan without contrast injection showed peripheral ground glass lesions typical of SARS VOC 19 infection with an estimated 20% involvement. Because of her clinical stability, the patient was treated as an outpatient with the following national anti-COVID protocol: Azithromycin 500 mg at D1, then 250mg from D2 to D7, Vitamin C 1000 mg/12H for 15 days, Vitamin D 100000 IU/week, Zinc 45mg/day for 15 days, with regular medical follow-up. The initial evolution was favorable with a clear clinical improvement.
After 20 days since the beginning of her symptoms, the patient presented skin lesions made of punctiform erythematous macules that did not fade with in vitro pressure on the lower limbs , with progressive extension without signs of infection or other associated signs. A biological assessment was requested. The blood count showed a correct platelet count of 440,000/mm3 with the rest of the blood lines normal. Bleeding time, partial thromboplastin time and prothrombone levels were normal. The rest of the hemosatosis workup was without abnormalities. During the etiological investigation, the patient had no signs of infection other than COVID-19, no signs of infective endocarditis, no signs of drug use, and neither clinical sign pointing to systemic vasculitis such as arthralgia, ocular or renal involvement. There was no evidence of rheumatoid purpura, AL amyloidosis or diabetes. Therefore, the diagnosis of post-covid vascular purpura was retained. The patient was put on antihistamines and topical emollients. The evolution was marked by the progressive disappearance of the purpuric lesions after one week .