A 33-year-old male (60 kg) diagnosed with type 3b kyphosis of the thoracic region at the L1 level underwent extended pedicle subtraction osteotomy. After shifting from the preoperative holding area to the operating room, standard American Society of Anesthesiologists monitors were connected, and baseline parameters were noted. An intravenous line was secured, and infusion of normal saline was started as maintenance fluid. Anesthesia was induced with fentanyl (2 mg/kg), propofol (2 mg/kg), and vecuronium (0.08 mg/kg), and the airway was secured with an armored endotracheal tube with an internal diameter of 8 mm. Anesthesia was maintained with oxygen, air, and sevoflurane. After placing the patient in a prone position, US-guided (US machine M-Turbo, Fujifilm Sonosite Edge II, Inc., USA) ESP block was administered. The probe was kept transversally in a midline position at approximately the level of the target lumbar vertebra . The corresponding spinous and transverse processes were identified, and the probe was placed on the ipsilateral side to insert the needle in-plane to target the area below the erector spinae muscle, above the lateral edge of the transverse process (target point). LA (20 ml of 0.125% bupivacaine) was injected deep into the erector spinae muscle complex . The ESP block was administered bilaterally at two different levels, one at T12 (above the angle of kyphosis L1) and another at L3 (below the angle of kyphosis L1). A total volume of 80 ml (bupivacaine 0.125%) was administered, which is well below the toxic dose of a 60 kg patient. On visualization of the longitudinal spread, the LA had spread caudally to approximately T7 cephalad and L5 caudad. Neuromonitoring was performed in this patient, including somatosensory evoked potential and motor evoked potential (Medtronics Inc., USA). There was no significant change in waveform amplitude (less than 50%) and latency (less than 10%) after the ESP block. The bispectral index was monitored and maintained in the range of 40–60. Any increase in the 20% heart rate/mean arterial pressure was treated with 1 µg/kg fentanyl. The surgery lasted for five hours and was uneventful. The patient’s trachea was extubated and the patient was transferred to the postoperative ward. Total intraoperative fentanyl consumption was 180 µg. Postoperative analgesia was provided by 1 g of intravenous paracetamol injection at eight-hour intervals. The patient was successfully extubated after the surgery, and was assessed at various time points: immediate postoperative period and at 1 h; 3 h; 6 h; 12 h; 24 h; and 48 h postoperatively using a numerical rating scale (NRS). The patient reported an NRS of 3/10, 2/10, 2/10, 2/10, 3/10, 2/10, and 2/10 at these respective time points.