The patient was a 27 years old woman, Gravid3, Para 3, Live 3 (G3P3L3) with no prior history of any disease. She had a repeat Cesarean delivery a week before the symptom onset. The patient was presented to the emergency department, with decreased level of consciousness, seizure-like movements and a history of headache. She was infected with COVID-19 (confirmed by nasopharyngeal swab test for SARS-CoV-2 PCR), 2 weeks before the onset of neurological symptoms. She did not receive any anti thrombosis prophylaxis followed by cesarean delivery. On admission, her vital signs were as follows: blood pressure 160/90 mmHg, heart rate 88 beat/min, respiratory rate 24 breaths/min with oxygen saturation of 92% on air room and temperature 37.9 °C. Brain CT scan showed a 30*56 mm hyperdense mass-like lesion in the left fronto-parietal area, with midline shift and mass effect . Her past medical history, was not consist of abnormal coagulation profile before or after delivery. She had normal coagulable laboratory tests during the admission with normal platelet count, as well. Anticonvulsant therapy (Phenytoin) was commenced and the patient was scheduled for an emergent surgery. Given the history of COVID-19 and ground-glass opacities in the chest CT scan, Remdesivir, Interferon, Cefepime, Dexamethasone and Sofosbuvir were commenced for the patient. She was transferred to the operating room and an urgent evacuation of hematoma via a left fronto-temporo-parietal craniotomy approach was performed. Evacuation of hematoma (≈ 200 cc), drain insertion and duraplasty were performed successfully with no postoperative bleeding. After the surgery, patient was admitted to the intensive care unit. She became extubated a day after surgery. Three days later, a 40 °C fever started. Therefore, with diagnosis of Hospital acquired pneumonia (HAP), Colistin and Teicoplanin were ordered at this time. The patient became afebrile, but she was aphasic and had right hemiplegia. However, the neurological symptoms of the patient gradually improved within a week. Follow-up brain CT scan was uneventful and the patient was discharged without any serious complications . On the 2-month follow-up, the patient reported no significant disability. Meanwhile, she refrained to be evaluated by diagnostic cerebral angiography.