A 71-year-old Japanese man was diagnosed with localized high-risk prostate cancer (cT2bN0M0, Gleason Score: 4 + 5 = 9, initial prostate specific antigen: 18.9 ng/mL). Trimodality therapy with I-125 BT was selected, and CAB therapy with bicalutamide and goserelin was initiated. BT (prescribed dose: 110 Gy) and a hydrogel spacer injection were performed 7 months after CAB initiation . Seventy seeds were placed during BT without complications or loss. The external beam radiation therapy (prescribed dose: 45 Gy) was performed 1 month after BT. The patient visited our hospital with complaints of redness, pain, and bleeding in the perineum 6 months after BT and the hydrogel spacer injection. We observed erythema, swelling, and induration on the right side of the perineal anus; the formation of a pinhole fistula in the center of the lesion ; and serous effusion with loss of a seed from the fistula. The laboratory tests revealed elevated C-reactive protein levels to 5.91 mg/dL (normal range, ≤0.14 mg/dL) and elevated blood glucose levels to 230 mg/dL. In addition, his HbA1c was 5.8% before BT and had increased to 7.6%. Abdominal computed tomography showed a high-density area suggestive of a seed on the right side of the perineum and inflammatory findings in the surrounding tissue . Pelvic MRI showed a tunnel-like discharge of hydrogel from the dorsal prostate to the perineum . The fistula was incised, the seed was removed, and drainage was performed. Both the perineal drainage and urine cultures were negative. The patient received antibiotic therapy and underwent wound cleaning, and the inflammation improved thereafter (based on receding erythema and reduced C-reactive protein levels). Indigo carmine was injected through the perineal fistula to evaluate for urethral and rectal fistulas, neither of which were observed. After the inflammation subsided, the fistula site was sutured. Two years after treatment, no recurrence of prostate cancer or relapse of inflammation has been observed.