Patient A, a 21-year-old lady with a severe substance use disorder for various substances in addition to a psychotic vulnerability, was involuntarily admitted for a fixed period of 40 days following a paranoid psychotic outburst while being intoxicated. At the time of admission, the patient looked very unkempt. The patient was poorly oriented in time and place, was for the most part uncooperative and had difficulties having a coherent conversation. Sustained attention was affected, and there was logorrhea. There were persecutory and somatic delusions (e.g., She felt as if her eyeballs where placed there by someone else). There were no visual or auditory hallucinations. Furthermore, the patient experienced severe psychomotor restlessness. She reported that she was unable to sit during meals and was continuously rocking back and forth. Finally, there was subconjunctival hemorrhage of unknown etiology.
In addition to the severe psychotic state, the patient found it impossible to eat in a sitting position, found it extremely difficult to stand still and had the feeling that she had to pay attention almost continuously. A Barnes Akathisia Rating Scale (BARS) was taken at the start of treatment, on which the patient scored 11 out of 14 in total and 3 out of 5 on the global clinical assessment, a subscale of the BARS. It was unclear how long the akathisia had already been present. There were no signs of other extrapyramidal symptoms (acute dystonia, parkinsonism or tardive dyskinesia) present. The patient did not take any antipsychotic medication in the 6 months prior to admission. There was no prior history of traumatic brain injury, no neurological antecedents in the patient or (for so far known) her family. Possible differential diagnoses considered for akathisia were ADHD, agitated depression, agitation due to manic or psychotic states and Restless Legs Syndrome but we had insufficient clinical arguments, based on thorough anamnesis and clinical psychiatric examination to withhold any of these diagnoses. There was no history of major mood disorders, nor did she take any antidepressants or mood stabilizers. There was no history of substantial attention deficits or hyperactivity in early childhood and no increase of restlessness in bed or during the night. The restlessness also stayed long after psychotic features disappeared. The patient had no history of psychotic features in absence of substance abuse. As a result, no further screening instruments were used.
Anamnestically we learned that from the age of 17, there was also heavy Ketamine use (up to 8 grams per day) for which there were several episodes of emergency presentation with abdominal cramping, falling within the phenomenon of k-cramps: Biliary obstruction and dilatation in patients with heavy ketamine usage. In the past there was also sporadic use of cocaine, amphetamines, 3,4-methylenedioxy-methamphetamine (MDMA), 4-Bromo-2,5- dimethoxyphenethylamine (2-CB), gamma hydroxybutyrate (GHB) and heroin. Earlier emergency reports do not mention similar akathisia symptoms, nor did the patient mention experiencing them during the usage of these substances. She stopped taking before mentioned substances around 3 years prior to current hospitalization, when she switched to synthetic cathinones. Previous psychiatric assistance was limited to a 21-day crisis admission, 6 months before the current admission because of a substance induced paranoid psychotic episode, in the absence of akathisia or any other psychomotor symptoms. Psychotic symptoms were treated with aripiprazole 30 mg, leading to an alleviation of the symptoms, but the treatment was immediately discontinued after hospitalization.
There was also a significant familial burden: The father had been alcohol abstinent for about 2 years and had also been dependent on amphetamines and cocaine in his youth. Mother had known for 25 years varying periods of heroin addiction and methadone dependence. When she was born, the patient was thus hospitalized for an extended period because of methadone withdrawal.
Routinely toxicology testing for stimulants such as cocaine, amphetamine and methamphetamine but also cannabis, benzodiazepines and opiates repeatedly showed negative during current hospitalization, but the patient admitted to having used a combination of several synthetic cathinones before admission, and she managed to use these substances once during hospitalization. For about 3 years she smoked mainly α-Pyrrolidinopentiophenone (α-PVP—better known as “Flakka”), α- Pyrrolidinohexiophenone (α-PHP) and alpha-Pyrrolidinoisohexaphenone (α-PHiP) on daily basis with peaks up to 6 to 7 grams per day. There was also occasional use of other synthetic cathinones being Mephedrone (“Miaow Miaow” or “MCAT”), Hexedrone, 4-Chloro-alpha-pyrrolidinovalerophenone (4-Chloro-PVP) and 4’-Fluoro-α-pyrrolidinopentiophenone (4-Fluoro-α-PVP).
represents a summarizing timeline of pharmacological treatments. The psychotic features were initially treated for 5 days with Olanzapine up to 30 mg daily but given persistent complaints of motor restlessness was switched initially to Quetiapine 600 mg and was diminished to 200 mg daily. Quetiapine was administered for 35 days (the remainder of the hospitalization period) under which the psychotic features stabilized. Propranolol was also associated for the whole period of hospitalization (40 days) and was increased to 80 mg while monitoring her vital parameters. Due to limited effects on akathisia, additionally Diazepam 10 mg was given at day 10 and was continued for 30 days. Despite these interventions, akathisia remained present, resulting in the addition of Biperidene 4 mg at day 19, which was continued during the last 21 days of hospitalization. Mirtazapine 15 mg was briefly associated without convincing effect. Intake of the medication was systematically supervised by nursing staff. The BARS score stayed high at discharge, with a total score slightly dropping to 7 in total and 2 out of 5 at the global clinical assessment subscale. The patient left the hospital at her own request at the end of her involuntary admission, despite the presence of persisting symptoms and as a result, some treatment options were left unexplored.
Despite the administration of propranolol, a pulse of 100–130 beats per minute was consistently measured, followed by an electrocardiographic check-up. The electrocardiogram was reassuring and showed a sinusoidal rhythm with non-specific T-top inversions in the inferior leads II, III, and aVF. To exclude epileptogenic activity and neurotoxicity, a control EEG and brain MRI were also performed: Both could not retain any abnormalities. The biochemical workup and blood pressure also showed reassurance. There was no sign of inflammation (CRP 1.8 mg/L and WBC 7.16 × 10*3/μg), no deviations in electrolytes (Sodium 140 mmol/L, Potassium 4.1 mmol/L, Chloride 102 mmol/L and Bicarbonate 25.6 mmol/L) and no thyroid abnormalities (TSH 0.548 mIU/L, Free T4 12.9 pmol/L). The differential diagnoses of hyperactive delirium and neuroinflammation were therefore excluded.