A 49-year-old woman underwent screening gastroendoscopy because of chronic liver damage, which detected an ulcerous lesion in the lesser curvature of her pylorus. Carcinoma was suspected macroscopically but biopsy results failed to confirm the diagnosis; however, gastrectomy was planned. The patient had no prior history of abdominal surgery. However, she was a heavy drinker, and the laboratory data revealed liver damage. She underwent LDG including lymph node incision using an ultrasonic coagulation cutting device. No lymphatic leakage was detected in the operation field, and a drainage tube was placed after completion of the Billroth-I reconstruction. The duration of the operation was 247 min and the total blood loss was 10 ml. Early gastric adenocarcinoma with radical resection was confirmed by histopathology.
Postoperatively, 200–300 ml of clear fluid was discharged every day, and the patient was diagnosed with hepatic lymphorrhea. However, the patient discharged herself on postoperative day 11, despite no reduction in the volume of ascites. She was re-admitted on postoperative day 26 because of the onset of right hemiplegia, and was diagnosed with an infarction in the left middle cerebral artery. We considered that this was likely to have been caused by reduced cerebral blood flow resulting from systemic dehydration due to hepatic lymphorrhea .
The patient was treated with sufficient infusion and albumin transfusion and her condition gradually improved. Ultrasound-guided PTL was attempted on day 34 by a specialist in interventional radiology (IR) for hepatic lymphorrhea, but visualization of the lymph vessel was unsuccessful.
To prevent loss of ascites from a drainage tube, a peritoneovenous shunt (PVS) was placed under local anesthesia, and her activities of daily living recovered. The PVS tube was clamped temporarily on postoperative day 54 in preparation for ending the procedure, but her ascites increased again and the PVS was continued.
On day 61, a 2nd PTL was planned to remove the shunt and perform Lipiodol embolization. We considered that the lack of success of the 1st procedure was attributable to the 1st PTL puncture being distal to the hepatic hilum and, therefore, made the puncture for the 2nd PTL proximal to the hepatic hilum. A 22G Chiba needle was inserted by an IR specialist, from the right hypochondrium to the junction of the right superior and right anterior branches of the portal vein. The space of Disse was then delineated using a water-soluble contrast medium. The contrast medium flowed downstream, and lymphatic leakage was confirmed at the site of the hepatoduodenal ligament . Lipiodol (oily contrast medium) 4 ml was then injected and computed tomography images showed all the contrast agent located in the duodenal ligament, suggesting that the procedure had been effective. However, her abdominal distention improved temporarily but then worsened again 3 weeks later. Given that a lymph vessel had developed, we considered that the short-term effectiveness of the Lipiodol injection was attributable to incomplete embolism of the point of leakage.
PTL on day 81 showed a remarkably developed lymphatic vessel. A mixture of Lipiodol and NBCA 0.5 ml was then injected to embolize the lymph vessel with obvious results . The patient’s ascites had disappeared by day 106 , her condition, including her paralysis, improved, and she was discharged on postoperative day 108. The only complications of the percutaneous transhepatic lymphangiography and embolization (PTLE) were minor abdominal pain and a slight worsening of hepatic function. One year after gastric resection, the patient remained disease-free without paralysis.