A 70-year-old male was admitted in our hospital with history of gradual onset progressive decrease in level of consciousness and altered behavior for last 1 month. He also developed cough, coryza, and fever for last 7 days. He was known to have insulin-requiring type 2 diabetes mellitus for which he was receiving insulin, and bipolar affective disorder for which he had been receiving lithium (300 mg twice a day) for about 10 years; his other medications included atorvastatin for dyslipidemia and losartan for hypertension. One year earlier, he had been admitted in our ward for glycemic control and evaluation of complications and found to be clinically and biochemically euthyroid; he never returned for follow up until the present admission.
On initial examination, he was drowsy with incoherent speech. Patient had hypothermia (94° F), bradycardia with heart rate of 52 beats per minute and stable blood pressure. Patient's respiratory rate was 12 per minute. He had features of hypothyroidism including a slow husky voice, a small goiter, a thick, dry, and cold skin, pouting lips, and profoundly delayed deep tendon jerks. The systemic examination revealed crepitations in the right infrascapular region, normal cardiac examination, other than bradycardia, and unremarkable abdominal examination. The neurological examination revealed drowsiness, incoherence (a glasgow coma scale (GCS) of 13/15), no apparent cranial nerve palsy or focal motor weakness, and markedly delayed deep tendon reflexes.
The routine laboratory evaluation showed macrocytic anemia (Hb 10.2, MCV103), azotemia (urea 76 and creatinine 2.6 mg/dl), fasting blood glucose of 141 mg/dl, mild hypernatremia and hypokalemia, and normal liver function test results. Electrocardiogram revealed bradycardia and chest X-ray showed infiltrates in right mammary region.
Thyroid function showed thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) >150 IU/ml, Tetraiodothyronine (T4) <1 μg/dl, anti-thyroid peroxidase (TPO) titer of 60 IU/ml. The serum lithium level was 2.9 nmol/L (therapeutic level 0.8-1.2 nmol/L) . He was managed with levothyroxine, starting with a loading oral dose of 500 μg through ryles tube followed by 100 μg daily, IV antibiotics and IV fluids; lithium was stopped after consultation with a psychiatrist. From day 5, patient started showing progressive improvement and by day 10, he had a GCS of 15/15, normal electrolyte, serum creatinine of 1.8 mg/dl and serum lithium level of 0.5 nmol/L.