This is a case of a 75-year-old lady who is known to have diabetes mellitus, hypertension, hypothyroidism, adrenal suppression, previous history of stroke and a history of aortic valve replacement with mechanical prosthesis 15 years prior to presentation. She was admitted urgently to the cardiac care unit with shortness of breath on exertion class III and lower limb edema. Chest X-Ray was compatible with pulmonary edema. Echocardiogram showed a well-functioning aortic prosthesis but severe mitral valve stenosis (MS) and mitral regurgitation (MR) with severe Mitral annular calcification (MAC) (video , 2).
The patient was stabilized medically then underwent Cardiac CT to characterize the MAC that appeared as a dense horseshoe calcification occupying most of the circumference of the mitral annulus (Video , ). The case was discussed in the multidisciplinary rounds and she was deemed very high risk for surgical intervention with a calculated STS risk score of (19.5%). Given the patient age and frailty, it was not reasonable to decalcify the mitral annulus and reconstruct the annulus that may lead to high risk of Atrio-ventricular (AV) groove dissociation. So the decision was taken to implant the Sapien 3 valve in the mitral position under direct vision after redo sternotomy. To predict the risk of post procedure LVOT obstruction, the neo LVOT was assessed preoperatively during systole by measuring the distance from the inter- ventricular septum to the frame of the simulated transcatheter valve and then calculating the neo LVOT area which was 211 mm2 in this case. However, there is no set threshold for LVOT obstruction when this procedure is done using transatrial approach and the anterior mitral leaflet is excised since the calculated neo LVOT is underestimated due to the fact that there is flow through the cells of the valve stent frame.
Intraoperatively, and after exposing the mitral valve, the anterior leaflet was excised and was thickened and fibrosed (Video 5). The posterior calcium bar was so prominent that made the MV orifice very small not even accommodating size 25 regular MV prosthesis sizer. We decided preoperatively to use the largest Sapien 3 valve (size 29) based on the mitral orifice size from CT scan with additional 20% oversizing. We loaded the valve on the balloon in a similar way to the transapical aortic approach and we advanced the balloon inside the ventricle until the end of the valve stents was just across the mitral annulus (Video 6). We elected not to perform a balloon predilatation to avoid fracture of the calcium body or to induce atrioventricular groove rupture. Subsequently one operator was responsible for inflating the balloon and another one was responsible for stabilizing the position of the valve across the annulus with fine tuning the direction of the valve during inflation of the balloon. The balloon was inflated until an atmospheric pressure of 4 and kept inflated for 15 s then deflated (Video 7). The valve was nicely deployed and stable in position with normal movement of the leaflets. We did not use supportive sutures to fix the valve nor utilized any patches or skirts around the valve. The patient was weaned smoothly from bypass and intraoperative transesophageal echo was performed and showed that the valve is well seated in position with no evidence of any paravalvular leak (Video , 9). The mean gradient across the valve was 4 mmHg.