A 41-year-old man diagnosed with end-stage renal disease, secondary to Gout kidney disease, was hospitalized for preemptive living kidney transplantation. He underwent ABO-compatible living kidney transplantation. The kidney donor was his 45-year-old sister, and her right kidney was selected for allograft due to a split renal function with Tc-99m mercaptoacetyltriglycine-3 renography revealing superiority of contralateral kidney function. The right kidney consisted of a single artery and vein. Despite instruction of weight loss, his preoperative body mass index (BMI) was 33.4 kg/m2; thus, we handled the surgery with the greatest care to avoid complications. The surgery progressed smoothly (first warm ischemic time: 5 minutes, cold ischemic time: 29 minutes, and second warm ischemic time: 60 minutes), and urine output was observed immediately after reperfusion of the transplant renal artery and vein. Doppler US immediately before abdominal closure revealed sufficient blood flow throughout the allograft, without reversed or absent diastolic flow and an obvious elevated resistive index (RI). An allograft biopsy 1 hour after the allograft blood flow was restored, showing no specific changes. He was introduced to an immunosuppression regimen consisting of tacrolimus, MMF, prednisone, and basiliximab. On postoperative day (POD) 1, the serum creatinine levels decreased, the urine output gradually decreased, hematuria was recognized, and Doppler US revealed mild hydronephrosis in the allograft. Doppler US on POD 2 showed a decrease in the diastolic flow and an elevated RI without obvious evidence of TRVT ; thus, rejection was considered, and steroid pulse therapy was initiated. Despite this therapy, allograft function did not improve, hydronephrosis worsened, and urine output decreased. Unenhanced computed tomography (CT) on POD 4 revealed a hematoma with air in the urinary tract of the allograft , and serum creatinine levels increased to 7.0 mg/dL. By washing ureteral catheter to check for obstraction was the reason why air accumulated in urinary tract. To remove the hematoma with clots in the urinary tract, a ureteral stent was placed, and the allograft was assessed for anastomotic stenosis and compression of the renal artery and vein; then, surgical exploration was performed. Perforation of the pelvis was detected, and evacuation of the hematoma with clots in the urinary tract was performed. Ureteral stent indwelling was performed, and the pelvis was repaired using bioabsorbable sutures. Vascular anastomoses were examined to determine whether there was arterial anastomotic stenosis, kinking of the artery, compression of the vein, and presence of thrombosis. Although there was no evidence of arterial anastomosis and kinks in the renal artery, one of the two branches of the proximal renal vein was compressed by the surrounding tissues, including the allograft, and TRVT was detected. Therefore, subsequent surgical thrombectomy was performed, and Doppler US revealed improved diastolic flow and RI . Postoperative CT also showed that hydronephrosis and the urinary tract hematoma were no longer present . Simultaneously, an allograft biopsy was performed and showed no evidence of rejection, calcineurin inhibitor toxicity, or tubular injury. After surgical thrombectomy, urine output increased, and serum creatinine levels decreased to 1.8 mg/dL .