A 3-month-old Caucasian male infant was admitted to our department because of 24 hours of high-grade persistent fever (T 39.5°C) not relieved by acetaminophen.
He was the second-born of non-consanguineous parents, after 36 weeks gestation after an unremarkable pregnancy. Birth weight was 3015 g. On admission, his general condition was poor because of high fever (T 39.5°C), tachycardia and tachypnea. On physical examination, he presented with generalized edema and non-palpable peripheral lymph-nodes. Muscle tone was normal and lungs and heart examination was unremarkable. Pharynx was hyperemic. Abdomen examination was normal: liver and spleen were within normal limits. Meningeal signs were absent but the patient was very irritable .
At the admission, laboratory test showed normocytic anemia (hemoglobin 9 g/dL, red blood cells 3,180,000/mm3, mean corpuscular volume 80 fl), neutrophilic leucocytosis (white blood cells 28,300/mm3, neutrophils 69%) with a normal platelet count (200,000/mm3). Laboratory investigations also showed elevated gamma-glutamyltransferase (52 U/L), hyperbilirubinemia (2.98 mg/dL), hypoalbuminemia (2.5 g/dL), hypoproteinemia (4.3 g/dL), hyponatremia (128 mEq/L); transaminase levels were normal (aspartate aminotransferase 45 IU/L, alanine aminotransferase 40 IU/L). C-reactive protein (CRP) confirmed the significant state of inflammation (12.39 mg/dL).
Chest radiography showed a generalized increased translucency of the thorax. The heart size was within normal limits .
Abdominal ultrasound revealed slight hepatosplenomegaly and mild peritoneal effusion.
Right coronary artery (RCA) on echocardiography resulted to be within the maximum limits of normality with mild hyperechogenicity of the wall. A small pericardial effusion was detected too.
The patient was initially treated with intravenous antibiotic therapy (ceftriaxone) but, because of the persistence of the fever we suspected KD, we started the first dose of IVIG (2 g/kg in a single infusion) and replaced acetaminophen with ibuprofen.
Nevertheless, the child continued to be febrile and a generalized rash starting from the trunk and conjunctivitis appeared. In addition, the hands and feet became swollen .
Echocardiography examination performed after 48 hours from the first dose of IVIG showed a dilatation of RCA (0.25 cm).
Due to the persistence of fever we performed a second dose of IVIG.
After this treatment the patient developed fissuring of the lips, hydrocele , ectasia of left coronary artery (LCA) and a worsening of the dilatation of RCA (RCA: 0.45 cm; LCA: 0.32 cm) .
On the 10th day of illness, because of persistent fever, we performed a bone marrow aspiration which showed no cellular abnormalities and we started the administration of intravenous methylprednisolone (IVMP, 30 mg/kg/day) for 3 consecutive days together with high-dose of acetylsalicylic acid (80 mg/kg/day).
Although this treatment, laboratory tests showed worsening of thrombocytosis (from 143,000/mm3 to 298,000/mm3), neutrophilic leukocytosis, anemia with reticulocytosis, a further increase of CRP value and a persistence of the fever.
Because of the marked increase of transaminase levels (aspartate aminotransferase 230 IU/L, alanine aminotransferase 427 IU/L), a week later, the dose of aspirin was slightly reduced (60 mg/kg/day).
Following the IVMP therapy, we decided to continue steroid therapy by oral prednisone at dosage of 2 mg/kg/day and, after the improvement of the clinical condition, we reduced the dosage at 1mg/kg/day two weeks later.
Periungueal desquamation began on day fifteen and lasted for a week . Although fever disappeared 19 days after onset of the illness and inflammatory indexes turned into normal values, platelet count remained high and for this reason we reduced the dosage of acetylsalicylic acid at 5 mg/kg/day for its anti-aggregant effects.
Finally, we used clopidogrel (1mg/Kg/day) instead of acetylsalicylic acid at low dose for its anti-aggregant effects because of the persistence of the ectasia and the dilatation of the coronary arteries (the maximum diameters were 0.71 cm for RCA, 0.42 cm for LCA and 0.4 cm for the left anterior descending artery - LAD).