A 44-year-old man presented to the gastrointestinal surgery clinic with a 1-week history of persistent dull pain in the perianal region, which worsened when standing and walking. Simultaneously, he developed a fever of 37.5°C. He was diagnosed with “diabetes mellitus type 2” one month previously and treated with pioglitazone hydrochloride and metformin hydrochloride tablets, following which he achieved good glycemic control. The abdomen was found to be soft with no tenderness when a physical examination was conducted in a supine position. An anal examination in the knee-chest position showed mild tenderness without redness and swelling around it. Upon a digital rectal examination at the level of the lower rectum, a sharp tip could be touched in the rectal wall at 9–12 o'clock with apparent tenderness. The latex glove was stained with blood and no purulent secretion was observed. A pelvic computed tomography (CT) demonstrated that the left wall of the lower segment of the rectum approximately 6 cm above the anal verge was thickened, and a linear hyperdensity of 46 mm [CT value: 108–134 Hounsfield units (HU)] was detected outside the rectal wall, which was considered a foreign body . The FB was inserted into the left internal obturator muscle through the mesorectal fat and the left levator ani muscle. No bubble-like air shadow was detected around the FB or the adjacent fat space. The left levator ani muscle and the left internal obturator muscle were significantly thickened to approximately 7 and 19 mm, respectively, with poorly defined boundaries. The focal mesorectum and the fat space between the two muscles were blurred. A pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed that the left rectal muscle swelled and presented as increased signal intensity on the T2-weighted imaging (T2WI) and diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI), with a linear low signal penetrating the rectal wall to the left internal obturator muscle . The patient stated that he got drunk ten days ago. On the day of the CT and MRI examination, the patient was placed in the supine lithotomy position and his anus was enlarged to four fingers under subarachnoid block anesthesia. A sharp FB was touched in the rectal wall at 2–3 o'clock approximately 6 cm above the anal verge. The surgeon held vascular forceps in his right hand, and guided by his left index finger, grasped and removed the FB along its long axis. No suturing was performed due to the fact that it was only a small wound with mild bleeding in the rectal mucosa. The FB was a wooden toothpick with a length of approximately 46 mm with two sharp tips. The patient was discharged after a single 2,000 mg intravenous dose of ceftriaxone per day was administered for 6 days. The patient made a return visit two weeks after the surgery, with no complaint of pain in the perianal region. A follow-up pelvic CT revealed that the left levator ani muscle and the left internal obturator muscle became thin with measurements of 5 and 10 mm, respectively, with clear boundaries and a gap in the local mesorectal fat .