A 66-year-old male with a history of diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and tobacco use presented to the emergency department with acute vision loss in the left eye and progressively decreased vision in the right eye. Visual acuity was 20/200 in the right eye and light perception (LP) in the left eye. He had a relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD) in the left eye. Slit lamp examination of the anterior segment was unrevealing. A fundus examination showed a choroidal mass measuring approximately 6 mm × 6 mm superior to the optic nerve with an exudative retinal detachment of the right macula. Fundus examination of the left eye was unremarkable. Fundus autofluorescence revealed hyper-autofluorescent specks overlying the choroidal mass in the right eye . Optical coherence tomography (OCT) of the retina and B-scan ultrasonography confirmed a choroidal mass and exudative retinal detachment in the right eye.
He was admitted to the hospital for further workup. CT angiogram of the head and neck revealed an incidental finding of a cavitating mass in the right upper lobe. Follow-up CT chest imaging showed a large right upper lobe cavitary mass, mediastinal adenopathy, and bilateral pulmonary nodules. A diagnostic bronchoscopy was performed with a biopsy of the lung mass. The biopsy revealed lung adenocarcinoma .
MRI of the brain and orbits with and without contrast demonstrated thickening in the right posterior globe and optic nerve changes on the left side. After discharge from the hospital, the patient had PET–CT performed demonstrating PET-avid RUL lung mass with extensive pulmonary, nodal, liver, and osseous metastatic disease consistent with the clinical staging of IVB (cT3, cN2, and pM1c). A blood next-generation sequencing test was positive for an EGFR exon 19 deletion. Subsequently, he was started on osimertinib, an oral third-generation irreversible EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor, at a dose of 80 mg daily. The patient underwent radiation therapy to the left orbit × 3 for a total of 2400 cGy. At the patient's one-month follow-up appointment, the right eye showed complete resolution of subretinal fluid, shrinking of the right choroidal mass, and improved visual acuity in the right eye (20/30) .
The left eye vision did not improve, and disc pallor was noted. A posttreatment CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis with contrast demonstrated significant interval improvement of right upper lobe mass, improvement in mediastinal and right hilar lymphadenopathy, and improvement in metastatic liver lesions. The patient is continuing follow-up with both ophthalmology and oncology services.