A 55-year-old Japanese man underwent a right hemicolectomy in our hospital for a tumor in the ascending colon.. He did not have any inherited or acquired thrombophilic predispositions. The tumor was histopathologically diagnosed as moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma, and staged as IIIB (T4N1M0), according to the TNM (tumor, nodes, metastasis) classification . Tumor markers including carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) were all within normal limits before the operation. During follow-up in our outpatient clinic, our patient received adjuvant systemic chemotherapy for six months.
Despite the adjuvant treatment, abdominal computed tomography (CT) 13 months after surgery showed a liver tumor in segment 8 based on Couinaud's classification . Our patient was subsequently readmitted to our hospital for full diagnosis and treatment of the liver tumor. Hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis B core antibody, and hepatitis C antibody test results were negative. Tumor markers including CEA, CA19-9, α-fetoprotein, and protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist II, were all within normal limits. CT arteriography (CTA) showed a tumor of approximately 25 mm in diameter consisting of two components: an apparently solid part and a cystic component. The solid component of the tumor was enhanced in the early phase of the CTA and was washed out in the delayed phase, a pattern compatible with HCC . However, based on the cystic component, the tumor was also suspected to be a cystadenocarcinoma. The right portal vein was not visible on portography, but CT during arterial portography (CTAP) revealed defective portal perfusion in the whole right lobe of the liver . This finding was suggestive of PVTT. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiography was performed to differentiate cystadenocarcinoma connected to a biliary duct. However, no specific findings of biliary carcinoma were noted and the collected bile sample was cytologically negative. For preoperative differential diagnosis of the tumor, echo-guided biopsy was performed. The biopsy revealed that the liver tumor was a liver metastasis from the colon cancer. With a preoperative diagnosis of liver metastasis from colon cancer, laparotomy was performed. Neither peritoneal dissemination nor hilar lymph node metastasis was detected. The liver tumor, measuring 28 × 25 mm in size, was located in segment 8, while PVTT was located in the right portal vein in direct communication with the liver tumor. Our patient underwent a right lobectomy . The resected tumor, which had a fibrotic capsule, macroscopically resembled HCC. The cystic component observed on preoperative examination was not detected in the resected specimen. Histopathology of the resected liver tumor and PVTT revealed a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma . The histopathological findings from the resected tumor were similar to the previously resected ascending colon cancer. Based on the similarity, the final diagnosis for the liver tumor was a liver metastasis from the ascending colon cancer accompanied by macroscopic PVTT in the right portal branch. Histopathological infiltration into the endothelial layer of the portal vein was not seen. All resected margins were free from cancer. Postoperatively, our patient agreed to receive adjuvant chemotherapy. Our patient remains healthy, with no evidence of recurrence 51 months after the hepatectomy.