A 13-year-old girl presented to the outpatient department with intermittent pain in both hip joints for 6 months. Pain aggravated on prolonged walking and got relieved with rest and occasionally radiated to the inner thighs and knee. She had consulted a physician for hip pain and was prescribed symptomatic treatment without any further investigations. Since then, she was on intermittent painkillers but was able to do all the routine activities of daily life. The patient neither gave a history of any significant trauma nor of any underlying comorbidity that can affect bone metabolism. There were no obvious risk factors for the fracture too. Except for intermittent use of pain-relieving medications, she was not on any other medications and was not actively involved in any sports. Medical history, family history, and personal history were unremarkable. The build was normal for her age with a body mass index of 23.4 (normal range: 18.5–24.9).
On clinical evaluation, the patient had a bilateral Trendelenburg gait with mild discomfort. The movements of both hips were painless and normal in range (flexion: 0–120°, extension: 0–10°, adduction: 0–30°, abduction: 0–40°, internal rotation: 0–30°, and external rotation: 0–30°) with no tenderness. There was no fixed deformity or limb length discrepancy and both limbs had normal neurovascular status. The laboratory tests that were conducted in the hospital did not reveal any significant abnormality except for a mild Vitamin D deficiency . The patient had normal rheumatological, metabolic, and endocrine workup.
A radiograph of the pelvis with both hips showed a Delbet type II fracture neck of the femur with preserved neck length on both sides . There was varus angulation on both sides but no significant translation of the fragments. Neck shaft angles on the right and left sides were 98° and 99°, respectively; while Powel’s angles on the right and left sides were 57° and 65°, respectively . Computed tomogram (CT) scan of both hips confirmed a preserved neck length and alignment of fragments .
A diagnosis of bilateral stress fracture of the neck femur was made. Magnetic resonance imaging of both hips was done and the presence of osteonecrosis of the femoral head was ruled out. Under combined spinal and epidural anesthesia, the patient was taken on a traction table on both sides and both sides were operated in the same sitting, left followed by right. The fracture was reduced satisfactorily by a closed maneuver. However, as Powel’s angle was high on both sides, valgus osteotomy was planned at the sub-trochanteric level with an aim of getting 30° corrections in Powel’s angle on both sides. A guide wire was passed across the fracture from the lateral cortex of the trochanter at an angle of 100° to the long axis of the femur. Fixation of the fracture was done with a 9.5 mm dynamic hip screw (DHS). Thereafter, valgus sub-trochanteric osteotomy was performed on both sides and fixation was done with a 130° side plate . She remained non-weight bearing for 12 weeks. However, range of movement and strengthening exercises were started as soon as the patient was pain-free after surgery.
The neck fractures on both sides as well as osteotomy on the right side healed satisfactorily. However, the osteotomy site on the left side revealed signs of nonunion at 10 months follow-up . Parents were counseled for revision surgery but they did not agree and presented at 12 months after surgery with implant failure . Patient underwent revision surgery and intraoperatively, the proximal fragment was found to be completely displaced and rotated in flexion. The previous implant was removed, the nonunion was reduced, fixation was done with a longer DHS, and an autologous bone graft was added . Further post-operative period was uneventful and the nonunion healed satisfactorily within 6 months of revision surgery .