An 82-year-old woman (gravida 1, para 1) was diagnosed with uterine prolapse 3 years ago. She also had difficulty in micturition, for which a urethral catheter was occasionally inserted for 6 months. She visited our hospital due to vulvar bleeding and difficulty in manually reducing the prolapsed uterus.
Pelvic examination revealed uterine prolapse with protrusion of a red-colored mass (65 × 65 mm) on its ventral side . Although identifying the external urethral meatus was difficult, urinary outflow from the mass was detected, suggesting bladder eversion from the external urethral meatus.
Biochemical blood analysis revealed the presence of severe inflammatory reaction (white blood cell count, 17.7 × 103/μL; C-reactive protein, 5.22 mg/dL) and decreased renal function (serum blood urea nitrogen, 36.4 mg/dL; serum–creatinine [S–Cr], 2.68 mg/dL).
Computed tomography revealed bilateral hydroureteronephrosis. Magnetic resonance imaging showed prolapse of adipose tissue into the retropubic space, but the urinary bladder lumen could not be confirmed . Antegrade pyeloureterography and ureteral stent placement were performed to improve renal function. Leakage of the contrast medium and the guidewire were observed in the red vulval mass ; thus, complete bladder eversion was diagnosed.
Robotic supracervical hysterectomy and sacrocolpopexy and bladder neck reconstruction were performed. Bladder neck reconstruction involved trimming the edge of the dilated bladder neck, dividing it into two layers, leaving 10 mm on the ventral side, and suturing using a polyglactin suture. A Foley catheter was placed from the bladder neck.
Postoperatively, bilateral hydronephrosis disappeared, and the S–Cr level improved to 1.4 mg/dL. Cystography performed 2 months postoperatively revealed a bladder capacity of 80 mL and no granulation formation. Subsequently, the cystostomy catheter was removed, resulting in total urinary incontinence. However, complete bladder eversion recurred 10 months later. According to DeLancey's theory, the level of bladder eversion is divided into levels 1, 2, and 3 depending on the position of the pelvic organ supporting tissue. The reason for the recurrence was considered to be that complete bladder eversion was a level 3 (pelvic floor muscle) weakness and the sacral fixation was dislodged. We chose to perform robotic Burch colposuspension and robotic sacrocolpopexy concurrently; we considered that a rating of DeLancey level 3 required anatomical repair of complete bladder eversion.
The bladder was completely everted and prolapsed completely from the vagina. The bladder neck was dilated to 35 mm; the everted bladder was manually reduced from the perineum.
The da Vinci Xi™ was used for robotic surgery. The abdominal cavity was observed using a laparoscope, and the mesh was confirmed to be fixed to the sacral anterior surface. The anterior bladder cavity was opened, and the anterior surface of the urinary bladder and posterior surface of the pubis was sutured at 10 points using polyester sutures , and cystopexy was performed to the rectus fascia at five points using polyester sutures . Transvaginal surgery was performed for bladder neck reconstruction using the same procedure as the previous surgery. In addition, colpoclesis and cystostomy were performed. The operative time was 4 h 12 min, the robotic console operative time was 2 h 53 min, and the blood loss was 5 mL. Postoperatively, a Foley catheter was not placed from the bladder neck. The postoperative course was favorable, and the patient was discharged 10 days after surgery. Cystostomy enabled postoperative urination management, and there was no recurrence of complete bladder eversion 12 months postoperatively.