A 66-year-old female patient had experienced intermittent right epigastric pain for almost 2 mo.
A 66-year-old Chinese female presented to our hospital with intermittent right epigastric pain for 6 mo. An enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen revealed a solid lesion with a size of 2.3 cm × 2.3 cm in the junction of the left lateral lobe of the liver. Contrast-enhanced ultrasound suggested the presence of hepatocellular carcinoma. Subsequently, a radical partial hepatectomy was performed and the operation went smoothly. Except for regular follow-up examinations, the patient did not receive adjuvant chemotherapy or radiotherapy. However, enhanced CT of the abdomen and fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/CT (PET/CT) suggested lymph node metastases. She was unsuitable for surgery because of the location and number of metastatic lymph nodes. The patient was admitted to our department for further evaluation and treatment.
She had a 16-year history of chronic hepatitis B virus infection.
Unremarkable.
Vital signs, such as respiration, pulse, temperature, and blood pressure, were within the normal range. There were no other positive signs with the exception of mild tenderness in the right upper abdomen.
The initial laboratory examinations included a complete blood count which showed a normal white blood cell count, haemoglobin, and platelet count. Liver enzymes were elevated: alanine transaminase, 26 IU/L; aspartate transaminase, 23 IU/L; and serum albumin, 27.3 g/L. Quantitative analysis of hepatitis B markers revealed that the level of hepatitis B virus surface antigen was 829.9 IU/mL. She was negative for hepatitis B surface antibody and hepatitis B virus e antigen, but positive for hepatitis B e antibody and hepatitis B core antibody.
Contrast-enhanced CT of the abdomen revealed enlarged lymph nodes in the portacaval space and the zone of the pancreatic head and ligamentum hepatogas-tricum. PET/CT confirmed metastases according to the history of hepatic FDCS .