A 48-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with 1-year history of pancreatic and liver tumors. The tumors were accidentally found when the patient went to a local hospital after a sudden incidence of fainting. It is noteworthy that he reported of recurrent incidences of hypoglycemia, however, there was no history of any endocrine disease.
His medical history showed that he had been treated eight times for metastatic liver tumor by transcatheter arterial chemoembolization and once by radioactive seed implantation. Five years before presentation, he had undergone an excision of a tumor of the right pterygopalatine fossa.
Physical examination showed no other positive findings except that the liver was enlarged and palpable.
Laboratory investigations showed an abnormal hemogram, including hemoglobin of 123 g/L (reference range: 131-172 g/L), neutrophils 72.8% (reference range: 50%-70%) and lymphocytes 10.8% (reference range: 20%-40%). The results of liver and kidney function were normal. The levels of serum tumor markers (CEA, CA 19-9, CA 12-5, and AFP) were all within normal limits.
Computed tomography (CT) imaging of the abdomen showed a 4.7 cm well-defined mass located in the lower posterior part of the body of the pancreas . Non-uniform enhancement was observed from the arterial to portal venous phase. Meanwhile, multiple nodules and masses of various sizes were seen in the liver . The largest one was located in the segment VIII of the liver with a diameter of about 15.9 cm. No obvious dilatation of intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts was observed.
Pancreatic magnetic resonance (MR) imagining also confirmed a hypervascular tumor located in the body of the pancreas and multiple tumors located in the liver. Those tumors were hypointense on T1-weighted MR images and hyperintense on T2-weighted MR images.
For a complete preoperative evaluation, fluorine-18 fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/CT (18F-FDG PET/CT) was performed. Images from the PET/CT revealed that both the pancreatic and the metastatic liver lesions had an increased uptake of the tracer FDG. Besides, the thoracic and lumbar vertebrae, humerus, femur, scapulae, ribs, sacrum, and pelvis also showed heterogeneous FDG uptake .
A liver biopsy guided by B-mode ultrasound confirmed that the tumor was an SFT/ hemangiopericytoma (Grade 2).