In this study, a 63-year-old male patient was presented, who had undergone silicone oil tamponade in the right eyeball in June 2009 as a result of diabetic complications. No significant discomfort was observed at the initial stage postoperatively, but unfortunately, the right eye vision decreased gradually on the 2nd month, and completely blind on the 3rd month after operation. The silicone oil in the right eye was not removed for maintaining the normal eyeball in morphology.
In November 2011, the patient came to see a doctor because of dizziness and headache.an emergency CT examination had occasionally shown the quasi-circular high-density shadows at bilateral lateral ventricular anterior horns, and a small high-density shadow at the right side of suprasellar cistern; besides, similar findings were also discovered in the right eyeball in addition to the low-density regions at the right side of basal ganglia and corona radiata. Therefore, the patient was suspected with old cerebral infarction at right side of basal ganglia/corona radiata, and cerebral hemorrhage was not excluded. Moreover, the high-density lesions were still found at bilateral lateral ventricular anterior horns and at the right side of suprasellar cistern on the re-examined CT 6 h later. A similar finding was also found in the right optic nerve, which is thicker and denser than the left. Then the diagnosis of intraventricular migration of silicone oil after an intraocular tamponade was made based on the patient’s medical history .The cause of the patient’s symptoms is considered to be hypertension, sequelae of cerebral infarction, and the patient is also accompanied by diabetes. The patient’s symptoms improved markedly through a series of symptomatic treatments, including nutritional support, adjust blood pressure, and control blood sugar.
In July 2014, the patient was hospitalized due to dizziness and walking instability.A CT examination revealed the greatly decreased density of bilateral cerebella and brainstems, suggesting cerebral infarction (as subsequently confirmed by MRI). At the same time, the high-density lesion at the anterior horn of right lateral ventricle had disappeared. However, the quasi-circular high-density shadow could still be observed at the anterior horn of the left lateral ventricle, along with the small high-density shadow in the right side of suprasellar cistern. No significant change was detected at the anterior lesion of the left lateral ventricle 3 days later, while the density of lesion at the right side of suprasellar cistern was slightly increased. Afterwards, the patient had received craniocerebral MRI examination, which revealed that the lesion at left lateral ventricle anterior horn had displayed the consistent signal characteristics as those in right eyeball, including slightly higher signal on T1WI (on which water appears as low signal and lipid components as slightly higher signal), slightly higher signal on T2WI(on which water appears as high signal and lipid components as slightly higher signal), chemical shift artifacts (a special artifact that is easy to appear on the surface of fat in MRI) on both T1WI and T2WI, low signal on T2WI lipid-pressing image .The main cause of symptoms in this patient is subacute cerebral infarction in the brain.The patient’s symptoms improved significantly with a standard procedure for stroke therapy in neurology, including thrombolysis, improvement of brain metabolism, nutritional support, while controlling blood pressure and blood sugar.
In March 2018, the patient was re-admitted as a result of cerebral infarction symptoms with unknown cause. A CT examination showed that the quasi-circular high-density lesions in the right eyeball and the anterior horn of the left lateral ventricle still existed, and the high-density shadow at the right side of suprasellar cistern remained almost unchanged. However, a new strip-shaped high-density lesion was found at the middle of left lateral ventricle, which was well-defined on the ventricular side, but ill-defined on another side adjacent to the left corona radiata, where a slightly low-density lesion was also discovered (subsequently confirmed by MRI as a new cerebral infarction). MRI examination revealed that the lesions both at middle and anterior of left lateral ventricle had exhibited the same signal characteristics as most of those obtained previously (2014.07). Additionally, There were some new change observed. The ADC maps (on which water molecule diffusion movement visual display; the more restricted the motion, the lower the signal) showed that the signal of silicone oil at left lateral ventricle (anterior horn and middle) were more complicated than those obtained in 2014, and it had more dotted iso-hyper signals compared to the former. Three months later, the re-examined CT suggested that the high-density lesion in the middle of the left lateral ventricle had disappeared, but the quasi-circular high-density lesion could still be detected in the anterior horn of left lateral ventricle; meanwhile, the density of silicone oil elsewhere increased. We found that the high-density lesion had persisted in the anterior horn of left lateral ventricle in the next two CT reexaminations (in 2018.09 and 2018.10), while the high-density shadow in the right suprasellar cistern had displayed a slight sustained increase in density . The patient underwent an active thrombolytic therapy, but the effect of intervention on imaging founding was not obvious compared to the improvement of his symptoms.
In addition, the ADC maps of lateral ventricular silicone oil acquired in 2014 and 2018 had revealed some subtle changes .The CT values (reflecting material density, HU as its unit) of silicone oil in the right eyeball and in different intracerebral parts over time were shown in Fig. .