A 56-year-old Korean female was referred for progressive symptoms characterized by dyspnea on exertion. A 4/6 diastolic murmur along the left sternal border following systolic murmur was heard upon cardiac auscultation; and mild cardiomegaly was detected on a chest roentgenogram. Upon admission of the patient, transthoracic echocardiography revealed a grade III aortic regurgitation, which was caused by an anomaly of the aortic valve characterized by an ‘X’-shaped commissural morphology during diastole . A left ventricular hypertrophy with a dilated left ventricular cavity (LV mass index: 120 g/m2, LV end-diastolic dimension: 73 mm) was also detected. Electrocardiogram-gated computed tomographic aortography revealed a QAV with four symmetrically-sized cusps and a central coaptation failure with a regurgitation orifice . Furthermore, aneurysmal ascending aortic dilatation (maximum diameter = 45 mm), with preservation of the normal dimensions of the aortic root, is demonstrated . In addition, the ostium of the left coronary artery is juxtaposed with that of the right coronary artery, resulting in a single united ostial formation in the left coronary sinus (despite the normal course of coronary arteries presenting without stenosis) . Volume rendering of 3-dimensional reconstruction imaging showed the spatial and anatomical relationships of the ostia of two coronary arteries, originating from the oval-shaped, single united ostium, with adjacent structures . Under the diagnosis of dysfunctional QAV with concomitant single coronary ostium and separate aneurysmal ascending aortic dilatation, surgical correction (aortic valve replacement with mechanical devices and supracoronary aorta replacement with prosthetic graft) was performed. At surgery, the aortic valve was confirmed to be quadricuspid (Type A in anatomical classification by Hurwitz, et al.), with wrinkling fibrotic thickening of the free margin and commissural fusion . Resection of QAV disclosed the oval-shaped, single ostium to both coronary arteries, as seen on the preoperative multidetector computed tomography . Hereby, the location of the accessory cusp was not specified; and another classification suggested by Nakamura, et al. was not applicable to this case. The patient was discharged without any complications 8 days postoperatively.