A 64-year-old woman presented to our hospital with a 3-month history of intermittent chest pain and palpitation. In addition to the hypertension and diabetes mellitus, she had an 8-year history of CLL for which she had received imatinib (420 mg daily) as initial therapy. On admission, her vital signs were normal and no remarkable abnormality was found in cardiac physical examination. The electrocardiography (ECG) showed a sinus rhythm with inverted T wave in the lead III, V1 and V2 . The laboratory results revealed a mildly elevated high-sensitive troponin (566.9 pg/ml), and her first transthoracic echocardiography examination indicated the heart chamber size, structure, and systolic function were normal except for mild mitral regurgitation . Based on the symptoms and laboratory findings, the initial diagnosis was non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI). The patient then underwent coronary angiography and the results showed an approximately 50%-70% stenosis in the proximal and intermediate segments of the left anterior descending artery (LAD). No stenosis was observed in the left circumflex artery (LCX) and the right coronary artery (RAC) . She was then discharged with aspirin, clopidogrel, atorvastatin, and metoprolol.
One month later, the patient presented to the cardiac outpatient clinic of our hospital with complaints of chest tightness and palpitation. Her ECG showed deeper inverted T wave of the inferior leads (II, III and avF), as well as leads V1 and V2 compared with the ECG obtained one month before . However, a repeated echocardiography revealed a large irregular mass, measuring about 75.4 mm × 37.5 mm. The mass was located on the lateral and the outflow tract of the right ventricle, and adhered to the anterior leaflet of the tricuspid valve, resulting in slightly restriction of the tricuspid valve opening and right ventricular wall mobility. Continuous wave Doppler (CW) showed that the peak forward tricuspid valve flow rate was 1.2 m/s, the peak pressure gradient was 6 mmHg, and the mean gradient was 4 mmHg. Color Doppler detected a mild tricuspid regurgitation, with the velocity being 2.7 m/s and the regurgitation pressure gradient being 30 mmHg. Besides, moderate pericardial effusion was observed . In order to identify the character of the mass the patient underwent contrast enhanced echocardiography. After injection of the contrast agent, the mass was rapidly filled with echocardiographic contrast, indicating substantial vascularization which could help exclude the thrombus. As showed in Supplementary Video , after clearing the microbubbles using transient high-mechanical index flash imaging, rapid contrast re-filling in the mass was observed suggesting a high extend of vascularization of the mass, which is the typical feature of malignant tumors. Then the patient underwent biopsy of the cardiac mass and the results revealed diffuse large B-cell lymphoma with dual expression of myelocytomatosis viral oncogene (MYC) and B-cell lymphoma-2 (BCL2) . The chest and abdomen CT scan indicated that there was no evidence a mass elsewhere. The patient was diagnosed with Richter's syndrome and then referred to the hematology department for further chemotherapy. Until now, the patient has completed 2 times of chemotherapy with CHOP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone) plus venetoclax and the cardiac mass is getting smaller. At present, the patient is still under follow-up.