A 31-year-old white Caucasian woman suffering from repetitive ankle twisting underwent a second ligamentoplasty of the right ankle in 2008 for persisting instability. After intervention, she was treated with plaster-immobilization for seven weeks. Immediately after removal of the plaster, the patient reported intense pain and did not respond to standard painkillers (paracetamol, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and opioids), while physiotherapy became more and more difficult. Swelling of the right foot appeared, the scar re-opened and she presented with a dystonic posture of the right foot. Following an assessment by scintigraphy, possible CRPS was suspected. The diagnosis of CRPS-1 with dystonia was made and she was treated with several drugs, all of which were either without effect or poorly tolerated. A mobilization of the ankle was also performed under general anesthesia without long-lasting improvement.
In 2009, the patient was referred to a hospital where multidisciplinary management was started. Other treatments were tried, but without therapeutic benefits: dextropropoxyphene (600 mg/d), a buprenorphine patch (26.25 µg/h), hydromorphone (12 mg/d), clomipramine (50 mg/d), duloxetine (60 mg/d), pregabaline (300 mg/d), clonidine (0.30 mg/d), a lidocaine patch (2/day), intravenous pamidronate (30 mg/d) and methylprednisolone (64 mg/d). Three months later, the patient was referred to the Multidisciplinary Pain Center of CHU Mont-Godinne for administration of peridural and intrathecal anesthetic blocks (bupivacaine 5–15 mg). We noticed that the intrathecal block induced a contra-lateral motor block.
When the patient was transferred to the Multidisciplinary Pain Center of the Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc in Brussels two months later, she presented with pain in the entire right foot, irradiating to just under the knee. The pain was permanent and reported on average at 8-9/10 on the VAS (Visual Analogue Scale). The patient described the pain as a burning feeling, which was enhanced by touch and mobilization. Walking required two canes, long distances necessitated a wheelchair. She also suffered from sleep and mood disturbances. Housekeeping was left to her husband and she took leave from her job at a child-care centre. Clinical examination showed a swollen foot and calf and tightened skin that was pale, gleaming and cold. The ankle was fixed in a dystonic equinus; only the toes presented active, though limited, movement of flexion-extension. The range of motion of the knee and hip were normal. Neurological assessment showed hypoesthesia like a sock on the right foot (up to the shin), hyperesthesia and hyperalgesia on the leg (on and above the knee- with allodynia (mechanical and dynamic rather than static). It was almost impossible for the patient to bear touch to the painful region, which meant that a complete sensory assessment could not be realized . Evoked somesthetic potentials indicated normal lemniscal pathways coming from the lower limbs. The presence of a peripheral injury could not be evaluated because of the pain in the right leg.
In our Multidisciplinary Pain Center, the patient underwent the following algological techniques in order to try starting rehabilitation:
Intravenous ketamine (6 mg/h, increasing to 20 mg/h): no effect and handicapping side-effects (nausea, drowsiness). Two anesthetic peripheral blocks of the right sciatic nerve at the knee, guided by echography (ropivacaine 115 mg, lidocaine 100 mg, clonidine 75 µg): no anesthesia and persistence of pain. Patches of clonidine (400 µg/day) and local anesthetic (lidocaine 5%) applied to the right foot: no effect. Anesthetic epidural block with a lateralized catheter. X-ray control with iohexol showed good epidural diffusion but injection of bupivacaine (25 mg) and lidocaine (100 mg) in combination with clonidine failed to produce any anesthesia or analgesia. Nine anesthetic intrathecal blocks using bupivacaine (5 to 13 mg), clonidine (60 to 75 µg) or baclofen (50 µg): no effect was found with 5 mg of bupivacaine, a partial positive effect lasting a maximum 2h 15min for 10 to 13 mg of bupivacaine as reported by the patient. Treatment by continuous infusion and bolus of clonidine and bupivacaine respectively had a partial effect but had to be interrupted because of post-lumbar-puncture-syndrome. Baclofen had no effect. Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS): the stimulations were not perceived below the knee, this treatment was thus ineffective.
Two months later, almost one year after onset of CRPS, the patient discontinued all analgesics because of lack of therapeutic benefits and side effects on her cognitive functions and personality. Subsequently, she start noticing an improvement in her mood and cognitive functioning. Pain and neuro-orthopedic status of the right leg remained the same. As she started to feel better mentally, she progressively broadened her activities and started spinning and hydrotherapy.
In 2010, almost one year later, SCS (epidural electrode, Medtronic
®, USA inserted percutaneously at lower lumbar level and pushed up to the T9 level) was trialled. During the testing period, we noticed a reduction in the intensity of hyperesthesia and allodynia of the right foot allowing touch and both active and passive mobilization of the foot, especially of the toes. Edema of the right foot decreased and vasodilation returned colouring the foot and warming it up. Importantly, the patient also experienced psychological relief. There was no effect on the equinus. After multidisciplinary discussion, it was decided to finally implant the pulse generator after about six weeks of testing.
At the time of writing this paper (2013), the patient is doing better. She has set up different strategies of coping, she is considering taking up her social life again and feels more optimistic about her future. Physiotherapy is now possible, but needs to be performed gently and progressively. Mobilization is performed during hydrotherapy. Orthopedic shoes have been manufactured in order to allow her to lean on her foot. Retrospectively, the Neuropathic Pain Symptom Inventory (NPSI), used to determine the quality of pain relieved by SCS showed a partial relief of both spontaneous pain and evoked pain . Laser evoked potentials (LEP) at one year after implantation of SCS showed a dysfunction of afferent small fibers (Aδ) from the right foot. No abnormalities where observed when stimulating the left foot and hand .