A 53-year-old female with a history of an uncomplicated left TKA using a cemented, posterior-stabilized femur and all-polyethylene tibia implant in 2017 presented for her 4-year post-operative follow-up. Initial routine post-operative radiographs did not demonstrate any abnormality . However, subsequent routine anterior-posterior (AP) and lateral radiographs revealed a large, expansile lesion in the medial aspect of the proximal tibia . CT confirmed a 1.8 × 1.7 × 3.9 cm well-circumscribed osteolytic lesion with surrounding sclerosis, suggestive of a penetrating ganglion . At the time, the patient was asymptomatic, and it was elected to proceed with routine surveillance and conservative therapy.
Over the ensuing 6 months, the patient reported increasing pain and limited ambulation secondary to pain. Physical examination of the left knee demonstrated 0–120° of range of motion and stability to varus and valgus stress through the flexion-extension arc. Radiographs (AP and lateral views) showed progressive growth of the pre-existing cyst. An infection workup was initiated; the erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 12 mm/h (normal threshold is 0-20 mm/hr) and C-reactive protein was 1.89 mg/L (normal threshold is 0-10 mg/L) . The knee was aspirated yielding 100 nucleated cells with 9% neutrophils. Aspiration cultured for 14 days incubation did not yield any organisms. Based on Musculoskeletal Infection Society criteria the patient scored 0 which indicates low concern for infection . After a discussion with the patient about the risks and benefits of revision TKA, the patient elected to proceed.
The surgery was performed through the previous midline incision, followed by a medial parapatellar arthrotomy. An extensive synovectomy was performed. The tibial implant component was removed, and a high-speed burr was used to remove retained cement from the proximal tibia. Examination of the tibial component did not demonstrate significant wear or damage.
A cyst was identified in the medial tibia metaphysis, and the cyst wall was curetted and sent to pathology. Pathology confirmed a fibrous-lined cyst consistent with a ganglion cyst . The femoral and patellar implants were found to be well-fixed and were left in place. A clean-up cut was made on the proximal tibia, and a trail tibial component and bearing were placed. The tibia was prepared for a porous tantalum cone (48–15 mm) using trials as a guide. The final cone was placed after trialing and intra-operative assessment. A final stemmed tibial component was cemented through the cone. A final PS polyethylene bearing was placed after trial optimization.
Post-operative X-rays showed adequate initial fixation of the revision components with resolution of the intraosseous cyst . The patient’s inpatient course was uncomplicated, and she was discharged home with services on hospital day 1. At latest office follow-up, at >6 months post-operative, she presented with resolved symptoms of pain and is walking unrestricted distances. On examination, her knee was stable from 0 to 120 to varus and valgus stress. Post-operative X-ray imaging demonstrated stable implants .