A 71-year-old man was referred to the authors because of ocular hyperemia and corneal perforation in his left eye. He had been under regular observation by his ophthalmologist because of recurrent herpes simplex keratitis in his left eye from 8 years before the first visit. shows a slit-lamp photograph of the patient's left eye 6 years before the first visit. The nasal portion of his left cornea became slightly thinner than normal, and a scar was left in the paracentral cornea after an episode of herpes simplex keratitis. Until about 1 year before the first visit, however, his best-corrected visual acuity in the left eye remained at 20/20. Conversely, no pathological changes were observed in the patient's right cornea. Later, he was diagnosed with a hypopharyngeal carcinoma (stage IVA) with cervical lymph node metastases, so he underwent chemotherapy (5-fluorouracil (5-FU), docetaxel) starting from 8 months before the first visit. Six months before the first visit, he underwent an operation for cervical lymph node dissection. He received radiation therapy combined with 7 cycles of cetuximab (EGFR inhibitor monoclonal antibody) treatment (400 mg/m2) for 7 weeks after the operation. Two months before the first visit, computed tomography (CT) revealed the recurrence of cervical lymph node metastases and the appearance of supraclavicular lymph node metastases. He was then additionally treated with two cycles of cetuximab combined with carboplatin and 5-FU before he was referred to us. His medical history was significant for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
At the patient's initial visit with us, slit-lamp examination revealed a corneal perforation with a corneal epithelial defect in his left eye. In addition, his left anterior chamber space had almost disappeared . We treated him with a medical-bandage soft contact lens and topical antibiotics, such as levofloxacin eye drops (Cravit, Santen, Osaka, Japan) and ofloxacin eye ointment (Tarivid, Santen, Osaka, Japan). However, 2 days later, his corneal perforation was exacerbated, with iris incarceration into the wound site and exposure to the surface of the cornea. We therefore consulted the patient's medical oncologist. Eventually, chemotherapy of cetuximab combined with carboplatin and 5-FU was stopped by the medical oncologist. Two days later, we carried out lamellar keratoplasty using a preserved cornea after hospital admission. The host cornea, including the perforated area, was trephined with a 7.0 mm diameter, and the stromal lamellae were removed from Descemet's membrane during the operation. A graft, 0.5 mm larger in diameter than the recipient bed, and resected Descemet's membrane and endothelium were transplanted using 10-0 nylon sutures. The slit-lamp microscopy image from the day after the operation is shown in . The corneal graft was clear, and the anterior chamber was almost back to normal depth. The patient left our hospital 4 days after the operation. From 1 week to 1 month after the operation, he suffered from a graft-stitch abscess accompanied by anterior chamber hypopyon; he received antibiotics topically and systematically, and the corneal infection improved to some extent. During the break from chemotherapy, CT revealed increased cervical lymph node swelling and recurrence of hilar lymphadenopathy and mediastinal lymphadenopathy. One month after the eye operation, treatment with cetuximab, in combination with carboplatin and 5-FU, resumed for a third cycle. After retreatment with cetuximab therapy, there was no recurrence of the corneal perforation but the patient died from progression of the tumor invasion and metastases about 5 months after the eye operation.