A 28-year-old Caucasian male was regularly followed-up for a Crohn’s disease (CD) treated by infliximab, an anti-tumor necrosis factor (TNF) therapy. Infliximab treatment had been initiated in August 2011 and maintained up to now. In 1997, he received a complete vaccination scheme of 3 doses of Engerix-B10 (0–1–6 months). In September 2010, a CD was diagnosed. In June 2011, serological HBV screening performed before infliximab initiation revealed the presence of a low anti-HBs titer of 15.4 IU/L without HBs antigen (HBsAg) . At that time, the anti-HBc status was not determined. In April 2019, the HBV serology confirmed a protective anti-HBs antibodies (Ab) titer at 15 IU/L and the absence of anti-HBc Ab; a serological profile indicative of an efficient vaccine induced immunity. In parallel of his CD management, this patient, who had a high-risk of acquiring sexually transmissible infections (STI), has been receiving regular STI screenings at a free sexual health center. In June 2020, HCV and HIV serologies were negative while the syphilis serology showed an inconclusive profile . The HBV serological markers revealed an ongoing hepatitis B infection as documented by positive HBsAg and anti-HBc Ab but an absence of anti-HBs Ab. Liver function tests indicated a moderate hepatic cytolysis, with ALT around 4 times the upper limit of normal values. Additional hepatitis B markers were reactive for anti-HBc IgM, HBeAg and viral replication reaching 8 log IU/mL. Hepatitis Delta testing was negative. Interestingly, through retrospective testing of a sample collected 6 months earlier, the serological profile was already in agreement with an active HBV infection. HBV sequencing identified a genotype A2 strain carrying the sD144A substitution on the S protein. In July 2020, 1 month after HBV diagnosis and 7 months after the first evidence of a positive HBsAg, persistence of HBsAg and viral replication were in favor of a transition toward a chronic HBV infection. The FibroTest® result (F0–F1) did not support a significant fibrosis. To prevent the risk of HBV transmission and the development of liver lesions, a treatment by tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (TDF) and emtricitabine, active against HBV and also efficient as an HIV pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP), was initiated in September 2020. Five months after treatment initiation, HBeAg remained positive but a decline in HBV-DNA and HBsAg levels was recorded. Twelve months after treatment initiation, all surrogate virological endpoints for HBV functional cure were achieved. ALT levels remained slightly elevated while HBe seroconversion was observed. HBsAg became undetectable by both current and ultrasensitive HBsAg assays without anti-HBs seroconversion. HBV-DNA remained slightly detectable but below the limit of quantification of 10 IU/ml . On the last control, 18 months after treatment initiation, HBV-DNA was undetectable in the blood and anti-HBs Ab appeared. However, ALT levels had increased again (1.8 ULN). Antiviral treatment and periodical STI monitoring are being maintained, in front of high-risk behaviors and to ascertain durable HBsAg loss.