A 4-years-old Caucasian male came to our attention for persistent asymptomatic elevation of serum creatine-phosphokinase (CPK) levels. He was born at term by cesarean delivery after a pregnancy complicated by maternal hypertension and hypothyroidism. Family history was unremarkable. At birth, the patient was hospitalized in the NICU for neonatal sepsis complicated by hypoglycemia. Early cognitive development was mildly affected, with a delayed acquirement of the main language milestones (lallation at 12 months, first words at 18 months, simple sentences at 30 months), with normal motor development. At the time of evaluation, CPKs were found to be elevated in various samples over several months (up to twice the normal value, range 219–315 mg/dl), with concurrent elevation in serum lactate dehydrogenase and aldolase. No muscle symptoms such as fatigue, myalgia, exercise intolerance or gait alterations were reported. Physical examination was normal, except for mild dysmorphic features: long eyelashes, slightly anteverted nostrils, long nasal philtrum, mild asymmetric pectus excavatum . His fine and gross motor skills were preserved, and Gowers sign was negative. Auxologic parameters were on the low centiles (3-10th centile) according to sex and age, fitting the mid parental target height. Limb electromyography, EKG and cardiac ultrasound were normal. A Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) gene panel for hyper-CPKemia revealed a variant of uncertain significance on PYGM, inherited from the healthy father (who had normal CPK values) and classified as likely benign. The assessment of global cognitive functioning, performed with the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children, 4th edition (WISC-IV) and repeated at 6 and 9 years of age, showed worsening verbal comprehension skills (Verbal Comprehension Index declining from 80 to 64 – defective), with markedly improving working memory (Working Memory Index from 82 to 103). Fluid reasoning (Fluid Reasoning Index from 82 to 87) and processing speed (Processing Speed Index from 82 to 85) scores remained in the low normal range over time, deriving an overall borderline Intelligence Quotient (IQ: 75–77). He attended primary school with a dedicated teacher for special educational needs, received pedagogical support for homework and attended weekly psychomotricity sessions.
At 9 years old, brain MRI showed a moderate enlargement of the peri-cerebellar CFS spaces due to mild cerebellar hypoplasia, mega cisterna magna and a splitting of the cerebellar falx . A trio whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed, revealing a novel de novo heterozygous missense variant in KIRREL3 (NM_032531.4) [c.2003G > C; p.(Arg668Pro)]. The pathogenicity of this variant was assessed by using bioinformatic tools [, ], by its frequency in gnomAD v2.1.1 (Absent from controls in Exome Sequencing Project, 1000 Genomes Project, or Exome Aggregation Consortium) and by its de novo origin. The KIRREL3 variant was thus classified as hot VUS (a variant of uncertain significance which may become pathogenic with additional proof of pathogenicity) according to ACMG criteria (PP4, PS2, PM2) . Clinical follow up was continued until the age of 11 years, annual CPK dosages showed progressive normalization, without new neuro-muscular signs or symptoms.