A healthy 3-year-old male presented for routine paediatric cardiology follow-up. He was initially referred due to the presence of atrial ectopy during a hospital admission for left orchidopexy at 6 months of age. Otherwise, his history was unremarkable with an uneventful antenatal course and normal 20-week anomaly scan. There was no family history of cardiac disease or TSC and no other parental concerns during follow-up except for mild speech delay. At 9 and 18 months, 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) were normal and 24-h Holter monitoring noted sinus rhythm with a combined ectopy burden of 11%. Isolated atrial ectopy accounted for 7% of beats and ventricular ectopy 4%. There were no runs of ventricular tachyarrhythmia and the longest run of premature atrial contractions was 3 beats at 158 b.p.m. Echocardiograms performed at the same time as these Holter recordings were normal.
Although clinically very well, at this appointment he was in atrial flutter on his 12-lead ECG. His examination was unremarkable with normal heart sounds and no murmurs heard. Dermal, respiratory, urinary, and visual system were normal as well. Echocardiogram revealed a severely dilated right atrium with a new large mass (6.4 × 3.1 cm) in the right atrium attached to the interatrial septum (see ). The mass was prolapsing through the tricuspid valve into the right ventricle during diastole causing no significant obstruction to inflow but with moderate tricuspid regurgitation through multiple jets. The right ventricular function was reduced (ejection fraction = 39%) but left ventricular function preserved (ejection fraction = 61%). The conventional blood work (including liver enzymes and cardiac biomarkers) was unremarkable. A sedate cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a heterogeneous, multilobulated right atrial mass but was not able to refine the differential to a single diagnosis. There were few cystic and myxomatous components, no brisk intense early enhancement and no evidence of infiltrative disease (see ).
Given the potential obstruction to inflow, reduced ventricular function and persistent arrhythmia he underwent surgical excision. At the time of surgery, the mass was found to originate from the superior vena cava and right atrial junction (see ) which were consequently reconstructed in addition to a tricuspid valve annuloplasty.
His post-operative course was uncomplicated. The echocardiogram on post-operative Day 3 showed a good result with a good biventricular systolic function and no residual mass. From a rhythm perspective, the flutter immediately resolved following excision of the mass and he remained in sinus rhythm with no significant ectopy noted on subsequent 24-h Holter monitoring at discharge.
Histology of the tumour revealed large rounded polygonal cells with pathognomonic spider cells confirming the tumour to be a cardiac rhabdomyoma (see ).
He underwent a brain MRI which revealed multiple cortical and subcortical tubers together with calcified subependymal nodules (see ). Abdominal ultrasound demonstrated bilateral renal angiolipomas. Subsequent genetic testing confirmed a likely pathogenic variant TSC1 gene (TSC1.c.1641_1642delAC (p.Pro548Lysfs*15)) according to the ACMG 2015 variant classification guidelines.
Cardiac follow-up at 1 year confirmed good ventricular function on echocardiogram with no recurrence or new tumour growth. Three 24-h Holter monitors throughout the year demonstrated no arrhythmia. He was referred to the TSC clinic at our institution for ongoing follow-up. Routine EEG showed epileptiform discharges from the centro-parietal head regions but he has not had any clinical seizures and did not require seizure medication.