A 59-year-old man with a history of medically treated hypertension and hyperlipidemia had a transient ischemic attack (TIA) and was transferred to another hospital 10 years ago; however, the details about the case were unknown. Six years ago, he had a left transient amaurosis attack and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) revealed a decreased signal of the left ICA ; however, no detailed examination was performed. Four years ago, he experienced another transient amaurosis attack on the left side and visited our hospital. Although MRA showed a further decreased signal of the ICA , conservative therapy with an antiplatelet was delivered for a few months since an embolic source was not detected at the origin of the ICA using carotid duplex ultrasonography examination, and he was diagnosed with idiopathic cervical ICA.
Recently, the left amaurosis fugax reappeared, and the patient was referred to our hospital. Oral administration of clopidogrel (75 mg/day) and cilostazol tablets (100 mg/day) managed the amaurosis fugax. Due to repeated amaurosis attacks, with the ophthalmic assessments to exclude other ocular or retinal pathology, and gradually decreasing left ICA on MRA , we performed computed tomography angiography (CTA) and digital subtraction angiography (DSA). CTA demonstrated that the left elongated styloid process was directly impinged on the ICA . The DSA and cone-beam computed tomography (CT) demonstrated that the bilateral styloid process was elongated, and the left cervical ICA had an irregular lumen and stenosis with false lumen [ and ]. Because of proximity between the ICA stenosis site and tip of the elongated styloid process, the patient was finally diagnosed with repeat left cervical ICA dissection caused by the compression of the left elongated styloid process.
The patient underwent left styloid resection through transcervical approach. In the surgery, we confirmed that the tip of the styloid process was very close to the ICA , and we removed the 2 cm tip of the styloid process [ and ]. Post the removal of the styloid process, no contact was verified on the image study between the styloid process and cervical ICA .
In addition, the patient underwent stent placement (Stent: Precise 6 × 20) since we considered that the residual severe stenosis caused by the left cervical ICA dissection could lead to further ischemic events [ and ]. He was discharged without any complications associated with surgery. Postoperatively, he experienced no ischemic attack, and the MRA 3 months after these procedures showed improvement of the left MRA signal .