A 3.5-year-old boy showed perturbed consciousness with movement and intellectual dysfunction after suffering from HSVE and secondary epilepsy . He was administered antiviral and antiepileptic therapy, as well as immunomodulatory and neurotrophic agents. On admission, he was unsteady with his head upright and was able to roll over but unable to sit up independently. He was unable to actively or passively grasp objects. Although he was able to open his eyes, no visual tracking was observed. He was unable to follow any instructions. His left limb had involuntary activity sometimes accompanied by altered sleep–awake cycles. He was able to cry and make a “hum” sound through his nose. He required bolus nasogastric tube feedings due to dysphagia. His growth and development had proceeded normally until the onset of HSVE. Seizures were under control after taking levetiracetam tablets .
On initial physical examination, his vital signs were normal. He presented deficits in upright head/neck control and inability to support himself with his elbows and hands. Although he could roll over, he had problems controlling the movement of all four limbs, making it difficult for him to crawl, stand, and walk independently. He could not easily control shifts in position, e.g., from lying down to sitting up. His muscle tone was generally normal, but limb weakness grade was 3/5 (MRC strength scale). Adductor angle, popliteal angle, and dorsiflexion angle of his foot was 150°, 150°, and 70°, respectively. Knee/Achilles jerk reflexes were normal. Ankle clonus was positive. Neither the Babinski sign nor the meningeal irritation sign was positive.
His PVS score was 5 (command execution = 0, body movement = 2, eye movement = 1, emotional reactions = 1, swallow = 0, and speech = 1). Gesell Developmental Schedules (GDS) scores indicated a severe defect [gross motor (developmental quotient (DQ) = 4.4, fine motor (DQ = 0), adaptive behavior (DQ = 0), language (DQ = 0), and personal–social behavior (DQ = 0)]. Infants-Junior High School Students' Social Development Screening Test (coarse score = 1 and standardized score = 6) indicated a severe abnormality, suggestive of movement and intellectual disorder. Gross Motor Function Measure-88 (GMFM-88) was as follows: A = 82.4, B = 0, C = 0, D = 0, and total score = 16.5, indicating significant retardation in GMF.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed that the sulcus in the bilateral cerebral hemispheres was slightly deeper than before, and the lateral ventricles were slightly enlarged. Some abnormal signals were observed around the bilateral ventricles. There were perivascular lesions in the bilateral frontal lobe and pachymeningeal enhancement . Video electroencephalogram (VEEG) demonstrated slow background activity. Numerous bilateral sharp waves and sharp wave complexes were observed in the posterior head and right rolandic area. Transcranial Doppler (TCD) indicated that the blood flow velocity of the bilateral middle cerebral artery was asymmetric, with its right side slightly slower. The anterior and posterior communicating arteries were unobstructed with compensatory capability. Visual evoked potential (VEP) and brainstem auditory evoked potential (BAEP) were normal.
The results of routine biochemical tests were normal. Immunologic tests found a high concentration of immunoglobulin G (IgG), while the concentration of IgA was decreased.