A 74-year-old Japanese man was transferred to our department from a local hospital under a diagnosis of pneumonia. He had been in good health five days before transfer to our hospital, but with pyrexia and dyspnea upon effort. He had been treated with oral antihyperglycemic drugs to control type 2 diabetes mellitus five years previously. He was a carpenter who did not consume alcohol, but had a smoking history of 44 pack-years. Although he could walk unaided, he seemed very ill. His consciousness level was E4V5M6 (Glasgow coma scale), and his vital signs were: blood pressure, 90/50 mmHg; temperature, 37.3°C; heart rate, 86 beats per min with sinus rhythm; respiratory rate, 24 breaths per minute; and oxygen saturation, 78% with an oxygen supply of 10 L/min delivered via a reservoir mask. He was immediately admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU). Physical findings were normal except for coarse crackles in the bilateral middle to lower lung fields. Upon admission to our hospital (day 1), a chest X-ray revealed infiltration throughout all lung fields except the left upper lung. These results together with positive findings of pneumococcal urinary antigens indicated a diagnosis of pneumococcal pneumonia (CURB 65 score was 3, which is defined as Confusion, Urea nitrogen, Respiratory rate, Blood pressure, and 65 years of age and older; pneumonia severity index was class IV). He was immediately intubated and treated with intravenous meropenem (1.5 g/day) plus ciprofloxacin (600 mg/day), which gradually improved his respiratory status over a period of two weeks. However, acute watery diarrhea amounting to 4 L/day (determined by inserting a rectal tube) together with pyrexia (38°C) was evident on day 19 (Figure ). Although stool specimens were negative for Clostridium difficile toxins A and B, pseudomembranous colitis was considered and metronidazole (1 g/day) was started via a nasogastric tube (Figure ). However, the watery diarrhea was refractory to metronidazole, and Gram staining stool samples revealed abundant fecal leukocytes (Figure ), suggesting colonic membranous damage. Although colonic fiberscopy on day 22 provided limited information only as far as the sigmoid portion because the health status of the patient was unstable, definitive evidence of pseudomembranous formation other than membranous edema or hyperemia was not found. Furthermore, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA; 104 colony forming unit/mL) was predominantly isolated from stool cultures on day 19 whereas other enteric bacterial pathogens and parasites or ova were negative, indicating MRSA enterocolitis. Vancomycin (VCM; 1 g/day) delivered via a nasogastric tube completely resolved the watery diarrhea within a few days. However, at day 30, high fever recurred with moderate watery diarrhea (~500 mL/day), and one of two sets of blood cultures was positive for MRSA. Thereafter, intravenous VCM (0.5 g/day) with dose adjustment for renal dysfunction was initiated, and repeated blood cultures were negative for MRSA. The total amount of watery diarrhea excreted between days 19 and 34 was 22.43 L and the maximum volume per 24 h reached 3.50 L on day 25.
The general status of the patient gradually improved except for persistent low-grade fever, and he was able to walk unaided by day 64. Intermittent pain in the right hip joint started on day 71 after he started rehabilitation for walking (Figure ). A physical examination revealed the obturator or psoas sign, and he was positive for the Gaenslen maneuver, suggesting inflammation at the retroperitoneal or lumbar vertebrae and/or sacroiliac joint. We explored the source of the fever and right hip joint pain using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (Figure A and B) and 67gallium scintigraphy of the hip joint. T2-weighted MRI (T2WI) revealed an area of high intensity around the head of the right femur indicating fluid collection (Figure A). Fat-saturated T2-weighted images (T2WI) revealed another area of high intensity on the right obturator externus or adducent muscles (Figure B), suggesting right hip arthritis that 67gallium scintigraphy confirmed as a hotspot (Figure C). Joint drainage fluid collected on day 100 showed abundant leukocytes enclosed by phagocytic gram-positive cocci (Figure D) that were later identified as MRSA. Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) showed that the MRSA strains in the samples isolated from stool (day 19), blood (day 30) and synovial fluid (day 100) were identical (Figure ), suggesting a hematological spread of MRSA originating from the colonic membrane damaged by MRSA enterocolitis. The PFGE profiles of two strains isolated from sputum on days 10 and 44 and that of a strain isolated from a catheter tip on day 20 were similar, but all three strains differed by one band from strains isolated from stool, blood and synovial fluid specimens. These strains were considered to be derived from the same clone with different subtypes according to Tenover's criteria
, and they had the same antibiogram (VCM ≤ 1, teicoplanin ≤ 1, linezolide 2). These findings suggested that persistent colonized MRSA could co-evolve even in a host environment.
None of the findings were consistent with the criteria for confirmed toxic shock syndrome (TSS; fever > 38.9°C, hypotension ≤ 90 mmHg), diffuse erythroderma, desquamation (unless death occurs before desquamation) and the involvement of at least three organ systems) or probable TSS (missing one characteristic for confirmed TSS) or pseudomembranous colitis. Thus, he was finally diagnosed with MRSA enterocolitis that subsequently caused septic arthritis in the right hip.
Indeed, multilocus sequence typing confirmed that the allelic profiles of the MRSA strains obtained from blood, sputum and synovial fluid on days 30, 45 and 100, respectively, were identical (Table ), belonged to sequence type (ST) 764, clonal complex (CC) 5 and carried SCCmec type II. These strains carried enterotoxins G and I, but no other SEs or TSST-1. Our patient was discharged uneventfully on day 156 after completing a two-month course of oral linezolide (1200 mg/day) with intravenous clindamycin (CLDM; 1200 mg/day) followed by teicoplanin (400 mg/day) with intravenous CLDM (1200 mg/day) infusion.