A 96-year-old woman presented with a 4 h history of substernal chest pain along with diaphoresis.
The patient had substernal chest pain along with diaphoresis four hours before admission to the emergency department. On the way to the emergency department, the patient was free of symptoms after sublingual administration of nitroglycerin. A standard 12-lead ECG obtained on admission indicated an ectopic atrial fibrillation rhythm and convex ST-segment elevation in V1-V4 . No previous ECG was available for comparison. Assessment of initial myocardial injury markers showed that the troponin T level was less than 40 ng/L (0-40), the troponin I level was 0.007 ng/mL (0-0.030), the myoglobin level was 57.4 ng/mL (14.3-65.8), and the creatine kinase MB level was 5.0 ng/mL (0.6-6.3). The patient was transferred to the cardiovascular intensive care unit for further monitoring and evaluation after treatment with 300 mg of aspirin and 300 mg of clopidogrel. Intermittent chest pain was relieved with sublingual nitroglycerin. Approximately two hours after admission, the patient progressed to severe recurrent chest pain.
The patient had a history of hypertension for 30 years and type 2 diabetes for 20 years.
The patient had no relevant personal history. The patient had no family history of inherited diseases or premature coronary heart disease.
Vital signs were stable. A pulmonary examination showed clear lung auscultation. A cardiac examination showed an irregular rate and rhythm without rubs, murmurs or gallops. No jugular vein engorgement or peripheral edema was found.
The troponin T level increased to 167 ng/L. The peak troponin T level was more than 2000 ng/L, and the peak troponin I level was 15.107 ng/mL.
Echocardiography showed normal motion of the left ventricular anterior wall and interventricular septum (ejection fraction of 54%). The right ventricle was slightly dilated.
A twelve-lead ECG indicated ST-segment elevation in V1-V4 with dynamic changes compared with the former results . A suspected anterior wall myocardial infarction caused by LAD artery occlusion was first considered. Emergent coronary angiography demonstrated complete occlusion of the proximal nondominant RCA with thrombus without reverse perfusion and collateral circulation at the distal end . The left coronary artery showed 75% stenosis in the left circumflex artery and mild atherosclerosis of the LAD artery . We realized that the infarct-related artery was the RCA.