A 66-year-old Thai man with bilateral advanced primary open angle glaucoma (POAG) presented to our clinic with chronic panuveitis for four months. His medical conditions included hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, and non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) with an HbA1C of 8.2%. The patient had undergone three trabeculectomy surgeries in each eye; the last surgery having been performed in the left eye five years prior to the intraocular inflammation. Four months before presentation to our clinic, he complained of diminution of vision, pain, and redness in the left eye, which was treated as inflammatory panuveitis by an ophthalmologist at a local hospital. The treatment included topical and systemic corticosteroids. The inflammation improved during the three-month treatment period, but recurred after discontinuation of the medications. The second attempt showed minimal improvement over one month. Therefore, he stopped the medications and sought our opinion.
At our service, the patient reported blurred vision with no ocular pain. The initial examination showed 6/6 best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) in the right eye, and a poor response to light projection (PJ) in the left eye. The intraocular pressure (IOP) measurements were 21 mmHg in the right eye and 15 mmHg in the left eye. Slit-lamp examination of the left eye showed three flat trabeculectomy blebs with moderate circumcorneal conjunctival injection without discharge. Several large, mutton-fat keratic precipitates (KPs) were observed. There were plasmoid aqueous and 4+ cells in the anterior chamber . A fundus examination revealed severe vitritis with a string-of-pearls appearance. The right eye was normal with three flat trabeculectomy blebs.
A moderate heterogenous vitreous echogenicity and attached retina appeared on B-scan ultrasonography. Chest radiography was normal. Laboratory results for anti-HIV, VDRL, TPHA, rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibodies, and toxoplasma serology were all negative. Unfortunately, tests for serum lysozyme and angiotensin-converting enzyme were not performed as they were not available in Thailand. A presumptive diagnosis of severe panuveitis was made although infectious causes could not be excluded. Oral prednisolone was started at a dosage of 1 mg/kg/day with caution. The inflammation subsided. The visual acuity improved to hand motion (HM), and the prednisolone was gradually tapered.
One month later, his symptoms worsened with moderate ocular pain. Intense inflammation, including 4+ cells, iris fibrinous membrane, and hypopyon, was observed in the left eye. The inferior filtering bleb became inflamed. Due to these findings, infectious endophthalmitis became more suspicious. Aqueous and vitreous aspirations for cultures and molecular detections were performed to identify the organism, along with intravitreal injections of vancomycin (1 mg/0.1 ml) and amikacin (400 mcg/0.1 ml). After two unsuccessful results from aqueous and vitreous samples, pars plana vitrectomy (PPV) and iris membranectomy were performed, with additional intravitreal injections of vancomycin (1 mg/0.1 ml) and ceftazidime (2.25 mg/0.1 ml). The iris membrane was sent for microbial cultures and histopathological examination. The vitreous fluid was sent for direct microscopic examination, culture, and molecular identification of bacteria, fungi, and mycobacteria. The patient was admitted and treated with fortified vancomycin and amikacin eye drops every hour concurrent with intravenous administration of both medications (vancomycin 1 g/day and amikacin 750 mg/day). Two days after PPV, vitreous staining indicated 1+ acid-fast bacilli, but the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was negative for mycobacteria. All other investigations for bacteria and fungi appeared negative.
According to the test results, NTM endophthalmitis was mostly suspected. The treatment was changed according to the infectious disease specialist’s recommendation to intravenous imipenem (4 g/day), levofloxacin (750 mg/day), and amikacin (750 mg/day) combined with levofloxacin eye drops every hour and tobramycin eye ointment before bedtime. After two weeks, the intravenous antibiotics were switched to oral doxycycline (200 mg/day), clarithromycin (1 g/day), and ciprofloxacin (1500 mg/day). Intermittent local injections (intravitreal, intracameral, and subconjunctival) of amikacin and imipenem were performed as an adjunctive to the systemic and topical treatments. The ocular pain and intraocular inflammation gradually improved over the treatment period. Despite the clinical improvement, the patient’s visual acuity deteriorated to no light perception (NPL), and uveal tissue had prolapsed through the superotemporal scleral window of a trabeculectomy wound . Enucleation of the infected eyeball was advised to prevent sympathetic ophthalmia, but the patient declined. Three months later, vitreous cultures revealed M. haemophilum in liquid medium. Unfortunately, the organism could not be identified in the solid medium even after sub-culturing from liquid to solid medium, so the antibiotic susceptibility test could not be done in this patient. The final regimen was changed to oral azithromycin (500 mg/day), doxycycline (200 mg/day), and rifampicin (600 mg/day) for the next 12 months. The eye eventually became phthisical although there was no sign of recurrence or systemic infection at the five-year follow-up.