A 69-year-old Japanese male presented with a history of bronchial asthma from age 61 and hypertension from age 50. He had been treated with inhaled glucocorticosteroids, long-acting inhaled β2-agonists, leukotriene modifiers, methylxanthines, and antihypertensives. He was an ex-smoker with a Brinkman Index of 1200. He had noticed purpura appearing in both lower extremities without any preceding infection, including upper respiratory tract infection. He then developed, without fever, edema in both lower extremities and arthralgia in the right foot. Four days after the patient had first noticed symptoms, the purpura gradually improved. However, he began suffering from abdominal pain, diarrhea, edema of the upper extremities, and oliguria.
On admission, the patient had a body temperature of 36.9°C, a pulse of 109/min with sinus rhythm, and blood pressure of 133/78 mm Hg. Physical examination revealed pretibial pitting edema and diffuse small palpable purpuras on both lower extremities and on the lower abdomen. The patient’s heart and lung sounds were normal. His abdomen was slightly distended, but neither muscular guarding nor tenderness was detected. On auscultation, the bowel was hypoactive. There was no hepatosplenomegaly or existing masses. A neurological examination revealed no abnormalities. An electrocardiogram and X-rays of the chest and abdomen were essentially normal. Computed tomography of the patient’s abdomen demonstrated diffuse thickening of the bowel wall, with target signs in the small intestine and ascites . The white blood cell count was 14,260/μL, hemoglobin was 16.4 g/dL, and C-reactive protein was 22.36 mg/dL. There was microscopic hematuria and proteinuria. A skin biopsy taken from the right leg showed purpura.
On the second hospital day, abdominal pain and melena in our patient appeared after the purpura improved and before treatment with steroids or immunosuppressants. Upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopic investigation on day 4 revealed irregular ulcerations in the stomach and the duodenum and erythema in the sigmoid colon. The ascending colon and cecum were not observable, owing to the presence of a stricture caused by severe edema of the mucosa. However, there were patchy areas of erythema in the sigmoid colon and rectum . Cutaneous leukocytoclastic vasculitis was confirmed by skin biopsy. The patient was diagnosed with HSP on the basis of American College of Rheumatology criteria . Computed tomography of the abdomen performed on day 9 showed severe edematous and dilatational changes in the small intestine and ascites before treatment with steroids and cyclophosphamide .
After intravenous treatment with Factor XIII concentrate (20 mL/day for 3 consecutive days) and prednisolone sodium succinate (40 mg/day for 13 consecutive days; see Figure for dosage schedules of all drugs), the skin lesions and abdominal pain disappeared completely. However, gastrointestinal hemorrhage and mild proteinuria remained and did not improve upon treatment with intravenous methylprednisolone (pulse dose of 1000 mg/day for 3 consecutive days) and intravenous cyclophosphamide (800 mg on 1 day). Twenty-nine days after treatment began, the ascites remained, and there were severe edematous changes in the small intestine . Colonoscopy confirmed frank bleeding from the ascending sigmoid colon . Neither bleeding points nor vascular occlusion was detected by mesenteric angiography. However, angiography revealed narrowing and irregularities in the major branches of the superior mesenteric artery and absence of blood flow, indicative of NOMI . On day 30, blood flow in the superior mesenteric artery increased and vascular narrowing improved after catheter injection of 10 μg of PGE1 and 20 mg of prednisolone sodium succinate into the artery . After the intervention, proteinuria decreased. However, subsequent continuous intra-arterial infusion of papaverine hydrochloride (100 mg/h) did not improve the patient’s gastrointestinal hemorrhaging, and renal function deteriorated. He died on the 33rd hospital day.
Examination at autopsy showed widely distributed jejunoileal ulcers of irregular form. Histopathologic examination of the submucosa of the jejunum revealed an exposed small vessel , as well as obliteration of small vessels and ruptured elastic laminae in the tunica externa of those vessels . There was also an abundance of fibroblasts under the submucosa of the jejunum but no regeneration of the epithelium. There was no evidence of active vasculitis or thrombosis in the tunica media of the superior mesenteric artery , although there were edematous changes . These findings suggest that severe vasospasm due to small-vessel vasculitis before treatment with PGE1 plus steroid had caused wide ischemic changes and delayed regeneration of the epithelium in the submucosa of the small intestine. We considered that the primary cause of death was bleeding from an exposed small vessel, without apparent active vasculitis in the jejunal submucosa. Other findings were typical of HSP and included mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis with crescent formation.