A previously well 58-year-old British Caucasian man presented with a three-week history of right upper quadrant pain, vomiting and jaundice. Using computed tomography (CT), a mass 30 mm in size in the head of pancreas was identified, with associated biliary dilatation . The mass was potentially resectable. It was not possible to cross the biliary obstruction at endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography. As a result, the patient was referred for radiological percutaneous drainage. Under ultrasonography guidance, a right lobe duct was punctured and a catheter was manipulated through the obstruction of the distal common bile duct in the duodenum. A biliary brush cytology sample was obtained. Through a 9Fr peel-away sheath, two 8.5 Fr × 10 mm plastic stents (Cotton-Leung; Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN, USA) were inserted across the obstruction using fluoroscopic guidance. The position of the stents appeared satisfactory , and cholangiography confirmed good drainage. The total bilirubin dropped from 80 μmol/l to 15 μmol/l five days after the procedure and the patient was discharged. The cytology sample confirmed adenocarcinoma.
Two weeks after insertion of the stents, the patient developed upper abdominal discomfort and pyrexia, and was admitted for further investigation. On physical examination, right upper-quadrant tenderness with guarding was found. Initial laboratory tests revealed mildly deranged total bilirubin of 20 μmol/l, with slight increase in inflammatory markers and white blood cell count. Abdominal CT was performed the next day, which revealed a large gas-containing collection in the retroperitoneum, with evidence of migration of one of the plastic stents, which appeared to have eroded through the posterior wall of the duodenum . The second stent was in a satisfactory position, allowing biliary drainage. Our patient was started on intravenous piperacillin and tazobactam and amoxicillin and clavulanic acid, with parenteral nutrition. In view of the CT findings, the patient was referred for CT-guided drainage of the collection. The migrated stent was snared under fluoroscopic guidance, and a 12F pigtail drain was inserted into the collection. Frank pus was drained.
Our patient's symptoms resolved and he remained afebrile. Six days after the drainage procedure he reported pain around the site of the drain. On physical examination, pus was found to be leaking from the drain site, and it was decided that the drain should be manipulated under CT guidance. During the procedure, despite the 12F drain being correctly placed, no significant decrease in the size of the localized fluid collection was noted, so two more 8Fr drains were inserted. After one week, there was minimal drainage, so the drains were removed, and our patient discharged. CT performed a month later showed that the remaining stent was in a satisfactory position. The collections identified previously below the level of the duodenum and in the right retroperitoneal region had almost completely resolved.