A 69-year-old female patient presented with recurrent intermittent right upper abdominal pain for more than 1 year, which recurred for 3 hours. One year ago, she had intermittent right upper abdominal pain and discomfort without obvious inducement, no radiating pain in other parts. She was fearless of cold, fever, nausea and vomiting, headache and dizziness, etc. During this period, she was given anti-infection, liver protection and other support symptomatic treatment, and her symptoms were slightly relieved. The patient developed pain and discomfort in the right upper abdomen again without obvious inducement 3 hours ago, accompanied by nausea and vomiting, without fever, dizziness, chest tightness and other symptoms.
After admission, the blood routine test report showed that the percentage of lymphocytes was 16.9%↓, the percentage of neutrophils was 77.7%↑, and the other blood routine indicators were normal. Blood biochemical test report: Total protein 64.9g/L↓, albumin 37.8g/L↓, Alanine aminotransferase 174IU/L↑, Aspartate aminotransferase 420IU/L↑, glutamyltransferase 170IU/L↑, alkaline phosphatase 166IU/L↑, glucose 7.3mmol/L↑, lactate dehydrogenase 435IU/L↑, Creatine kinase isoenzyme 29IU/L↑, angiotensin converting enzyme 62.3U/L↑.Blood tumor marker report: CEA (-), AFP (-), CA199 224.50U/mL ↑.One year ago, the patient underwent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)examination of the upper abdomen due to abdominal pain, and MRI showed chronic cholecystitis without gallbladder tumor signs . After admission, computed tomography(CT) scan showed increased gallbladder volume, uneven density at the bottom of the gallbladder, fusiform thickening of the gallbladder wall, uneven thickness, and rough edges, suggesting gallbladder neoplastic lesions and high possibility of gallbladder cancer. The patient was examined directly by PET/CT without MRI, PET/CT showed uneven thickening at the bottom of the gallbladder, slightly increased gallbladder volume, and eccentric and localized thickening of the gallbladder body wall, PET/CT showed nodular soft tissue density shadow, about 13×19mm in size, increased radioactive uptake, SUVmax was 10.2, which was considered to be a high possibility of gallbladder cancer. PET/CT also revealed stenosis of the lower common bile duct, which was considered to be inflammatory (, ).
The patient was considered to have malignant tumor before surgery, and planned to undergo laparoscopic cholecystectomy (radical resection of gallbladder cancer) and cholangio-jejunostomy. Intraoperative inspection: One cholecystectomy specimen, 7×4.5×3.8cm in size, contained dark green bile, the focal folds of the mucosal surface disappeared, accompanied by hard gallbladder wall, the range was about 2.5×2cm, and the section of the gallbladder wall showed pale yellow deposition, medium and solid, and the thickness of the gallbladder wall was about 0.2-1.3cm.Frozen pathology showed spindle cell tumor (gallbladder), tending to borderline tumor, with no tumor involvement at the surgical margin. Therefore, we decided to perform hilar lymph node dissection, dissociate the common hepatic artery and proper hepatic artery, and dissect the 8th group of lymph nodes. The common bile duct and portal vein were separated, and the 12th group of lymph nodes were dissected until the common bile duct, main portal vein, common hepatic artery, and proper hepatic artery were nude. Finally, pathology suggested inflammatory pseudotumor of the gallbladder , Reactive hyperplasia of lymph nodes in group 12A, group 12C, and group 12P.The patient recovered well after surgery and had no significant signs of recurrence after one-year of follow-up.