A 67-year-old man was admitted in the Infectious Diseases Unit of our hospital because of pneumonia and urosepsis complicating a post-traumatic subarachnoid haemorrhage (SAH).
His past medical history consisted of hypertension, progressive supranuclear palsy-like Parkinsonism and recurrent moderate hypokalemia and slight hyponatremia. His home therapy included angiotensin receptor blockers, angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors, aldosterone blockers, levodopa/carbidopa and sertraline.
At the admission the patient was febrile and asthenic; blood tests showed severe hyponatremia (Na 120 mEq/l) and hypokalemia (K 2.6 mEq/l), neutrophil leucocytosis, normal liver and renal functions. Multiple antimicrobial therapies, including meropenem and levofloxacin, steroids, tetracosactide and 0.9% NaCl saline infusions were promptly initiated.
In the following days the patient showed negative volume balance (about −2.5 l/day with a median diuresis of 7 l/day), while the arterial blood analysis revealed severe metabolic alkalosis and hypokalemia (pH 7.6, HCO3 46 mEq, Base Excess 21 mEq/l, K 1.5 mEq/l). Simultaneously, his general conditions progressively worsened insomuch as he was transferred to the Intensive Care Unit.
There, the patient was treated with abundant infusions (3–4 l/day) of Ringer’s acetate, KCl i.v. supplementation (60–80 mEq/day) and hypertonic solutions (NaCl 3% at a mean infusion rate of 20 ml/h); blood exams showed Na 124–130 mEq/l, K 2.3 mEq/l and progressive improvement of metabolic alkalosis.
Because of the persistent negative liquid balance (−2 l/day) and marked diuresis (6 l/day), insipidus diabetes was suspected and a NMR of the turcic sella was performed. This exam showed an absence of the normal hyperintensity of the neurohypophysis [Figure ], consistent with the supposed diagnosis; consequently, therapy with desmopressin was started at dose of 2 μg/day i.v. The general and hemodynamic conditions gradually improved, but fluid and electrolyte balance did not change despite desmopressin therapy.
Once stabilised, the patient was transferred to our ward, where he presented hypotension and severely dehydrated oral mucous membranes. With the intent of discerning the spontaneous electrolyte and liquid balance, we stopped desmopressin and steroids administration, beginning a controlled infusion of liquids and electrolytes.
After few days, since the patient still showed persistent polyuria with negative liquid balance (−2/3 l, diuresis 6 l/day), hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis (pH 7.47, HCO3 30 mEq/l) despite of KCl supplements, we decided to suspend infusions.
The plasmatic osmolarity values ranged from 245 to 292 mOsm/l, urinary osmolarity (Uosm) showed extremely variable levels from 275 to 431 mOsm/l, while ADH (11,9 pg/ml with a normal range < 13), TSH, T4, ACTH and cortisol serum levels resulted normal. Moreover, ultrasonography was negative for renal artery stenosis, as well as for any cardiac alteration.
Our attention was then focused on the Uosm value, suggestive for a mixed diuresis composed of both water and solutes. Urine evaluations revealed a sodium chloride driven diuresis, as proven by the high concentrations of urinary sodium (Na U 900 mEq/24 h with Urinary Anion Gap 40 mEq/l) associated to low urinary glucose and urea levels. This urinary sodium loss was accompanied by an estimated total sodium deficit of about 600 mEq, calculated considering a patient weight of 70 Kg - corresponding to total body water (TBW) of 42 Kg - and an actual natremia of 120 mEq/l .
On the basis of these evaluations, together with the evidence of hypovolemia, we diagnosed a salt loosing nephropathy. However, the explanation of the free-water part of the diuresis was still difficult to find. In fact, the patient was no longer receiving i.v. infusions and was confined to bed, reporting to need help to eat and drink.
So, we excluded both iatrogenic excessive water administration and polydipsia.
Aiming to confirm the only missing diagnosis, i.e. diabetes insipidus, supported by NMR findings, we performed a water deprivation test. Surprisingly, we found a preserved urine concentrating capacity (Uosm was 222 mOsm/l at the beginning of the test and 556 mOsm/l at the end). During this test the patient complained of an irresistible desire of water and, unexpectedly, he revealed an ability to drink autonomously a large amount of liquids.
These findings suggested a diagnosis of primary polydipsia, further confirmed by the effectiveness of psychotherapy, which was associated to a rapid normalization of the volume balance [Figure ].
Consequently, we prescribed a measured intake of water (2000 ml/day), sodium chloride (19 g/day admi potassium and acid–base equilibrium and well-compensated hemodynamics.
Hence, it was possible to transfer the patient to a rehabilitative hospitalization. Ten months later the patient still presented good general conditions, controlled thirst and water intake, normal serum potassium and sodium levels with only a moderate sodium chloride supplementation (3 g/day).