A 42-year-old male presented to the ED, referred by his primary care physician for concern of anemia and vision changes. Over the previous two weeks, blurred vision to the left eye progressed to solid black centrally with sparing of the peripheral vision. Over the previous five days he also noticed right eye blurred vision. On review of systems, the patient endorsed experiencing occasional floaters and flashes bilaterally and unintentional weight loss of more than 60 pounds in the previous four months. He denied eye pain, headache, jaw claudication, scalp tenderness, fevers, or chills. Past medical history included only hypertension and hyperlipidemia, maintained on nifedipine 30 milligrams (mg) and simvastatin 20 mg daily, as well as strabismus of the left eye. The patient had been recently admitted to the hospital for symptomatic anemia, was found to have low vitamin B12 and borderline iron levels, had received a transfusion, and was started on ferrous gluconate and cyanocobalamin before being discharged. Social history included non-injection heroin use.
On the exam, he was well-appearing, resting comfortably in bed, in no distress. His vital signs were as follows: 36.6°C; blood pressure 160/87 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg); heart rate 75 beats per minute; respiratory rate 18 breaths per minute; and pulse oximetry 98% on room air. His head, ear, eye, nose and throat exam was notable for mild strabismus of the left eye compared with the right, as well as decreased central vision in the left eye. Fundoscopic exam was notable for significant retinal hemorrhage of the left eye. The remainder of the physical exam was unremarkable.
The blood work was significant for a red blood cell count of 2.31 million/microliter (M/μL) (reference range 4.30–5.80 M/μL); hemoglobin of 7.0 grams/deciliter (g/dL) (13–17.5 g/dL); mean corpuscular volume of 104 femtoliters (80–99 femtoliters), platelets of 94/ μL (140–390/μL), creatinine of 1.37 mg/ dL (0.6–1.3 mg/dL); glucose of 156 mg/dL (65–100 mg/dL); prothrombin time of 17.2 seconds (10.5–13.5 seconds); partial thromboplastin time of 28.7 seconds (24.8–38.4 seconds). Complete blood count differential was notable for absolute plasma cells of 0.1 K/uL, or 3% (0 K/uL), and red blood cell count morphology was notable for rouleaux. Calcium level was 8.9 mg/dL (8.3–10.5 mg/dL).
Given the patient’s vision change and findings of retinal hemorrhage noted on ED fundoscopic exam, ophthalmology was consulted. Their exam was notable for visual acuity: 20/60 without correction and 20/40 pinhole on right eye. On the left eye, he was able to count fingers only. His visual fields were full on right eye, full and central scotoma on left eye. Extraocular movements were intact bilaterally. and pupils were equal, round, and reactive bilaterally. Intraocular pressures were 9 mm Hg on the right eye and 7 mm Hg on the left eye (10–21 mm Hg). His slit lamp exam of the eyes bilaterally was notable for clear corneas, absence of conjunctival injection, round and flat irises, and clear lens and vitreous. His dilated fundus exam with 1% tropicamide and 2.5% phenylephrine revealed optic discs with sharp margins, pink rims, and no edema. The macula exam demonstrated possible edema on right and macular edema on left. The vessel exam was significant for diffuse hemorrhages throughout with vascular tortuosity of most vasculature and notable flame hemorrhage inferior to disc in both eyes.
The patient was diagnosed with bilateral central retinal vein occlusions, acute kidney injury, and symptomatic anemia. He received two liters of fluid. Consultation was made to hematology/oncology for presumed diagnosis of multiple myeloma. Due to the absence of other systemic signs or symptoms of hyperviscosity, the decision was made not to start plasmapheresis. Inpatient bone marrow biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of multiple myeloma, and the patient was started on steroids. On follow-up ophthalmology exams, the patient’s vision has maintained at 20/200 bilaterally. He continued to follow up in the hematology/ oncology clinic. He was initially started on bortezomib and methylprednisolone and then daratumumab and hyaluronidase human-fihj were added. At the time of manuscript submission, the patient was a candidate for bone marrow transplant and undergoing workup.