A 76-years-old male, non-smoker, known case of Hepatitis B, Diabetes, and hypertension with a history of an old stroke, presented to the emergency department in January 2023 complaining of 3 days history of spitting blood, associated with dysphagia for the past 7 days. He reported no constitutional symptoms. The head and neck examination showed a left dark firm grade 4 tonsillar mass pushing the uvula to the right side with the overlying mucosa appearing erythematous and normal in texture. The swelling was moderately firm and no tenderness with multiple bleeding points . There were no other abnormalities found on physical examination. A flexible fiberoptic scope was done which showed left palatine tonsillar enlargement reaching supraglottic region with true vocal fold movement bilaterally. A contrasted Computed Tomography (CT) scan of the neck showed a 2.7 × 2.5 × 3.4 cm heterogeneous enlarged left tonsillar occupying half of the oral part of pharynx with hyperemia of the mucosa, and air foci without collection . The metastatic workup, which included chest radiographs, Computed Tomography (CT) scan of chest, abdomen, and pelvis, and head and neck magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), was negative.
An excisional biopsy of the mass was carried out which confirmed diagnosis of Polymorphous Adenocarcinoma of Minor Salivary Gland. Histopathological examination revealed the following characteristic, sub-epithelial infiltrative lesion that shows different patterns of arrangement include solid, cribriform, duct and tubules (A). The tumor cells are round to oval with pale nuclei and vesicular chromatin and inconspicuous nucleoli (B). Mitotic activity was very low. S100 immunohistochemical stain (IHC) was performed and found to have strong positive staining (C). The overall features were suggestive of polymorphous adenocarcinoma.
Patient was staged after complete metastatic work up as T2N0M0 Stage 2. Case was discussed in tumor board; a decision was made to go for selective neck dissection left level II and III with completion left tonsillectomy. Intra operative frozen section came back negative for all margins. Histopathology of neck dissection came negative for malignancy.
Patient made an uneventful recovery. Follow up 2 weeks, 3 months and 6 months post operatively showed good healing with no signs of clinical recurrence.