A 47-year-old man was evaluated at the department of gastroenterology because of abdominal pain. He had a 1-year history of occasional epigastric pain. Contrast computed tomography revealed celiac artery stenosis caused by compression of the MAL. The patient was referred to the authors’ hospital for treatment.
Physical examination revealed epigastric tenderness. There was no bruit in the upper abdomen. The patient’s height was 167 cm weight was 69 kg. Laboratory findings and results of esophagogastroduodenoscopy imaging were normal. Detailed, contrast enhanced, three-dimensional computed tomography showed the origin of the celiac artery was narrowed due to compression of the MAL . In addition, an Adachi V type vascular anomaly was observed . The patient chose to undergo laparoscopic treatment.
The procedure was performed under general anesthesia. The patient was placed in the supine position. A Stryker 1588 AIM camera system with 4K surgical display was used (Stryker, Kalamazoo, MI, USA). The first port of the scope was inserted via an open technique at the umbilicus. After that, four operating ports were inserted . The left segment of the liver was elevated with a silicon disc (Hakko Co., Nagano, Japan). After dissecting the lesser omentum, the right crus of the diaphragm was identified, and the anterior surface of right crus was detached. The left gastric artery and vein were then exposed on the suprapancreatic surface, and the left gastric vein was resected.
An Adachi V type vascular anomaly was observed in which the common hepatic artery branched from the superior mesenteric artery. Stenosis of the celiac artery origin was confirmed by laparoscopic ultrasound . Fibrous connective tissue on the anterior aspect of celiac artery was observed, which was identified as the MAL . After dissecting the MAL, the origin of the celiac artery was identified, and release of stenosis was confirmed by laparoscopic ultrasound .
The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful. He was discharged on postoperative Day 5, and his symptoms of abdominal pain improved. At 2-month follow-up, ultrasonography was performed and showed no stenosis at the origin of the celiac artery .