The patient is a 56-year-old married, retired Caucasian male with a 6-year history of PD. He previously worked in a scientific lab at a large academic institution and seven years prior to presentation, he began to experience a right-handed tremor that increased in severity over several months. He was evaluated by neurology after which he was diagnosed with PD. He was treated with various dopaminergic medications, including carbidopa-levodopa, with poor symptom relief. Due to poor response to medications, the patient decided to elect for DBS treatment. He received DBS in the left VIM 3 years prior to presentation and experienced significant relief of his right-handed tremor. Over time, the patient began to develop a worsening left-handed tremor and bradykinesia that required restarting treatment with carbidopa-levodopa. The dosage of carbidopa-levodopa was increased over the years for continued control of his Parkinsonian symptoms. The settings of DBS were also increased for continued control of the right-handed tremor. During this time, the patient began to experience changes in behavior including apathy and poor communication skills in social settings. One month prior to presentation, family members noted that the patient began to display uncharacteristic hypersexuality, anger, and impulsivity. The patient was subsequently found by family members in the car garage after what appeared to have been a suicide attempt by carbon monoxide poisoning. According to the patient and family members, this was the patient's first suicide attempt. Emergency services were able to arrive on time to transport the patient to the ED where he was found to have oxygen saturation of 94%, and an arterial blood gas study found a carboxyhemoglobin level of 49.3 (normal <2). Neurology and psychiatry were consulted to evaluate the patient's neurological and mental status. Neurology (internal medicine) found that the patient was taking 3 tablets of carbidopa-levodopa 25-100 (25 mg of carbidopa and 100 mg of levodopa) 5 times a day and was concerned that the behavioral changes may be due to the high dose of carbidopa-levodopa and attempted to reduce the dose to 1 tablet 3 times a day. However, the patient developed acute neck dystonia and the carbidopa-levodopa dose was increased up to 1 tablet 5 times a day. The patient was subsequently admitted to inpatient psychiatry.
Upon intake to inpatient psychiatry, on the lowered dose of carbidopa-levodopa, the patient was noted to display low levels of positive affectivity and was chronically nihilistic. Additionally, he displayed a lack of affect, the lack of appreciation or interest in the nearly completed suicide attempt, and a lack of appreciation of how out of character this was for him. He appeared to have poor insight into his current situation and was often superficial and vague with his responses. No significant behavioral issues were noted.
Investigation into the cause of the patient's behavioral decline and eventual suicide attempt subsequently began with a systematic approach to all the possible offending agents. Both DBS and carbidopa-levodopa are well documented independent causes of behavioral changes. The pathology of PD itself is also associated with behavioral changes such as hypersexuality, pathological gambling, and mood swings. Hypersexuality in particular appears to be a common variable associated with all three factors. We therefore approached each risk factor independently.
It is known that a dose dependent association exists between carbidopa-levodopa and altered behavior including hallucinations and/or hypersexuality [, ], quite a contrast to the baseline depression and psychological akinesia seen in PD. Increased dopaminergic activity is indeed the hallmark of illicit substances such as cocaine and amphetamines so the development of behavioral changes is therefore not surprising with high doses of carbidopa-levodopa. In this case, Mr. C clearly demonstrated these behavioral changes as evidenced by his increasingly bizarre sexual advances on his wife which were occurring with higher frequency as his dose of medication increased. shows the gradual increase in carbidopa-levodopa dosing over the years for the patient.
clearly shows the increase in carbidopa-levodopa required to treat the patient's Parkinsonian symptoms and the high daily dose the patient was taking when he made his suicide attempt. The decision was therefore made to decrease his carbidopa-levodopa dosage from 1 tablet 5 times a day to 1 tablet 4 times a day and to continue to monitor his behavior on the inpatient unit. The patient was also started on fluoxetine as depression and apathy are known to occur when the dosage of carbidopa-levodopa is changed or stopped. It was believed that the patient's PD would also benefit from the mild dopaminergic nature of fluoxetine.
The patient did well on the reduced dose of carbidopa-levodopa and did not exhibit any strange behavior, hypersexuality, or impulsivity while on the unit. He also did not endorse any suicidal ideation, thoughts, or plans and appeared to tolerate fluoxetine well.
Subthalamic nucleus (STN) stimulation is considered an established surgical treatment for Parkinson's disease (PD). Episodes of depression and suicide have however been reported in patients treated with DBS of STN, notably when stimulation targets the inferior part of the STN which can induce acute depression symptoms . As the stimulation improves motor symptoms, patients are more able to attempt suicide. Limited data however exists regarding VIM stimulation especially with regard to its cognitive and behavioral effects. Very little data also exists on the impact of positional changes of the device itself over the years. This was especially relevant for the patient after family members reported a mild concussion he had suffered a few months prior.
The decision to obtain a CT scan was therefore justified with the aim of ruling out potential positional changes within the past 3 years. shows CT scans from 2015 and 2018.
Upon comparison with a CT from the time of DBS placement, radiology determined that there was no significant change in DBS position and it was concluded that a positional change was not the cause of the patient's behavior. It is therefore reasonable to assume that VIM stimulation by itself might have been, despite the high doses of carbidopa-levodopa, the cause of his depression and eventual suicide attempt. This was especially important to note as the patient and his neurologist were beginning to consider DBS of the right VIM to control his worsening left-handed tremor.
The patient's family played a large role in his treatment as they visited daily to speak to both the patient and his care team. They also agreed that the patient's behavior had improved from the time of presentation. It was decided, after 8 days of inpatient stay, that he was ready for discharge with close follow-up with both neurology and psychiatry.