We present the case of a 76-year-old white woman admitted to the hospital for worsening dyspnoea and peripheral congestion. The medical history was relevant for arterial hypertension, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, chronic kidney disease, and recent SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia. Her home medications included furosemide (25 mg t.i.d.), amlodipine (5 mg o.d.), canrenone (50 mg o.d.), olmesartan (20 mg o.d.), and atorvastatin (20 mg o.d.).
The onset of symptoms insidiously arose over the previous 9 months, with two episodes of acute HF with preserved ejection fraction (EF), requiring hospitalization in other centres. The respective echocardiograms documented, indeed, only left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy, with normal global and regional LV contractility. After the second episode, which occurred 3 months before the admission to our hospital, a cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (cMRI) revealed a hypertrophic phenocopy with biventricular involvement and circumferential subendocardial late gadolinium enhancement, mainly in the mid-apical segments .
At admission, the patient was severely symptomatic for dyspnoea at rest (NYHA Class IV) and presented signs of right ventricular (RV) failure (lower limbs oedema and jugular vein distention). Fine bilateral basal crepitations were also present. Her vitals were as follows: heart rate 110 b.p.m., blood pressure 135/75 mmHg, SpO2 94% in ambient air, and she was apyretic. The electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm, first-degree atrioventricular block, Q waves, and low-voltage QRS complexes without R-wave progression (pseudo-infarction pattern) in pre-cordial leads . Blood tests revealed elevated NT-proBNP (10 794 pg/mL; n.v. < 150 pg/mL) and moderately elevated high-sensitivity cardiac troponin I (236 ng/L, n.v. < 37 ng/L).
A transthoracic echocardiogram was then repeated and it revealed a severe LV hypertrophy (interventricular septum [IVS] thickness 18.5 mm, relative wall thickness 0.94, left ventricular mass index 176 g/m²) with ‘granular sparkling’ aspect, severe left ventricular contractile dysfunction (EF 34%; left ventricular outflow tract velocity time integral 9 cm; stroke volume index 16.5 mL/m2), third-degree diastolic dysfunction with elevated LV filling pressures (E/A 2.57, E/e′ 32.4; ), dilated RV with severe contractile dysfunction (TAPSE 12 mm, RV-FAC 14%) and significant pulmonary arterial hypertension (estimated systolic pulmonary arterial pressure of 60 mmHg). Coronary angiography revealed an MB with a long and severe systolic narrowing (‘milking’) of the proximal/mid-LAD epicardial artery without any evidence of coronary artery disease ( and ) Invasive functional assessment with instantaneous wave-free ratio (iFR) was performed to probe the haemodynamic impact of MB:iFR was 0.88 at baseline (n.v. > 0.89), lowering to 0.82 after inotropic and chronotropic stimulation by intravenous dobutamine and atropine. These results were suggestive for an MB responsible for inducible ischaemia. Moreover, heart catheterization documented severe pulmonary arterial hypertension, mainly post-capillary (pulmonary capillary wedge pressure 37 mmHg, mean Pulmonary arterial pressure 46 mmHg, pulmonary vascular resistance 3.56 WU), elevated LV end-diastolic pressure (40 mmHg), cardiac output 2.54 L/min, cardiac index 1.7 L/min/m², cardiac power output 0.45 W, pulmonary artery pulsatility index 1.9.
The patient also underwent non-invasive and invasive tests in order to confirm the diagnosis of CA, suspected on the basis of transthoracic echocardiography and cMRI: 99mTc-diphosphonate scintigraphy revealed no myocardial uptake of the isotope, ruling out cardiac ATTR (transthyretin) amyloidosis; of note, the serum protein electrophoresis showed no apparent qualitative alterations, but it detected lambda-type (λ) monoclonal immunoglobulin-free light chains (FLC; lambda 643.5 mg/L, n.v. = 5.7–26.3 mg/L; ratio kappa/lambda 0.02, n.v. = 0.26–1.65), which was confirmed by the serum-urine immunofixation. Bone marrow aspiration showed high percentage of plasma cells (5%) and, finally, periumbilical fat biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of CA type AL, due to multiple myeloma.
During the hospitalization the patient suffered from acute worsening of HF with acute pulmonary oedema (NT-proBNP increased to 15 500 pg/mL), requiring intravenous diuretics and non-invasive ventilation cycles (administered in cardiac intensive care unit). Nitrates were avoided due to the concomitant presence of MB. Low-dose beta-blockers were initially considered as conservative strategy to treat MB to increase diastolic filling time, but this option was early discarded. In case of CA with severe diastolic dysfunction, slowing heart rate could in fact be counterproductive because, due to an alteration of compliance and reduction in stroke volume, the cardiac output can be maintained within normal ranges only by an increase of heart rate. The patient also developed an acute renal failure requiring continuous haemodiafiltration (creatinine levels increased from 0.6 to 2.11 mg/dL, n.v. = 0.67–1.17 mg/dL, and anuria occurred). The case was collectively discussed in heart team, also with haematologists: implantable cardioverter defibrillator therapy was not recommended because of NYHA Class IV refractory to pharmacological therapy; considering the age >70, LVEF < 40%, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance score > 2 and NYHA class > 2, the patient was also considered not eligible for an autologous stem-cell transplantation. Combination chemotherapy of bortezomib and cyclophosphamide was instead started.
Despite intensive care and chemotherapy, the patient's clinical conditions progressively worsened and led to a multiorgan failure until, after 2 weeks of intensive care management, unfortunately she passed away.