A 53-year-old female patient suffered a head trauma from a backward fall. While bathing at a public bathhouse, she fell backward and struck the occipital area of her head against the floor. The patient mentioned that she experienced loss of consciousness and post-traumatic amnesia for approximately 30 min after the accident. Her Glasgow Coma Scale was 15 when she arrived at the hospital [, ]. After the head trauma, she experienced pain in the abdomen and in both hands and feet as well as memory impairment, dysarthria, depressive mood, and auditory impairment which are common symptoms of TBI. She visited several hospitals and underwent various evaluations including conventional brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), abdominal and pelvic ultrasonography, and stomach and intestine endoscopy. No abnormalities were observed in her brain, abdomen, and pelvic organ. In addition, her abdominal pain had not been relieved by any medical management mainly at the department of internal medicine. Four years after the head trauma, she came to the rehabilitation department of our university hospital for evaluation of her brain. No specific lesion was observed on brain MRI that included T1-weighted, T2-weighted, and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery [FLAIR] images . Electromyography, nerve conduction and motor evoked potential studies for both upper and lower extremities, and paraspinal muscles did not show any abnormality. The characteristics and severity of her pain were assessed as follows: intermittent pain without allodynia or hyperalgesia; squeezing and warm creeping-like pain in the abdomen (visual analog scale score: 7); tingling pain in both hands and feet (visual analog scale score: 7). She notified that her pain was a little decreased with the passage of time from onset . She was prescribed pregabalin (150 mg/day) and gabapentin (300 mg/day), and her abdominal and limb pain was well-controlled at a tolerable level. The patient provided signed, informed consent, and our institutional review board approved the study protocol.
DTI data were acquired 4 years after the patient’s head trauma by using a six-channel head coil on a 1.5 T Philips Gyroscan Intera (Philips, Best, Netherlands). For each of the 32 non-collinear diffusion sensitizing gradients, 70 contiguous slices were acquired parallel to the anterior commissure-posterior commissure line. Imaging parameters were as follows: acquisition matrix = 96 × 96; reconstructed matrix = 192 × 192; field of view = 240 × 240 mm2; TR = 10,726 ms; TE = 76 ms; parallel imaging reduction factor (SENSE factor) = 2; EPI factor = 49; b = 1000 s/mm2; NEX = 1; and slice thickness = 2.5 mm with no gap. For assessment of the STT, the Oxford Centre for Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the Brain (FMRIB) Software Library was used for analysis of DTI data. Affine multi-scale two-dimensional registration was used for correction of head motion effects and image distortion due to eddy currents. Fiber tracking was performed by using a probabilistic tractography method based on a multi-fiber model and was applied in the current study by utilizing tractography routines implemented in FMRIB Diffusion software (5000 streamline samples, 0.5 mm step lengths, curvature thresholds = 0.2). The STT was reconstructed by selecting fibers passing through regions of interest (ROI). To assess the STT, the seed ROI was placed in the posterolateral medulla on an axial slice, and two target ROIs with the option of termination were placed on a portion of the ventro-postero-lateral nucleus of the thalamus and primary somatosensory cortex . The threshold values of two streamlines were applied for the results of fiber tracking for each tract.
On four-year post-trauma DTT, the upper portion of the STT in both hemispheres showed partial tearing .