A 63-year-old man presented with gross hematuria and urinary retention. He had no remarkable medical or family history. His serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) was 4.58 ng/mL, and urine cytology was class 3 (atypical urothelial cells). Since cystoscopy revealed a papillary tumor in the prostatic urethra, we performed transurethral resection of the prostate. The pathological diagnosis was poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with Gleason score of 5 + 4 = 9 with DCa . Magnetic resonance imaging showed local invasion of the left lobe of the prostate and bone metastasis of the left trochanteric section of the femur . Although he was treated with androgen deprivation therapy (ADT), 10 months later, the disease became castration-resistant prostate cancer. At this point, the PSA level was 3.66 ng/mL and serum NSE was 9.6 ng/mL. Then, we administered three courses of docetaxel (75 mg/m2) as the second-line therapy. Since the serum PSA level was decreased to 0.54 ng/mL, the patient was treated with a combination of 160 mg of enzalutamide and intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) consisting of 78 Gy administered in 39 fractions for the prostate and 40 Gy administered in 14 fractions for the left femur as the third-line therapy, which decreased the PSA level to be nadir of 0.03 ng/mL. After the combination therapy, enzalutamide was continued for 13 months, and when the serum PSA increased to 0.35 ng/mL, four courses of cabazitaxel (25 mg/m2) were administered as the fourth-line therapy. Despite multimodal therapy, positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) showed viability of the left trochanteric section of the femur. Thus, we performed left femoral head replacement, and we confirmed the absence of viable cancer cells pathologically. After 1 year, he was treated with local radiation of 60 Gy administered in 25 fractions because the PSA level increased to 0.76 ng/mL and pelvic lymph node metastasis was noted. At this point, we performed targeted genome sequencing of the tumor specimen from the transurethral resection and re-evaluated the immunochemistry findings. We identified PTEN p. R233fs*10, RB1 loss exons 18–27, and TP53 p.R249G mutations by genome sequencing , and the patient was found to be positive for synaptophysin by immunohistochemistry . Currently, he is undergoing chemotherapy with cabazitaxel, and his PSA/NSE level was around 0.20/9.0 ng/mL.