A 61-year-old female patient presented with a medical history of herniated discs as well as inherited plaque psoriasis. Essential arterial hypertension was diagnosed several years ago after the exclusion of secondary causes. The patient already received full doses of antihypertensive drugs (olmesartan 40 mg, bisoprolol 10 mg, amlodipine 10 mg, rilmenidine 2 mg, spironolactone 100 mg, torasemide 20 mg, and hydrochlorothiazide 25 mg) and even underwent renal denervation twice until the indication for BAT implantation was made in January 2017 according to the applicable guidelines at that time. At this time, there was no evidence of any late complications due to hypertension. Baroreflex activation therapy implantation (CVRx® Neo, Minneapolis, MN, USA) was successfully performed in general anaesthesia in February 2017, where the lead was fixed at the bifurcation of the right carotid artery and the device was placed into a retro-pectoral pocket due to the lean patient constitution [body mass index (BMI) 19.1 kg/m2] .
Outpatient follow-up visits were performed on a regular basis every 3–4 months with a consecutive improvement of systolic and diastolic blood pressure values .
In November 2019, the patient presented with progressive pain at the site of the electrode, which was reproducible on palpation and when the patient turned her head in both directions, which finally resulted in a surgical revision procedure. The existing lead was removed from the right side and a new one was placed contralaterally at the bifurcation of the left carotid artery. In addition, the generator was removed from the deep origin below the right major pectoral muscle and the same device was re-implanted subcutaneously because of slightly gained body weight (BMI 20.9 kg/m2). A few weeks later, the patient returned again because of painful sensations at the area of the generator and, although any manipulation has been denied, an immediately performed X-ray revealed a twist of the device of 180° around its transverse axis with multiple loops of the lead . Therefore, pocket-revision was performed in December 2019, and the existing lead was untwisted, but not replaced due to good technical values, and, finally, re-conducted with the generator without any complications.
At the time of the next scheduled outpatient visit 1 week after the procedure, stimulation impedance was below an acceptable threshold indicating lead fracture and, therefore, another surgical revision was unavoidable and was performed in January 2020 . The existing lead was removed, and the novel one was successfully fixed at the same point at the left carotid bifurcation.
Four months later, the patient presented in a stable clinical condition without any pain or signs of infection in relation to the BAT device with inconspicuous technical values.