A 58-year-old male with a history of T3NO hypopharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), on a background of smoking and alcohol use, treated with chemotherapy and radiation nine months prior re-presented to a tertiary referral centre for head and neck cancer clinic with a four-month history of progressive dysphagia and right sided neck pain. Examination with flexible nasendoscopy revealed largyngeal oedema and extensive sloughing, exposed laryngeal cartilage, but no definite evidence of a recurrent tumour .
A panendoscopy was performed, and biopsy of the right lateral pharynx, which showed no evidence of tumour recurrence. The patient was discharged and subsequently represented with worsening symptoms of dysphagia, dyspnoea and pain a month later. Repeat panendoscopy demonstrated further cartilage exposure, but again no evidence of recurrent malignancy, despite progression of the patient's clinical symptoms. The patient was admitted to hospital for analgesia and observation. Five days later he experienced a large volume hemorrhage necessitating neck exploration and ligation of his right external carotid artery and tracheostomy carried out by the head and neck surgical consultant. The patient subsequently underwent a pharyngolaryngectomy with gastric pull up and primary anastomosis of conduit to pharynx, indicated due to the extent of radiation induced laryngeal necrosis. His post-operative course was complicated by an anastamotic leak and a salivary pharyngocutaneous fistula. This was initially managed conservatively, however three weeks later the patient suffered a further massive acute hemorrhage requiring resuscitation, and emergent return to the operating theatre. On this occasion, a defect in his right common carotid artery which was repaired using a biopatch with the assistance of vascular surgeons. The pharyngocutaneous fistula was closed by the head and neck surgeons with a rolled myocutaneous pectoralis major flap, with a supraclavicular flap required to close the skin defect. Eleven days later the patient experienced a third massive bleed in the absence of further salivary fistula. Following resuscitation, and in consultation with a vascular surgeon, on this occasion the right common carotid artery was ligated. No further bleeding occurred following this intervention. Subsequent imaging revealed an ischaemic stroke with right parieto-temporal watershed regions. Clinically, this manifested with left sided neglect with no major motor deficit. After a prolonged rehabilitation, the patient was discharged, on normal diet and has returned to most normal daily activities, including employment.