A 74 year old man presented to the Old Age Psychiatry Service with cognitive deficits, in particular deficits of short term memory, while being treated for recurrent depressive episode. Depressive disorder was diagnosed 1986 and under continuing treatment with Moclobemid the depression was remitted until 2009. Several month after cessation of treatment with Moclobemid depression recurred and he was treated with Valproic acid and Sertraline. Due to incomplete remission, several antidepressants were used until 2014. On admission the patient was treated with Lithium (serum level 0.8 mmol/l (norm: 0.6 – 1.0 mmol/l)) and Venlafaxine. In addition, the patient had familial essential tremor treated with Primidone.
Neuropsychological testing on admission revealed normal performance on cognitive (Mini-Mental Status Examination 28/30) and affective scales (Geriatric Depression Scale 3/15). Digit and block span forward and backward were 8 and 5, and 6 and 5, respectively. The German version of the California Verbal Learning Test showed impaired word learning (3/16) in trial 1 with impaired delayed recall (4/16). Trail-Making Test A and B were 121 and 278 s, respectively. Semantic fluency was reduced to 13 animals per minute.
After cessation of treatment with Lithium and Primidone, the impairment on neuropsychological testing reversed . Digit and block span forward and backward improved to 9 and 6, and 7 and 7, respectively. Verbal learning improved to 4 of 16 in trial I and 9 of 16 in delayed recall. Trail-Making Test A and B were 78 s and 103 s, respectively. Semantic fluency improved to 23 animals per minute.
FDG-PET on admission showed reduced glucose metabolism in temporo-parietal areas and the posterior cingulum with a pattern characteristic for Alzheimer’s disease. After cessation of treatment with Lithium and Primidone glucose utilization in FDG-PET normalized in all areas .
To further rule out Alzheimer pathology an amyloid-PET with was performed. No cortical amyloid deposition was observed and thus, AD was ruled out .