An 83-year-old male with a history of prostate cancer status post transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP), diabetes type 2 on insulin, and hypertension presented to the emergency department (ED) complaining of left inguinal pain for several days associated with worsening dysuria for the past month. He stated he has had increased size of his scrotum during this time and has been having post void dribbling, urinary frequency, and nocturia. He stated he visited a urologist about one year prior to presentation who told him he had bilateral hydroceles found on scrotal ultrasound. He had no other complains on admission and was in no apparent distress. Family history was significant for hypertension and coronary artery disease in mother. He is a former smoker and drinks alcohol socially. Drug history includes amlodipine, carvedilol, furosemide, ramipril, atorvastatin, insulin, tamsulosin, and oxybutynin.
In the ED, vital signs were unremarkable with a temperature of 99.0° Fahrenheit, blood pressure of 131/61 mm Hg, heart rate of 82 beats per minute, and oxygen saturation of 96% on room air. His body mass index (BMI) was 30. Physical examination revealed bilateral enlargement of the scrotum in particular the left hemi-scrotum. There were no skin changes, no erythema and nontender. The findings were consistent with a chronically incarcerated but not strangulated inguinal scrotal hernia on the left. The rest of physical examination was unremarkable.
Laboratory testing was significant for a white blood cell count of 12.3 10*3/μL (normal value: 4.5–11 10*3/μL), blood urea nitrogen of 93 mg/dL (normal value: 5–25 mg/dL), and creatinine of 3.34 mg/dL (normal value: 0.61–1/24 mg/dL) . A urine analysis with turbid appearance, yellow in color, too numerous to count white blood cells, moderate leukocytes, many bacteria, and negative nitrites. Scrotal ultrasound with doppler study showed a left sided moderate to large complex hydrocele containing debris and a moderate to large right sided hydrocele. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis revealed a herniation of the bladder approximately 80% through the left inguinal canal into the left scrotal sac with the portion of the bladder containing the uretero-vesical junction remains within the pelvic cavity . Moderate bilateral hydronephrosis and hydroureter were noted, but no obstructing calculi were seen.
A foley catheter was placed and he was started empirically on ceftriaxone 1 g every 24 hours for his complicated urinary tract infection. Urology, surgery and infectious disease were consulted for further management. On day 2, urine culture grew Staphylococcus caprae and blood cultures remained without growth. His antibiotics were switched to cefazolin 1 g twice daily for a total of 2 weeks of antibiotic treatment. The decision was also made for elective surgical intervention for his bladder herniation. On day 6, he underwent surgical left inguinal hernia reduction and repair with phasix mesh placement without complications using open tension-free mesh repair technique. Surgery was performed under general anesthesia primarily by a general surgeon who has more than 30 years of experience with the assistance of a fourth-year surgical resident. The patient tolerated the surgery very well and remained with an uncomplicated post-operative course. His symptoms and kidney function improved significantly afterward.
The patient was discharged to subacute rehab with an indwelling foley catheter on day 8 of hospitalization and he had his foley catheter removed within one week of discharge with a successful voiding trial. He reported no post-operative complications such as pain or recurrence at his latest follow-up visit.