In August 2016, a 10-year-old boy presented to the orthopedic outpatient clinic of our hospital, complaining of limited range of motion of the left elbow as well as difficulty in extending the left thumb. There was a history of an injury to his left forearm 9 months ago, which was initially treated conservatively. Unfortunately, the patient had come from another country and had no previous radiographs. Clinical examination revealed difficulty to flex and inability to rotate his left elbow. Specifically, the patient presented: 90° flexion, 70° pronation, 20° loss in extension, and almost no supination. His Mayo Elbow Performance Score was poor (55/100). The anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the left elbow showed an anterior dislocation of the radial head ( and ). We concluded that the patient had most probably suffered a Monteggia Bado type I fracture which had been missed and therefore gone untreated. A computed tomography scan of the left elbow was performed to determine if there were any bony fragments in the joint. However, there were no intra-articular fragments.
The patient’s main complaint was the difficulty of extending his thumb. Parents were also concerned about serious limitations in elbow range of motion. For these reasons, it was decided to try to reduce the radial head. The patient was taken to the operating theater and an above elbow tourniquet was placed. A posterolateral Boyd’s approach was utilized. Initially, the humeroradial joint was cleared of scar tissue and of the remains of the annular ligament. The radial head could only be partially reduced, so we had to perform a proximal ulnar osteotomy. To be able to distract the osteotomy, we applied a mini rail external fixator to the ulna and proceeded to perform a proximal ulnar osteotomy. At that point, the radial head was found to sublux during supination and pronation. Therefore, annular ligament reconstruction was performed using a synthetic tendon graft and anchor sutures . In addition, the radiocapitellar joint was fixed with a Kirschner wire. Given the fact, the PIN was not found to be interpositioned within the radiocapitellar joint or the proximal radioulnar joint, we did not proceed to a nerve exploration. After surgery, the arm was placed in an above elbow half cast. Post-operative radiographs were obtained, showing an adequate radiocapitellar alignment . Bone elongation started 7 days postoperatively at a rate of 1 mm per day, until a distraction of 8 mm was achieved .
The radiocapitellar k-wire was removed 1 month postoperatively. Union of the ulna was achieved at 3 months after surgery and the external fixator was removed . The patient was followed up until 18 moths postoperatively . During his final examination, the range of motion of the left elbow improved to: 150° flexion, 80°pronation, 70° supination, and only 10° loss in extension ( and ). His Mayo elbow performance score was excellent (100/100). In addition, the extension of his thumb was also improved.