We present a case of a 30-year-old woman with a history of multiple inpatient admissions and outpatient visits for headaches due to idiopathic intracranial hypertension status – postlumboperitoneal (LP) shunt placement with a programmable valve 5 years before at another institution. She presented with new nonpositional tussive headaches, without any deficits on physical examination. Her LP shunt valve (Strata II) was confirmed to be set at 2.0, stable from 3 months before, when the resistance was increased from 1.0. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed, demonstrating a Chiari I malformation without any abnormalities in the cervical spine . She was treated with LP shunt removal and placement of a new ventriculoperitoneal (VP) shunt (Certas valve set to 5). She had improvement in her headaches, however, she returned 3 months later with symptoms of bilateral upper extremity paresthesia. On physical examination, she exhibited full strength without hyperreflexia; however, she did endorse bilateral sensory dysesthesia when light touch was applied to her upper extremities.
CT of the head and shunt series showed baseline small ventricle caliber and no shunt system disconnection, respectively. Her shunt remained at a moderate resistance (Certas Plus set at 5). Cervical MRI revealed resolution of the Chiari malformation. However, there was now an intradural extramedullary lesion ventral to the spinal cord starting at C3 and extending to L3. The lesion was hyperintense on T2-weighted imaging , hypointense on T1-weighed imaging , and displaced the cord posteriorly . The neurosurgery and radiology services concluded that this was an interdural cyst.
Given her continued sensory symptoms, a decision was made to fenestrate the interdural cyst in the lower thoracic region.
A T11 laminectomy was performed, and the dura was opened just left of midline. After the arachnoid adhesions were released, a fluctuant dural surface was encountered anteriorly in the canal, with no other visible abnormality. The inner layer of the dura was incised and revealed a fluid-filled cavity, bounded by dura. This confirmed the presence of an interdural cyst . Once adequate fenestration was accomplished and the cyst seemed decompressed, the wound was closed in usual fashion.
Postoperatively, the patient reported improvement in bilateral upper extremity tingling. At her 6-week follow-up appointment, she reported resolution of her paresthesias.
Head CT also demonstrated continued resolution of her Chiari malformation.