The patient was a 77-year-old female with a past medical history significant for hypertension, asthma and a previous hip replacement. At the time of the event, the patient’s only medication was Ramipril 5 mg per day and she lived independently in her own home. The patient had not recently altered any of her medications, changed her diet or lifestyle or used drugs or alcohol preceding the event.
At approximately 14:30 on the day of the event while out walking, the patient experienced a sudden onset of dizziness, nausea and vomiting and experienced multiple pre-syncopal episodes at rest and on exertion. The patient was able to return to her home but after laying flat experienced a syncopal episode each time she tried to sit up and so 9-1-1 was called at 15:59. A dual-crewed primary care paramedic unit and a dual-crewed advanced care paramedic unit were dispatched to the scene given the symptoms described during the 9-1-1 call (Supplementary 1).
On arrival to the scene, the patient was found supine in bed, alert and oriented with weak peripheral pulses at a rate of 25 and cool, clammy skin. On any attempt at movement, the patient would again become pre-syncopal and so was left in her current position during assessment. The initial vital signs are found in and the initial rhythm strip and 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed a 2:1 heart block ( and ).
A single dose of 600 micrograms IV atropine was administered and within one minute of this administration the patient experienced a period of ventricular standstill lasting approximately 30 seconds until therapy was commenced, accompanied by loss of consciousness, decorticate posturing and urinary incontinence. This episode was treated with a single dose of 50 micrograms IV adrenaline (prepared as 10 micrograms/mL), which led to a short episode of pulsatile, self-terminating polymorphic ventricular tachycardia and a subsequent return to the bradycardic 2:1 heart block . With the patient’s symptoms worsening and precluding extrication, an adrenaline infusion was commenced at 2 micrograms/min and subsequently escalated in 2 micrograms/min increments until a response was achieved at 10 micrograms/min approximately 10 minutes after initiation of the infusion . A follow-up 12-lead ECG is not available as the patient had at this time been transitioned to defibrillator pads for monitoring; however, the rhythm remained a 2:1 heart block at an elevated rate for the remainder of patient care.
The patient was conveyed to hospital with the on-going adrenaline infusion, having experienced a reduction in the dizziness and nausea and with no further pre-syncopal or syncopal episodes. Given these improvements and the patient experiencing no side effects from the adrenaline infusion, a transition to transcutaneous pacing was not considered to be required. The patient subsequently received an implanted pacemaker and was later discharged back to the community.