A 15-year-old patient with a female phenotype presented at our hospital with a chief complaint of short stature for 9 years. She was the first full-term child born to her parents; the mother was healthy during pregnancy and had no history of illness or medication. Her father was 167 cm in height; he began to develop at the age of 14 and had his first spermatorrhea at 18 years. Her mother was 157 cm in height, and her menarche began at the age of 12 years. Both parents stated no history of other hereditary and infectious diseases.
The patient was delivered via cesarean section, no postpartum asphyxia or hypoxia and no abnormal Apgar score. Her birth weight and length were 3.3 kg and 48 cm, respectively. She had normal teething, and mental and physical development before the age of 6 in line with her healthy peers. At the age of 6 years, she showed a slow growth rate, growing approximately 1–2 cm every year, with a gradual decline in intelligence, understanding, and learning ability. Five years ago, at the age of 10, her bone age was determined to be 8 years. The patient was then diagnosed with “dwarf syndrome” and treated with growth hormone. However, no height growth was obvious, and thus the treatment was terminated after 1–2 months.
Upon physical examination, the patient’s height was 136 cm and the weight was 29 kg, which are both below the third percentile of children of the same age and gender. The patient was lean, with a short neck, many moles, an epicanthic fold, tall palatine arches, a shield-like chest, wide breast distance, evident breath sounds in lungs, and no dry and wet rales. The heart rate was 86 beats per minute, with a regular rhythm. No murmur was heard in each valve auscultation area. The abdomen was soft, with no tenderness, rebound tenderness, and muscle tension, and there was no palpable swelling in the liver or spleen. Cubitus valgus was present. The 4th and 5th metacarpals were short, and no edema was detected in either of the lower limbs. In terms of sex development, she doesn’t have normal breast development. If the Tanner stage is adopted, the patient’s breast is stage I, which does not match the age. The patient had a young vulva and a small clitoris. There was no mass in the inguinal and labia majora area, and no pubic hair or armpit hair.
Blood, urine, and stool analyses were unremarkable. Liver function, renal function, blood lipids, electrolytes, blood sugar, and thyroid function were all normal. Hepatitis tests revealed hepatitis A virus IgM antibody (−), hepatitis B surface antigen (−), hepatitis C virus antibody (−), and hepatitis E virus IgM antibody (−). Thyroid function and antibody were normal. Six sex hormones were analyzed: luteinizing hormone (LH), 17.5(0.1–11.9) mIU/ml; follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), 103.50(2.1–11.1)mIU/ml; testosterone 0.09(0.00–2.39) nmol/l; progesterone, 1.50 (0.98–4.83)nmol/l; prolactin, 292.50 (6.68–53.44)μIU/ml, and estradiol < 18.35 (48.00–521.00)pmol/l, prolactin levels increased, but other biochemical and imaging tests were normal, which may be related to the patient’s nervousness, the above results suggest that the patient has hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism (gonadal failure/lack of functioning). Insulin-like growth factor-1 was 172.00 ng/ml. The 24-h urine free cortisol was normal. Karyotype analysis (400 belt, G belt) showed 47,XYY . Further chromosomal microarray examination showed a chimera of the karyotype 46,XY/47,XYY. The ratio was approximately 2:1, and the Y chromosome contained the SRY gene.
Pituitary magnetic resonance imaging and chest X-rays showed no abnormalities. The bone age was approximately 13 years of age . Ultrasound examination of the uterus and double attachment revealed an approximately 1.1 × 0.9 × 0.6-cm hypoecho, similar to a uterine echo. There was no endometrial echo and both ovaries were unclear. Cardiac ultrasonography showed no abnormalities in the intracardiac structure nor aortic stenosis. Abdominal color Doppler showed no abnormalities in the structures of the liver, gallbladder, pancreas, spleen, and kidneys.
Next-generation sequencing showed no mutations in the 65 genes associated with disorders of sex development, and no large missing or repeated segments of sex-reversal-related genes (NROB1, WNT4, NR5A1, SOX9, AMH, SF1, FGF9, FOXL2) were detected by multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification.