A 14-year-old Tibetan girl presented at the emergency department due to multiple episodes of tonic–clonic seizures for 14 h and progressive headache for 2 weeks with dizziness and vomiting. She reported a 1-month history of haematuria, fever and pharyngalgia. The patient had no history of hypertension, diabetes, head injury, or drug allergies. Her developmental and family history was normal. On admission, her blood pressure was 150/90 mmHg; physical examination showed somnolence, decreased muscle strength (grade 4/5) in all four limbs, and facial swelling.
At presentation, urinalysis identified significant haematuria (3 +), proteinuria (3 +), and mild leukocyturia (1 +). Blood laboratory tests showed the following remarkable results: azotaemia (urea 7.33 mmol/L, serum creatinine 168 μmol/L), infection (white blood cells 10 770 cells/mm3, C-reactive protein [CRP] 40.44 mg/L, hypersensitive CRP 10 mg/L), anaemia (haemoglobin 11.1 g/dL), increased anti-streptolysin O (ASO) antibody (890.4 IU/mL), and increased antinuclear antibody (ANA) (1:1280). Brain T2 fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (T2-FLAIR) images showed bilateral hyperintense signal changes in the frontal, parietal, and occipital lobes . Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) showed slightly hyperintense signals in the bilateral frontal cortex and hypointense signals in the right occipital lobes . Brain computed tomography (CT) revealed bilateral hypointense lesions in the frontal, parietal and occipital lobes . A urinary ultrasound scan showed an enhanced echo in the tissue of both kidneys, and chest CT indicated pneumonia of the right lung .
A multidisciplinary team (MDT) composed of a neurologist, a nephrologist, a rheumatologist and a radiologist was involved in the patient’s care. Based on clinical symptoms and examination results, especially the acute onset of haematuria, acute kidney damage and proteinuria associated with increasing ASO, the patient was diagnosed with APSGN . The typical cerebral MRI features of PRES include a bilaterally symmetrical parieto-occipital pattern, holohemispheric watershed pattern, and superior frontal sulcus pattern reflecting vasogenic oedema . PRES was diagnosed on the basis of both an acute onset of multiple neurologic features and distinctive neuroimaging findings . Differential diagnoses of ischaemic stroke, cerebral venous thrombosis, infectious encephalitis, autoimmune encephalitis, high-altitude cerebral oedema and central nervous system vasculitis were ruled out.
According to the opinions of the MDT, an antibiotic regimen (penicillin 6,400,000 U intravenously, twice a day for 2 weeks) was administered to treat pneumonia and acute post-streptococcal glomerulonephritis. An antiepileptic drug (sodium valproate, infused by a syringe driver for 3 days and administered orally for 2 weeks) was administered to control the seizures. HBO therapy (once per day, 1 ATA for 90 min) was given to prevent cerebral vasospasm, decrease cerebral oedema and protect the neurovascular unit. After 48 h of treatment, the patient had made favourable clinical progress; her seizures were controlled, and she regained full consciousness. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) after 7 days showed that the abnormal lesions had completely disappeared . The patient was discharged on Day 14. At the 1-month follow-up, the patient’s facial swelling and haematuria had disappeared, her fatigue had improved, and her epilepsy had not relapsed. Repeated blood tests were normal except for mild anaemia (haemoglobin 11.5 g/dL) and increased ASO antibody (876.3 IU/mL). Brain CT after 4 weeks and 6 weeks showed normal results . The patient and parents were highly satisfied with the care she had received in the hospital, and they expressed their appreciation to the department.