Our index case no 3 and 5 (index case, we called because all relevant pictures has been shown in this manuscript, whereas only data were included for remaining patients) involves a 39-year-old male patient with no significant medical history, who was presented to the emergency department with polytrauma due to a road traffic accident. He reported an episode of transient loss of consciousness after the accident and indicated feeling pain throughout the body, particularly severe in the right ankle, upper back, and right shoulder.
Physical evaluation revealed full consciousness, and alertness, with stable vitals and without any neurological deficits. Multiple abrasions and hematomas across the chest, shoulders, knees, and abdomen were noted. Over his left ankle, there was a 4 cm × 8 cm deep contaminated laceration wound over the anterolateral aspect of the ankle with oozing blood (Gustilo-Anderson grade 3B wound). Extruded talus was lying outside of the ankle mortise on the lateral aspect of the ankle with a few attached soft tissues. Distal pulsation was present, and no neurological deficit was detected clinically. The wound was washed with a copious amount of saline and broad-spectrum antibiotics were administered. The wound was covered with sterile gauze and a posterior slab was applied.
Multiple radiological studies were performed, which revealed fractures of the right 3, 4, and 5th ribs, minimal haemothorax on the right, no intracranial abnormalities, and subcutaneous swelling throughout the left upper abdomen and right chest. Left ankle radiographs revealed extruded fracture dislocation talus . He was immediately admitted into surgery. Under spinal anesthesia debridement, relocation of the talus was performed, fixed with screws and K-wires along with an application of an external fixator for wound care . The wound was loosely closed and was inspected every day. Intravenous antibiotics were administered based on the culture report for 2 weeks. The wound healed in 3 weeks and the external fixator was removed. Physiotherapy was performed thereafter, and the patient was discharged after 6 weeks. The patient was followed up at 6 months, 12 months, and finally at 2 years. On every visit X-ray, and CT scan was taken to record and monitor the talus fracture union and the range of ankle movement . Fifth patient (case no 5) of extrude talus was managed in similar way . Our management algorithm is shown in . This algorithm may not be an ideal because management of this devastating injury depends on surgeon’s experience, availability of reconstruction surgeon, vascular surgeon, patient requirements, and availability of various orthopedics implants. The demographical characteristics of all five patients are shown in . All cases were able to achieve a satisfactory range of motion at the ankle after 12 months of follow-up . Within 6–12 months, four cases achieved the union of fracture talus while case no 5 non-union. Two cases developed osteomyelitis. Painful subtalar joint was recorded in all cases .