A 60-year-old East Asian male was admitted to the Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong University (Jinan, China) in July 2014, with complaints of epigastric distention and right shoulder pain for the past six months. His past medical history included prolapse of a lumbar intervertebral disc and hypertension, both of which were under control. Family history indicated the patient’s mother was a hepatitis B patient. Physical examination revealed tenderness over the epigastric and right subcostal areas.
Lab tests showed hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), hepatitis B e antibody (HBeAb) and hepatitis B core antibody (HBcAb) were positive, while hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) and hepatitis B surface antibody (HBsAb) were negative. The serum HBV DNA level was slightly elevated to 21 IU/mL (normal level:< 20 IU/mL), measured by highly sensitive HBV DNA detection tools. Hepatitis C virus (HCV) antibody was negative. Gamma glutamyltransferase (GGT) was mildly elevated to 69 U/L (normal level: 10 U/L - 60 U/L). Other liver function tests, including total bilirubin, conjugated bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), total protein and albumin, were all within normal limits. Of the tumor markers tested, AFP was 12,310 ng/mL (normal level: 0 ng/mL −20 ng/mL). Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (CA19-9) and carbohydrate antigen 125 (CA125) were within normal limits.
The axial CT scan showed a large (10.2 cm × 8.6 cm × 6.3 cm), lobulated and irregular mass in the left lobe of the liver (segment IV), which was not enhanced on the arterial phase but only vaguely enhanced on the portal phase, suggesting intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC) .
The patient was admitted to surgery on July 22, 2014. Intraoperatively, significant nodular cirrhosis was noted and a hard tumor with a diameter of about 11 cm was palpable in the left hepatic lobe. It invaded the liver capsule and gallbladder bed. No lymphadenopathy or ascites was found. No tumor implantation or distant metastases were found in the omentum or pelvic cavity. The patient underwent left hepatic lobe resection and cholecystectomy.
Histopathologic examination showed a nonencapsulated, moderately or poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. The tumor cells were arranged in duct-like structures against a background of broad desmoplastic stroma . The tumor cells were cuboidal to columnar in shape with round and medium-sized nuclei, prominent nucleoli, frequent mitotic activity, and a moderate amount of eosinophilic cytoplasm. Some tumor cells appeared undifferentiated with stem cell-like features , with no definite histological features of hepatocytes and cholangiocytes. Massive coagulative tumor necrosis involved approximately 40 % of the tumor volume. Extensive sampling of the tumor failed to demonstrate histologic evidence of hepatoid differentiation. No histologic features of yolk-sac tumor were recognized. The background liver showed chronic hepatitis B . Because the clinical impression and histopathologic findings were inconsistent, we conducted IHC studies with a panel of antibodies. The results showed that the tumor cells were strongly and diffusely positive for AFP, whereas the adjacent non-neoplastic hepatocytes and bile ducts were completely negative. The tumor cells were also strongly and diffusely positive for cytokeratins CK7 and CK19 with a luminal staining pattern. However, the tumor cells were completely negative for hepatocyte antigen, Glypican-3, CK20, and CDX-2. The antibodies to liver stem cells/progenitor cells, including KIT (CD117), CD34, CD56, cytokeratin CK14 and P63, were used to explore the possibility of stem cell origin. Immunostaining of P63 and CK14 was positive in small cells within the “stem cell-like” zone . These IHC findings strongly supported the diagnosis of ICC with aberrant expression of AFP.
At postoperative weeks 1, 5 and 8, the patient’s AFP level declined to 628.4 ng/mL, 43 ng/mL and 15.7 ng/mL, respectively (normal level: 0 ng/mL −20 ng/mL). From August 30, 2014 to November 10, 2014, the patient received gemcitabine (1800 mg on days 1 and 8) plus oxaliplatin (200 mg on day 1) every 3 weeks for four cycles. The patient tolerated chemotherapy very well with mild gastrointestinal and hematological toxicities. One week before chemotherapy, he started taking entecavir dispersible tablet (0.5 mg po qn), continued during chemotherapy and for 6 months after chemotherapy. The patient was followed up in the outpatient department. The latest follow-up on March 25, 2016, showed no evidence of recurrence. His AFP level was 12.1 ng/mL (normal level: 0 ng/mL −20 ng/mL) and HBV DNA declined to normal level (<20 IU/mL).