The index case, a 25-year-old Caucasian man (pedigree III.3, Fig. ) who consulted the otolaryngology outpatient clinic for a presumed viral upper respiratory tract infection, was referred 2 days later to the hematology outpatient clinic because of the suspicion of an hemolytic anemia with an hemoglobin level of 129 g/L. Other than atopic rhinitis, the patient had an uneventful medical history. He started xylometazoline nose drops and saline nasal irrigation 2 days before the hematology consultation in the context of the presumed viral upper respiratory tract infection. In addition, his medication comprised mometasone nasal spray for the atopic rhinitis. The patient had no oral medication, did not smoke, and consumed alcohol occasionally and only moderately. He is a student, living with his parents in Switzerland. Clinical and laboratory characteristics at the time of the hematology consultation are reported in Table . Notably, the patient had scleral icterus and moderate splenomegaly. The rest of the physical examination was normal. Laboratory analyses revealed mild macrocytic anemia with high reticulocyte count. Unconjugated bilirubin and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) were elevated. Haptoglobin was undetectable. DAT test was negative. Blood smear examination revealed anisopoikilocytosis, polychromasia, bite cells, and basophilic stippling . However, no Heinz bodies were detected. Although basophilic stippling is not a feature of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency (G6PD), this diagnostic possibility was investigated and excluded , leading us to suspect an unstable hemoglobinopathy. Hb analysis was initiated by cellulose acetate electrophoresis (Helena) and high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) (VARIANT II, Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules), and confirmed by automated capillary electrophoresis (CapillaryS2 Flex Piercing, Sebia). Sanger sequencing (Applied Biosystems ABI 3500, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was performed using exon-specific primers. HPLC and capillary electrophoresis showed slightly increased HbA2, normal fetal Hb (HbF), and a variant hemoglobin . DNA sequencing revealed a heterozygous mutation c430delC in the beta-globin gene hallmark of Hb Montreal II and a heterozygous mutation c287C>T in the alpha-globin gene corresponding to Hb G-Georgia [–], indicative of the not yet described combination of double-heterozygous Hb Montreal II and Hb G-Georgia variants. Owing to the likelihood that drugs with oxidative effects may aggravate hemolysis in our patient, we recommended him to avoid drugs contraindicated in G6PD deficiency .
The patient had a control at the hematology outpatient clinic 3 weeks later showing a hemoglobin level of 135 g/L and a reticulocyte count of 662 G/L. LDH level was 1843 U/L, indicating the persistence of the hemolytic process. No further follow-up was performed in hematology. Six months ago, a cell blood count obtained at the occasion of a consultation at the allergology outpatient clinic showed a hemoglobin level of 140 g/L. We considered that this was probably the baseline hemoglobin level of our patient.
The grandfather (pedigree I.1, Fig. ), of Italian origin, had anemia without more specification.
The mother (pedigree II.1, Fig. ), 66 years old, carries heterozygous Montreal II. She has no anemia, but has signs of chronic hemolysis, had gallstones, and recently underwent cholecystectomy for cholecystitis.
The father (pedigree II.2, Fig. ), 68 years old, carries heterozygous G-Georgia. His Hb level is normal, and he has no hemolysis.
The brother (pedigree III.2, Fig. ), 33 years old, carries the combination of double-heterozygous Hb Montreal II and Hb G-Georgia variants. He suffers from moderate anemia and chronic hemolysis, and had splenectomy when he was 23 years old. During the same period, he received a kidney transplant for terminal renal failure because of a rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis.
The nephew (pedigree IV.1, Fig. ), 3 years old, has mild anemia with basophilic stippling. No further investigation was undertaken.
There is no relevant additional family history to report.