A 54-year-old male was struck by a truck while riding a motorcycle and consequently impacted a guardrail. He was reportedly conscious, ambulatory, and unable to bear weight on his left leg at the scene. His pelvis was temporarily stabilized at an outside hospital, and he was transferred to our facility. A pelvic X-ray and a computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis from the outside hospital demonstrated diastases of the left pubic symphysis and a fracture involving the left sacral wing extending to the left sacroiliac joint and a ruptured bladder. On arrival, he underwent a retrograde cystogram during Foley catheter placement, which demonstrated extraperitoneal bladder rupture.
The patient underwent an additional CT scan with contrast enhancement of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis with reconstructions of the thoracic and lumbar spine. At the same time, a CT scan of the head and cervical spine was performed. The images demonstrated extensive hyperdensity within the spinal canal subarachnoid space related to extravasation of contrast material, which was not previously observed on the outside hospital imaging .
The imaging suggested that the contrast material extravasated out of the bladder into the extraperitoneal space . Because of extensive fracturing of the left sacral pelvic tube with violation of the left sacral nerve roots, the contrast agent entered the subarachnoid space at the left sacral ala predominantly through the left L5 and S1 nerve roots .
The patient underwent emergent repair of the bladder by the urological surgeon, and the pubic symphysis was secured with plates by the orthopedic team. Two days later, the patient underwent open reduction and internal fixation of the left sacrum and percutaneous pinning of the left sacroiliac joint by the orthopedic surgeons. The dural tear and cerebrospinal fluid leak were treated conservatively.
The patient was discharged home 13 days after presentation with family support, physical therapy, wheelchair, and crutches with instructions for no weight bearing on the left lower extremity. On follow-up 3 months later, X-rays demonstrated stable alignment, and on physical examination, he was healing well without complication.