A previously healthy, 77-year-old, non-smoking woman, with normal chest radiograph at a medical check-up three years earlier, was referred to our hospital for dyspnea on exertion, which occurred one month earlier. She was a homemaker with no remarkable family history.
A physical examination revealed no abnormality. A chest X-ray and computed tomography (CT) scan indicated ground glass opacity in both lower lungs, of which crazy-paving appearance was confirmed upon high-resolution CT scan . Laboratory studies revealed elevated levels of serum KL-6, a mucin-like protein (4314 U/mL), surfactant protein D (SP-D; 400 ng/mL), and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA; 13.2 ng/mL); and negative test results for beta-D glucan and Aspergillus antigen. Analysis of arterial blood gas while breathing room air revealed a low partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2) of 47 mmHg just before WLL. BALF presented a milky appearance with lymphocytosis (macrophages, 64% of total cells; lymphocytes, 26%; neutrophils 9%; eosinophils, 1%), foamy macrophages, and amorphous materials .
The patient was diagnosed with PAP, based on typical findings from chest CT scan and bronchoalveolar lavage. She had no underlying disease. GM-CSF autoantibodies were not detected in either the serum or the BALF. On the other hand, a high level of serum GM-CSF was detected (91.3 pg/mL), indicating disrupted GM-CSF signaling and genetic defects in the GM-CSF receptor. We decided to screen for GM-CSF signaling abnormalities because GM-CSF concentration was extremely high in her BALF.
To investigate signaling activated by GM-CSF in the PBMCs, we first probed the presence of phosphorylated STAT5 upon stimulating the PBMCs with increasing concentrations of GM-CSF (0–1000 ng/mL). Phosphorylated STAT5 was observed in the control but not in the patient PBMCs, indicating defective GM-CSF signaling in the latter . To confirm this result, we performed flow cytometry. The results also showed that expression of phosphorylated STAT5 was not observed on stimulation of peripheral blood mononuclear cells of the patient with GM-CSF, while expression of phosphorylated STAT5 was observed on stimulation of those of the control with GM-CSF as well as on stimulation of those of both with IL-2 .
Next, we investigated the expression of the α and β chains of the GM-CSF receptor on the PBMCs, by western blotting. The expression of GM-CSF-Rβ and IL-3Rα on patient monocytes was comparable with that on the controls; however, expression of GM-CSF-Rα was not detected in the former . The result was further confirmed by RT-PCR . Together, these results indicated defects in the molecules that transmit GM-CSF signals to STAT5.
cDNAs of CSF2RB, reverse-transcribed from the mRNA of the patient PBMCs, harbored no mutations or deletions (data not shown). PCR amplicons for each exon of CSF2RA from the patient PBMCs were screened for their nucleotide sequences, revealing a homozygous single-base mutation C > T at nt 508 in exon 7 . This mutation was a nonsense mutation that gave rise to a stop codon (Q170X).
Further evaluation by aCGH demonstrated a 22.8-Mb region of loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in Xp22.33p22.11, encompassing the CSF2RA gene.
To investigate the functional background underlying the late onset of the symptoms in the present case, we compared the changes in serum levels of IL-2, IL-3, IL-4, IL-5, IL-17, and M-CSF before and after WLL that improved PaO2 by 26 mmHg . The IL-2, IL-4, and IL-5 levels were remarkably reduced post WLL, after which they gradually increased. IL-17 levels remained low for about 7 months after WLL. On the other hand, IL-3 and M-CSF levels were marginally altered post WLL. In addition, the serum level of GM-CSF demonstrated a tendency to decrease after WLL.