A 46-year-old man was referred to the Department of Infectious Diseases of Shaanxi Provincial Hospital of Infectious Diseases (Eighth Affiliated Hospital of the Medical College of Xi’an Jiaotong University) on 7 September 2023 with a fever for more than 10 days. Two days prior to admission, he felt fatigued, had diarrhea, and was later confirmed to be infected with plasmodium coupled with a positive of HFRS-immunoglobulin M (IgM) in another medical institution. Due to the suspicion of coinfection of HFRS with malaria, he was referred to our hospital. The patient traveled to the Republic of Cameroon but has no history of health problems or other comorbidities and has not been vaccinated for the HFRS.
Physical examination on admission showed that body temperature, pulse rate, respiratory rate, and blood pressure were 38.6°C, 86 beats/min, 23 beats/min, and 110/66 mmHg, respectively, together with slight pharyngeal congestion. Laboratory examination during hospitalization indicated leukocytosis (peak value 13.15 × 109; normal value 3.7–9.15 × 109 cell/L), thrombocytopenia (nadir value 18 × 109; normal value 85–303 × 109 cell/L), and renal injury with an elevated level of creatine (Cr) (peak value 315.1; normal value 70–115 μmol/L), urea (peak value 27.1; normal value 1.7–8.3 mmol/L), and uric acid (UA) (peak value 684.2; normal value 204–416 μmol/L). Furthermore, overexpression of interleukin-6, procalcitonin, and B-type natriuretic peptide was also observed, which indicated inflammation and cardiovascular injury to some extent . Besides, the abnormality of CD8+ T lymphocytes, B and natural killer (NK) cells were also found. Chest computer tomography (CT) scan showed a few inflammatory cords in the lower lobe of the left lung as well as the middle lobe of the right lung but with no further abnormality .
Considering that the patient suffered a recurrent fever and chills coupled with confirmed malaria, while a typical manifestation of HFRS, including headache, orbital pain, back pain, abdominal pain, and blurred vision, was not found at admission. The patient was treated with artemether injection (100 mL/160 mg) for antimalaria together with supportive treatment including xiyampin (a traditional Chinese medicine, 250 mL/250 mg) for clearing heat and relieving cough, compound glycyrrhizin (a traditional Chinese medicine, 100 mL/120 mg) for hepatoprotection, and ranitidine (100 mL/50 mg) for the prevention of stress ulcers on admission. Although the number of infected red blood cells was significantly reduced on the fifth day of admission, the condition of the patient was still not stabilized, which presented as a progressing elevated level of procalcitonin, B-type natriuretic peptide, urea, and UA. Additionally, considering that the HFRS spectrum varies from the mild to the critical phases, non-specific flu-like symptoms can be detected in the early stages of HTNV-infected patients. Thus, the patient received treatment with a combination of methylprednisolone (100 mL/40 mg), ceftriaxone sodium (100 mL/2 g), and the aforementioned drugs since the sixth day of hospitalization. Nevertheless, owing to the deterioration of the disease course, which presented persistently elevated levels of C-reactive protein (CRP) (126.98 mg/L; normal value 0–10 mg/L) and leukocytes (13.15 × 109; normal value 3.7–9.15 × 109), the patient suffered blurred consciousness. Ceftriaxone sodium was replaced by meropenem (50 mL/0.5 g) for better anti-infection on the seventh day of hospitalization. Furthermore, artemether injection was changed to artesunate (120 mg/day) for the reason that the plasmodium-infected red blood cells still can be found under the microscope . Noteworthy, even though the serological test of HTNV-IgM was still positive on the fifth day of admission, the typical stages of HFRS, including febrile, hypotension, oliguria, polyuria, or HTNV-IgG, were found, while the patient presented a progressive decline of erythrocytes and hemoglobin coupled with a symptom of anemia, which coincided with the characteristics of malaria . Thus, the patient was treated with artesunate for antimalaria, methylprednisolone, and meropenem for anti-infection, coupled with corresponding supportive treatment as mentioned above, until the 10th day of admission.
After 13 days of hospitalization, major clinical values of the patient gradually returned to normal and were discharged from the hospital with no further discomfort. Given that his erythrocyte and hemoglobin levels were below normal, he was advised to monitor his condition and contact a clinician if he felt any discomfort.