RMA, a 53-year-old female, was diagnosed with right chronic sacroiliac joint pain after she attended pain clinic to get further treatment. Her history revealed a chronic dull and throbbing pain that was a typical nociceptive type of pain in her right lower back that was worsened by prolonged sitting, persisting for nearly 2 years. Standing and walking temporarily reduced her pain, but the low back pain returned if she did either too long. Initially, the pain reduced with paracetamol, but later, she needed more potent non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs); the initial attending doctor had her switch to tramadol to avoid the side effects of NSAIDs, as she needed to take the medication for long durations.
When first examined at pain clinic, the pain score was moderate to severe, with pain score ranging from 5-7/10 [using visual analog score (VAS)], nociceptive in character. On examination, there was no sensorineural deficit in the lower limbs, and during the flexion abduction and external rotation (FABER) test of the right leg, significant pain was noted in the buttock area. The shearing test was also positive in the right sacroiliac joint area. Relevant examinations to exclude other possible diagnoses, such as lumbosacral x-ray, and blood tests were performed, and the results were within the normal range.
With a high-index clinical diagnosis of chronic sacroiliac joint arthropathy, the patient was advised to receive a diagnostic joint block with local anesthetic. After giving written consent, the patient was prepared for a right sacroiliac joint block by fluoroscopy. Four milliliters of 1% preservative-free lignocaine was injected, and the patient claimed that her pain decreased by more than 50% after 5 minutes. Appreciating the 50% pain reduction as a positive result, another 40 mg of depomedrol was injected, and the patient was discharged content. However, the pain relief was not long lasting, and the patient returned to clinic after 4 weeks with a similar complaint of right lower back pain. A second injection of 40 mg depomedrol with 4 mL of 1% lignocaine was given, with good results.
After another pain-free episode of about 4 weeks, the patient experienced a similar attack of pain and came to clinic requesting another type of pain treatment. Bipolar RF nerve ablation was offered to her, and she agreed to proceed with it. The bipolar RF technique of her right sacroiliac joint was carried out on July 25, 2011. The procedure involved ablation of the right L5 medial branch and the S1, S2, and S3 lateral branch nerves. The procedure was successful, and at the follow-up at 2 weeks, 6 weeks, and 12 weeks, the patient claimed to have a pain-free back at 12 weeks.
The patient lies prone with a pillow under the abdomen during the procedure. Strict aseptic technique is applied. A C-arm fluoroscopic machine is adjusted accordingly in the antero-posterior (AP) view to obtain the best images of the right ala of the sacrum (for the L5 medial branch nerve) and the S1, S2, and S3 neural foramen. A local anesthetic was then injected at the area perpendicular to the right ala of the sacrum and just lateral to the S1, S2, and S3 foramen (-).
Using a 10-cm RF needle with a 10-mm active tip, the right L5 medial branch nerve was initially targeted. The final location of the needle tip was at the junction between the superior articular process of the sacral bone and the ala of the sacrum. The other target points were the lateral branch nerves of S1, S2, and S3. The tips of the needles were placed about 0.5 cm lateral to the S1, S2, and S3 foramens for each nerve .
Sensory stimulation at 50 Hz, 0.5 V is then tested, and the patient should feel paresthesia at a painful area. Needle tips should be adjusted accordingly if there is no paresthesia felt by the patient. Next, motor stimulation at 2.0 V and 2 Hz is carried out. There should not be any muscle contraction except for the lumbar multifidus muscle on stimulation of the L5 medial branch .
Conventional RF for 90 seconds at 80°C is carried out for the L5 medial branch nerve. For the S1, S2, and S3 lateral branch nerves, an extra RF needle is injected around 0.5 cm above each needle in a sequential manner for the bipolar technique. Using the bipolar mode for each level, 2 RF needles are stimulated concomitantly each time. A RF wave is delivered for 90 second at 80 °C for each level. shows needles being injected at L5 medial branch nerve and lateral branch of S1 and S2 nerves, another needle is targeted at 0.5 cm above to S1 lateral branch for bipolar technique.