A 51-year-old female patient with no medical history presented to the Endodontic Department of Jilin University Stomatological Hospital with a complaint of persistent painful swelling at the left mandibular posterior buccal area.
Upon history-taking, she revealed that she underwent a tooth-filling procedure on the left mandibular posterior area 10 years ago. For the past 3 mo, she had been experiencing slight pain, discomfort, and swelling over the affected area. She took a type of anti-inflammatory drug, and the pain decreased. She was unsure of the type and dosage of the drug she took. However, for the past 1 mo, the pain and swelling recurred. It was worse in severity and not relieved by the same anti-inflammatory drug she took before.
She had no significant medical history.
The external examination of the face and palpation for lymphadenopathy did not show any significant abnormality. However, a composite resin restoration in the left mandibular first molar (tooth #36) was detected upon the intraoral examination. There was no response on the pulp vitality test, but the patient complained of obvious pain upon percussion. Furthermore, there was slight gingival congestion and swelling at the buccal area of tooth #36 with exudate extrusion upon the application of pressure. The periodontal examination showed a pocket of 6 mm depth in the mesiobuccal (MB) aspect of tooth #36, with a grade I tooth mobility. The intraoral examination also reveals a fair oral hygiene status with no signs of trauma or malocclusion.
No laboratory tests.
The preoperative radiograph revealed an occlusal filling close to the pulp cavity in tooth #36. A large area of radiolucency in the apical area was observed along the periodontal lining. It was associated with a bifurcation involvement. Cone beam computed tomography (CBCT) imaging showed that the apical, periodontal, and root bifurcation areas were all connected. Furthermore, a high level of resorption of the buccal bone plate in the tooth #36 region .