A 32-year-old otherwise healthy non-smoking and non-drug using Caucasian nulliparous woman (BMI 22.2) with obstructed labour, underwent an emergency caesarean section. The procedure took 124 minutes with 2.0 L blood loss caused by insufficient uterine contraction and difficulties to obtain appropriate haemostasis. During the procedure two packed cells and one unit of fresh frozen plasma were infused. Moreover, 500 μg Sulprostone and 0,2 mg Methylergometrine was administered intravenously to promote contraction of the uterine arteries. In addition, Tranexamic acid 2 g. intravenously was administered to promote haemostasis. A healthy girl was born and eventually the mother was fine. Regrettably, her condition gradually deteriorated and at 48-h post-surgery the patient was seen by the consultant gastro-intestinal surgeon for a suspicion of paralytic ileus. Prior to this consultation, the abdomen was remarkably bloated but with no signs of peritonitis. Laboratory (Lab.) results disclosed C-Reactive Protein: 290 mg/L; Haemoglobin: 4.5 mmol/L and Leucocytosis: 28.7 × 10 9/L. Computer Tomography (CT) showed distended colon (max. 88 mm), . A nasogastric tube was inserted and produced 500ml clear fluid during the following 12 hours.
Follow-up Laboratory tests the day after showed a further increase in inflammatory makers (C-Reactive Protein: 330 mg/L leukocytes: 38 × 10 9/L). A follow-up CT scan revealed progressive expansion of the caecum to 100 mm and was suggestive for intestinal pneumatosis without coexisting intraperitoneal gas, see , .
The initial differential diagnosis was either transient paralytic ileus after caesarean section or progressive caecal and colonic distention based on pseudo-intestinal obstruction (Ogilvie's syndrome) [, , , , , , ]. However, a secondary CT scan the next day showed progression of distention and pneumatosis intestinalis [,]. By then, the differential diagnosis was either caecal blow-out or iatrogenic perforation that prompted surgical exploration.
A median laparotomy was performed 72 hours after the initial caesarean section. On inspection, there was a four-quadrant faecal peritonitis. The situs was flushed, and a careful inspection of the small and large intestine was performed. The coecum showed three linear full thickness perforations, possibly iatrogenic, see . An ileocecal resection was performed, followed by thorough rinsing with saline. At that moment, the quality and perfusion of the remaining small bowel and colon was good. We considered performing an ileostomy versus an anastomosis with or without a diverting ileostomy. Because of the hemodynamically stable situation and otherwise healthy patient we choose a primary side-to-side isoperistaltic ileo-colic anastomosis without a diverting ileostomy. No drains were left behind. The fascia was closed with PDS 2–0 and the skin with intracutaneous sutures. Ceftriaxone, Metronidazole, and Gentamycin were administered peri and post-surgery and continued for 2 weeks. Her condition gradually improved until full recovery.