We present the case of a self-sufficient 33-year-old woman, with no relevant history. She was diagnosed with COVID-19 using an antigenic test for SARS-CoV-2 in July 2020 and presented with mild symptoms without requiring oxygen or hospitalization. She received the first dose of the BBIBP-CorV COVID-19 vaccine on April 4, 2021, and the second dose on April 28 same year.
She was admitted to the neurology service of a referral hospital in Peru after three weeks of illness characterized by severe headache, the sensation of thermal rise, conciliation insomnia, and transitory episodes of environment disconnection that began 3 days after receiving the second vaccine dose.
The neurologist evaluated the patient and found that she was confused and unresponsive to simple commands with a tendency to mutism, bilateral pyramidal tract lesions, generalized hyperreflexia, and no signs of meningeal irritation.
Suspecting acute encephalitis, we performed a brain computed tomography (CT) without contrast, finding no pathological results. In addition, we examined the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) without suggestive findings of infection. We equally prescribed blood count and basic biochemical serum tests that showed no abnormalities. Due to the suspicion of autoimmune encephalitis, we started a five-day dual immunosuppressive treatment scheme with methylprednisolone (1 g daily). We added immunoglobulin (0.4 g/kg daily) on the second day of admission after carrying out serum and CSF tests.
On the eighth day after admission, we performed brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with contrast that revealed nonspecific demyelinating lesions at the periventricular region, right cerebellum, internal capsule, and bilateral subcortical areas . Due to the disconnection with the environment episodes, we performed a prolonged electroencephalogram examination that did not record associated epileptiform activity.
The serum and CSF studies were negative for inflammatory disease (oligoclonal bands in serum and CSF), systemic autoimmune pathologies (C3, C4, antinuclear antibodies, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, extractable nuclear antigens, rheumatoid factor), neoplastic causes (Pap smear in CSF, flow cytometry and immunofixation in CSF, tumor markers: CEA, CA 125, CA 15–3, AFP, CYFRA 21.1) and associated infectious causes (serological test for syphilis, test for toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex, viral load of cytomegalovirus, John Cunningham virus in serum and CSF, herpes virus in CSF, HIV, Epstein-Barr virus in serum and CSF, human T-lymphotropic virus type I and II, adenosine deaminase and Koch bacillus in CSF). The cervical, thoracic, abdominal, and pelvic CT scans with contrast excluded the presence of neoplasms.
During the first three weeks of hospitalization, the patient improved clinically (consciousness, speech emission, and coherency); however, after three weeks of hospitalization and awaiting the autoimmune encephalitis panel results, the patient’s condition worsened, with sustained confusion, apathy-abulic, and gait apraxia. For this reason, we requested another brain MRI that demonstrated new well-defined hyperintense lesions at the bilateral caudate nucleus .
We started a new cycle of methylprednisolone 1 g daily for five days, with subsequent maintenance therapy of 1 mg/kg of prednisone. Post 1 week of starting the new cycle, the patient improved significantly. The autoimmune encephalitis panel results of the cerebrospinal fluid (NMDA, CASPR2, AMPA 1, AMPA 2, GABA, and LGI 1) and anti-MOG were negative. We then concluded the diagnosis of seronegative autoimmune encephalitis associated with the COVID-19 vaccine. The patient was discharged after a 2-months hospital stay and received outpatient follow-up with oral prednisone without reporting clinical relapses.