A previously well 55 year old Caucasian male presented to gastroenterology out patients clinic in November 2003, with a three week history of worsening dysphagia to solids and weight loss of 4 kilograms. He described a sensation of food sticking at the level of the lower sternum. He had suffered in the past with mild heartburn for which he took a proton pump inhibitor on an as required basis. He was a married and worked as an accountant. He had never smoked. Physical examination including the body mass index and blood pressure was unremarkable.
Initial investigations revealed proteinuria (++) on urine dipstick, a haemoglobin of 11.8 (normal indices) with an otherwise normal blood count and film. Urea and electrolytes, estimated glomerular filtration rate, liver enzymes, thyroid stimulating hormone, random blood glucose, bone profile, haematinics and urine culture & sensitivity were normal. The ESR was 96 mm/hour. Unfortunately 24 hour urinary protein quantification was never been considered as the patient's presentation did not suggest nephrotic or nephritic syndrome.
Oesophagogastroduodenoscopy including biopsies from the mid and lower third of oesophagus were normal thus excluding eosinophilic oesophagitis.
Although a liquid barium swallow showed no abnormality, a swallow with a solid medium (bread soaked in barium) detected a significantly abnormal non-specific dysmotility of the lower oesophagus (,). This was performed because the use a solid medium during a barium swallow increases the sensitivity of the test by generating a greater amplitude and duration of peristalsis . The dysmotility that was seen was confirmed with oesophageal manometry.
A chest radiograph obtained during his barium swallow identified a “coin shaped” lesion in the periphery of the left lower lobe of the lung . On the same day his ultrasound scan of the abdomen detected a mass arising from the left kidney measuring 8x6x6 cms. A computed tomography scan confirmed a large tumour arising from the left kidney with renal vein involvement, and a left sub-pleural lesion of uncertain nature, but suspicious of a metastasis .
Immunological tests were negative for autoantibodies, extractable nuclear antigens, anti-centromere, anti-topoisomerase-I (Scl-70) as well as the anti-neuronal antibodies (anti-Hu, anti-Yo and anti-Ri).
The patient was given regular metoclopramide and dietary input to optimise his nutritional status. He underwent a left radical nephrectomy for a poorly differentiated renal cell carcinoma (stage T3b, N0, Mx) at the end of December 2003. He was discharged home after an uneventful post-operative course.
He was reviewed by the cardiothoracic surgeons and respiratory physicians with regards to the lung lesion. Serial CT scans showed that the lesion slowly decreased in size and then disappeared altogether over a 5 month period. A PET scan was normal 6 months post-operatively. The lesion was therefore deemed to be benign. Surveillance CT scans are been carried out every 12 months, as pulmonary metastases from renal cell carcinomas can regress spontaneously following removal of the primary lesion, yet the long-term consequence is unknown .
The dysphagia that prompted the initial assessment had resolved completely by the time of review in the gastroenterology clinic a few weeks after surgery. Repeat oesophageal manometry and pH study at 12 months after presentation was normal. His renal functions have remained stable. He remains well and annual CT scan surveillance has remained normal to date.