The patient was a Caucasian, non-smoking 51-year-old woman with insulin-dependent diabetes and hypertension who initially presented at the age of 46 with acute-onset ictal headache, meningismus and emesis (Hunt/Hess grade I). A non-contrasted head CT scan revealed SAH in an aneurysmal pattern . She underwent cerebral angiography, which revealed a 6 mm anterior communicating artery (Acomm) aneurysm that was treated with endovascular coiling in the same setting. At the end of the procedure, a 0.5 mm residual was noted at the base of the aneurysm that incorporated the anterior cerebral arteries and was not treated (not shown). Follow-up angiography eight months later showed complete obliteration . The patient's hospital course was complicated by vasospasm, which was treated with hypervolemia, hypertension and intra-arterial nicardipine, as well as cerebral salt wasting, which was treated with sodium and volume supplementation. She was ultimately discharged to home and returned to work six weeks later with no residual neurologic deficits. After her eight-month posthemorrhage angiogram, she was lost to neurosurgical follow-up. Of note, the patient developed peritoneal dialysis-dependent renal failure three years later. A renal ultrasound did not demonstrate evidence of polycystic kidney disease (not shown).
Prior to the patient's current admission (five years after her aneurysmal SAH), the patient had experienced three days of intermittent nausea and vomiting. On the day of admission, she developed an acute-onset severe headache with worsened nausea and emesis. On admission, the patient's condition was Hunt/Hess grade II with an initial non-contrasted head CT scan demonstrating perimesencephalic SAH in the prepontine, interpeduncular, ambient and crural cisterns . Of note, no hemorrhage was noted adjacent to the previously treated Acomm aneurysm . Although there was no evidence of thrombocytopenia or other coagulopathy on her admission laboratory testing, she was taking clopidogrel and received a pool of platelets. A toxicology screen revealed no evidence of sympathomimetic use. Diagnostic cerebral angiography did not reveal any new aneurysms or vasculopathy and showed the previously treated aneurysm to be stable with no residual . The diagnostic angiogram also demonstrated patent cerebral venous sinuses without evidence of thrombosis or stenosis. Given the lack of vasculitic changes on the angiogram, further workup for vasculitis was not performed. The patient had a follow-up angiogram eight days later that again failed to show any source for the hemorrhage, consistent with BPH (not shown). The patient had an uneventful hospital course and was discharged to home in good condition on post-bleed day 10. Follow-up magnetic resonance imaging and angiography performed six months later demonstrated no vascular abnormalities (not shown).