A 14-year-old neutered male domestic shorthair cat was presented with a 2-week history of ataxia, seizure-like episodes, vomiting and weight loss. On clinical examination the patient was lethargic. Body condition score was 5/9. Mucous membranes were pale. On thoracic auscultation, an intermittent gallop rhythm was detected. On neurological examination, the cat appeared to be disoriented and ataxic, with an inconsistent menace response. No other neurological deficits of cranial nerves or spinal reflexes were identified. Ophthalmic examination revealed no abnormalities. Systolic arterial blood pressure was normal.
An automated complete blood count revealed a mild, non-regenerative anaemia (haematocrit 28%; reference interval [RI] 30–47%). Serum biochemical abnormalities included severe hypoglycaemia (0.2 g/l; RI 0.7–1.6 g/l), mildly increased alanine aminotransferase (178 U/I; RI 20–130 U/I) and moderate hypokalaemia (3.1 mmol/l; RI 3.7–5.8 mmol/l). Mild azotaemia with a blood urea nitrogen of 0.7 g/l (RI 0.2–0.6 g/l) and a creatinine of 18 mg/l (RI 5–16 mg/l) was also noted. Urine specific gravity was measured at 1.015, with no further abnormality on urinalysis. Serum testing for feline leukaemia virus antigen and feline immunodeficiency virus antibodies yielded negative results. Total thyroxine concentration was within the RI (28 nmol/l; RI 20–50 nmol/l). Serum fructosamine concentration was low (160 μmol/l; RI 220–340 μmol/l), while insulin concentration was increased (47 mU/l; RI 0–25 mU/l). An insulin-secreting malignant (pancreatic or extra-pancreatic) or benign (beta cells hyperplasia) neoplasm was therefore strongly suspected.
Supportive care included intravenous fluid therapy with dextrose and potassium supplementation (saline solution [0.45% NaCl] with 2.5% dextrose and 28 mEq/l potassium chloride) and monitoring of blood glucose concentration.
On abdominal ultrasound, a focal hypoechoic well-defined mass in the left limb of the pancreas was identified , and the presence of an additional smaller nodule was suspected. The pancreas was otherwise normal in size and echogenicity, and associated lymph nodes were not measurably enlarged. The liver was normal, but the ultrasonographic appearance of the kidneys was consistent with chronic renal disease. Thoracic radiography, with three views, and complete echocardiography revealed no abnormality. Cytological examination of samples from the pancreatic mass, obtained under sedation via ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration, revealed clusters of intact cells with indistinct cytoplasmic borders and uniform round nuclei containing prominent nucleoli . Based on these findings, an insulin-secreting pancreatic neoplasm was suspected.
Prior to surgery, the cat was managed medically with prednisolone (0.5 mg/kg q24h) and fed small, frequent meals. CT was the suggested next step to evaluate metastatic spread and to better define the pancreatic lesions but was declined by the owners for financial reasons. Therefore, tissue contrast-enhanced ultrasonography (CEUS) was performed, although it did not permit the investigation of the thorax for metastasis.
Two CEUS studies were undertaken under general anaesthesia with butorphanol (0.2 mg/kg IV), dexmedetomidine (1 μg/kg IV) and propofol (2 mg/kg IV), each employing 1.0 ml of a reconstituted microbubble contrast agent (Sonovue; Bracco International). Ultrasound was performed using a linear probe (2–8 MHz) on conventional B mode. In the first study, the liver was evaluated in the transverse plane from 10 s before, up until 3 min after contrast administration. Homogeneous contrast uptake by the hepatic parenchyma was observed throughout the time following administration.
The second study, performed 30 mins later, aimed to evaluate the pancreatic parenchyma and followed the same time frame as for the first study ultrasound. Uniform enhancement of the pancreas was observed, with a rapid increase in its echogenicity, peaking at 30 s post-injection and followed by a rapid wash out. The previously identified hypoechoic mass presented a lower contrast uptake than the surrounding parenchyma at peak contrast enhancement, and therefore appeared by subtraction.
In addition, two ill-defined smaller nodules were also identified by subtraction at 30 s post-injection, owing to their relatively poor contrast enhancement, in the left pancreatic limb, both caudally to the larger mass. A prominent blood vessel was detected in the centre of the most caudal nodule, appearing as a linear, highly contrast-enhanced structure. Of these two additional nodules, one was suspected on conventional B-mode ultrasound, while the other was not seen owing to its isoechoic appearance and the absence of distortion of the pancreatic margins. These features were considered suggestive of multifocal pancreatic disease.
A ventral midline laparotomy was performed, and the pancreas was exposed. The larger nodule was macroscopically visible, while the smaller ones were identified by gentle palpation of the pancreas. After visualisation of the cranial and caudal pancreaticoduodenal artery, hemi-pancreatectomy of the left lobe of the pancreas was performed by suture fracture technique.
A multifocal islet cell carcinoma was diagnosed at histopathology . At immunohistochemistry, neoplastic cells showed marked positive staining for insulin , and negative staining for chromogranin A, glucagon and somatostatin. Blood glucose concentration remained high (varying from 1.8–4 g/l) during the first few days postoperatively, but subsequently normalised (1.5 g/l at discharge 5 days later). Prednisolone treatment was progressively tapered off over 10 days after surgery. The cat was thereafter clinically normal, and the owner declined further monitoring for tumour recurrence.
Six months later, the cat was presented with faecal tenesmus, severe obstipation and vomiting. No abnormalities were recorded at urinalysis, haematology and serum biochemistry. On abdominal radiography, severe colonic dilatation with partially mineralised faeces were observed. Because of severe obstipation, the colon was not easily investigable at abdominal ultrasound. As further non-invasive testing was declined (repeating abdominal ultrasound after enema and/or abdominal and pelvis CT), an exploratory laparotomy was performed. A large luminal mass infiltrating the colorectal junction wall was identified and resected. Histopathology was consistent with an adenocarcinoma with infiltrated margins. The cat was euthanased a month later due to recurrent episodes of severe obstipation.