A 20-year-old pregnancy at 12-week’s gestation with nontraumatic chest pain was monitored at local hospital. After one week treated, her chest pain wasn't relieved with medicine, she was suddenly deteriorated and then transported to our hospital in severe medical situation with conscious responses to stimuli, oxygen 2 l/min through endotracheal tube, blood pressure was 170/90 mmHg.
The blood tests were within normal limits (Hct 43%, Hgb 131 g/l), the electrocardiogram were normal sinus rhythm and no myocardial ischemia, the cardio echography showed the normal structure and function with ejection fraction were 63%. She had no abnormal medical history, not Marfan syndrome, Ehlers Danlos syndrome or bicuspid aortic valve. Her fetal condition was healthy (checked by echography, heart rate 178 beats per minute).
The chest computed tomography scanner showed the aortic arch aneurysm, a huge hematoma covered outside the aortic arch, the position rupture of the aortic arch was near the left subclavian artery. The size of aortic arch without hematoma was 2.1 × 4.18 cm, and at rupture position was 4.68 × 6 cm; the diameter of ascending aorta was around 3.08 cm, and descending aorta was nearly 1.3 cm .
She was treated with antihypertension (Nicardipine intravenous), mechanical ventilation (mode Intermittent Positive Pressure Ventilation) at emergency room and immediately transferred to our Cardiovascular Surgery Department. A multidisciplinary consultation with the support from the obstetric hospital decided to aortic arch repair and continue pregnancy, the obstetric team was standby during operated time and instantly performed hemostasis surgery in case uttering bleeding due to miscarriage.
An urgent surgery was performed sequentially: median sternotomy and right groin exposure; cardiopulmonary bypass initiation via brachiocephalic trunk artery, left common carotid artery, right common femoral artery, superior and inferior vena cava; general hyperthermia to temperature 25 °C; cross clamp; a huge hematoma covered outside the aortic arch with the rupture position at left subclavian artery; total aortic arch was replaced by a 25-mm protheses, total heart arrest time was 80 min, total cardiopulmonary bypass time was 185 min..
The fetal condition was healthy and followed by echography at the 1st and 7th day after surgery, the obstetric experts suggested Cyclogest 400 mg (Progesterone rectally) twice daily within 7 days for continue pregnancy. The patient was discharged from the hospital after 20 days without any complication and the fetal was safe.