We report the case of previously healthy 24-year-old man who was referred to the Department of Urology, Mandalay General Hospital following a 3-week history of visible hematuria. It was described as total painless hematuria. He also complained about lower urinary tract symptoms such as frequency and straining. Moreover, there was also significant loss of weight and appetite.
Although abdominal examination was normal, digital per rectal examination revealed a lobulated extraluminal mass at the anterior wall. Upper limit of the mass could not be reached.
All the laboratory results were within normal limits except neutrophil leukocytosis. Initial pelvic ultrasound scan showed a large echogenic mass in the retrovesical area about 69 × 69 mm invading into the posterior vesical wall.
Contrast enhanced CT scan of abdomen and pelvis showed a well-defined hypo-dense mass 79 × 73 mm between the bladder and rectum with slight enhancement in post-contrast scan . There was no enlarged lymph node. Radiologist's impression was pelvic tumor (lymphoma probably NHL) and differential diagnosis was teratoma.
Because of inconclusive imaging results, joint cancer team decided for cystoscopy and transuretheral resection of tumor for tissue diagnosis. Cystoscopy revealed a large solid tumor occupying the whole bladder neck and trigonal area. Size was about 80 × 80 mm and the tumor occupied almost the whole bladder. Both ureteral openings could not be identified. Then transuretheral resection of tumor was done by monopolar diathermy. It was only for diagnostic purpose.
Histological report of resected tissue was “blastema cells (suggestive of neuroblastoma) with immature ganglion cells and schwannian stroma, Ganglioneuroblastoma” . Pathologist also suggested for immunohistochemistry workup. Immunohistochemistry staining resulted in positive for both NSE and S100 and the remark was “Ganglioneuroblastoma” .
While waiting for further surgery, the patient was admitted to the oncology unit with features of raised intracranial pressure. CT scan of the head showed a brain metastasis in the right temporal lobe. Emergency radiotherapy to metastasis was given for one. Since then, we have lost contact with the patient.