A 42-year-old male, non-smoking Asian patient sought medical help with chest pain and perceived tightness in the left chest. He had no family history of cancer. Upon physical examination, percussion dullness and decreased respiratory sound were noted in the left lower lung. Laboratory examination showed no sign of hematuria or blood in the feces. The C-reactive protein (CRP), blood coagulation, electrolytes, liver and kidney functions and fasting blood glucose were all within the reference range. The serum tumor markers, including cytokeratin 19 fragment (CYFRA21-1), neuron-specific enolase (NSE) and squamous cell carcinoma antigen (SCC) were all within reference range, while carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) had a slight elevation. Chest CT revealed that diffuse infiltration in the left lower lobe, as well as effusion in the left side pleural and multiple nodes, were found in both lungs . Non-small tumor cells were found by histological analysis of the drained thoracic effusion . Immunohistochemical staining showed that the tumor cells were positive for thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) and CEA, but negative for prostate-specific antigen (PSA), Wilms tumor 1 (WT-1), p40, cytokeratin 5/6 (CK5/6), CK7, CK20 and anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK). Ki67 staining revealed a proliferation rate of approximately 38%. The H&E and immunohistochemistry results confirmed the tumor cells originated in the lung and were consistent with a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma . Further molecular analysis of tumor tissue by the amplification refractory mutation system (ARMS)—PCR demonstrated an exon 19 deletion of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene . The final diagnosis of this patient was adenocarcinoma of the lower left lung, T2N2M1, Stage IV, PS score (see vol. 1 in ).
For treatment, the Gefitinib (250 mg, QD) was initiated, resulting in an almost complete remission within six weeks . The patient remained symptom free for over a year. By thirteen months, however, multiple solid metastatic lesions appeared in both lungs on chest CT. A peripheral-blood-based PCR was performed but did not identify other mutations. Subsequently, the patient received four cycles of Pemetrexed (800 mg, Day 1) and Cisplatin (40 mg, Day 1 to 3), resulting in disease stability for an additional three months.
At 20 months, a CT scan of the patient revealed multiple metastases in both lungs and a metastatic lesion in the left cerebellar hemisphere . Molecular analysis of the peripheral blood identified an EGFR T790M mutation, for which the patient was given Osimertinib treatment (80 mg, QD). This resulted in complete response of the intracranial metastasis and partial response of the lung lesions .
At 33 months, a CT scan revealed a mediastinal mass, which was biopsied and found to be adenocarcinoma. The patient then received local radiotherapy (DT: 60 Gy, in 20 fractions), resulting in a tumor volume decreased by over 80% .
By 39 months, a solid mass and pleural effusion had developed in the left thorax . A next generation sequencing (NGS) analysis of the cells from the pleural effusion revealed multiple additional EGFR mutations, including 2389 T > A and 2390 G > C, both causing C797S amino acid substitution, and 2386 G > A causing C796S substitution . To counter the effect of these mutations, the patient received Brigatinib and Cetuximab treatment. However, the patient developed interstitial pneumonia after treatment. Steroid treatment was used and successfully resolved interstitial pneumonia .
By 42 months, the tumor cells from the pleural effusion were tested for sensitivity against 30 targeted and cytostatic drugs using the D ~ Sense ex-vivo viability assay . The assay identified eight drugs with moderate to high sensitivity. The Lobaplatin and Vinorelbin were chosen for combination therapy. However, this set of drugs was unable to control the pleural effusion. A repeated assay by months 44 identified the similar set of most effective drugs, whereupon selection of the two most effective drugs, Gemcitabin and Lobaplatin , resulted in full symptom control, reduction of pleural effusion, and stable disease for the solid lesions as well as a 16% increase of the air capacity of the left lung .