A 58-year-old female visited the Cognitive Disorders and Dementia clinic in March 2016, with a 10-month history of gradually progressive language disturbance. The initial symptoms appeared 4 years ago, when the patient started talking gibberish during conversations at work, without any perception. These events caused some trouble with her colleagues, and lead her to quit the job. Recently, 10 months ago, her family found she accidentally said wrong but similar words in the middle of conversations. The disease was gradually worsened. From 6 months ago, she also began complaining of having trouble in reading. In recent a few months, her speech and behavior had begun to slow. In addition, memory deterioration was observed since the past 4 months, and she intermittently cried alone. Two months prior to the visit, she could speak only one or two words, but was unable to construct complex sentences. She spoke less than before, and almost didn't talk. She was taking anti-hypertensive drugs without having any specific family history. She had no past history of smoking and alcoholism.
Neurological examination during the first visit revealed right upper and lower limbs bradykinesia, mild rigidity in both sides of upper limbs, and ideomotor apraxia on both sides. The arm swing was reduced during walking. There were no symptoms of rigidity, myoclonus, alien hand, or cortical sensory loss. There were no abnormalities in eye movement and postural instability. Fluency of speaking was very poor, and she frequently answered "Don't know" to complex instructions. Her repetition was impaired to some long sentence.
For overall evaluation of patient's cognitive impairment, neuropsychological assessment and Korean version of Western aphasia battery was carried out on the second day of hospitalization. She had 6 years of education and was right-handed. She achieved 7 point in the Korean version of Mini-Mental State Examination. In most of the tests such as Backward digit span, Seoul verbal learning test, Rey complex figure test (RCFT) copy, RCFT recall, controlled oral word association test (COWAT), and Stroop test, she was unable to understand the instructions, or got low grades . In the results of the K-WAB, the fluency score was 14/20 (61 percentile), and slow, effortful and hesitant speech were accompanied with agrammatism and intermittent phonemic paraphasia. The comprehension score was 128/200 (56 percentile). The score was relatively lower than the fluency score, but she had comprehension disabilities about grammatically complex instructions during the command performance test and the Yes/No test, while performed well in simple instructions. The Naming score was 54/100 (66 percentile) and there was limited response at the COWAT, sentence completion, and sentence response. The repetition score was 44/100 (36 percentile).
Brain MRI showed left parieto-temporal cortical atrophy . F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography showed diffuse hypometabolism in the left fronto-parieto-temporo-limbic lobes, and in the left striatum & thalamus . In addition, the F-18 FP-CIT PET showed a decrease of uptake in the left striatum. Subsequent evaluation by F-18 florbetaben PET revealed brain amyloid plaque load score 1 (negative finding) , and it confirmed the beta amyloid deposition, which represents Alzheimer's disease (AD)-related pathology was not combined.