A 58-year-old woman (height, 157 cm; weight, 53 kg; BMI, 1.51) was referred for outpatient FNA of the thyroid gland to evaluate a 22 mm × 13 mm right hypervascular thyroid nodule . She was taking prednisolone 2 mg and iguratimod 25 mg for rheumatoid arthritis and diuretics for continuing left-to-right shunt after patch repair of sinus of Valsalva aneurysm 15 years before. Her thyroid function was normal; free T3, 2.72 pg/ml; free T4, 1.23 ng/dl; TSH, 2.821 mIU/ml, and she had no known allergies. FNA was performed without anesthesia once using a 22G needle under US guidance. Shortly after aspiration, ultrasonography demonstrated hypoechoic swelling with a crack-like pattern as well as a small amount of fluid retention in the subcapsular space of the thyroid gland. Five minutes after the single needle pass, the patient complained of neck pain and difficulty swallowing saliva. She was observed under bed rest in the Fowler position. Neck swelling was evident , and hydrocortisone 100 mg was administered intravenously. A computed tomography (CT) scan performed 1.5 h after FNA showed swelling not only of the thyroid gland but also of the retropharyngeal space . The patient complained of dyspnea and she was transferred to the intensive care unit 3 h after FNA. Laryngeal fiberscopy revealed protrusion of the posterior pharyngeal wall, edematous changes in the mucosa of the pharynx and epiglottis, and retention of saliva. Her dyspnea worsened and stridor developed, although her SpO2 was 96%. A repeat CT scan showed increased swelling of the thyroid and surrounding areas, especially at the level of the hyoid bone. The swelling exhibited the same CT density as muscle, and it extended from the mid-pharyngeal level to the upper mediastinum . An endocrine surgeon, otolaryngologist, and intensive care physician discussed the patient’s ongoing management and decided on conservative observation rather than immediate surgery because the US findings showed diffuse swelling with a heterogeneous (crack-like) pattern (hypoechoic areas interspersed throughout the gland), which meant that the swelling was due to reversible edema and not hematoma. Furthermore, it was decided that the patient should be intubated early because progressive retropharyngeal swelling and edematous pharyngeal changes were expected to result in later difficulty with intubation. She was intubated awake and hydrocortisone 100 mg was administered every 8 h. US and CT assessment was performed every day. On the next day after intubation, swelling of the thyroid and surrounding tissues had rapidly decreased, although ultrasound still demonstrated the crack-like, hypoechoic appearance . CT of the thyroid gland showed findings similar to those seen before FNA, and the patient was extubated 3 days after FNA . Echocardiography revealed elevated central venous pressure due to continuing left-to-right shunt after patch repair of sinus of Valsalva aneurysm, in agreement with the dilation of the internal jugular vein observed throughout the hospital course. She was discharged 7 days after extubation without any complications. FNA findings of the thyroid gland were benign.