A 64-year-old female with TNNI3 gene-positive HCM presented to cardiovascular medicine clinic with occasional lightheadedness, two prior episodes of exertional syncope, and New York Heart Association Class III exertional dyspnoea despite beta-blockade at maximally tolerated doses. Titration of her medical management was significantly limited due to side effects and allergies; she was intolerant to angiotensin receptor blockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, metoprolol, hydrochlorothiazide, amlodipine, and diltiazem. Her current medication regimen was carvedilol 12.5 mg orally twice a day. The first syncopal episode occurred when climbing a flight of stairs at home and the second occurred the following day at work, with fall-associated head trauma. Her past medical history was pertinent for systemic hypertension, pulmonary hypertension, Stage 3 chronic kidney disease, and chronic heart failure with preserved ejection fraction.
Physical exam at outpatient clinic revealed severe systolic hypertension (174/92 mmHg) with a normal heart rate (64 b.p.m.). There were no signs of peripheral or pulmonary oedema. Cardiac examination revealed a high-pitched, crescendo-decrescendo, systolic ejection murmur best heard at the left lower sternal border. Laboratory studies showed elevated high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T of 32 ng/L (normal range: <14 ng/L for women, <22 ng/L for men) and significantly elevated N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide of 4420 pg/mL (normal range: < 125 pg/mL). A resting electrocardiogram demonstrated normal sinus rhythm with non-specific ST and T-wave abnormalities. Holter monitor showed a mean heart rate of 66 b.p.m. and no evidence of ventricular tachyarrhythmias.
Transthoracic echocardiography showed sigmoid septal hypertrophy (maximum wall thickness 16 mm) with a calculated left ventricular ejection fraction of 75%. The right ventricular systolic pressure was estimated to be 86 mmHg, consistent with severe pulmonary hypertension. The LVOT MIG was 12 mmHg at rest, with no further augmentation during the Valsalva manoeuvre . Amyl nitrite was not available at the time of evaluation given a nationwide shortage. The patient then performed a repetitive squat-to-stand manoeuvre (5–10 repetitions) which resulted in systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve (Video 1) and 2D colour Doppler evidence of LVOT obstruction (Video 2). Continuous-wave Doppler performed after repetitive squat-to-stand revealed severe LVOT obstruction (MIG 85 mmHg, Figure ). Because severe dynamic LVOT obstruction had been identified during the initial TTE inclusive of repetitive squat-to-stand, exercise echocardiography was not needed for the purposes of determining if the severe latent obstruction was present.
Given medically refractory symptoms and severe dynamic obstruction, septal reduction therapy was recommended. After consideration of medical comorbidities (including severe pulmonary hypertension) and informed discussion, alcohol septal ablation was pursued. Invasive haemodynamics at the time of septal ablation confirmed severe dynamic LVOT obstruction with post-premature ventricular contraction (PVC) augmentation accompanied by ‘spike and dome configuration’ (asterisk, Figure , Brockenbrough–Braunwald–Morrow sign). The Brockenbrough–Braunwald–Morrow sign, observed in obstructive HCM, describes a paradoxical decrease in arterial pulse pressure in the beat after a PVC due to dynamic outflow obstruction. Following a PVC, there is a compensatory pause in the cardiac cycle. During this longer RR interval, more calcium is accumulated in the sarcoplasmic reticulum. The increased calcium release results in augmented contractility on the beat after the PVC. The increased contractility results in increased obstruction. The aortic pressure tracing demonstrates the ‘spike’ (initial ejection), mid-systolic drop in amplitude due to reduced forward flow from LVOT obstruction and systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve, and ‘dome’ in the aortic pulse pressure tracing as obstruction and systolic anterior motion resolves. The first septal perforator was ablated with 1 cc of alcohol, with resolution of dynamic obstruction. The patient developed transient high-grade atrioventricular block during the procedure which necessitated a temporary pacemaker. After 3 days of close cardiac monitoring, the pacemaker was removed and the patient was discharged. At 1-month follow-up, her medication regimen included carvedilol 12.5 mg orally twice a day. She denied chest discomfort, dyspnoea on exertion, palpitations, syncope, or near syncope and had not experienced further events.