Patient AM is a Caucasian female born at a community hospital by cesarean section to a 20-year-old gravida 1 para 0 mother of Western European descent. The mother had regular prenatal care, took prenatal vitamins and did not use alcohol, tobacco, or illicit drugs during the pregnancy. During prenatal visits, the fetus had reassuring vitals so an ultrasound was not obtained. The pregnancy was complicated by gestational diabetes and preeclampsia for which the mother had been placed on bedrest during the final trimester. At 42 weeks gestation, the mother was induced, but during labor, fetal distress was noted, requiring an emergency cesarean section to be performed. Birth weight was 7 lbs 4 oz. (3.29 kg) and length was 17″ (43.18 cm). After birth, our patient failed to spontaneously void and concern for acute renal failure resulted in her being transferred to a tertiary pediatric hospital for further evaluation. This later resolved during the hospitalization.
During the admission, radiographs of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis were obtained. The images demonstrated multiple vertebral segmentation defects in the thoracolumbar spine and agenesis of the distal sacrum and coccyx. Our patient was noted to have fusion of multiple vertebrae within the cervical spine consistent with a Klippel–Feil deformity and partial fusion of multiple ribs bilaterally consistent with spondylocostal dyostosis. She was referred to pediatric orthopaedics. Since our patient was healthy and without other congenital anomalies, she was conservatively followed with serial radiographic evaluations every 6 months . On exam, she was noted to have a short neck with limited range of motion. Bowel and bladder function were normal. Motor responses were good, and there was full strength in the lower extremities.
She began walking at eight months old. At one year of age, she was noted to have a 40° thoracolumbar scoliosis. At age three, she was noted to have a disproportionately short trunk, but was otherwise well developed and wanted to participate in gymnastics. Over the next few years, our patient's congenital spinal deformity was stable. By age seven, she had developed an extremely protuberant abdomen and had prominences of her rib cage due to relatively little longitudinal growth of the spine. Her 3-year-old younger sister, who had no evidence of skeletal deformity, had surpassed her in height at this point. However, the patient was otherwise asymptomatic and doing well in school, subsequently participating in gymnastics, tumbling, and cheerleading with only minimal episodic back pain.
At age ten, radiographs began to demonstrate evidence of consolidation in the thoracic spine. Our patient continued to remain very active over the ensuing years with cheerleading and dance but had increasing back and chest wall pain with these activities. Due to her short truncal stature, she also began to have pain related to costo-iliac impingement that occurred when she bent over, sat, or coughed. She was managed conservatively with NSAIDs and core strengthening exercises which provided some relief. Notably, the patient did not have shortness of breath with her regular activities or frequent respiratory illnesses. By age 14, her spine had almost completely fused. She continued to follow-up with her orthopaedic surgeon every 3 years and had no notable progression of her spinal deformity.
At the age of 18, she became pregnant but subsequently terminated the pregnancy due to obstetrical concerns for compromised respiration secondary to limited thoracic volume. At the time, she also underwent a tubal ligation to prevent future pregnancies. At 21, she returned for follow-up. She was working a job which required her to remain standing throughout her shift that was causing her to experience increasing hip and knee pain. She also noted increasing back pain without neurological deficits that had progressed over the last 3 years. She had a notable leg length discrepancy due to pelvic obliquity, a result of her scoliosis. She was treated with a 5/8-inch shoe lift which provided some relief.
At the age of 25, she experienced an episode of severe back pain for which she visited the emergency department (ED). Radiographs were obtained which could not definitively rule out a vertebral compression fracture, so an outpatient bone scan was obtained. The scan demonstrated multiple foci of increased uptake in the vertebral bodies of the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar spine as well as the costovertebral region. These nonspecific findings were attributed to stress reactions from the patient's multiple vertebral anomalies. Several years later, she was involved in a high-speed MVA and was transported to the ED complaining of significant neck and back pain. At the time, computed tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis and a posteroanterior (PA) chest film were obtained which illustrated her known vertebral, costal, and pelvic anomalies with no evidence of acute fractures . She was next seen at age 30 after an accident on a “slip and slide” in which she dove and noted immediate pain in the lower right rib cage. Radiographs illustrated a nondisplaced fracture of the right 7th rib near the costochondral junction which was managed conservatively with NSAIDs . The fracture subsequently went on to heal with resolution of symptoms at one month.
She is now 31 years of age and currently suffers from chronic back pain for which she takes naproxen daily. Two to three times per year she has exacerbations of mid-back pain, necessitating a visit to the emergency department for intravenous narcotic analgesics. She also complains of intermittent sciatic neurogenic symptoms including numbness and paraesthesias down the right lower extremity which are exacerbated by sitting in the car for extended periods of time. She occasionally has dyspnea with exertion after walking long distances or climbing the stairs. She feels that her shortness of breath has always been present, but only has limited her during certain activities in the past three years. Given the intermittent nature of her respiratory issues, she has not required a pulmonary function workup; however, this may be necessary moving forward. She currently smokes a half pack of cigarettes daily and has a 3-pack year history. She is being encouraged to quit. She is now 54 inches tall (4′6″) and weighs 138 pounds. She has been counseled on diet and exercise given the risk of abdominal obesity causing further restriction of lung volume. She completed a Scoliosis Research Society 30 Questionnaire (SRS 30) at her most recent follow-up and 5 years prior. Notably, she felt that she looked worse in clothes and had a more negative body image at present. However, she has increased her level of activity despite increasing back pain at rest.