A 74-year-old man presented to the Department of Ophthalmology, Shanghai Ninth People’s Hospital, for extremely severe redness and swelling of the conjunctiva, loss of visual acuity and exacerbation of disfiguring proptosis. The patient had a history of Graves’ disease and underwent a bilateral subtotal thyroidectomy in 1978. He experienced relapse of Graves’ disease three months after surgery and was treated with methimazole with limited response. Due to uncontrolled hyperthyroidism, the patient underwent a left total thyroidectomy in 1985 and radioiodine treatment in 2002. He exhibited proptosis 20 years ago and the proptosis had gradually worsened over the previous years. He underwent iv-MP therapy with doses of 0.84 g (consecutive daily infusions of 0.12 g for 3 days and 0.08 g for 6 days) in 2014 and with doses of 1.8 g (consecutive daily infusions of 0.48 g for 3 days, 0.24 g for 1 day and 0.12 g for 1 day) twice in 2015 with limited response. The patient also suffered from intolerable side effects of steroids, such as dizziness and headache, had profound muscle weakness and was unable to walk. He also experienced iv-MP-related hepatotoxicity with elevated alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels. The patient had a history of myocardial infarction, atrial fibrillation and multiple lacunar infarctions. He denied any other comorbid conditions such as hypertension and diabetes mellitus.
An ophthalmic examination showed reduction of best corrected visual acuity to hand movement in the right eye and 0.3 in the left eye, eyelids edema, swelling and hyperemia of the caruncle and plica, redness of the conjunctiva, remarkable chemosis and severe conjunctival prolapse . He was found to have severe restrictions in ocular movement in all directions with pain on attempted upward and downward gaze and spontaneous retrobulbar pain. He suffered from lagophthalmos and severe corneal exposure with diffuse punctate keratopathy and ulcers. Color vision, pupillary function and optic discs were normal in both eyes. His clinical activity score (CAS) was 6 points. Exophthalmometry showed proptosis of 32 mm of the right eye and 30 mm of the left eye. His intraocular pressures were 11 mmHg and 12 mmHg for the right and left eyes, respectively. He exhibited a free triiodothyronine (FT3) level of 3.43 pg/mL, low free thyroxin (FT4) level of 0.54 ng/dL, low thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level of 0.06 μIU/mL, thyroid stimulating hormone receptor antibody (TRAb) level greater than 40.00 IU/L, an extremely high thyroid peroxidase antibody (TPOAb) level of 511.50 IU/mL, an elevated thyroglobulin antibody (TgAb) level of 433.10 IU/mL, high C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 2.06 mg/dL, high interleukin-6 (IL-6) level of 127.58 pg/mL, high tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) level of 259.42 pg/mL, normal immunoglobulin (Ig) G, IgA, IgM and IgG4 levels and an elevated IgE level of 465 IU/mL . The patient received 7.5 mg of methimazole per day and 12.5 μg of levothyroxine sodium per day. An orbital computed tomography (CT) scan showed enlargement of the extraocular muscles bilaterally with marked enlargement of the medial rectus and inferior rectus muscles resulting in apical crowding and optic nerve compression . A diagnosis of active TED with DON and exposure keratitis was made .
The patient was evaluated as an urgent case and required prompt intervention . Bilateral tarsorrhaphy and local therapy were performed to prevent worsening of chemosis and development of corneal ulcers. The patient was suggested to start 500 mg iv-MP for 3 consecutive days, but he had strong concerns about the use of glucocorticoids. At that time, the severe and terrible ocular signs including remarkable chemosis and severe conjunctival prolapse prevented immediate decompression surgery due to high intraorbital pressure and inaccessibility to the small surgical field. Therefore, decompression surgery was deemed high risk for optic nerve impairment. His poor general status due to multiple comorbidities and increased risk under anesthesia also interfered with urgent decompression surgery. Therefore, orbital radiotherapy with 20 Gy per orbit divided into 10 doses was given over a two-week period. Concomitant low-dose oral glucocorticoids were administered. The chemosis, conjunctival prolapse and corneal lesions significantly improved within 1 month . Spontaneous retrobulbar pain and pain on attempted eye movement were also significantly decreased. His CAS was also reduced by 2 points. Thus, an additional 10 Gy per orbit divided into in 5 doses was given. However, the impairment in best corrected visual acuity remained. Orbital radiotherapy significantly improved the ocular signs and offered the possibility of decompression surgery.
Two months later, after extensive discussion of the risks and benefits of surgery, such as haemorrhage, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage, postoperative diplopia, postoperative lateral orbit depression and scarring, the patient agreed to proceed with right three-wall orbital decompression surgery under general anesthesia. A horizontal skin incision along with the double eyelid fold and lateral to the lateral canthus was made for lateral wall decompression. The deep lateral wall into the trigone of the greater wing of the sphenoid was removed, and the lateral orbital rim was removed en bloc. Transconjunctival and transcaruncular incisions were made for medial and inferior wall decompression. The patient subsequently underwent left three-wall orbital decompression using the same surgical techniques .
Following bilateral orbital decompression, the patient’s best corrected visual acuity gradually improved. Six months following surgery, the final best corrected visual acuity improved to 0.5 in both the right and left eyes. The patients exhibited improvement in the eyelids edema and swelling and hyperemia of the caruncle and plica. His CAS was reduced to 2 points. Postoperative CT scans demonstrated relief of bilateral crowding in the orbital apex .