A 60 years old asian male, labourer presented with progressively increasing shortness of breath for last 3 years that was more in the supine position. The patient had history of cough with expectoration off and on, for last 5 years. Patient had a history of smoking (40 pack years). There was a past history of episodes of upper abdominal discomfort, early satiety off and on for which he took symptomatic treatment. There was no history of chest pain or atopy. On examination, vitals were stable. Chest examination revealed a hyperinflated chest. Diaphragmatic excursion on left side was decreased on percussion. Auscultation revealed vesicular breath sounds with prolonged expiration and decreased breath sounds on left side. Pulmonary function test (PFT) revealed a mixed obstructive – restrictive pattern. Total Lung Capacity (TLC) was 85% of predicted, Vital Capacity (VC) was 75% predicted and FEV1 was 60% predicted. Forced Residual Capacity (FRC) and the ratio of Forced Expiratory Volume in 1 sec (FEV1) and Forced Vital Capacity (FVC) i.e. FEV1/FVC were normal. Chest roentgenogram revealed an elevated left hemidiaphragm and a shift of the lower mediastinum to right . The patient improved on bronchodilators. On fluoroscopy, Sniff Test revealed a paradoxical movement of > 2 cm of left hemidiaphragm.
Three days later patient developed an episode of upper abdominal discomfort with recurrent retching and production of little vomitus. Barium study revealed organoaxial type of gastric volvulus .
Nasogastric tube decompression was done and patient's symptoms improved. Computed Tomography (CT) upper abdomen after 24 hours revealed total eventration of left hemidiaphragm and stomach in its normal position. A diagnosis of total eventration of left hemidiaphragm with chronic intermittent gastric volvulus was made.
Plication of left hemidiaphragm with anterior gastropexy was done via an abdominal (left subcostal) incision. Dyspnoea improved, PFT postoperatively showed slight improvement in VC, FVC, FEV1, FEV1/FVC and marked improvement in total lung capacity (TLC).