A 39-year-old man presented to the emergency department for worsening dyspnoea for 10 days. He had suffered from asthenia and progressive exercise intolerance for 6 months. Past medical history was unremarkable.
Physical examination on admission revealed a heart rate of 70 beats/min, blood pressure of 110/70 mmHg and oxygen saturation of 97% in ambient air. Heart sounds were audible with a mitral diastolic murmur and jugular veins were not distended. The respiratory sound was decreased throughout both lung fields without rales. Peripheral oedema was not present. Electrocardiography was normal.
An echocardiographic scan showed a large non-homogeneous left atrial mass (36 mm × 21 mm diameter), adherent to the mitral ring, and involving also the left ventricle, causing severe mitral stenosis (; Video 1). A mild pericardial effusion was also present. A gadolinium-enhanced cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) confirmed the localization of the solid mass, which was isointense in T1-weighted and hyperintense in T2-weighted sequences with a non-homogeneous and mainly peripheral impregnation. The mass was heterogeneously enhanced in late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) and hypoperfused in first-pass perfusion (FPP) ( and ; Videos 2 and 3).
The invasive nature of the cardiac mass, the irregular margins, the presence of pericardial effusion and the LGE on CMR aroused the suspicion of malignancy. Metastases and invasion of epicardial vessels were excluded by a total-body computed tomography (CT) scan, which confirmed the large irregular mass, hypodense after contrast .
After a multidisciplinary assessment, the cardiac surgical removal of the mass was planned.
The surgical resection of the mass was incomplete, as found during operation, due to parietal infiltration. Macroscopically, the tumour had a scirrhous consistency and a diameter of about 5 cm. The histologic examination showed a high-grade sarcoma with spindle cells and chondrosarcoma elements.
There were no intraoperative or post-operative complications and the patient was transferred to a cardiac rehabilitation program 2 weeks after surgery. Then, he received adjuvant radiation and chemotherapy. Each cycle of chemotherapy (two cycles were performed) consisted of Doxorubicin 20 mg/m2 and Ifosfamide 3000 mg/m2, on Days 1–2–3.
Twelve months after surgery and 3 months after the end of chemo- and radiation therapy, the patient had a local recurrence with severe mitral regurgitation and pulmonary hypertension, which seemed to be of post-capillary origin, as indicated by low pulmonary vascular resistance and high pulmonary artery wedge pressure at right cardiac catheterization. No metastases were present and, after a multidisciplinary evaluation, he was referred to a Cardiac Transplant Centre and treated with a conventional orthotopic heart transplant. According to the post-transplant protocol, an endomyocardial biopsy was performed, but the procedure was complicated by haemopericardium with tamponade and cardiogenic shock: the patient was immediately treated with surgical drainage, but veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (V-A ECMO) was necessary to support the cardiac function with bridge-to-recovery purpose. Subsequently, the cardiac function recovered (left ventricular ejection fraction of 55%), but irreversible end-stage renal failure developed and haemodialysis was started. After 22 months, the patient received a kidney transplant from a living donor (patient’s father).
After 7 months from the renal transplant, 30 months from the cardiac transplant and 42 months from the cardiac sarcoma diagnosis, the patient is in good general condition. Cyclosporine, Mycophenolate Mofetil, Methylprednisolone, Valganciclovir and Cotrimoxazole are maintenance therapy.