A 45-year-old male was admitted to a local hospital for chest distress with cardiopalmus for 1 month. Physical examination after admission revealed no abnormal findings. Initial enhanced Chest computed tomography (CT) scan of the upper mediastinum demonstrated a 4.2 * 3.4 cm large mass attached to the adjacent vessels with heterogeneous enhancement . Tumor biomarkers, including CEA, CA19.9, hCG and AFP, were all within the normal range. Tracheoscopy revealed no evidence of other abnormalities. The patient underwent thoracoscopic excision of the lesion in the left superior mediastinum and part of the left lung.
Grossly, the tumor was a firm nodular mass measuring 3.5 × 3.0 × 2.0 cm in size. The cut surface appeared grayish-white and yellow. Microscopically, the tumor showed an invasive growth pattern, which had a lobulated architecture separated by dense fibrous tissue. Hyalinized stroma can be seen in some area. Multifocal necrosis was found. The tumor cells were epithelioid and focally spindle-shaped with a predominance of clear cytoplasm; some appeared slightly eosinophilic. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for epithelial markers (AE1/AE3, CK18, EMA) and focally expressed CD10, PAX8 and vimentin. The Ki67 index was determined to be 30% . Overall, lung tumor (TTF1, NapsinA, Syno), parathyroid carcinoma (CK19, PTH), thymoma (TdT), clear cell sarcoma (HMB-45, Melanoma Pan, Melan-A), germ cell tumor (PLAP, OCT3/4, SALL4, CD30), renal tumor (RCC), salivary gland clear cell carcinoma (P63, P40) and CD117, CD5 markers were negative. Genetically, FISH results were negative for translocation of EWSR1.
We carried out further blood tests and examined his serum levels of thyroxine, parathyroid hormone and AFP postoperatively, which were normal. CT results revealed no other lesions in the kidneys. Therefore, a diagnosis of thymic clear cell carcinoma (T1bN0M0) was made according to the WHO staging system.
The patient was received regular follow-up and treated systemically with radiotherapy after surgery. CT showed no remnant in situ. However, left adrenal metastasis was occurred at 20 months after the surgery.