A 32-year-old Syrian male, married for 6 years, presented to the clinic seeking medical advice for rheumatologic consultation for primary infertility, despite engaging in regular sexual activities. He had normal libido, preserved spontaneous erections, and satisfactory tumescence. He had a history of muscle dystrophy for 12 years. He had no previous medical history, drug addiction, or family history.
He appeared healthy, his height was 162 cm and his body weight was 75 kg. He had visible atrophy of the masseter, temporalis, and neck muscles, with movements of the neck against resistance; the sternocleidomastoid muscle was found atrophied bilaterally.
On neurological examination, he had muscle weakness only in the upper extremities, leading to difficulty releasing objects from his handgrip and lifting his arms up, developing for 12 years. He had gynecomastia .
The lower extremity muscles were normal on neurological examination.
Secondary sexual characteristics were normal, and he was adequately virilized, but the testes were soft and atrophied in size, measuring 4 ml on the left and 4.2 ml on the right. Bilaterally, vas deferens and epididymides were normal on palpation. Monthly separated semen analysis in three samples showed oligospermia (sperm count <5×106/ml, normal: 15–259×106/ml), average ejaculate volume of 1.5 ml, and pH between 7.3 and 7.5 with normal seminal fluid fructose, respectively.
Early morning serum testosterone, luteinizing hormone (LH), aldolase, and serum creatine kinase were found to be within normal ranges. Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) was elevated at 21.3 mIU/ml (1.1–13.5). The immune profile was negative. Gene analysis could not be done due to fund issues.
The percutaneous testicular biopsy revealed hypospermatogenesis, atrophy, and marked hyalinization of the seminiferous tubules.
Electromyography of the upper extremities demonstrated myotonic discharges with a waxing–waning frequency, amplitude, and a characteristic ‘engine revving’ sound, while the electromyography of the lower extremities was normal.
In light of this evidence, a diagnosis of myotonic dystrophy (MD) was made.
This case report has been reported in line with the Surgical CAse REport (SCARE) Criteria