A 27-year-old Greek woman, gravida 2, para 1, presented at 10 weeks’ gestation to our hospital complaining of diffuse abdominal pain for a week with deterioration the last 3 days and localization in her right iliac fossa, with simultaneous vomiting (April, 2016). Her medical history was unremarkable, although she had undergone laparotomy and right salpingo-oophorectomy at the age of 23 due to an ovarian cyst.
On arrival, a clinical examination revealed tenderness on palpation of her right iliac fossa, without rebound tenderness or muscle guarding. She had a temperature of 36.2 °C, her blood pressure was 154/97 mmHg, and her pulse rate was 97 beats per minute. Her body mass index (BMI) was 37.1 kg/m2. Her respiratory rate was normal. A cardiac examination showed S1, S2, mild tachycardia, and no murmur. A thorough neurological examination was performed; she was alert, attentive, and oriented. Her speech was clear and fluent with good repetition, comprehension, and naming. In addition, muscle bulk and tone were normal. Leukocytosis (white blood cell count 27,400/μl) and increased serum C-reactive protein (185 mg/dl) were the only pathologic findings. Obstetrical and gynecological causes were the first to consider; therefore, we tried to make an evaluation of the patient by transvaginal ultrasonography excluding causes of acute abdominal pain such as placenta disruption, abortion, ectopic pregnancy, or huge myomas which may have led to this deterioration. An intrauterine pregnancy with a live fetus and normal bilateral adnexa were revealed. A vaginal examination and surgical physical evaluation were normal.
Within 10 hours of hospitalization her symptoms deteriorated further with rebound tenderness, tachycardia (130 beats per minute), and a drop of 12 units in her hematocrit level. A transvaginal ultrasonography showed accumulation of free fluid in the pouch of Douglas, with normal left adnexa; a transabdominal ultrasound of her upper and lower abdomen by radiologists revealed a cyst approximately 9 cm diameter which was of unknown origin. Due to her increased BMI, her history of a previous laparotomy, and the lack of available qualified specialists for laparoscopy at that time, an immediate emergency laparotomy was decided (23 April 2016; Fig. ); under general anesthesia and a lower midline incision, two cysts of 9 cm and 4 cm diameter were found in the mesentery of the jejunum combined with thrombosis in her jejunal arteries (the presence of thrombus was observed macroscopically by surgeons behind the smaller cyst) and consequent jejunal ischemia (60 cm necrotic bowel), while free hemorrhagic fluid was found in her abdominal cavity. The excision of both cysts was performed; the ischemic small intestine was resected (60 cm of ischemic intestine) and a primary anastomosis was performed. Finally, an appendectomy was done due to the hemorrhagic and necrotic “appearance” of her appendix.
Postoperatively, she was kept nil by mouth; she had a Levin catheter and urine catheter for daily output measurement. The first postoperative day she had a high fever (up to 38.5 °C) and was treated with piperacillin and tazobactam (Tazocin; 4.5 gr × 3). She was mobilized very early and wore antithrombotic socks continuously; she was administered low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) with tinzaparin by injection (Innohep) 5000 IU subcutaneous injection once per day. Blood cultures revealed Staphylococcus species sensitive to the antibiotics she was taking. Her hemoglobin was 9.5 g/dl. On the third postoperative day, 2 units of red blood cells were transfused because of her low hematocrit of 21, 9% and hemoglobin of 7 g/dl. She complained of abdominal pain, so an abdominal ultrasonography was performed; an intrauterine pregnancy with a live embryo and an enlarged spleen with maximum diameter of 19 cm were revealed. The fourth postoperative day she had vaginal bleeding leading to incomplete abortion of the fetus. So, she underwent obstetric curettage successfully.
A few hours after the procedure, she had tachycardia (130 beats per minute), respiratory rate of 25 breaths per minute, dyspnea without chest pain, and a blood pressure of 121/76 mmHg. An electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed sinus tachycardia; her fibrinogen was 3.6 g/dl, activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) 35 seconds, international normalized ratio (INR) 1.16, prothrombin time (PT) 13.4 seconds, pH 7.48, partial pressure of carbon dioxide (pCO2) 29 mmHg, partial pressure of oxygen (pO2) 63 mmHg, bicarbonate anion (HCO3
-) 21.6 mmol/L, oxygen saturation (SO2) 94%, and her serum level of d-dimers was 28,132 mg/l. Based on the fact that she was pregnant, that she had recent surgery, the presentation of thrombosis during surgery, her obesity, and her clinical symptoms, an emergency thorax CT scan for the possibility of pulmonary embolism (CT pulmonary angiogram) was ordered, while the dosage of LMWH (tinzaparin by injection) was increased to 7000 IU subcutaneous injection once per day. The thorax CT scan showed embolism to branches of her pulmonary artery, small pleural effusion with atelectasis in the dorsal part of her lungs, and small pericardial effusion. A supplementary abdominopelvic CT scan with an injection of iodine-rich contrast material administered intravenously revealed a small filling defect – thrombus – in the celiac axis of her abdominal aorta, mesenteric vein thrombosis (MVT) was revealed as filling defect in her mesenteric vein, as well as filling defect in her common iliac vein and in the initial portion of her left external iliac vein . So the decision for an increased suitable anticoagulant dosage was taken; the new therapy was enoxaparin by injection (LMWH) 8000 IU subcutaneous injection twice daily. The triplex of veins and arteries of her legs was normal, as well as the color-flow Doppler echocardiography. Her family history for thrombosis was unremarkable. She had never used any oral contraceptives or similar hormonal therapy in the past.
During hospitalization in our intensive care unit, the results of a thrombophilia investigation were normal; more specifically, she was negative for prothrombin F20210A mutation and factor V (FV) Leiden mutation, heterozygous for methylene tetrahydrofolate eductase (MTHFR) C677T mutation, and heterozygous for MTHFR C1298T mutation. A paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) test was negative. The results for lupus anticoagulant, anti-cardiolipin antibodies (ACA), and anti-beta-2-glycoprotein I (Aβ2GpI) antibodies (IgG and IgM) were all in normal ranges. Protein S and protein C deficiency had normal values. She was discharged on the 11th postoperative day with normal blood and urine tests. A histological diagnosis confirmed two lymphatic cysts, ischemic intestinal necrosis, hemorrhagic mesenteric fat, and a hemorrhagic and swollen appendix; a thrombosed vascular venous branch was observed in the mesenteric adipose tissue proximate to the smaller cyst .
She was discharged with instructions to take one tablet of rivaroxaban 20 mg (Xarelto) administered orally once per day for 6 months. She continues to receive this anticoagulant therapy, although she does not complain of any suspicious symptoms. She is in continual communication with surgeons, gynecologists, and hematologists of our department and her next appointment will be in the next few days at the time of this writing.