A 63-year-old Caucasian woman complaining of insidious upper abdominal pain (unrelated to food ingestion) and nausea was admitted after an episode of intense acute abdominal pain. She denied having hematemesis or melena and had a history of untreated dyslipidemia. Her dietary habits included acid fruits, soft drinks, beer, chocolate, and high-fat foods. She was a smoker of 10 or more cigarettes per day and had no family history of cancer. She had systemic arterial hypertension that was being treated with 500mg of methyldopa per day. The results of a physical examination were normal except for a palpable and movable upper abdominal mass. The results of all laboratory tests were normal, and our patient did not have anemia. An abdominal ultrasound was promptly performed, and a large echoic mass compatible with an expansive lesion was found in the gastric antrum. Conventional endoscopy detected a large bulging mass in the posterior gastric wall and three ulcerated areas in the gastric mucosa, but none of them showed signs of recent bleeding (Forrest III). Owing to technical limitations, the procedure did not result in an adequate biopsy of the mass in the submucosa. The fragments acquired from the ulcers revealed nothing but necrotic mucosa. Abdominal contrasted computed tomography revealed a well-defined homogeneous oval mass that was located within the posterior gastric wall and that compressed the second portion of the duodenum. The lesion had fat tissue density and a suspicious central contrast enhancement with trabecular architecture but was noninvasive with respect to the peripheral layers .
For this reason, as well as the tomographic dimensions (size of 10 × 6 × 11cm and volume of 660cm3), malignancy was suspected. Our patient then underwent an open laparotomy for abdominal exploration. During surgery, unexpected benign aspects of the mass, such as the envelopment by a fibrous capsule and no signs of lymphadenopathy or local metastasis, surprised the team . Multiple septated cysts in the right ovary and multiple simple cysts in the left ovary were also found, and although the freezing biopsy failed to demonstrate tumor cells, a bilateral oophorectomy was done. In regard to the gastric mass, subtotal gastrectomy and D1 lymphadenectomy with a Roux-en-Y reconstruction were performed. The post-operative period was uneventful, and our patient was discharged by the seventh day.
Macroscopic findings included a well-defined homogeneous yellowish lesion that was located in the submucosa and that comprised the entire gastric posterior wall and three ulcerated zones of 0.5, 1.0, and 1.4cm in diameter . Despite the dimension indicated by computed tomography, an actual size of 12 × 8 × 6cm (576cm3) was measured. Microscopy revealed a histological pattern of well-differentiated noninvasive mature adipose tissue surrounded by a fibrous capsule . The findings confirmed the benign intra-operative aspect of the lesion and the diagnosis of gastric submucosal lipoma. The greater omentum was free of tumor cells.