The 50-year-old female patient presented with non-specific left knee pain of 18 months duration and gradual difficulty in terminal extension. He had no previous knee injury and did not complain of giving way sensation. Examination of the knee showed loss of 15° of terminal extension without a ligamentous laxity or patella- femoral pathology. Results of both McMurray’s and apprehension’s tests were negative, and the patient was able to fully flex the knee without pain. There were no clinical signs or symptoms consistent with instability. The patient received conservative treatment for months, but the condition did not improve. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the knee was performed.
Coronal proton density-weighted MRI of the right knee consists of a slice through the middle aspect of the knee which shows a thickening of the ACL . The ACL shows a normal orientation with preserved fibers and homogeneously increased signal intensity. The slice demonstrates an ill-defined ACL with diffuse increased signal intensity.
Sagittal proton density-weighted MRI . The slice demonstrates an ill-defined ACL with increased signal intensity and a “celery stalk” appearance of intact fibers. The girth of the ACL is increased in size. When mucoid degeneration is present, an amorphous mucoid matrix increases the signal intensity of the ACL and is focally collected between intact, almost parallel fibers. This appearance bears similarity to a stalk of celery (Celery Stalk Sign).
Coronal T2 weighted fat suppressed fast spin echo image showed complex ACL ganglion cyst arising from superior aspect of ligament. The ACL presented increased signal intensity. These changes were consistent with ACL ganglion cyst. Images did not show secondary signs of ACL injury.
Under arthroscopic examination, some yellowish content in the ACL was found . The yellowish content did not limit the range of motion or cause any mechanical block. This yellowish lesion of the ACL was debrided . The patient had no complaint about his left knee at the 12 months follow-up.