A 64-year-old Caucasian female presented with bilateral reduction in vision and metamorphopsia for two months. A presumptive diagnosis of MacTel 2 was established four-years prior to the current presentation on the basis of bilateral temporal macular telangiectatic vessels and OCT imaging exhibiting the ILM drape sign as shown in Fig. (a,b). The diagnosis of MacTel 2 was confirmed on fluorescein angiography, which showed bilateral dilated, ectatic capillaries with late phase dye leak predominantly in the parafoveal temporal areas as shown in Fig. (a-d) one year prior to the current presentation.
On examination visual acuity was 6/15 and 6/18 in the right and left eyes, respectively. Slit-lamp biomicroscopy of the right macula demonstrated temporal retinal opacification, with dilated right-angled telangiectatic vessels. Refractile crystalline structures were noted in both maculae associated with loss of foveal details. Central macular thickness was 318 μm and 348 μm on the right and left eyes, respectively. There was bilateral asymmetrical sub-retinal fluid consistent with foveal detachments. Although there was disruption of the outer retinal architecture, the foveal contour remained identifiable. Previously noted foveal cystoid changes were undetectable on this occasion as shown in Fig. (c, d). An additional diagnosis of left SRNV was made on the basis of a half a disc diameter area of sub-retinal hemorrhage temporal to the foveola at three weeks follow-up as shown in Fig. (a,b). As a decision was taken not to perform a fluorescein angiogram, treatment was given to the right eye, assuming underlying proliferative change, given the presentation of the left eye, and the disease symmetry on a previous fluorescein angiogram. Four doses of bilateral sequential intravitreal Bevacizumab 1.25 mg/0.1 ml were administered six weeks apart. By 12 weeks after the initial presentation, visual acuity stabilized at 6/12 bilaterally; slit-lamp biomicroscopy demonstrated regression of the sub-retinal hemorrhage in the left eye. Resolution of the foveal detachments with unmasking of the intraretinal foveal cystoid changes are shown on the OCT in Fig. (g-h).
Visual acuity declined to counting fingers in the left eye after three years of follow up as a consequence of sub-retinal fibrosis, the right eye maintained a vision of 6/12. Retinal examination showed an RPE plaque temporal to the macula, resulting in disruption of the temporal retinal architecture Fig. (i, j). These findings remained consistent over a period of observation of seven years and no further intravitreal Bevacizumab was prescribed during this interval.