A 12-year-old boy noticed painless vision loss in his left eye several days before. There was no history of visual disturbances and no family history of significant ocular disorders. He did not report any previous trauma and prior use of any medication. On physical examination, linear depressed scarring of the cutaneous and subcutaneous tissue of the left frontoparietal area was noted. This atrophic band of skin extended from the left eyebrow to the frontoparietal scalp [Figure 1]. His best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/20 in the right eye and 20/200 in the left eye. The size of pupils was normal and there was no afferent pupillary defect. Ocular motility was within normal range. The intraocular pressure by applanation tonometry was 14 mmHg in both eyes. On slit lamp examination, the anterior segment was normal in both eyes. Funduscopy of the left eye showed vitreous hemorrhage with severe exudation in the posterior pole and telangiectatic vessels and saccular aneurysms in the mid-peripheral and peripheral retina. The optic disc was normal. The right fundus examination was unremarkable. Para-clinical evaluations with spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) and fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) were performed. SD-OCT of the left macula revealed intraretinal fluid and marked exudates [Figure 2]. FFA demonstrated vascular tortuosity and multiple beading and fusiform aneurysms with distinct leakage in the mid-peripheral and peripheral regions. Areas of capillary nonperfusion with no neovascularization were noted. The fundus findings were compatible with Coats'-like response. Corresponding rheumatologic consultation diagnosed his atrophic skin lesion as “en coup de sabre” (ECDS) a form of craniofacial linear scleroderma. Further examinations did not show any neurological signs or systemic involvement of scleroderma. Laboratory tests for antinuclear, anti-centromer, and Scl70 antibodies, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and blood composition were normal.
The patient was scheduled for three monthly intravitreal injections of 1.25 mg/0.05 ml bevacizumab. On follow-up examinations, there was a significant decrease in macular exudation and vitreous hemorrhage. Targeted laser photocoagulation was performed over the abnormal retinal vasculature. Macular SD-OCT demonstrated significant reduction of intraretinal fluid and exudates [Figure 3]. At 12-month follow-up examination, BCVA improved to 20/25 in the left eye. Fundus examination and repeated FFA showed moderate resolution of vascular beading and tortuosity with no evidence of peripheral neovascularization [Figure 4]. The patient was scheduled for ophthalmic visits every three months. After one year of follow-up, we noted a loss of visual acuity (BCVA: 20/32) and moderate recurrence of macular edema and exudation. The patient was subsequently treated with one session of intravitreal injection of 1.25 mg/0.05 ml bevacizumab. He is currently under routine ophthalmic and rheumatologic observation.