The patient, a 37-year-old woman, provided written consent to publish the information contained in this case report. She presented with symptoms of progressive right knee pain and stiffness 7 months after undergoing arthroscopic synovectomy of the ligamentum mucosum and medial plica, limited lateral meniscectomy of the posterior root area, and stabilizing chondroplasty of the medial facet of the patella of the ipsilateral knee . Postoperatively, she had persistent pain in the posteromedial aspect of the knee, an abnormal gait with right knee flexion throughout the stance, and an inability to achieve total knee extension.
On physical examination, initial inspection of the right knee revealed moderate swelling and fullness of the posteromedial aspect of the joint. There was substantial tenderness over the distal semimembranosus tendon, approximately 2 cm proximal to the insertion site. Right knee active range of motion (AROM) was measured at 0˚ hyperextension, 5˚ extension lag, and 110˚ flexion (0˚/5˚/110˚) (contralateral: 4˚/0˚/135˚). Manual muscle testing of right knee flexion was 4/5 (contralateral: 4+/5) with reported pain. Neurosensory examination was normal, and distal pulses were palpable and bilaterally symmetric. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated loculated fluid surrounding the distal semimembranosus tendon and a partial, low-grade tear of the distal semimembranosus tendon .
Point-of-care ultrasonography demonstrated distal semimembranosus tendon thickening and substantial hypoechoic swelling surrounding the tendon, which correlated with location of maximum pain reported by the patient. An ultrasound-guided injection of triamcinolone (40 mg of Kenalog-40; Bristol-Myers Squibb, New York, NY) into the SM-MCL bursa was performed, providing approximately 2 weeks of improvement in pain .
One month later, AROM of the right knee was 0˚/2˚/135˚ (contralateral: 3˚/0˚/135˚), and ultrasonography showed persistent semimembranosus tendon thickening and hypoechoic swelling around the tendon and an equivocal semimembranosus tendon tear. The patient agreed to proceed with autologous platelet-rich plasma injection. After injection of 3.5 mL of leukocyte-poor platelet-rich plasma into the semimembranosus tendon sheath and SM-MCL bursa, and 3.0 mL into the joint, there was substantial pain for the first 7–10 days, which was followed by another week of pain relief and mild improvement in knee extension. However, pain and stiffness recurred despite activity modification, gradual strengthening and stretching exercises, and careful attention not to overload the tendon.
Three months later, because of persistent posteromedial knee pain and swelling and worsening AROM of the affected knee (0˚/14˚/120˚; contralateral: 5˚/0˚/135˚) despite extensive nonoperative treatment, the patient agreed to surgical exploration and SM-MCL bursectomy. A tourniquet was placed around the right upper thigh. The right leg was prepared and draped in a sterile fashion, elevated, and exsanguinated, and the tourniquet pressure was increased to 250 mmHg. An approximately 7-cm-long incision was made at the anteromedial aspect of the knee over the distal medial hamstrings and extending down to the sartorial sleeve. The sleeve was opened, and the medial hamstrings were identified. The SM-MCL bursa was identified and excised. An approximately 2 × 3–cm calcified coral-like body was observed within the bursal excision, and several small (less than 1-cm diameter) bodies were appreciated with further exploration of the bursa, all of which were excised and submitted for pathologic evaluation .
The wound was irrigated, and with further inspection, confirmation was made that all calcific bodies had been excised. Minimal changes of the tendon were appreciated, and the semimembranosus appeared intact. The sartorial sleeve was left open. The subcutaneous tissue was approximated with 2 − 0 Vicryl suture, and the skin was closed with running subcuticular 3 − 0 Prolene suture and reinforced with wound closure strips. The knee was dressed and immobilized.
Histopathological analysis of the bursal body showed synovial chondromatosis with chronic reactive changes . Approximately 80% of the tissue had undergone chondroid metaplasia, exhibiting predominantly mature chondrocytes within lacunae arranged in lobules and nests. At the periphery of the cartilaginous nodules were regions of fibrosis and granulation tissue. In addition, the synovium showed reactive changes of hyperplasia and lymphoplasmacytic inflammation.
At initial follow-up, 2 weeks later, no complications were noted, and the patient reported being comfortable. The incision was apposed with minimal swelling and resolving ecchymoses, and the sutures were removed. Right knee AROM was measured to be 0˚/0˚/100˚ with total knee extension achieved for the first time in more than 18 months.
The patient resumed physical therapy to mobilize the soft tissues and joint, focusing on gradual restoration of range of motion. At 6 weeks postoperatively, AROM was 3˚/0˚/135˚ (contralateral: 5˚/0˚/135˚), and a favorable outcome was achieved for the patient. Good rehabilitation potential and response to therapy were documented in the physical therapists’ subjective assessments throughout the course of treatment, and tolerability of intervention with regard to fatigue, pain, and soreness was assessed using the visual analog scale . The patient also demonstrated ongoing receptiveness to the treatment plan by following therapists’ advice and undertaking prescribed exercises during more than 65 h of in-clinic attendance over 16 months. A timeline detailing relevant diagnostic and therapeutic interventions from the time of presentation through the most recent follow-up evaluation is provided below .