A 24-year-old African-American man presented to our Emergency Department with a one-week history of fever, dyspnea, cough with brownish phlegm, and abdominal pain. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest and abdomen revealed bilateral lower lobe pneumonia and two retained Jackson-Pratt drains in the right upper quadrant with a small amount of subcutaneous emphysema and stranding adjacent to one of the drain tips . In addition to the presence of pneumoperitoneum, one drain was resting over the dome of the liver and traversing the transverse colon, while the other drain was near the right flank and distally traversing the second portion of the duodenum. Neither drain could be appreciated by palpation or inspection along the external body surface.
His history was significant for an exploratory laparotomy, right nephrectomy, and diaphragm repair for a gunshot wound sustained to the right lower back and abdomen eight years previously. The entrance wound was via the diaphragm into the abdomen, with the bullet traversing segments eight and five of the liver and then into the retroperitoneum. There was no significant bleeding from the right lobe liver wound, but there was a large zone 2 retroperitoneal hematoma on the right. The mid-portion of the parenchyma of the right kidney had been essentially obliterated, and the pelvis of the right kidney was involved; the right kidney was therefore resected. The diaphragm injury was repaired with a running #0 Prolene suture and then two separate 3/16 inch round silastic drains were placed, one over the dome of the liver, the second into the subhepatic pararenal space. Our patient was discharged home with the drains left in place for large output drainage. He stated that a non-medically trained acquaintance cut the surgical drains at the skin several months after he had been sent home. He was taken to the operating room for drain removal, right hemicolectomy, debridement of duodenal injury, Roux-en-y duodenojejunostomy, and end ileostomy. On exploration, one drain was found eroding into the duodenum causing a chronic duodenotomy that had previously communicated with the sinus tract on our patient's anterior abdominal wall. The defect was in the lateral wall on the anti-mesenteric side of the c-loop of the duodenum. The duodenum was inspected carefully intra-luminally and the ampulla was identified clearly. It was therefore felt safe to debride the edges and perform a side-to-side duodenojejunostomy with a Roux-en-y limb. A 10-mm Jackson-Pratt drain was left near the anastomosis. There were no signs of anastomotic leakage post-operatively. During the case, bubbling of air was noticed near the dome of the liver, and while under anesthesia, our patient sporadically became hypoxemic despite ventilation with 100% oxygen. However, no obvious diaphragmatic injury could be identified intra-operatively. He was admitted to the surgical ICU for further post-operative care.
Over the course of the next 48 hours, he remained hypotensive, hypoxemic, acidotic, and increasingly dys-synchronous with the ventilator. Both peak airway pressures (38 to 42 cm H2O) and plateau pressures (36 to 38 cm H2O) remained elevated and the chest radiograph showed bilateral patchy infiltrates consistent with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), and no pneumothorax. Multiple ventilation modes were attempted, including all available pressure-limiting modes as well as bi-level ventilation and airways pressure release ventilation (APRV) to improve oxygenation and attenuate the high airways pressures. During conventional ventilation, approximately 60 mL per breath of air leak was observed in a right upper quadrant Jackson-Pratt drain, and a persistent air leak of greater than 100 mL/mL breath was found in the right-sided thoracostomy tube that had been placed intra-operatively. A total of four thoracostomy tubes were eventually placed: two at each apex and two at each base. Brochoalveolar lavage (BAL) specimens recovered from the right middle and right lower lobes grew pan-sensitive Escherichia coli. During serial bronchoscopies, no laceration or evidence of fistula could be identified. A CT scan was obtained which showed a large volume pneumoperitoneum, and an old drain exit site near the right upper quadrant was leaking air . A bronchoperitoneal fistula had formed from drain erosion into the diaphragm, connecting the peritoneal and pleural cavities. Due to his severely compromised lung function and progressive hypoxemia (partial pressure of oxygen in the blood (PaO2) of 54 on 100% fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2)), he was sedated, paralyzed, and high-frequency oscillatory ventilation (HFOV) was initiated with a frequency of 5 Hz, FiO2 of 100%, mean airway pressure (mPaw) of 44 cm H2O, and oscillation pressure amplitude (ΔP) of 90 cm H2O. Over the course of four days, the frequency was gradually increased to 10 Hz, the FiO2 was weaned to 0.4, the mPaw was decreased to 26 cm H2O, and the ΔP was decreased to 30 cm H2O. As his oxygenation and hemodynamic status improved, he was removed from HFOV and a left-sided double-lumen tube was inserted to provide differential lung ventilation. After two days of differential ventilation with the right lung receiving a tidal volume of 150 mL, FiO2 of 40%, PEEP of 0 cm H2O, with peak inspiratory pressures of 14 to 18 cm H2O, the air leaks from both the abdominal drain and chest tubes were found to have stopped completely. Our patient received a tracheostomy, mechanical ventilation was eventually discontinued, and the chest tubes were removed. He was discharged home and had a documented full functional recovery with an osteomy takedown completed one year later.