A 36-year-old male was attended the Α & E department of our hospital with a painful and swollen right (dominant) hand and wrist. He reported immediate onset of pain after a fist strike on a metallic door 3 days ago, for which he sought medical advice in another health institution in proximity to his residency. Initial radiographs of his wrist were interpreted as normal by the attending physician and the patient was discharged with painkillers and elastic bandage.
Upon admission to our department, physical examination revealed massive swelling of the right hand and tenderness over the ulnar side of his right wrist, both palmar and dorsal. He had limited motion at the wrist, ring and little finger with pain during passive motion. The extremity was neurovascularly intact. Radiographic evaluation included x-rays (anteroposterior, lateral and oblique views) and computed tomography scan, which clearly demonstrated a coronal fracture of the body of the hamate associated with fourth and fifth CMC dorsal dislocation . The patient underwent operative treatment at the day of presentation, consisting of ORIF of the hamate fracture and reduction of CMC dislocation with KW under image intensifier. Through a dorsal incision the hamate fracture was reduced and fixed with two small interfragmentary screws. The ring and little finger CMC dislocation was reduced applying longitudinal traction with a volar displacing force to the fourth and fifth metacarpals and 2 KW were driven to the third metacarpal and capitate bone .
Post-operatively, the wrist was immobilized with a volar splint for 4 weeks with the hand elevated in a sling and no neurovascular deficit was recorded. The patient was discharged after dressing change and surgical wound inspection two days after admission.
Sutures were removed at 2 weeks follow-up in the outpatient department and at 6 weeks after the operation KW were also removed and the patient was given instructions on activity modification and physiotherapy. However, he failed to comply with medical instructions and at 3 months follow-up he admitted to have returned to heavy manual labor without attending any physiotherapy sessions. Nevertheless, the patient was very satisfied with treatment outcome reporting just a slight discomfort when lifting heavy objects. At his last follow-up appointment 18 months post-surgery, the patient was asymptomatic with almost full range of wrist and finger motion and a Mayo wrist score of 90 points .