An intact female goat (2 years old; 16 kg) was admitted to hospital for investigation of neurological signs. Behavioural disturbances, standing apart from other goats, and disorientation were observed. Furthermore, it seemed to be very easy to chase and catch the goat.
General physical examination was unremarkable. However, upon neurological examination, an absent left-sided menace response, alert mentation and head tilt were noted. No other abnormalities were noted and the results of haematology and blood biochemistry were unremarkable. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI; Vet-MR Grande; Esaote S.A., Barcelona, Spain) of the brain revealed a cystic lesion at the level of the right cerebral hemisphere . The goat was scheduled for resection of this lesion.
The goat was anaesthetised for surgery. Food (but not water) was withheld 12 h before anaesthesia. The goat was pre-medicated with xylazine (0.05 mg kg−1, i.m.; Rompun 2% soluble injection; Bayer, Barcelona, Spain) and morphine (0.05 mg kg−1, i.m.; Morfina 1%; Fresenius Kabi España S.A., Barcelona, Spain) 20 min before the induction of anaesthesia. A 20-G catheter (BD Insyte; Becton Dickinson Medicals Pte. Ltd., Singapore) was inserted into the cephalic vein for the administration of drugs and intravenous fluids. An antibiotic (ampicillin, 20 mg kg−1, i.v.; Britapen, 500-mg soluble injection; Reig Jofre S.A., Madrid, Spain) was given and administration repeated every 90 min throughout the surgical procedure. The auricular artery in the left ear was catheterised using a 24-G catheter. Five minutes before the induction of anaesthesia, the goat underwent pre-oxygenation via a facemask with 100% oxygen. Before the induction of anaesthesia, the degree of sedation was moderate. Propofol (Vetofol, 10 mg mL−1; Esteve, Barcelona, Spain) was administered initially as a bolus at 2 mg kg−1 over 30 s, followed by incremental doses at 0.5 mg kg−1 every 15 s, until the goat was anaesthetised sufficiently to allow endotracheal intubation (total dose, 50 mg). A cuffed, 6.5-mm ID endotracheal tube was placed and connected to a rebreathing (circle) system. Intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV) with 100% oxygen was initiated using a pressure-cycled mechanical ventilator (ABC; Stephan GmbH, Gackenbach, Germany). Peak inspiratory pressure (PIP) was set at 8–10 cmH2O, and the respiratory rate (f
R) adjusted to maintain a partial pressure of expired carbon dioxide (PE′CO2) at 33–35 mmHg.
The goat was placed in sternal recumbency for preparation of the surgical site with the head elevated at 30°. Occlusion of the jugular vein was avoided throughout the procedure. The goat was connected to a multi-parameter anaesthesia monitor (S/5; Datex-Ohmeda, Inc., Madison, WI, USA), which displayed continuously a lead-II electrocardiogram, heart rate (HR), f
R, PE′CO2, inspired fraction of oxygen, tidal volume, invasive blood pressure (IBP), PIP, dynamic respiratory system compliance and plethysmographic oxygen saturation (SpO2). The catheter in the auricular artery was connected to an electronic pressure transducer (Deltran DPT-200; Utah Medical Products, Inc., Midvale, UT, USA) zeroed at the level of shoulder joint to measure IBP. Body temperature was measured using an intra-oesophageal temperature probe and displayed continuously on the multi-parameter monitor.
A CRI of propofol (6 mg kg−1 h−1) was started immediately after the induction of anaesthesia. Additionally, a bolus of lidocaine (1 mg kg−1; Lidocaína 2% soluble injection; B. Braun Medical S.A., Barcelona, Spain), midazolam (0.25 mg kg−1; Dormicum 5 mg mL−1 soluble injection; Roche Farma S.A., Madrid, Spain) and fentanyl (2.5 μg kg−1, Fentanest 0.05 mg mL−1 soluble injection; Kern Pharma, Barcelona, Spain) were delivered (i.v.) by hand over 60 s, followed immediately by a CRI of lidocaine (50 μg kg−1 min−1), midazolam (0.15 mg kg−1 h−1) and fentanyl (6 μg kg−1 h−1) administered via the intravenous route throughout the surgical procedure. Propofol and fentanyl for CRI were drawn up to fill a 20-mL syringe (Perfusor Compact; B. Braun Medical S.A.), whereas 600 mg of lidocaine and 30 mg of midazolam were mixed in 1 L of lactated Ringer’s solution (Ringer Lactato; B. Braun Medical S.A.) and infused together with a volumetric pump (Niki: C.M.E. Ltd., Lichtenstein, Germany) at 5 mL kg−1 h−1.
The criteria used to assess the depth of anaesthesia were HR, IBP, attempts to breathe against the ventilator and spontaneous movement. According to clinical signs, CRI of propofol was increased to 12 mg kg−1 h−1 10 min after the induction of anaesthesia. Lactated Ringer’s solution was infused via the intravenous route during surgery at 5 mL kg−1 h−1. A bolus of propofol (0.5 mg kg−1, i.v.) was administered if voluntary movement occurred. The infusion rate of propofol was recorded every 5 min, along with all physiological parameters displayed on the multi-parametric monitor.
Samples of arterial blood were collected anaerobically from the arterial catheter. They were analysed immediately and 45 min after the induction of anaesthesia to ensure blood gases remained within established reference ranges (PaCO2, 39.5 mmHg; PaO2, 475 mmHg; HCO3, 29.5 mmol L−1; base excess, 5 mmol L−1; SaO2, 100%; pH 7.481; lactate, 0.88 mmol L−1).
TIVA provided adequate cardiovascular stability (HR, 76–96 bpm) and adequate arterial blood pressure throughout anaesthesia (mean arterial blood pressure (MAP), 75–90 mmHg). Regurgitation, hyper-salivation and tympany were not observed. Oesophageal temperature decreased gradually over the period of anaesthesia but hypothermia (36.1 °C) was not corrected until the end of the procedure.
Craniectomy was undertaken to remove the cyst. Five minutes before completion of surgery, a bolus of dexamethasone (0.3 mg kg−1, i.v.; Cortesona 2 mg mL−1 soluble injection; Laboratorios Syva, León, Spain) and acepromazine (0.02 mg, i.v.; Equipromacina 5 mg mL−1 soluble injection; Labiana Life Sciences, S.A., Barcelona, Spain) were administered to ensure a smooth recovery. After skin closure, all CRI was stopped (total dose of propofol, 310 mg). IPPV was continued until attempts were made to breathe spontaneously. Then, the goat was moved in sternal recumbency to the recovery room. To avoid complications associated with the digestive tract and respiratory system, the goat was supported in sternal recumbency and the endotracheal tube removed only after return of the swallowing reflex (20 min after the end of the surgery). Total anaesthesia time (from the induction of anaesthesia to TIVA cessation) was 90 min. The goat recovered uneventfully from anaesthesia and could stand and eat <24 h after surgery.
Assessment of pain and physiological variables was conducted every hour until hospital discharge: no abnormalities were detected. Immediate postoperative care comprised administration of dexamethasone (0.1 mg kg−1, i.v.) every 24 h, buprenorphine (0.005 mg kg−1, i.v.; Buprecare 0. 3 mg mL−1 soluble injection; Group Divasa-Farmavic, Barcelona, Spain) every 8 h, head elevation, intravenous fluid therapy (Sterovet; B. Braun Vetcare S.A., Barcelona, Spain) to maintain normotension and regular evaluation of neurological status. Neurological examination was done 24 h after surgery and revealed no worsening of neurological deficits. Neurological signs improved within 5 days and resolved upon hospital discharge (14 days after surgery).