A 68-year-old man presented with features of jaundice without abdominal pain.
The patient had no unusual symptoms other than jaundice and was referred to our hospital for further evaluation of a pancreatic head tumor found on abdominal computed tomography (CT).
Fourteen years ago, the patient presented to our hospital with a complaint of decreased visual acuity. Brain CT revealed an 8 cm × 4.7 cm multilobulated heterogeneous mass at both parieto-occipital lobes . The mass was initially suspected as meningioma and the patient underwent osteoplastic craniotomy for removal . The pathologic diagnosis was solitary fibrous tumor with hypercellularity, focal moderate to marked cellular atyia, 0-1 mitosis per 10 HPF, and margins indeterminate. Immunohistochemical stain showed positive for vimentin, Bcl-2, and CD34, and negative for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), S-100, CD99, smooth muscle actin (SMA), and CD56. On 3 and 6-mo follow-up CTs, abnormal enhancement was observed at the surgical site, which was thought to be a remnant tumor or postoperative change. Follow-up was continued and on the 16-mo follow-up brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), a 1.7 cm sized abnormal nodular enhancing lesion at the left cerebellar area highly suggested remnant mass . The patient underwent GKRS and continued follow-up. 2 years later, brain MRI showed an interval decrease in the extent of the enhancing lesion at the left cerebellar area. However, a new 0.6 cm-sized enhancing mass was observed, suggesting recurrence . The patient underwent a second GKRS. 5 years later, brain MRI showed multiple new masses in both cerebellar areas . The patient underwent a second osteoplastic craniotomy and immunohistochemical staining showed positive for vimentin and STAT6, focal positive for CD34, and negative for GFAP, S-100, and EMA, leading to the diagnosis of hemangiopericytoma. The patient continued surveillance.
The patient denied any family history of malignancies.
Regular physical examination revealed no unusual findings except jaundice. The patient had no complaint of abdominal pain on examination.
The laboratory results on the day of the first visit to our hospital showed elevated levels of aspartate aminotransferase (223 U/L; reference range: 0-40 U/L), alanine aminotransferase (394 U/L; reference range: 0-40 U/L), alkaline phosphatase (762 U/L; reference range: 40-129 U/L), total bilirubin (4.18 mg/dL; reference range: 0.1-1.2 mg/dL), and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (1990 U/L; reference range: 11-73 U/L). These results comprehensively suggested a mixed pattern of hepatocellular and cholestatic liver disease. The serum tumor marker level of carcinoembryonic antigen was within the normal range and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 was slightly elevated to 42.20 U/mL (reference: 0-39 U/mL). Serum amylase and lipase were within normal limits.
Abdominal CT showed a 3.5 cm-sized mass lesion on the pancreas head . As the mass lesion compressed the pancreatic and bile ducts, the ducts were dilatated, resulting in the appearance of a double duct sign . Compared to the surrounding parenchyma of the pancreas, the mass lesion showed hypervascularity during the arterial phase and isovascularity on the delayed phase of the CT. Compared to the usual CT findings of pancreatic cancer, its size was larger and the boundaries were relatively clear, so the possibility of other malignancies such as neuroendocrine tumor or acinar cell carcinoma were considered for differential diagnosis. For further investigation, an MRI was done. MRI showed low signal intensity on T1-weighted imaging and iso-signal intensity on T2-weighted imaging compared to the surrounding pancreas parenchyma .