A 24 year-old male presented to his primary care physician with an 8-day history of fevers, chills, and myalgias. He complained of a sore throat and worsening headache with neck pain for the past 2 days. He also had abdominal pain, constipation, and bloating throughout the week, without nausea or vomiting. At his primary care physician's office, he had a temperature of 104°F and was sent to the emergency department for further evaluation. On admission, the patient was awake and oriented, but appeared lethargic and pale. Vital signs included a temperature of 103°F, blood pressure of 112/51 mmHg, pulse of 112/minute, respiratory rate of 22/minute, and an oxygen saturation of 88% on room air. The physical exam revealed minimal crackles at the lung bases and mid-abdominal tenderness without peritoneal signs or hepatosplenomegaly. The rest of the physical exam was unremarkable. Laboratory data included a white blood count of 14,900/μL with 77% neutrophils and 10% bands, hemoglobin of 14.9 gm/dL, platelet count of 244,000/cmm, and a C-reactive protein of 39.9 mg/L. Liver enzymes, BUN, creatinine, and electrolyte panel were within normal limits. A monospot and influenza A and B were negative. A lumber puncture performed in the emergency department did not show evidence of meningitis. A chest x-ray showed a left basilar infiltrate.
The patient was initially treated for community-acquired pneumonia with ceftriaxone 2 g once daily and azithromycin 500 mg once daily. Blood cultures drawn on admission grew viridans group streptococci, and azithromycin was discontinued. A transesophageal echocardiogram showed vegetation on the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve , and ceftriaxone was continued for treatment of endocarditis. A CT scan of the abdomen performed due to persistent abdominal pain revealed multiple liver abscesses. One of the abscesses was drained percutaneously under CT guidance. Cultures of the aspirate also grew only viridans group streptococci. Anaerobic cultures were negative. The patient continued to spike fevers, and antibiotics were changed to penicillin 24 million units a day and low dose gentamicin. Repeat blood cultures were negative. However, the patient remained febrile and tachycardic with increasing leukocytosis. Because of worsening clinical status, he required additional percutaneous drainage of three more abscesses. After six months of antibiotic therapy, the patient is doing well with significant clinical improvement.