A 72-year-old man was referred to our hospital with dyspnea on effort and palpitations. Although he had no history of chest pain, he felt nauseous and had experienced dizziness for 6 days before hospitalization. An electrocardiogram showed atrial tachycardia (150 beats/min) with no apparent ST elevation . Echocardiography revealed no left ventricular asynergy, and the patient’s serum creatine kinase level was within the normal range (174 IU/l). We therefore did not suspect acute coronary syndrome at admission.
However the patient’s circulatory and respiratory status deteriorated even with optimal medication (inotropes and a vasodilator). A chest roentgenogram showed severe congestion of the lung and a moderate amount of effusion in both pleural cavities . Enhanced computed tomography suggested shunt flow in the cardiac cavity. A second echocardiogram revealed a VSR in the basal part of the posterior ventricular septum with left-to-right shunt flow . Emergency coronary angiography revealed occlusion of the final small branch of the dominant left circumflex artery .
During angiography, an intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) was used to support coronary flow and cardiac function. Postinfarction posterior VSR was diagnosed, and emergency surgery was performed.
After median sternotomy, cardiopulmonary bypass was established in the usual manner. After aortic cross clamping and cardiac arrest, we made a right atrial oblique incision. We located the perforation site in the basal posterior part of the ventricular septum (size, 17 mm) . It was just behind the septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve; thus, a part of the septal and posterior leaflet of the tricuspid valve was detached from the annulus to obtain a better view and handling space.
After resecting the necrotic tissue around the defect, the edge of the defect was not friable, which suggested that the infarction was not large. We closed the VSR using the double patch technique. The left and right sides of the ventricular septum were covered with a bovine pericardial patch with eight interrupted mattress sutures (4-0 polypropylene). The tricuspid valve leaflet was then re-sutured to its annulus using a continuous suture (5-0 polypropylene), and the right atrium was closed.
After declamping the ascending aorta, we successfully weaned the cardiopulmonary bypass using IABP support. The patient was moved to the intensive care unit on an IABP and mechanical ventilation.
On the first postoperative day since the patient’s cardiac and respiratory functions were stable, we discontinued IABP support and performed extubation. Postoperative echocardiography showed no residual shunt flow, almost normal ventricular wall motion, and a trivial degree of tricuspid valve regurgitation.
After his atrial arrhythmia and junctional bradycardia were controlled, the patient was discharged on postoperative day 37.