A 29-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital with hypertension and hypokalaemia. In October 2018, the patient had visited her local hospital with symptoms of hypertension and fatigue. During admission, her blood pressure reached 220/120 mmHg. Immediately, antihypertension medications were prescribed, specifically, arotinolol, valsartan and amlodipine, spironolactone, and hydrochlorothiazide. Laboratory tests suggested an increased aldosterone to renin ratio (ARR) and aldosterone level . A computed tomography scan revealed hyperplasia in the left adrenal gland. The patient was diagnosed with PA based on the hypertension, hypokalaemia, increased ARR and adrenal hyperplasia, and discharged with antihytention drugs and potassium supplementation.
In December 2018, the patient returned to our hospital for extensive examination. The results of the examination revealed that the patient had no secondary female sexual characteristics; the patient reported no menstruation during adolescence. Further examination revealed the patient had an infantile vulva and absence of breast development, pubic hair, or auxiliary hair. Her blood pressure was 154/98 mmHg; a medical history interrogation indicated she had suffered hypertension and hypokalaemia since she was 13 years old.
The results of subsequent laboratory panels are presented in Table . The corticosterone level increased remarkably, and the progesterone level was higher than the normal value; oestradiol and testosterone levels were low; and the plasma potassium concentration was approximately within the normal range for a patient treated with a potassium supplement. Considering that arotinolol, valsartan, spironolactone, and hydrochlorothiazide might affect the ARR result, we re-examined the ARR more than 14 days after the gradual withdrawal of these medications. At this point, the aldosterone level was below the normal, and the revalued ARR was in contrast to the value observed during her last hospitalization . In addition, we assessed the patient’s adrenal function. After performing an overnight 1 mg dexamethasone suppressing test (DST), ACTH and cortisol levels were suppressed. Furthermore, an ACTH stimulation test was performed. The patient was injected intravenously with 1 μg ACTH; blood samples were collected at baseline, after 30 min, 1 h, 2 h and 3 h to measure the cortisol level. The stimulated cortisol level did not increase.
Based on the high levels of ACTH and corticosterone, low levels of cortisol and aldosterone, abnormal sex hormone profile, combined with the results of the ACTH stimulating test and 1 mg DST, we conceived a diagnosis of CAH with 17α-hydroxylase deficiency. Blood samples were collected for genetic analysis and informed consent was obtained from the patient and her parents. The results revealed that patient held a homozygous frame-shift mutation in her CYP17A1 gene: c.985_987delTACinsAA (p.Y329KfsX418), inherited from her parents. Karyotype analysis was identified as 46, XX.
Finally, we confirmed the diagnosis of CAH with 17α-hydroxylase deficiency based on the patient’s medical history, laboratory results, imaging findings, and the genetic analysis. We then initiated scheduled cortisol treatment. We recommended oral prednisone acetate 2.5 mg twice daily and potassium chloride 1 g four times daily to continue potassium replenishment. The patient’s normal blood pressure was maintained with the amlodipine besylate at 5 mg once daily.
During the follow-ups, laboratory tests were performed to assess therapeutic efficacy . In the first follow-up, the recommended dosage of prednisone acetate was adjusted from 2.5 mg twice daily to 2.5 mg thrice daily. The prednisone dosage in the evening was halved in the second follow-up. The patient’s blood pressure was eventually stabilized and maintained at a desired level with amlodipine besylate 5 mg once daily, although unsatisfactory blood pressure occurred transiently during the treatment. We gradually tapered the dosage of potassium chloride and the plasma potassium level was 4.32 mmol/L (3.5–4.5 mmol/L) a week after potassium supplement suspension.
More importantly, we performed sequential observation of the blood glucose level before treatment and after the third follow-up using FGMS. Five-day blood glucose data collected before and after treatment were analyzed. FGMS parameters, such as coefficient variance (CV), mean amplitude of glucose excursion (MAGE), and mean of daily differences (MODD) representing general, with-day, and day-to-day glucose variability (GV) were calculated and compared before and after treatment; no significant difference was identified in these parameters . Blood glucose levels at nocturnal (0–6 AM), fasting (6–8 AM), and postprandial periods (8–10 AM, 1–3 PM, and 8–10 PM) were specifically analyzed. The overall blood glucose level was nearly within the normal range before and after treatment . Nocturnal and fasting blood glucose levels decreased significantly after cortisol treatment and three hypoglycaemia points (3.82 mmol/L, 3.8 mmol/L, and 3.86 mmol/L) were identified during the fasting period ; the incidence of hypoglycaemia event during the monitoring before and after treatment were further compared and no significance was identified . Postprandial blood glucose levels increased after treatment at 1–3 PM and 8–10 PM .