A 14-year-old male presented to our emergency department with respiratory distress due to massive abdominal distention. He reported non- bilious vomiting and decreased oral intake for the past 3 days. His last bowel movement was 5 days prior to the admission. Parents reported that the child had chronic constipation since birth with bowel movement every 2–3 days. He was not on any regular medications but occasionally, he takes oral laxatives, glycerin suppositories and sometimes he may require enema for colonic evacuation. The parents cannot remember when the child passed his first meconium. His growth and development are average for his age. There was no family history of similar illnesses.
On general examination, vital signs were all in normal range except for tachycardia. All anthropometric measurements were in the normal range. Clinical examination of the abdomen showed massive universal distention, tympanic on percussion with diminished bowel sounds. Digital rectal examination revealed empty rectum. Plain erect abdominal X-ray showed massive colonic distention occupying most of the abdomen with multiple fluid levels and ground-glass appearance suggesting fecal impaction at the distal part of the sigmoid colon .
After stabilization of the general condition with intravenous fluids, intravenous antibiotics, and correction of hypokalemia, the patient underwent a trial of surgical disimpaction with rectal tube for deflation, which failed to evacuate the colon or decompress the abdomen. Colonoscopy failed to pass beyond 15 cm after entering dilated sigmoid loop. So, the decision was made for surgical exploration. The time between presentation and surgery was about 6 h. The patient was not eligible for laparoscopy due to the massive abdominal distention causing respiratory distress. Open surgical exploration was done by the authors through a lower midline incision and revealed sigmoid volvulus 270 degree clockwise with massive distention of the entire colon .
After detorsion of the volvulus, we found a markedly dilated sigmoid colon (length ∼50 cm and diameter ∼15 cm) with an evident classical discrepancy at the lower sigmoid suggestive of HD .
Due to massive colonic dilatation and ectasia, the decision was made for terminal ileostomy. Evacuation of the colon was made from the ileostomy and by milking toward the anus. Full thickness biopsies were taken from the distal narrow segment, the dilated proximal segment and from the ileostomy. The site of the discrepancy was marked with two 3/0 sutures to help in the future pull through operation. The patient started oral feeding on the 2nd postoperative day and was discharged on the 6th postoperative day.
Histopathological examination with immunohistochemical staining demonstrated aganglionosis and hypertrophic submucosal neural fibers in the biopsy from the distal narrow segment confirming the diagnosis of HD.
After confirmation of Hirschsprung's disease, Duhamel pull through procedure was done after 3 months when the general condition of the patient was optimized. Frozen section was used intraoperatively for identification of ganglionic margins. The patient started oral feeding on the 2nd postoperative day and was discharged on the 5th postoperative day. The excisional biopsy showed aganglionic distal colon and ganglionic proximal bowel. Closure of the ileostomy was 2 months later.
The patient experienced passage of loose frequent motions for the first 2 weeks after the operation which improved gradually. Currently, after 6 months from the operation, the patient is having regular bowel movement.