A 6-year-old boy of average height and weight presented to the ER in 2003 with complaints of repeated vomiting and headache for 1-month. He was a student of a local public school, his past medical history being unremarkable; his immunization status was complete, and there were no known allergies. In family history, the patient's father and uncle (father's brother) were known to have NF2. On physical examination, he was vitally stable. Positive findings included left-sided facial nerve palsy and ataxic gait.
After a series of initial investigations, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain was done. The report described a solid mass arising from the right cerebellar cortex, which was isointense to the gray matter on T1-weighted images and hypo to isointense to the gray matter on T2-weighted images. Postcontrast images showed an intense enhancement, which was almost homogenous. The mass was causing effacement of the fourth ventricles with dilatation of the third and lateral ventricles. The vertical height of the lesion was 4.2 cm; AP dimension was 4 cm, and the transverse diameter was 4.8 cm. There was no evidence of intracranial hemorrhage. Gray and white matter signals of supratentorial brain were within normal limits. No midline structural defect was seen. The differential diagnoses of medulloblastoma or astrocytoma were made.
The patient underwent craniotomy and excision of the lesion with the insertion of a ventriculoperitoneal shunt. The histopathology report described a malignant infiltrating tumor present in sheets . The tumor was composed of small oval to indented basophilic cells, exhibiting nuclear hyperchromasia [Figures and ]. Extensive necrosis and karyorrhexis were identified with areas of hemorrhage. Brisk mitotic figures were also seen . The tumor cells showed positivity for immunohistochemical stain CD 56 . Focal positivity for immunohistochemical stain glial fibrillary acidic protein was also seen . Based on these findings a final diagnosis of desmoplastic medulloblastoma was made.
The patient underwent metastatic workup which was negative. After discharge, he was kept under close follow-up. Pediatric oncology team was taken on board and after discussing the case at the tumor board meeting, a multidisciplinary approach was taken and both chemotherapy and radiotherapy were administered.
In 2003, he was found to have a 1.0 cm × 1.5 cm skin colored nodule on this left forearm, which was excised with histopathology of the lesion revealing benign peripheral nerve sheath tumor.
In 2004, during a routine MRI scan the patient was found to have a cerebellar lesion for which he underwent craniotomy and excision of the lesion. Biopsy of the excised specimen revealed postchemotherapy and radiotherapy gliosis. He was then again kept under close follow-up. He complained of vision disturbances in 2006 and after an ophthalmological exam, was diagnosed to have right eye cataract for which he underwent phacoemulsification and insertion of the intraocular lens.
Till 2010, his routine follow-up MRI scans showed no significant pathological changes. However, in 2010, he again started complaining of vision disturbances and ophthalmological examination revealed right-sided posterior capsular opacification and left-sided cataract. He underwent left capsulectomy.
Over the span of next 3 years the patient remained well however, in 2013, he was again brought to Aga Khan University Hospital with complaints of headache, vomiting, and gait disturbances. MRI brain showed right superior frontal, inferior frontal, parasagittal and left posterior parietal meningiomas; excision of the lesions was performed.
Considering his case history and his family history, a diagnosis of NF2 was considered for him. A neurologist was taken on board; the NIH criterion was applied, and the patient was diagnosed to have NF2.
After the surgery in 2013, the patient has not been reported any symptoms. The follow-up MRI scans have not revealed any positive findings.