A 42-year-old previously healthy Russian man living in Estonia was hospitalised due to a one-year history of progressive cognitive decline, confusion attacks, rare hallucinations, gait disturbances and involuntary movements.
At the beginning of the symptoms he was often sent on short sick leaves because of his employer’s doubt about his health. He resigned 6 months after the first symptoms appeared, being unable to perform his duties at work.
In addition, his spouse could not allow him to leave home due to his progressive disorientation. The patient became unable to cope with daily activities like dressing, brushing teeth and washing. He soon became dependent in most daily life activities. Therewith, he came to the neurologist for the first time.
On neurological examination he had predominantly left-sided bradykinesia and rigidity and intentional tremor in his left hand and both legs. There was no weakness on motor examination. Deep tendon reflexes were brisk and more pronounced in the left but there were no extensor reflexes. His gate was cautious and wide-based. There were myoclonic jerks in his legs and left arm that were more pronounced in action (stimulus-sensitive) (Additional file ). According to the neuropsychological testing he had severe dementia with the mini mental state examination (MMSE) Score 12/30. The results were affected by severe attention deficit. He had affective symptoms like irritability, aggressive behaviour and delusions. His speech was dysarthric and dysphonic with mixed aphasia that included difficulties in word finding, impaired articulatory agility, verbal stereotypes, some paraphasias in running speech and difficulties in understanding longer sentences. He had anisocoria (the left pupil was larger), with pupils nonreactive to light, and horizontal nystagmus.
Head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan revealed brain atrophy . There was focal slowing and epileptiform discharges in the right fronto-temporal regions on the electroencephalography (EEG) .
Blood tests were normal including hepatic function and thyroid tests, although the level of vitamin B12 was slightly decreased (124 pmol/l, reference range 141–489 pmol/l). Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 1 and 2 antibodies were negative but the rapid plasma reagin (RPR) test as well as the T. pallidum hemagglutination assay (TPHA) were highly positive (RPR 1:32 and TPHA 1:1520) in serum as well as in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) (RPR 1:8 and TPHA 1:640). CSF showed predominantly lymphocytic pleocytosis (12 cells/mm3), the protein was elevated to 0.63 g/l, as well as IgG index (4.31).
Based on clinical pictures and laboratory data, neurosyphilis was diagnosed and intravenous penicillin-G treatment 24 million units per day for 14 days was initiated. Thereafter intramuscular benzathine penicillin of 2.4 million units once per week was injected for 3 weeks. Complementary treatment with divalproex sodium was started as there were epileptiform discharges on the EEG that demonstrated an increased risk for developing of epilepsy, and the patient had emotional problems and agitation.
On the follow-up 6 months later, he had a mild dementia (MMSE 25/30), but there were neither myoclonus nor parkinsonism. Deep tendon reflexes were still brisk but symmetrical. He still had Adie’s tonic pupil in the left and very little constriction to direct light bilaterally. No clinical features of cerebellar dysfunction were detected. Both the serological markers [RPR (1:2) and TPHA] and the above mentioned CSF measures changed to negative.
The patient continued treatment with divalproex sodium 300 mg bid, and enalapril with amlodipine for hypertension. On the subsequent follow-up visits (twice a year), no consistent changes have been found.