A 74-year-old male presented at our clinic with a 10-day history of mild pain and loss of vision in his right eye. In 2003, he had undergone an exenteratio bulbi with the insertion of a prosthesis in the left eye following the corneal perforation of a Mooren's ulcer. Medical examination revealed acute conjunctival hyperaemia and a large perforated Mooren's ulcer in the right eye. The anterior chamber was absent and a seclusio pupillae with cataract were also present . Visual acuity was hand movements. Under general anaesthesia, we performed a 14 mm corneoscleral transplantation in association with the extracapsular extraction of the cataract, intraocular lens implantation and superior basal iridectomy.
The surgical technique included a total limbal peritomy in attempt to save limbal stem cells. A 14 mm trephine was used to mark and partially cut the scleral surface. After careful haemostasis, the anterior chamber was entered obliquely with a diamond knife and the sclera was cut with Castroviejo's corneal scissors. The entire cornea and scleral ring was removed, viscoelastic material was placed on the recipient bed and a large anterior capsulorhexis was performed. After the expression of the lens nucleus and aspiration of residual masses, an intraocular lens was implanted into the capsular bag and a peripheral iridectomy was performed. The donor tissue was trephined from a whole eye used within 24 hours of the donor's death and stored in a moist chamber using a trephine of the same diameter as that used on the recipient. The donor corneoscleral graft was then sutured into place onto the scleral ledge using 8.0 interrupted silk sutures. The anterior chamber was filled with viscoelastic material and the conjunctiva was closed with Vicryl 8.0 interrupted sutures.
The day after surgery we found a mild keratitis with a low flare in the anterior chamber. The intraocular pressure measured with a pneumotonomer was 14 mm/Hg. Postoperative steroid therapy was prednisolone acetate 1% every two hours for four weeks (decreased to four times a day for five months), oral cyclosporine A (5 mg/kg/day) for six months and prednisone 25 mg a day for four months. After six months, the best corrected visual acuity was 6/60 .