A 38-year-old woman presented to the emergency room in a regional hospital with nausea and left flank pain that had suddenly started 12 h earlier. She had a history of left flank trauma, having fallen from 2-meter- height 5 years earlier. Physical examination revealed no tenderness over the abdomen or flank and normal chest auscultation. Blood analysis was within normal limits, except for leukocytosis (12.7 × 109/L). Routine urine analysis showed microscopic hematuria without white blood cells or proteins. Abdominal ultrasonography showed an enlarged kidney and a 16-mm hyperechoic focus in the left renal pelvis, suggesting a diagnosis of renal calculus. The patient was therefore administered extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy at the regional hospital. A follow-up ultrasound examination 2 weeks later showed that the shape and size of the hyperechoic focus had not changed.
Due to left lower back pain and the persistent left hyperechoic focus in the renal area, the patient was referred to our hospital for further evaluation and treatment. Urine analysis and ultrasound examination showed the same results as in the regional hospital . An abdominal plain film showed a left-sided renal calcification , but there was no evidence of a palpable tender mass or an audible abdominal bruit. Laboratory data, except for urinalysis results, were within normal limits. Because of the failure of extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy, percutaneous lithotomy was recommended.
Because the shape of the calculus was unusual and there was no evidence of hydronephrosis, the diagnosis of calculus was questioned. Further evaluation to determine the true nature of the hyperechoic lesion included computed tomography (CT) without contrast, which showed the calculus in the left ureter . In addition, intravenous pyelography showed that the pelvic areas around both kidneys were normal, although a patchy shadow was observed above the left renal pelvis . Color Doppler ultrasonography showed the hyperechoic focus in the left renal vein . CT angiography indicated a hyperdense mass in the left renal vein, suggesting a calcified thrombus, as well as occlusion of the left renal vein, varicosity in the left ovarian vein, and peripheral veins around the left renal hilum .
The patient was actively monitored. Three months later, there was satisfactory regression of microscopic hematuria and left lower back pain. After 15 months, the patient remained asymptomatic. Routine urine analysis, serum creatinine and glomerular filtration rate were normal. Periodic ultrasound examination also revealed no morphologic changes in the affected kidney, with RVT remaining in situ.