A 43-year-old Japanese man suffering from fever, night sweats, general fatigue and weight loss complained of a mass in the left inguinal area. The patient did not complain of gastrointestinal symptoms.
The patient was admitted to a local hospital. Computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated multiple lymph node lesions continuing to the mesentery and para-aortic/left common iliac artery/left inguinal region . Scattered nodular lesions were found in both lung fields . Following needle biopsy of the left inguinal lesion, malignant lymphoma was suspected, and the patient was transferred to our department.
He had no chronic illness.
Left inguinal lymph nodes were significantly swollen.
WBC and CRP showed markedly high values, and elevated platelet count, liver dysfunction, and hypoalbuminemia were also observed. In addition, the level of soluble interleukin-2 receptor (normal range: 121-613 U/mL), which was severely elevated according to the measurement of the previous hospital, had further increased over approximately one week (7120 → 12500 U/mL) .
As measured by positron emission tomography (PET)/CT scan, the mean standardized uptake value was 18.1 in the abdomen – pelvis/inguinal nodes and 3.5 in the lung fields and the mediastinal nodes .
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy findings: In the descending portion of the duodenum, multiple polypoid lesions of 2-3 mm in diameter were observed . Various large and small polypoid lesions were observed in the antrum of the stomach . These lesions are consistent with MLP continuously extending from the antrum of the stomach to the descending portion of the duodenum. Mucosal folds in the corpus of the stomach were slightly thickened, and its surface had changed to a white tone .
The biopsies of both gastric and duodenal lesions proved the invasion of lymphoma cells, as below mentioned. These lesions could not be detected by PET/CT scan. Colonoscopy and bone marrow aspiration showed no involvement of lymphoma lesions.
Left inguinal lymph nodes were examined by open biopsy. Medium to large-sized abnormal lymphoid cells were observed to be invasively proliferating. CD25, CD30, T-cell intracellular antigen-1, and ALK tested positive by immunostaining. Meanwhile, CD3, CD20 and the Epstein-Barr encoding region in situ hybridization tested negative. Based on the histopathology, ALK+ ALCL was diagnosed. In the gastric and duodenal biopsy samples, abnormal lymphoid cells with irregular nuclei grew diffusely , and mitotic figures were observed in high numbers . Immunohistochemically, CD30 tested strongly positive , ALK (monoclonal antibody, ALK1) tested positive in nuclear and cytoplasmic pattern , and the Ki-67 proliferative (MIB1) index was > 80% (not shown).