A 77-year-old man was presented to the hospital after sustaining a fall due to fever and weakness. On admission, a routine reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test was performed. A diagnosis of COVID-19 caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 infection was confirmed. Chest CT showed typical signs of pneumonia, including bilateral ground-glass opacities. The patient reported worsening of his respiratory symptoms during the preceding few days. Owing to his severe condition, he was intubated and transferred to our hospital’s intensive care unit (ICU) on day 5 of hospitalization. On arrival at our hospital, his vital signs were as follows: blood pressure, 124/73 mmHg; heart rate, 63 beats/min with sinus rhythm; SpO2 90% (FiO2, 50%); and body temperature, 38.0 °C; laboratory tests showed white blood cell (WBC) count, 6900/μL; hemoglobin (Hb), 11.3 g/dL; platelet, 197 × 103/μL; activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), 29 sec; prothrombin time (PT), 1.09; D-dimer, 1.93 μg/mL; and CRP, 12.74 mg/dL, indicating no abnormalities of anemia, thrombocytopenia, and coagulopathy. We did not investigate alternative causes, such as acquired hemophilia or acquired vitamin K deficiency. The patient had a medical history of hypertension and cerebral infarction without any prescription. He wanted to receive favipiravir and tocilizumab to manage COVID-19 after receiving informed consent despite the unproven effect of these medications on COVID-19. During his ICU stay, new-onset paroxysmal atrial fibrillation (Af) occurred. The CHADS2 VASC score was 5 points (age, stroke, hypertension) and HAS-BLED was 2 points (age, stroke). After the fall, there was no obvious hematoma on the body surface, and the Hb level was normal at the time of the visit; therefore, we considered that there was no active bleeding. We decided to start heparin aiming for aPTT between 42 and 56 seconds (1.5 to 2.0 times compared to aPTT standard [28.0 s]). As a result, the heparin dose increased up to 24.000 units. In addition, we administered ART-123, a recombinant human soluble thrombomodulin (rTM), considering the hypercoagulation status . On day 5 after admission, his respiratory condition improved, and he was extubated. However, an anterior chest hematoma was observed the following day. The Hb level dropped from 11 mg/dL to 7 mg/dL, suggesting continuous bleeding. The platelet count was within the normal range. A clinical decision for CT was made to detect the source of the hematoma. Computed tomography (CT) revealed multiple hematomas, including a massive chest hematoma ( and ) with active extravasation and an obturatorius internus muscle hematoma . An emergency TAE was indicated, and the angiography suite was prepared prior to patient transfer. The walls and equipment were covered with vinyl to prevent contamination, and the suite was set to a negative pressure of −5 Pa. Maximum barrier precautions (caps, masks, eye guards, sterile gowns, sterile gloves, double glove use, and N95 respirator masks) were employed by all the hospital staff involved. TAE was approached from the right common femoral artery. Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) of the left axillary artery was performed. Extravasation was observed at the acromial branch of the left thoracoacromial artery . The second source of extravasation was the left lateral thoracic artery, which is also a branch of the axillary artery . Extravasations from these arteries were embolized using gelatin sponge and coil. Hemostasis after TAE was confirmed using DSA of the subclavian artery. After TAE, the bruising of the chest wall subsided. Seven days after TAE, the patient was discharged from the ICU. A 22-day follow-up CT showed that the chest hematoma had decreased in size and there were no signs of extravasation or pseudoaneurysm. The patient was transferred to another hospital the following day.