A 67-year-old Chinese male presented to the respiratory clinic with several months of a productive cough and exertional dyspnea with no abdominal symptoms. He had a background of chronic hepatitis B, pulmonary tuberculosis treated in 2002, and an upper midline laparotomy in China 20 years prior for a perforated gastric ulcer. Computed tomography (CT) of chest showed mild bronchiectasis and multifocal consolidation in both lower zones with gas tracking from the colonic hepatic flexure to the right pleural cavity, suggesting a colopleural fistula. Bronchoscopy showed no obstructing endobronchial lesion, and bronchial washings grew Escherichia coli and mixed anaerobes with no mycobacterium and no malignant cells. Colonoscopy showed two diverticula at the hepatic flexure, one particularly large . CT scan of the abdomen with rectal contrast confirmed a colopleural fistula with contrast outlining a fistula tract between the colon and right lower lobe .
Following discussion with the respiratory and cardiothoracic teams, he was arranged to undergo resection of the involved colonic segment and repair of the associated diaphragmatic defect, then insertion of a right chest drain for an expected postoperative pleural effusion. Preoperative preparation included lung function tests, which were normal, chest physiotherapy to establish good airway clearance, two weeks of oral amoxicillin/clavulanate to reduce the microbial load in the respiratory tract, and bowel preparation the day before the operation. Laparoscopy showed the liver was adherent to the diaphragm in the right upper quadrant along with the omentum, distal stomach, and a short segment of colon also adherent just anterior to the liver edge. Adhesions were divided laparoscopically to isolate the segment of colon leading up to the diaphragm with the stomach, gallbladder, and liver safely dissected away . He developed mild subcutaneous emphysema related to the laparoscopic insufflation and diaphragmatic defect from the fistula; therefore, a chest drain was inserted into the right pleural cavity with palpation showing the right lung to be tethered basally. The right colon was mobilized laparoscopically with the ileocolic and right colic vessels ligated, achieving good colonic mobility and leaving only the short segment tethered to the diaphragm. A right subcostal incision was made, allowing this segment of colon to be dissected off the diaphragm. A 2 cm diaphragmatic defect at the site of the fistula was repaired with interrupted 2/0 Ethibond sutures. A right hemicolectomy was performed with a stapled side-to-side ileocolic anastomosis. An omental flap was placed over the diaphragmatic repair. The patient had an uneventful postoperative course with resolution of respiratory symptoms at 3-month follow-up. Histology of the colon showed inflammation and scarring in keeping with a fistula.