A 70 year-old woman came to our hospital with intermittent wheezing for more than 10 days. She had a history of coronary heart disease for more than 3 years, and one stent was implanted in the first diagonal to the left anterior descending (LAD) after coronary angiography (CAG), which indicated 90% stenosis of the first diagonal opening. Three months prior, the patient had an acute anterior wall myocardial infarction. CAG indicated occlusion of the LAD, and another stent was implanted in the LAD. For more than 3 years, she had paroxysmal AF, and she was given clopidogrel 75 mg qd combined with rivaroxaban 15 mg qd for the treatment of paroxysmal AF in the prior 3 months. She had a history of chronic cardiac insufficiency, hypertension, type 2 diabetes, and renal insufficiency. On admission, acute heart failure was considered, and the symptoms were relieved after vasodilator and diuresis. The serum creatinine level of the patient on admission was 120 µmol/L (normal value: 45–84 µmol/L). Echocardiography showed that the left heart was enlarged (anteroposterior diameter of left atrium: 39 mm, end-diastolic diameter of left ventricular: 53 mm). The apical segment of the ventricular septum and the anterior wall of the left ventricle lose the ability to systolic or diastolic movement. The apex of the left ventricle moved paradoxically. The left ventricular ejection fraction was 30%. The patient had recurrent episodes of AF with a rapid ventricular rate after admission. The CHA2DS2-VASc score was 6, and the HAS-BLED score was 2. We administered clopidogrel combined with rivaroxaban for antithrombosis and amiodarone for antiarrhythmia. Left atrial or atrial appendage thrombus was excluded by left atrial CT, and RFA was then performed to treat her paroxysmal AF. The patient was in sinus rhythm before the operation. After the atrial septal puncture was completed under fluoroscopy, 7500 IU of unfractionated heparin was given according to 100 IU/kg. 3D electroanatomical mapping using the CARTO3 system (Biosense Webster) was performed. The power ablation mode was used, and the power was 40 W. Bilateral pulmonary vein isolation was performed by using a cold saline irrigated RFA catheter. During the ablation process, the pressure was controlled between 5 and 20 g. The activated clotting time (ACT) was 229 s at half an hour after the atrial puncture, followed by an additional 1000 IU of heparin. The RFA process was completed before the next ACT test. After the operation, 15 mg of rivaroxaban was administered orally.
After the patient had returned to the ward, she developed diffuse abdominal pain with abdominal distension, which had both persistent and paroxysmal exacerbations, and the patient developed frequent vomiting and dysuria. The abdominal examination showed that the abdomen was soft, and the upper abdomen was slightly tender. The patient’s bloating was slightly relieved after the placement of a urinary catheter. However, after being given acid suppression, antispasmodic and antiemetic treatment, the symptoms of abdominal pain and vomiting were not obviously relieved. At 12 h after RFA, the abdominal pain of the patient was slightly relieved, but there was mild tenderness in the upper abdomen, right abdomen, and around the umbilicus, no obvious muscle tension and no rebound tenderness, and active bowel sounds. Abdominal CT showed ileocecal thickening with upper small bowel obstruction, and enhanced CT was recommended. After that, we considered the possibility of mechanical small bowel obstruction due to an ileocecal mass. Because the patient had renal insufficiency and the left atrial CT was performed before RFA, we did not urgently check the abdomen with contrast-enhanced CT, which was not performed to reduce the occurrence of contrast agent nephropathy. Laboratory tests showed elevated white blood cell (WBC, 20.83 × 109/L, normal value: 3.5–9.5 × 109/L), neutrophil percentage (88.6%, normal value: 40–75%), and creatinine (130.00 µmol/L, normal value: 45–84 µmol/L), and normal levels of tumour markers. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed only an enlarged gallbladder with deposits and a small amount of fluid around the spleen. We instructed the patient to fast with water. The patient passed stool after the enema. Cefoperazone sodium and sulbactam sodium were prescribed for anti-infection, and the condition of the patient was continuously observed. At 36 h after RFA, laboratory tests showed elevated WBC (15.26 × 109/L), neutrophil percentage (87.5%), C-reactive protein (CRP, 442 mg/L, normal value: 0–6 mg/L), and procalcitonin (4.62 ng/ml, normal value: 0–0.5 ng/ml). At 72 h after RFA, the abdominal pain was slightly relieved, but the bowel sound was weakened. In addition, blood in the stool appeared. Laboratory tests showed faecal occult blood3+ and elevated WBC (14.64 × 109/L), neutrophil percentage (85.3%), CRP (408 mg/L), procalcitonin (6.37 ng/ml), D-dimer (2881.96 µg/L, normal value: 0–500 µg/L), and lactic acid (2.7 mmol/L, normal value: 1.0–1.7 mmol/L). Then, we performed a contrast-enhanced CT of the abdomen, which showed pelvic small bowel necrosis and thickening of the ileocecal and terminal ileal walls.
Laparotomy was performed immediately after the surgeon’s consultation. The exploration revealed dark red exudate in the pelvic cavity, and the amount was approximately 500 ml. Purulent material was attached to the surface of the small intestine. Thirteen to forty-five cm away from the ileocecal ileum, the colour of the ileum turned black, and the peristalsis disappeared, which was considered to be due to small intestinal necrosis. The contralateral side of the necrotic midsection mesentery was perforated. The perforation diameter was approximately 3 mm. The surgeon performed partial resection and anastomosis of the ileum, and 38 cm of the ileum was completely resected . During the operation, the appendix was congested and oedematous, and the surface was covered with purulent material. An appendectomy was performed. Copious amount of warm saline was used to repeatedly rinse the abdominal cavity. After surgery, we administered cefoperazone sodium and sulbactam sodium combined with linezolid for anti-infection and parenteral nutrition support. Considering the possibility of SMAE after RFA, low molecular weight heparin was added for anticoagulation the next day after surgery. The samples of ascites collected during operation was cultured for common bacterial and showed the presence of Pseudomonas adaceae, Enterococcus faecalis, and Staphylococcus haemolyticus. Postoperative pathological examination confirmed a small bowel wall haemorrhagic infarction with inflammatory fibrinous exudation, vasodilation and congestion, and thrombosis. The postoperative diagnoses that were made were SMAE and partial ileal necrosis with perforation. On the 9th day after surgery, enhanced abdominal CT showed postoperative changes in the pelvic small intestine, and the thickening of the ileocecal and terminal ileal wall was better than before. After 1 month of treatment, the patient’s condition improved, and she was discharged. After one month of follow-up, the patient’s condition was stable.