A 12-month old girl was referred to our pediatric oncology department for further investigation of an abdominal mass. On initial physical examination her weight was in 90th percentile, length in the 75th percentile. Her right cheek was slightly fuller than left cheek. The right arm and forearm were thicker than counterparts on the left. The right leg was thicker and measured approximately 2 cm longer than left leg. We noticed a right sided complex hemihyperplasia (, ) as well as a right-sided abdominal mass of 10 cm dia-meter. Her blood pressure and other vital signs were normal. A detailed medical history showed that the mother first noticed the asymmetry of her legs when she was three months old and took her to a pediatrician. The physician's presumptive diagnosis was congenital hip dislocation. Therefore a hip ultrasonography (US) was performed which showed no evidence of hip dislocation. An orthopedic surgeon was consulted, who ruled out a hip problem. Then the family was told it was something constitutional and no other recommendation was made. The infant was otherwise healthy during the following months, however the family noticed that the cheeks were also growing asymmetric but they took no other action since they were told it was constitutional and would do no harm to the child. The family history was unremarkable and she was the first and only child of the parents who was born weighing 3.5 kg after an uneventful pregnancy.
At the age of 12 months, when she developed macroscopic hematuria, an abdominal US showed a right sided renal mass. The patient was then referred to our hospital for further investigation and management. A renal mass and hematuria in an infant with isolated hemihyperplasia strongly suggested a Wilms’ tumor. An abdominal US and a computed tomography (CT) scan confirmed a cystic/solid mass of 10 cm in diameter at the right kidney consistent with Wilms tumor . Left renal vein and inferior vena cava were free of tumor infiltration. Right kidney was normal and there was no evidence of intraabdominal extention of tumor beyond the kidney. Metastatic work-up including chest X-ray and chest CT showed no distant metastatic disease.
A pre-operative diagnosis of Wilms tumor was made by clinical and radiological findings without biopsy. She was put on preoperative chemotherapy with two drugs (vincristine 1.4 mg/m2 weekly, 4 weeks; actinomycin-D 0.015 mg/kg/day, 1-5 days) since she had a large tumor to avoid capsule perforation during surgery. After significant regression with preoperative chemotherapy, a radical right nephrectomy was performed through a transabdominal approach. A final diagnosis of Wilms tumor, stage I favorable histology, was made. The patient received postoperative chemotherapy according to stage-I Wilms’ tumor (vincristine 1.4 mg/m2 weekly, 24 weeks; actinomycin-D 0.015 mg/kg/day, 1-5 days, 6 weeks interval). The treatment was well tolerated. We have been following her with regular (every three months) abdominal US and urine analysis to detect any recurrence of Wilms tumor or for the development of any other embryonal tumor. She has been in complete remission for four years. This screening process will be continued until she becomes 7 years old.