An 83-year-old Greek woman, without any prior significant medical history, referred to the outpatient department of the 2nd Department of Ophthalmology of the Medical School of Athens, complaining for visual deterioration at her left eye (OS). At presentation she underwent a complete ophthalmological examination. Best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 10/10 in her right eye (OD) and 2/10 in OS. Slit lamp examination did not identify any abnormalities in the anterior segments in both eyes. Her intraocular pressure was normal bilaterally.
Funduscopy and fundus photography revealed an unremarkable retina in OD. However, in OS a dark brown lesion, with “fuzzy” borders was identified, which covered partially the optic nerve head and extended temporal into the adjacent choroid and retina . Furthermore, hard exudates were observed temporal to the aforementioned pigmented lesion.
Fluorescein angiography (FA) and ICGA showed diffuse blocked hypofluerescence in all phases in the area covered by the pigmented lesion, with diffuse hyperfluorescence at the temporal rim of the lesion. As well, ICGA detected 3 hyperfluorescent polypoidal lesions arising from the choroidal circulation .
The pigmented lesion was shown in optical coherence tomography (OCT) (SPECTRALIS, Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) as a gradually sloped nodular elevation, with hyperreflective anterior surface and dense posterior shadowing. OCT also revealed subretinal fluid, RPE detachment, and a round protrusion attached beneath the posterior surface of the detached RPE, at the site corresponding to polypoidal lesions in ICGA .
A diagnosis of PCV associated with ODMC was made.
The treatment strategy included a session of verteporfin photodynamic therapy (PDT) in combination with 3 monthly intravitreal aflibercept injections. PDT was performed according to the standard TAP guidelines . Fifteen minutes after the infusion of verteporfin (dose of 6 mg/m2 body surface area), its irradiation was performed using an ocular photoactivation diode and a laser-linked slit lamp. The treatment spot diameter, based on the ICGA findings, was approximately 1500 μm and it was targeted against the polyps and not the surrounding branching vascular network. The intravitreal injections of 2.0 mg aflibercept (Eylea, Bayer Healthcare, Germany), were performed under standard sterile conditions, while topical antibiotics were applied 4 times per day for 2 days after the injection.
PDT session was performed 7 days after the first intravitreal aflibercept injection. One and two months later, the several injections were applied.
Three months after the treatment initiation, significant improvement was observed. Patient’s new BCVA was 5/10, while ICGA demonstrated total polyp regression . In OCT RPE detachment was present, whereas subretinal fluid was not evident .
Thirteen months since the beginning of the treatment, the patient was re-examined. ODMC remained stable, her BCVA rose to 7/10, no polyps were detected, while total resolution of RPE detachment was achieved .