A previously medically and surgically healthy 5-year-old Saudi girl presented with neck swelling and fever. She lived with her parents and siblings with good socioeconomic status. Parents are nonconsanguineous. Her initial vital signs during first presentation were a temperature 36.6 °C, blood pressure 85/53 mmHg, heart rate 101 beats/minute, and respiratory rate 22 breaths/minute on room air. She was admitted and diagnosed with right medial clavicular sterile osteomyelitis by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and bone scan. She was treated for 2 weeks with intravenous ceftriaxone and vancomycin (see Additional file : list of laboratory results and medications). Her symptoms resolved a few days after management initiation, and she was discharged in normal physical and neurological condition with oral sulfamethoxazole–trimethoprim and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Two months after her initial presentation, she was brought again to the pediatric emergency department (PED) febrile, with generalized tonic clonic status epilepticus (SE), which was aborted with lorazepam and phenytoin. She had no prior history of trauma, speech disturbance, limb weakness, behavioral changes, confusion, or febrile convulsions.
In the PED, she was tachypneic, tachycardic, and ill appearing. Her fever was 39 °C, blood pressure 131/94 mmHg, heart rate 142 beats/minute, respiratory rate 36 breaths/minute, and saturation 95% on non-rebreather face mask. Upon physical examination, she exhibited poor neurological responses, with Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 9/15, bilaterally reactive and symmetric pupils, strong gag and cough reflexes, and no focality, or neurocutaneous stigmata. Other systems examination including heart, lung, abdomen, skin, and musculoskeletal system was unremarkable. After SE treatment, she developed hypoventilation requiring intubation and mechanical ventilation.
Initial investigations showed unrevealing extensive infectious work-up including serological and cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) tuberculosis and brucellosis, and noninfectious causes including metabolic, hematological, immunodeficiency, and genetic diseases. Genetic investigations included both patient and her parents, and was nonrevealing, comprising primary immune deficiency (PID) panel and whole-exome and whole-genome sequencing. Immunological investigations comprised immunoglobin levels, oxidative burst assay, and lymphocyte markers. Initial cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and preliminary inflammatory analyses are summarized in Table . Of note, von Willebrand factor (vWF) levels were elevated, and declined with disease improvement. She was started on empirical intravenous broad-spectrum antimicrobial therapy including meropenem, vancomycin, and acyclovir (see Additional file : List of laboratory results and medications).
Initial brain computed tomography (CT) revealed no acute brain insult, and initial electroencephalogram (EEG) showed diffused nonspecific slowing with no epileptiform discharges. She was then shifted to the pediatric intensive care unit (PICU).
On hospital day (HD) 1, the patient’s course was complicated with increased right focal seizures and signs of elevated ICP (fixed dilated pupils, bradycardia, and hypertension). She was managed with hyperventilation, 3% intravenous sodium chloride (NaCl) 5 mL/kg, and intravenous mannitol 1 g/kg. After treatment began, an ophthalmological examination showed unequal pupil diameters, 5 mm right and 3 mm left, with bilateral papilledema with blurred disc margins. Repeated brain CT angiography showed multiple hypodensities associated with diffuse brain edema with a midline shift of 5 mm and impending right uncal herniation. Due to clinical and radiological findings of brain edema, first-tier elevated ICP therapy was initiated, comprising medical neuroprotection with osmotic, sedative, and inotropic therapies: head elevation at 30°, adequate sedation, target arterial partial pressure of CO2 (PaCO2) of 35–40 mmHg, target serum sodium of 145–155 mmol/L with 3% NaCl infusion, targeted mean arterial blood pressure (MAP) above 60 mmHg, and normothermia. Vasculitis treatment was also started, and she received her first intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) of 1 g/kg and was started on induction intravenous methylprednisolone at 30 mg/kg/day for 5 days. The patient then continued maintenance 2 mg/kg/day methylprednisolone in addition to intravenous 250 mg/m2 cyclophosphamide monthly for 6 months.
On HD 4, magnetic resonance angiography/venography (MRI/MRA/MRV) showed significant changes in herniation. With acute status epilepticus presentation and bilateral vessel involvement at onset, she was diagnosed with APP-cPACNS. Despite first-tier neuroprotective measures, she was still showing signs of refractory elevated ICP with clinical and radiological signs of herniation. As such, second-tier therapy was commenced, and she underwent an emergency right frontal decompressive hemicraniectomy, with intraparenchymal ICP monitor insertion. A simultaneous brain biopsy and right upper abdomen quadrant implantation of a bone flap was also performed. Intraoperatively, the ICP ranged from 30 to 35 mmHg. The patient was shifted back to the PICU, where medical therapy and treatment of elevated ICP were continued, with a target ICP < 20 mmHg, which was successfully achieved 17 hours later by a thiopental-induced coma. Histopathology showed neutrophil vacuolation. There were few mitotic figures in the white matter and gliosis with prominent clasmatodendrosis.
On HD 6, the immune therapy was intensified. She received plasmapheresis daily for a total of five sessions, in addition to the maintenance intravenous methylprednisolone. On HD 15, the sedation and thiopental-induced coma were gradually tapered off, and the patient was extubated after clinical and radiological improvement. She was transferred out of the PICU to a high-dependency unit. On HD 60, she underwent cranioplasty using the autologous bone flap from the abdomen. On HD 81, she was discharged conscious and alert, with fluent speech and intact comprehension, and sat independently, but could not walk. She also had oropharyngeal agnosia evident by moderate-to-severe weakness in lingual movement, weak oral bolus manipulation, and delayed oral swallow initiation with oral residue, and laryngeal excursion to palpation was inconsistent and delayed with reduced laryngeal range of motion. She was discharged on levetiracetam, phenytoin, aspirin, cyclophosphamide, and prednisolone. Follow-up MRI/MRA/MRV 6 months later showed marked improvement of vascular enhancement . Serial monthly clinical follow-ups in an outpatient clinic by multiple teams showed gradual progressive improvement allowing her to regain cognitive and speech abilities. One year after her initial presentation, she had appropriate cognition and speech for her age, normal cranial nerves and cerebellar examinations, and a mild motor deficit (4/5) with left hemiparesis.