A 40-year-old-woman with a history of Gardner's Syndrome status post prophylactic colectomy presented with an enterocutaneous fistula and for reevaluation of desmoid tumors. She had three previous abdominal operations including a prophylactic colectomy in 1992. In 1995, she had a resection of small intestine and marginal resection of associated desmoid tumors causing small bowel obstruction. In 2002, an emergent resection of small intestine and desmoid tumors for intestinal perforation removed only a portion of the diffuse mesenteric disease. This operation was complicated by an enterocutaneous fistula from the jejunum that subsequently healed with conservative care. She had no adjuvant radiation therapy at any point. Estrogen and progesterone receptor expression of the tumors was never assessed.
Despite treatment with anti-inflammatory agents, the patient's abdominal desmoid tumors continued to grow and she was re-admitted 10 months later for recurrence of her enterocutaneous fistula. Radiographic studies showed near-complete small bowel obstruction by desmoid tumor and complete diversion of the fecal stream through the fistula. She began total parenteral nutrition (TPN). The fistula was not amenable to operative repair without resolution of the distal small bowel obstruction. Options for resolving the distal obstruction included operative resection of the desmoids, a procedure associated with much potential morbidity, or systemic therapy to reduce the size of the desmoids. The patient was offered therapy with anti-estrogen agents or investigational therapy with imatinib. Imatinib was initiated and was ineffective, possibly related to the patient's difficulty with gut absorption. Imatinib was discontinued, and she began a regimen of cytotoxic therapy that is active for sarcoma, including doxorubicin 20 mg/m2 IV on days 1, 2, and 3 and ifosfamide 2 g/m2 daily for 3 days of a 21 day cycle. She received five cycles of this regimen, with a clear radiographic response on CT scan . However, her high-output fistula continued.
A barium enema demonstrated resolution of the distal obstruction with reflux of contrast through the fistula. Enterocutaneous fistula resection with primary enteroenterostomy was performed without complication. The patient was discharged on TPN for continued nutritional support, although she was able to tolerate oral feedings with normal bowel function. Her midline surgical wound subsequently healed by secondary intent. With the return of gastrointestinal function, antiestrogen therapy with tamoxifen 20 mg po daily was initiated.