A 41-year-old Iranian woman, without any history of known immunodeficiency conditions presented with slowly growing crusted, painful, and ulcerative lesions on her lips since 10 months ago. The patient had no history of smoking, alcohol, and opium use. She had a history of anxiety symptoms with no specific diagnosis. There was no travel history or unusual behavior. The patient had no classical risk factors for the development of opportunistic infection, prominent history of trauma, cosmetic lip tattoo, or burning in her lips. She had taken corticosteroid nasal spray for bronchitis. The clinical examination revealed an ill-demarcated, kissing ulcer associated thick, crusted area with a size of 3 × 1 cm on her lower lip. The ulcer was tender and discharged when pressed . There were no symptoms of interdigital intertrigo involvement nor signs of onychomycosis. The patient was not febrile, and there was no regional lymphadenopathy. The oral mucosa and tongue tissues were normal. Systemic general examinations were not noticeable. The results of screening for human immunodeficiency virus antibody (HIV Ab), hepatitis C virus (HCV) Ab, and hepatitis B virus surface antigen (HBsAg) were negative. At the onset of symptoms, she complained of dysphagia; however, she had typical results for endoscopic evaluation. Despite the local wound care and topical antifungal and antimicrobial therapy, immunosuppressive treatment with suspicion of immunobullous disorders and long-term antibiotic therapy worsened the wound. The clinical differential diagnosis of squamous cell carcinoma, other malignant lesions, ulcerative leishmaniasis, ulcerative mycobacterial infection, erosive lichen planus, immunobullous disorders, and opportunistic fungal infection was considered. Following these clinical manifestations, incisional skin biopsy samples were collected from the lower lip twice. Histopathological examination with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining revealed parakeratotic hyperkeratosis, severe acanthosis, spongiosis, and exocytosis of inflammatory cells in the epidermis accompanied by edema in papillary dermis with several inflammatory cells around blood vessels which were nonspecific . Direct immunofluorescence evaluation was negative for immunobullous diseases. The direct smear for leishmaniasis was negative. Nitroblue tetrazolium (NBT) test was negative. On direct microscopic examination (DME) with potassium hydroxide (KOH 10%), hyaline septate hyphae were seen . After 6 days, pink cottony growth with an irregular margin was grown on sabouraud dextrose agar (SDA) (Merck) with chloramphenicol , and fusiform microconidia and monophialides were seen in the microscopic scene . Antifungal susceptibility testing was considered using broth microdilution according to the clinical and laboratory standard institute methods . The MIC values were as follows: amphotericin B (1 mg/mL), voriconazole (4 mg/mL), itraconazole (0.032 mg/mL), and posaconazole (8 mg/mL). For molecular identification, the ITS1‑5.8SrDNA‑ITS2 region was amplified using ITS1 (5′-TCC GTA GGT GAA CCT GCG G-3′) and ITS4 (5′-TCC TCC GCT TAT TGA TAT GC-3′) primers . The PCR products was sent to sequence analysis in a forward direction (Bioneer, South Korea). The results were analyzed with Chromas 2.4 software (Nucleics Pty Ltd, Sydney) and the NCBI BLAST online tool targeting fungal sequences in DNA databases . Fusarium proliferatum was identified as the etiologic agent (having 100% sequence identity), and the gene sequence was deposited in the GenBank with the accession number OK340646. Based on the results of antifungal susceptibility, itraconazole (100 mg orally twice a day) was started, and after 2 months, the lesions were treated . After a 3-month follow-up, there was no sign of recurrence. Figure shows the clinical course timeline of the present case.