The patient was a 44-year-old woman who visited a physician for fever, bloody stool, and abdominal pain 1 year earlier. She was diagnosed with ulcerative colitis on colonoscopy, and symptoms improved with oral treatment. A colonoscopy performed 2 months after diagnosis detected a hard, 20-mm submucosal tumor (SMT) in the cecum, and the patient was referred to our hospital for additional examination.
Her past medical history included polyostotic fibrous dysplasia that was followed for 2 years and ulcerative colitis treated orally for 1 year. There was no particular familial medical history, and her pregnancy/delivery history was 2 gravida 1 para.
The findings of her first examination by us were as follows: height, 164 cm; body weight, 41 kg; body temperature, 36.5 °C; blood pressure, 102/64 mmHg; and pulse, 84/min. No jaundice or anemia was noted in the palpebral conjunctiva. The superficial lymph nodes were not palpable.
Her blood chemistry showed no abnormal finding other than a mild increase in a tumor marker, CEA (≦ 3.0 ng/dl), to 3.4 ng/dl.
On abdominal CT, an intensely stained mass with a 30-mm diameter, including a low-density region, was observed in the cecum. No lymph node swelling was noted around either the cecum or ileocolic artery .
SMT with a 20-mm diameter was noted in the cecum on colonoscopy. A boring biopsy was performed after resection of the mucosa using a snare, but a tumorous lesion was not observed .
Laparoscopic surgery was performed for a diagnosis of the cecal tumor. The appendix could not be confirmed, and twitching and hardening of the serosa were observed in the ileocecal region, for which laparoscopic ileocecal resection was performed following the procedure for malignant disease. Lymph nodes were dissected up to the origin of the ileocolic artery following D3 dissection. No obviously enlarged lymph node was evident during surgery .
The excised specimen contained a submucosal tumor-like protruding lesion at a location consistent with the appendiceal orifice. The appendix was very short and showed marked deformity .
On histopathological examination, high columnar epithelium accompanied by endometrial stroma was observed in the ileum over the cecum, mainly in the appendiceal muscular layer and subserosa. This finding provided the rationale for the diagnosis of appendiceal endometriosis. Twenty-three lymph nodes around the ileocolic artery were excised. Two of them were covered with a columnar epithelial monolayer and showed luminal structures accompanied by pilus structures, and these were diagnosed as endosalpingiosis of lymph nodes in the mesocolon .
The postoperative course was favorable. The patient started oral ingestion 2 days after surgery and was discharged at 7 days after the surgery. The tumor marker level (CEA) was maintained at about 1–2 ng/dL after surgery.