A 24-year-old Sri Lankan man developed fever, profuse vomiting and diarrhoea followed by reduced level of consciousness over a 12-h duration. He had myalgia, arthralgia and frontal headache. He did not have photophobia, phonophobia, skin rash, fits, cough or urinary symptoms. He did not have any bleeding manifestations. He did not smoke tobacco or consume alcohol. There was no history of illicit drug abuse or high risk sexual behavior. He had been previously diagnosed with mild intermittent bronchial asthma.
On examination, he was febrile (101.3 °F), drowsy with a Glasgow coma scale of 11/15. There were no skin rashes or lymphadenopathy. No focal signs were noted in the neurological examination and fundoscopic examination was normal. His Pulse rate was 112 bpm; blood pressure was 100/60 mmHg with no postural hypotension; respiratory rate was 14/min. Rest of the general and systems examinations were normal.
His full blood count on admission showed white blood cells of 6 × 109/L (Normal range [NR] 4.0–11.0 × 109/L) with neutrophils of 59%; haemoglobin 14.3 g/dL (NR 13.5–16.5 g/dL) and platelet count of 74 × 109/L (NR 150–450 × 109/L). Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 13 mm in first hour and C-reactive protein was 63 mg/l (NR < 5 mg/L). Serum electrolytes were normal with mild impaired renal function. Liver enzymes were elevated, alanine aminotransferase was 303 U/l (NR < 50 U/L) and aspartate aminotransferase was 482 U/l (NR < 50 U/L) with a total bilirubin of 10.6 µmol/L (NR 5–21 µmol/L). His urine analysis and coagulation profile were normal. Non-contrast CT brain demonstrated cerebral oedema. Lumbar puncture was precluded by a low platelet count.
Based on a working diagnosis of encephalitis, he was commenced on intravenous meropenem, vancomycin, aciclovir and dexamethasone, but were subsequently omitted once the diagnosis became evident.
On further investigation, dengue IgM antibody in serum was positive on day 6 of fever. Blood and urine cultures did not yield any microbial growth. Electroencephalography showed generalized slow wave activity. The cranial MRI showed an isolated ovoid hyperintensity in the splenium of the corpus callosum with homogeneous hyperintense signal on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) . A diagnosis of reversible splenial lesion syndrome (RESLES) was suspected based on the MRI appearance.
Standard dengue monitoring of vitals, urine output, haematocrit and platelet count were done. His platelet count dropped to a nadir of 31 × 109/L, but subsequently increased. The white cell count steadily increased to 14 × 109/L and then stabilized around 7 × 109/L. Fluid leakage was not detected on repeated ultrasound scanning during the acute phase of illness.
He was discharged from hospital on the tenth day of illness with complete clinical, heamatological and biochemical recovery. Follow–up cranial MRI done 1 month later showed complete resolution of the splenial lesion .