The patient is a 6-year-old girl. She is the fourth child in a large family. Her parents are unrelated and come from the same region. The pregnancy was unremarkable. The birth weight was 3000 g and the body length was 43 cm. Her two elder brothers died at a young age from suspected infantile cerebral palsy (ICP). Other siblings (younger brother and two elder sisters) are as healthy as their parents. Triple X syndrome, ICP, and hip dysplasia were diagnosed in the first year of life. The generalized seizures began at the age of 1.5 months and the patient had been treated with anticonvulsants for five years. There were no seizure relapses during anticonvulsant therapy and after its withdrawal. A low-grade fever of unknown origin was observed during the first year when seizures began. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in the first year of life showed ventricular dilatation. The girl has psychomotor development delay and spastic tetraparesis with the 5th level of Gross Motor Function Classification System (GMFCS). She neither talks nor communicates with the outside world and only uses vocalizations and social smiles. Metabolic (tandem mass spectrometry) and mitochondrial disorders (lactate and pyruvate were normal) have been ruled out by genetic counseling.
The erythematous rash appeared on the neck, chest, nape, and face at the age of 5.5 years. Then, periorbital erythema developed. Topical corticosteroids had a partial effect. Wrist edema, periorbital edema, weakness, and low-grade fever were observed during 1 month. Sleep disorder occurred. Infections and allergic conditions were excluded. Juvenile dermatomyositis was suspected and the patient was transferred to the Department of Pediatric Rheumatology. Findings of the examinations were the following: widespread erythematous rash with cyanotic discoloration on the upper extremities, on the chest and the neck, periorbital edema and erythema, and alopecia on the back of the head . The girl had spastic tetraparesis. She also had swelling of her hand joints, as well as swelling and local hyperthermia of the left knee. Laboratory tests revealed mild inflammation (slightly elevated ESR with normal CRP), increased AST = 107 U/L (n.v. < 34 U/L) and LDH = 669 U/L (n.v. < 220U/L) with normal creatine kinase, hypergammaglobulinemia (17.9 g/L, n.v. < 11.2 g/L), and negative immunological markers (antinuclear antibodies and polymyosities antibodies). The whole data are included in . Whole-body MRI was performed to assess muscle inflammation. Diffuse MR-signal increase on T2 and STIR was determined in the upper and lower muscle extremities and the pelvic and back muscles. Similar changes were found in the fascia and fat tissues. There were signs of bilateral hip joint dislocations. Electroneuromyography revealed signs of an active stage of primary muscular lesion of the pectoralis major and supraspinatus muscles, as well as indirect signs of inactive lesions of the anterior tibial muscle. The clinical manifestations, prior severe neurological impairment, and familial history led to the suspicion of interferonopathy. We performed brain CT, IFN-I score, and clinical exome sequencing. Basal ganglia, periventricular, and cerebellum calcifications; hypoplasia of the corpus callosum; and leukodystrophy were detected on CT . Unfortunately, we did not perform lumbar puncture because of the mother’s rejection. IFN-I scores were 12 times higher than normal. The nucleotide variant c.434G > C (chr 20:36935104C > G; NM_015474) was detected in exon 4 of the SAMHD1 gene in the homozygous state, leading to amino acid substitution p.R145P. This variant has not been described in the gnomAD database v2.1.1 previously. Finally, Aicardi-Goutières syndrome 5 was diagnosed. A short course of corticosteroids (CS) and tofacitinib 5 mg twice a day was started. The rash disappeared. The girl became calmer and began to crawl and roll to the goal. Relapse of rash and myositis were detected in the 8th month of CS tapering (daily dose was <0.2 mg/kg). During the CS tapering, the patient received tofacitinib 5 mg twice a day regularly. The new brain CT depicted the previously discovered changes without a sign of calcification spreading. After confirmation of relapse, we were forced to return to the full dose of CS (1 mg/kg), with a methotrexate treatment as a supplementary steroid-sparing agent, and continue Tofacitinib treatment at the previous dose. Positive dynamics were achieved again. The flow chart of diagnostic procedures and the algorithm is depicted in .