A 74-year-old man had back pain while working. At 1 week after experiencing back pain, he underwent periodontal debridement. He did not take antibiotics despite their prescription and developed a fever after debridement. At 3 weeks after periodontal debridement, he visited our hospital because back pain had not improved. He was admitted on the same day in the Department of Orthopedics with a diagnosis of compression fracture of the 12th thoracic vertebral body. He had never smoked and had no history of diabetes mellitus or steroid therapy. Physical examination revealed a temperature of 38.5 °C and severe lumbar back pain. His laboratory test results indicated a peripheral white blood cell (WBC) count of 8760/μL, an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 75 mm/h, and a C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 9.9 mg/dL. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a compression fracture of the 12th thoracic vertebral body and a hematoma anterior to the vertebral body . Chest and abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed no findings suggestive of infection and hematoma anterior to the vertebral body. Orthopedic surgeons initially managed the compression fracture using a corset. Furthermore, we performed a percutaneous biopsy of the vertebral body at 15 days after admission because the patient’s fever did not resolve. Cytological findings revealed no malignancy, and biopsy cultures were negative. During follow-up observation without antibiotic therapy, blood culture was performed at 20 days after admission because his inflammation worsened (peripheral WBC count, 9490/μL; CRP level, 22.4 mg/dL). Two blood cultures grew S. gordonii susceptible to cefaclor (minimum inhibitory concentration [MIC], 0.5), cefotaxime (MIC, 0.12), erythromycin (MIC, 0.12), meropenem (MIC, 0.12), clindamycin (MIC, 0.25), and vancomycin (MIC, 1). Cardiac ultrasonography showed no infective endocarditis. Immediately after the detection of S. gordonii in blood cultures, we initiated empirical antibiotic therapy with intravenous (IV) meropenem (1.5 g/day) at 26 days after admission. As the patient verbalized an increase in back pain, CT was performed at 5 days after initial antibiotic therapy, which showed right-sided pleural effusion encapsulated in the right thoracic cavity . Thoracic surgeons were consulted about pleural effusion, and we placed a 20-Fr thoracic drain at the dorsal side of the right thoracic cavity from the right fifth intercostal space. We established a diagnosis of empyema because the effluent from the drain was purulent and the pleural effusion culture yielded S. gordonii. The inflammation did not improve (peripheral WBC count, 12,320/μL; CRP level, 20.0 mg/dL), and pleural effusion encapsulated in the thoracic cavity was still observed on chest CT at 4 days after drainage; hence, we performed surgical debridement through video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS). The lungs had extensively adhered to the chest wall. When we peeled the adhesion, a large amount of purulent pleural effusion was observed in the space anterior to the vertebral body and was drained as much as possible. Adhesion was severe at the dorsal side of the thoracic cavity, particularly at the anterior aspect of the vertebral body. No evidence of apparent vertebral body fracture or damage to the parietal pleura was observed during surgery. After drainage, one drain was placed in the space anterior to the vertebral body and another drain in the lung apex, and the operation was completed. Intraoperative pleural effusion cultures also yielded S. gordonii. A drainage tube was displaced at 4 days after surgery. Because of the patient’s mild but persistent back pain, MRI was performed at 10 days after surgery to evaluate the compression fracture. MRI showed low T1-weighted signals and high T2-weighted signals in the 12th thoracic vertebral body, and the signals spread to the upper and lower intervertebral disk space . We diagnosed bacteremia and an infected hematoma resulting from periodontal debridement after a compression fracture; the infected site directly spread and caused empyema and pyogenic spondylitis. The patient postoperatively received IV antibiotic therapy with meropenem (1.5 g/day) and clindamycin (1200 mg/day) for 2 weeks and with ceftriaxone (3.0 g/day) and clindamycin (1200 mg/day) for another 4 weeks. A dentist was consulted for dental caries assessment after surgery and provided continuous treatment for dental caries during hospitalization. Follow-up CT after treatment revealed resolution of pleural effusion, and the patient’s back pain gradually decreased after surgery. After discharge, oral treatment with clindamycin (600 mg/day) and minocycline (200 mg/day) was maintained for 5 weeks. Because of a taste disorder and reduced renal function due to minocycline, the oral treatment was changed from clindamycin and minocycline to cefcapene (300 mg/day). Treatment with cefcapene was continued for 9 weeks and completed. CRP level and ESR gradually decreased and remained within normal limits. Neither empyema nor pyogenic spondylitis had recurred at 12 months after surgery.