A 41-year-old nulligravida Japanese woman was referred to our hospital (Kawakita General Hospital, Tokyo, Japan) due to the presence of a large cervical mass. Thirteen years previously, she had undergone myomectomy for the treatment of multiple uterine fibroids in the lower uterine segment, including one weighing 1.4 kg. Penetration beyond the endocervical gland had occurred during resection, and the anterior endocervical canal had been opened during the surgery. Her original follow-ups were approximately once a year at another hospital, where cancer screening was performed using transvaginal ultrasonography and cytology of the cervix and endometrium. Eight years after the original surgery, she had undergone pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which did not detect any abnormal masses in the uterine body or cervix. Twelve years after the original surgery, she underwent transvaginal ultrasonography, and no abnormal masses were detected.However, a pelvic examination, performed 13 years after her myomectomy, indicated marked enlargement of the cervix, which was suspected to be a cervical malignancy. The patient had experienced no symptoms prior to the examination, and given the lack of observed progression, we were unable to estimate the period over which the mass developed. Transvaginal ultrasonography indicated that the mass contained multilocular, hypoechoic lesions, with heterogeneous internal echogenicity. Furthermore, MRI confirmed the presence of a multilocular, irregularly shaped cystic mass (overall diameter, >15 cm) in the upper anterior cervix . Computed tomography (CT) did not show any evidence of enlarged lymph nodes, ascites, or a distant tumor. Blood tests did not show elevated levels of inflammation or tumor markers. The patient’s white blood cell count was 6,000/mL and C-reactive protein level was <0.3 mg/dL. Levels of CA125, CA19-9, and squamous cell carcinoma antigen (SCC) were 32.4 U/mL, 6.4 U/mL, and 1.4 U/mL, respectively. Results from cytological examination of both the cervix and endometrium were negative for cancer.Therefore, we suspected that the mass was either a degenerated uterine fibroid, lobular endocervical glandular hyperplasia, or cervical malignancy. We performed a total abdominal hysterectomy, and dense adhesions were observed in the pelvis, particularly around the cervical mass. Moreover, the cervix was markedly enlarged, given the mass in the anterior wall. However, no additional abscesses or ascites were detected in the abdomen. A macroscopic examination revealed that the cystic mass originated from the upper anterior cervix, which was one of the sites involved in the original myomectomy. The mass consisted of 2 components, one containing an abscess within the soft solid tissue, and another that was filled with old blood (similar to an endometrial cyst) .
Following culture of the abscess tissue, Escherichia coli was identified as the causative bacteria. Microscopic examination revealed the coexistence of endometriosis, and an abscess was confirmed within the cyst, although malignant cells were not identified. An additional pathological review was performed at the University of Tokyo, which confirmed the absence of atypical or malignant cells. Thus, we diagnosed the mass as a pyogenic cyst, with endometriosis, which most likely occurred at the site of the uterine scar.