In November 2020, a 75-year-old male with low comorbidity (hypertension, no previous abdominal surgery) was admitted to the Department of General Surgery, Frieri-Criscuoli Hospital (Avellino, Italy) with abdominal pain, vomiting and bowels not opened in the last 3 days. The patient lived in a rural area of the Campania region, southern Italy. The anamnesis revealed that until 3 years ago he had an orchard and raised chickens and pigs for his own consumption. Physical examination revealed abdominal pain with bloating. Examination of blood showed a white blood cell (WBC) count of 19.16 × 103/μL with 86.8% neutrophils and 2.9% eosinophils. Computed tomography (CT) scan exposed multiple air-fluid levels in the epigastrium and left hypochondrium with some fluid in mesenteric recesses and signs of bowel obstruction . The day after the hospitalization, the symptoms persisted so the patient was referred to surgery. The explorative laparotomy revealed bowel dilatation with vascular suffering and kinking of a tract of ileus in correspondence of a severe mesenteric inflammation. During the bowel palpation, from the Treitz ligament to the ileocecal valve, a long worm-like foreign body was felt and this occasioned to a little enterotomy to extract the worm . The palpation of the entire bowel did not show the presence of other ones. The worm recovered was washed in saline solution and stored in 70% (v/v) ethanol. A stool sample was also collected from the bowel of the patient and preserved at + 4 °C.
The worm and the stool samples were sent, within 24 h, to the laboratories of the WHO Collaborating Centre for diagnosis of intestinal helminths and protozoa (WHO CCITA-116, University of Naples Federico II, Italy) for further analysis.
The worm was cylindrical in shape, pinkish in colour and measured 20 cm in length and 6 mm in diameter . Under the stereomicroscope the helminth presented a buccal orifice with three lips (two subventral and one dorsal) and a straight posterior end . The worm was identified as an adult female of Ascaris spp. .
A portion of the adult worm was sent in 70% (v/v) ethanol to the Department of Public Health and Infectious Diseases, Section of Parasitology (Sapienza University of Rome, Italy) for the genetic characterization.
DNA extraction was performed using the Isolate II Genomic DNA kit (Bioline, UK), according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The entire ITS nuclear region (ITS1, 5.8S, ITS2) was amplified using 20 ng of genomic DNA, 10 mM Tris–HCl (pH 8.3), 1.5 mM MgCl2 (Bioline), 40 mM of a nucleotide mix (Bioline), 20 pmol/µl each of the forward primer NC5 (59-GTAGGTGAACCTGCGGAAGGATCAT- 39) and the reverse primer NC2 (59-TTAGTTTCTTCCTCCGCT-39) described by Zhu et al. and 1.0 U of BIOTAQ DNA Polymerase (Bioline) in a final volume of 50 µl. The PCR was performed in a GenePro Eurocycler Dual Block (Bioer) under the following conditions: 10 min at 95 °C (initial denaturation), 30 cycles of 30 s at 95 °C (denaturation), 40 s at 52 °C (annealing) and 75 s at 72 °C (extension), and a final elongation step of 7 min at 72 °C. A negative control (PCR master mix without genomic DNA) was included in the amplification reaction.
A PCR product of around 1000 bp was obtained. The ITS amplicon was digested with the restriction endonuclease HaeIII, as the resulting patterns have been previously proved useful for the identification of Ascaris species. This approach yielded the specific banding pattern peculiar to the A. suum genotype, showing three bands of about 610 bp, 230 bp and 140 bp .
The stool sample was analysed with the FLOTAC dual technique as described in Gualdieri et al. . The analytic sensitivity was four eggs per gram (EPG) of faeces. Faecal examination revealed the presence of unfertilized Ascaris eggs with an intensity of 16 EPG.
The patient was treated with mebendazole 100 mg twice a day for 3 days. The stool examination at 7-days follow-up was negative. The post-operative hospitalization was regular with re-alimentation after 3 days and discharge after 12 days, asymptomatic. A week after the discharge another parasitological stool examination was negative.