A 13-year-old Caucasian boy with congenital arhinia presented for evaluation of delayed puberty and micropenis. He was born at 32 weeks gestation weighing 2045g. The absence of his nose resulted in significant respiratory distress at birth necessitating resuscitation and subsequent tracheostomy, which was maintained until age 2 years. He also had a cleft lip and palate that were repaired in infancy. He had no other dysmorphic features, notably no microphthalmia. He met developmental milestones appropriately. No family history of arhinia, anosmia, delayed puberty or hypogonadism was reported.
Absence of the nose along with mid-face hypoplasia was the most striking feature on physical examination. His height was 161.6cm (50th percentile for age and sex). His weight was 79.9kg (greater than the 97th percentile for age and sex). He appeared of normal intelligence and was taking advanced placement classes in school. On genital examination, his left testicle could not be palpated. His right testis was 2mL in volume and descended into his scrotum. The stretched penile length was 3.7cm (two standard deviations below the mean for his age). His pubic hair was Tanner stage 2. Subsequent to this examination, orchiopexy of his left testicle had been attempted, but on exploration the testis was noted to be small and of poor quality, resulting in orchiectomy.
Our patient’s bone age was 14 years by the standards of Greulich and Pyle at chronological age 13 years and 10 months, which is slightly advanced for hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, but could be explained by his obesity. Computed tomography imaging with three-dimensional reconstructions of his facial bones revealed a lack of nasal bones, the absence of sinus cavities and lacrimal glands, and maxillary hypoplasia.
A Smell Identification Test was administered; this consists of four booklets containing 10 scratch and sniff odorants. The test is derived from basic psychological test measurement theory and focuses on the comparative abilities of individuals to identify a number of odorants at the supra-threshold level . The individual’s score of correctly identified odorants is compared to scores of normal individuals of the same age and gender using tables provided in the administration manual. Only 11 of 40 possible smells were identified, diagnostic of anosmia as the test is designed such that someone unable to smell would guess the correct answers 25% of the time.
Serum was obtained for measurements of gonadotropin levels and testosterone and whole blood for gene testing. His karyotype was 46,XY with no structural or numerical anomalies. Gonadotropin and testosterone measures at 13 years of age were consistent with severe hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. His level of luteinizing hormone was <0.1IU/L (expected range for age, 0.2 to 5.0IU/L) and follicle-stimulating hormone was 0.3IU/L (expected range for age, 1.2 to 5.8IU/L). At 13 years of age, his testosterone measured 1.1nmol/L (expected range for pre-pubertal males <0.7 to 0.8nmol/L). A pathological examination of the extirpated gonad revealed tissue consistent with atrophic testis.
His DNA was screened for rare sequence variants in the genes KAL1, FGFR1, PROK2, PROKR2, FGF8 and GnRHR by Dr William Crowley at the University of Massachusetts. These genes were selected for examination because of their known association with Kallmann syndrome and/or hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. Rare sequence variants were defined as DNA sequence variations with minor allele frequency of less than 1% in normal healthy controls. Screening for rare sequence variants in the KAL1, FGFR1, PROK2, PROKR2, FGF8 and GnRHR genes were all negative. Sequencing for the coding region of CHD7 was provided by Dr. Shibo Li at the University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center. No mutations were identified.
Array comparative genomic hybridization was carried out with a commercially available array designed to detect copy number imbalances (losses or gains) across the whole genome (NimbleGen 720K V.3.1, Roche NimbleGen System Inc., Madison, WI, USA). The array contains 720,000 oligonucleotides with a median probe space of approximately 2.5kb that represents coding and noncoding human sequences in the genome (content sourced from the University of California, Santa Cruz hg18 human genome: March 2006 National Center for Biotechnology Information build 36, RefSeq and GenBank databases). One normal female validated DNA sample was used as an opposite sex control for the analysis. Data interpretation was based on information from University of California, Santa Cruz Genome Browser , the Database of Genomic Variants and an internal copy database. A high sensitivity microarray was carried out with specific attention to the loci of the known genes involved in hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and nasal development including MSX1, NRP2, ALX3 and ALX4. No chromosomal imbalances of these regions were seen on this analysis.
At age 13 years and 11 months, treatment with intramuscular testosterone enanthate at 75mg a month was begun and increased to the full adult replacement dose over 29 months. With testosterone replacement, his penile length increased to 9cm, pubic hair advanced to Tanner stage 4, acne developed and he experienced an overall improved sense of well-being. At the age of 17, he is in a staged process of building a nose.