A 33-year-old Malay man, unmarried, with no known past medical history, was newly diagnosed with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) in September 2020. He was the youngest of four children. At presentation, he reported that he previously had multiple sexual partners. He was a non-smoker and non-alcoholic who worked as a laborer and had experienced difficulties during the COVID-19 pandemic. He was not on any medications or oral supplements. Test results for other infective diseases, including hepatitis B, hepatitis C, toxoplasma, syphilis, cryptococcosis and tuberculosis, were unremarkable. CD4+ T lymphocyte count taken on September 2020 was 9 cells/mm3. He was subsequently started on highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) the following month, including oral efavirenz 600 mg, oral emtricitabine 200 mg and oral tenofovir 300 mg, all once daily. One month after starting the HAART regimen, he had contact with a COVID-19-positive person, and a nasal swab for the COVID-19 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay was performed. The result indicated that he was positive for COVID-19. He was not admitted to the hospital but was under home quarantine.
He presented to our department in December 2020 complaining of a progressive blurring of vision in his right eye for the past 2 months, with no symptoms suggestive of COVID-19 at the time of presentation. Visual acuity in the right and left eye was 6/60 and 6/7.5, respectively. No significant abnormalities were noted upon examination of the bilateral eye anterior segment. Generalized retinal vasculitis with severe sheathing of the retinal vessels and mild vitritis was seen in the right eye on fundus examination . FBA was noted. No abnormalities were found in fundus examination of the left eye. Subsequent serum serology testing for CMV was positive for both IgM and IgG. At the same time, his nasal swab for COVID-19 was still positive with a low cycle threshold value.
The patient was then admitted into the COVID-19 ward for 2 weeks. At that time, the patient had already been on HAART for 2 months. Upon admission to the COVID-19 ward, testing revealed that the CD4+ T lymphocyte count had increased from 9 to 41 cells/mm3.. There were no remarkable findings on physical and neurological examination upon admission to the COVID-19 ward: blood pressure was 126/85 mmHg, pulse rate was 84 beats per minute, temperature was 36.8 °C and oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 100% under room air. He did not have any body weakness, shortness of breath or chest pain, with clear lungs upon auscultation. Chest X-ray taken upon admission to the ward showed no significant findings, with clear lungs . He was then treated with intravenous (IV) ganciclovir 225 mg twice a day (10 mg/kg/day) for 2 weeks. The patient came back to the clinic for review 1 week after the completion of his IV ganciclovir. It was noted that his FBA in his right eye had improved gradually and that his best corrected visual acuity had recovered to 6/12. Blood investigations showed a high level of acute inflammatory markers during the initial diagnosis of COVID-19, with subsequent down-trending . The patient subsequently defaulted follow-up.