A 75-year-old male (body weight 71.6 kg, height 159.3 cm, body mass index [BMI] 28.22 kg/m2) came to emergency room with right lower quadrant pain that had started 2 days previously. We diagnosed him with acute appendicitis and decided to do a laparoscopic appendectomy. He had undergone a radical prostatectomy five years previously for prostate cancer. The patient took oral medications for hypertension and Parkinson’s disease. His neck was a little bit rigid. The thyromental distance was 7 cm. His mouth opening was 2.5 fingerbreadths. The Mallampati score was a class III. There were no loose, chipped, or damaged teeth. Although there was a concern about airway difficulties on physical examination, we decided to proceed with general anesthesia because there had been no airway issues in previous surgeries.
After giving consent for general anesthesia, the patient entered the operating room. The patient’s vital signs were stable prior to general anesthesia. We applied standard monitoring, including electrocardiogram, pulse oximetry, and noninvasive blood measurement. The patient was preoxygenated with 4 L/min oxygen via facial mask. General anesthesia was induced with propofol 120 mg and rocuronium 50 mg. We inserted the oral airway into the oral cavity. There was no difficulty in mask ventilation. We attempted direct laryngoscopy to visualize the patient’s larynx. But after several attempts, it turned out that it was impossible to insert the direct laryngoscope deep enough for vocal cord visualization without damaging his teeth because of a limited mouth opening.
We decided to do a fiberoptic intubation. We expected the laryngeal view on fiberoptic intubation to be bad because the patient had a high BMI (28.22 kg/m2) and was fully relaxed. We decided to use the modified Guedel airway that we had made earlier for difficult fiberoptic intubations.
We modified the regular Guedel airway by making a longitudinal channel at the convex side to facilitate airway removal after intubation and opened the distal lingual end for a better laryngeal view .
We inserted the sterilized modified Guedel airway into the mouth. We inserted a fiberoptic bronchoscope (5.2 mm diameter, Olympus LF-TP, Japan) into the lubricated 7.5-mm endotracheal tube. An assistant lifted the jaw for a better laryngeal view. We advanced the fiberoptic cable through the modified Guedel airway until the glottis was visualized. The fiberoptic cable advanced through the vocal cord until the carina was seen . The airway was removed gently from the oral cavity. The endotracheal tube was inserted into the trachea along the fiberoptic cable.
We completed the laparoscopic appendectomy under general anesthesia without any problems. Following surgery, we infused 200 mg of sugammadex via the intravenous route after we had confirmed four twitches in a train-of-four stimulation. We performed extubation when the patient was fully awake. No specific event was reported after extubation.
After the operation, the patient provided written informed consent to have his case details and the accompanying images published.