A 69-year-old Japanese woman with osteoporosis and lower acute kyphosis was referred to our hospital complaining of severe back pain and difficulty in walking. The patient's physical examination demonstrated an obvious thoracolumbar kyphosis with a normal, lower extremity neurologic status. Back pain worsened in intensity and frequency during standing and walking and did not respond to treatment with pharmacotherapy, bracing, or trigger point injections. Protruded spinous processes of the apex with back muscle atrophy resulted in irritated skin, and the patient could not lie on her back. Radiography of total spine showed severe lower acute kyphosis with osteoporotic vertebral fractures of T11, T12, L1, and L2 . The kyphosis was rigid, measuring 70° from T11 to L2, and correcting to 67° on hyperextension. The kyphosis at the upright position from T10-L3 was 74°.
The patient met the criteria for surgery and underwent an anterior release and interbody fusion followed by a posterior instrumented fusion. A left side extrapleural-retroperitoneal approach with T11 rib resection, anterior spinal release, discectomies, and interbody bone grafting were performed from T11 to L3. For interbody fusion, Harms Cage (DePuy Spine, Raynham, MA, USA) and harvested autograft T11 rib were used for T12-L1 level and 15-mm slices of fresh-frozen femoral head allograft were used for T11-T12, L1-L2, and L2-L3. The fresh-frozen femoral head allograft was obtained from living donors who had undergone total hip arthroplasty. The posterior instrumented spinal fusion using CD System (Medtronic Sofamor Danek, Memphis, TN, USA) was performed from T10 to L3. Partial facetectomies were performed at each level. Transpedicular fixation was obtained bilaterally from T11 to L3. Downgoing transverse process hooks were placed bilaterally at T10, and upgoing laminar hooks were placed bilaterally at L3. Bone chips from the femoral head allograft mixed with resected spinous processes were grafted posteriorly. Postoperatively, kyphosis was corrected to 28°, as measured from T10 to L3. Symptoms were alleviated after surgery.
A thoracolumbar brace was applied for 6 months. Interbody solid fusion from T11 to L3 with incorporation of the femoral head allograft was seen by 1 year postoperatively. A new vertebral fracture of T10 occurred 2 years postoperatively, resulting in a slight loss of correction (35°, T10-L3). However, no additional vertebral fractures occurred thereafter. After surgery, the patient started osteoporosis pharmacotherapy with alfacalcidol (1 μg/day) for 5 years, followed by alendronate (5 mg/day) or risedronate (2.5 mg/day) until present. Kyphosis corrected to 35° 2 years postoperatively was maintained at the patient's 12-year follow-up evaluation . She remained free of back pain and able to walk without a cane at her 12-year follow-up (age, 81 years).