On 10 February 2023, a 31-year-old woman visited our institution with lower abdominal pain. The patient underwent laparoscopic unilateral ovarian cystectomy in another medical institution due to an unknown pathologic diagnosis approximately 4.5 years before the presentation. Whether surgical spillage occurred or not in this laparoscopic surgery was unclear. Computed tomography (CT) and subsequent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 6.5 × 4.0 cm multi-loculated cystic mass lesion arising from the right pelvic wall, along with a 4 cm sized cystic tumor in the right ovary . The pelvic mass was observed to be supplied by the right internal iliac artery in the coronary view of T2-weighted MRI (B). Contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MRI revealed contrast enhancement throughout the pelvic mass, except for the internal cystic component (D). The pelvic mass exhibited a high signal intensity (SI) on the diffusion-weighted MR image (b = 1000 s/mm2), and the apparent diffusion coefficient map showed a signal loss, indicating a highly cellular tumor (G). Additionally, some lesions with similar SIs were observed in the rectal serosa, which were later confirmed as tumor seeding in laparoscopic exploration (G,H). For this pelvic mass, a neurogenic tumor, such as a benign schwannoma, was suspected, whereas a benign cystic tumor and functional cyst were suspected in the right and left ovaries, respectively. No other abnormal findings, including ascites or lymphadenopathies, and the pancreas, were observed on MRI and CT. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Kyungpook National University Hospital (KNUH 2023-06-015).
On 25 April 2023, the colorectal surgeon in our institution performed laparoscopic exploration. Intraoperatively, the surgeon detected seeding lesions on the rectal serosa and an isolated pelvic mass on the right side of the pelvic cavity. Moreover, the surgeon noted several small cystic or polypoid spherical mass lesions on the surfaces of both ovaries, fallopian tubes, and pelvic peritoneum (see C, F and I, respectively). The mass was laparoscopically removed; subsequently, the surgeon called the gynecologic surgeon to examine the bilateral ovarian lesions. The capsules of the bilateral cystic lesions were resected and sent to a pathologist for frozen section analysis, which revealed the possibility of malignancy. Following permanent pathologic examination, both ovarian capsules and peritoneal lesions were diagnosed with solid pseudopapillary tumors. Following this diagnosis, whole-body positron emission tomography/CT was performed; however, no specific lesion in the pancreas or other distant organs was observed.
On 15 May 2023, the gynecologic surgeon performed laparotomic staging surgery and cytoreduction, including total hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, lymphadenectomy from both pelvic sides up to the para-aortic level, infracolic omentectomy, appendectomy, and multiple peritoneal biopsies. During this surgery, the colorectal surgeon also detected multiple nodular lesions in the anterior side of the rectosigmoid and upper rectum (the lower margin was anterior peritoneal reflection). The surgeon planned en bloc resection with rectal preservation; therefore, to prevent rectal perforation, sharp dissection was performed. Multiple nodular lesions were completely removed, and a rectal tube was placed to prevent perforation and stricture. No residual lesions were macroscopically visible in the abdominal cavity postoperatively. The permanent pathologic examination confirmed the presence of SPN in both ovaries, paragutter peritoneum above the pelvic brim, cecal serosa, and appendix. However, no tumors were noted in the uterus, omentum, pelvis, and para-aortic lymph nodes. Interestingly, despite the absence of any specific macroscopic lesions, microscopic examination revealed metastatic SPN in the peritoneum near the appendix.
The pelvic mass was 7.5 × 5.5 × 4.5 cm in size with a well-capsulated ivory-to-light-brown-colored solid and cystic mass. In the pathologic examination, the tumor showed solid nests with a pseudopapillary architecture. The pseudopapillary patterns were caused by the discohesion of tumor cells with hyalinized cores (A). Its cells were polygonal with eosinophilic-to-pale cytoplasm, and some cells had abundant foamy cytoplasm with paranuclear vacuoles (B). Intracellular and extracellular hyaline globules were frequently observed (C). Interestingly, microscopic examination revealed a metastasis in the peritoneum near the right paragut (D). Immunohistochemistry revealed that the tumor cells were positive for β-catenin, which is characteristic and fairly specific for SPN (nuclear translocation), WT-1 (focal nuclear), and CD99, which is a helpful finding for SPN (MIC2; paranuclear dot-like pattern) (see E, F and G, respectively); additionally, cytokeratin was focally positive. Among neuroendocrine markers, synaptophysin and chromogranin were negative; however, CD56 was positive. Inhibin, S-100, and Melan-A showed a negative reaction.
We performed genetic testing using formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded samples of the pelvic mass with next-generation sequencing (NGS), which revealed some missense mutations in multiple genes among a total of 344 target genes with ONCOaccuPanelTM (NGeneBio, Seoul, Korea) . Whereas no mutation was noted in the genes of tier I (variants of strong clinical significance), four missense mutations were noted in tier II (variants of potential clinical significance) genes on the basis of the Association for Molecular Pathology guidelines , including CTNNB1 (c.100G > A), TP53 (c.329G > T), FGFR4 (c.379G > C) encoding fibroblast growth factor receptor 4, and NKX2-1 (c.1106C > T) encoding thyroid transcription factor 1. These point mutations resulted in pathogenic changes in amino acid sequences in each gene, Gly34Arg, Arg110Leu, Asp127His, and Ala369Val, respectively. Moreover, NGS revealed twelve mutations in the genes classified as tier III (variants of unknown clinical significance) or IV (benign or likely benign variants); of the twelve mutations, five were single-nucleotide variants/Indel (ERBB3, MET, OR4M2, RBBP8, and XRCC2, encoding epidermal growth factor receptor 3, hepatocyte growth factor receptor, olfactory receptor 4M2, retinoblastoma-binding protein 8, and X-ray repair cross-complementing protein 2, respectively), and seven were gene fusion (ARAF-IGF2, ARAF-PHF2, DIS3L2-ARAF, FLT4-RFX2, FLT4-SAMD4B, JAK3-RAB11FIP4, and NOL9-NKX2-2 [ARAF, IGF2, PHF2, DIS3L2, FLT4, RFX2, SAMD4B, JAK3, RAB11FIP4, NOL9, and NKX2-2 encode serine/threonine-protein kinase, insulin-like growth factor 2, plant homeodomain finger protein 2, DIS3 like 3′-5′ exoribonuclease 2, vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 3, regulatory factor X2, sterile alpha motif domain-containing protein 4B, Janus kinase 3, Rab11 family-interacting protein 4, nucleolar protein 9, and NK2 homeobox 2, respectively]).
Although R0 surgery, leaving no visible lesions, was performed, the multidisciplinary tumor board decided to recommend adjuvant chemotherapy because a microscopic metastasis was observed in the peritoneum near the right paragut. The patient received adjuvant chemotherapy with an FP regimen (D1, cisplatin 60 mg/m2 intravenously; D1–D3, 5-fluorouracil 825 mg/m2 intravenously) in four cycles every 3 weeks since 29 June 2023. The patient underwent chemotherapy without experiencing any specific adverse effects, except for grade 2 nausea/vomiting and grade 1 oral mucositis. The latest chest and abdomen CT revealed there was no evidence of disease on 8 February 2024.