A 35-year-old Ethiopian female patient presented to the outpatient clinic with a complaint of right upper abdominal pain for 1 year along with symptoms of fatty meal intolerance and long-standing epigastric burning pain, but no history of steatorrhea, urine color change, or jaundice, and 15 years ago, the patient had yellowish eye discoloration (jaundice) but no right upper quadrant pain or fever, and was treated with unspecified oral medication at the nearby health center. The patient had no history of previous surgery, trauma, or any risk factors suggesting hydatid disease of the liver. She had no history of diabetes, hypertension, asthma, or any known drug allergy.
On examination, her vital signs were within normal limits. Her body mass index (BMI) was 23 kg/m2. At presentation, she had no jaundice, right upper quadrant tenderness, or any palpable abdominal mass. The rest of the examinations were unremarkable. Viral markers and the autoimmune hepatitis antibody spectrum were negative. The laboratory results showed the values of liver function, urinalysis, and hemostatic test were within normal limits. She was investigated for possible gallstone disease, and imaging was carried out. Ultrasonography showed she had multiple stones in the gallbladder and agenesis of the right hepatic lobe with an enlarged left lobe.
Computed tomography revealed the absence of the right hepatic lobe with compensatory hypertrophy of the left hepatic lobe and caudate lobe and the absence of the right portal vein, right hepatic artery, and right hepatic vein. Retrohepatic gallbladder and multiple radiopaque foci in the gallbladder and colonic diaphragmatic interposition were also reported. .
The patient then underwent an explorative laparotomy with a right upper quadrant subcostal incision. The patient was operated on under general anesthesia by a hepatobiliary surgeon and general surgery residents. The findings are as detailed here. We observed a complete absence of the right lobe of the liver with compensatory hypertrophy of the left and caudate lobes and some degree of early cirrhosis. The gall bladder was located posterior to the left lobe of the liver in a vertical position with attachment to the diaphragm and a high-positioned hepatic flexure of the transverse colon. The cystic duct has a tortuous course to enter the “common hepatic duct.” The gallbladder was full of stones, and the common bile duct had a few stones that were palpable. Then cholecystectomy, common bile duct exploration with T-tube drainage, and discharging the patient without perioperative complications were carried out. .
The patient’s postoperative course was smooth. She underwent T-tube cholangiography on the seventh day, which had no retained stones . She was discharged on the tenth day after all the tubes were removed. Currently, patient comes every 6 months to our outpatient department for checkups and to monitor the progress of the cirrhosis.