In October 2021, a 55-year-old male presented with intermittent otorrhea in the left ear.
The patient’s symptoms started a month ago with intermittent otorrhea in the left ear. His hearing in the left ear was poor. He had no complaints of the right ear.
The patient developed right ear otorrhea without hearing loss, tinnitus, vertigo, or headache in 2012. He visited our hospital because of hearing loss in the right ear and headache for 1 mo in 2018. Physical examination showed congestion of the right external auditory canal and a large amount of purulent discharge near the tympanic membrane. Pure tone audiometry showed mixed hearing loss in both ears, and the pure tone averages of air conduction were 70 dB in the right ear and 97 dB in the left ear. Computed tomography (CT) showed an area of low density in the right middle ear and mastoid and auditory ossicle defects. The parietal wall of the right tympanic cavity and the posterior wall of the mastoid sinus were thin and less continuous. There was a small amount of soft tissue flocculent shadow in the left ear tympanum and the mastoid sinus . Cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an area of low intensity encapsulated by an area of high intensity in the right temporal lobe . We diagnosed him with a brain abscess secondary to middle ear cholesteatoma. After consultation with a neurologist, the patient was transferred to the Department of Neurology and received surgery to drain the abscess after one week of systemic antibiotic treatment. The patient received a modified radical mastoidectomy in our department 3 wk later. After 1 mo, an MRI reexamination showed that there was no abscess in the brain .
The patient’s family history was unremarkable.
Physical examination showed that pus and debris filled the left middle ear cavity. The pure tone averages of air conduction were 55 dB in the right ear and totally deafness in the left ear.
The patient had no meaningful laboratory results throughout the examinations.
CT showed that the area of the soft tissue density in the left middle ear and mastoid was significantly increased compared to the CT in 2018. The posterior wall of the mastoid sinus and auditory ossicles in the left ear wasdestroyed, leaving the left middle ear connecting with the brain . There was no cholesteatoma in the right ear. An MRI showed no recurrence of brain abscess .