A 34 years old man without any significant previous psychiatric history except for marijuana abuse for the last two years, with normal neurodevelopment throughout his life, had his first medical encounter due to his family’s complaint of restlessness and a significant decline in social activities. His family reported that he was socially withdrawn and didn’t go to work recently. Other symptoms included anhedonia, apathy, and a significant decline in all areas of functioning. He was admitted to the psychiatric hospital. After mental status examination and history taking, an antidepressant was started for the patient. Finally, the patient was discharged after partial improvement (48 days) with the diagnosis of marijuana amotivational syndrome.
According to the patient’s father, the patient’s symptoms worsened after the discharge. During the follow-up, the patient was referred to several doctors (neurologist and psychiatrist), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was requested for him. MRI displayed Frontotemporal lobar degeneration, with cortical brain atrophy more significant in the frontal, parietal, and temporal lobes . Due to the non-specific symptoms, a definite diagnosis was not given to the patient, and only brain atrophy was explained to the patient’s father.
Two years after the onset of the first symptoms and hospitalization, the patient was brought into the emergency department (ED) with various progressive psychiatric symptoms. The patient had perseverative behaviors without obsession, as he bathed about ten times a day and performed long walking to count buildings and other objects in his neighborhood. He also suffered from disinhibition in such a way that he borrowed money from people around him without any purpose. Bizarre behaviors such as defecation, urination in the street, and worsening of amnesia from about a year ago have progressed to Anomia and prosopagnosia. The patient had hyperorality, as he placed both edible and inedible objects in his mouth, and finally, the patient suffered from apraxia and echolalia. He had symptoms of irritability, mutism, disorganized behaviors, increased appetite, memory impairment, urinary and fecal incontinence, and lack of pain perception. He also had anosognosia, did not demonstrate any insight into his life problems, including his divorce, and declined any psychiatric or medical problems. This presentation led to the second admission of the patient, antipsychotic was started for him, showing some benefits.
For a workup of this atypical presentation of psychosis, and associated symptoms, a brain computed tomography (CT) scan was taken. Non-contrast spiral brain CT scan through the brain without gadolinium contrast demonstrates bilateral cortical brain atrophy inappropriate for the patient’s age, which was more in the frontal, parietal and temporal lobes and is suggestive of frontotemporal lobar degeneration .
His family history was extensively reviewed except for one second-degree relative with a suicidal attempt and another second-degree relative with an unknown psychiatric illness requiring him to undergo Electroconvulsive therapy. No familial history of dementia, cognitive impairment, parkinsonism, and other neurodegenerative disease was noted.
Due to the early-onset presentation and severe behavioral and personality changes, lack of previous psychiatric or medical history, lack of specific stressors or risk factors, lack of familial history of neurodegenerative disease, and brain imaging findings with prominent cortical brain atrophy, especially in frontal, parietal and temporal lobes, early-onset FTD post cannabinoids consumption was considered as the final diagnosis.