A 76-year-old Japanese man was transported to our hospital's emergency room after a car-to-car accident. His vital signs on arrival were stable (Glasgow Coma Scale: E4V5M6, blood pressure 111/83 mmHg, heart rate 92/min, respiratory rate 18/min), but the attenuation of breath sounds of the right chest and an open fracture of the patient's forearm were observed. Ultrasonography showed fluid collection in the right chest cavity and suspected hemothorax. Chest drainage was done and approx. 800 mL bloody pleural effusion was observed, showing no continuous discharge. Contrast computed tomography (CT) showed a fracture of the first rib (precordial side) and a spinal body fracture of the fifth thoracic vertebra plus fluid collection at the dorsal side of chest cavity, without obvious extravasation .
A complex fracture of the distal radius diaphysis was also seen. Temporary external-fixation fracture treatment for the radius open fracture was started. In the middle of the procedure, a drop in the patient's blood pressure and continuous blood discharge in the chest drainage tube were observed. Surgeons (we) were summoned, and when we reached the operation room, anesthesiologists were pumping the red cell concentrate into the patient. Based on the CT findings, we suspected that the bleeding was from the fractured fifth thoracic vertebra, and it was apparent that surgery performed by orthopedic surgeons was desirable. However, our hospital's orthopedic surgeons felt that the surgery would be difficult because the patient could not be placed in the prone position, due to his unstable vital signs.
We then asked our hospital's radiologists whether interventional radiology (IVR) was applicable, and they noted that IVR was not suitable because there was extensive bleeding from the fractured vertebral body. Eventually, we started surgery for emergency hemostasis by performing an anterior thoracotomy through the fifth intercostal space with the patient in the supine position. As suspected in light of the CT findings, bleeding was observed from the fractured fifth vertebral body . We attempted to stop bleeding using sequentially bone wax, oxidized cellulose (SURGICEL®), powder absorbable hemostat (SURGICEL Powder®), biological tissue adhesive (Beriplast® P), sheet-shaped biological tissue adhesive/closure (TachoSil®), and argon plasma coagulation (APC), but none of these were effective .
At that point, it was judged difficult to achieve hemostasis through surgery, we decided to adopt a second-look surgery at a later day after palliative hemostasis was achieved by gauze packing and transfusion fresh frozen plasma. However, the gauze-packing method was not effective, either . While we were searching for other hemostasis methods, we discovered that the patient's bleeding could be controlled by pressing the mediastinal pleura above the bleeding . We finally achieved hemostasis using bipolar cautery to coagulate the pleura above the bleeding point . We filled the bleeding point with bone wax and finished the operation. The surgery's total bleeding was 12,913 mL, and the transfusion was 21,860 mL.
On postoperative day (POD) 3, an orthopedic surgeon performed posterior lumbar interbody fusion and transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion. On POD 9, the patient was weaned off the respirator, and on POD 51 he was transferred to a rehabilitation facility, with no subsequent complications.