A 41-year-old woman with a 14-day history of subacute intermittent right lower quadrant abdominal pain was admitted to our hospital. No accessory symptoms were observed. She experienced similar symptoms approximately 5 years prior to this event. At that time, her symptoms resolved after fasting and the administration of intravenous fluids and antibiotics. Cecal volvulus was not noted.
She did not have a history of any surgical procedures and any gynecologic diseases. She had a regular menstrual cycle and had not taken oral contraceptives or progestins. Her physical examination revealed a distended abdomen with localized tenderness in the right lower region without peritoneal signs. Laboratory tests reported a white blood cell count of 4820 cells/μL and C-reactive protein level of 0.06 mg/dL. Plain radiography showed dilated gas-filled loops of the colon. The colon was displaced in the pelvis but there was no evidence of air-fluid levels . Abdominal computed tomography showed both dilated intestinal gas like coffee beans in the pelvis and signs of twisting of the mesentery and mesenteric vessels (whirl sign), although these findings did not indicate which section of the large intestine was twisted .
We suspected sigmoid colon volvulus and performed an emergency colonoscopy. The large intestine was not ischemic and was filled with stool . We successfully repositioned the colon, and the patient’s symptoms resolved soon after the colonoscopic reduction. We scheduled an elective laparoscopic sigmoid resection 14 days after the colonoscopy. Intraoperative exploration showed a significantly distended cecum and ascending colon, which was twisted around a short rope-like adhesion that connected the cecum and transverse colon mesentery. The intestinal wall showed no evidence of ischemia, necrosis, or perforation. Therefore, a laparoscopic ileocecal resection rather than a sigmoid resection was performed . The postoperative course was uncomplicated. Histopathological examination revealed the presence of endometriosis in the short rope-like adhesion . This finding confirmed a diagnosis of cecal volvulus caused by endometriosis. No other focus of endometriosis could be identified. The patient was discharged in good general condition 10 days after the laparoscopy. After the operation, she was diagnosed with endometriosis for the first time. The endometriosis was not found in the other organs on magnetic resonance imaging, and the patient has since been monitored without the need for any further treatment.