A 45-year-old man (treated from 11/2014 to 06/2016) with hypertension and hypothyroidism medications had twisted his right ankle while walking his dog. Primarily, he presented edema around the lateral malleolus, and no fracture was detected on radiographs ; thus, conservative treatment with ankle brace was initiated. The pain in the ankle persisted for 3 months, and subsequent follow-up radiographs, and eventually MRI of the ankle was performed. The radiographs were normal , but the MRI revealed ARC O Stage I osteonecrosis of the talus with increased signal on T2- weighted fat-saturated images and decreased signal on T1- weighted images; an additional minor crescent sign was also present ( and ). Due to the persisting pain and poor strain tolerance, core decompression with stem cell and PRP injection was performed using GPS® III (Gravitational Platelet Separation System; Zimmer-Biomet, Warsaw, Indiana, USA) and BioCUE BMA (Bone Marrow Aspirate [BMA] Concentration System; Zimmer-Biomet, Warsaw, Indiana, USA) systems. First, 30 ml of venous blood (including 3 ml of anticoagulant) was collected from the patient and centrifuged for 15 min. Accordingly, 3 ml of PRP was recovered from the centrifuged sample. In operating room under general anesthesia, autologous aspiration of bone marrow-derived stem cells from the right anterior iliac crest was carried out by an orthopedic surgeon. In total, 60 ml of BMA was collected and subsequently centrifuged for 15 min producing 6 ml of concentrated BMA. Finally, the PRP and BMA were mixed producing a total of 9 ml of the injectate. A stab incision on the anteroinferior edge of the medial malleolus was performed, and on fluoroscopic control, a guidance spike was directed into the talus to the region of the osteonecrosis. A 2.7 mm cannulated drill was used to provide core decompression. Routine histopathological specimens were not produced due to typical findings of osteonecrosis on MRI. Next, the PRP-BMA concoction was injected into the osteonecrotic region under fluoroscopic control using a 3 mm aspiration needle . The incision wound was closed and full weight-bearing was restricted for 4 weeks with free mobilization of the ankle. On 4- week clinical follow-up, the patient presented no pain in the right ankle. Radiographs were normal except for the low mineral density of the bones in general . On the 3-month follow-up, the patient had fully resumed to his daily activities and his ankle was symptomless. The MRI revealed virtually complete resolution of the talar osteonecrotic changes ( and ). On the subsequent 15-month follow-up, the patient presented no symptoms and the MRI scan ( and ) as well as the radiographs were normal.