A 74-year-old male with a past medical history of coronary artery disease, congestive cardiac failure, permanent atrial fibrillation status-post nodal ablation, and placement of a biventricular pacemaker presented to the hospital with complaints of generalized fatigue. The patient denied other constitutional symptoms including chest pain, dyspnea, abdominal pain, diarrhea, or dysuria. Vitals were as follows: afebrile, blood pressure 116/80, pulse 72, respiratory rate 21, and saturating well on 3 litres/minute nasal cannula. Physical examination showed pitting edema in bilateral lower extremities till knees, decreased bibasilar breath sounds, and jugular venous distension. There was no rash, painful nodes or splinter hemorrhages. Holosystolic murmur was heard at the apex, JVD ∼18 cm H2O. Laboratory investigations showed normal WBC count, neutrophilia with 17 bands, 26 lymphocytes, and 8 monocytes. CRP was elevated at 4.3. The patient also had a troponin level of 0.22; however, this was found to be chronically elevated. Chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly, but no pulmonary vascular congestion, consolidation, nor effusions. Urinalysis did not show any evidence of infection. Overnight, the patient developed fever with a maximum temperature of 39.2°C.
Blood cultures turned positive for Gram-positive rods at which time the patient was started on vancomycin. Echocardiogram was performed due to concerns of endocarditis and showed left ventricular ejection fraction 20–25%, severe diffuse hypokinesis, moderate mitral and tricuspid regurgitation, and a 1 mm mobile strand in the left atrium attached to pacer lead concerning vegetation. Final blood cultures revealed Listeria monocytogenes, and two sets of subsequent cultures grew listeria. TEE was not performed as it would not have changed management. The patient was not a surgical candidate for pacemaker removal due to comorbidities and advanced heart failure. Antibiotic therapy with vancomycin was continued. Ampicillin was not used due to high sodium content in the infusion in setting of decreased systolic function. The patient received 6 weeks of IV vancomycin followed by oral suppression with amoxicillin. There was appropriate clinical response to the abovementioned treatment with resolution of fever and subjective improvement.