A 23-year-old gravida 2 para 1 woman at 27-week gestation was admitted following a high-speed motor vehicle accident. She was a restrained front seat passenger in a car that rear-ended a parked vehicle at 70 miles per hour. Injuries included a left hip dislocation and multiple closed pelvic fractures involving the bilateral hips and the bilateral pubic rami. She was alert and normotensive on admission. Fetal heart tones were noted to have a baseline of 140 beats per minute with minimal variability and no accelerations or decelerations . The fetus was in footling breech presentation.
She received a course of betamethasone. An ultrasound done approximately 34 hours into admission showed unremarkable intracranial anatomy with an anterior placenta and no evidence of abruption. The biparietal diameter (BPD) was 71 mm (81%ile) and head circumference (HC) 263 mm (65%ile). The amniotic fluid volume was normal at 12.3 cm.
In the subsequent days of admission the fetal heart tones demonstrated persistent minimal variability without accelerations or decelerations. The patient was receiving fentanyl and it was speculated that narcotics were contributing to the decreased variability. Approximately 62 hours into admission a biophysical profile (BPP) was performed. The BPP returned 6 of 8 (off 2 points for absent breathing). However at this time a hyperechoic lesion in the left frontal cortex was noted, extending to the left lateral ventricle with an additional fluid collection concerning for a left subdural hematoma . The middle cerebral artery Doppler peak systolic velocity was normal at 1.04 MoM. With the knowledge of a central nervous system (CNS) insult and the absence of fetal anemia, the abnormal fetal heart rate pattern was assessed to be a manifestation of the injury rather than placental dysfunction or fetal acidosis, thereby avoiding an unnecessary preterm delivery. By hospital day 6 the fetal heart tones became reactive and she was discharged home.
She presented for follow-up ultrasound at 30-week gestation. A left subdural hypoechogenic lesion and mild left ventriculomegaly were present. In addition, there was no interval head growth (BPD 67 mm, HC 269 mm). Follow-up ultrasound at 35 weeks again showed mild left ventriculomegaly and minimal head growth (BPD 72 mm, HC 273 mm).
Delivery was by an uncomplicated scheduled repeat cesarean delivery at 39 weeks gestation. APGARs were 8 and 8 at 1 and 5 minutes, respectively, with umbilical artery cord pH of 7.16 and base excess of −4.3. The neonate required continuous positive airway pressure in the delivery room. Birthweight was 3033 gm, but severe microcephaly was present with a head circumference of 31.8 cm (<3%ile). Neurologic findings also included seizure-like activity, lower extremity hyperreflexia, and increased truncal tone. Brain MRI on day of life 4 was consistent with cystic encephalomalacia of the bilateral frontal lobes and left parietal lobe. There was also artifact suggestive of hemosiderin deposits, consistent with prior left intraventricular hemorrhage, hemorrhagic contusion, and subdural hematoma, but no indications of skull fracture . There was no coagulopathy. At 8 months of age the infant is undergoing care for cerebral palsy with quadriplegic involvement.