A 25-year old pregnant woman in the second trimester of pregnancy of a male fetus, without complications, underwent routine prenatal ultrasound that detected a mass in the right adrenal gland of the fetus. Vaginal delivery occurred at term (40 weeks) without complications. The newborn was submitted to postnatal ultrasound on day of life 5, which showed a 2.6cm oval mass in its largest diameter, peripherally echogenic with an anechoic core. Abdominal computed tomography assessment carried out at day of life 30, showed a hypodense nodule (60 pre-contrast Hounsfield units), with slight enhancement after intravenous contrast administration. Through this method, the lesion showed to be 2.5cm in its largest diameter and no apparent cleavage plane with the right liver lobe or right adrenal. The metabolic assessment, which included the measurement of sex hormones, catecholamines, cortisol, aldosterone and metanephrines, performed before the computed tomography (CT) assessment, showed no abnormalities. All monitoring and all examinations in the perinatal and neonatal periods were carried out at another health care service. After a long time without follow-up care, the patient returned for assistance at two years and nine months of age, when magnetic resonance of the upper abdomen was requested. This examination showed the presence of a nodule with the following characteristics: largest diameter of 3.4cm, located above the right adrenal, partially defined contours, hyperintense signal on T2, hypointense on T1, heterogeneous enhancement after intravenous contrast injection and no cleavage plane with the right liver lobe or right adrenal . The adrenal metabolic assessment performed at that time, remained unaltered.
The patient underwent laparoscopic surgical exploration. The position used was the lateral decubitus position at 45° with slight lumbar deformation. Four trochanters were placed in the usual position for right adrenalectomy. The medial displacement of the right colon after sectioning of the line of Toldt and the hepatocolic ligament was carried out without difficulty, showing a protuberance in the region above the right kidney. After dissection, contact of the mass with the diaphragmatic crus and the right liver lobe was observed superiorly, with no adherence to these organs, while inferiorly, the lesion showed no cleavage plane with the right adrenal. The mass was removed together with the adrenal gland and then they were separated on the surgical table. Major, higher-caliber and dominant vessels were not identified during the procedure. The material was sent for histopathological analysis and the gross examination showed the presence of an 11g tumor with 4.3cm in its largest diameter, of brown color and regular, smooth, heterogeneous and shiny surface. Microscopic examination showed the presence of lung tissue with alveoli filled with macrophages . The adrenal identified in the histopathological examination showed usual aspect. The results found in the histological sections defined the diagnosis of intra-abdominal extralobar pulmonary sequestration. The patient recovered uneventfully and was discharged on the 2nd postoperative day.