A 49-year-old African American man presented to a clinic with an 18-month history of a painful, enlarging right groin bulge. On physical examination, he had a large right inguinal hernia containing chronically incarcerated bowel with a scrotal component. He denied any history consistent with obstructive symptoms. However, he expressed interest in surgical intervention as the hernia continued to increase in size and started causing symptoms.
While awaiting elective surgical repair, he presented to the Emergency Department (ED) with acute onset of right groin and abdominal pain. Upon arrival to the ED, he indicated that the symptoms began after he had gone to the bathroom for a bowel movement. Following his attempted continuation of bed rest, he began an aggressive bout of coughing. There was no history of trauma to his groin or abdomen. Following the coughing episode, he developed sharp, intense right groin pain and an episode of non-bloody, non-bilious vomiting.
In the ED, his physical examination demonstrated hypertension (182/124 mmHg) and normocardia (99 beats per minute). Further examination demonstrated that his abdomen was distended and rigid as well as diffusely tender to mild palpation.
Laboratory evaluation showed hypokalemia (3.6 mmol/L), but no other abnormalities. His white blood cell count was 8000 K/cu mm and his lactic acid was 1.3 mEq/L. An upright chest radiograph showed no free air.
Given that his abdominal examination was consistent with peritonitis, he was taken to the operating room for an exploratory laparotomy. At celiotomy, there was a large amount of blood (approximately 400 cc) mixed with a small amount of feculent material. A segment of small bowel was found within the inguinal canal. Following lysis of adhesions and extraction of the bowel from the inguinal canal, a complete circumferential segment of jejunum was identified . No other bowel injuries were noted.
A small bowel resection was performed on both sides of the transection with a gastrointestinal anastomosis device followed by a side-to-side two layer hand-sewn anastomosis.
The patient had excellent hemodynamics and attention was directed at the inguinal canal through a separate groin incision. The inguinal canal demonstrated an obliterated transversalis fascia. The hernia sac was addressed via the transabdominal portion of the operation. We then proceeded with repair of the inguinal floor from the anterior incision. This was undertaken with biologic mesh (AlloDerm®) using the Lichtenstein technique. The remainder of his hospital course prior to discharge was uneventful. There was no surgical site infection at discharge or during clinic follow up. No recurrence had been noted up to 18 months following repair.