A 52-year-old non-smoker multiparous woman was referred to our hospital by one month history of post-menopausal vaginal bleeding. She has had a normal menstruation cycle for 20 years. At the time of admission, she had stable vital sign and complained of no abdominal symptoms. She did not complain of any irregularities in her bowel habits, fever, and weight loss. Furthermore, she reported no history of contraceptive usage and no alarming findings were detected in her medical history. She had no previous history of diseases or malignancies in her family history. During the last 6 months, she had menorrhagia and metrorrhagia with intermittent abdominal discomfort. Nonetheless, she had not sought medical care due to her poor socio-economic status. However, she was referred to our surgical department based on her imaging. In her physical exam, she had BMI of 27 and she was pale. The abdomen had obese appearance and shape and a mass could be palpated in the left lower quadrant. No lymphadenopathy was detected, as well. Lab data showed anemia of Hb = 10 g/dL. Also, CA-125 was checked which was 45 units/mL.
In regard to imaging, pelvic ultrasonography revealed large left ovarian mass of 15 cm. The abdomino-pelvic CT scan revealed enlarged bilateral ovaries with a large mass of 18 to 6 cm in the left ovary, intra-myometrium necrotic mass with irregular margins, and pelvic tissue reaction with mild transudate in the right iliac fossa. There were no enlarged lymph nodes (, ).
Considering the CT scan and clinical findings and the age of our patient, a decision was made to move toward early surgical intervention. In the operating room, primary diagnostic laparoscopy was done which revealed a large left ovarian mass with no macroscopic findings of abdomino-pelvic endometriosis. During laparotomy, there was mild serous fluid collection in the pelvic cavity. There was no sign of metastasis in the peritoneal region of the abdomen and pelvic area. Also, liver, omentum, and bowels were normal. From the carful investigation of the uterus and ovaries, we detected some irregularities and enlargement in both ovarian surfaces. Also, there was a large polypoid ovarian mass in the left lower abdomen with no adhesion or invasion to surrounding pelvic area. Uterus had slightly larger size and no palpable mass could be touched. No lymphadenopathy was detected in the mesothelium of bowels or retroperitoneal region. Hence, a total abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (BSO), greater omentectomy, and appendectomy were done. There was no significant blood loss during the procedure and the patient experienced good recovery in the ward.
Macroscopically, the ovarian mass was 18 to 7 cm with a solid cystic irregular appearance (, ). Sections of samples from both ovaries had sheets of monotonous oval to spindle cells with minimal cytologic atypia, vesicular chromatin, and scant cytoplasm .
An ill-defined soft whitish small polypoid lesion measuring approximately 3 cm in uterus was seen which infiltrated the myometrium in a finger like pattern. Areas of hemorrhage were also seen. Microscopically, sections revealed sheets and irregular islands of uniform tumor cells with permeative growth into the myometrium and vascular invasion in which surrounded by tumoral cells as well as low mitotic activity (<5 mitoses per 10 high power fields) . These were monotonous atypical oval cells with mild atypia and might be admixed with few collagen bands. . It had >3 infiltrative pattern, finger-like projections into the myometrium that each one was at least 3 mm. Immunohistochemistry stains (IHC) were applied to confirm the diagnosis besides rolling out other differential diagnosis. The samples showed high positive result for CD10 , ER, and PR, whereas SMA and Inhibin, CK, Melan, CD99, and Cyclin D1 were negative in all of the tissue sections. Based on International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics classification , the final diagnosis was primary uterus LG-ESS with bilateral ovarian metastasis (stage IIA). The greater omentum, the appendix and lymph nodes were free of tumor cells.
Regarding her follow-up, hormonal therapy with letrozole 2.5 mg daily was initiated. During her 2-year follow-up, no recurrence or further post-op complications were detected. Our study has been reported in line with the SCARE criteria .