A 35-year-old African male refugee from Eritrea arrived in Switzerland in 2015, after several months of a migratory route through Sudan, Libya, and Italy. This former member of the Eritrean military left his country and exiled himself in Switzerland because of the Eritrean political conflict and for personal security. He is married and has three children in good health. One year after his arrival and during a routine appointment with his primary care physician, he complained of a soft and slightly painful tissue swelling in his right buttock, localized on a previous scar. He mentioned that in 2001 in Eritrea he submitted to surgery several times for recurrent abscess on his right buttock. He was otherwise in good health, had no tobacco smoking or drinking habits, and no regular treatment.
On physical examination, he had a visible scar approximately 20 cm on the lateral side of his right buttock. On the medial level, the presence of deep indurated exophytic nodules with some visible openings and spontaneous drainage were noted, which suggested an abscess . He was afebrile and no lymphadenopathy was found.
He was referred to the Department of Dermatology at the University Hospital of Lausanne for further investigation. A punch biopsy was performed and during that procedure a sanguinolent discharge was witnessed with conglomerates of small and rather firm blackish pellets, evoking eumycetoma. Tissue and black grain samples were sent for biological and histological evaluation. These revealed chronic suppurative inflammation in the presence of histologic fungal aspects . The infectious agent could not be determined exactly at that time, however, the black colored grains indicated a probable Madurella mycetomatis infection. A second biopsy was needed and these samples were negative on bacterial culture and positive for fungal culture of Madurella mycetomatis, which grew in 2 weeks.
To determine the precise depth of the buttock lesions, a magnetic resonance imaging examination of his pelvic area was performed. This examination identified a pseudotumoral infiltration of the cutaneous and subcutaneous tissue into the gluteal muscular plane of the paramedian part of his left buttock compatible with a mycetoma without bone extension .
We considered several differential diagnoses of mycetoma such as: recurring epidermal cyst of gluteal region, hidradenitis suppurativa (Verneuil’s disease), pilonidal cyst, cutaneous tuberculosis, profound mycosis, leprosy, and cutaneous metastatic lesions.
He was initially treated with orally administered itraconazole at a dosage of 400 mg once daily for 3 months, which was well tolerated. After antifungal therapy, the lesions did not improve substantially and he had surgical debridement of the lesions followed by a double cutaneous-subcutaneous transposition flap .
After surgical removal of the lesions, treatment with itraconazole was continued to achieve a total length of 6 months. An ultrasound of his buttock was performed 3 months after the surgery and two residual mycetomatic nodules were identified: one situated at the surgical scar with a size 0.7 × 0.6 cm; and a second one at the intergluteal region with a size of 0.8 × 0.45 cm. Both remained asymptomatic and he did not develop any further lesions at 12 and 24 months after surgery.