A 40-year-old woman at 26-wk gestation was admitted to the hospital for hematemesis, hematochezia, and abdominal pain for 10 h.
Abdominal color Doppler ultrasonography showed portal vein thrombosis, splenomegaly, intrauterine pregnancy, and intrauterine fetal death
The patient had no significant past medical history.
The patient had no history of smoking or alcohol consumption. She had no relevant family history.
The physical examination revealed that the patient had normal vital signs, a body weight of 56 kg, a height of 1.58 m, a body mass index of 22.4 kg/m2, an anemic appearance, and lower abdominal distension, and had no abdominal shiftiness sound.
The laboratory examination was otherwise unremarkable. The laboratory assessment included an initial blood test of the complete blood count (hemoglobin level, 76 g/L), liver test (albumin level, 29.9 g/L), and tumor markers (alpha-fetoprotein level, 179.60 ng/mL; cancer antigen 125 level, 209.40 U/mL; and cancer antigen 199 level, 168.20 U/mL). Viral hepatitis markers were negative. Glucose and serum insulin levels were normal.
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed esophageal and gastric varicose veins and portal hypertensive gastropathy . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) demonstrated multiple emboli formation in the portal vein and splenic vein, multiple round shadows in the liver with a slightly lower density (metastatic tumors were mostly considered), portal vein broadening, varicose veins in the lower esophagus and gastric fundus, splenomegaly, bilateral pleural effusion, ascites and pelvic effusion, broadening of the common bile duct, and increased uterine volume. Ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy of the liver tumor was performed. Histologically, the tumor consisted of heterogeneous cells arranged in nests, with a small cell extraction volume, short spindle or polygonal, unclear cell boundary, eosinophilic cytoplasm, increased nucleoplasmic ratio, and varying degrees of nuclear atypia. Immunohistochemical staining revealed that the tumor cells were positive for CKp, synaptophysin (Syn), chromogranin A (CgA), CD10, CD56, CDX-2, CEA, and Ki67 (40%+) . To identify the primary lesion, 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose Positron emission tomography/computed tomography (18F-FDG-PET-CT) was performed and showed multiple metabolic elevations in the pancreatic tail area, intrahepatic portal vein, and adjacent mesenteric and splenic veins. Considering the pathological tendency, it was considered that there was a high possibility of primary lesions of pNEC, secondary intrahepatic metastasis, venous cancer thrombogenesis, and corresponding varicose veins. No other metastatic lesions were found .