A 25-year-old Sri Lankan phenotypically female presented to the general medical unit with the complaint of gradual onset left loin pain associated with fever for 5 days. It was a moderate to severe dull ache which did not radiate to groin. The fever was intermittent and associated with chills but not with rigors. She did not experience urinary symptoms like dysuria, increased urinary frequency or hematuria. She has had few episodes of vomiting associated with the abdominal pain but her bowel opening was normal. She’s an unmarried, nulliparous female and further inquiry revealed that she had been investigated for primary amenorrhoea at the age of 14 years. She was found to have rudimentary uterus with intact ovaries ultrasonically and was initially started on combined oral contraceptive pills. With the medication she started normal menstruation but the treatment was not regularly taken due to the appearance of acne and weight gain. At the age of 23 years she was referred to an Endocrinologist and found to have 46, XY genotype by chromosomal analysis. She was given estradiol valerate titrating doses by the physician but treatment was defaulted by the patient due to fear of cancer risk.
On examination she was 66 kg in weight and 170.2 cm in height (BMI = 22.84 kg/m2). She had small breasts, scanty axillary hair and scanty female pattern pubic hair. Her external genitalia were female in type but clitoromegally was observed. She was febrile but not pale or icteric. Cervical lymphadenopathy was not detected. A tender mass with smooth surface was palpated over left hypochondrium which was not ballotable and the upper margin was not detected by palpation or by percussion. There was no hepatomegaly. Her cardiovascular, respiratory neurological and loco-motor system examinations were unremarkable.
Investigations revealed a total white cell count of 7.6 × 109/ml (neutrophils—75.3 %, lymphocytes—13.9 %, monocytes—8.3 % and eosinophils—2.4 %), hemoglobin of 11.5 g/dl and a platelet count of 243 × 109/ml. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 127 mm in 1st hour. Liver profile revealed alkaline phosphatase (ALP) level of 2986 U/L with slightly elevated transaminase levels (alanineaminotransferase—60 U/L and aspartate aminotransferase—47 U/L). Renal and coagulation profiles were normal. Serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level was 395 U/L. Serum tumor markers including alpha-feto protein (AFP) levels, serum beta- human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) and CA 125 levels were within normal range. The chest and lumbo-sacral spine roentgenograms were reported as normal. Ultrasound scan of abdomen and pelvis revealed a well-defined mass lesion in relation to the lower pole of the left kidney. Small uterus was visualized but ovaries could not be identified separately. The liver was normal in size and there were no focal lesions. Contrast enhanced computerized tomography of abdomen and pelvis revealed large complex mass lesion (11.0 × 9.7 × 8.3 cm) in relation to antero-medial aspect of the lower pole of the left kidney . Few para-aortic and left common iliac lymph nodes were also detected.
Her serum hormonal assay revealed a low estradiol level of 9.0 pg/ml (normal range: 39–189 pg/ml in follicular phase) in the background of elevated luteinizing hormone level of 40.64 μIU/ml (2–15 μIU/ml in follicular phase) and follicular stimulating hormone level of 73.09 μIU/ml (3–20 μIU/ml in follicular phase). The progesterone level of 0.35 ng/ml (0.33–1.2 ng/ml in follicular phase) and testosterone level of 0.25 ng/ml (0–0.73 ng/ml) were within normal range. She was found to have normal thyroid stimulating hormone level of 2.55 μIU/ml (0.4–5.1 μIU/ml) and serum prolactin level of 18.5 ng/ml (3.9–29.5 ng/ml).
Diagnostic laparoscopy revealed a small uterus with bilateral normal sized ovaries with fallopian tubes. The mass lesion revealed by imaginary studies was confirmed as a para-aortic mass but which was not attached to the lower pole of the left kidney. The left gonadal vein was seen crossing over the mass. Excision of the left para-aortic mass with attached lymph nodes was done via a subcostal incision which extended up to the xyphisternum. Pathological sectioning of the mass macroscopically showed a soft degenerating tumor with a uniform red-brown appearance . A uniform, firm, yellow- white separate lobule was seen outside the capsule measuring 4.0 × 3.0 × 2.8 cm . Five lymph nodes were dissected from the loose connective tissue outside the capsule. Sections of large red brown mass showed a necrotic mass of tumor with few areas of viable tissue. Adjacent white lobule showed viable tumor tissue compatible with germ cell tumor consistent with a seminoma or dysgerminoma . Tumor nodules were noted within the capsule and were seen to infiltrate beyond the capsule into adjacent connective tissue. No vascular or perineural invasion was noted. Normal testicular or ovarian tissue was not detected within the tumor mass. Four out of five lymph nodes showed tumor deposits within which two nodes were extensively involved by the tumor.
The differential diagnosis of Swyer syndrome (46, XY complete gonadal dysgenesis), 46, XY disorder of sex development (46, XY DSD) and partial androgen insensitivity syndrome were made. Androgen insensitivity syndrome was easily excluded since the presence of female internal genital organs. Even though the presence of clitoromegally is against the diagnosis of Swyer syndrome, 46, XY DSD could be fairly excluded due to the absence of testicular elements via direct visualization of the abdominal cavity and by histology. The treating oncologist decided to preserve the ovaries and the patient was given full course of chemotherapy.