A 33-year-old woman was hospitalized for closure of a PFO. In the preceding weeks, she presented with a right hemiparesis deemed secondary to a stroke for which no clear cause was identified (cryptogenic stroke). Her past medical history was unremarkable, and the only routine medication taken by the patient on admission was aspirin 75 mg/day. Patent foramen oval was diagnosed on transthoracic echocardiography. A pre-procedural electrocardiogram did not reveal any atrioventricular or ventricular conduction disturbances (sinus rhythm; heart rate, 69 b.p.m.; PR, 150 ms; QRS, 82 ms; normal QRS axis; ). The patient underwent 24-h electrocardiogram monitoring during hospitalization for stroke in the neurovascular unit to identify the potential presence of conduction disorders or atrial fibrillation. Upon induction of general anaesthesia, PFO closure was performed under transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE) guidance and 10 F right femoral venous access. Transoesophageal echocardiography examination confirmed the presence of a PFO characterized by a large shunt (>30 bubbles). Owing to the large tunnel size (16 mm × 4.5 mm) and the presence of an atrial septal aneurysm (size: 10 mm), a 35-mm Amplatzer PFO Occluder® device (Abbott Vascular, Abbott Park, IL, USA; left- and right-atrial disc diameters: 25 and 35 mm, respectively) was selected to repair the defect .
When the PFO was crossed, the left disc was successfully positioned without complications. However, positioning of the right disc was followed by the onset of a complete AVB. A ventricular escape rhythm at 35 b.p.m. alternating with a second-degree AVB was evident both on the anaesthetist’s monitoring screen and the TEE monitoring screen . Although administration of atropine (0.5 + 0.5 mg) restored atrioventricular conduction within a few seconds, persistent complete AVB relapsed rapidly. We hypothesized that AVB stemmed from a compression of the atrioventricular node elicited by the right disc, which was therefore recaptured. Atrioventricular conduction was normalized as expected and transient cardiac pacing was performed through a left femoral venous access. We therefore opted for a smaller Amplatzer PFO Occluder® (left and right atrial disc diameters: 30 mm both). The device was successfully positioned and sealing of PFO at the end of the procedure was confirmed by the absence bubbles crossing the septum (through injection of agitated saline with Valsalva manoeuver). High-grade conduction disturbances did not recur both upon completion of the procedure and in the subsequent 48-h monitoring in the cardiac intensive care unit. The patient did not undergo steroid therapy because no recurrence of atrioventricular conduction disturbances was observed. The post-procedural electrocardiogram did not reveal any atrioventricular or ventricular conduction disturbances (sinus rhythm; heart rate, 86 b.p.m.; PR, 154 ms; QRS, 93 ms; normal QRS axis; ). Upon completion of the procedure, a dual antiplatelet therapy (aspirin and clopidogrel) was started and maintained 3 months.
On post-procedural Day 2, we performed an invasive electrophysiological study aimed at assessing the presence of pre-existent atrioventricular conduction disturbances. Recordings of His bundle electrogram were obtained with a diagnostic quadripolar electrode. The study revealed a normal atrioventricular nodal conduction with an AH interval of 80 ms (normal range: 55 − 125 ms). Intra-Hisian and infra-Hisian conduction were both normal, being characterized by a thin Hisian potential and a HV interval of 38 ms (normal range: 35 − 55 ms), respectively . The device was located as close as 5 mm to the His bundle . Moreover, the two proximal electrodes of the catheter were in contact with the umbrella —ultimately producing signal artefacts . Artefacts were due to the contact of the two proximal electrodes with the right atrial disc during the cardiac cycle. These findings confirmed the close proximity between the device and the atrioventricular node, leading to the hypothesis that the implantation of the 35-mm Amplatzer PFO Occluder® device could have exerted a strong compression of the atrioventricular node and triggered AVB.
Post-procedural transthoracic echocardiography confirmed the close proximity of the device to the septal tricuspid valve annulus . After an unremarkable hospital stay, the patient was discharged on post-procedural Day 5. After a 6-month follow-up, there were no symptomatic recurrences. The electrocardiogram did not reveal any atrioventricular or ventricular conduction disturbances (sinus rhythm; heart rate, 75 b.p.m.; PR, 142 ms; QRS, 91 ms; normal QRS axis).