A 16-year-old female patient diagnosed with SLE 5 years prior was admitted to our hospital due to a 2-d history of intermittent abdominal pain accompanied by fever without obvious inducement.
Five years previously, the patient presented with fever, cough and expectoration after catching a cold, which was accompanied by skin petechiae and ecchymoses in the distal extremities. After receiving an infusion at the local hospital (details unknown), the patient’s condition improved; therefore, the episode was considered unremarkable. Three months later, the patient experienced a relapse of the above symptoms that was associated with hair loss, photoallergy and joint pain. Laboratory test results were as follows: Urine protein, 2 +; 24-h urinary protein quantity, 2.412 g; anti-double-stranded DNA (anti-dsDNA) antibody, +++; anti-nucleosome antibody, ++; anti-histone antibody, ++; anti-nuclear antibody (ANA) (1:100), positive; ANA (1:320), positive; ANA (1:1000), weakly positive; complement C3, 0.45 g/L (reference range: 0.79-1.52 g/L); liver and kidney function, normal; and routine blood test, normal. Combined with mild mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis indicated by renal biopsy pathology, the patient was diagnosed with “SLE and lupus nephritis”. After treatment with mycophenolate mofetil (0.5 g bid), prednisone tablets (10 mg qd), hydroxychloroquine (200 mg bid) and enalapril maleate and folic acid tablets (10 mg qd), the patient’s clinical symptoms were relieved, and she was discharged. The results for several routine urine tests thereafter were as follows: Urine protein, 3 +; and 24-h urinary protein quantity, 1-3 g. After the steroid was tapered and terminated, tacrolimus (1 mg bid) was added to the original treatment plan. In the past 4 years, the patient experienced no relapse of the above symptoms; however, her urine protein failed to normalize. Two months prior, the patient experienced persistent pain with paroxysmal exacerbations in both hands and feet. Each onset lasted approximately 2-3 d and was relieved spontaneously. Physical examination showed vasculitis-like changes in the skin on both hands. Laboratory test results were as follows: Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, perinuclear anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (pANCA) +; creatinine (Cr), 105 µmol/L (reference range: 30-90 µmol/L); urine protein, 3 +; urinary occult blood, 1 +; erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), 49 mm/h (reference range: < 38 mm/h); C-reactive protein (CRP), 29.9 mg/L (reference range: 0.068-8.2 mg/L); complement C3, 0.66 g/L; and haemoglobin (Hb), 86 g/L (reference range: 115-150 g/L). Chest computed tomography (CT) indicated bilateral interstitial pneumonia. Renal biopsy-proven active class IV lupus nephritis and cutaneous vasculitis were considered. Considering the presentation of abnormal renal function, tacrolimus was discontinued. The patient and family members refused cyclophosphamide. Then, targeted therapy with belimumab was given on the basis of steroids and mycophenolate mofetil. Her extremity pain was alleviated after treatment, and she was discharged. Treatment with prednisone tablets (50 mg qd), mycophenolate mofetil (0.5 g bid) and intravenous injection of belimumab (360 mg 1/mo) was continued at home. Two days prior, the patient was admitted to our hospital due to a 2-d history of intermittent abdominal pain accompanied by fever without obvious inducement. The primary symptom was whole-abdominal pain, especially in the upper abdomen, presenting as colic, occasionally involving the waist, back and buttocks and lasting from tens of minutes to several hours. Self-administration of acid-reducing agents had no effect, and her body temperature ranged from 35.9 °C to 38.5 °C. There was no oedema, oral ulcer, photoallergy, cough, expectoration or diarrhoea, and her urine and stool were normal.
The patient had whole-abdomen tenderness, particularly in the upper abdomen, without rebound pain or muscle tension. Two days after admission, a small amount of tufted herpes appeared in the labia majora and minora and pharynx, and the patient developed fever with a maximum body temperature of 39 °C (axillary temperature), which was accompanied by ocular hyperaemia, light bloody tears, and oral, nasal and vaginal bleeding. Four days after admission, numerous vesicular herpes and small pustules appeared on her entire body, some of which fused into flakes, and the patient exhibited tachypnoea in the decubitus position with a high pillow and uncontrolled blood pressure and oxygen saturation under oxygen inhalation. A large number of wet rales were heard in both lungs, and low-pitched breath sounds were heard in the lower lobes of both lungs.
Laboratory test results are provided in Tables and .
Whole-abdomen CT + contrast-enhanced scanning and CT angiography of the kidney were normal. Gastroscopy indicated chronic gastritis. Chest CT indicated bilateral pneumonia, bilateral pleural effusion and pericardial effusion .