A 58-year old male was brought to our emergency department after a fall from a ladder. He sustained a bicondylar left tibial plateau fracture with an ipsilateral left diaphyseal tibia fracture. His BMI was 30.5, he had a 25-year history of smoking, and he took omeprazole for gastro-esophageal reflux disease (GERD). Exam demonstrated extensive soft tissue swelling to his left lower extremity. A temporary external fixator spanning both fractures was applied to allow soft tissue rest. The patient remained on the orthopaedic ward in stable condition and was brought back to the operating room for definitive ORIF ten days after initial treatment. Definitive management consisted of stabilizing the fractures with a 13-hole lateral locking plate (Synthes, West Chester, PA, Figure ). DVT prophylaxis was performed by administration of subcutaneous heparin, 5000 units twice daily.
Four days after ORIF, the patient developed extensive swelling and erythema to the left lower extremity as well as frank scrotal edema. He was tachycardic and febrile. Compression gray scale ultrasound as well as Doppler imaging revealed an extensive occlusive DVT from the common femoral to the popliteal vein.
Systemic anticoagulation with heparin and warfarin was immediately started and a CT venogram was obtained, demonstrating an extension of the DVT into the common iliac vein. A stump of the left common iliac vein at the crossover from the right common iliac artery, diagnostic with MTS, was found. With still increasing soft tissue swelling and fear of a possible pulmonary embolism, a decision for an immediate endovascular intervention was made.
Both right internal jugular and right iliac vein were cannulated and a seven French inferior vena cave (IVC) sheath was positioned in the common iliac vein using a guide wire. Contrast venography was performed at this point and demonstrated the extensive DVT . A Bard-Ecclipse filter device (Bard Peripheral Vascular, Tempe, AZ) was deployed at the L1/L2-level. A glidewire and a glide catheter were then used to traverse the thrombus in the left common iliac vein. The glidewire was replaced by an Amplatz wire (Cook, Bloomington IN) over which an Angiojet (Possis, Minneapolis, MN) was advanced and mechanical thrombolysis was performed.
The patient was closely monitored after the venous intervention, and formal anticoagulation was continued for two months. At this time, repeat ultrasound studies demonstrated extensive residual thrombus with extensive collateral formation. Catheter-directed thrombolysis with recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rTPA) was performed, and stents were placed to maintain patency of the common iliac vein. Following 10 mm angioplasty of the stent segment, improved venous outflow was demonstrated by completion venogram .
Three months following thrombolysis and iliac stent placement, the patient was noted to have significant improvement in his lower extremity swelling. Following healing of his fracture, he resumed full weight-bearing on his left lower extremity.