A 58-year-old man visited our outpatient clinic in September 2018 because of a sudden development of lower right abdominal pain, which occurred one hour previously.
He reported lower right abdominal pain that had continued for one hour at the same degree and in the same portion.
He had no prior contributory medical history, although no health checkups had been performed.
He had no obvious family history of the disease.
The results of his physical examination were as follows: height, 1.75 m; weight, 79.4 kg; body mass index, 25.9 kg/m2; blood pressure, 170/100 mmHg (systolic/diastolic); and pulse rate, 76 beats/min. No cardiac murmur nor abnormal respiratory sounds were noted, and he complained of knocking pain in his right back. There was no tenderness on his abdomen, with normal body shape and no particular dermal findings.
Routine laboratory examination revealed a reduced estimated glomerular filtration rate (45.8 mL/min/1.73 m2) with normal potassium levels (4.5 mEq/L). The patient’s fasting blood glucose level was 87 mg/dL, with hemoglobin A1C of 6.0%.
An electrocardiogram demonstrated regular sinus rhythm without any evidence of left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) and an echocardiography showed normal left ventricular wall motion and no indications for LVH. Subsequent computed tomography (CT) performed for exploration of his abdominal pain revealed the presence of a right ureterolithiasis, which could account for his symptoms, and a right adrenal adenoma measuring 22 mm × 25 mm .
The patient was subsequently treated with analgesic drugs to control his pain due to the right ureterolithiasis, and the stones were excreted after a few weeks.
While his hypertension had been treated with a calcium channel blocker with amlodipine (10 mg), detailed examination on his right AI was also performed for the possible presence of pheochromocytoma, PA, and SCS. The urinary metanephrines were within the normal range. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed the presence of a right adrenal tumor , as detected in CT. The salt loading test was positive, with a plasma aldosterone concentration (PAC) of 83 pg/mL, consistent with PA. However, the captopril challenge test was negative, and the aldosterone/renin ratio (ARR) after the challenge was in the range of 192.5 (< 200). The subsequent adrenal venous sampling (AVS) a revealed bilateral increase of plasma aldosterone levels following intravenous infusion of adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) (aldosterone: 15251 pg/mL in the right adrenal vein, 14.271 pg/mL in the left adrenal vein; cortisol: 618.1 µg/dL in the right adrenal vein, 530.5 µg/dL in the left adrenal vein, and a lateralized ratio 1.09), with a higher increase in the aldosterone level in the left adrenal gland before ACTH infusion . Based on these findings, we ultimately diagnosed this patient as bilateral PA. In addition, dexamethasone administrations (1 or 8 mg) did not suppress the production of cortisol (cortisol: 4.5 µg/dL in 1 mg dexamethasone; 3.3 µg/dL in 8 mg dexamethasone). ACTH and cortisol concentrations in the early morning were 2.4 pg/mL and 5.9 µg/dL, respectively. Conversely, the concentration of cortisol at midnight was 4.6 µg/dL. These findings all indicated the presence of diurnal variation in cortisol patterns. In addition, an increased ACTH concentration was noted in the corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) challenge test. Adrenal scintigraphy revealed an increased uptake in the right adrenal gland with its decreased uptake in the left adrenal gland .