A 23 year old female was referred to our policlinic due to vaginal bleeding because of suspected uterine fibroid and Turner syndrome. Before she came to our facility, she was diagnosed with primary amenorrhea due to TS in 2016 in her previous medical facility and given hormone therapy for 6 years with Cyclo-Progynova. Patient then decided to stop taking the hormone therapy in early 2022. Three months before admission, she noticed an enlargement of her abdomen the size of a tennis ball, accompanied by vaginal bleeding. At presentation, patient appeared with developed breasts and pubic hair. Abdominal examination revealed a solid mass measuring 15 x 15 x 10 cm. Her external genitalia were within normal limits .
Ultrasonography revealed a solid mass measuring 14.05 x 10.99 cm above the uterus, with a colour doppler score of +1 . Free fluid was also identified between the liver and kidneys (Morisson pouch). Ultrasonography revealed a solid mass measuring 14.05 x 10.99 cm based on the International Ovarian Tumor Analysis (IOTA) simple rule M1 and M2, and a malignant ovarian tumor with TS was suspected. Hormonal level examination had already been performed in 2016, which confirmed TS. The markers were Anti-Mullerian hormone (AMH) at 0.02 ng/mL, follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) at 116,8 mIU/mL, luteinizing hormone (LH) at 59.9 mIU/mL, and estradiol (E2) at 5.0 pg/mL. These results confirmed that the patient had primary ovarian insufficiency, which is consistent with TS.
We confirmed that her karyotype was 46XX, with 5% X mosaicism, which had been identified by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis in 2016. FISH analysis included 300 cells using X and Y probes, with 15 cells containing only one X chromosome and 285 cells containing two X chromosomes. There was no Y chromosome found by FISH analysis .
It was intended that the patient would then have a joint exploratory laparotomy with Gynecology Oncology department. Alpha-feto protein (AFP), βHCG and lactic dehydrogenase (LDH) examination were planned for her next visit before the operation. However, before her next visit, she was admitted to the emergency department because of severe abdominal pain and increased bowel sound. We performed abdominal roentgen and found high intestinal obstruction. Emergency laparotomy was performed in the Digestive surgery and Gynecology Oncology department. Suboptimal debulking was performed (total abdominal hysterectomy; bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy; peritoneal sampling; omental sampling) after the identification of a solid mass measuring 20 x 15 x 15 cm on her left ovary, with adhesion to the omentum, ileum, and caecum . After total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy was performed, a residual mass measuring 5 x 3 x 2 cm was found on her ileum. Removal was not an available option because the patient’s family refused to accept the possibility of a colostomy. After further evaluation of her bowel, it was returned to normal and the operation was concluded. Her post-operational diagnosis became suspected ovarian carcinoma stage IIIC, Turner syndrome, and obstructive ileus due to an ovarian mass.
Pathology results revealed that the mass was an ovarian yolk sac tumor metastasized to the left and right of the peritoneum and omentum. The uterus and right adnexa were free from cancer cells. The patient was then treated with a three-weekly BEP (Bleomycin, Etoposide, and Cisplatin) regimen. Currently, the patient has finished 4 cycles of this regimen and has been evaluated in the department of oncology and gynecology policlinic. There’s no residual mass present on ultrasound examination and no abnormalities on tumor markers (AFP, bHCG and LDH). The patient was placed on hormone replacement therapy after evaluation.