A 63 years-old Caucasian male patient, with a negative family history of thyroid diseases and without a personal anamnesis of neck irradiation, was referred to general surgery unit for multinodular goiter, bigger on the right side, complicated by a tracheal deviation and symptoms of compression.
Routine preoperative tests, unexpectedly, showed a mild serum hypercalcemia (13.3 mg / dL) [normal range (n.r.): 8.6–10.2)], hypophosphatemia [2.2 mg / dL (n.r. 2.7–4.5)], with no symptomatology of urolithiasis, myasthenia, osteoarthralgia, dyspepsia, constipation or psychotic depression. Serum parathyroid hormone (PTH) value was increased 159 pg / mL (n.r. 4.6–58.1), the urine calcium was 896 mg / 24 h (n.r. 100–400) and urine phosphorus was 1000 mg / 24 h (n.r. 400–1300). No kidney disorders were found thus a diagnosis of primary hyperparathyroidism was made.
A neck ultrasound (US) exam confirmed a multinodular goiter without extra-thyroid lump: in particular, a 14 mm-diameter nodule with intravascular spot signal at Doppler exam was observed at the left posterior base of the thyroid. The parathyroid subtraction scintigraphy with 99mTechnetium and Sesta-Meta-iodo-Benzylguanidine showed a strong posterior signal at the left thyroid base in correspondence of the nodule . No pathological signal was observed in other extrathyroidal sites.
Therefore, these observations suggested the suspect of an IP adenoma: the decision was made not to proceed with a needle aspiration, due to the risk of severe fibrosis that could complicate the final histological diagnosis .
Otherwise fine-needle cytology (FNC) on the major nodule of the thyroidal right lobe diagnosed Thy 2 according to Bethesda System.
The patient received an intravenous injection of 12.3 mCi of Tc99m-sestamibi approximately 1 hour prior to surgery. A total thyroidectomy with radio-guide technique using gamma probe after intraoperative sesta-MIBI administration and intraoperative PTH level evaluation was performed.
The intraoperative PTH level evaluation, performed with a chemiluminescence immunoassay, allows the determination of the serum bio-intact PTH value. The basal serum PTH level before thyroidectomy was 164 pg/mL. After 20 min from the surgery, the value decreased at 38 pg/mL and 30 min later at 19 pg/mL.
The use of the gamma probe after surgery was essential to identify high radiation levels in the posterior left thyroid lobe, where a yellow-brown nodule was found .
Conversely, the postoperative thyroid lodge did not show any radiation activity.
The patient was discharged on the third post-operative day without complications and with normal range serum values of PTH, calcemia and phosphoremia.
Histopathological examination revealed a classic papillary carcinoma of 0.8 cm of diameter at the thyroidal left lobe , a follicular variant of a papillary carcinoma of 0.6 cm of diameter at the thyroidal right lobe and a parathyroidal main cell carcinoma of 1.2 × 1.0 cm of diameter at the posterior thyroidal left basal lobe . Photographs of histological slides were obtained using a digital acquisition system (Olympus DP2-SAL4).
Postoperatively, 131I ablation therapy was administered at a dose of 50 mCi.
The patient was followed up closely for both malignancies. US examination was performed every 6 months in the first year and every year later. TSH, FT3, FT4, Thyreoglobulin (Tg), Thyreoglobulin Antibodies, PTH, calcemia and phosphoremia was scheduled every 3 months.
Tg value was 6 ng/ml before I-131 therapy and remained < 0.2 ng/ml after treatment and for the 7 years follow-up; serum calcium, phosphorus and PTH levels remained in the respective normal ranges, with multiple negative neck US.