A 68-year-old male patient with a background of hypertension, chronic hepatic C, and peripheral vascular disease presented to our institution for elective surgical removal of a cutaneous basal cell carcinoma on the right side of his face. He took candesartan 16 mg daily and reported no allergies. Induction of anaesthesia with midazolam, alfentanil, propofol, and rocuronium and orotracheal intubation was followed by subcutaneous infiltration of local anaesthesia with adrenaline to the right cheek. Within minutes after the administration of local anaesthesia, the patient became markedly hypertensive (blood pressure 252/135 mmHg), tachycardic (heart rate 135 b.p.m.), and developed mild ST-segment elevation in leads V1–V3 on the electrocardiogram with reciprocal ST-segment depression in leads V4–V6 and T wave flattening/inversion in leads I and aVL . Non-sustained, broad-complex tachycardia was noticed on cardiac monitoring. The QTc interval was 404 ms. On review of the medications administered, it was noted that an unintentionally large dose of adrenaline (4 mg) had been injected subcutaneously with the lignocaine. Urgent blood pressure control was achieved with intravenous esmolol, clonidine, metoprolol, and further propofol. Profound hypotension followed (blood pressure 65/35 mmHg), necessitating multiple intravenous boluses of metaraminol and a dose of ephedrine. He was extubated and transferred to the recovery room. His ST-segment deviation persisted. Physical examination was unremarkable. Urgent bedside transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated moderate LV apical dilatation and systolic function (estimated LV ejection fraction 40%). Initial cardiac troponin T was mildly elevated at 18 ng/L (reference range 0–14 ng/L); repeat measurement was 11 ng/L. Results of the tests of renal, hepatic function were within normal limits. Full blood count was unremarkable. Serum calcium, magnesium, and phosphorus levels were normal. Urgent cardiac catheterization revealed non-obstructive coronary artery disease. Left ventriculography demonstrated apical ballooning and moderate systolic dysfunction, consistent with acute takotsubo syndrome . He was observed in the coronary care unit for 24 h and bisoprolol 2.5 mg daily was initiated the following day. He recovered uneventfully and was discharged on Day 2 post-procedure. On follow-up 1 month later, his LV function had normalized on transthoracic echocardiography . He remained on bisoprolol and candesartan and underwent basal cell carcinoma excision under general anaesthesia uneventfully 1 month later. Subcutaneously injected adrenaline was used with infiltrative anaesthesia in the latter operative procedure, albeit at a much lower dose (1 mg). Six months following the index event, he was doing well.