A 72-year-old woman came to our department complaining of auditory hallucinations. Six months earlier, she had developed severe low back pain and numbness in her left lower extremity, which made it difficult for her to walk. She had been diagnosed with lumbar spinal canal stenosis associated with herniated and slipped disks at another hospital. A few days after the onset of her condition, she was started on 75 mg of diclofenac sodium, 112.5 mg of tramadol, and 50 mg of pregabalin. Due to persistent back pain, she was referred to the pain clinic in our hospital 4 months later for block injections. The dose of tramadol was increased to 200 mg, and 1 month later (3 months ago), the dose was increased to 300 mg. The next day (87 days after starting tramadol), she began to hear nursery rhymes, songs of the Ministry of Education, and folk songs, among others, that she had sung in her childhood as part of a chorus. The songs consisted of male and female voices, divided into lower and higher parts, and the same song was repeated approximately 10 times before moving on to another song. Auditory hallucinations appeared mainly during periods of silence, such as before bedtime and while doing housework. Approximately 1 month after the auditory hallucinations began, the patient reported her symptoms to the prescribing physician, and the dose of tramadol was reduced to 200 mg and then to 100 mg 1 week later. After dose reduction, the auditory hallucinations decreased in volume, but the symptoms themselves remained. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head and a hearing test were performed to rule out organic lesions, but neither examination showed any abnormalities by a physician General Medicine Department. No ear pain, redness, swelling, ear leaks, plugged ears, tinnitus, dizziness, or cerumen were observed. An electroencephalogram was not performed. There were no signs of psychiatric disease. Mini-mental examinations showed no cognitive dysfunction with a score of 28. Therefore, the patient was referred to our department and started on aripiprazole 3 mg, which further decreased the volume of auditory hallucinations. Two weeks later, tramadol was tapered off in 25 mg increments and discontinued after 6 days. After discontinuation, the patient's back pain continued without exacerbation with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) alone. After starting aripiprazole, the patient developed dysrhythmias and a skin rash that were suspected to be drug-related, so the drug was changed to risperidone 1 mg 42 days later. Ten days later (32 days after the discontinuation of tramadol), auditory hallucinations were almost nonexistent, but dizziness and rhythm disturbances were observed, so risperidone was discontinued 2 weeks after its initiation. After the discontinuation of risperidone, the auditory hallucinations did not recur, and the patient's mental status remained stable. A summary of the clinical course of this case is shown in Figure .