Our patient is a 6-year-old girl who was referred for evaluation for psychomotor retardation, hypotonia, ataxia, inverted nipples, and a heart murmur. She was the third child born to healthy, nonconsanguineous Caucasian parents at 38 weeks' gestation via caesarean section with a birth weight of 4.2 kg (90-95th percentile). Apart from the mother taking fluoxetine in early pregnancy and decreased fetal movement, the pregnancy was uneventful with no particular exposure to teratogenic substances.
During routine pediatric check-up 1 week after birth, right-sided torticollis, episodes of cyanosis and sleep apnea had been noted. At the age of 2 months, the patient presented with delayed development, failure to thrive, hypotonia, ataxia, muscle weakness, tongue fasciculation, and inverted nipples. Deep tendon reflexes were difficult to elicit. The palate was intact and normally arched, and no hearing problems were present at that time. Cranial ultrasound was normal and brain magnetic resonance imaging showed a myelination pattern at the lower limit of normal for her age. Electromyography showed no signs of motor neuron disease and myopathy. Spinal muscular atrophy gene sequencing as well as Prader-Willi methylation and chromosome microarray were negative. Routine laboratory investigations revealed elevated total CK (240 U/L; standard range, <172 U/L) and elevated CK-MB (10.4 ng/mL; standard range, 0.0-6.0 ng/mL).
Due to worsening feeding problems, intermittent coughing and cyanosis, video fluoroscopy swallowing exam (VFSE) was performed at 3 months, which suggested vascular abnormality. Echocardiography revealed vascular ring anomaly with a right-sided aortic arch, an aberrant left subclavian artery that originated from the descending aorta and a persistent foramen ovale (PFO). Cardiac segmental anatomy was otherwise normal. Ventricular hypertrophy or pericardial effusion was absent.
With the above clinical results, CDG-I was suspected. Serum transferrin isoelectric focusing was performed at the age of 5 months and showed a type I pattern. At 8 months, subsequent whole exome gene sequencing revealed two PMM2-CDG mutations in two different alleles: c.422G > A (p.R141H) and c.415G > A (p.E139K). No known pathogenic mutations related to CHD were found.
Family history revealed that the patient had one 2-year-older healthy brother and an older sister who passed away at 44 days after surgery for truncus arteriosus. The latter was suspected to have CDG based on a retrospective analysis of images and clinical features, but no whole exome gene sequencing was performed. Besides her older sister, there were no reported family members with either CHD or CDG. In addition, family history was negative for other genetic abnormalities and sudden cardiac death.
At 6 years of age, the patient suffers from global developmental delay, cerebellar atrophy, and peripheral neuropathy. She has no documented epilepsy. The patient did not undergo surgery and her vascular ring anomaly is followed up via VFSE and echocardiography. The PFO has closed naturally and other cardiac findings are normal. She was diagnosed with vision impairment (retinitis pigmentosa) with strabismus. Currently, she receives physical, occupational and speech therapy with favorable results.