An 80-year-old African-American male presented to the University of Michigan Hospital and Health Systems Comprehensive Wound Center for ongoing care of a painful right foot fifth digit wound. He first noticed the lesion after stubbing the digit 2 months prior. He presented to his primary care doctor 1 month after the injury and the lesion was diagnosed as a diabetic foot ulcer (DFU). The lesion improved minimally with local wound care. Due to stagnation of the suspected DFU the patient presented to the wound center for further care. Upon initial wound center presentation, a granulomatous mass was noted to the medial aspect of the right fifth digit . A biopsy of the lesion was subsequently scheduled. However, upon presenting to the biopsy procedure, the patient stated the granulomatous mass had sloughed off in his sock the week prior leaving only a small partial-thickness ulcer . The patient elected to defer the biopsy as his symptoms had improved. The patient continued regular monthly follow-up at the wound center with development of his wound into two painful papules.
The patient’s past medical history was significant for type 2 diabetes mellitus T2DM, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, asthma, and dementia. He denied a family history of skin lesions and cancer. He did not take any immunosuppressive medication. The patient was a lifelong non-smoker and denied alcohol and illicit drug use. He was married, heterosexual and monogamous. At the time of presentation his last recorded hemoglobin A1c was 6.1%. Clinical examination revealed palpable pedal pulses with triphasic flow to the bilateral dorsalis pedis artery and posterior tibialis artery. His right hallux toe pressure was 126 mmHg and his left hallux toe pressure was 184 mmHg. He had diminished protective sensation, 2 out of 4 sites bilaterally, as tested with 10-g 5.07 Semmes-Weinstein monofilament as per American Diabetes Association guidelines . To the medial aspect of the patient’s right fifth digit were two firm, cyanotic appearing papules. The distal papule measured 0.5 cm in diameter and the proximal papule measured 0.7 cm in diameter . There were no clinical signs of infection noted to the right foot. As the lesion caused moderate discomfort and did not improve despite 2 months of local care at the wound center, a biopsy of the lesion was again recommended.
After obtaining written informed consent a #15 blade was used to perform a shave biopsy of both the right fifth digit proximal and distal papules. The two specimens were labeled appropriately and sent separately to the University of Michigan Hospital and Health Systems pathology laboratory for assessment. The pathology report identified the specimen obtained from the distal papule as the superficial aspect of a hemorrhagic vascular lesion. The specimen from the proximal papule was identified as Kaposi sarcoma, nodular stage, transected at the deep margin. Hematoxylin and eosin stain demonstrated dermal nodules with haphazard spindle cell proliferation of endothelial cells forming vascular spaces which is diagnostic of classic KS . The tumor cells showed diagnostic positive staining for HHV-8 .
After the resulting classic KS diagnosis, the patient was referred to the Surgical Oncology Clinic at the University of Michigan Hospital and Health Systems. He underwent a series of blood tests to assess for underlying immunosuppression including HIV testing and a complete blood count with platelet and differential. He was determined to be HIV seronegative without any other clinical findings of immunosuppression. His case was reviewed by the University of Michigan Sarcoma Medical Oncology Department as well as the Multidisciplinary Sarcoma Tumor Board. The consensus of the combined board was local therapy with radiation without surgical intervention. The patient underwent 30 Gy of radiation in 10 fractions directed to the right foot fifth digit. The patient tolerated radiotherapy well and upon finishing his course of therapy, the KS lesion to the right foot had completely resolved. Upon a 10 month follow-up from initiation of radiation, the patient was disease free.