A 59 years old male patient presented to our emergency department with severe generalized abdominal pain of four-day duration. The pain developed gradually, until it became more severe and unbearable. The patient had normal bowel habits. However, he had 3-month history of weight loss. On presentation, he appeared ill and shocked. His vital signs were: temperature 37.7 °C orally, heart rate 120/minute, respiratory rate 22/minute, and blood pressure 90/60 mm Hg. Abdominal examination revealed massively distended, tender rigid abdomen. Digital rectal examination revealed the presence of soft stool and it was negative for fresh blood or melena. His initial laboratory showed a hemoglobin of 11.1 g/dL, leukocyte count (10.3 × 109)/L (Segmented neutrophils 70%), sodium (135 mEq/L) and potassium (3.5 mEq/L) with normal creatinine and blood urea nitrogen level (1 mg/dL, 29 mg/dL). An abdominal CT scan with IV contrast enhancement was performed after initial resuscitating, it showed pneumoperitoneum with significant fat stranding in the small bowel mesentery (see ).
We decided to perform exploratory laparotomy. General anesthesia with endotracheal intubation was performed. Prophylactic antibiotics were administered. Nasogastric drainage and urinary catheter tubes had already been inserted.
Upon entrance to the peritoneal cavity, a gush of turbid, free intraperitoneal fluid, mixed with enteric content came out. Suction of about 3000 mL was done. Exploration of the abdomen revealed the presence of a large mass lesion, measuring about 11 × 9 cm, arising from the mid jejunum with extensive adhesions involving the majority of small bowel length. This tumor was grossly perforated resulting in fecal peritonitis. The liver was grossly free of metastasis. No synchronous lesions were identified in the small or large bowel. Other intraabdominal organs were assessed and were grossly intact. Apart from the proximal 40 cm of the jejunum and the distal 30 cm of the ileum, the whole length of the small bowel was diseased and could not be preserved (See ).
Keeping in mind the possibility of short bowel syndrome and its catastrophic consequences, creation of stoma at 40 cm from the DJ junction was not an option. Primary anastomosis was performed as the sole option of treatment at the expense of high possibility of anastomotic leak. Resection of the tumor along with the surrounding adhesive, unhealthy small bowel was done. The peritoneal cavity was generously irrigated with warm saline followed by aqueous betadine and finally warm saline again. A primary jejuno-ileal bowel anastomosis was performed using gastrointestinal staplers. Two intraperitoneal drains were applied and the abdomen was finally closed. The patient was extubated and transferred to the intensive care unit.
On day one post-surgery, the patient developed melena and coffee-ground gastric drainage on NG tube along with a drop in hematocrit level. His gastrointestinal bleeding responded to fluid resuscitation and blood products transfusion. On the fourth postoperative day, he started feeding and was transferred to the surgical ward. On the eleventh postoperative day, the patient was discharged home in an excellent general condition. On the 2-week post-surgery follow up, the patient had wound infection that required hospitalization for IV antibiotics and regular dressings.
Histopathologic examination of the specimen showed a malignant, spindle cell- type GIST with a mitotic rate of 8 MF/50 HPF. Histologic grade was high (G2). Adequate safety margins were confirmed. The number of lymph nodes retrieved in the specimen was 9. None of which was involved by the tumor. The pathologic stage was pT4 pN0.
One-month and two-month post-surgery follow up visits to the clinic were unremarkable. The patient maintained the same body weight as when discharged. No features of short bowel syndrome were detected. The patient started oral imatinib treatment 3 weeks post-surgery.