A 9-year-old female rhesus macaque (Macaca mulatta) with a history of a previous caesarian section presented with a large, firm uterine mass on abdominal and rectal palpation at routine semi-annual physical exam. All animal studies were approved by the Johns Hopkins University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and conducted in accordance with the Weatherall Report, the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, and the USDA Animal Welfare Act. Abdominal ultrasound revealed numerous cysts near the uterus. Fine needle aspirate of one of the cysts revealed dark red-brown fluid that on cytology contained numerous degenerate red blood cells, foamy macrophages with hemosiderin, scattered neutrophils and lymphocytes as well as numerous clusters of endometrial-like cells (chocolate cyst) . A laparotomy was subsequently performed, which revealed extensive cyst formation localized to the ovaries; numerous adhesions extending from and between the reproductive tract and the bladder and omentum were observed. Euthanasia was elected due to poor prognosis.
On necropsy, the animal was in good postmortem condition and good body condition (BCS 3/5). The uterus was markedly thickened and nodular with a prominent “chocolate brown” cystic structures on the serosal ventral surface. Dissection between the uterus body, uterine horns, and ovaries was not possible due to the extensive adhesions . One ovary was grossly discernable and exhibited multiple simple cysts as well as a cyst containing “chocolate brown” material.
Ovarian histology confirmed initial examination impressions of endometriosis: Transmurally disrupting and expanding the parenchyma of the bladder and uterus and also impacting the mesentery of the retroperitoneal space were multiple, unencapsulated, infiltrative islands of ectopic endometrial glands surrounded by densely cellular endometrial stromal tissue. The endometrial glands were lined by simple columnar epithelial cells with a moderate amount of clear to pale eosinophilic cytoplasm. The endometrial stroma was composed of spindle cells with indistinct cell borders, scant eosinophilic cytoplasm and an oval nucleus with finely stippled chromatin. Occasionally glands contained moderate numbers of macrophages, neutrophils, erythrocytes, and cellular debris. Within the retroperitoneal mesenteric adipose tissue, multifocal areas of hemorrhage, degenerate neutrophils, and necrotic debris is appreciated along with plump mature reactive fibroblasts (adhesions). The adjacent lymph node contained increased number of histiocytes, which often demonstrated erythrophagocytosis along with hemorrhage and congestion .
Just prior to euthanasia, CVS and CVL were collected. Samples were collected with the aid of a vaginal speculum by either gently swabbing in the endocervical area with a sterile cottom swab or by lavaging the vaginal vault with a syringe filled with 3.0 mililiters of 1X PBS, respectively. The total yield of CVL fluid was recorded. Swabs were immediately placed in two mL of 1X Dulbecco’s PBS and within thirty minutes of collection were swirled in a circular fashion within the PBS and then repeatedly pressed against the side of their respective 15 mililiter conicals to ensure optimal liberation of secretions; lavage fluid was collected into a 15 mililiter conical. Normal CVL samples were pooled by species prior to analysis. Both types of samples were centrifuged at 1,000xg for 15 min to remove cells and large debris. Following this first spin, supernatant from each of the sample types was saved, diluted 1:10 with 1X phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and subjected to single particle tracking with a NanoSight NS-500 system. At least five 20-s videos were recorded of each sample at a camera setting of 14, and files were analyzed at a detection threshold of ten using NanoSight software version 2.2.
Samples subsequently underwent high-speed ultracentrifugation (110,000xg for 70 min at 4 °C) using a Sorvall Discovery 100SE instrument and a Sorvall AH-6502 swinging-bucket rotor (k-factor =53). After carefully pouring off supernatant, pellets were resuspended in 500 ul PBS using an optimized resuspension protocol. Both sets of samples were diluted at a ratio of 1:10 as well and observed using the same camera and detection threshold settings as were used for the pre-ultracentrifugation observation (described above).
Particle counts of samples from the endometriosis case were compared with CVL and CVS data obtained from four other individuals (two rhesus macaques and two pigtailed macaques, Macaca nemestrina) that had no notable reproductive tract history or pathology at necropsy, using the same protocols. Histologic examination of endometrial tissue from the 4 reproductively normal animals revealed that the animals were either in the proliferative phase (n = 3) or early secretory (n = 1) phase of the menstrual cycle, allowing for the best physiologic comparison with respect to the presence of endometrial cells observed in endometriosis [–].