History, current disease and physical examination, 38-year-old mixed-race woman, from Bagua, housewife, with a pathological history of diabetes mellitus with irregular treatment, family member reported that the patient presented with abdominal pain of mild to moderate intensity, nausea, vomiting, an unquantified thermal rise that persisted and intensified associated with generalized tonic–clonic movements, and sensory impairment, so she went to the health center, where she was tested with an uncertain result. She was referred to a private clinic, where she remained 1 day with unfavorable evolution and was referred to the hospital emergency room,
Physical examination; head and neck: normocephalic, symmetrical, no palpable adenopathy, neurological status with disorientation and soporous, symmetrical thorax, rhythmic heart sounds, tachycardic, vesicular murmur passes in both lung fields, bibasal cramps, respiratory distress, dyspnea with oxygen support, with sustained low saturation, with reservoir mask at 15 L, soft abdomen, depressive, no palpable masses, limited mobility initially, was hospitalized due to community-acquired pneumonia, which progressed to type I respiratory failure, requiring mechanical ventilation to maintain respiratory homeostasis, admitted to the intensive care unit for acute respiratory failure and respiratory failure on mechanical ventilation secondary to pneumonia associated with mechanical ventilation due to Klebsiella pneumoniae. Evolution with refractory septic shock of respiratory focus, requiring initiation of norepinephrine, then epinephrine due to persistent hypotension.
Exploratory thoracotomy was performed, identifying a massive left pneumothorax with empyema, left pulmonary decortication and wedge resection of the anterobasal segment and lingula, with a thoracic drainage. The patient persisted with bronchopleural fistula, for which she underwent multiple reoperative procedures without resolution.
Subsequently, he presented new ventilator-associated pneumonia due to the Pseudomona aeruginosa and Acinetobacter baumannii complex, with a torpid evolution. She required to be prolonged mechanical ventilation and a tracheostomy.
Computed Axial Tomography of the thorax showed multiple lesions compatible with pulmonary metastasis. A thyroid biopsy was performed, which reported metastatic papillary thyroid carcinoma. The patient developed hypoparathyroidism and permanent, severe hypocalcemia.
After multiple complications, prolonged ventilatory support and a refractory critical condition with acquired weakness in the intensive care unit, the patient died after 62 days and was discharged from the intensive care unit to the medical service. After 5 days of stay, the tracheostomy was decannulated, the patient ventilated spontaneously, with an indication for consultation with oncology, palliative treatment was started, and the patient requested voluntary withdrawal to go home. This case report seeks not only to describe the clinical course and interventions performed, but also to highlight the diagnostic and therapeutic challenges inherent in the management of multiple concurrent diseases in a single patient.