A 10-day-old male infant was referred to our hospital because of suspected congenital hypothyroidism. The patient presented with symptoms of airway obstruction, such as an inspiratory stridor and retracted breathing. A hormonal test revealed subclinical hypothyroidism with a free thyroxine level (1.44 ng/dL) within the reference range, although the thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) level (34.6 μIU/mL) was increased beyond the normal range. Laryngo fiberscopy revealed a lingual mass compressing the epiglottis . Enhanced computed tomography (CT) and thyroid scintigraphy revealed that the mass was an ectopic thyroid with the absence of a normal pretracheal thyroid gland . The patient received oral levothyroxine at a dose of 12 μg/kg/day for 4 weeks to lower the TSH level and reduce the volume of the ectopic thyroid tissue. However, we observed no reduction in the volume of the thyroid tissue and a concomitant progression in his symptoms of airway obstruction. He underwent surgery to relieve the airway obstruction when he was 2 months old. Under general anesthesia, nasotracheal intubation was performed in a sniffing position, and a transverse skin incision measuring 2.5 cm was made at the level of the hyoid bone. We split the hyoid bone at the midline, dissected the base of the tongue towards the foramen cecum, detected the ectopic thyroid mass, and suspended the mass by suturing it to the hyoid bone . We used 5–0 monofilament absorbable sutures and sutured between the lingual thyroid and the hyoid bone. The bite length of both the lingual thyroid and hyoid bone was about 3 mm. The points of suturing were to the lateral side of the lingual thyroid and to the front of it. The total number of suture threads was 3. The degree of suspension of the ectopic thyroid was guided by an intraoperative laryngo fiberscopy to confirm the complete elevation of the epiglottis. The patient was not extubated until postoperative day 4 and needed noninvasive positive pressure ventilation until postoperative day 22. Laryngo fiberscopy performed 6 months postoperatively revealed the complete disappearance of compression of the epiglottis by the lingual mass, and CT performed 8 months postoperatively also revealed the relocation of the lingual thyroid gland towards the hyoid bone . When the patient was 2 years 6 months old, his height was 94.1 cm(1.4 SD), weight was 14.0 kg(1.0 SD), free T3 was 2.97 pg/mL, free T4 was 1.48 ng/dL, and TSH was 4.178 μIU/mL. He was taking daily levothyroxine 4.5 μg/kg/day and had been kept in the euthyroid state. Since we were able to preserve his thyroid gland (which is his only functioning thyroid tissue), the postoperative control of his thyroid hormone status was relatively easy. The surgery was complicated by the development of a salivary fistula that was spontaneously resolved 5 months postoperatively.