An asymptomatic 61-year-old woman (gravida 0, reaching menopause in her 40s) was referred to our hospital because of elevated levels of CA125 (389 U/mL; normal range < 35 U/mL) and CA19–9 (785 U/mL; normal range < 37 U/mL). Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging showed a heterogenous mass 7.3 cm in diameter composed of an enhanced solid area and a bloody liquid area, suggesting degenerated leiomyoma or leiomyosarcoma. Endometrial and cervical cytology was performed, which did not indicate any malignant tumors. Because significant uptake of fluorodeoxyglucose was observed in the lesion, a total hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy were performed. After surgery, the peripheral levels of both tumor markers returned to normal. The patient then underwent adjuvant chemotherapy (paclitaxel and carboplatin) and currently remains free of disease 9 months since the operation.
Macroscopic examination of the resected specimen did not reveal any significant changes in the luminal surface of the uterine cervix, endocervix, endometrium, or peritoneal surface, except for an endometrial polyp and intramural and subserosal myomas. The tumor (8 cm × 6.5 cm) was located in the left-sided posterolateral wall of the corpus and was entirely confined to the myometrium . The tumor was comprised of a yellow–white bulky polypoid mass in an intramural cyst containing brownish serous fluid and an invasive lesion in continuum with the intracystic component . No abnormalities in the uterine cervix or adnexa were observed.
The tumor was composed of an intracystic bulky component confined to the intramural cyst and an invasive component in the myometrial layer . In the former component, a variety of morphologic patterns, such as tubular, papillary, acinar, and solid growth, were observed. These patterns were admixed but changed abruptly in some areas. The predominant and characteristic growth pattern was a tubular pattern, in which back-to-back, small, round, uniform tubules were lined by cuboidal or flattened cells, and some of their lumens exhibited densely eosinophilic, PAS-positive secretion . Acinic and solid patterns were observed at the periphery of the mass neighboring the myometrial wall . The tumor cells were relatively bland and absent from the nuclear pleomorphism, although occasional mitotic figures were observed. In addition to the abovementioned component at the periphery of the intracystic mass, a more atypical tumor component invaded the myometrial wall . This component exhibited a ductal pattern with many mitotic figures and moderate cytologic atypia. No squamoid or mucinous elements were detected. Invasion was observed from the outer-most layer of the cyst to just beneath the peritoneal surface. No tumor necrotic foci were observed in either component.
No neoplastic changes were observed in the cervix, endometrium, or fallopian tubes. Scattered ectopic endometrial tissue was observed in the myometrium. Despite a careful and thorough examination, no mesonephric remnants were identified in the myometrium or uterine cervix.
Regardless of the differences in histologic patterns, all neoplastic cells were diffusely positive for CK7 and PAX8 and completely negative for CK20, inhibin, PgR, and WT1 . Only a small number of cells (<1%) in the tubular pattern expressed ER and Napsin A; neither was observed in other patterns. Luminal staining of the neoplastic tubules for CD10, nuclear and cytoplasmic staining for calretinin, and nuclear staining for GATA3 were observed focally . Tumor cells in the tubular and acinar patterns exhibited diffuse expression of vimentin and TTF-1, whereas no expression was observed in those in the solid pattern . Focal but intense expression of CA125 and CA19–9 was observed in the tumor regardless of the histologic pattern . A high labeling index of Ki67 antigen was observed in the solid and ductal patterns in the myometrial layer but was much lower in the tubular and acinar patterns in the cystic component. Significant expression of p53 antigen was not observed in either component.