A 78-year-old Japanese woman, with a previous medical history of arterial hypertension and who had not undergone any previous operations, was admitted to our hospital with a low grade fever and mild diarrhea, which had occurred two or three times a week during the six months before admission. Physical examination revealed no spontaneous pain, no tenderness, and no guarding in the abdomen, and no abdominal or pelvic mass was present on palpation. The patient was afebrile, but there were mild inflammatory signs in the laboratory data (C-reactive protein: 1.1 mg/dL, white blood cells: 10,400/μL). The other biological values (hemoglobin, electrolytes, urine) were normal.
First, we performed computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) as non-invasive imaging modalities. The CT scan revealed a capsular lesion including air density with a diameter of 5 cm between the posterior wall of the uterine body and the sigmoid colon . The MRI scan showed the capsular lesion including an air structure. A gastrograffin enema and colonoscopy demonstrated a giant diverticulum of the sigmoid colon without evidence of malignancy and penetration to the wall of the uterus . These data confirmed the diagnosis of diverticulitis complicated by a giant diverticulum. Since these clinical manifestations, imaging findings and colon examinations did not suggest the presence of any severe complications, such as a penetration of the sigmoid colon to the posterior uterine wall, sigmoid-uterine fistula, perforation, or peritonitis, we selected a conservative therapy. Therapy with antibiotics was instituted for two weeks, and although improvement in the low grade fever was observed, the fever redeveloped. We proceeded to laparotomy where we found a portion of the sigmoid colon was adherent to the uterine fundus. An en bloc resection of the sigmoid colon with the uterus and adnexae was performed, as well as a side-to-end colorectal anastomosis. Pathological examination confirmed a giant diverticulum with inflammation and abscess of the sigmoid colon, penetrating to the posterior wall of the uterus . Our patient had an uneventful recovery and no problems have been observed over five years of follow-up.