An 87-year-old man with a history of atrial fibrillation with CHA2DS2-VASc score of 5, heart failure with preserved ejection fraction, and hypertension presented to the emergency room with weakness, decreased oral intake, and mild cough. Consent for publication of this case report was obtained from the patient’s wife. Five months earlier, the patient started dabigatran etexilate 150 mg orally twice-daily for thromboembolic prophylaxis of atrial fibrillation [which is the dose approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for patients with normal or mildly impaired renal function—the 110 mg dose is not available in the US]. One week prior, the patient was seen by his primary care physician for increased lower extremity edema and found to have atrial fibrillation with a rapid ventricular response averaging 120 beats per minute. The serum creatinine (Cr) at the time was measured at 1.20 mg/dL [estimated glomerular filtration (eGFR) = 57 mL/min/1.73 m2 as reported by the hospital laboratory based on the isotope dilution mass spectrometry (IDMS)-traceable Modification of Diet in Renal Disease [MDRD] study equation]. The daily doses of verapamil, metoprolol, and furosemide were increased from 120 to 240, 25 to 100, and 40 to 60 mg, respectively. Two days prior to presentation, the patient fell while getting out of bed, but did not seek medical attention. On the day of admission, the patient was too weak to stand and vomited three times, prompting his family to seek emergency medical care. The last dose of dabigatran was reportedly taken 2 days prior to admission.
On initial evaluation, the axillary temperature was 95.7 °F, blood pressure 102/48 mmHg, ventricular rate 36 beats/min with atrial fibrillation , and oxygen saturation 96% on 2 L/min of supplemental oxygen. On examination, the patient was ill appearing but in no acute distress. The patient had 10 cm of jugular venous distension with monophasic waves and hepatojugular reflux. There were bibasilar crackles present on lung examination. Cardiac auscultation revealed a bradycardic, irregular rhythm, normal first heart sound with a physiologically split second heart sound, and a III/VI systolic murmur loudest at the upper sternal border. The abdomen was benign without organomegaly. There was 3+ pitting edema of the extremities with normal pulses bilaterally.
Upon arrival to the emergency department 2 L of intravenous (IV) normal saline and 1 mg of IV glucagon were administered. A chest X-ray revealed a right lower lobe infiltrate , cultures were obtained, and treatment was initiated with ceftriaxone and levofloxacin. Laboratory studies were notable for acute renal failure and hepatic dysfunction, which likely developed in the setting of septic shock from pneumonia, potentially compounded by recently increased diuretic therapy and bradycardia in the setting of uptitration of nodal blockade . In conjunction, laboratory studies revealed electrolyte disturbances, elevated serum lactate, and profound coagulopathy . The patient received 10 units of IV insulin, 50 g of IV dextrose, 2 g of IV calcium gluconate, and 50 mEq of IV sodium bicarbonate to manage hyperkalemia. Computed tomography of the head, neck, and cervical spine did not show evidence of acute hemorrhage or fracture.
On admission to the cardiac intensive care unit, the heart rate was irregular at 48 beats/min and the blood pressure was 90/50 mmHg. The patient rapidly developed worsening hypoxia and was placed on 70% oxygen at 35 L/min delivered by high flow nasal cannula. During a phlebotomy, the patient became acutely unresponsive with a loss of palpable pulses. The cardiac monitor revealed progressive bradycardia to less than 30 beats/min. The patient received approximately 2.5 min of chest compressions with return of spontaneous circulation, was intubated, and placed on mechanical ventilation.
The patient did not demonstrate any overt signs of active bleeding at any point during the hospitalization. On admission, the hematocrit was 43.5%, consistent with the patient’s baseline value. In the setting of receiving a total of 4.5 L of IV normal saline during the first day of hospitalization, the hematocrit dropped to a nadir of 33.9%, but gradually improved without infusion of red blood cells to 38.3% on day of discharge. However, taking into account the history of a recent fall, need for central venous access, and presence of multi-organ failure in the elderly gentleman with possible need for dialysis, the decision was made to reverse the coagulopathy. A reversal strategy was pursued that attempted to counteract both dabigatran toxicity and the potential for decreased hepatic synthesis of clotting factors given concern for hepatic injury in the setting of an acute transaminitis. The patient’s history of heart failure and acute renal failure limited the amount of high volume blood products that could be administered and more concentrated forms of coagulation factor replacement were considered. A total of 4 units of fresh frozen plasma (FFP), 15 mg of vitamin K (initially 5 mg orally, then 10 mg IV), and 5,020 international units (IU) of IV inactivated prothrombin complex concentrates (PCC; Profilnine®, Grifols Biologicals, Inc, Los Angeles, CA, USA) were administered on the first day of hospitalization . The prothrombin time (PT) and partial thromboplastin time (PTT) peaked in the first 24 h and then gradually returned to normal . Coagulopathy was further measured using the thrombin time at 7, 24, and 26 h after admission and was >150 s (normal range 15–30) at all three measurements. A diluted thrombin time (one part patient plasma to three parts normal plasma) was measured at 24 and 26 h and was 125.0 and 113.1 s, respectively . The hepatic transaminases and renal function also peaked on the first day with an alanine aminotransferase (ALT) of 4,590 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) of 4,965 U/L, and Cr of 3.07 mg/dL (eGFR ≤20 mL/min/1.73 m2). Thereafter, the patient’s Cr, transaminases, and coagulation parameters trended downward over the course of 10 days .
The patient was stabilized and treated for pneumonia in the intensive care unit for 7 days. The patient was extubated on day 5, had no signs of bleeding, and was discharged home on hospital day 19. On hospital day 5, the patient’s international normalized ratio (INR) was 1.8 (see Fig. for trend) with a PTT of 46.9 s, at which time an unfractionated heparin infusion was started for stroke prevention secondary to atrial fibrillation given a CHA2DS2-VASc score of 5 (indicating a high yearly risk of stroke), and concern that the patient was unable to reliably take oral medications in the setting of acute illness and deconditioning. However, the patient regained ability to take oral medications more quickly than anticipated and was, therefore, started on warfarin on hospital day 7. On the day of discharge, the Cr was 0.70 mg/dL (eGFR ≥60 mL/min/1.73 m2) with a PTT of 41.3 s and INR of 1.8 on warfarin. The ALT and AST were last measured on hospital day 10 at 271 and 32 U/L, respectively.