An otherwise healthy 30-year-old woman presented on 2004 for the subacute onset of asymmetric paresthesias in the lower limbs over the previous six months. The symptoms had been relapsing-remitting during the first four months, followed by a slow progression that resulted in limbs ataxia and a progressive gait disturbance requiring Canadian crutches (ODSS: 4). Routine blood examinations, vitamins E and B12, folate, lipid profile, serum protein electrophoresis with immunofixation, ceruloplasmin, angiotensin-1-converting enzyme, thyroid function including anti-thyroid antibodies were normal. Laboratory research for neoplastic, rheumatic, celiac and venereal disease, as well as myelin associated glycoprotein, sulfatide and anti-peripheral nerve antibodies showed normal values.
Motor and sensory nerve conduction studies (median, ulnar, common peroneal, tibial, sural nerves) and electromyographic evaluation (extensor digitorum brevis, tibialis anterior, quadriceps femoris, first dorsal interosseous, extensor digitorum communis, deltoid, L4-L5 and D9 paraspinal muscles) were into normal limits, with the exception of a bilateral mild elongation of the tibial F-waves latencies (< 15% of the upper normal limit). Median SSEPs were normal, while tibial SSEPs were characterised by the bilateral absence of both lumbar (N22) and cortical (P40) responses.
A lumbar puncture detected clear cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) without cellularity, a normal glucose level (52 mg/dl) and an increased protein concentration of 128 mg/dl (NV < 50 mg/dl).
Spinal MRI showed a pronounced thickening of the sacral nerve roots, together with a tube-shaped enlargement .
A left sural nerve biopsy was performed, showing slight axonal impairment without inflammatory infiltrate, a minimal reduction in myelinated fibre density with some isolated aspects of chronic (cluster) reinnervation, and sporadic fibres in Wallerian degeneration .
These findings led to the diagnosis of CISP and the patient was treated with a high dose course of methylprednisolone (500 mg/day for 8 consecutive days), without significant effects on ataxia and on walking disability (ODSS: 4–5). As a second step, ten days after high dose steroid course, she was treated with IVIG (0.4 g/kg per day, for 5 consecutive days) every 4 weeks: vibration sense and joint position began to improve after the third IVIG-dose, with a marked reduction of the ataxic pattern, and an almost normal walking ability was achieved on the tenth day (ODSS: 1–2). This regimen has ensured a prolonged and stable remission over the following 9 years with an ODSS of 0–1.
In early 2014, the patient started to have symptom fluctuations, a variable response to treatment with erratic anticipation of sensory disturbances, and a more pronounced walking disability (ODSS: 2–4): she was treated with plasmapheresis (3 a week cycles for 3 weeks without benefit), mycophenolate mofetil (500 mg per day, discontinued after 4 weeks for relevant side effects - diarrhoea and vomiting), and cyclophosphamide (100 mg per day added to IVIG, maintained for 5 months, and then discontinued because of loss of weight and leukopenia). The patient was therefore subsequently kept only on IVIG therapy. To better assess the response to IVIG in terms of time-effect, consistency and duration, we have combined a scheduled clinical (ODSS scale) and SSEPs evaluation during and after each IVIG cycle.