A 51-year-old woman had symptoms of cough and sputum for more than 10 years. Although the patient developed bronchiectasis at that time, it was not treated. Ten years later, in 2014, her symptoms of cough, sputum and breathlessness worsened, and she was referred to our hospital. As a medical history, she had more than 10 years of sinusitis. She did not have any relevant family history. At this initial visit, her height was 142.0 cm, body weight was 34.0 kg, and emaciation was remarkable. The patient did not have a fever, but a productive cough was heard during the examination. Coarse crackles were heard on auscultation. She had a part-time job in inventory despite a saturation of percutaneous oxygen (SpO2) rate of 91–92% at rest. Forced expiratory volume% in 1 s was dropped to 63.7%. A high-resolution computed tomography scan taken at the first consultation showed typical DPB findings, i.e., bilateral basal predominant bronchiectasis and centrilobular opacities with branching lines . We diagnosed her with DPB, and she had HLA-B54 and HLA-A11. A cavity lesion in the apex of the left lung was also found . The sputum was acid-fast bacillus (AFB) smear-positive and culture-positive in liquid media after 6 days. Bronchoscopy was also performed, and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid was AFB smear-positive and culture-positive after 8 days. However, no NTM species corresponding to 17 types including M.avium, M.intracellulare, M.kansasii, M.marinum, M.simiae, M.scrofulaceum, M.gordonae, M.szulgai, M.gastri, M.xenopi, M.nonchromogenicum, M.terrae, M.triviale, M.fortuitum, M.chelonae, M.abscessus, M.peregrinum were identified with the DNA-DNA hybridization method. P. aeruginosa was also isolated from her sputum. She received treatment with long-term, low-dose erythromycin for DPB. Her condition had been stable, but the cavity enlarged and the cavity wall gradually thickened . Her sputum remained acid-fast bacillus smear-positive and culture-positive, which was considered to be a cause of the wall thickness. Respiratory samples were sent to the Research Institute of Tuberculosis, Japan Anti-tuberculosis Association to identify the mycobacterial species.
An isolate cultured on 2% Ogawa medium (Kyokuto Pharmaceuticals, Tokyo, Japan) was harvested and suspended in 500 μl of TE buffer. The suspension was boiled for 10 min for DNA extraction, centrifuged for 5 min at 12,000 xg, and 10 μl of the supernatant was used for PCR amplification of 16S rRNA (primer 285-rP2). The sequence was then analyzed by Applied Biosystems 3730xl DNA analyzer (Macrogen, Seoul, South Korea), and the result was subjected to BLAST homology search. The isolate showed 100% nucleotide homology to the 16S rRNA sequence of M. talmoniae type strain ATCC BAA-2683, while other species showed < 98% similarity. Thus, more than 2 years after her first visit, the patient was finally diagnosed with M. talmoniae infection at the end of 2016.
Susceptibility testing of the patient isolate was performed using BrothMIC NTM (Kyokuto Pharmaceuticals, Tokyo, Japan) which was the method based on the Clinical and Laboratory Standard Institute (CLSI) in 2003 and was commonly used in Japan. Table showed some of the minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) results for antimicrobials. It inferred to be susceptible to amikacin, clarithromycin, rifampicin and to be resistant to levofloxacin referring MAC in vitro MIC category decision by BrothMIC NTM. Levofloxacin was included in the BrothMIC NTM test instead of ciprofloxacin or moxifloxacin in Japan. Therefore, the patient was started on daily standard treatment for NTM (600 mg clarithromycin, 150 mg rifampicin, and 500 mg ethambutol). Approximately 5 months after the start of treatment, sputum was AFB smear-negative and culture-negative. She continued treatment for 2 years. The thickened wall of the giant cavity improved , and the SpO2 rate increased from 91 to 92% to 93–94%. Her productive cough and shortness of breath were improved, and she could take care of her parents. After 2 years of combination therapy, acid-fast bacillus smear and culture remained negative with every half year sputum inspection.