A 69-year-old man was referred to our hospital after the right hydrocelectomy when suspicious, non-homogeneous tissues were found intraoperatively. Ultrasound imaging and computed tomography (CT) scan were not performed before the surgery. On physical examination, right scrotum appeared to be edematous, hard and painful mass was evident with no palpable lymphadenopathy. Mentioned symptoms have been observed for a year. The patient denied any history of scrotal trauma or exposure to asbestos. 8 years ago he was diagnosed with prostate adenocarcinoma (Gleason 3 + 3 = 6) cT1cN0M0 stage II, the result of external beam radiotherapy (74 Grays / 37 fractions) treatment was radical. One year due to PSA (prostate specific antigen) relapse, there were androgen deprivation therapy prescribed. 9 months thereafter androgen deprivation therapy was discontinued due to low PSA rates. To the date of testicular mesothelioma diagnoses serum PSA level was 0.1 ng/ml. No other comorbidities were reported to this patient. Levels alpha-fetoprotein and beta human choriogonadotropin were not elevated. The excisional biopsy revealed a multinodular tumour with focal areas of necrosis and infiltrative growth. Mixed epithelial and spindle cell proliferation was present. The bulk of the epithelial component contained confluent cords and nests of monotonous, ovoid to polygonal cells with pale or eosinophilic cytoplasm . Focally, cell clusters were scattered in dense fibrous stroma or intermixed with moderately atypical spindle cells . Few glomeruloid structures were noted . There was no distinct transition from epithelioid to sarcoma-like areas . Diffuse immunoreactivity for cytokeratin AE1/AE3, calretinin, WT1, vimentin and CD10 was seen, with focal positivity for desmin in the epithelial component and smooth muscle actin in the sarcomatous part. CK5, EMA, PSA, NKX3.1, CK7, CK20, BerEp4, TTF-1, Cdx2, Pax8, SALL4, alpha-inhibin, ER, AR, LCA, myogenin were negative. According to morphological and immunohistochemical findings, diagnosis of malignant biphasic mesothelioma of the tunica vaginalis testis was made.
Two months after hydrocelectomy, right inguinal orchidectomy was performed. Paratesticular space was largely replaced with yellow-white nodular masses with cystic spaces . The subsequent histological examination confirmed the diagnosis . Post-surgical whole body CT scan revealed paraaortic and pararenal lymphadenopathy, likely to be metastatic . The multidisciplinary team indicated adjuvant treatment with 6 cycles of cisplatin and pemetrexed. Three months after initiation of systemic treatment (3 cycles of cisplatin and pemetrexed), CT scan showed progression and the treatment was changed to gemcitabine 1 month after. Seven months after initiation of systemic treatment, patients status deteriorated significantly (ECOG – 3), accompanied by unmanageable pain and patient was transferred to palliative care centre. The patient died 9 months after the diagnosis.