The patient was a 75-year-old Japanese man with progressive muscle weakness of his bilateral lower extremities and gait disturbance. He was referred to the Department of Neurology of our hospital for workup. His neurological examination showed muscle weakness and atrophy of his lower extremities, depressed deep tendon reflexes and autonomic dysfunction, that is, dry mouth and orthostatic hypotension. His results for manual muscle strength testing increased from 3 out of 5 to 4– out of 5 for his bilateral lower extremities after a sustained 30-second contraction. His sensation was intact to light touch, and pinprick and Babinski’s sign were down-going bilaterally. A provocative nerve conduction study on the ulnar nerve showed no reduction after repetitive stimulation and tended to increase at 15Hz of high-frequency stimulation (Figure ). Serum P/Q-type VGCC antibody level was elevated to 31.8pmol/L (cut-off point <20.0pmol/L ). Taken together with clinical findings, we made a diagnosis of LEMS. A chest abdominal computed tomography (CT) to screen for malignant lesions revealed an abnormal shadow in the right pulmonary lower lobe. He was then referred to our department (Thoracic Surgery in Respiratory Disease Center) for diagnosis and treatment of lung tumor.
The lung tumor with spiculation was located in Segment 9b, with a maximum diameter of 30mm (Figure ). There was no lymphadenopathy or pleural effusion. A CT of the patient’s chest showed a very bilateral emphysematous lung. No abnormality was seen in his abdomen by CT or in the brain by enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). A [18F]-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography showed increased uptake of fluorodeoxyglucose in the mass region and right hilar region (maximum standardized uptake values were 9.6 and 3.3, respectively). Although a bronchoscopic examination did not reveal malignancy, primary lung cancer was strongly suspected.
The patient had worked as a carpenter before the onset of muscle weakness. However, as his symptoms worsened, he required assistance in daily life (performance status 2). He was admitted to our ward by wheelchair. He had a history of chronic RA medicated by oral prednisolone therapy. He also complained of thirst for many months. A full blood examination and biochemical examination were almost within the normal range. Carcinoembryonic antigen was slightly elevated to 6.0ng/mL, whereas other tumor markers for lung cancer (squamous cell carcinoma-related antigen, sialylated Lewis X-i antigen, cytokeratin fragment, neuron-specific enolase and progastrin-releasing peptide) were within normal ranges. On screening for autoimmune disease and collagen disease, serum CH50 was slightly elevated to 46.7U/mL (normal range, 30 to 45), and rheumatoid factor was within the normal range (10.4IU/mL; normal range, 0 to 20). On screening for other collagen diseases, anti-nuclear antibody was positive at the titer of 1:640 and anti-SSA/Ro antibody was elevated to >500U/mL (normal range, 0–100). At this time it was clear that the patient also had Sjs. He had a history of cigarette smoking (40 cigarettes per day for 40 years). The preoperative spirometry result was, %VC: 63.9% and FEV1.0% 76.0%; and the blood gas analysis result was pCO2 38.9mmHg and pO2 83.1mmHg (room air).
An operation was performed for a definite diagnosis and treatment of the tumor. An intraoperative frozen diagnosis obtained by tumor biopsy revealed lung adenocarcinoma, and he underwent right lower lobe lobectomy and lymph node dissection with video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery. The operation took 230 minutes, with a blood loss of 200mL. In the postoperative course, because of prolonged air leakage from the remaining right pulmonary lobes, tube drainage lasted for 9 days. Muscle weakness gradually improved on approximately postoperative day 5, and he could walk without assistance. Serum P/Q-type VGCC antibody level was still elevated to 30.6pmol/L on postoperative day 7. He underwent daily rehabilitation for discharge. Approximately 2 months after the operation, he had aspiration pneumonia with respiratory failure. Intubation and respiratory management were performed in the intensive care unit. He remains ventilator dependent at 4 months postoperation. Postoperative provocative nerve conduction studies could not be performed.
His tumor was composed of a proliferation of infiltrating atypical cells with cribriform or papillary structures. The tumor measured 30mm in size and the diagnosis was moderately-differentiated (G2) mixed-type adenocarcinoma (papillary and acinar adenocarcinoma) (Figure ). Lymph nodes metastases in the lung parenchyma were noted. Pathological T2aN1M0 (Stage IIa: TNM staging 7th edition) was diagnosed. Immunohistochemistry revealed that most of the cancer cells were positive for P/Q-type VGCC (Sigma-Aldrich®; St. Louis, MO, USA) (Figure ).