A 56-year-old Caucasian male with a history of an undescended left testicle was admitted to a community hospital with right lower quadrant pain. The clinical and radiological evaluations were consistent with appendicitis. Although he had refused orchiectomy in the past, he consented to it on this admission. He underwent laparoscopic appendectomy and left orchiectomy. The left testicle was noted to be in the left pelvic sidewall and was resected without complication. Prior to admission, he was asymptomatic and denied weight loss, dysphagia, odynophagia, and voice hoarseness. He did not have a history of smoking, exposure to radiation, or a family history of thyroid cancer.
The evaluation for testicular tumor markers included normal serum α-fetoprotein and normal serum β-human chorionic gonadotropin. Lactate dehydrogenase was slightly elevated (680 units/l, normal range 313–618). A chest X-ray on the day of admission revealed a well-demarcated 3-cm round density in the lower right perihilar region. A CT scan of the chest with intravenous contrast showed a well-circumscribed soft tissue mass arising from the inferior right hilar area, with a size of 2.2 × 2.4 × 2.7 cm, as well as a 0.7-cm lesion in the right superior hilar area and multiple smaller nodules in the lower lobes of both lungs.
The pathology report identified the testicular tissue as a monodermal teratoma composed of thyroid parenchyma and associated with the development of papillary thyroid carcinoma with a predominantly follicular growth pattern . Immunoperoxidase stains demonstrated that the neoplastic cells were strongly positive for cytokeratin CAM 5.2 and thyroid transcription factor 1. α-Fetoprotein, vimentin, β-human chorionic gonadotropin, placental alkaline phosphatase, S100, CD30, inhibin, and calretinin stains were negative in the malignant cells.
A video-assisted thoracoscopic wedge biopsy of the right lower lobe nodule revealed metastatic papillary thyroid carcinoma. Due to concerns about the effectiveness of I-131 ablation in the presence of a right lower lobe mass, the decision was made to perform open right lower lobectomy. A wedge resection of the right upper lobe nodule was also performed. The pathology report of all specimens confirmed papillary thyroid cancer, with a maximum tumor size of 2.1 cm in the right lower lung lobe .
In preparation for treatment with radioactive iodine, total thyroidectomy was performed. Interestingly, the patient had one microscopic focus (0.5 mm) of papillary carcinoma with follicular architecture . A pretreatment stimulated (thyroid-stimulating hormone 95 mIU/ml) whole-body scan using 1.5 mCi of I-123 showed a residual uptake in the neck (2.5%) in addition to foci of increased uptake in the lungs bilaterally. At the same time, the serum thyroglobulin (Tg) level was 16.8 ng/ml, and that of Tg antibodies (TgAbs) <0.9 IU/ml.
To determine whether the papillary microcarcinomas of the lung and testis have a similar origin, we performed BRAF and RAS (HRAS, NRAS, and KRAS) mutational analyses, which were negative, and comparative genomic hybridization (array-comparative genomic hybridization, a-CGH) from both the lung and testis revealed trisomy 17 and monosomy X, indicating their common origin .
The patient was treated with 200 mCi of I-131, and the posttherapy whole-body scan did not show any new areas of increased uptake. He was started on levothyroxine 175 μg daily and did very well clinically and biochemically. Nonstimulated (thyroid-stimulating hormone 0.111 mIU/ml) Tg and TgAbs were undetectable. One year after the I-131 ablation, thyrogen-stimulated Tg was <0.2 ng/ml, with TgAbs at <20 IU/ml (normal range 0.00–20), and a whole-body scan using 1.55 mCi of I-123 did not show any iodine concentration areas consistent with metastases. A CT scan of the neck and chest revealed a decrease in the size of the unresected lung nodules. Three years after treatment, he continues to have undetectable Tg levels.