A twenty-five weeks old infant (12 weeks of correct age) was admitted to our Paediatric Emergency Department (PED) for inconsolable crying, abdominal distension, diarrhoea, feeding and growth failure.
He had been delivered in our NICU by urgent caesarean section, from non-consanguineous healthy parents, at 27 + 5 weeks’ gestational age from a spontaneously occurring monochorionic triamniotic trigemellar pregnancy complicated by intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR) of two twins. His family history was known for gallstones (twin brother, maternal grandmother and paternal grandfather) and Hashimoto's thyroiditis (mother). The Apgar score at birth was 6/9. His birth weight was 690 g (9th percentile), length 32 cm (6th percentile) and cranial circumference 23.8 cm (15th percentile). Minimal enteral feeding was provided concurrently with parenteral nutrition from birth. Parenteral nutrition was progressively tapered off until full enteral feeding was achieved at 26 days of age. From 20 days of life cholestatic jaundice (total serum bilirubin 15.31 mg/dl, direct serum bilirubin 4.21 mg/dl), with normal gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) and hypocholic stools was observed.
Diagnosis of NSBDP was based on exclusion of anatomical, genetic, endocrine, infectious and metabolic causes of cholestasis. These included serologic tests for intrauterine infections, alfa-1-antitrypsin levels, serum and urine amino acids, urine organic acids, levels of very long chain fatty acids, qualitative urine bile acids analysis, isoforms of transferrin, screening test for cystic fibrosis and lysosomopathies. Liver biopsy showed intracanalicular cholestasis with absence of bile ducts in portal tracts within twelve portal spaces , modest ductular reaction . No evident inflammatory or necrotic component, and absence of fibrosis. Deposits of PAS-d positive material were not noticed in hepatocyte cytoplasm. Whole exome sequencing was negative and intraoperative cholangiography were performed showing regular opacification of the bile ducts. Vertebral, ocular and cardiac anomalies were excluded. The clinical course was also complicated by severe bronchopulmonary dysplasia (sBDP) and grade I intraventricular haemorrhage (IVH). Patient growth was poor with whole protein formula (86,4 kcal/100 mL) recommended for cholestasis rich in medium-chain triglyceride (MCT) (up to 50%) and branched-chain amino acids (BCAA) (up to 30%), started at 13 weeks of post-natal age, which provided approximately 130% of the caloric requirements for age. Due to frequent fasting hypoglycemic episodes, nocturnal enteral feeding with nasogastric tube was introduced. At 23 weeks of life (9 weeks of corrected age) oral maltodextrin supplements (Fantomalt), a product protein, lactose and fiber free, were provided. The infant had been discharged from our NICU, in a satisfactory condition, on the 25st weeks of life (12 weeks of correct age). After two weeks since the introduction of maltodextrins he presented abdominal distension and crying crises so he was admitted to paediatric ward. At admission, physical examination was unremarkable, except for cutaneous-scleral jaundice and painful, distended and meteoric abdomen. Hypocolic stools were also observed. Routine blood tests confirmed cholestatic jaundice with increased alanine transaminase (ALT) and normal GGT values (total serum bilirubin 12.5 mg/dl, direct serum bilirubin 9.0 mg/dl, ALT 534 U/L). Abdominal ultrasound scan (US) revealed a modestly enlarged liver with an inhomogeneous ecostructure, a normal intrahepatic and extrahepatic biliary tree and ileal loops distended by gaseous material. Abdominal X-ray ruled out free air in the abdomen and surgical urgencies. Diarrhoeic discharges after meals and poor fasting tolerance were observed during hospitalisation, so gastrointestinal transit assessment showed normal gastric emptying time and regular disposition of bowel loops. Oral maltodextrins supplementation has been interrupted and, due to family history (twin brother) of non-IgE mediated cow's milk allergy, an allergological evaluation was perfomed and search for sIgE to cow’s milk proteins, which resulted negative. A hypoallergenic casein based extensively hydrolysed formula, rich in MCT (55% of total lipids) (0,66 kcal/ml) was started with prompt remission of symptoms. Due to low energy intake, poor growth and episodes of hypoglycaemia, reintroduction of 2 gr after every meal (10 gr per day) of maltodextrins for 24 h was attempted. Crying crises and diarrhoea immediately reappeared, so maltodextrins administration was definitively interrupted and only hypercaloric seroproteins extensively hydrolysed formula (1 kcal/ml) enriched with high percentage of MCT (48%) was introduced. Dietary tolerance was then observed, so the energy intake of enteral nutrition with extensively hydrolysed formula was increased to meet total daily energy requirements. Recovery of weight gain and improvement in glycaemic control were observed, with parallel improvement in cholestasis. Ursodeoxycholic acid therapy and fat soluble vitamin (ADEK) was administered throughout the hospitalization.
At discharge (7 months of age, 5 months of corrected age) total serum bilirubin was 2.3 mg/dl, with direct serum bilirubin 1.6 mg/dl. No abdominal pain crises have been reported since the discontinuation of maltodextrins.