A 56-year-old woman fell and hit her head after consuming alcohol. She was brought to the emergency room due to a mild disturbance of consciousness. On arrival, she exhibited impaired consciousness with a Glasgow coma scale score of 14 (E4V4M6), complained of headache, and presented with hemorrhage in the left ear. Computed tomography (CT) of the head suggested right traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage, cerebral contusion of the right temporal lobe, right pneumoencephalopathy, and longitudinal fracture of the left petrous bone .
To assess the cerebral contusion in the right temporal lobe, magnetic resonance imaging of the head was conducted on the 4th day after the injury. It suggested the involvement of the right MMA and a vein, indicating the occurrence of shunt disease . Cerebral angiography of the external carotid artery (ECA) performed seven days post-injury aided in the visualization of the MMA, MMV, diploic vein (DV), superior sagittal sinus (SSS), and pterygoid plexus (PP) . Cone-beam CT (CBCT) of the ECA revealed a right temporal bone fracture that was not evident on the CT scan. In addition, a direct shunt was observed from the MMA to the MMV in conjugation with the fracture line. In the lower segment of this shunt, the MMA was clearly visualized due to the presence of the contrast. However, in the regions above the shunt, the entire contrast agent in the MMA perfused the MMV, causing the MMA to appear darkened and showing a tram track appearance . Considering the single direct shunt from the MMA to the MMV, coil embolization was selected as the treatment method.
A 5Fr FUBUKI guiding catheter (Asahi Intecc Co., Ltd., Aichi, Japan), along with an intermediate catheter Guidepost (Tokai Medical Products, Aichi, Japan), was used to approach the right MMA. Subsequently, CHIKAI (Asahi Intecc Co., Ltd.) was used to guide the GREACH (Tokai Medical Products) to the shunt point. Coil embolization commenced from the MMA distal to the shunt point and continued until immediately before the point. At the shunt point, the MMV was embolized with the coil, concluding with proximal MMA embolization. Seven coils were used for the embolization. In the final image, the MMA was no longer visible, and the MMV, DV, SSS, and PP were absent . Postoperatively, the headache symptoms experienced by the patient had improved; she was discharged on the 20th day after the injury and exhibited no recurrence at the 1-year follow-up.