A 63-year-old Japanese woman was referred to our hospital after suffering from rectal prolapse with a mass and rectal bleeding for 2 years. An examination revealed complete rectal prolapse of the entire thickness of the rectum with a soft, ulcerated tumor, 7 cm in diameter, included in the prolapse . The tumor and prolapse were easily reduced manually; the distance from the anal verge to the tumor was 5 cm. The anal sphincter tone was slightly diminished. The patient’s laboratory data were normal except for anemia (hemoglobin level, 5.9 g/dL). Tumor markers were within normal limits: carcinoembryonic antigen was 2.8 and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 was 6.2. A computed tomography scan revealed that the lower rectum was filled with a tumor measuring 7 × 6 cm, which was enhanced with contrast medium . There was no evidence of direct invasion of the tumor around the rectum, and no evidence of lymph node involvement or distant metastasis. A gastrografin enema revealed that the tumor was located in the posterior wall of the lower rectum . Colonoscopy showed a large villous tumor in the lower rectum. The cauliflower shape of the tumor caused the edge to protrude laterally from its base, and the rim of the tumor appeared friable . Biopsies of the tumor revealed adenocarcinoma. These findings suggested that the large, partially ulcerated tumor was not more than a T1 stage. We defined her cancer as clinical stage 1; cT1, cN0, cM0 according to the Union for International Cancer Control Classification of malignant tumors, 7th edition. Therefore, we did not consider neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy. Thus, we planned to perform Lap-LAR. To preserve the anal sphincter and to retract the part of the cauliflower-shaped tumor protruding over the wall of the rectum, ensuring a negative distal margin, we also planned to use a prolapsing technique.
Our patient was placed in the lithotomy position under general anesthesia, and five ports were inserted. We dissected the lymph nodes from the origin of the inferior mesenteric artery. We preserved the left colic artery and ligated and divided the superior rectal artery. The sigmoid colon and the rectum were mobilized using the total mesorectal excision technique, and the dissection was extended distally to expose the entire circumference of the levator ani muscle . The proximal colon was transected using an endoscopic stapler. Then, we grasped the stump of the rectum using a forceps introduced anally and gently withdrew the stump under laparoscopic assistance. The distal rectum was easily everted and pulled outside of the anus . We transected the distal rectum 1.5 cm distal to the lower edge of the lesion under direct visualization, using the same stapler . An intraoperative frozen section revealed that the surgical margin was negative for tumor involvement. We reduced the distal rectum, through the anus, back into the pelvis . Then, we performed a minilaparotomy with a 4-cm incision at the umbilical port site to extract the proximal colon. We resected an extra 10 cm of proximal colon to create the proper length for an anastomosis and attached a 29-mm anvil head. We performed an end-to-end anastomosis using a double-stapling technique with a circular stapler. The operative time was 194 minutes, and the blood loss was 10 mL.
On gross examination of the resected specimen, a cauliflower-shaped soft tumor with an ulcer was located in the lower rectum. The tumor measured 7 × 8 × 3 cm, and the distal margin of the resected rectum was more than 1.5 cm from the tumor. Histological examination of the tumor showed moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma without regional lymph node metastasis. Almost the entire tumor was intramucosal, with focal invasion of the submucosal layer (stage 1; pT1, pN0, pM0) . Our patient had an uneventful postoperative course. She had no fecal incontinence or constipation. Twelve months after surgery, she is doing well with no evidence of recurrence of either her rectal prolapse or her cancer.