An 11-year-old girl, 158 cm tall, weighing 40 kg, visited our ED from her local doctor with a chief complaint of left abdominal pain persisting for 2 days. Approximately 1 month ago, she presented with the same symptoms, which self-resolved within a few days.
The patient had no significant medical or surgical history. Her breast development as a secondary sexual characteristic had started at least a year before, and her peak growth rate had ended; however, she had not yet reached menarche.
The patient was febrile with a normal heart rate, respiratory rate, oxygen saturation, and blood pressure. On physical examination, the heart and breath sounds were normal and lymph nodes in the neck, axilla, and groin were not palpable. Abdominal examination revealed soft, slightly distended tenderness in the left lower quadrant. No hepatosplenomegaly was observed. The white blood cell count was 9,100/μL, and the C-reactive protein was 2.1 mg/dL. No other abnormal laboratory findings were noted.
Computed tomography (CT) was then performed. It showed high absorptive value liquid filling the upper vaginal to uterine cavity, a pale highly absorptive fluid component suggestive of hemorrhagic ascites in the abdominal cavity on both sides of the uterus, and normal bilateral ovaries .
Consultation with OB/GYN was performed. There was no abnormality in the shape of the vulva, but a sonde was not inserted >2 cm from the hymen line. The blood clot was aspirated using a transabdominal ultrasound-guided transvaginal puncture under local anesthesia to diagnose retained hematocolpos. The amount of drained blood was small, considering the amount of blood stored, and it was difficult to insert the sonde deep enough into the vagina, even after the incision was made. However, because the drainage partially relieved abdominal pain, we decided not to perform further painful procedures in the ED. We conducted a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to search for the cause. MRI revealed a considerable amount of fluid retention from the cervix to the upper vaginal area; however, the retention cavity did not extend to the perineum, and no obvious vaginal structures were observed between the urethra and rectum. Hematocolpos due to lower vaginal agenesis was diagnosed . Surgery for complete drainage of blood clots and partial vaginoplasty was planned. Informed consent was obtained for her to undergo surgery for drainage. After a discussion with her parents, the diagnosis of a vaginal defect, the need for a two-stage vaginoplasty and the expected prognosis were not explained to her at this time, considering the psychological aspects of puberty.