An 83-year-old female presented in August 2020 with complaints of gradual diminution of vision in the left eye (OS) for two weeks. She had a history of infiltrating duct carcinoma of the breast (Stage IIIA T2N2M0), for which she had undergone modified radical mastectomy followed by chemotherapy with epirubicin and radiation therapy in 2017. On immunohistochemistry, the carcinoma was found to be ER positive, PR positive and HER2 negative. At the time of presentation to us, she was on hormonal therapy in the form of oral tamoxifen 20 mg daily.
Best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 6/9 in the right eye (OD) and 6/24p in the left eye (OS). Intraocular pressure was normal in both eyes (OU). Anterior segment examination revealed pseudophakia OU. Fundus examination was within normal limits OD. The left eye showed a solitary yellowish elevated choroidal lesion along the superotemporal arcade, measuring approximately 3DD (disc diameters) by 3DD, with mottled hyperpigmentation on its surface . Subretinal fluid (SRF) was present at the macula. Autofluorescence (Heidelberg Retina Angiograph, Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) showed alternate areas of speckled hyperautofluorescence and hypoautofluorescence within the lesion . Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) (Heidelberg Retina Angiograph, Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) showed early hypofluorescence with late hyperfluorescence and pinpoint leakage at the borders of the lesion , while indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) showed early and late hypocyanescence. . Spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) (Optovue RTVue XR Avanti, Optovue Inc., Fremont, CA) revealed an elevated choroidal hyporeflective lesion, with thickened, undulating ("lumpy-bumpy") overlying retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). SRF with overlying elongated "shaggy" receptors were also seen . Bearing in mind her significant past history of breast carcinoma and the characteristic features on multimodal imaging, a provisional diagnosis of choroidal metastasis OS was made.
An urgent oncology clinic review was advised. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest and abdomen revealed mediastinal lymphadenopathy, right pleural effusion and multiple heterogeneously enhancing lesions in the liver, highly suggestive of metastases. Palliative chemotherapy for metastatic breast cancer was initiated by the oncologist in the form of oral palbociclib (cyclin-dependent kinase 4/6 (CDK4/6) inhibitor) 125 mg administered orally in 4-week cycles (3 weeks of treatment followed by 1 week off), in combination with oral letrozole (non-steroidal aromatase inhibitor) 2.5 mg daily (continuous treatment).
Three weeks after initiation of the palliative chemotherapy, her BCVA improved to 6/9 OS. Although a clinically appreciable reduction in size of the choroidal lesion OS was not visible, the tumor surface showed RPE alteration. SD-OCT showed regression of subretinal fluid and reduction in height of the choroidal lesion. At the 3-month follow up visit, BCVA was maintained at 6/9 OS. Fundus examination revealed reduction in height of the choroidal lesion OS . Autofluorescence showed stippled hyperautofluorescence and hypoautofluorescence . Repeat FFA showed early hypofluorescence and late stippled hyperfluorescence . Repeat ICGA showed regression of hypocyanescence that was noted prior to initiation of treatment. Corresponding resolution in SRF and reduction in height of the choroidal elevation was seen on OCT . Thus, a gradual regression of the choroidal lesion on OCT was documented over 12 months of follow-up . At the end of the year-long follow-up in the ophthalmology clinic, she maintained status quo.