A 25-year-old man experienced double vision for 1 month. He had no history of trauma or surgery. Physical examination revealed overall good health. Neurological examinations revealed right abducens nerve palsy. Motor and sensory examinations including cerebellar tests were normal with full cooperation and orientation. Results from laboratory tests conducted on admission, which included blood biochemical analysis, complete blood count, pituitary function, and tumor markers, were normal.
Computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a homogeneously enhanced mass (5.1 cm × 3.1 cm × 4.9 cm) in the clivus [Figure and ]. The mass was isointense and hypointense on T1- and T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), respectively [Figure and ]. Gadolinium-enhanced MRI revealed a homogeneously enhanced tumor extending into the brainstem . Three-dimensional (3D) CT angiography showed feeder arteries arising from the bilateral meningohypophyseal trunks (MHTs) . Preoperative embolization was not conducted owing to the risk of internal carotid artery (ICA) migration of embolic materials. A neuronavigation-guided operation was performed via the endonasal endoscopic transsphenoidal approach (EEA). The tumor was yellowish gray and bled profusely [Figure and ]. Partial resection was performed because of massive intraoperative bleeding from the feeding artery (850 mL; ). Histopathological analysis revealed a cellular tumor comprised of osteoclastic giant cells and stromal cells . Postoperative MRI showed partial resection . The MIB-1 index was 4.2%. One month after the operation, the patient received 3D conformal radiotherapy at a dose of 50 Gy delivered in 25 fractions. Two months after the initial surgery, MRI confirmed gradual postradiation tumor regrowth . The tumor gradually increased in size and eventually invaded the brainstem, leading to brainstem edema . Therefore, a second operation was planned; however, because of massive intraoperative bleeding during the previous operation, preoperative angiography was performed before surgery. Angiography revealed weak tumor staining, which may have been caused by radiotherapy [Figure and ]. Seven months after the first surgery, we used the EEA for the epidural lesion. The tumor was fibrotic and there was slight intraoperative bleeding . Thereafter, 1 month after the second surgery, we performed the anterior transpetrosal approach (ATPA) for the subdural lesion . Although blood control was good owing to MHT interruption by this approach, the tumor was tightly adhered to the brainstem, and we performed a partial resection . Histopathological analysis revealed mitotic spindle cell proliferation . The MIB-1 index was 26.3%. Postoperatively, the patient had right hemiparesis and died 19 months after the second operation because of respiratory dysfunction due to tumor regrowth.
Informed consent was obtained from this patient.