A 46-year-old man with a history of CF-LVAD implantation for fulminant cardiomyopathy 5 years ago was referred to our department for an intracranial aneurysm. He was on the waiting list for heart transplantation. The aneurysm was incidentally found on a computed tomography (CT) scan. It was situated in the C2 portion of the left internal carotid artery, measured 4.8 mm in its neck and 13.0 mm in its maximal diameter, and had a bilobular shape [ and ]. The patient was alert and oriented and showed no neurological deficits. He was independent in his daily living and spent his social life as an office worker. He took aspirin (100 mg/day) and warfarin (2.75 mg/day) to prevent thrombosis inside the CF-LVAD circuit. The prothrombin time-international normalized ratio (PT-INR) was maintained between 2.0 and 2.4 on a monthly outpatient visit. After discussing whether to intervene in the aneurysm, we suggest performing coil embolization for this aneurysm, considering the possibility of aneurysmal rupture and the expected long-term prognosis. He and his family gave consent for the treatment and publication of the details of his case.
The procedure was performed under general anesthesia. Both aspirin and warfarin were continued during the periprocedural period. A 6-Fr FUBUKI Dilator Kit (ASAHI INTECC, Aichi, Japan) was inserted into the right femoral artery under ultrasound guidance. Since pulsation was weak due to multiple punctures for cardiovascular intervention and the continuous flow created by the CF-LVAD, ultrasound guidance was necessary for accurate puncture. Following the femoral artery puncture, 5000 U of heparin was injected, and the tip of the guiding catheter was perfused with heparin-added saline to control the activated clotting time between 200 and 250 min. Although the patient was a CF-LVAD recipient, there were no access route difficulties. After advancing the guide catheter to the left internal carotid artery, the aneurysm was confirmed by angiography [ and ]. A 6-Fr Navien catheter (Medtronic, Tokyo, Japan) was placed at the petrous portion of the internal carotid artery to access the lesion more easily. Headway-17 (TERUMO, Tokyo, Japan) microcatheter was stem-shaped at a double angle and introduced into the aneurysm with a CHIKAI Black soft tip microguidewire (ASAHI Intec, Aichi, Japan). Shouryu SR 4 × 10 (Kaneka, Osaka, Japan) placed at the neck of the aneurysm with Tenrou10 (Kaneka, Osaka, Japan) was intermittently inflated during the procedure as a balloon-remodeling technique . After the insertion of 18 coils through the microcatheter , the contrast of the aneurysm almost disappeared after injection . The volume embolization ratio was calculated to be 28.3%, and the Raymond-Roy occlusion classification was Class III (body filling). Angiography after coil insertion revealed no distal embolism. Heparin expression was not reversed. Postoperative imaging showed no hemorrhagic or ischemic complications and the patient was anesthetized without neurological deficits. Aspirin and warfarin were administered daily during the periprocedural period. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 4 without any complications.
Since magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) did not apply to patients with CF-LVAD implantation, we followed the patient with CT and head X-ray scans for a year to date. Routine CT angiography with contrast material was waived because the patient had moderate chronic kidney disease. Plain CT tomography revealed no ischemic or hemorrhagic strokes. Even though the head X-ray scan performed 1 year after the treatment showed a minimal conformational change in the coil [ and ], we are continuing to follow-up on this patient at the outpatient service for another 2 years postoperatively.