A 77-year-old woman with untreated hypertension and hyperlipidemia presented to our hospital with sudden left hemiparesis. National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale for the patient was 6. Electrocardiogram at admission revealed sinus rhythm and no atrial fibrillation. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed right medial side of the anterior lobe infarction. Brain magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) showed right A2 occlusion and poor visualized right MCA . Emergent digital subtraction angiography showed right A2 near occlusion and reticulated vessels developed from the proximal right MCA [ and ]. These results indicated that reduced flow of the right MCA due to occlusion of the right A2 caused the left hemiparesis.
We immediately performed thrombectomy of the right A2. After deploying stent retriever to the right A2 segment, the lesion was identified as a stenotic lesion. Oral administration of loading-dose dual-antiplatelet therapy (200-mg aspirin and 300-mg clopidogrel) was initiated. After the stent was slowly retrieved, recanalization of mild stenosis was accomplished. The lesion was considered dissection due to the presence of dilatation and string sign in retrospect . The symptoms of the patient improved without any recoiling of MRI 1 week after the treatment, and the MRI showed no enlargement of the CI, and MRA showed adequate dilatation of the right A2 segment [-]. Basi-pararel anatomical scanning showed no right M1 form . We continued dual-antiplatelet therapy (100-mg aspirin and 75-mg clopidogrel). However, transient left hemiparesis frequently occurred 2 months after treatment. MRI showed worsening of stenosis in the right A2 segment and an increase in the right ACA area infarction [ and ]. Hence, we switched Clopidogrel with prasugrel (3.75 mg).
Since perfusion study of the CT scan showed a remarkable decrease in cerebral blood flow (CBF) in the right hemisphere was achieved , we performed an additional endovascular treatment under general anesthesia 7 days after second admission. For increasing the stability, AXS Catalyst5 110 cm (Stryker) was placed in the left A1 segment with AXS Offset (Stryker). The catheter was wedged, and the antegrade flow from the left A1 segment was stopped. Right internal carotid angiography showed that the bilateral A2 segment was described, and we judged that continuing treatment with a short-term wedge of the left A2 segment was possible. Wingspan 2.5 × 15 mm (Stryker) was deployed at the dissecting right A2 segment. The right A2 segment was adequately dilated, and the flow of the right distal ACA was improved . The wedge time of the left A1 segment was 15 min. The patient was discharged without any neurological deficit or other obvious complications. Restenosis was not observed 6 months after stenting .
For this report, consent was obtained from the patient.