A 56-year-old man was admitted in our hospital because of progressive limb paresthesias and weakness for 8 weeks. His symptoms began subacutely with numbness in the feet and fingers, and then gradually progressed proximally to involve the knees and hands. He was treated with vitamins B1 and B12 at a clinic and showed a mild response. In the previous 2 weeks, his symptoms had aggressively developed with weakness and ataxia. He exhibited foot-drop, steppage gait, and difficulty in walking in a straight line. His medical history included hypertension and hypertriglyceridemia. Neurological examination at admission revealed normal cranial nerve function, motor weakness (4/5) affecting the distal lower extremities, hyporeflexia, decreased proprioception, and superficial sensation in a glove-and-stocking pattern. Accuracy in the finger-to-nose and heel-to-knee-to-shin tests, tremor, and positive Romberg’s sign were noted. His Overall Neuropathy Limitations Scale (ONLS) score was 5. The neuroelectrophysiological results were as follows: obvious prolongation of motor distal latency in the bilateral peroneal, tibial, and median nerves; marked reduction of motor conduction velocity in the bilateral medianus, ulnar nerve, bilateral tibialis, and peroneus; ≥30% reduction in the proximal relative to distal negative peak compound muscle action potential (CMAP) amplitude in the bilateral tibialis and peroneus; there was no response to stimulation in sensory conduction of the medianus, ulnaris, radial nerve, peroneus, and suralis. The F wave conduction velocity of the bilateral medianus was markedly decreased. The occurrence rate of F waves in the lower extremities was decreased less than 30% with a prolonged latency . The protein level in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was severely elevated at 2.68 g/L. Other CSF tests, routine blood tests, biochemical tests, and serum electrophoresis were negative. Tests for paraneoplastic antibodies(Hu, Yo,Ri, CV2/CRMP5, Ma1, Ma2, SOX1, Tr, Zic4, GAD65, PKCg) and anti-ganglioside antibodies (GM1, GM2, GM3, GM4, GD1a, GD1b, GD2, GD3, GT1a, GT1b, GQ1b) in the serum were negative in the serum and CSF yielded negative results. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) neurography with enhancement was conducted using a 3.0-T whole-body clinical imager (Ingenia; PHILIPS, The Netherlands). The patient showed marked symmetric hypertrophy and increased signal intensity in the lumbosacral roots and plexuses .