A 62-year-old female presented with sudden headache and vomiting was referred to our institute. Her consciousness level was evaluated as 14 points on the Glasgow Coma Scale (E3V5M6), and no weakness was observed in her extremities. Computed tomography (CT) demonstrated subarachnoid hemorrhage [SAH; ]. An interview revealed that she had experienced massive epistaxis and had been treated with emergent ligation of the right CCA at the age of 25. She had also suffered from SAH caused by rupture of a left internal carotid artery (ICA) aneurysm that had been treated by means of neck clipping at the age of 37.
Emergent digital subtraction angiography (DSA) revealed that the right CCA was occluded at its origin . The blood flow to the right MCA territory came mainly from the right posterior cerebral artery (PCA) through the enlarged PCoA, and an irregular-shaped aneurysm was found on the right PCoA [Figures and , ]. A right vertebral artery (VA) injection also detected collateral blood flow from the VA to the OA (through the dilated muscle branches) that had reversed toward the right external carotid artery (ECA) and the carotid bifurcation . The right ICA, ECA, and superficial temporal artery (STA) were found to be extremely small in caliber. The left ICA aneurysm had been completely clipped . The parietal branch of the left STA had been sacrificed by the previous craniotomy.
Diagnosis of the ruptured true PCoA aneurysm was made from the radiological data. The lesion did not appear amenable to simple neck clipping or coil embolization. Trapping of the PCoA with bypass to the anterior circulation was considered, but insufficient flow of the ECA precluded a standard bypass strategy such as STA-MCA bypass or ECA-RA-MCA bypass. In addition, trapping of the PCoA could cause thrombosis of the perforators arising from the PCoA, which could lead to thalamic infarction. A surgical treatment strategy in the acute stage, therefore, was abandoned, and the patient was kept under sedation for 14 days. When the sedative was discontinued, she was found to have right oculomotor nerve palsy (anisocoria) and mild left hemiparesis. Repeated DSA did not demonstrate vasospasm, but demonstrated enlargement of the aneurysm .
Surgery to reduce the PCoA flow was designed to prevent rebleeding and further growth of the aneurysm. The strategy consisted of (i) OA-RA free graft-MCA bypass and (ii) subsequent obliteration of the distal M1 portion of the right MCA with a clip . Although the patient initially refused surgery, informed consent was obtained finally, and the operation was performed 43 days after the hemorrhagic onset.
The patient was positioned supine with her head turned 80° to the left. A retromastoid linear incision was made to expose the OA and its dilated muscle branch. The RA was harvested from her left forearm. After the right frontotemporal craniotomy, the RA graft was implanted from the retromastoid field to the frontotemporal field through the subcutaneous tunnel. The Sylvian fissure was opened and the superior and inferior trunk (M2) of the MCA was exposed. The RA graft was anastomosed to the superior trunk in end-to-side fashion with interrupted 10-0 nylon sutures. Subsequently, the opposite side of the RA was anastomosed to the dilated muscle branch of the OA with interrupted 9-0 nylon sutures. After the bypass was opened, the M1 segment of the MCA was observed carefully. A cortical branch with 2 mm in caliber was found to originate from the M1 approximately 1.5 cm proximal to the MCA bifurcation. The M1 was then obliterated with two Sugita Elgiloy clips just distal to this point, leaving the cortical branch proximally to function as a flow-outlet of the collateral flow through the PCoA . The flow of the bypass was confirmed with a Doppler microprobe.
Postoperative DSA revealed sufficient bypass flow perfusing the MCA territory and extremely reduced collateral flow through the PCoA [Figure -]. This flow directed to the cortical artery of the distal M1 as designed during the operation, preserving the flow of the M1 and its perforators [Figure , ]. The size and shape of the aneurysm appeared to be reduced . The oculomotor nerve palsy and the left hemiparesis gradually improved, suggesting the reduced mass effect of the aneurysm.
After the placement of the ventricular-peritoneum shunt system for the hydrocephalus, the patient was discharged without major sequelae. Three-dimensional CT angiography performed 4 years after surgery demonstrated further reduction of the aneurysm . She has remained asymptomatic as of last follow-up, 5 years after surgery.