Our patient is a 15-year-old girl born in Sweden after 40 weeks gestation as the third of four siblings from Assyrian consanguineous parents originating from Iraq. Contact with the national health system was sparse until the age of 5 years, when she presented with sensorineural hearing impairment and developmental delay. After application of bilateral hearing aids her development accelerated in all domains. In retrospect her parents reported frequent loss of balance as a toddler. Our patient was referred from her school physician to a child neurologist at the age of 7 years and 8 months due to her toe-walking gait. Except for her Achilles tendons being tight, almost spastic, no other neurological abnormality was noted. Brain imaging at the age of 8 years showed a central lesion in the mesencephalon, from the nucleus ruber dorsocaudally down to the cerebellar peduncles. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of her spine was normal. After physiotherapy and orthoses her gait improved, but her motor skills were still abnormal for her age. At the age of 12 years she showed bilateral muscle weakness on her peroneal muscles with absence of peripheral reflexes. Neurography and electromyography showed sensorimotor polyneuropathy and chronic neurogenic changes in her leg muscles. An MRI scan of the brain was repeated showing the same lesion as described at the age of 8 years . At the age of 13 she presented cognitive delay, impaired gross and fine motor skills, and tremor. At this point, a neurometabolic disease was considered. At the age of 14 she presented learning difficulties and obvious generalized muscle weakness. Her fingers are extremely flexible, her feet are in plan valgus position and she has problems with her balance. At the age of 15 she shows no signs of puberty. Growth is also delayed with a skeletal age of 10.7 at chronological age of 14. Hormonal tests have shown nonfunctioning ovaries. She has no retinal changes and normal optic nerves. One of the younger sisters presents some learning difficulties.
Blood metabolites were analyzed twice when our patient was 13 years . Her plasma levels of C26:0 were moderately increased resulting in an increased C26:0/C22:0 ratio. The C24:0/C22:0 ratio was borderline normal. Her phytanic and pristanic acid levels were significantly increased at both sampling occasions. Her erythrocyte plasmalogen levels were normal. Because of the abnormal VLCFA and phytanic and pristanic acid levels further peroxisomal studies in fibroblasts were performed. Remarkably, her VLCFAs and DHAPAT activity in cultured fibroblasts were normal .
Immunofluorescence microscopy analysis using antibodies raised against catalase, a peroxisomal matrix protein, did show abnormal peroxisomal staining but not in all cells. When cultured at 37 °C most cells revealed a normal peroxisomal staining, but in some cells a markedly reduced number of peroxisomes was observed. Culturing patient fibroblasts at 40 °C for 2 weeks resulted in a complete absence of peroxisomal staining with catalase immunofluorescence microscopy analysis, indicating the lack of import-competent peroxisomes at this elevated temperature . These results showed that our patient suffered from a Zellweger spectrum defect.
Mutation analysis was performed by using a custom-made next generation sequencing (NGS) gene panel (SureSelectQXT, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). The panel targets coding exons of 21 genes described to be involved in peroxisomal disorders including the 13 PEX genes (+/- 25 bases, according to RefSeq database and assembly Feb. 2009 (GRCh37/hg19)). Variants of interest were filtered according to allele frequency, exonic/splice site location and autosomal recessive or X-linked pattern of inheritance. NGS analysis identified only one variant of potential clinical significance, namely a homozygous mutation (c.530 T > G (p.Leu177Arg) (NM_153818.1)) in the PEX10 gene. This variant is not present in HGMD® Professional database (Biobase, Qiagen®, Redwood City, CA, USA) or ClinVar , but has a very low allele frequency in the normal population according to 1000 genome database , is classified as probably damaging by PolyPhen and deleterious by SIFT and affects a highly conserved amino acid. The result was verified by Sanger sequencing and targeted sequencing on the parents showed the expected segregation pattern . To confirm the PEX10 defect in the patient we performed complementation studies at 40 °C by co-transfection of wild-type PEX10 and PTS1 (peroxisome targeting sequence 1)-tagged green fluorescent protein (eGFP-SKL) in the patient’s fibroblasts. Three days after transfection there was restoration of PTS-1 protein import, confirming that PEX10 is responsible for the peroxisomal dysfunction in our patient (data not shown).