A 25-year-old Qatari male with no medical or surgical history presented to the Infectious Diseases clinic with a history of skin rash for one month. The skin rash was diffuse, involving the trunk, extremities, palms, and soles. It was light brown in color and non-itchy, associated with malaise and myalgia but with no associated fever or sore throat.
Two weeks before the onset of the skin rash, the patient noticed a non-painful ulcer over his penile shaft. No purulent discharge was seen, and the ulcer healed spontaneously within four weeks.
The patient denied any associated headache, neck stiffness, nausea, vomiting, blurred vision, or hearing loss, and no associated urethral discharge, urinary, gastroenterology, or musculoskeletal symptoms. Two months earlier, the patient had gone on vacation abroad and had multiple unprotected sexual encounters with sex workers and women. His initial assessment at the clinic was normal except for a scaly brownish macular-papular skin rash over the trunk and extremities, including palms and soles. Otherwise, his clinical examination, including a thorough neurological examination, was normal.
Based on this typical skin rash, a diagnosis of secondary syphilis was suspected, and serum treponemal as well as non-treponemal tests were ordered, which came back positive with RPR titer 1:32. Subsequently, complete sexually transmitted infection (STI) screening tests were ordered, including HIV-1/2 Ag/Ab Combo test, and all returned negative.
The patient was initially treated for secondary syphilis with one dose of intramuscular Benzathine penicillin 2.4 million units. However, one week later, the patient presented to the clinic complaining of a new onset left ear tinnitus and fullness but denied hearing loss.
The patient was admitted to the communicable disease center (CDC) as a case of suspected neurosyphilis/otosyphilis for further evaluation, where ENT assessment was arranged immediately. Pure Tone Audiometry confirmed an asymmetrical left sensorineural hearing loss with a dip at 6 kHz of 35 dB on the left side . His tympanometry revealed Type "A" bilaterally, showing normal tympanic membrane mobility bilaterally, as ear canal volume, peak pressure, and static compliance were within normal limits. Computed Tomography (CT) scan of the temporal bone was unremarkable, with no evidence of inflammation. However, a lumbar puncture was not performed as the patient declined the procedure.
The patient was started on IV penicillin G (3 million Q 4 hrs.), and he completed a total of 14 days duration with no complications. A follow-up audiogram was done one month later and was within normal limits. A follow-up serum RPR showed a significant titer reduction (repeat RPR 1:4).