A 52-year-old man was referred to our department by an otolaryngologist for an evaluation of a mass that was detected on his TMJ, using computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The patient had an operative history that included the repair of a hernia and a ruptured cruciate ligament, but with no other specific medical history. The patient’s chief complaints were swelling and asymmetry of his right TMJ area, which occurred approximately 2 weeks before the first visit. He also experienced tenderness in the TMJ area upon palpation, but without spontaneous pain. In addition, paralysis of the right eyebrow was observed, suggesting that the mass had damaged the temporal branch of the facial nerve. The detected mass was then fixed and confirmed. The EAC swelling was confirmed by the otolaryngologist. The mandible deviated to the right at the maximum intercuspal position. The maximum mouth opening was limited to 30 mm. The patient had a history of TMJ dislocation approximately 25 years earlier.
CT clearly showed a mass of eccentric soft tissue (approximately 37 × 28 × 28 mm) surrounding the right TMJ and extending into the right pterygoid space; the tissue had also eroded the temporal bone of the skull base. In addition, bone destruction (having the appearance of being moth eaten) was observed in the right mandibular condyle neck . The CT scan showed mild thickening of the tympanic membrane and fluid collection in the EAC . These findings were tentatively diagnosed as external otitis by the radiologist. T2-weighted MRI showed that the tumor was a well-marginated, ovoid-shaped mass with multiple inhomogeneous lobes; the tumor had an intermediate signal similar to that of the gray matter. The deeper areas of the mass showed bright signals, such as those found in the central necrosis of the mass .
Under general anesthesia, complete surgical excision was performed using a pre-auricular approach. Local anesthesia (2% lidocaine with 1:100,000 epinephrine) was injected into the temporal and pre-auricular skin regions to reduce intraoperative bleeding and postoperative pain. Access was obtained via an extended pre-auricular (hockey-stick) incision, with an oblique anterosuperior extension into the hair-covered temporal region . To reach the main mass, blunt dissection was performed up to the temporal fascia, and bleeding control was achieved by ligating the superficial temporal artery and vein. The tumor was carefully separated from the condyle and the mandibular fossa of the temporal bone to achieve its complete removal . The tumor had invaded the anterior articular disc of the TMJ, necessitating partial resection of half of the disc. After tumor excision, peripheral ostectomy of the neck of the condyle and mandibular fossa of the temporal bone was performed using round burs. The neurosurgeon confirmed that the bony erosion of the mandibular fossa was severe enough to expose the dura mater of the brain, but no perforation of the dura was observed. As the probability of cerebrospinal fluid leakage was extremely low, no further surgical procedures were required. The tumor was observed to have also destroyed the anterior wall of the right EAC. An otolaryngologist confirmed that the tympanic membrane was intact. An absorbable gelatinous foam packing was applied in front of the tympanic membrane to maintain the remaining EAC. The EAC defect was covered using a temporal fascia flap pedicled to the deep temporal fascia layer .
After complete removal of the tumor, the remaining defect was extensive. If the defect had remained, there would have been a substantial risk of facial depression and secondary infection due to the accumulation of fluid and blood in the dead space. To compensate for the extensive volume loss, a free fat graft from the right inguinal region was performed on the right TMJ. The transplanted inguinal free fat graft was connected to the remaining articular disc and covered by the pedicled TPFF .
Pathologic examination revealed a cellular tumor composed of multifocal chondroid tissue and sheets of tumor cells . Ovoid to polygonal multinuclear cells comprised the tumor tissue, each having occasional nuclear grooves and eosinophilic cytoplasms. Osteoclast-like giant cells and pericellular lace-like calcifications were also identified. The pathologic examination confirmed the chondroblastoma diagnosis.
One month after the operation, the patient had not developed trismus, but the paralysis of the right eyebrow remained. In addition, the patient complained of tinnitus in his right ear. After 7 months, a follow-up MRI revealed resolved muscle edema at the right masseter and pterygoid. In addition, stable coverage of the defect in the temporal bone was achieved with the inguinal free fat graft , and there was no evidence of chondroblastoma recurrence. The swelling and asymmetry of the right TMJ area decreased, and the maximum mouth opening range was maintained at 28 mm. Postoperatively, the paralysis of the patient’s right eyebrow worsened, and right eyelid ptosis developed; supra-brow excision and blepharoplasty were required, after consulting with plastic surgeons, 8 months after the operation. At the 18-month follow-up, the patient demonstrated normal occlusion and no masticatory disturbance. An MRI did not reveal any newly developed, abnormally enhanced lesions or any evidence of local recurrence .