A 43-year-old woman was referred to our hospital complaining of a 4-year history of headache. She denied nausea, vomiting, seizure, and blurred vision. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at outside hospital revealed a lesion in the sellar region displaying hypointense signal on T1 weighted image, partial hyperintense signal on T2 weighted image, and capsule enhancement on contrast image . Pituitary adenoma was suspected. Her past medical history was unremarkable except being allergic to penicillin. Vital signs were stable. Neurological examination was intact. Labtest revealed an elevated level of prolactin (PRL) at 744.0 mIU/L (reference value: 40.3–530 mIU/L). Other hormones such as growth hormone (GH), thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), triiodothyronine, thyroxine, adrenocorticotropin (ACTH), plasma cortisol, luteinizing hormone (LH), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), testosterone, estrodiol, and progesterone were all within normal range. An endoscopic transnasal transsphenoidal surgery was performed. After opening the dura of sellar turcica, a dark red mass with firm texture and rich blood supply was found, adhering closely to sellar diaphragm. Subtotal resection was conducted because of the highly vascularized nature of the tumor. Cerebrospinal fluid leakage occurred during surgery. Reconstruction of sellar turcica was performed with fat graft and gelatin spongy.
Two days after surgery, the hyperprolactinemia was resolved (192.0 mIU/L) and postoperative MRI revealed a residual hyperintense signal in sellar turcica without enhancement . Histological examination demonstrated an adenohypophysial tumor composed of dysplastic ganglion cells with vesicular hypochromatic nuclei and prominent nucleolus, neoplastic glial cells with small and irregular oval nuclei, and hyperplasic pituitary cells . Immunohistochemistry (IHC) showed positive staining of synaptophysinin ganglion cells, and positiveglial-fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) in glial cells . Interestingly, staining of CD34 was positive around blood vessels . Other trivial findings included positive ACTH, FSH, TSH, GH, LH, and PRL in pituitary cells, and <2% of Ki-67 labeling index. No anti-diuretic hormone (ADH) and oxytocin were found, indicating that the tumor was derived from adenohypophysis rather than neurohypophysis. The sepathological findings were consistent with ganglioglioma in adenohypophysis.
After surgery the patient developed cerebrospinal fluid rhinorrhea. The symptom was resolved after lumbar drainage and the patient was discharged. Follow-up 6 months later with MRI showed on tumor progression .