A 52-year-old obese West African male patient with type II diabetes presents to the gastroenterology clinic with a 1-year history of intermittent hematochezia and intermittent postprandial bloating. He denies any current or recent history of anorexia, anemia, weight loss, fevers, chills, abdominal pain, constipation, nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea. He had no prior history of esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) nor colonoscopy. The patient denies any family history of cancer, previous history of surgery or trauma, or smoking, alcohol use, or illicit drug use.
On physical examination, the patient had no signs of acute distress. On abdominal inspection, there were no scars, striae, nor bruising. Normal bowel sounds were auscultated. There were no tenderness on superficial or deep palpation, and no palpable masses. No organomegaly was noted.
The patient underwent an elective EGD and colonoscopy to evaluate his symptoms. Colonoscopy revealed one 4-mm rectal polyp, which was resected, as well as internal hemorrhoids. EGD revealed a severe duodenal stricture 4–5 cm distal to the ampulla (shown in ), suspicious for extrinsic compression of the duodenum. The patient was recommended admission to the hospital for further imaging evaluation of the tight stricture at the distal duodenum on EGD. His vital signs remained stable. Complete blood count and iron profile returned within normal range. Blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, and electrolytes were within normal limits. Tumor markers CA 19-9, CEA, and AFP remained within range. Liver enzymes (AST, ALT, and alkaline phosphatase) and pancreatic enzymes (amylase and lipase) were within normal limits.
Abdominal and pelvic contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a 5.0 × 3.7 × 4.3-cm mass within the mesentery, encasing the distal portion of the duodenum (shown in ), with no signs of obstruction, possibly representing a neoplasm of mesenteric or small bowel origin. The patient underwent exploratory laparotomy and en bloc resection of mesenteric mass, jejunum (with primary anastomosis), and antimesenteric part of 4th portion of duodenum (Heineke-Mikulicz strictureplasty). After surgical excision, the specimen was sent for histopathological analysis.
Microscopic examination revealed the jejunal mesenteric mass to be fibroblastic/myofibroblastic, with uniform spindle cells arranged in sweeping fascicles (shown in ). Immunohistochemistry analysis stained positive for nuclear β-catenin and smooth muscle actin, and stained negative for STAT6, desmin, caldesmon, pan-cytokeratin, or c-KIT. The Ki67 index is <1%. The microscopic findings and immunophenotype are consistent with mesenteric fibromatosis (desmoid tumor). The patient was informed and educated of his diagnosis and was recommended regular follow-up in the gastroenterology and surgery clinic.