In May 2011, a 34-year-old male was treated for an ACL rupture using a hamstring graft fixation associated with a partial internal meniscectomy. The hamstring grafts were fixated using a transfixation system in the femur and a biodegradable screw in the proximal tibia. The patient’s post-operative course was uneventful, and he returned to sports without further difficulties. In July 2014 (3 years and 6 months following the initial operation), a tibial cyst suddenly presented and was first treated conservatively, including physical therapy and non- steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, until it became symptomatic. There were no signs of clinical or laboratory infection. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a 10 mm x 25 mm cyst lesion filled with liquid . In November 2014, an open excisional biopsy and primary closure surgery were performed at a different medical center. The material was sent to a pathology laboratory and resulted in a “ganglion cyst.” 2 months after surgery, a painful mass recurred over the anteromedial proximal tibia measuring approximately 10 mm x 25 mm. A gelatinous substance was suctioned from the mass, in a sterile environment, consistent with a recurrent ganglion cyst. 40 days following this event, the cyst had reappeared and measured approximately 50 mm χ 40 mm . At that time, the patient was referred to our hospital.
The physical examination revealed a stable knee and a complete range of motion. An approximately 50 mm χ 40 mm palpable mass was evident at the anteromedial proximal tibia. MRI images were consistent with a homogeneous, fluid-filled cyst with a connection toward the tibial tunnel .
On April 2015, a second open resection and an exploratory arthroscopy were performed. The cyst was approached through the previous skin incision. The mass was meticulously dissected, with care not to injure the cyst or its stalk. After the cyst was isolated from the surrounding soft tissue, it was brought back to its original placing at the tibial tunnel. The cyst and stalk were then excised altogether. Once removed, the tunnel showed no evidence of communication with the joint and the walls showed signs of sclerosis. Walls were debrided with a rongeur and curette and filled with bone plugs extracted from the lateral femoral condyle. Graft was impacted, and fascia and subcutaneous tissue were sutured. The pathology report revealed a fibrous tissue capsule compatible with a synovial cyst .
The patient remained asymptomatic for 3 months, but when he returned to sport activities, a painful palpable mass was evident again in the same site. Like previous episodes, no clinical or laboratory parameters of infection were found. The X-ray and MRI revealed a new cyst recurrence, with an increase in the tunnel size compared to the previous episode. Bone blocks were evident within the cyst . A third surgical intervention was performed. After the cyst was isolated from the surrounding soft tissue, the three bone plugs were found inside the tunnel and extracted, and the tunnel walls were filled with fibrous tissue. A proper debridement was performed with a curette, and the space was filled using a cancellous allograft and a cortical allograft table . The last follow-up at 18 months postoperative has shown the patient asymptomatic, practicing sports regularly, and from an iconographic point of view , a good integration of the bone graft both at the cancellous and cortical side. As shown in the MRI images, the ACL has still survived with good signal and without any modification since the first surgery.