A 64-year-old man with an unremarkable medical history was admitted to our hospital due to fever and scotoma. Six days before admission, he developed fever and a non-productive cough. Two days later, he became aware of a black spot in the center of his visual field. He visited an ophthalmologist, and his symptoms were interpreted as bilateral central scotomata . He was diagnosed with bilateral exudative retinal detachment on optical coherence tomography (OCT) . Fundus examination was normal. The cause of the fever and bilateral central scotomata was unclear, and he was referred to our hospital for further neurological evaluation.
On admission, he had a variety of symptoms including fever, mild headache, confusion, diarrhoea, urinary incontinence, and mild non-productive cough. The central scotomata improved, but he still complained of a round yellowish lesion in the bilateral central visual fields. He had a temperature of 38.7 °C, blood pressure of 108/78 mmHg, pulse rate of 100/min, and respiratory rate of 30/min, with an oxygen saturation of 93% on room air. His breath sounds were diminished in the right lower lung field. He showed disorientation to place, but the rest of the neurological examinations were normal.
Laboratory tests revealed leucocytosis with neutrophilia. C-reactive protein (CRP) and procalcitonin levels were elevated. Blood chemistry examinations showed hyponatremia, renal insufficiency, elevated serum aminotransferases, and high lactic dehydrogenase (LDH) levels . Urinalysis showed microscopic haematuria (urine occult blood 2+, urine red blood cells 1–4/high power field), and proteinuria (urinary protein 2+, spot urine protein/ creatinine ratio of 1.20 g/g creatinine) without leucocyturia.
We suspected meningoencephalitis based on several symptoms, including the visual abnormality, fever, headache, and confusion. Lumbar puncture and head imaging were performed following the initial examination. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis revealed a mildly elevated protein level of 55.7 mg/dL, a normal cell count, and a normal glucose level of 92 mg/dL. Brain magnetic resonance imaging did not reveal any mass lesions, inflammatory processes, or acute ischemic changes. Thus, the possibility of brain tumours, meningitis, encephalitis, and stroke could be excluded.
Chest radiography, which was performed to determine a possible fever origin, showed infiltrates in the right lower lung field . Chest computed tomography revealed consolidation in the right lower lobe . To detect the aetiology of lobar pneumonia, the urinary antigen test (Binax NOW, Alere, Orlando, FL, USA) was performed that was positive for serogroup 1 of Legionella pneumophila. Therefore, a diagnosis of Legionnaire’s disease was made. He did not receive previous antibiotic therapy for the present illness and treatment with levofloxacin and azithromycin was initiated on the day of admission after the diagnosis. After antibiotics were administered, the patient’s symptoms and laboratory abnormalities simultaneously normalized. The visual symptoms disappeared on day 3. An ophthalmologic examination, including OCT, was done on day 10 which revealed complete resolution of the bilateral retinal lesions . The patient was discharged, and the antibiotics were continued until completion at 10 days of administration. To reveal the possible source of infection, samples from an old water dispenser used by the patient at his home were collected for Legionella culture. Although Legionella species were not detected, the patient was advised not to use that dispenser. The local health care centre conducted epidemiological surveillance; however, an outbreak was not reported.