A 50-year-old man presented to the emergency department (ED) complaining of progressively worsening swelling over the angle of his left jaw associated with difficulty speaking, described as hoarseness and pain with phonation, as well as difficulty swallowing. It began spontaneously one day previously, right after he felt a snap or pop. There were no triggering incidents, although he was unclear if he was talking or swallowing at the time. It was associated with a non-radiating, moderate intensity pain, just below the angle of the mandible on his left side that increased in severity when he moved his jaw to speak, turn, or swallow. Over the course of 12 hours he developed worsening anterior cervical neck swelling and progressive odynophagia, dysphagia, and hoarseness. His medical history was significant for hypertension and left-sided Bell’s palsy since 2014, which was associated with ipsilateral tinnitus.
On examination, he was hypertensive with a blood pressure of 187/105 millimeters of mercury, heart rate 91 beats per minute, temperature 98.4° Fahrenheit, and oxygen saturation 100% on room air. The patient’s physical exam was unremarkable with the exception of palpable and visible swelling to the soft tissues below the left side of the mandible and clear discomfort on swallowing. Concern for a vascular abnormality such as aneurysm or thrombosis prompted immediate CT of the neck with IV contrast. This imaging revealed a fracture though an elongated, calcified left styloid process with hematoma formation causing mass effect on the left lateral hypopharyngeal wall .
The patient was preliminarily diagnosed with a spontaneous fracture of an elongated calcified styloid ligament with hematoma formation and was admitted to observation with otolaryngology (ENT) consultation for airway monitoring and the potential for surgical intervention if worsening airway impingement. He did well with no further progression of symptoms and was discharged after 24 hours. At follow-up with ENT services one week post-ED visit, swelling was markedly reduced and his pain had fully resolved. The spontaneous fracture was thought to be corrective and no further surgical intervention was required., He has had no further symptoms one year from his injury.