A 5-year-old Italian boy was admitted to our Pediatric Gastroenterology Unit with a presumptive diagnosis of metastatic Crohn’s disease (CD) or cutaneous manifestations of inflammatory bowel disease.The patient’s past medical history included neonatal pyoderma requiring antibiotic therapy, intermittent diarrhea and abdominal pain since 2 years of age, and hospitalization at the age of three for treatment of severe pneumonia with pleural effusion. Laboratory tests at time of hospitalization showed elevated inflammatory parameters, iron deficiency anemia, and positive serologic screening for celiac disease, later confirmed by endoscopy. The patient started a gluten-free diet but continued to have sporadic episodes of diarrhea and abdominal pain, recurrent oral ulcerations, persistent anemia, and elevated inflammatory markers. The following year, the patient experienced a relapse of pneumonia, preceded 7 days earlier by fever, abdominal pain, and diarrhea, followed by the appearance of two painful red nodules, one on the left leg and one on the lower left abdominal region. The lesions progressively evolved into round demarcated ulcers with violaceous edges and a yellow surface (Figure ).
Physical examination at presentation showed poor general condition and nutritional status, mild cervical lymphadenopathy, tenderness of the lower left abdomen during examination, and perianal skin tags, but no hepatosplenomegaly or other masses. Physical examination revealed that the patient’s height and weight were below the 10th percentile.
Laboratory tests demonstrated leukocytosis (WBC 20,500/μL, 65% neutrophils, 19%, lymphocytes, 5% monocytes, 9% eosinophils), thrombocytosis (PLT 635,000/μL), iron deficiency anemia, hypoalbuminemia, and elevated fecal calprotectin level. Inflammatory bowel disease markers were positive for IgA and IgG antibodies against Saccharomyces cerevisiae (ASCA) and negative for perinuclear anti-nuclear cytoplasmic antibodies. Topical and systemic antibiotic therapy had been performed without success.We performed ileocolonoscopy, which revealed isolated aphthous ulcerations in the left colon with normal mucosa (Figure ). Histology showed mild distortion of crypt architecture, cryptitis, and the presence of epithelioid granulomas in the lamina propria of both the ileum and the colon, a picture consistent with CD. Skin biopsies documented neutrophilic vasculitis consistent with pyoderma gangrenosum, and lesions were thus interpreted as an extraintestinal manifestation of CD.
Culture of cutaneous lesions grew Serratia marcescens, a catalase positive, Gram-negative bacillus. Isolated Serratia infections are rare in children, but they are a common feature of primary immunodeficiency, particularly of phagocytic dysfunction disorders such as CGD
. The patient was referred to our Immunology Unit for evaluation and further diagnostic work-up. Repeat intestinal biopsies were also required. The nitroblue tetrazolium test, used to investigate phagocytic function, revealed a complete inability to produce a normal respiratory burst, supporting the suspected diagnosis of CGD.
A second pathologist found clusters of well-formed noncaseating granulomas within the lamina propria as well as the presence of large pigment-laden histiocytes, the characteristic that best distinguishes CGD-associated enterocolitis from CD (Figures and
)
.
Based on clinical history, laboratory data, granulomas on histology, and cutaneous infection from Serratia, CGD was diagnosed. CYBB gene sequencing for gp91phox, a membrane-bound subunit of NADPH oxidase, ultimately confirmed the diagnosis of X-linked CGD
[,,].
The patient began long-term antibiotic prophylaxis with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (6 mg/kg/d given in two doses), and antifungal prophylaxis with itraconazole (5 mg/kg/d), and had complete resolution of cutaneous lesions within 3 weeks. The patient’s inflammatory parameters, which had been constantly elevated during the preceding 3 years, normalized. He has been completely symptom-free for 6 months.