A 22-year-old woman with a one-month history of hoarseness was referred to department of otolaryngology and head and neck surgery, the first hospital of Jilin University in China. She had sustained hoarseness without history of a sore throat or symptoms suggesting laryngopharyngeal reflux since July 2008. During fibrolaryngoscopy (Kawe, Germany), a lesion as a red, smooth sublobe mass (1.5 × 0.7 × 0.5 cm) was found in her right vocal cord .
In August 2008, the lesion was excised using a prop-up laryngoscope (WelchAllyn, USA). Macroscopically, the mass was brittle and vulnerable to bleeding. Fibroepithelial papilloma was diagnosed based on instant frozen pathology. The immunohistochemistry results showed MyoD-1 positivity, 20% - 30% Ki-67-positive cells, a few actin and smooth muscle actin-positive cells and S-100 negativity , which confirmed that the mass was ERMS . Computed tomography (CT, GE Healthcare) of the lung and color Doppler sonography (Mindray, China) of the neck and abdominal regions were performed, which showed many ellipsoidal low echo-level echogenic masses in the neck. Of these masses, a 12 × 5 mm mass on the left and a 10 × 4 mm mass on the right were the largest and had clear margins, which confirmed the diagnosis of ERMS of the vocal cords. No lesions were detected in the liver, gall bladder, pancreas, kidneys or lungs. Under general anesthesia, selective neck dissection and right cordectomy were performed. Pathological examination showed residual ERMS with hemorrhage, necrosis, fibroplasias and foreign-body reactive giant cells in the periphery. No tumor cells were detected along the surgical margin or in the lymph nodes of the neck. We corrected the clinical diagnosis to ERMS of the right vocal cord (T1N0M0).
The patient was followed-up every three months during the first year after surgery and every four months during 2010. From 2011 to 2012, the patient was followed-up every six months. After 2013, the 5-year follow-up visit showed no local recurrence.