A 69-year-old man with a feeling of epigastric compression was referred to our hospital for examination of an abdominal mass. His past medical history included hyperlipidemia, pulmonary emphysema, and bronchial asthma. He had no history of liver disease, blood transfusion, tattooing, or alcohol abuse. He had smoked 30 cigarettes per day for 35 years. The patient’s laboratory findings on admission were as follows: white blood cell count, 7500/μl; hemoglobin, 13.7 g/dl; platelet count, 21.1 × 104/μl; C-reactive protein, 0.5 mg/dl; total protein, 6.7 g/dl; serum albumin, 4.0 g/dl; UN, 11.1 mg/dl; serum creatinine, 0.7 mg/dl; glucose, 86 g/dl; and HbA1c, 5.4%. Liver function tests revealed total bilirubin, 0.5 mg/dl; serum aspartate aminotransferase, 21 IU/l; serum alanine aminotransferase, 14 IU/l; serum glutamyltransferase, 83 IU/l; prothrombin time, 80.8%; and indocyanine green retention rate at 15 min, 8.6%, and indicated Child-Pugh class A. Antibody tests were negative for both hepatitis B surface antigen and hepatitis C virus. The following tumor markers were all within normal ranges: α-fetoprotein was 5.7 ng/ml (normal range < 10 ng/ml), PIVKA-II was 18 mAU/ml (normal range < 40mAU/ml), carcinoembryonic antigen was 1.5 ng/ml (normal range < 5.0 ng/ml), carbohydrate antigen 19-9 was 4.1 ng/ml (normal range < 37.0 ng/ml), and sIL-2R was 362 U/ml (normal range 121–613 U/ml). Abdominal computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a relatively well-contrasted 12 × 11 × 8 cm tumor with a well-defined boundary replacing the lateral segment of the liver alongside multiple intrahepatic metastases. In addition, several nodules up to 12 mm were found in both lungs, suggesting metastasis. Contrast-enhanced CT revealed a hypodense tumor on plain scans, with heterogeneous and peripheral enhancement on early phase and delayed washout on late phase. MRI revealed a homogenous hypointense tumor on Tl-weighted images and a hyperintense one in T2-weighted images without encapsulation. On Gd-EOB-DTPA-enhanced MRI, the tumor was heterogeneously enhanced during the early phase and weakly enhanced during the late phase. SUVmax of the liver mass and the lung tumor in positron emission tomography (PET) were 10.4 and 1.5, respectively . No abnormal accumulation was observed in the lymph nodes, bones, peritoneum, or any other sites. Upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopic examination detected no abnormal findings. Hepatocellular carcinoma was primarily suspected; however, intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma or mixed hepatocellular and cholangiocarcinoma were other possible diagnoses. Lateral segmentectomy of the liver was performed to confirm diagnosis and prevent tumor rupture. Operation time was 104 min, with a bleeding volume of 240 ml. Macroscopically, the lateral segment of the liver was replaced by a lobular or multinodular tumor with a maximum diameter of 15 cm . In pathological findings, the tumor consisted of bundle-like proliferation of complicated banding spindle-like cells with clear cytoplasm, accompanied by storiform pattern and compressed blood vessels . Hydropic change and hyalinization were observed. Various degrees of nuclear atypia were observed, and nuclear fission images were demonstrated in 8/10 high-power field. Partial necrosis was present, with associated venous invasion and intrahepatic metastasis. Immunohistochemical staining for tumor cells revealed desmin, α-smooth muscle actin (αSMA), and h-caldesmon to be diffusely positive, while c-kit, S100, CD34, CAM5.2, EMA, CD163, and DOG1 were negative . Ki-67 labeling index of the main tumor was 70%. These findings suggested differentiation into the smooth muscle, informing a final diagnosis of leiomyosarcoma of the liver. No other neoplastic lesion was detected on image examinations such as gastrointestinal endoscopy, CT, MRI, and PET, so the tumor was considered to be primary, not metastatic liver tumor. Postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged on the 12th postoperative day. Four weeks after surgery, systemic chemotherapy with doxorubicin (75 mg/m2) was commenced for metastatic tumors of the liver and lung.