An 87-year-old woman with a history of hypertension presented with acute heart failure symptoms. She was found to have severe AS with left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction of 38%. She had femoral artery tortuosity and underwent urgent TAVI via a transapical approach using a 23 mm SAPIEN 3 bioprosthesis (Edwards Lifesciences, USA). Post-operative transthoracic echocardiography showed a well seated prosthetic valve with no paravalvular leak and no evidence of pericardial effusion. Chest X-ray showed a left sided pleural effusion that resolved with antibiotics and treatment for heart failure. She was discharged home 30 days after admission.
She presented to the breast clinic with a pulsatile mass 4 months after TAVI. Examination revealed a mildly tender, pulsatile mass at the lower aspect of her left breast under the transapical access scar. Cardiovascular and respiratory examination was otherwise unremarkable. She was admitted for further investigations as it was considered to be a LV pseudoaneurysm. Full blood count and C-reactive protein were normal, and no organism was isolated on blood culture after 5 days of incubation.
Ultrasound of the left breast revealed a pulsatile fluid collection measuring 44 mm in diameter, containing echogenic material and suspected to be arising from the apex of the heart. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest showed a 54 × 47 mm multi-loculated fluid collection arising from the cardiac apex and extending along the chest wall into left breast tissue via a communication through the intercostal space . Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan showed a pulsatile mass measuring 30 × 48 × 46 mm in the left breast and 32 × 15 × 11 mm in the extension into the pericardial space adjacent to the anterior wall of the left ventricle. The mass was initially considered to be a LV pseudoaneurysm but first pass perfusion imaging suggested no direct communication between the LV cavity and the mass . Cine views in the sagittal plane showed dyskinetic motion of the anterior wall of the left ventricle, which pushed against the pericardial component resulting in transmission of a systolic pulse to the breast component of the mass (, Video S3). Coronary angiography showed non-obstructive plaque disease but no communication to the pulsatile mass. Contrast aortography did not demonstrate any arterial communication with the mass.
Ultrasound-guided needle aspiration of the mass drained 40 mL of purulent fluid . Culture of the fluid did not grow any organisms. She made an uneventful recovery and a repeat CT scan of the chest 1 month later showed no recurrence of the mass .