A 57-year-old man was admitted to our hospital in August 2020 on account of significant loss of weight and appetite over the past 4 months and fever for 1 month. Few positive findings were noted on the physical examination except the patient was poor development with a body weight of 45 kg (body mass index: 14.2 kg/m2), and had anemic appearance and hepato-splenomegaly. No palpable lymph nodes were found. The patient was HIV-seronegative and was considered immunocompetent. He was a builder. On admission, the serum 1.3- beta-D-glucan level increased significantly. The Histoplasma capsulatum was presumed by microscopic examination of the bone marrow smear . However, no measurement was made for Histoplasma capsulatum antigen. Drug susceptibility testing for Histoplasma capsulatum should have been performed, but unfortunately, we did not conduct it since the blood and bone marrow culture were all negative. The Metagenomic Next Generation Sequencing Test in bone marrow was also negative. Antifungal therapy with Voriconazole (Pfizer Inc, New York, NY, USA, 6 mg/kg intravenously every 12 hours for the first 24 hours, then 4 mg/kg oral every 12 hours) instead of amphotericin B was first introduced due to lack of experience with AmB. Trough serum levels of Voriconazole were monitored weekly after 5 days of therapy to ensure adequate absorption, with a goal of achieving a concentration of 2 to 5μg/mL. 7.40μg/mL,5.29μg/mL, 3.79μg/mL of serum level of Voriconazole were obtained. But the patient did not make improvement. Voriconazole was stopped. Intravenous liposome AmB (New Asia pharmaceutical, Shanghai, China) was gradually added at the dose of 3 mg/kg daily. Two weeks later, the patient’s clinical symptoms, such as his fever and loss of appetite, began to improve. But the patient did not tolerate chemotherapy very well with markedly elevated sera creatinine levels. Intravenous AmB liposomal (reduced to 1 mg/kg daily) plus Voriconazole (4 mg/kg oral every 12 hours 4 mg/kg twice daily after initiation of a loading dose) was administered. Monitoring Voriconazole serum levels continued regularly. 0.52μg /mL, 1.71μg/mL, 0.86μg/mL of serum level of Voriconazole were obtained. Glutathione was co-administrated to protecting hepatic and renal function during hospital. The patient with good adherence did not take any agent or food supplements (ie, phenytoin, St.John’t wort, etc.) that influenced the blood drug level of Voriconazole. Liposomal AmB (L-AmB) was stopped due to presumption of drug interactions between Voriconazole and AmB. Voriconazole (4 mg/kg oral every 12 hours) alone was administrated for subsequent therapy. 3.20μg /mL, 5.29μg /mL, 4.46μg /mL of serum trough concentration of Voriconazole were obtained, which were significantly higher than previous result. This suggested that AmB may decrease the serum levels of Voriconazole. Unfortunately, due to be unable to test the serum concentration of AmB, we could not observe the influence of Voriconazole on AmB levels.
Sample Collection, Storage and Bio-Analysis
Venous blood samples (2 mL) were collected into anticoagulant tubes. The samples were collected at least 3 days after initiation of a loading dose or maintenance and an adjusted dose of 4 days as well as within 2 h before any maintenance doses. All Voriconazole plasma concentration was measured by an automatic two-dimensional liquid chromatography (2D-HPLC, Demeter Instrument Co., Ltd., Changsha, Hunan, China). The two-dimensional separation conditions consisted of the following: the first dimensional chromatographic column was FRO C18 (100mm × 3.0 mm, 5μm, ANAX); and the flow rate: 1.0 mL/min. The second dimensional chromatographic column was ASTON HD C18 (150 mm × 4.6 mm, 5μm, ANAX). The stability of blood sample at room temperature for 8 h and at-20°C of three repeated freeze-thaw cycles was within ±8.00% and ±10.0%, respectively. Besides, the laboratory performed annual external quality assessment (EQA) to ensure the accuracy of the measurement results.