A 19-year-old female patient presented at the laser unit of the Dermatology Department at the University Hospital of Bern with 17 self-induced tattoos spread over her entire body, including her face and hands (a, b, a, c, e). These tattoos had been created using eyeliner ink and sewing needles in multiple sessions 2 years prior to her first consultation. Notably, there had been no spontaneous fading of the tattoos. The patient was significantly distressed by the presence of these tattoos, as she acquired them during a psychosocially challenging period of her life when she was a resident of a youth home where many of her peers were also engaged in self-tattooing. During her first dermatological exam, she referred that those tattoos would remind her of a stressful phase, and they could also put her at a disadvantage on employment prospects, considering that they were in visible areas such as face and hands. No signs of complications, such as itching or changes in skin texture, were evident immediately after tattooing or during the subsequent course. The clinical assessment revealed amateur black, flat, and uneven tattoos in the periocular region, on the neck, chest, wrists, and right hand, as well as on both legs. One tattoo located on the fourth finger of the right hand was thickened, and dermoscopy indicated the presence of fibrosis.
To assess the efficacy of treatment, a test spot of the QS Neodymium-doped Yttrium Aluminum Garnet (Nd:YAG) 1,064-nm laser (MedLite C6, Cynosure, Westford, MA, USA) was performed on the right lower leg using a 4-mm spot size and a fluence of 3.0–3.5 J/cm2. At the 6-week follow-up visit, a striking clearance of the pigment was observed, with no resulting side effects, such as hypo- or hyperpigmentation. Subsequently, 10 additional sessions of QS Nd:YAG 1,064-nm laser treatment were administered using a 4 mm spot size and fluence ranging from 3.0 to 7.0 J/cm2. The spots were set one aside from the other; no overlap was performed. The fluence increased by around 10 percent each session. The desired fluence endpoint was set to achieve slight whitening along with a popping sound. As the patient exhibited a very high pain tolerance, this factor did not significantly influence the chosen parameters, as it often does during laser tattoo removal procedures. A 6–12 week therapy interval was chosen. These sessions led to a progressive fading, and on some tattoos, complete clearance. After seven sessions, the tattoos on the right lower leg and the neck disappeared completely (f). Three further treatment sessions were applied to the tattoos on the wrist, face, lower leg, and dorsal hand. Notably, tattoos located on the periocular, wrist, distal leg region and the finger exhibited slower fading. The tattoo on the finger with slight fibrosis persisted partially, while the other tattoos were removed completely (b, d). Posttreatment care included the application of sunscreen. Apart from a within 3 months self-limiting hyperpigmentation observed on the right lower leg, no adverse effects, such as hypopigmentation or scarring, were observed.