A 44-year-old otherwise healthy Caucasian man, with a past medical history of anxiety and 15 pack year tobacco use, initially presented to his primary care physician with several days onset of fevers, congestion and cough. He was prescribed azithromycin, promethazine hydrochloride and dextromethorphan hydrobromide syrup. One week later, the patient developed an acute diffuse blistering morbilliform erythematous rash involving bilateral hands, which was extremely pruritic and associated with high-grade fever. Within two weeks, the rash spread to involve nearly his entire body surface, sparing only his face. He presented to an outside hospital with persistent fever, rash, and hypotension consistent with systemic inflammatory response syndrome. He was treated for severe sepsis and presumptive superimposed skin infection with vancomycin and aztreonem, given his history of penicillin allergy. Despite aggressive therapy, the patient rapidly deteriorated with worsening skin involvement, and was subsequently transferred to our institution for higher level care.Upon arrival, his vital signs were temperature of 38.2°C, blood pressure of 95/20mmHg, heart rate 68 beats/min, respiratory rate 20 breaths/min, and oxygen saturation 95% on 2L nasal canula. Shortly thereafter, our patient became hypotensive despite aggressive fluid resuscitation and was started on norepinephrine. Our patient was subsequently intubated due to worsening level of consciousness. A physical examination revealed an ill-appearing sedated man with evidence of generalized ill-defined coalescing erythema and diffuse pinpoint petechiae. A pulmonary examination was notable for bilateral crackles and diffuse rhonchi and a cardiovascular examination was normal except for tachycardia. There was no lymphadenopathy. A detailed skin examination revealed keratotic desquamation of his palms and soles. His lips and oral mucosa were dry with some cracking of vermilion lips but no bullae. His tongue was diffusely red. His conjunctivae were injected. There were no vesicles, bullae, or target lesions seen. The Nikolsky sign was negative.
Laboratory studies revealed leukocytosis with a white blood cell count of 17.6×109/L with 47% eosinophils, 33% neutrophils, 5% bands, and 12% lymphocytes as well as thrombocytopenia of 117×109/L. No atypical lymphocytes were seen on the peripheral blood smear or manual differential. His blood chemistry test results were notable for blood urea nitrogen of 21.4mmol/L, serum creatinine 229μmol/L, albumin 21g/L, alkaline phosphatase 188μg/L, aspartate aminotransaminase 58IU/mL, and alanine aminotransferase 37IU/mL. Serological test results including HIV titer, leptospira antibody, and streptolysin O antibody were all nonreactive. His blood cultures, urine culture, herpes simplex wound culture, as well as varicella zoster wound cultures were all unremarkable. Coccidioides serology was negative. His chest X-ray was consistent with pulmonary edema . Results from a diagnostic bronchoscopy showed evidence of diffuse mucosal hyperemia from the trachea through the subsegmental bronchi but no sloughing. Bronchial washing studies including bacterial, viral and fungal cultures, as well as pneumocystis jiroveci DFA, were all unremarkable.
Despite an exhaustive workup noted above and consultation with dermatology, infectious disease, ophthalmology, pulmonary and burn specialists, no clear etiology was identified. Over the next several days, he continued to worsen despite broad-spectrum antibiotics including vancomycin, meropenem and clindamycin. He developed low-grade disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), worsening leukocytosis, worsening renal failure as well as persistent hypotension requiring high levels of norepinephrine.On hospital day 4, results from his skin biopsy showed evidence of spongiotic lichenoid dermatitis with eosinophils and neutrophils , compatible with systemic drug hypersensitivity reaction. No evidence of vasculitis was seen on histopathology. Our patient was started on high-dose steroids and all antibiotics were discontinued, given no convincing evidence of infection. He was weaned off norepinephrine and extubated shortly thereafter. His fever resolved and his generalized body rash dramatically improved over the course of 48 hours with supportive treatment . Our patient subsequently made a full recovery after an additional week of rehabilitation and was discharged home.