A 72-year-old male presented with no chief complaints.
In July 2017, the patient attended a health check-up at another hospital where he underwent an abdominal ultrasonography. A hepatic mass was detected by the ultrasonography, and intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC) was suspected from the findings of a computed tomography (CT) scan. He was therefore referred to our department for further investigation.
In May 2006, the patient underwent a low anterior reresection for rectal cancer. The preoperative serum level of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) was 28.4 ng/mL (normal range, < 5.0 ng/dL). Histopathological examination showed that the tumor was a 70 mm × 50 mm type-3, moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma. According to the staging system described in the Union for International Cancer Control 8th edition, the pathological stage of the tumor was pT3N0M0 Stage IIA. As adjuvant chemotherapy, 450 mg/day of tegafur/uracil was administered orally for a period of 9 mo. In May 2012, the final follow-up CT was performed, and no recurrence nor metastases were detected. He was lost to follow-up after his final appearance in October 2014. The serum levels of CEA and cancer antigen (CA)19-9 were within normal range at that time. He also had hypertension and hyperlipidemia.
The patient had no significant personal or family history.
The vitals on admission in August 2017 were within normal reference range and the patient’s physical examination was unremarkable.
Routine blood analysis on admission showed that complete blood counts, liver function, renal function, and electrolytes were within normal limits except for slightly decreased levels of hemoglobin (13.5 g/dL; normal range, 14.0-18.0 g/dL) and hematocrit (39.5%; normal range, 40.0%-52.0%) and slightly elevated levels of prothrombin time (PT) (123%; normal range, 85%-120%) . The serum levels of CEA and CA19-9 were elevated with 1120 ng/mL and 305.9 U/mL (normal range, < 37.0 U/mL), respectively . However, the serum levels of AFP and PIVKA-II were within normal range. This profile of tumor marker positivity was consistent with ICC.
Contrast-enhanced dynamic-CT showed a tumor with a diameter of approximately 8 cm in the posterior segment of the liver which was weakly and gradually enhanced . It also showed an intratumoral artery in the arterial phase , suggesting that this tumor had an infiltrating replacement growth pattern, and that this finding was compatible with ICC. In the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) study, the tumor showed high signal intensity on T2-weighted images and weak enhancement compared to surrounding liver parenchyma in the portal venous phase after administration of gadolinium ethoxybenzyl diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (Gd-EOB-DTPA) . These findings were also consistent with ICC. 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (PET)/CT showed an abnormally high uptake on the tumorous lesion in the posterior segment, with a maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of 20.0 . In addition, the abnormally high uptake showed that the tumor appeared to spread convexly along the intrahepatic bile ducts . According to the results of these imaging examinations, ICC was suspected.