A 38-year-old male patient (blood pressure: 138/78 mmHg, heart rate: 76 b.p.m., temperature: 37.4°C, SpO2: 96%) was admitted to hospital with slightly progressive exertional dyspnoea NYHA II with insidious onset of symptoms three weeks ago, consecutive performance dip, and unspecific chest pain with history of dyslipidaemia, hypertension, smoking, and respiratory infection 4 weeks ago. There was no past medical history.
At the first visit, the patient was stable without any complaints at rest. Physical examination, ECG, and chest X-ray showed normal findings. Conventional TTE showed normal LVEF without any significant valvular lesions but an unspecific decrease of basal septal and anterior longitudinal strain and apical post-systolic shortening at rest. Due to risk factors for coronary heart disease (CHD) stress echocardiography was performed showing slightly improved global longitudinal strain (−22% vs. −18% at rest) and post-systolic shortening of the basal inferior and lateral wall being non-specific for CHD . Furthermore, LV deformation was analysed and revealed abnormal subepicardial circumferential layer strain basal inferior and posterior as well as abnormal apical rotation . The net effect of rotation resulted in a reduced net torsion and an abnormal/’chaotic’ torsion rate pattern .
Laboratory findings showed thrombocytopenia [30 000/μL (140 000–360 000/μL)], leukopenia [3300/μL (3500–9800/μL)] and slightly elevated Troponin-T-values [45 pg/mL (<14 pg/mL)]. The decision to test the patient for HIV was based on the laboratory findings (thrombocytopenia and leucopenia) and a more detailed patient’s history at the second visit. Virologic testing revealed >1 000 000 HIV copies/mL (<40 copies/mL) confirming the diagnosis of acute phase of HIV infection. Cardiac magnet resonance (CMR) showed ubiquitous myocardial oedema and focal hyperaemia in absence of significant delayed enhancement confirming the diagnosis of AM in acute stage of HIV infection.
The patient was treated with beta-blocker (Metoprolol 50 mg) once a day since the diagnosis of AM has been assumed. Antiviral treatment was started with weight-related dose of emtricitabine/tenofovir and nevirapine according to the current guidelines.
In addition to CMR, the diagnosis of AM could have been confirmed retrospectively by changes of deformation patterns at 6-month follow-up in comparison to baseline . Longitudinal strain pattern has changed showing abnormalities in the basal septal and anterior segments with normalization basal inferior. Global radial strain (GRS) was significantly increased, showing normal monophasic pattern of basal segments. Circumferential layer strain was abnormal in the apical inferior and posterior as well as basal inferoseptal segments. Net-rotation rate still showed a ‘chaotic’ pathological pattern during diastole. After 6 months, the effectiveness of antiviral treatment could be documented by improvement of clinical (improvement of physical capacity) and laboratory findings (decrease of HIV copies).
At 12-month follow-up regional longitudinal deformation and longitudinal post-systolic shortening index were normal. No relevant changes of GRS were observed. Circumferential strain still showed slight abnormalities in the apical inferior and posterior as well as basal inferoseptal segment. Furthermore, net-rotation rate still showed an abnormal pattern.