A 65-year-old male was admitted to the department of urology with painless swelling of the left scrotum, which gradually enlarged over 1 wk.
He accidentally found left testicular enlargement 1 mo prior, which did not catch his attention. During the last week before admission, he noticed it growing rapidly. Then he visited a private clinic and was given a scrotal ultrasound, which showed aleft testicular tumor.
He had dyslipidemia, hypertension, and type 2 diabetes and denied anorexia, weight loss, fever, dysuria, history of sexually transmitted infection, and recent sick contacts.
He did not have a history of scrotal trauma, genitourinary tract anomalies, any known asbestos exposure, or surgeries.
Physical examination revealed a 2 cm × 3 cm hard, globular mass with transillumination in the lower part of the left scrotum. His right testis was of normal size with no associated scrotal swelling. Digital rectal examination was negative. There was no palpable inguinal lymphadenopathy or abdominal masses.
Preoperative blood tests including the β-subunit of human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG), cancer antigen carbohydrate antigen19-9, α-fetoprotein, prostate specific antigen and lactate dehydrogenase were all in normal range.
Preoperative scrotal ultrasound showed hydrocele on the left side with paratesticular masses. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed lung metastases and enlarged left supraclavicular lymph node . Postoperative CT of his chest, abdomen, pelvis, and brain was performed as a part of metastatic workup, which showed multiple nodules measuring 0.5-1.7 cm in the tail of the pancreas and many metastatic hypodense masses in the liver with the size of about 0.5-5.8 cm. The pancreatic duct in the tail was not dilated and there was no clear boundary with the ascending duodenum. Retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy, nodular infiltration in the omentum, and ascites were also observed . Brain metastasis was not detected (pictures not list).
Final pathologic examination showed infiltration of malignant cells into the tunica vaginalis with negative incisional margin, which was highly suggestive of metastatic tumors. The testis, epididymis, and spermatic cord were not involved. Immunohistochemistry showed tumor tissues were diffusely positive for cytokeratin 7 (CK7), CK20, and CK5/6 . Meanwhile, they were negative for Wilms’ tumor suppressor gene 1 (WT-1), calretinin, melanocyte, prostate specific antigen, thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), GATA binding protein 3 (GATA-3), caudal type homeobox 2 (CDX-2), and napsinA (pictures not listed).