A 77-year-old woman who was diagnosed with chronic hepatitis C at the age of 50 years was referred to a local hospital for follow-up. Abdominal ultrasonography showed a tumor in the left lobe of the liver. She was referred to our department for further examination and treatment. Laboratory data were as follows: platelet count 126 K/uL, total bilirubin 0.8 mg/dL, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 176 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 157 U/L, albumin 4.2 g/dL, prothrombin time 90.6 %, indocyanine green 15-min retention test (ICG R15) 19.7 %, α-fetoprotein (AFP) 16 ng/mL, protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist II (PIVKA-II) 2873 mAU/mL, hepatitis C virus (HCV) Ab positive, HCV RNA 6.54 logIU/mL. The liver damage was grade A and Child-Pugh classification was class A. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed a 28 × 25 mm tumor in segment 4, with a tumor thrombus in the left portal branch reaching the right portal branch, both of which were enhanced in the arterial phase and washed out in the equilibrium phase . The patient was diagnosed with clinical stage T4 (Vp4) bN0M0, stage IVA HCC involving PVTT, according to the tumor-node-metastasis classification of the Liver Cancer Study Group in Japan (6th edition) , which indicated poor prognosis when treated with surgery only. After providing informed consent, the patient decided to receive PIHP before surgery. She received continuous hepatic arterial infusion (HAI) of 100 mg/m2 doxorubicin plus 30 mg/m2 mitomycin C for 30 min . She recovered from a single dose of PIHP without severe toxicity, except a reduction in the grade 4 neutrophil counts (neutrophil count 200/μL) that was treated with recombinant G-CSF (CTCAE version 4.0) on the 12th day after PIHP. The serum level of AST and ALT rose up to 516 U/L and 242 U/L on the 4th day after PIHP, respectively. CT showed reduction of tumor volume and no enhancement of the PVTT after PIHP . The efficacy of chemotherapy was determined to be treatment efficacy (TE) 3 according to the criteria of the Liver Cancer Study Group in Japan (6th edition) and based on the partial response achieved. The clinical stage after PIHP was determined to be T4N0M0, stage IVA. The serum levels of AFP and PIVKA-II dramatically declined to 16 ng/mL and 21 mAU/mL, respectively . Subsequently, the neutrophil increased to 2400/μL, and the serum levels of AST/ALT improved to 36/61 U/L. The patient underwent extended left hepatic lobectomy and PVTT thrombectomy 6 weeks after PIHP. The operative findings revealed the extent of PVTT to be from the left and right portal branches to the portal trunk. Because the PVTT did not adhere to the portal vein wall, which would have led to a combined resection, she underwent thrombectomy with the back flow perfusion method and closure of the stump through a running suture of the portal vein with radical intent.
Histological examination of the resected specimen revealed complete necrosis without any viable cancer cells in the primary tumor and PVTT and we further showed that treatment efficacy 4 and pathological complete response were achieved. The patient recovered uneventfully after surgery and remained relapse-free 12 months after the surgery, without any postoperative chemotherapy.
The optimal treatment method for patients with HCC involving PVTT in the portal bifurcation or the main trunk remains controversial . PVTT represents one of the most important prognostic factors in patients with HCC. Most patients with HCC involving extensive PVTT have multiple intrahepatic metastases at the time of diagnosis and they are considered poor surgical candidates. If left untreated, patients with HCC involving PVTT have a median overall survival (OS) of 2–4 months [, ]. PVTT is also a causative factor for intrahepatic tumor dissemination, which primarily accounts for the poor prognosis in this group of patients [, ]. The most common staging system for HCC employed in American and European centers, the Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer (BCLC) system, recommends against surgical resection in cases involving PVTT . In a previous series of patients who underwent hepatectomy and thrombectomy for HCC involving PVTT in the main portal trunk, the 1- and 3-year OS rates were 25 and 4 %, respectively, and the disease-free survival rates were 3 % and 0 %, respectively . However, surgical resection is considered the only curative option. To improve the efficacy of surgical resection for HCC involving PVTT, neoadjuvant/adjuvant therapies were evaluated in several studies [, –]. Because of the heterogeneous results, the effect of neoadjuvant therapy on the OS was inconclusive.
Since 1989, our center has been using PIHP for the treatment of advanced multiple HCC . In our previous study, the data suggested a significant tumoricidal impact on less sensitive HCC and sufficient sorption with charcoal hemoperfusion of high-dose doxorubicin and MMC regimen . In 2003, we reported the efficacy of reductive surgery plus PIHP for multiple HCC, including HCC with macroscopic PVTT . The favorable survival profile suggested the efficacy of the second PIHP in local tumor control. Based on these previous reports, we extended the use of PIHP as preoperative therapy. In the present case, because the PVTT in the left portal branch reached the right portal branch and the high level of PIVKA-II indicated high recurrence possibility, surgery was planned after preoperative chemotherapy with PIHP. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of a case with pathological complete response after preoperative chemotherapy with PIHP in advanced HCC involving PVTT. Although there were several reports of spontaneous regression of PVTT [, ], in the present case, we judged PIHP was effective based on the pathohistological assessment.
Recently, the efficacy of preoperative HAI chemotherapy has been shown in patients with HCC and PVTT [, ]. Because PIHP has shown a high objective response rate (70.6 % complete and partial response) and safety, it might be a better alternative instead of preoperative therapy.
The clinical question of whether preoperative or postoperative PIHP is better should be addressed. Preoperative PIHP might not only reduce post-curative therapy recurrence but also downstage tumors from an unresectable to a resectable stage.