A 38-year-old Caucasian woman was hospitalized in 2008 with IPD (serotype 7 F) causing meningitis, septic shock and disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). Sequelae included total hearing loss treated with bilateral cochlear implants and amputation of the four lateral toes of the left foot. Hereditary immunodeficiency was suspected, as a one-year-old daughter was hospitalized with pneumococcal meningitis (serotype 7 F) one month earlier. Immunological investigation of the patient and her daughter included assessment of complement activation, fraction and concentrations of T, B and NK lymphocytes and subpopulations, proliferative response of CD4 T-cells, and Toll-like-receptor-stimulation. No signs of immunodeficiency were found. The only abnormal finding was a low level of IgM-positive CD27 memory B cells in the mother. The child was too young for assessment of memory B cells. No screening for impaired spleen function was made at that time. The patient was immunized with a 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPV23, Pneumovax®, Sanofi Pasteur MSD) one month after admission, but measurement of the vaccination response was not performed. Retrospective analysis of serum IgG-antibody-levels against 14 representative serotypes was performed on samples taken 5 days and 20 days after debut . A cut-off level of at least 0.35 μg/mL was estimated as a protective level against IPD. Antibody levels against the serotypes 3, 4, 5 and 7 F were below the cut-off level of at least 0.35 μg/mL and the patient continued to have apparently not protective levels of antibodies against serotype 7 F despite the current infection. The cut-off level of 0.35 μg/mL is recommended by a WHO Working Group as applicable for assessing the efficacy of pneumococcal conjugate vaccines and is widely considered to provide a protective effect against IPD . However, it should be noted that this recommendation relates to measurement of antibody-levels after vaccination with the conjugate vaccines and is based on trials that analyses protective levels in infants after vaccination .
In 2012, the patient was admitted with fever, neck stiffness, confusion, septic shock, DIC and peripheral tissue ischemia. Lumbar puncture revealed cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) with 287 · 106/L leukocytes of which 189 · 106/L were neutrophils. Cultures of CSF and blood were positive for S. pneumoniae and later serotyping showed type 17 F. On admission, blood laboratory analyses showed: leucocyte count 43 · 109/L, platelet count 35 · 109/L, hemoglobin 6.4 mmol/L, C-reactive protein 300 mg/L, creatinine 245 μmol/L, alanine aminotransferase 730 U/L, lactate dehydrogenase 2980 U/L, D-dimer 138 mg/L, PP 0.2, INR 2.4, antithrombin 0.42 kIU/l, and fibrinogen 3.1 μmol/L. Initial empirical treatment for bacterial meningitis was intravenous ceftriaxone, ampicillin and dexamethasone. On day 2, the S. pneumoniae strain was found to be fully sensitive to penicillin, and treatment was changed to high-dose penicillin G. Infusion of epoprostenol was administered due to severe peripheral ischemia. Measurement of plasma immunoglobulin revealed low IgM at 0.17 g/L, but normal IgG and IgA, and the patient was treated with single intravenous infusions of immunoglobulin (IVIG) at day 3 to day 5. The cochlear implant was suspected to be the infectious focus, but CT scan of the head with intravenous contrast showed no signs of infection. Transthoracic and trans-esophageal echocardiography revealed no signs of endocarditis or cardiovascular abnormalities and the chest X-ray showed no infiltrates. An ultrasound investigation of the abdomen was performed, during which no spleen could be detected, and a subsequent CT scan of the abdomen and thorax with intravenous contrast revealed a small irregularly defined and partially calcified mass measuring 3.8 × 2.1 cm interpreted as a small spleen . No enlarged lymph nodes were detected and all other organs were unremarkable. A Technetium-99 m (99mTc) labelled heat-denatured red blood cell scintigraphy showed a small rudimentary spleen (2 cm) at the same location as with the CT scan , and a blood smear revealed Howell-Jolly bodies (HJB), indicating an impaired function of the spleen . No genetic defects were found by analysis of chromosomes and comparative genomic hybridization array. The patient recovered to normal consciousness within day 1 and was discharged on day 16 after two weeks of treatment with high-dose penicillin G. Persistent mild cognitive impairment was the only apparent sequelae. On discharge, ‘stand-by’ antibiotics (amoxicillin/clavulanic acid) for use in case of fever were provided.
IgG-antibody-levels against the 14 pneumococcal serotypes were examined 16 days after admission , and the results suggested protective titers against all 14 serotypes, however, probably influenced by the recent immunoglobulin infusion. The patient was vaccinated with the 13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV13, Prevenar 13®, Pfizer) and with the Haemophilus influenzae type b (ACT-HIB®, Sanofi Pasteur MSD) vaccine two months after debut. IgG antibody-levels were evaluated one and a half month after vaccination, showing decreasing average antibody levels from 5.48 μg/mL to 4.42 μg/mL although levels beneath 0.35 μg/mL were only found against serotype 4 .
The patient has three children, at that time aged 2 (M), 4 (F) and 7 (F) years. All three children were healthy with no obvious signs of immunodeficiency. The children were examined with abdominal ultrasound in order to detect a possible hereditary asplenia or hyposplenia. The abdominal ultrasound was normal, except from the finding of a slightly small spleen in the 4-year old daughter that as 1-year old was hospitalized with pneumococcal meningitis (serotype 7 F). The children were not evaluated for Howell-Jolly bodies. All children had normal immunoglobulin levels including IgG-subtypes and normal response to vaccination against tetanus, diphtheria and H. influenzae type b. All the children were vaccinated with the PCV13 vaccine.
The patient was admitted with a third episode of IPD five and a half month after the second episode. The patient took stand-by antibiotics prior to admission, but due to vomiting probably without effect. The symptoms started less than 24 hours before admission on which the patient presented with septic shock but without signs of meningitis or neurological dysfunction. Lumbar puncture was performed and CSF contained 12 · 106/L leukocytes of which 2 · 106/L were neutrophils. Again, S. pneumoniae was cultured in blood, but also detected in CSF using PCR with specific primers for S. pneumoniae. Typing showed infection with serotype 17 F. The S. pneumoniae strain was fully sensitive to penicillin, and accordingly the patient was treated with high-dose penicillin G for two weeks. The patient rapidly recovered without new sequelae. Detailed reassessment of the immune function was performed one month after recovery. A mild lymphocytosis with increased concentrations of B cells, increased concentrations of CD8 T cells , normal fractions of T, B and NK cells, normal expression of CD45RA/CD45RO among T cells, but a reduced level of IgM positive memory B cells and reduced levels of IgM in blood was found. The proliferative response of CD4 T-cells to stimulation with CD3/CD28/CD2 or pokeweed mitogen was within the normal range. In serum day 3 after admission IgG-pneumococcal-antibody-levels against the 14 serotypes were measured. It applied to all subtypes that antibody-levels declined since the post-immunization measurement or regarding 17 F and 12 F since measurements from the first two episodes of IPD. However, only antibody-levels against 3, 4, 5 and 7 F were below the cut-off level of 0.35 μg/mL. Information from the patient’s history organized as a timeline is summarized in Figure .