A 17-years old female patient sustained a severe roll-over trauma and pelvic crush injury as a bicyclist rolled over by a truck. Upon arrival of the first responders, the patient was awake, alert, and following commands. The rescue of the patient required lifting of the truck. The patient suddenly became unstable when the pressure of the tire on the pelvis decreased. Subsequent to lifting the truck, the patient became hypotensive and required cardiopulmonary resuscitation, application of a pelvic binder, and endotracheal intubation at the accident scene. She was then admitted by ambulance to our trauma center under ongoing resuscitative measures. However, no intravenous access was established yet, only an intraosseous needle was placed into the left proximal tibia. After primary survey following the principles of ATLS®, a pelvic C-clamp was applied and a massive transfusion protocol was activated. In total, 10 units of concentrated blood and 10 units of fresh frozen plasma were given. In case of non-responding situations our further approach is immediate emergency surgery . REBOA is not an integral part of the algorithm in our institution yet. It was decided to perform a Venae sectio and to establish a REBOA with surgical approach to the left femoral artery. We use a conventional aortic stent graft balloon catheter (Reliant Stent Graft Balloon Catheter, Medtronic, Minneapolis, USA) as occlusion device. The initial insertion of the catheter was successful but could not be advanced beyond the inguinal region. Hence, the patient was transferred to the operating room (OR) but died despite maximum therapy before finalization of the surgical steps and after 100 min of ongoing cardiopulmonary resuscitation. In the OR, we carried out an emergency laparotomy with a standard midline approach and could find exsanguinating bleeding in the pelvis. Moreover, the reason for the missing sufficient catheter placement could be found . The catheter had been inserted correctly into the femoral artery but then exited the vessel through a vascular injury of the iliac artery and, hence, came to its end in the inner pelvis. Later, a forensic autopsy was performed, showing a long-distance ruptured and dehiscent external iliac artery with massive bleeding into the pelvis, and a bilateral vertical shear fracture of the pelvis with retro- and preperitoneal hematoma. The acetabulum was fractured on both sides and the left femur head was impacted into the lesser pelvis. The fracture pattern was concluded to be a sufficient reason for the long distance ruptured iliac vessel ipsilaterally . However, it was not possible to assess with certainty whether the vessel was already ruptured by the over-roll accident, or whether this injury has totally or partly been a complication related to the sheath insertion. Given the massive surrounding hemorrhage a vessel injury existing before circulation collapse and starting of the CPR was most plausible from a forensic point of view.