Month 0: A 44 year-old man, 12 years of education, started complaining acutely of slowness and sustained attention difficulties. He had neither clinical comorbidities nor relevant familial history.
Within three weeks after the first complaints, his status rapidly worsened and the patient needed help for every daily life activities. He was hospitalized, and presented significant cognitive impairment and walking difficulties related to marked parkinsonian syndrome. Depression with suicidal ideation was reported. No cerebellar features were observed. Neuropsychological assessment showed marked cognitive slowness and impairment of anterograde memory, mental calculation, verbal fluency, praxies and mental flexibility . Electroencephalogram (EEG) showed slow cerebral activity without any epileptic or pseudo periodic abnormalities. Tianeptine and ropinirole treatments were introduced.Month 2: His condition worsened, and he was hospitalized in the Department of Neurology, in University Hospital, Toulouse, France. In the absence of sustained stimulation, the patient remained motionless and speechless, due to severe apathy. Falls occurred frequently (about once a day), due to altered postural reflexes. After marked stimulation, it was noticed that the patient was depressed but not melancholic or suicidal. Marked symmetric and axial parkinsonian syndrome did not improve after L-dopa challenge. Slight reflex myoclonus was noticed in the upper limbs. Ocular saccades were slow but not limited. Apraxia and executive dysfunctions had worsened. Detection of 14–3–3 protein performed from cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) sample by western-blot was positive, whereas cytology and biochemistry were normal. Structural cerebral MRI revealed fronto-temporal atrophy on visual assessment of T1 sequence, with no abnormality on diffusion weighted imaging (DWI). Ropinirole, and tianeptine treatments were replaced by citalopram, oxazepam and zopliclone. Month 6: Daily risperidone treatment was introduced due to delusions of persecution and rare visual hallucinations. Month 7: Parkinsonism did not deteriorate with the addition of neuroleptic agents. Delusions and hallucinations remained present, although less prominent, and cognitive functions kept worsening. Structural MRI was unchanged, and 18F-FDG-PET visual assessment showed severe hypometabolism in parietal regions. Month 10: The patient only experienced few hallucinations without delusions. Risperidone treatment was stopped but parkinsonian symptoms had worsened: he had severe dysarthria and was not able to walk without assistance because of his instability.
The patient had to be institutionalized 12 months after symptoms onset.Month 20: Axial parkinsonian symptoms had worsened: he had difficulties swallowing, severe dysarthria, freezing in narrow place and total loss of postural reflexes. He was bed-ridden most of the day. CSF 14–3–3 protein remained positive, while total-tau (238 pg/mL) and Aβ42 (511 pg/ml) levels were within the normal ranges (norm < 450 pg/mL and > 500 pg/mL, respectively).
MRI showed moderate striatal, brainstem, and bilateral fronto-temporo-parietal atrophy on visual assessment.Month 43: Parkinsonian symptoms were very severe, and myoclonus more pronounced. Important perseverations, imitations, and grasping were reported. Speech was unintelligible. Detection of 14–3–3 protein in CSF was negative.
The patient died one year later, aged 49, after a total duration of 55 months. Cerebral histopathological examination was performed.
Grey matter density was assessed in our patient from his first T1 MRI sequence , and compared to the grey matter density of a group of 30 age-matched healthy controls (age = 44.9 ± 3.8) from the online database OASIS , using a whole brain z-score map. The 18F-FDG-PET scan from our patient was also compared to another group of 23 age-matched healthy controls (age = 44.3 ± 9.4) using z-scores map (for details on the control population and imaging processing procedures, see Additional file ). All z-scores below −2 or above 2 were considered as significant.
The patient showed global bilateral decrease of grey matter density affecting all cortical regions as well as subcortical structures and cerebellum . Negative z-scores below −5 were found in parietal, temporal, but also frontal and insular cortices. Left hippocampus and bilateral thalami were spared. No z-score > 2 was found.
Regarding 18F-FDG-PET, the patient showed widespread significant bilateral hypometabolism, encompassing all cerebral lobes, most predominant in the parietal lobe . Negative z-scores below −8 were found in parietal and medial temporal regions. No difference compared to controls was found in the thalamus, orbitofrontal regions, or the posterior cingulate. Hypermetabolism was found in the putamen.
Preliminary examination was carried out on hematoxylin-eosin stained paraffin sections, completed by immunohistochemistry with the following antibodies: anti-tau AT8 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Illkirch, France), anti-amyloid-beta A4 (Dako, Trappes, France), anti-alpha-synuclein (Leica Biosystems, Newcastle, UK), and anti-prion protein 12 F10 (Spibio, Montigny Le Bretonneux, France). Macroscopic brain examination showed a marked palor of the substantia nigra, while anti-alpha-synuclein immunohistochemistry revealed numerous Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites in the frontal and temporal cortices, hippocampus, substantia nigra, locus cœruleus, as well as in the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus, occipital and entorhinal cortices, and more rarely in the thalamus, caudate nucleus, putamen, and pallidum . Spongiosis was absent and anti-prion protein immunohistochemistry was negative. A few AT8-positive neurofibrillary tangles were noticed in the hippocampus and the entorhinal cortex, whereas anti-amyloid-beta 4 staining revealed neither neocortical deposits nor amyloid angiopathy.
SNCA gene (encoding the alpha-synuclein) mutations were investigated using bidirectional Sanger sequencing on an ABI 3730 automated sequencer (Applied Biosystem) and SeqScape v2.6 software (Applied Biosystems), and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA, MRC-Holland). PRNP gene (encoding the prion protein) mutations were investigated using a previously described protocol . Neither missense mutations nor multiplications were found in the SNCA gene (alpha-synuclein), and no mutation was identified in the PRNP gene (prion protein) either. The polymorphism at codon 129 was methionine-methionine.