A 50-year-old female was referred to our institution with 3 months of left hyperglobus and paresthesias in the distribution of V2, for CT and MRI imaging concerning for mass of the left maxillary sinus with tumor visible along orbital floor with bony defect to the inferolateral orbit (shown in , ). Examination was notable for visual acuity of 20/20 in both eyes, extraocular movements were full without deficits in both eyes, and there was no proptosis with exophthalmometry measurements of base 90 mm, 18 mm right eye and 18 mm left eye. Subsequent loose tooth removal and biopsy results were notable for maxillary ameloblastoma with acanthomatous and follicular patterns. She underwent left partial maxillectomy with radial forearm free flap, orbital floor reconstruction with an inert porous implant, and stenting of the nasolacrimal duct with a bicanalicular silicone stent. Histology confirmed maxillary ameloblastoma with acanthomatous and follicular patterns, with negative margins and no lymph node involvement. Postoperatively, the patient was orthotropic with full extraocular movements and normal tear lake. Three years later, the patient re-presented with recurrent left hyperglobus (shown in ). On exam, vision was 20/20 in both eyes, and she had a mild abduction defect of the left eye without complaint of diplopia and no proptosis by exophthalmometry. MRI orbits demonstrated a new signal abnormality along the left orbital floor suspicious for recurrence, and maxillofacial CT demonstrated a slight interval increase in soft tissue mass in the left orbital floor corresponding to the area of new signal abnormality on MRI (shown in ). Whole-body PET demonstrated local recurrence in the left orbital floor as well as FDG-avid cervical nodes and pulmonary nodules suspicious for metastatic disease (shown in ). Biopsy of a left lower lobe lung nodule demonstrated maxillary ameloblastoma with acanthomatous and follicular patterns, confirming the diagnosis of metastasis. There were no actionable mutations found on genetic testing. She has undergone three rounds of gemcitabine/cisplatin chemotherapy, followed by 6 weeks of radiotherapy with weekly cisplatin to maximize local control. Posttreatment PET scans demonstrated resolution of lung nodules and a small remaining signal in the infraorbital mass, which is favored to be postsurgical changes and resolving inflammation instead of incomplete tumor response with remaining active disease. She is currently undergoing interval imaging every 3 months with PET/CT and MRI orbits of the infraorbital mass to assess for stability over time. Currently, there are no plans for further chemoradiation due to intolerable adverse effects of chemotherapy including severe ototoxicity in the setting of her favorable response. Additionally, there are no plans for further surgical procedures.