A 45-year-old male, a known smoker for 20 years, self-presented in Chandka Medical College teaching hospital's OPD with the chief complaint of sudden onset acute dysphagia for 9 days, both for solids and liquids. According to the patient's attendant, he would regurgitate anything he eats. It was not associated with hiccups, hoarseness of voice, weight loss, chest pain, halitosis, and dyspnea. He had no past surgical history, while the past medical history revealed that he was admitted to the psychiatry ward due to an unknown psychiatric illness 20 years back. Furthermore, his family history revealed no significant information. Additionally, he was not taking any sort of medication and no proven allergies were reported.
On general physical examination, he seemed healthy, and Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) was 15/15. The vital signs examination revealed a regular heartbeat of 88 beats per minute, a non-invasive blood pressure of 180/110 mmHg, a temperature of 98.6F, and a respiratory rate of 16 breaths per minute. While pulse oximeter showed 99% saturation on room air, and random blood sugar was 114mg/dl. Moreover, a detailed neurological examination revealed that there was an absent gag reflex and deviation of the uvula towards the right side, whereas all other cranial nerves were intact. The symptoms of vertigo, gait disturbance, ipsilateral Horner syndrome, ipsilateral dysmetria, dysrhythmia, spontaneous nystagmus, ipsilateral facial pain, and contralateral loss of pain and temperature sensation were not reported.
Initial lab investigations showed an elevated white blood cell (WBC) count of 12.6 × 109/L, elevated neutrophil percentage of 80%, increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 28mm/hr, decreased lymphocyte percentage of 16%, and an increased platelet count of 510 × 109/L. Initially, we suspected the local causes of dysphagia. These included not only the structural benign lesions, such as esophageal strictures, Schatzki ring, and esophageal web, but also malignant conditions, like esophageal adenocarcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and extrinsic compression. Furthermore, motility disorders, including diffuse esophageal spasm, and achalasia were also presumed. Therefore, an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was performed on the third day of hospital admission, which showed right vocal cord paralysis with no masses. Thereby, excluding the local causes. Also, the Chest X-ray revealed no significant findings . This led us to investigate the neurogenic cause. Therefore, an MRI brain was done which confirmed the presence of an acute infarct in the left lateral medulla, and the lateral medullary syndrome diagnosis was established . Electrocardiography and echocardiography findings were within normal limits.
The management and treatment strategies during his hospital stay comprise nasogastric feeding tube, antibiotic ceftriaxone twice a day, injection (proton pump inhibitor) 40 mg intravenously once a day, injection dextrose 10% intravenously once a day, injection ringer lactate intravenously once a day (fluid resuscitation), injection normal saline 0.9% intravenously once a day. Additionally, antiplatelet therapy (clopidogrel) and lipid-lowering drug (rosuvastatin) were administered to mitigate the risk of another stroke. He recovered gradually over the next week; improvement for solids was significant. Therefore, he was discharged, but had not shown up for a follow-up.