A 76-year-old male with coronary artery disease, hypertension, dyslipidemia, and gout presented to hospital with frank hematemesis, melena, and a decreased level of consciousness. He denied any alcohol intake and was a previous smoker. Physical exam was non-contributory other than his decreased level of consciousness. He was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU), requiring intubation, transfusion, and vasopressor support.
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) revealed diffuse gastritis, as well as nodularity and ulceration of the cardia. Hemostasis of what appeared to be a bleeding fundic varix was not performed due to potential diagnostic uncertainty. Subsequent computerized tomography (CT) angiography was completed for clarification, which showed contrast extravasation from the left gastric artery. Given that hemostasis was not achieved on index endoscopy, radiologic evidence of bleeding, and the patient’s critical condition, the treating interventional radiologist performed embolization of the left gastric artery. Imaging did not suggest portal hypertension but showed irregularity along the gastric cardia and fundus. Initial biopsies were reported as chronic gastritis, negative for H.pylori or malignancy.
Complications during index admission included development of bilateral subsegmental pulmonary emboli and bilateral pleural effusion. Treatment included therapeutic anticoagulation and bilateral thoracentesis, with pleural fluid analysis consistent with a transudative effusion, negative for malignancy. The patient developed symptoms of significant congestive heart failure following standard resuscitation. Chest radiograph showed vascular congestion. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed a strain pattern with apical sparing, moderate left ventricular systolic dysfunction, and an ejection fraction of 35–40%. Repeat endoscopy was arranged to clarify findings and revealed persistent nodularity and ulceration of the cardia . The patient’s suggestive cardiac manifestations and unexplained appearance on EGD led to case discussion between treating gastroenterologist, consulting cardiologist, and pathologist, prompting staining of gastric biopsies for amyloid. In the interim, the patient was transferred to a peripheral hospital for continued care and rehabilitation prior to results being available.
Unfortunately, the patient developed signs and symptoms of recurrent UGIB, warranting transfer back to our tertiary hospital for re-admission to the ICU. EGD on this occasion revealed a duodenal ulcer with a visible vessel which was treated with 1:10,000 epinephrine injection and cautery. Hemostasis was achieved. It was at this point that prior gastric biopsy results became available. Congo Red staining revealed apple green birefringent material under polarized light, consistent with amyloid deposition.
Subsequent investigations during this re-admission revealed elevated serum kappa light-chains and an elevated kappa/lambda ratio. Serum protein electrophoresis showed an abnormal 3 g/L band of IgG kappa. A diagnosis of multiple myeloma was made. The patient was followed by hematology and actively treated with cyclophosphamide, bortezomib, and dexamethasone (CyBorD) treatment protocol for four months. Despite no recurrence of GI bleeding, the patient experienced progressive weakness, functional and cognitive decline, and was ultimately unable to tolerate further chemotherapy. Subsequently, based on the patient’s goals of care, curative therapy was suspended, comfort care was prioritized, and the patient passed away peacefully.