A 49-year-old male without any substantial food or drug allergy history or other medical history presented to the emergency room (ER) with an acute onset of erythema and pruritus that appeared during surfing. He started surfing at 5 a.m. and noticed urticaria at approximately 6:30 a.m. He subsequently left the ocean and headed to work. After arriving at work, he developed respiratory distress at approximately 7 a.m. and called for emergency medical assistance. He arrived at our ER at approximately 8 a.m., and his vital signs were as follows: heart rate (HR), 95 bpm; blood pressure (BP), 124/79 mmHg; oxygen saturation (SpO2), 97% (ambient air); respiratory rate, 20 cycles/min; body temperature, 36.4℃; and Glasgow Coma Scale, E4V5M6. Multiple erythematous plaques with a tendency to merge were observed on extremities and trunk. These skin findings are consistent with those of urticaria. He complained of pruritic erythema and respiratory distress; however, no airway obstruction sounds were heard during auscultation. Approximately 10 min after arrival at the ER, he complained of nausea, and his HR dropped to ∼40 bpm without any decrease in BP or oxygen saturation. We suspected anaphylaxis and administered 0.5 mg of adrenaline intramuscularly. Immediately after the intramuscular adrenaline injection, his HR recovered to approximately 60–70 bpm. A complete blood cell count, basic metabolic panel, and electrocardiogram were performed, and all results were within normal limits. The patient was diagnosed with allergy-associated anaphylaxis and was admitted to the emergency care unit for observation. Two hours after admission (4 h after onset), erythema persisted, and the patient also had nasal obstruction; therefore, an additional 0.5 mg of adrenaline was administered intramuscularly. Following gradual symptom improvement, the patient was discharged the following day.
An additional medical history interview was conducted, revealing that the patient had consumed natto (fermented soybeans) at dinner the previous night at approximately 6 p.m. Given that several previous case reports have indicated that surfing could be a risk factor for natto allergy and late-onset anaphylaxis, we planned another hospitalization to perform natto and PGA prick tests. On day 8 after discharge from the first admission, the patient was readmitted for a prick test to reveal the association between natto and allergic reactions. Histamine, a control solution, natto bean (fermented soybean), natto mucilage, a mixture of natto bean and mucilage, and PGA (1 mg/1 mL) were applied to the inner forearm of the patient , and a prick test was performed.
Fifteen minutes after initiating the prick test, histamine, natto mucilage, and PGA induced erythema and wheals . The results of the skin prick test are shown in Table . The patient was discharged the following day without an anaphylactic reaction. He was diagnosed with PGA allergy, advised to avoid natto, and prescribed an EpiPen.