A 16-year-old boy presented with a 35 mm ×x 25 mm mass over the left supra clavicular region of three months duration. He gave no history of trauma prior tobefore the onset of the masses. The mass was pea sized initially and had gradually progressed to the current size. The mass was painful, and the pain score was 5 on the VAS (visual analogue scale). The mass was not pulsatile, and thrill or bruit was absent There was no radiation of pain. The patient complained of tingling sensation over tips of all fingers and some loss of grip strength of left hand. Discriminative sensibility remained unaltered. On examination, a single, firm mass was palpable in the left supraclavicular fossa. The mass was tender and not adherent to the overlying skin. He had MRC grade 3 power of left wrist extension There was no tinel in relation to the mass and his brachial, radial, and ulnar pulses were well felt.
The patient was advised an magnetic resonance imagingMRI scan and ultrasound (US) Doppler scan to assess the tumor in greater detail, but declined due to financial constraints and only an ultrasound US Doppler scan was done. A high-resolution ultra-sonography of the neck showed a well-defined, lobulated, and vascular lesion between anterior and middle scalene muscles. It was surrounding the C5 and C6 nerve roots about 10-15 mm after their exit from the neural foramen and displacing the C7 root.. Based on the radiological investigations Gray-scale ultrasound (US) combined with color Doppler flow imaging and spectral analysis most probable diagnosis for patient is vascular malformation with risk of future hemorrhage at site and loss of sensory and motor function of nearby nerves due to compression.
The patient underwent exploration of the brachial plexus via through a standard L-shaped incision in the posterior triangle.. The phrenic nerve was identified and confirmed with a nerve stimulator. Subsequently, the C5, C6, and C7 nerve roots were identified, and the distal trunks and divisions identified, mobilized, and protected. The vascular tumor encasing the C5, C6, and C7 roots and the upper and middle trunk. All feeder vessels were ligated. Careful dissection of tumor from the involved nerves using the nerve stimulator as a guide was done.. For preservation of involved nerves and their function near total excision of tumor was performed and specimen sent for histology. In the post-operative period, the patient was asked for a strict follow- up to check for recurrence. The histology was reported as arteriovenous AVMmalformation and showed fibrocollagenous tissue and fibrofatty tissue with admixture of blood vessels consisting of capillaries, arteries, and venules. Vessels showed endothelial hyperplasia with collagenized thrombus dividing into coarse clumps along with presence of nerve bundles, areas of congestion, and hemorrhage.. At the 9-month follow-up, the patient exhibited asymptomatic status with no neurological deficits detected upon examination.