A 10-year-old boy was admitted to our hospital following a collision of his head to the underside of a metal barrier whilst riding at 30 mph on a motorized scooter. He sustained a hyperextension injury of the cervical spine. The patient also had considerable intracranial injuries. He was reported to be orientated and obeying commands at the scene of the accident but by his admission to the emergency department, he was GCS 9 (E2V4M3). He was intubated and ventilated. His injuries were assessed as per the ATLS protocol and his cervical spine was immobilized. IV mannitol was administered for suspected raised intracranial pressure. The initial trauma CT revealed acute hydrocephalus with subdural, subarachnoid, and fourth ventricular hemorrhage. In addition, there was a minimally displaced right occipital condyle fracture and a hematoma at the craniocervical junction displacing the medulla posteriorly. There was no evidence of AOD seen in the index trauma CT. The cervical spine was kept immobilized with hard collar.
The patient underwent insertion of a left frontal intracranial pressure monitoring probe and a right frontal ventricular access device. Following his transfer to pediatric ICU, he had external CSF diversion through the ventricular access device and his intracranial pressure remained well controlled. On the 5th day, the sedation was weaned and the patient was extubated.
He had CT and MR cerebral angiograms 7 days after presentation to investigate suspected vascular injury and this revealed ligamentous injury at the craniocervical junction . The apical ligament was suspected to be disrupted in the presence of a new increase in the basion-dens interval or BDI (was 11 mm, increased from 6 mm in the index trauma CT). Effusions were noted between the occipital condyles and lateral masses of C1 and the atlanto-occipital joint interval was increased bilaterally (C0-C1 interval or CCI was 5 mm). There was also prevertebral edema, edema related to the ligamentum nuchae, and elevation of the tectorial membrane by hematoma. AOD was diagnosed and we discussed the clinical case specifics at our departmental multidisciplinary meeting. Then, the management options were discussed with patient’s parents. On day 10 postinjury, we proceeded to immobilize the craniocervical junction with a noninvasive pinless halo after reducing the atlanto-occipital dislocation . He had no sensory-motor deficits or sphincter control disturbance at this stage.
Under general anesthesia, the dislocation was reduced with gravity (30° head end elevation) and gentle compression with the pinless halo, under fluoroscopic guidance. We used the “Lerman” noninvasive halo for this patient.
The pinless halo was kept on at all times for the next 3 months. The craniocervical junction alignment was monitored with weekly cervical spine X-rays and the noninvasive halo brace was reviewed weekly by orthotics. We also performed CT craniocervical junction to monitor the alignment and healing on day 15th day 30th, and day 70th . These radiological investigations were performed using our pediatric protocol to minimize radiation dose.
During this 3-month period, the patient received regular physiotherapy, orthotics, and pain medicine input. He had an occipital laceration from the original trauma and this progressed to a pressure sore. This pressure sore was debrided and treated with IV antibiotics at 3 weeks postadmission. He developed worsening hydrocephalus on withdrawal of CSF drainage , and consequently, he underwent insertion of a ventriculoperitoneal shunt 2 months after his injury.
A follow-up MRI C-spine at 3 months from presentation confirmed resolution of the soft-tissue injury . The noninvasive halo was replaced with a hard collar for 2 further weeks. His dynamic cervical spine X-rays revealed satisfactory alignment in both flexion and extension views. He needed extensive inpatient rehabilitation (physiotherapy, occupational therapy, speech therapy, and psychology support) before discharge. The patient was discharged home 4 months after his initial admission with no focal neurological deficits. After his discharge, we continued with clinical monitoring and the radiological monitoring was stopped. While making considerable progress with his neurorehabilitation, he had ongoing difficulty with confusion, aggression, impulsivity, and pressured speech. He had ongoing input from the psychology service to support him and his family with his rehabilitation.
At the 2-year follow-up, he was noted to have made excellent recovery without any symptoms and signs of any spinal instability.