A 4-year-old boy was referred to the Ophthalmic Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery Department of Farabi Eye Hospital, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, because of severe blepharospasm and secondary functional blindness. He had facial dysmorphism at birth and showed developmental delay. The patient was unable to walk until he was 2.5 years old and had delayed speech development as well as a hypertrichotic and mask-like face [Figures and ]. His blepharospasm began in infancy and increased progressively.
Considering these clinical aspects, SJS was the suspected diagnosis, and we referred him to the neurology department for confirmation of SJS. A neurologist diagnosed him with SJS Type IB. Due to severe blepharospasm, cycloplegic refraction was impossible and the vertical palpebral fissure in the right and left eyes were 2 and 1 mm, respectively, and both eyes had positive Bell's phenomenon. The cornea and lens were clear, and the fundoscopic exam was unremarkable.
Due to intolerance to general anesthetic drugs, botulinum toxin injection for the treatment of severe blepharospasm was tried by another ophthalmologist who injected 20 units of botulinum toxin (Dysport, Speywood Pharmaceuticals Ltd., Maidenhead, UK) into the orbicularis muscles on each side. After 1 month, no relief of blepharospasm was observed in both eyes. Because of the severity of the blepharospasm and resulting significant visual disability, we decided to try bilateral orbicularis oculi myectomy. Under general anesthesia, an upper lid crease incision was made and in the lower lid, a subciliary incision was made. Pretarsal and preseptal orbicularis muscle exposure and myectomy were performed; during the procedure, vermiform contractions of the orbicularis muscle were apparent and after the procedure, these movements were decreased but had not disappeared completely. These movements were a useful guide for the main part of the myectomy. We also did a procerus muscle myectomy, but the corrugator was left intact and the levator muscle was tucked.
On the first postoperation day, his blepharospasm had decreased and he had mild lagophthalmos (OD, 2 mm; OS, 3 mm). Frequent lubrication was prescribed and 1 month later on the second follow-up visit, the patient was able to open his eyes without using his fingers and his blepharospasm had significantly diminished [Figures and ]. His cycloplegic refraction showed hyperopic astigmatism in both eyes (OD, +3.75 − 3.75 × 180; OS, +3.75 − 3.50 × 170). The vertical palpebral fissure in the right and left eyes was 7 and 8 mm, respectively.
He had mild lagophthalmos in both eyes (OD: 1 mm and OS: 2-3 mm) but he did not have corneal exposure keratopathy. He had hyperopic astigmatism and full cycloplegic refraction was prescribed for him. In monthly follow-ups up to month 6, he had mild blepharospasm that minimally interfered in his daily life and also mild lagophthalmos without corneal exposure similar to the findings 1 month after surgery.