A 71-year-old man whose past medical history was unremarkable experienced sudden trismus and left facial stiffness was admitted to the hospital. On the third day of the patient's hospitalization, left-dominant muscle rigidity, pain, and intermittent myoclonus appeared in both lower limbs, and he was transferred to our hospital. A neurological examination on admission revealed decreased pain and temperature sensation in the mandibular nerve area and muscle rigidity of the left face, in addition to trismus, hoarseness, muscle rigidity of the left lower limb, myoclonus, and hyperekplexia with left lower limb predominance. He had no sensory impairment and had enhanced deep tendon reflexes in his extremities, but no pathological reflexes. One day prior to transfer, dysautonomia appeared, including dysuria, constipation, and excessive sweating of the trunk and extremities. Laboratory tests, including hematological and biochemical analyses, revealed that levels of autoantibodies (anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-SS-A antibody, anti-SS-B antibody), hepatitis B virus antigen, anti-hepatitis C virus antibody, anti- human T-cell leukemia virus type I/II antibodies and tumor marker (carcinoembryonic antigen, colorectal carcinoma antigen 19–9), were normal. However, his erythrocyte sedimentation rate was elevated at 58 mm/h, as was his IgG level at 1981 mg/dl.
A cerebrospinal fluid analysis showed a normal cell count of 3/μL (100% mononuclear cells) and a normal protein level (30 mg/dL). No oligoclonal band was detected. We tested for the presence of the following serum anti-neuronal antibodies: amphiphysin, CV2/collapsin response mediator protein 5, Ma2/Ta, Ri, Yo, Hu, Recoverin, SRY-Box transcription factor 1, titin, Zic, glutamic acid decarboxylase65, Tr, and GlyR. Of these, only anti-GlyR antibody yielded positive reactions in serum and cerebrospinal fluid. Surface electromyogram of the left tibialis anterior and left gastrocnemius muscles revealed continuous, simultaneous co-contraction of both muscles on tapping the Achilles tendon with a reflex hammer. This is suggestive of rigidity in both the agonist and antagonist muscles of the Achilles tendon reflex . Both the R1 and R2 components of the blink reflex showed higher amplitude on the left compared with the right after stimulation of either side, indicating hyper-excitability on the left side . Head magnetic resonance imaging showed no structural abnormalities. A whole body computed tomography showed a gastric submucosal tumor, which was diagnosed as a hyperplastic polyp by gastrointestinal endoscopy. We administered three courses of steroid pulse therapy with methylprednisolone (1,000 mg/day; duration 3 days) on the 1st, 8th, and 15th day after admission, as well as high-dose immunoglobulin (400 mg/kg/day; duration 5 days) on the 4th day. Following the third administration of steroid pulse therapy, we administered prednisolone (40 mg/day) and tapered. As symptomatic treatment, the patient was administered diazepam (20 mg/day, oral) and dantrium (75 mg/day, oral). After those steroid therapies, the muscle rigidity of the whole body and the myoclonus of both lower limbs gradually improved. The patient was then transferred for rehabilitation on the 60th day after admission. By the 90th day, his score on the modified Rankin Scale had improved from 5 to 3 .