A previously healthy, fully immunized, 16-month-old girl was hospitalized for high grade fever (maximum axillary temperature of 39.8 °C), vomiting and refusal to feed of 4 days’ duration and irritability of recent onset. She had been receiving oral antibiotic treatment with amoxicillin-clavulanic acid (50 mg/kg/day every 8 h) for 24 h, without any clinical improvement. On admission (day 1) the patient was irritable but in good general condition. Physical findings were as follows: body weight 11 kg; heart rate 101 beats/min; body temperature 38 °C; oxygen saturation in room air 98%; blood pressure 90/50 mmHg. The cardiorespiratory and abdominal examinations were normal and no skin rash was observed. There was no sign of meningitis. Laboratory tests showed elevated white blood cell (WBC) counts of 14,090/mmc (75.7% neutrophils), while the C-reactive protein (CRP) concentration was 5.76 mg/dl (normal value < 0.5 mg/dl). Electrolytes, renal function and coagulation tests were within the normal range. Given her vomiting, the ongoing oral antibiotic treatment was stopped and intravenous ceftriaxone (100 mg/kg/day in a single dose) was started in the suspicion of a bacterial infection.
On day 2 the patient rapidly worsened. She was lethargic and preferred the lying position. Neck stiffness and Brudzinski’s sign were also noted. A computed tomography scan of the brain was normal, with no signs of increased intracranial pressure. A lumbar puncture was performed, revealing clear cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) containing 840 cells/mmc with neutrophilic predominance and glucose and protein concentrations of 38 and 44 mg/dl respectively. Empiric parenteral antibiotic treatment with ceftriaxone (100 mg/kg/day) was continued and intravenous antiviral therapy with acyclovir (30 mg/kg/day in 3 doses) was started. Gram-staining resulted negative.
On day 3, a real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) for viruses and bacteria was positive for L. monocytogenes. Ceftriaxone was therefore discontinued and intravenous ampicillin (200 mg/kg/day in 4 doses) and gentamicin (5 mg/kg/day) were started.
On day 4, the CSF culture identified L. monocytogenes, while the blood culture was negative. A brain magnetic resonance imaging scan showed mild meningeal enhancement without any sign of parenchymal involvement.
The patient improved rapidly after the initiation of ampicillin and gentamicin. She was completely afebrile from day 7 and was progressively alert and communicative by day 10. Ampicillin and gentamicin were continued for a total of 21 days, while acyclovir was continued until the RT-PCR for Herpes simplex viruses proved negative. The patient was discharged after 22 days in good general condition and without any neurologic sequelae. Immunological screening, including an evaluation of cellular immunity (total and subpopulations of T cells), humoral immunity (immunoglobulin levels and subclass IgG) and complement (C3, C4, AP50, CH50), was normal. An HIV test was negative and there was no iron overload. A hearing test (auditory evoked potentials) was normal. At a follow-up visit after 1 month, her clinical presentation was normal and there were no signs of the disease. No source of infection was clarified in her recent history.