A 27-year-old male with no prior past medical history presented to the Emergency Department complaining of 3 days of increased urinary frequency, dysuria, nocturia, and intermittent hematuria. The patient indicated episodes of tinnitus that predated urinary symptoms. He reported no constitutional symptoms and denied noticeable hearing loss, visual changes, flank pain, polydipsia, penile discharge, or genital sores prior to presentation. Notably, multiple family members had a history of kidney disease. His mother has chronic kidney disease (CKD) with no pertinent histologic findings on renal biopsy. The patients’ elder brother died from renal failure of unknown cause at age 26 years.
Our patient presented with a blood pressure of 160/85 mmHg. His vitals were otherwise within normal limits. Physical exam showed no abdominal or costovertebral angle tenderness; his cardiopulmonary, ophthalmologic, and lower extremity exams showed no abnormalities. His labs were notable for elevated creatinine of 176.8 μmol/L (2.0 mg/dL), with a BUN of 5.7 mmol/L (16 mg/dL). Urine Dipstick revealed the presence of 2+ blood, 3+ protein; urine microscopy showed 6–10 Red Blood Cells (RBC) per high-powered field. His fractional excretion of sodium (FENa) was 0.6%, and serum osmolality was 295 mmol/kg (295 mOsm/kg).
The patient was admitted for observation due to his elevated blood pressure and pre-renal acute kidney injury with proteinuria and microscopic hematuria. He received intravenous fluids, however, creatinine remained between 165.35 to 171.53 μmol/L (1.87 to 1.94 mg/dL). The calculated GFR was 48 mL/min/1.73 m2 using the CKD-EPI Creatinine equation. Twenty-four-hour urinary collection revealed non-nephrotic range proteinuria of 1.4 g. Further workup during this hospitalization, including serum creatinine kinase, protein electrophoresis, C3, C4, antinuclear antibodies (ANA), and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), were all within normal limits. Renal ultrasound showed bilaterally increased echogenicity consistent with CKD, and no calculi or signs of hydronephrosis.
Subsequently, the patient underwent kidney biopsy for workup of his CKD and hematuria. Light microscopy revealed moderate interstitial fibrosis with tubular atrophy and multifocal scarring involving 40–45% of the sampled cortical areas. The glomeruli showed an increase in mesangial cellularity and a mild increase in mesangial matrix with no clear endocapillary proliferation, segmental sclerosis, or crescents. There were also abundant lipid laden foam cells present within the interstitium .
Immunofluorescent staining was positive for IgA (3+) and C3 (2+) showing a granular pattern of deposition in the mesangium . Immunofluorescent stains for IgG, IgM, C1q, albumin, and fibrinogen were negative. Electron microscopy showed mesangial expansion with electron-dense deposits consistent with IgAN [, ]. However, the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) exhibited irregular thickening and splitting of the lamina densa with a basket-weave appearance, and heterogeneous electron-lucent areas which are a typical characteristic appearance of the GBM in Alport Syndrome [, ], and are not seen in IgAN.
Based on the combined findings seen on immunofluorescence and electron microscopy, the patient was diagnosed with both Alport Syndrome and IgAN. He did not have any genetic testing or audiologic testing performed during the workup and management of these disorders. During admission, amlodipine was started to treat hypertension but was later switched to lisinopril to manage hypertension and proteinuria. As his 24-h urine protein collection showed non-nephritic range proteinuria of 1.4 g, further steroids or immunosuppression was not required in this case.