A 68-year-old man presented gross hematuria with pain and was hospitalized in June 2011. Four years ago, he had undergone laparoscopic sigmoidectomy for sigmoid colon carcinoma (stage B of Dukes’ classification). Histological examination of the primary tumor showed well to moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma. Postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy was not carried out and he went to hospital regularly for postoperative observation.
At the time of hospitalization, nodular induration was not noted. Tumor marker such as the carcinoembryonic antigen was slightly elevated (5.1 ng/mL, normal range, 0–5.0). Urethroscopy identified a papillo-nodular tumor 7 mm in diameter in the bulbar urethra . Biopsy of the tumor revealed adenocarcinoma, which suggested primary urethral tumor or metastasis of the sigmoid colon cancer. Barium enema examination and colonofiberscopy showed no reccurence of cancer. CT-scan imaging revealed the small mass of bulbous portion of urethra and solitary lung metastasis. A transurethral resection of the tumor was performed under the spinal anesthesia. Histological examination showed moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma, which was diagnosed as a metastasis of a sigmoid colon carcinoma pathologically by morphological examination with hematoxylin and eosin staining . Moreover, immunohistochemistry of the urethral tumor showed the positive for cytokertin (CK) 20 and CDX2, the intestinal epithelia-specific nuclear transcription factor, whereas negative for CK7 . These features were consistent with metastatic adenocarcinoma of the sigmoid colon cancer. Additional therapy whether surgical resection (partial penectomy and partial excision of the lung) or systemic chemotherapy was proposed to the patient, and systemic chemotherapy was selected. The patient received 6 cycle of chemotherapy with fluorouracil with leucovorin plus oxaliplatin (FOLFOX4). CT-scan and MRI imaging after 6-cycle FOLFOX4 revealed the total disappearance of both urethral and lung metastasis . After the induction chemotherapy, the patient received daily tegafur, gimeracil and oteracil (TS-1; 80 mg/day) and was under careful surveillance with CT scan and periodical measurement of serum carcinoembryonic antigen level. Although he is a high-risk patient of recurrent, he is healthy with no evidence of recurrence at about 34 months of follow-up to date.