We report the case of a 71-year-old man, with a past medical history of diabetes mellitus, without history of head trauma nor other medical, surgical, family, psychosocial, and pharmacologic histories or vascular anomaly. He was admitted to the emergency room with sudden onset retrosternal pain with radiation to back appeared for 14 hours. At presentation, he was conscious (Glasgow coma scale 15 points), oriented and cooperative, her pulse was 110 beats per min, and her blood pressure was 120/70 mmHg. Cardiovascular examination was unremarkable.
Admission ECG showed acute extensive anterior myocardial infarction . Initial laboratory data revealed an elevated white blood cells count of 15,870/μL (4000–1000/μL), C-reactive protein at 2.23 mg/L, hemoglobin at 16.5 g/dl, and a normal platelet count at 205.000/μL (150,000 à 400,000/μL), partial thromboplastin time of 25 seconds (24–41), prothrombin time of 10 seconds (9–12), and an international normalized ratio (INR) of 1, renal and liver function tests were within normal. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed akinesia in the anterior wall and the apex with severe left ventricular systolic dysfunction with ejection fraction of 25% . Diagnosis of acute ST-elevation elevation myocardial infarction was made, and the patient received pharmacological measures (aspirin 300mg, clopidogrel 300mg and low-molecular-weight heparins). Coronary angiography revealed atherosclerotic coronary disease with occlusion of the left anterior descending coronary artery, severe stenosis of the main in the marginal artery, and severe stenosis in the right coronary artery ( A, B). The patient underwent primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) with placement of five stents in total, without peri-procedural complications. Dual antiplatelet therapy (a aspirin at a dose of 75mg once daily and clopidogrel at a dose of 75 mg once daily) continued after percutaneous coronary intervention. After the procedure, his vital signs and neurological status remained stable. Twenty-four hours later of hospitalization, the patient became confused with GCS of E4V4M6. At neurological examination he was disoriented, confused, there were no focal neurological deficits. Brain computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a right temporoparietal acute subdural hematoma measuring 17 mm with mild mass effect on the ipsilateral ventricle ( A), there was no evidence of fracture or external contusion, rest of the brain parenchyma was normal. Laboratory investigations including hemogram, INR, activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) were normal. The patient was diagnosed with acute subdural hematoma.
After a discussion among cardiologists, neurosurgeon, and anesthesiologists, the decision was to stop all of the antiplatelet drugs. The patient was directly taken to the operating room, where a surgical evacuation of the hematoma was performed successfully by an experienced professor of neurosurgery with the aid of an junior trainee with 3 years of surgical specialty training (using general anesthesia). The intervention adherence and tolerability were well during the whole course of his treatment. After evacuation of the subdural hematoma, the patient was admitted to intensive care unit. Three day later, control brain computed tomography scan revealing complete resolution of subdural hematoma ( B). After 7 days, in the absence of any clinical, biological or radiological degradation, cardiology and neurosurgeon decided to start an aspirin mono-therapy antiplatelet agent-based, since the risk of stent thrombosis was high and he could be discharged from our hospital in good health without any neurological deficit 9 days after admission. One month after the discharge, the patient had no other bleeding episodes under aspirin treatment or thrombotic events. Control brain computed tomography scan showed that the subdural hematoma had completely resolved.