A 10-month-old Sri Lankan Sinhalese baby boy presented with generalized hyperpigmentation and overgrowth since birth . He was born at term following an uncomplicated antenatal period and had a normal perinatal period without episodes of hypoglycemia or circulatory collapse. He was the only child of a pair of consanguineous parents. His growth parameters at birth were within normal limits; weight 3.3 kg (at median for age), length 50 cm (at median for age), and head circumference 35 cm (between median and +1 SD). Since birth his growth chart demonstrated accelerated growth in weight, length, and head circumference . His parents observed hyperpigmentation at birth which worsened gradually over time. His developmental history revealed marginal gross motor developmental delay; at 10 months of age, he was able to sit without support, however, he was unable to come to seated position on his own, stand with support, or crawl. His vision, fine motor, speech, and social development milestones were age appropriate. There were no previous hospital admissions, recurrent infections, seizures, episodes of shock, or documented hypoglycemia.
On examination, his length was 84 cm (above +3 SD), weight was 12.6 kg (at +3 SD), and head circumference was 48 cm (at +2 SD). He had generalized hyperpigmentation involving oral mucosa, palms, and soles. The rest of the physical examination, including cardiovascular system, blood pressure, abdomen, and genitalia was clinically normal.
Basic hematological and biochemical investigations that included full blood count, C-reactive protein, renal and liver function tests, and serum electrolytes were normal. His random blood glucose was 76 mg/dl. Subsequent investigations revealed very low serum cortisol (< 22 nmol/l; normal 55–304 nmol/l) and very high ACTH (> 1734 pg/ml; normal 10–50 pg/ml) suggesting glucocorticoid deficiency. His serum aldosterone level was normal. An ACTH stimulation test demonstrated markedly reduced basal cortisol levels (< 4.39 nmol/L) with no cortisol response following administration of synthetic ACTH (cortisol remained < 4.39 nmol/L, 30 and 60 minutes after ACTH stimulation) suggesting severe glucocorticoid deficiency. MRI of his brain showed normal pituitary gland with marginal dilatation of the trigone and the body of the lateral ventricles; however, there was no hydrocephalus or structural brain abnormalities.
FGD was diagnosed based on isolated glucocorticoid deficiency, hyperpigmentation, and tall stature. Molecular testing was not done due to unavailability. The baby was started on orally administered hydrocortisone 10 mg/m2 per day and his parents were counseled on the requirement for lifelong steroids. A review of this baby 5 months after initiating treatment revealed less pigmentation and slowing of growth in weight, length, and head circumference confirming the diagnosis.