A 35-year-old female patient from Bangladesh without cardiovascular risk factors was admitted for chest pain, palpitations, and long-term exertional dyspnoea. Past medical history was unremarkable except for a heart murmur heard since childhood. Right ventricular enlargement was indicated by a palpable right ventricular lift; a systolic ejection murmur in the second and third intercostal spaces and a fixed splitting of the second heart sound throughout the respiratory cycle were audible. Electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with complete right bundle branch block and right atrium (RA) enlargement. Chest X-ray revealed signs of increased pulmonary flow, right chambers dilatation as well as the pulmonary artery and its branches. After the initial diagnostic work-up and medical treatment optimization, transthoracic echocardiography showed a large secundum ASD (ranging from 27 to 28 mm in diameter) with severe left-to-right shunt with pulmonary to systemic flow ratio (Qp:Qs) ratio of 2.6, mildly increased mean pulmonary artery pressure (40/15 mmHg, mean 25 mmHg) and significant right heart enlargement due to volume overload . Transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) colour Doppler imaging of the septal defect was done with 0–120° sweeping in addition to the standard imaging angles at 0°, 45°, and 90° and three-dimensional (3D) TOE in order to better define the secundum ASD (21.7 mm × 26 mm) showing a deficient floppy postero-inferior rim (<5 mm), adequate remaining rims (>10 mm), total septal length of 50 mm, normal drainage of pulmonary veins into the left atrium, and a thrombi-free left atrial appendage.
Considering that the particular ASD anatomy was likely to increase the technical difficulties of the percutaneous closure procedure, the patient was offered a surgical option, but she firmly rejected. In view of her clinical conditions (New York Heart Association class III), it was decided to address her congenital heart disease using a catheter-based technique. An informed consent was signed by the patient. The procedure was performed in the catheterization laboratory under deep sedation and continuous real-time 2D/3D TOE colour flow Doppler and fluoroscopic guidance. Balloon-stretched defect size was 25 mm in diameter and this measurement was used as a guide for device size selection. A third-generation Figulla Flex II ASD occluder (FSO, Occlutech GmbH, Jena, Germany) with a flexible titanium-oxide coated nitinol-mesh and double-disk design was selected. In consideration of the significant floppiness of the postero-inferior rim, an oversized by 8 mm occluder (33-mm FSO) and a modified implantation technique (pulmonary vein-assisted technique) was adopted. To delay the deployment of the left distal disc of the device, we started its placement in the right upper pulmonary vein (RUPV). When the left distal disc was uncovered in the RUPV, we held it stationary in an elongated form, allowing unsheathing of the occluder device so that the proximal disc would deploy in the RA, engaging the right aspect of the interatrial septum (IAS). A short wiggle of the delivery system released the left atrial disc from the RUPV position, engaging the IAS from the left aspect with a perfect configuration for ASD closure ( and , Video 1). Being postero-inferior rim deficiency a well-known risk factor for device migration, a vigorous pull and push manoeuvre was therefore done to check the final device stability. Transoesophageal echocardiography investigation showed a perfect device alignment, with no mitral valve regurgitation or aortic impingement of the disc tips to the aortic root and the device was finally released successfully. Transthoracic echocardiography at discharge confirmed the stable position of the device without residual left-to-right shunt (Video 2). The patient was treated with aspirin 100 mg and clopidogrel 75 mg once daily for 6 months. At 6-month follow-up the patient remained symptom free. Transthoracic echocardiography confirmed the stable position of the device with no left-to-right shunt and marked reduction in right cardiac chambers volume overload .