A 58-year-old Japanese man was referred to our hospital because of high serum CEA levels, found incidentally during a routine medical checkup. He was asymptomatic over the past year. His past medical history was significant for acute hepatitis A 20 years prior, which had been successfully treated. He is non-diabetic. He smoked 15 cigarettes per day until 10 years ago and does not consume alcohol.
A physical examination was unremarkable apart from a soft, non-tender, hemispherical mass approximately 5 cm in diameter on his left thigh. The mass had been present for approximately 40 years and had been gradually enlarging. Laboratory tests showed elevated serum CEA (15.9 ng/mL, normal < 5 ng/mL), but serum levels of carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) and calcitonin were not elevated. Liver function tests, thyroid function tests, and blood cell counts were normal. His serum glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) and glucose levels were normal.
An upper gastrointestinal endoscopic examination, a chest and abdominal computed tomographic (CT) scan, and thyroid ultrasound demonstrated no abnormal findings. A colonic endoscopy showed two polyps, each 10 mm in size at the ascending colon and transverse colon, which were resected endoscopically. Histological examinations showed a focal high-grade tubular adenoma and a low-grade tubular adenoma, respectively. However, his serum CEA level increased to 30.4 ng/mL following the endoscopic resection. A fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-positron emission tomography (PET) scan showed no responsible masses. However, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the region in his left thigh under the skin showed a well-circumscribed multilocular cystic mass with clear margins and a smooth surface. The mass comprised T1 low-signal and T2 high-signal intensity compartments with mostly fluid-fluid level. On the basis of these radiological findings, we suspected the mass to be a cystic tumor.
Our patient underwent local resection of the mass. Postoperatively, his serum CEA levels returned to normal. Ten years following surgery, his CEA levels remained normal without recurrence.
On gross examination, the mass was brownish, soft, and elastic, with a well-defined, dome-shaped, smooth surface. The mass measured 5.5 cm in diameter. Microscopic examination revealed multilocular cysts lined by an almost double layer of cuboidal epithelium . Cells of the inner layer had abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and apocrine snouts on the surface . Squamous epithelium partially lined a portion of the cyst. CEA immunostaining was positive in the cytoplasm of luminal cells . These results confirmed a diagnosis of apocrine hidrocystoma.