A 14-year-old boy, from a low socio economic background presented with a four-month history of pain, and a discharging sinus in the right upper scapular region that had been present for two months. The pain had been gradual, dull and aching. The patient had been treated for these complaints without relief and had developed a scapular swelling which broke down and discharged serosanguinous fluid. He had an antecedent history of trauma and an associated history of fever, weight loss, loss of appetite, night sweats, malaise and fatigue. He had no history of previous pulmonary or extrapulmonary tuberculosis and there was no family history of tuberculosis.
On local examination, we observed a sinus measuring less than 1 cm in size overlying the right upper scapular region. It was slightly tender, adherent to the bone and surrounding soft tissue, with associated granulation tissue and serosanguinous discharge and the surrounding skin was indurated and unhealthy. There was no significant regional lymphadenopathy, he had a full range of motion of the shoulder joint and there was no tenderness over the spine and paraspinal muscles in the thoracic region. Laboratory examination showed only a minimally increased white blood cell count (10950/mm3) with a predominance of lymphocytes (48%), elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 65 mm (Westergren method) after one hour and a positive C-reactive protein (CRP) test. A Mantoux tuberculin skin test (purified protein derivative, five tuberculin units) was positive with 15 mm of induration observed 48 hours after administration. Anteroposterior radiographs of the right shoulder showed two rounded oval lytic areas with low density seen in the body of the scapula involving the glenoid margin and there was a minimal increase in density surrounding the lesion. A plain chest radiograph was normal and a closed core biopsy of the sinus tract revealed epithelioid cell granulomas with central necrosis, typical Langhans giant cells and a positive stain for acid fast bacilli by Ziehl-Neelsen stain . On microbiologic examination positive culture on Lowenstein-Jenson medium for AFB was present. Anti-tuberculosis chemotherapy began immediately. The patient received four months of anti-tubercular chemotherapy, consisting of four drugs: isoniazid (INH), pyrazinamide, ethambutol and rifampicin. He was given INH, rifampicin and ethambutol for four months and INH and rifampicin for 10 months. Radiographs at 10 months showed complete resolution of the bony lesion. The sinus healed without any complications after four months of anti-tubercular treatment. The patient's appetite improved, he gained weight and his growth indices significantly improved at the end of the anti-tubercular treatment. At two-year follow-up he was asymptomatic.