A 45-year-old woman from Achefer, near Bahir Dar, northwestern Ethiopia, presented to the emergency department of our hospital on February 18, 2020, with a complaint of generalized fatigue for 18 years and worsening abdominal pain, vomiting, and diarrhea of 1 month duration. The history dated back 18 years to the birth of her seventh child in home delivery, following which she experienced excessive vaginal bleeding due to delayed expulsion of the placenta. She had lost consciousness following the vaginal bleeding and had been treated locally by traditional healers and survived. After the delivery, she had failed to lactate and remained amenorrheic and could not conceive, but had no any gynecological evaluation. She also complained of progressive generalized fatigue and decreased work capacity, preventing her from doing her routine activities. She had experienced repeated abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea as well for the past 6 years and had repeatedly visited a nearby clinic and was managed for dyspepsia and gastroenteritis but with no lasting improvement. In addition, she had associated weight loss, anorexia, dizziness, cold intolerance, myalgia, arthralgia, and progressive loss of axillary and pubic hair. These symptoms had worsened over the past month, and she had developed generalized weakness and extreme fatigue even at rest and experienced excessive sleepiness. She also had mild to moderate intermittent headache, but otherwise no blurring of vision or diplopia She had no history of head trauma, surgery, or irradiation, and no history of polyuria or polydipsia on physical examination, and she was conscious but sleepy. Her blood pressure was 90/60 mmHg, pulse rate 86 beats per minute, respiratory rate 24 breaths per minute, and temperature of 36.9 °C. She had mild epigastric and periumbilical tenderness. She had dry, coarse skin and sparse axillary and pubic hair. Examination of other systems was unremarkable. Laboratory findings showed the following: white blood cell count 2590 cells/μL, hematocrit 26.9%, mean corpuscular volume (MCV) 81.3 fl, creatinine 1.2 mg/dL, normal liver function tests, sodium 126 mEq/L, potassium 2.52 mEq/L (repeat 4.2 mEq/L), random blood sugar 113 mg/dL, total cholesterol 152 mg/dL, triglyceride 86 mg/dL, and low-density lipoprotein (LDL) 161 mg/dL. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an empty sella turcica, as shown in Fig. . As the clinical manifestations related to the patient’s previous obstetric history suggested Sheehan’s syndrome, relevant available hormone studies were performed . After all these tests were performed, she was diagnosed with Sheehan’s syndrome presenting with imminent adrenal crisis.
The patient was rehydrated with one bag of normal saline (NS), and started on prednisolone 2.5 mg in the evening/5 mg in the morning and subsequently levothyroxine 75 μg/day to be titrated based on clinical response. She was strictly instructed on the nature of her illness and was told to take these medications for the rest of her life. She was referred to an endocrine clinic and discharged. On subsequent clinical assessment, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea had subsided; her appetite had returned and she had started to gain weight.