A 55-year-old man presented with chronic testicular pain. An ultrasonography of the abdomen detected left renal tumor. The patient had a history of hypertension and left renal urolithiasis. CT showed a heterogeneous left upper pole renal tumor (5.3 cm in diameter). A laparoscopic radical nephrectomy was performed in May 2008. Left adrenalectomy and lymph node dissection were not performed because the CT scan showed no adrenal gland invasion or lymphadenopathy. The histological evaluation of the tissue revealed a clear cell renal cell carcinoma and negative surgical margins (pathological stage, T2N0M0). Three years after nephrectomy, following a cerebrovascular accident, the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group score changed from 0 to 2. No tumor recurrence (CT scan was performed every 6 months) was found until 51 months later. A CT scan detected two nodules in the renal fossa (1.8 and 0.9 cm, respectively). Retroperitoneal exploration confirmed recurrent clear cell carcinoma with microscopically positive surgical margins. Lymph node dissection was not performed because of severe adhesion around the aorta. Lymph nodes that could be detected by palpation were not identified during the surgery. Four months after excision, an abdominal CT showed a nodule (1.6 cm) over the right adrenal gland. At that time, tumor target therapy was not covered by the national health insurance in Taiwan. Therefore, because of economic reasons, the patient could not afford the treatment until 2013. A repeat CT evaluation confirmed the disease progression of the adrenal metastasis (2.1 cm). The patient was treated with sunitinib (37.5 mg/d) for 4 weeks, but the treatment was discontinued because of gastrointestinal side effects and fatigue. After 3 months, a CT scan showed the progression of the adrenal metastasis (3.8 cm) and no lower lung lesion. A chest X-ray revealed the absence of lung metastasis. The patient refused to undergo hormonal survey, biopsy, and adrenalectomy. Eleven months after sunitinib treatment, a CT scan showed an obvious growth of the adrenal metastasis (5.7 cm) , whereas 16 months after the treatment, a regression of the metastasis (3.4 cm) was observed . Twenty-two months after sunitinib treatment, a CT scan demonstrated a gradual reduction in the size of the adrenal metastasis (1.8 cm) . The patient was still alive and followed up at the outpatient department 44 months after the discontinuation of sunitinib treatment.