A 57-year-old man was admitted to the Department of Orthopedic Surgery of Qinghai University Affiliated Hospital on January 9, 2023 for generalized bone pain with fatigue for 2 years, aggravated for 1 week. He reported that systemic bone pain occurred accompanying fatigue with no obvious cause about 2 years ago, which was aggravated gradually and was not significantly relieved after taking oral analgesic drugs himself. In the past 1 week, the pain both in upper limbs and hips has been significantly worse than before. The patient had no history of trauma, weight loss, or a family history of any tumors.
Physical examinations showed that the patient was wheeled into the ward with localized pressure pain and impaired mobility in both upper limbs; equal length of both lower limbs with significant restriction of movement; positive axial percussion pain in the right lower limb; clear pressure pain with impaired movement in the right hip joint without swelling and bruising under the skin; the muscles of the extremities were atrophied to varying degrees, the muscle strength of forearms of two upper limbs, and two lower limbs was about grade 3; the biceps reflex, triceps reflex, and knee tendon reflex were weakened; no sensory abnormalities in the extremities; the pathological reflex was not elicited; meningeal irritation was negative; there was a 2 cm × 2 cm palpable mass, which is hard and has poor mobility in the left neck; and no significantly enlarged lymph nodes palpated.
Laboratory tests showed his serum calcium level was at 3.55 mmol/L (normal range: 2.25–2.75 mmol/L), alkaline phosphatase (ALP) was at 608 U/L (normal range: 40 ~ 125 U/L), creatinine (Cr) was at 110 mmol/L (normal range: 57–97 mmol/L), urea nitrogen (UN) was at 8.7 mmol/L (normal range:2.5 ~ 7.1 mmol/L), parathyroid hormone (PTH) was at 2565.0 pg/mL (normal range: 15–65 pg/mL), and there were no obvious abnormalities in his thyroid function tests and other tests.
Neck ultrasound (US) showed a 3.5 cm × 3.2 cm hypoechoic mass with tiny calcified dots in the left thyroid gland and a 1.5 cm × 1.5 cm hypoechoic nodule posterior to the left inferior thyroid lobe with undefined margins, considering a possibility of parathyroid origin; neck computed tomography (CT) and contrast-enhanced CT scan showed an enlarged left thyroid lobe within a 3.4 cm × 2.8 cm irregular slightly low-density shadow and circular calcification foci protruding downwards into the left paratracheal space; and a 1.3 cm slightly rounded low-density shadow posterior to the left inferior thyroid lobe grows backward into the anterior esophageal space, considering a parathyroid mass .
X-ray of pelvis showed a right femoral neck fracture and muscle atrophy around the left hip . Three-dimensional CT scan of the shoulder joint and pelvis showed the bilateral humeral shaft fractures, the right femoral neck fracture, and the decreased bone mineral density both of the shoulder joints and pelvic constituent bones . Abdomen CT scan showed multiple intrapelvic stones in both kidneys.
Given the patient had significantly high calcium levels (3.55 mmol/L) and PTH (2565.0 pg/mL), elevated UN (8.7 mmol/L) and Cr (110 mmol/L), a neck mass and severe skeletal damage, the departments of endocrinology, orthopedics, nephrology, neurology, imaging, and oncology surgery were invited for multidisciplinary team (MDT). MDT suggested that in view of severe osteoporosis and thin bone cortex, the patient could not undergo a fracture internal fixation surgery; the bilateral humeral shaft fractures and the right femoral neck fracture without significant displacement could be treated conservatively such as plaster bandages, analgesic, infusion of intravenous zoledronic acid (4 mg) and taking calcitriol capsules orally; in addition, the possibility of parathyroid tumor was not excluded, so the surgery for thyroid was recommended.
Complete resection of the left parathyroid mass was performed on January 18, 2023 after completing related examinations such as bone scan to exclude primary and secondary bone malignancies. Intraoperatively, left parathyroid mass invading the left thyroid lobe and surrounding tissues was seen, and freezing results were considered as a tumor of parathyroid origin, then radical resection of parathyroid tumor + removal of involved tissue structures + left thyroid and isthmus lobectomy + lymph node dissection in the VI region of the left neck were performed. Postoperative pathology was diagnosed as PC with no lymph node metastasis (0/4). Hematoxylin & eosin (HE) staining showed that PC invaded the thyroid lobe, fat, and striated muscle tissues . Immunohistochemically, tumor cells were negative for thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), negative for thyroglobulin, negative for Chromogranin A (CgA), partially positive for synaptophysin, positive for PTH, positive for CD31 and CD34 (vascular expression), positive for D2-40 (lymphatic+), Ki67 was at 10% . Calcium and fluid supplementation and oral levothyroxine tablets were given postoperatively.
At 24 h postoperatively, the patient's blood pressure was at 100/70 mmHg; heart rate was 120 beats per minute; the PTH dropped to 9.57 pg/mL rapidly; calcium level reduced to 2.88 mmol/L and phosphorus level lowered to 0.55 mmol/L; then a large amount of calcium gluconate and vitamin D were given timely. Unexpectedly, his serum calcium and phosphorus levels continued to decline in 1 week postoperatively while PTH gradually increased and returned to the normal range ; in the meantime, he was in poor mental condition, and felt tired and numb in perioral sites and fingertips; and we considered this condition to be HBS. Calcium supplementation was given continually for 1 month, and the patient got better with numbness of perioral sites and fingertips disappearing; and the rechecked serum calcium level was at 2.15 mmol/L and PTH was at 76.80 pg/mL on February 21, 2023. Nine months following parathyroidectomy (October 25, 2023), the patient's systemic bone pain and fatigue were distinctly relieved compared with before with the calcium and PTH decreased to the normal range on rechecking . His fractures have reached the clinical healing standard, and the external fixation has been released. He can move freely and do some low intensity physical work.