A 53-year-old man presented with a four-week history of worsening abdominal pain, anorexia and weight loss. This was on a background of a known large left sided cystic mass, which was discovered on imaging while he resided overseas nine months ago. He described his symptoms up until this presentation as mild but now complained of post-prandial abdominal pain, occasional vomiting and diarrhea. His impression was that the mass had been increasing in size for the past month. His past medical history included hepatitis C and diverticulosis. He gave no history of previous trauma and denied having symptoms or a history of pancreatitis in the past. There was no history of gallstones and no evidence of gallstones on prior or current imaging. His alcohol intake approximated 20 standard drinks a week. He also gave a 30 pack-year smoking history in addition to smoking marijuana daily.
On clinical examination, he had a grossly visible mass in his left upper quadrant, which could be appreciated at the end of the bed. This mass was firm and mildly tender. His blood examination revealed haemoglobin 124 g/L (Reference range: 130–180 g/L), l white cell count of 6.4 x109/L (Reference range: 4–11 x109/L) and CRP of 11.3 mg/L (Reference range: <5 mg/L). Renal function and liver enzymes were normal. His CEA was elevated at 9.5 μg/L (Reference range: <2.5 μg/L). CA 19.9 and AFP tumour marker were normal.
Computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and magnetic resonance cholangio-pancreatogram (MRCP) revealed a large retroperitoneal cystic lesion in the left flank with no septations or enhancement, measuring 13.7 cm craniocaudally, 12.2 cm transversely and 10.9 cm anteroposteriorly. It appeared to be isolated and separate from the adjacent organs including the pancreas, stomach, spleen and left kidney . There were two small simple cysts in the spleen. There was mild to moderate dilation of the left renal pelvis, calyces and proximal left ureter. This was likely due to partial mechanical distortion from the mass, which displaced the left ureter laterally. The right kidney was normal.
After discussion with the patient, the decision was made to resect the cyst due to his increasing symptoms of abdominal pain and for diagnostic certainty. At operation, the cyst was isolated from the pancreas and dissected from the left ureter, left kidney, renal vessels and aorta and did not communicate with any of these structures . The spleen was preserved. His recovery post-operatively was uneventful. His post-prandial pain and vomiting resolved and he was able to eat better post-operatively.
Histopathological assessment of the resected cyst revealed no epithelial lining to this cyst, and it was in fact a large fibrous pseudocyst.
As the cyst was delivered intact for pathological assessment, the fluid was not tested for amylase, or lipase.