61-year-old man with diagnosis diarrhea, who was referred to our institution on day 19 after the last treatment for lung cancer, because of symptoms were aggravated, with the frequency of diarrhea up to 20-30 times/d.
The patient was diagnosed with lung cancer (right lung adenocarcinoma with multiple subcutaneous muscle metastases, cT3N2M1c, stage IV, KRAS mutation (G12C), PDL-1 50%) on September 14, 2020. From September 17, 2020 to December 2, 2020, the patient was given treatment of chemotherapy (pemetrexed 900 mg and Carboplatin 600 mg) plus TISL 200 mg every 21 to 28 d for 4 cycles. The date of the fourth treatment is December 2, 2020. Before the fourth treatment, the lung computed tomography (CT) showed that the lesion was smaller than that at diagnosis, and the subcutaneous nodule in buttock disappeared. The treatment result was assessed as partial response. On day 10 after the last treatment (hereafter day 10), the patient began to have fever (Tmax 39.0 ℃), abdominal pain, and diarrhea (watery stools, more than 10 times/d). After defecation, the abdominal pain could be relieved. The patient was suspected of gastroenteritis and received drugs for anti-infection, antidiarrheal, rehydration and other symptomatic treatment at local hospital.
The patient’s past medical history was unremarkable except for hypertension.
No positive personal or family history.
The patient had stable vital signs. Abdominal examination: flat and soft, positive tenderness, negative rebound tenderness, hyperactive bowel sounds, 6 times/min.
Routine laboratory tests of a same-day showed white blood cells: 8.5 × 109/L, C-reactive protein: 80.0 mg/L, procalcitonin: 0.13 ng/mL, interleukin-6: 2.04 pg/mL, interleukin-10 (IL-10): 2.57 pg/mL. A clinical diagnosis of PD-1 inhibitors induced enteritis was made, and the patient was asked to fast and oral methylprednisolone 16 mg bid was started. Subsequent tests for cytomegalovirus DNA, bacteria cultured in blood and feces, WBC and Clostridium difficile in stool were negative, fecal calprotectin was significantly increased to 218.4 ug/g.
Abdominal contrast-enhanced CT revealed edema and thickening of the small intestine, ascending colon, transverse colon, sigmoid colon, and rectum in the middle and lower abdomen, and multiple small diverticula in the blind ascending colon . Colonoscopy showed extensive congestion and edema of the terminal ileum and colorectal mucosa . Intestinal mucosal pathological examination revealed chronic inflammations of the mucosa with moderated dysplasia of glandular epithelium, and chronic inflammation of the mucosa with moderate-severe dysplasia of the glandular epithelium .