The patient was a 67-year-old Caucasian gentleman, who was assigned an American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) grade of 3 (based on his obesity, hypertension, and asthma). He was classified as severely obese in accordance with his body mass index (BMI) of 40.4 kg/m2 (height 173 cm, weight 121 kg).
Aside from these comorbidities, there were otherwise no risk factors for tendon rupture or clinical evidence of inflammatory conditions that could have increased his overall risk. He initially had an acute, nontraumatic rupture of his right quadriceps tendon without any precipitating cause, and the tendon was repaired in the private sector in November 2019 after a delayed presentation of more than 6 weeks.
At the time of the initial surgery, there were several observations of note:The patellofemoral joint (PFJ) showed evidence of grade IV osteoarthritis. The rupture was seen to have extended into the vastus lateralis and lateral retinaculum. The torn ends of the tendon were degenerate and of poor quality.
Subsequently, the injured ends of the quadriceps tendon were freshened, debrided, and repaired with a modified Kessler’s technique (using an Arthrex fibertape) and reinforced with a continuous vicryl end-to-end suture. The medial parapatellar retinaculum was also repaired.
The intraoperative result was satisfactory, and flexion of the knee joint up to 90° was possible. He was discharged with a hinged knee brace, which was locked in extension for the first 4 weeks postoperatively, with a plan to gradually increase his range of motion (ROM) thereafter. Following an intense course of physiotherapy and rehabilitation, a good outcome was achieved at first. According to the patient, he returned to full unaided mobilization and was able to flex and extend his knee without any difficulty (clinical records of this were not available to us as the patient was initially treated elsewhere).
In December 2020 (over 6 months following discharge), he was referred to our care by his general practitioner after presenting to them with signs and symptoms that were consistent with a chronic rupture of his quadriceps tendon. No traumatic cause for this presentation was identified. Symptomatically, he now reported moderate discomfort in his right knee as well, but was pain free on the contralateral side and in his hip joints. Despite this, his mobility was impaired to the extent that he relied on a walking stick to assist with his activities of daily living (ADLs). He was clinically well otherwise, with no history of fever or infection either locally (around the surgical site) or systemically.
Clinical examination demonstrated an unsteady gait. On closer inspection, there was a mature, well-healed surgical scar over his right knee, with no evidence of infection or inflammation. There was a large palpable gap in the suprapatellar area but minimal swelling and effusion in the knee joint itself. Wasting of the ipsilateral quadriceps muscle was also noted. He was found to have weakness of active knee extension and was unable to straight leg raise (SLR). However, he had a reasonable flexion range from 0° to 100°, which was mostly asymptomatic. Further examination was unremarkable.
Considering these findings, the patient proceeded to have a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of his right knee, which confirmed chronic rupture of his quadriceps tendon. It showed that the ruptured tendon had retracted proximally, leaving a big residual space in the suprapatellar region with patella baja. Significant scarring and fluid signal were also seen within the rupture gap, which were radiographic signs consistent with the diagnosis . Of significance, the imaging also revealed severe progressive tricompartmental OA of his right knee, associated with the chronic quadriceps tendon rupture at the distal musculotendinous junction above the patella . A complete set of preoperative blood tests including inflammatory markers (C-reactive protein and erythrocyte sedimentation rate) were performed, all of which were within normal limits.
Following the results of these investigations, the patient was reviewed again in May 2021. An open discussion was held to ascertain their preferences regarding the surgical management of their dual problem of chronic quadriceps tendon rupture and severe knee OA. At this point, it was noted that his knee pain had deteriorated further as well.
In the meantime, a multidisciplinary team (MDT) discussion had been conducted in our unit to determine how best to proceed. We considered whether it was best to reconstruct the tendon first and perform the TKR at a later stage, or to perform both procedures in one sitting. Due to the severity of the OA and chronicity of the tendon rupture with subsequent retraction and scarring, the expert consensus was in favor of performing the two procedures in one sitting. This would thereby improve the patient’s chances of a good outcome. Furthermore, if only an isolated tendon repair was to be performed, a TKR would not be feasible for a prolonged period thereafter to allow for the full extensor mechanism to recover sufficiently. Considering the patient’s worsening symptoms, the dual procedure was deemed to be in their best interests.
The patient agreed with the proposed plan and was counseled accordingly. The expectations of surgery (including the possibility of permanent stiffness with limited knee flexion), intraoperative plan, and rehabilitation goals were discussed. The patient was also made aware that if the operation were to be unsuccessful, the only remaining options would be conservative management or a knee arthrodesis. Willing to accept the risks presented to him, the patient gave his informed consent to proceed with a right quadriceps tendon reconstruction and primary TKR in one sitting.