A 37-year-old male presented to the outpatient department with a history of fever, pain, and restriction of movements over the left shoulder, and generalized body pain for 20 days duration. Fever was high grade, intermittent with chills and rigor. The left shoulder pain was insidious in onset, gradually progressive, non-radiating, aggravated on left shoulder movements, without any relieving factors. On examination, the left shoulder was warm and tender with severe restriction of movements especially abduction and external rotation. Complete blood count showed leukocytosis with raised erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein levels. The inflammatory markers such as IL-1, IL-6, and procalcitonin were also raised. The blood culture was sent.
A plain radiograph of the left shoulder revealed distal left clavicular osteolysis . The patient was started empirically on intravenous cefuroxime twice daily but he continued to have a persistent high-grade fever. MRI of left shoulder demonstrated ill-defined diffuse edema with peripheral enhancing collection involving all the rotator cuff muscles and marrow edema with a patchy enhancement of distal end of clavicle suggestive of osteomyelitis .
Under general anesthesia, the pus was drained out and sent for culture. The debrided tissue turned out to be osteomyelitis. Blood and pus culture demonstrated O. anthropi showing susceptibility to cotrimoxazole, imipenem, meropenem, piperacillin-tazobactam, and resistance to aminoglycosides, cephalosporins, and fluoroquinolones. Gene Xpert was negative. The patient was started intravenous meropenem 1 gm thrice daily for 2 weeks followed by tablet co-trimoxazole (160 mg/800 mg) twice daily for 4 weeks. The patient was also supplemented with oral risedronate 35 mg once weekly for 12 weeks, oral calcium 500 mg once daily for 12 weeks, and Vit D3 60k IU once weekly for 12 weeks. The patient was motivated for an active range of shoulder movements and shoulder physiotherapy. The patient had an uneventful recovery and followed up for 12 months.