A previously healthy 2-month old male infant with parents from Romania and Lebanon presented to our hospital for investigation of fractures of the ulna and distal radius bilaterally. In addition, the infant had noisy breathing and signs of runny nose and reduced feeding. A few days earlier the patient’s mother had noticed that the patient couldn’t move his upper extremities and started to cry whenever she tried to passively move them. The day before admission the child was examined by an Orthopedic surgeon who asked for an x ray of the upper limbs which revealed a supracondylar fracture of the left elbow as well as lytic areas on the distal radius and ulna of both hands with probable fracture and displacement. Mild osteopenia in some areas was also noted. In addition, the end plates of peripheral radius and ulna bilaterally appeared with distorted edge . The child was referred to the Genetics clinic for further investigation for possible osteogenesis imperfecta (OI). The child was admitted to the Paediatric ward for all diagnostic work up.
On admission the child was well in himself, with mild hypotonia, hypertelorism and low base of the nose. He had mild tachypnoea with rhinitis and palpable liver and spleen.
He was born after a full-term uneventful pregnancy delivered by caesarian section, birth weight 3.020 kg. No problems in the perinatal period. He was gaining weight well. No family history of metabolic or genetic disease.
Laboratory workup revealed anemia, hyponatremia, low albumin, raised globulin, increased alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and D-dimers (DD).
Hemoglobin (Hb) of 7 g/dL, white blood cell (WBC) count of 14 × 103 cells/μL (35% segmented neutrophils, 52% Lymphocytes, 9% Monocytes, 2% eosinophils), platelet count of 421 × 103 /μl, sodium of 130 mmol/L, albumin 3 g/dl (3.7–4.4), globulin 4.7 g/dl (1.5–3.5), AST of 79 U/L, ALT of 142 U/L, ferritin 240 ng/ml (10–160), alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 431U/L (82–383) and C-reactive protein (CRP) of 47 mg/L(neg < 0.5). Serum Calcium, Parathyroid hormone (PTH), Vitamin D (25-OH Vitamin D), Coagulation and Thyroid hormones were within normal levels. Furthermore, we performed brain ultrasound, brain MRI, chest x ray, fundoscopy and hearing test which revealed no abnormal findings. A skeletal survey showed no other fractures except the above. Basic Metabolic Panel (BMP), molecular and simple karyotype were normal. Urine Biochemistry was also normal.
Abdominal ultrasound showed mild splenomegaly 6.8 cm (normal dimensions 4.8 ± 0.5 cm) and mild hepatomegaly 7 cm (6 cm ± 0.5 cm). Because of the mild hepatosplenomegaly we decided to screen for congenital infections: The screening for Toxoplasma, Rubella, parvovirus B19, Cytomegalovirus, Herpes Simplex virus and HIV were all negative. The syphilis screening resulted in positive non-treponemal and treponemal antibodies as shown in Table . Hence, the diagnosis for Congenital Syphilis was made.
We performed a lumbar puncture (LP) which revealed increased white blood cell count, normal glucose level and slightly raised protein level. Western Blot for syphilis was positive. Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF) culture was negative.
The patient was transfused with packed red blood cells and was treated for congenital syphilis which involved the Central nervous system (CNS) with intravenous aqueous penicillin G (50.000 UI/kg Q4hr for 10 days). A single dose of intramuscular penicillin G benzathine (50 000 UI/kg), was also given. The patient was discharged and a scheduled follow up readmission after 6 months was arranged.
On his 6-month follow up admission at the age of 9 months, the child was very well in himself with normal psychomotor development for his age.
The LP was repeated at this admission and the results are shown in Table . All findings were within normal levels except a very low positive Western blot test.
A new syphilis serology revealed Non-treponemal test (RPR) significantly lower (four times) than the previous admission results . The patient was discharged with instructions for subsequent follow-up by the pediatric infectious disease specialist in 3 months’ time.
When the child was diagnosed with congenital syphilis, the parents were tested for syphilis and were found positive. Therefore, they were referred to their General Practitioner for treatment.