A healthy 18-year-old woman lost consciousness while trying to catch the bus on her birthday. She was found with pulseless ventricular fibrillation (VF) upon arrival of emergency services. After four defibrillations with 200 Joules, adrenaline 3 mg, and amiodarone 300 mg intravenously (IV), the patient developed return of spontaneous circulation 15 min later. She was intubated and brought to the emergency department.
Cardiovascular exam findings revealed a patient with cool, mottled skin, euvolemic with normal heart sounds, and no murmurs on auscultation. Lungs were fully expanding and clear to auscultation. The patient was vasopressor-dependent and intubated on assist-control ventilation. Physical cooling procedures were started immediately.
A 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) was obtained and demonstrated sinus rhythm at approximately 110 b.p.m. with right bundle branch block morphology, negative T-waves, and ST-segment elevation in V3 and V4. Laboratory tests revealed leucocytosis (17 G/L, normal 3.0–9.6 G/L), elevated CRP (37 mg/L, normal <5 mg/L), and peak high sensitivity troponin T of 274 ng/L (normal <14 ng/L). Urine drug screening was positive for lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD). Confirmatory chromatography revealed that this was a false positive result due to cross-reaction with fentanyl, which had been administered several hours prior upon arrival to the emergency department. Initial transthoracic echocardiography was consistent with diffuse hypokinesis and reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 29%. The patient underwent computed tomography to exclude intracranial bleeding, cervical spine injury and pulmonary embolism. Coronary angiography was negative for obstructive coronary artery disease in the left coronary system. Since the right coronary system could not be engaged via catheter, a coronary computed tomography was ordered to evaluate for coronary anomalies. Indeed, an anomalous right coronary artery (RCA) was identified arising from the left sinus of Valsalva with acute angle takeoff and interarterial course between aorta and pulmonary artery .
Due to recent rhinovirus infection and a history suggestive for myocarditis, an endomyocardial biopsy was obtained on day 2 and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) on day 10, revealing borderline myocarditis, anterolateral hypokinesia with circular pericardial effusion and normalized LVEF. Only mild signs of inflammation without recurrence of arrhythmias during telemetry monitoring suggested that myocarditis was less likely the sole aetiology of the patient’s cardiac arrest. However, the inflammation could have lowered the threshold for arrhythmias and may have been the trigger for cardiac arrest on the grounds of an already predisposing condition—coronary anomaly.
Given suspicion for potential Brugada type 3 ECG pattern (<2 mm saddleback ST-segment elevation), the patient underwent Brugada Syndrome provocation testing with flecainide (2 mg/kg continuous IV infusion over 10 minutes, Figure ). No obvious signs for Brugada type 1 ECG pattern were revealed with this test.
Acute respiratory distress syndrome after aspiration was treated in the intensive care unit. Ultimately, after all reversible causes for the patient’s cardiac arrest had been ruled out, the patient underwent cardiothoracic surgery 20 days post admission with unroofing of the RCA and a wearable cardioverter-defibrillator (WCD) was installed to bridge until implantation of a subcutaneous implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (S-ICD) for secondary prevention.
Neurological course was favourable with no remaining neurological deficit and cardiothoracic surgery was successful. An S-ICD was implanted 5 months after the cardiac arrest.
Due to persistent, haemodynamically not relevant pericardial effusion, oral therapy with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (naproxen 500 mg twice a day), and colchicine (0.5 mg once a day) was initiated.