A 58-year-old Filipino female who has been residing in the USA for the past 3 years, and known to have long-standing history of hypertension and asthma, presented to the emergency room with 1 month of progressive dyspnoea on exertion. Review of systems was otherwise unremarkable. Cardiac exam showed normal heart sounds and respiratory exam revealed decreased air entry at the left lower lobe associated with fine crackles. Electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with T-wave inversion in leads 3 and AvF . Chest X-ray revealed hilar lymphadenopathy. Subsequently, contrast-enhanced computed tomography angiography (CTA) of the chest confirmed mediastinal lymphadenopathy and revealed left lower lobe atelectasis with traction bronchiectasis. In addition, chest CTA demonstrated giant RCA aneurysms (, , Movie S1). Echocardiogram demonstrated extrinsic compression of the right atrium by a complex mass with intrinsic blood flow consistent with the aforementioned finding of proximal RCA aneurysm (, Movie S2). The patient underwent computed tomography (CT)-guided lymph node biopsy of the mediastinal lymphadenopathy that only showed a non-specific reactive process. Invasive coronary angiogram (ICA) confirmed two large aneurysmal dilatations of the RCA at the proximal and mid vessel segments, measuring 1.8 × 1.8 cm and 4.9 cm × 2.9 cm, respectively (, , Movie S3). Distal RCA, however, could not be opacified due to contrast stagnation in the proximal aneurysms. A focused cardiac CTA was then performed and revealed an additional distal RCA aneurysm, measuring 6 × 10 cm, with extensive luminal thrombosis . Contrast-enhanced cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) was obtained for further evaluation of the aneurysm characteristics and its effect on myocardial perfusion to guide therapeutic decision-making. First-pass perfusion CMR with time-signal-intensity analysis showed delayed time to peak perfusion in the mid to apical inferior walls consistent with resting hypoperfusion . Late contrast-enhanced CMR showed no evidence of myocardial scarring, but depicted extensive luminal thrombosis of the aneurysms along with marked late enhancement of the RCA wall , suggesting an inflammatory process. Serological work up for connective tissue diseases including antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, rheumatoid, and systemic lupus erhythromatosis serologies were unremarkable. Complement levels and inflammatory markers were normal. Computed tomography angiography of the neck, chest, abdomen, and pelvis did not show evidence of vasculitis. Patient was referred to cardiothoracic surgery and subsequently underwent resection of the mid and distal right coronary aneurysms with a single saphenous vein graft anastomosed to the right posterior descending artery. Pathology of the resected aneurysms revealed non-specific chronic inflammatory pattern. Patient’s post-operative course was uneventful. At 3 and 6 months of follow-up, patient reported no symptoms and there was no change in ventricular function.