A 66 years old man referred to our center at Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Iran, complaining of fever, severe weight loss, and malaise for several months. He had a long-term history of uncomplicated RA with total hip joint replacement following a car accident 2 years ago.
His physical examination was significant for temperature: 38°C (orally) and axillary lymphadenopathy.
Laboratory investigation showed mild normochromic normocytic anemia with lymphocyte dominancy in differential WBC count. Serum protein electrophoresis was in favor of polyclonal gammopathy, and bone marrow study with immune-phenotyping revealed normocellular marrow with increased polyclonal plasma cells. Other significant laboratory test results in admission time are listed in .
Patient disease activity score was low (DAS 28:2.9), and patient previous lab data were negative in terms of ANA (anti-nuclear antibody), Anti-dsDNA (Anti-double Stranded DNA), and ANCA (Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody).
Chest CT scan shows multiple lymph nodes in aortopulmonary window and also sub-carina. More lymph nodes were identified at para-aortic, para iliac, celiac axis, and peri-pancreatic area in abdominopelvic spiral CT scan . The patient was referred to an oncologist and lymph node excisional biopsy was done for him with the impression of Hodgkin’s lymphoma, but the final report was just reactive follicular hyperplasia .
Since the patient was extremely ill, and the workup was inconclusive, the pathology slides were sent to our center for consultation and molecular study to rule out lymphoma. We are a referral center, and it is not surprising that there was also a serum specimen from that patient at the same time in our clinical laboratory, and he was recalled to get information about his present and past medical history. The slide review was done with complete access to the patient’s history and status. In addition to reactive follicular hyperplasia, there was inter-follicular/paracortical plasma cell infiltration as well as remarkable leukocytoclastic vasculitis of small vessels .
P-ANCA (perinuclear anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody) was also positive with an atypical pattern indirect IF study. The patient was visited by an expert rheumatologist and treated with a rheumatoid vasculitis diagnosis. Prednisone 60 mg daily was started for the patient, then tapered and after that Methotrexate 15 mg weekly was started with folic acid 1 mg daily.
In a follow-up visit three months later, the patient showed improvement in his symptoms. Repeated inflammatory markers showed a C reactive protein of 6 mg/L and a sedimentation rate of 29 mm/hour. The response to treatment was rapid and satisfactory, and now the patient has a favorable condition.
The patient has provided written informed consent for publication of this case report including images. Our institutional approval is not required to publish the case details.