A 60-year-old male with a history of type II diabetes mellitus and hypertension for more than 9 years visited our out-patient department (OPD) for evaluation of prostate status based on family history of prostate cancer. However, the patient denied a family history of multiple endocrine neoplasms (MENs).
Tracing back his history, it was found that he had right adrenal incidentaloma eighteen years ago when he was 42 years old. At that time, his body weight decreased by approximately 3–4 kg without other comorbidities. In addition, he denied Cushing appearance, elevated blood pressure and palpation or episodes of headache/hypertension/palpitations. The abdominal sonograph showed an 8.7 cm hypoechoic mass over the right adrenal gland, while a further MRI examination revealed a large heterogeneous mass over the right adrenal gland with blurred margins of the right adrenal gland and liver. The endocrine workup displayed normal serum aldosterone and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS) levels, whereas the cortisol level was suppressed in the low dose overnight dexamethasone test; there was also an elevation of urine vanillylmandelic acid (VMA), serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), alpha foetal protein (AFP) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) (13.6 mg/day, 5.77 ng/mL, 6.35 ng/mL, and 160 IU/L, respectively).
Under the assumptions of adrenal pheochromocytoma and a potentially increased risk of malignancy, he underwent right adrenalectomy and simple nephrectomy due to intraoperative severe adhesions of the right kidney. The pathology diagnosis was a ganglioneuroma composed of abundant Schwann cells ornamented with scattered mature ganglion cells and foci of calcification. .
Nonetheless, enlarged lymph nodes on the left side of neck were noted concurrently after that operation, and the follow-up neck CT revealed several lymph nodes (1–1.5 cm), some with cystic changes, over the posterior triangle of the left side of the neck. Excisional biopsy of the left supraclavicular lymph nodes yielded metastatic papillary thyroid carcinoma. He underwent total thyroidectomy and radical neck dissection 2 months later.
The pathology showed papillary microcarcinoma with characteristic features of nuclear crowding, optic clear and ground glass appearance and nuclear membrane irregularity with grooving ; the lesions were 0.3 and 0.1 cm in size and located in right and left lobes of the thyroid, respectively, with left supraclavicular lymph node metastasis (one of 5 lymph nodes was positive) and final stage pT1aN1Mx. After thyroidectomy and iodine-131 therapy, the patient was followed regularly. There was no recurrence or metastasis of the thyroid cancer.
At this visit, 18 years after previous concurrent adrenal GN and papillary thyroid carcinoma, the patient asked for a health examination and an evaluation of his prostate status. The digital rectal examination found no firm nodules, the PSA level was 1.587 ng/mL, and trans-rectal ultrasound showed a 46 mL prostate with no hypoechoic lesions.
The patient also complained of progressive enlargement of his right hemi-scrotum within the past 3 years. He had noted asymmetric sizes of the testes with a more prominent right hemi-scrotum since he was a teenager. Scrotal sonography revealed a 4.4 × 3.3 cm para-testicular hypoechoic nodule over the right hemi-scrotum . The tumour was attached firmly to the right testis and appeared to originate from the epididymis. The laboratory tests for AFP, beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-HCG), and LDH yielded results of < 3.0 ng/ml, < 1.20 mIU/mL, and 156 IU/L, respectively.
Under the impression of para-testicular tumor, the trans-scrotal orchiectomy was performed. Exploration of the right testis showed that the mass seemed to arise from the epididymis and was adhered firmly to the testis . Operation was procceded following the standard procedure of inguinal orchiectomy, and this patient was discharged uneventfully 3 days after the surgery.
The pathology diagnosis was a paratesticular GN composed of a neurofibroma-like stroma decorated with scattered individuals and clusters of mature large ganglion cells containing an abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and a prominent nucleolus. Primitive neuroblasts were absent. The parenchyma and epididymis of the testis were unremarkable. Microscopic pictures of the para-testicular GN over the right hemi-scrotum are shown in Figs. - and -.
He then received regular follow-up, and post-operative chest tomography and thyroid sonography showed no signs of malignancy. However, a 0.8 cm globular optic nerve meningioma was discovered incidentally by whole-body MRI. Since there was no visual impairment or proptosis, the ophthalmologist and neurologist recommended regular clinical and radiological follow-up visits every 6 months.