A 44-year-old female presented with right-sided severe neuropathic pain at the scapula radiating along the dermatomes C8/Th1 as well as burning pain at the fingertips, which gradually developed over 1 month. Additionally, the patient complained of weakness of the right hand. Two weeks before admission, she had noticed painful dysesthesias in the left fingers and the right knee (cutaneous branches of the femoral nerve).
The clinical examination revealed severe paresis of the right intrinsic hand muscles (Medical Research Council grade 3 paresis) and sensory deficits in the territory of both the median and right axillary nerves. There was a pronounced allodynia along the course of the upper arm nerves. Fever, night sweats, and weight loss were not reported. The serum and urine laboratory tests and cerebrospinal fluid analysis were unremarkable without evidence of an infectious, inflammatory, or systemic vasculitic disease. The magnetic resonance images of the brain, the cervical spine, and plexus brachialis with and without gadolinium were also normal. NCS revealed a severe axonal neuropathy of the right median and ulnar nerve with reduced compound muscle action potential amplitudes and sensory nerve action potentials, while NCVs were in the normal range. Electromyography of the paretic muscles (e.g. first dorsal interosseous and abductor pollicis brevis) showed a neurogenic pattern including spontaneous muscle fiber activity and polyphasic, extended, and high-amplitude motor unit action potentials, whereas clinically unaffected muscles innervated by different nerves were normal. On nerve ultrasound, multifocal swelling of the right median and ulnar nerves with enlarged CSAs was detected. Interestingly, we frequently found isolated enlarged nerve fascicles in the affected nerves. Beside enlargement, the affected nerves showed a decreased echogenicity with a hyperechogenic, thickened epineurium . Focally increased CSA was also detected in the electrophysiologically unaffected left median und ulnar nerves. On the side of nerve enlargement, compression with the ultrasound probe was painful.
In summary, subacute and asymmetric painful neuropathy in different nerve regions, axonal changes at electrodiagnostic examination, and missing clinical, laboratory, and radiological evidence of nonneuromuscular involvement and systemic vasculitic diseases as well as no other identified etiology strongly point to the diagnosis of NSCN . However, a definitive diagnosis could not be achieved, as nerve biopsy was not feasible due to the affected sensorimotor nerves (i.e. median and ulnar nerves). Other terminal sensory nerves suitable for nerve biopsy (i.e. sural or radial nerves) were neither clinically, electrophysiologically nor sonographically affected.
As initial intravenous high-dose steroids were insufficient to alleviate the clinical symptoms, immunosuppression was escalated to a combined treatment with 6 monthly courses of intravenous cyclophosphamide (500 mg/m2 body surface). After 2 months of treatment, neuropathic pain greatly improved, and neurological deficits stabilized. Finally, after tapering of immunosuppression, muscle strength returned to normal. However, NCS remained unchanged, showing persistent and severe axonal damage of the right median and ulnar nerves. In contrast, neurosonography findings improved remarkably. The pathological enlargement of single nerve fascicles diminished, and the overall swelling of the affected nerves was reduced; nerve echogenicity remained decreased in the affected nerves . For long-term immunosuppression, therapy was switched to azathioprine monotherapy (3 mg/kg body weight daily).