A 5-year-old female visited our hospital with a palpable mass in her left upper abdomen for 4 months. She developed abdominal pain 4 months prior to the consultation. However, she did not undergo any treatment until the tumor increased in size, which prompted her visit to our hospital. Her past history, personal history, and family history were unremarkable. Physical examination revealed a mass in the left upper abdomen. The mass measured approximately 9.5 cm × 9.2 cm and had a hard texture. It was fixed and was not tender on palpation. The patient had no abnormal bowel sounds (heard four times per minute). Since the onset of the symptoms, the patient was conscious and oriented, and no remarkable changes were noted in diet, sleep, or urination. However, constipation was noted, with defecation occurring once every three days. She reported no weight loss. Laboratory test results showed normal levels of tumor-associated antigen (0.60 U/mL, normal range = 0.01–37 U/mL), carcinoembryonic antigen (4.69 ng/mL, normal range = 0–5 ng/mL), and alpha fetoprotein (3.58 ng/mL, normal range = 0–10 ng/mL). Abdominal radiography showed obvious accumulation of gases in the colon, but no obvious abnormality was found in the rest of the intestinal tract . Subsequent barium enema revealed adequate filling and development of each segment of the colon under the double contrast of air and barium. Additionally, the colon was complete and clear; no filling defect or abnormal strictures were found. The transverse and sigmoid colon were long, and no obvious stricture was found in the anal canal . Further ultrasonography (US) revealed a round heterogeneous mass of size 11.6 cm × 9.7 cm in the left upper and mid quadrants with well defined margins, heterogeneous echotexture, with punctate echogenic foci, no acoustic shadowing. The mass was close to the superior mesenteric artery, which showed no abnormalities. Doppler revealed multiple foci of vascularity within the mass, which also displayed peripheral vascularity . To further determine the nature of the lesion, the patient underwent abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). A 11.2 cm × 11.1 cm × 10.8 cm (LR × AP × SI) mass was identified in the left upper quadrant. The mass was globally hypointense on T1 weighted images (T1WI), with some foci of increased signal intensity. On T2 weighted images (T2WI), the mass was mildly heterogeneous, with predominantly high signal and some internal elongated (or linear) hypointense structures. Diffusion weighted images (b = 1000 s/mm2) demonstrated a heterogeneous pattern of increased diffusion, more prominent in the periphery, with diffusion restriction on ADC maps. The margin of the lesion was well defined, and a surrounding capsule was noted. There was obvious compression and displacement of the stomach, spleen, and left kidney. The left adrenal gland was not clearly displayed. The head of the pancreas was clearly displayed; however, the tail of the pancreas was not. Multiple dilated and tortuous nutrient arteries were observed in the enhanced scanning arterial phase, multiple foci of enhancement, with flaky appearances were observed in the portal phase, and continuous enhancement was observed in the delayed phase, with obvious enhancement at the edge . The radiologist considered the abdominal mass to be splenic hemangioma or angiosarcoma.
After general anesthesia, the patient underwent splenectomy. Under the left costal margin, the skin, subcutaneous fascia, and each layer of the rectus abdominis muscle were dissected and opened, and the peritoneum was cut to enter the abdominal cavity. The tumor was located on the outside of the descending colon. The boundary between the upper end of the tumor and the spleen was unclear, and the lower end was located in the upper pole of the left kidney. The surface was covered by the greater omentum, and several nutrient vessels were seen penetrating the tumor. The tumor was spherical, smooth, and approximately 12 cm in diameter. Splenic hemangioma was suspected before the operation, and most splenic hemangiomas in children are capillary hemangiomas. However, during the operation, it was found that more nutrient vessels penetrated into the tumor. This finding is not consistent with the manifestation of splenic hemangiomas in surgery, but it is consistent with angiosarcomas. The surface tissue of the omentum was carefully dissected, the nutrient vessels were excised, and the tumor was completely removed. Hemostasis was achieved, and the wound was closed using biological hemostatic paper and fibrin glue. There was no active bleeding in the wound. No injury was noted to the hilum of the spleen, and good blood supply to the spleen was noted. Histopathology after surgery showed erythrocytes, fibrous tissue, hyperplasia of small vessels, spindle-shaped vascular endothelial cells, lesions filled with anastomosing lacunae and scattered mechanized thrombi . Immunohistochemical staining was positive for CD31, CD34, SMA, ERG, and negative for EMA, PR, GFAP, Desmin, corresponding to the phenotypic profile of IPEH. After the operation, the surgical incision had healed well without redness, swelling, or inflammatory secretions, and the patient did not complain of any discomfort. The patient’s family members requested her discharge from the hospital after 2 weeks. She was reviewed every 6 months. Follow-up over 3 years showed no recurrence or other complications.