A 61 year old otherwise healthy female patient presented with progressive low back pain. MR examination revealed pathologic lesion in 12th thoracic vertebra. The lesion filled majority of the vertebral body with extension into a left pedicle. Signal characteristics of the lesion were as follows: hyperintense on fat suppressed (STIR) MR image, homogeneously hypointense on pre-contrast T1 w SE MR image, homogeneously hyperintense on T2 w TSE MR image and very hyperintense on post-contrast T1 w SE MR image. Subtle disruption of the posterior vertebral wall was seen on pre-contrast MR scan. Post-contrast images confirmed homogenously enhancing (vascularized) haemangioma like tumour. The aggressiveness of the lesion was confirmed with signs of cortical bone disruption seen on CT .
However, the lesion lacked typical thickened trabeculae what brought a diagnosis of haemangioma into a question. A “mini brain” pattern that was partially recognized on CT raised a possibility of a plasmacytoma in the differential diagnosis. The PET scan showed no activity of the lesion. Therefore clear distinction between possible plasmacytoma was not possible with standard CT and MR imaging.
Additional MR examination with MRS was used to define fat content in order to clear out the diagnosis and confirm the aggressiveness of the lesion.
The examination was performed on Philips Achieva 1.5 T NOVA 16 channel MR scanner equipped with High Performed gradients with peak amplitude of 33 mT/m and slew rate 180 mT/m/ms. The SENSE 15 elements phased array Spine coil was used. MR imaging protocol consists of T2 w TSE, T1 w SE and STIR in sagittal plane, T2 w TSE, T1 w TSE in axial plane. After the use of the gadolinium contrast media T1 w sequences in sagittal and axial plane were repeated. Single Voxel (SV) spectroscopy data were acquired with STEAM (Stimulated Echo Acquisition Mode) sequence because it has several advantages compared to PRESS (Point Resolved Spectroscopy) in spine region. Parameters of SV STEAM sequences were: TR 2000 ms, TE 8.7 ms, TM (Mixing Time) 12 ms, voxel size of 19 mm × 26 mm × 17 mm, NSA (Number of Signal Averaging) 128. Water suppression was disabled and to define optimal cubic target volume PB (Pencil Beam) volume shimming was utilized. To suppress unwanted signals from adjacent structures three REST (REgional Saturation Technique) slabs were applied. The voxel of first measurement was placed in the lesion (12th thoracic vertebral body) and the second in lower healthy (1st lumbar) vertebral body. The data were processed on a Philips – Extended MR WorkSpace with SpectroView software. Special script for processing data was formed; only peaks from water and lipids were selected.
Peak lipid-water ratio (LWR), calculated as lipid peak/water peak was derived for each voxel. Another parameter – percent fat fraction (%FF) was used. %FF was derived from LWR as follows: LWR/(LWR+1) × 100.
MRS was successfully performed in both (12th thoracic and 1st lumbar) vertebral bodies. Two major signals (water and lipid) separated by 3.1 ppm were identified in both spectres. A difference between lipid peaks in both vertebral bodies was noticed, as expected . Peak LWR in affected 12th thoracic and adjacent 1st lumbar vertebral body were 0.49 and 2.15, respectively. The lesion in affected vertebra showed lower fat content (33%FF) than normal adjacent vertebra (68%FF). On the basis of % FF we speculated that the amount of fat could be more a feature of haemangioma than plasmacytoma.
Based on MRS data, the lesion was therefore characterized as an aggressive haemangioma.
The diagnosis of haemangioma was confirmed with biopsy, performed during the therapeutic procedure - percutaneous vertebroplasty.