Proband was a 9-year-old girl, referred to the Genetics Clinic by the neuropediatrician who had been following her for mild learning difficulties. RSTS was suspected after seeing her mother, who also had learning difficulties and had short broad thumbs. Our patient was born at term via Cesarean section (pelvi-fetal disproportion) after an uneventful pregnancy. Both, weight and length at birth were low: 2.3 kg (−2.38 SD) and 46 cm (−2.07 SD), respectively. Occipitofrontal head circumference (OHC) at birth was not recorded. The girl’s development was within normal range in the first years of life but increasing learning difficulties were noted at primary school. She is at her expected grade with educational support. On physical examination the proband’s weight was 21.4 kg (−1.74 SD), her length 119 cm (−3.15 SD on Spain 2000 growth chart), and her OHC 48.7 cm (−2.9 SD). She had a thickened and low hanging columella. Her hands and feet (thumbs and halluces) were quite normal ).
The mother (42 y.o.) had short stature (141 cm (−3.87 SD)) and proportionately small OHC (49 cm (−4 SD)). She had struggled at school but managed to get the Secondary School Certificate. Nowadays she is working as a check-out in a supermarket. Her general health is good. She is a single mother of two children: the proband and a healthy 7 year old boy. She had slightly posteriorly rotated ears, a prominent nose with high nasal bridge, low hanging columella, and talon cusp at an upper incisor. Her thumbs were short and broad but not angulated and her halluces were normal ). Proband’s maternal aunt and grandmother also had short stature and proportionate OHC but normal intelligence and normal hands and feet. The grandmother’s length was 142.1 cm (−3.5 SD) and her OHC 52.5 cm (−1.9 SD). Maternal grandfather died aged 50 from liver disease.
Previous assessments of the proband included a hand X-ray for bone age, which was according to chronological age, and endocrine tests with normal levels of growth hormone in two stimulation tests. A brain MRI scan showed a pineal cyst (9 × 9 × 5 mm) and no other anomalies.
Clinical data, samples and photographs were obtained after written informed consent. This work has been approved by the Committee for Ethics in Clinical Research in La Rioja (CEICLAR).
Blood samples from the proband, her mother and her grandmother were collected in EDTA tubes. DNA was extracted using QIAamp DNA Mini Kit (QIAGEN) following the manufacture’s protocol. MLPA of CREBBP and EP300 was performed (P313 and P333 Kit, MRC-Holland). Panel-based next generation sequencing (NGS) of CREBBP and EP300 genes was carried out. Briefly, libraries encompassing exons and introns of CREBBP and EP300 genes were prepared using the SureSelectXT2 Custom kit (Agilent) and sequenced to generate 150 bp single reads. The resulting reads were mapped to the human genome hg19 using BWA (version 0.7.12). Sequence variants were called using the Genome Analysis Toolkit (GATK) version 3.3 and called variants were annotated with Annovar. ExAC browser of Broad Institute, 1000 Genomes database and dbSNP138, as well as, the Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD), Leiden Open Variation Database (LOVD) and ClinVar databases were checked to assess the presence/absence of detected alterations in variations repositories.