A 42-year-old woman presented to our hospital for detailed examination of an abnormal shadow on her health check-up chest X-ray images. She complained of upper abdominal pain after eating, for more than 6 months. She had no remarkable medical history, and her general status was good. She was initially evaluated with computed tomography (CT), which revealed a tumor surrounding the lower thoracic esophagus. The tumor measured > 60 mm (major axis) and was slightly enhanced in the delayed phase with enhanced CT, and the shape of the tumor was extremely complicated . She underwent esophagogastroduodenoscopy, which revealed an SMT with a sub-circumferential elevated lesion near the esophagogastric junction . Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) revealed an irregular-shaped tumor arising from the muscularis, which surrounded the lower esophagus for 3/4 of its circumference . EUS-guided fine-needle aspiration (EUS-FNA) biopsy indicated a leiomyoma. Esophagography revealed a 40-mm stenosis owing to the tumor, in the lower thoracic esophagus . Considering the tumor size and its complicated shape, we planned to perform a hybrid operation with endoscopic and thoracoscopic procedures to enucleate the tumor safely without injuring the mucosa and with a minimal defect in the esophageal muscularis.
The patient underwent general anesthesia, and we first performed the endoscopic procedure with the patient in the supine position. We injected indigo carmine into the submucosal layer to create a space between the mucosa and muscularis ; then, we created the entry of the submucosal tunnel 30-mm proximal to the oral edge of the tumor . Next, we dissected the blue-stained layer between the mucosa and muscularis using an electrocautery knife (triangle-tip knife) (KD-640L, Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) and extended the submucosal tunnel anally and laterally . We then extended the submucosal tunnel beyond the anal edge of the tumor and separated the tumor from the mucosa . Next, we changed the patient’s position from supine to left hemi-lateral for the thoracoscopic procedure, which we performed under 10 mmHg to provide artificial pneumothorax. We placed the following four ports: a 12-mm port at the posterior axillary line in the 7th intercostal space (ICS), a 12-mm port at the posterior axillary line in the 9th ICS, a 5-mm port at the mid-axillary line in the 5th ICS, and a 5-mm port at the anterior axillary line in the 8th ICS. After opening the mediastinal pleura longitudinally along with the esophagus, we identified the tumor at the lower posterior mediastinum and began the enucleation. First, we cut the outer membrane of the esophagus around the tumor, then dissected the muscularis along the tumor to connect the layer of enucleation with the endoscopic submucosal tunnel . Despite its shape and size, we handled the tumor easily because the tumor was mobilized from the mucosa endoscopically when we created the submucosal tunnel. We completed the enucleation without damaging the mucosa and with minimal defect in the muscularis . The dissected tumor was extracted through the expanded working port. We closed the defect in the muscularis thoracoscopically with continuous 4-0 PDS (Ethicon Inc., Somerville, NJ) sutures and closed the entry of the submucosal tunnel with clips, endoscopically . Finally, we placed a 6.5-mm multichannel drain through the 12-mm port in the 9th ICS. The operation time was 273 min (endoscopic procedure: 68 min, thoracoscopic procedure: 185 min), and the blood loss amount was 25 g. The tumor was resected completely without injuring the surrounding structures, and the tumor had an irregular and complicated shape, as in preoperative images . We performed esophageal endoscopy on postoperative day 2 and confirmed that there was no leakage or stenosis. Oral intake was started on postoperative day 3, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 7 with no adverse events.