A 62-year-old woman of Korean ethnicity suffering from left knee arthralgia was hospitalized and diagnosed with left knee osteoarthritis complicated with grade 2 hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and tinea pedis. In October 2020, after her blood glucose was stabilized, the patient underwent bicompartmental arthroplasty of the left knee performed by an experienced chief physician in our hospital, during which a Depuy MBT joint prosthesis was used. Obvious cystic changes around the knee joint were observed in the preoperative imaging findings , and severe osteoporosis and contained bone defects in the medial tibial plateau were discovered after osteotomy during surgery; therefore, femoral and tibial stem extension implants were placed during surgery . The drainage tube was removed within 24 hours, and prophylactic antibiotics were applied within 24 hours of the perioperative period. At 10 hours after surgery, enoxaparin [40 mg once per day (qd)] was administered but was later changed to rivaroxaban (10 mg qd) to prevent lower-extremity venous thrombosis after discharge. The patient recovered a good joint range of motion after surgery, and she was discharged 5 days after the operation. The incision healed well, and the suture of the stage 1 incision was removed 14 days after surgery. Her erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) concentration were 11.00 mm/hour and 2.1 mg/L, respectively, before the operation and 10.00 mm/hour and 59.21 mg/L, respectively, 3 days after the operation. The patient complained of pain at the pes anserinus of the anteromedial knee during outpatient reexaminations at 2 weeks, 1 month, 2 months, and 3 months after surgery, and she received symptomatic treatment with anti-inflammatory and analgesic drugs. The patient was reexamined approximately 4 months after surgery owing to aggravated pain and was found to have mild local redness and swelling of the medial tibial tubercle of the left knee and a slightly elevated skin temperature. The patient was reexamined, and her ESR and CRP concentrations were 21.00 mm/hour and 14.90 mg/L, respectively. Oral levofloxacin (500 mg qd) was prescribed for suspected bacterial infection, but a mass (approximately 2 × 2 cm2) appeared at the medial tibial tubercle 1 month later, with no obvious local fluctuation and knee range of motion of approximately 15–70°. The patient was admitted to the hospital, and infection after knee arthroplasty was considered. After admission, her ESR and CRP concentrations were 23.00 mm/hour and 10.04 mg/L, respectively, and an ultrasound-guided knee puncture was performed, during which a small amount of dark red fluid was obtained for bacterial and fungal culture. The results of metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS) indicated Staphylococcus epidermidis. X-ray of the left knee showed abnormal translucent zones under the medial tibial plateau and at the femoral posterior condyle .
In March 2021, the patient was initially diagnosed with acute infection after knee arthroplasty because the symptoms of knee infection emerged in less than 3 months, and DAIR was considered. Intraoperative exploration revealed an unruptured local granulomatous mass at the medial tibial tubercle , which was excised. There was no apparent joint fluid in the knee, no remarkable loosening of the prosthesis, no significant wear of the liner, and massive papillary synovial hyperplasia. Hence, joint dislocation was performed first, and the liner was removed. Then synovectomy and adhesiolysis were conducted. During the debridement, local cystic changes under the tibial plateau and the femoral posterior condyle were observed; there were local bone defects, but the prosthesis was not loosened . The bone defects were filled with bone cement (40 g of bone cement with 1 g of vancomycin) to eliminate spaces, and the knee range of motion was 0–110°. After surgery, intravenous drip infusion of vancomycin (1 g every 12 hours) and rifampicin (0.45 g orally qd) was continued. Intra-articular injection of vancomycin (1 g qd) was administered in a dressing room 48 hours after surgery. Standard procedures for knee puncture were strictly followed to minimize the risk of contamination or reinfection of the knee. At 4 days after surgery, the culture results of specimens obtained before and during surgery were positive for Candida parapsilosis. Therefore, voriconazole [200 mg twice per day (bid)] and levofloxacin (500 mg qd) were administered orally. The intra-articular injection of vancomycin was stopped and replaced with an intra-articular injection of 200 mg voriconazole dissolved in 10 mL saline once daily for 6 consecutive weeks. Additionally, joint fluid conditions were observed, gradually turning clear from turbid. A routine test of the joint fluid was performed weekly until the white blood cell count was less than 3000 and the neutrophil ratio was less than 75%. After discharge, the patient continued with oral voriconazole (200 mg bid) and levofloxacin (500 mg qd) until 6 months after surgery. After 22 months of postoperative follow-up, no remarkable signs of loosening were indicated on the plain radiograph of the knee joint , and the patient’s knee range of motion recovered to 0–110°, without knee arthralgia or abnormalities in liver and kidney function.