A 76-year-old male patient had consulted a doctor for upper abdominal pain 16 months before being referred to us and had been followed up. Because plain computed tomography (CT) revealed a space-occupying lesion in the liver, he was referred to our hospital. A laboratory workup on admission showed that total bilirubin, aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, alkaline phosphatase, gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, albumin, and creatinine were all within normal ranges. Tumor markers including alpha-fetoprotein, protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist-II, carcinoembryonic antigen, and carbohydrate antigens 19–9 were also within the normal limits .
Abdominal ultrasonography (US) revealed a well-defined, heterogeneously hyperechoic mass that was 59 mm in diameter in segment 7 of the liver . Plain CT revealed a low-density 60-mm sized mass with an irregular margin. Dynamic CT revealed early ring enhancement in the peripheral part on the arterial phase and internal heterogeneous enhancement on the delayed phase . Gadolinium-ethoxybenzyl-diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (EOB-MRI) showed that the tumor had low-signal intensity on T1-weighted images and that the mass had some high-signal intensity foci in the tumor on T2-weighted images. EOB-MRI showed no uptake in the corresponding area on the hepatobiliary phase and ring enhancement in the peripheral part on the arterial phase and the portal phase .
Laparoscopy-assisted posterior sectionectomy and cholecystectomy including lymph node dissection in the hepatoduodenal ligament were performed for a preoperative diagnosis of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma. The resected specimen revealed a white solid mass, sized 61 × 46 mm. The cut surface of the tumor was elastic, soft, and homogeneous with the smooth margin including some faint red spots up to 10 mm in size .
Histopathological examination showed that the tumor was composed of fibrous connective tissue highlighted with collagen fibers and various sizes of cavernous hemangioma tissue with some hyaline degeneration secondary to thrombus, necrosis, or cicatrization, resulting in a hepatic sclerosed hemangioma .
The postoperative course was uneventful. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 6.