The proband, a 24-year-old man of South African descent, was the first child born to a healthy mother. There is no known parental consanguinity. Pregnancy was uneventful, and the infant was delivered by cesarean section due to failure to progress. The patient had two younger healthy siblings without any family history of neurologic symptomatology . Birth weight was noted to be 2.9 kg, and no perinatal risk factors or postpartum complications were reported. His early developmental milestones were attained and deemed normal up until the age of 15 months, when an abrupt onset of neurological decline presented with ocular strabismus, head tilt, and nystagmoid eye jerks noted a few days following an ear infection. Thereafter, he went on to experience episodes of ataxia, confusion that would last between minutes and hours, and regression in his baseline motor and language skills. These episodes would be followed by a partial recovery that was incomplete and never to the neurological baseline state prior to the onset of illness. Early in the course, these episodes would vary in frequency, occurring once every 1–4 weeks. These events were generally, but not always, associated with infections and febrile illnesses. Assessment at the age of 2 years and 5 months disclosed developmental delay with a developmental age closer to that of a 1-year-old. By this age, the patient was crawling but had not achieved walking and had no spoken language. His language comprehension, however, remained advanced when compared to his expressive skills.
The clinical course was punctuated by episodes of neurological decompensation until 2.5 years of age. These decompensations were characterized by ophthalmoplegia (mostly vertical), ptosis, gait ataxia, lethargy, and developmental regression and incoordination . He would have difficulty speaking and would be unable to participate in sporting activities of which he was previously capable. The clinical cessation of his episodes coincided with the empiric introduction of a mitochondrial cocktail of L-Carnitine 330 mg once daily, coenzyme q10 200 mg twice a day, B-100 complex once daily (100 mg of vitamins B1, B2, B3, B5 (pantothenic acid), and inositol, 10 mg of bioactive vitamin B6, 1,000 mcg of folic acid, 10 mg of choline, 500 mcg of bioactive vitamin B12, and 300 mcg of biotin in each tablet), and riboflavin 200 mg once daily, resulting in dramatic observed improvements in his neurodevelopmental status with residual ataxia and the stabilization of his neurological status. Aside from this, the patient received surgical correction for strabismus but continued to have gaze-evoked nystagmus. Hearing ability was subjectively normal, and he had never reported seizures, abnormal movements, or dystonic posturing. Kyphoscoliosis and longstanding reports of constipation were also noted, the latter possibly being related to gastrointestinal dysmotility.
Throughout childhood, our index case continued to display clumsiness with particular concerns around balance and limb coordination. He was noted to have a staggering and stumbling gait, difficulties using utensils independently, and challenges with his language skills. He also experienced intermittent fatigue with a tendency to do poorly during intercurrent infections; however, he continued to perform satisfactorily with his academic work at school. Neuropsychological assessment at the age of 8 years documented his cognitive performance within a normal range. Throughout childhood and adolescence, he was diagnosed with generalized anxiety, which was managed by citalopram. At 24 years of age, the patient was admitted to the mental health unit after experiencing violent intrusive thoughts consistent with obsessive-compulsive disorder as well as delusions in the setting of psychosocial stressors. Beyond the teenage years, he was neurologically stable, and at the time of the study, he was majoring in accounting and attempting to develop life skills for independent living.
On examination at the age of 24 years, the patient was aware and engaging. His speech was of a slurred quality but was otherwise fluent. His responses to questions appeared mildly sluggish but with no apparent intellectual difficulties; a formal assessment was not considered necessary in view of his current abilities and cognitive functioning. His examination identified notable difficulties in initiating saccades, often with an overshot, while ocular pursuit movements were incomplete or broken up by intrusions. In primary gaze, he had square wave jerks and bilateral ptosis. Limitations in his extraocular muscle movements were observed particularly during supraduction and infraduction. Muscle tone was low in the upper extremities, and spasticity was noted in the lower extremities with intact strength and positive pyramidal signs. Gait examination showed difficulty in tandem gait with a tendency for toe walking in stressed gait maneuvers. On examination of the spine, kyphoscoliosis was evident. Sensory examination showed distal impairment of vibration sense, but pain sense, temperature sense, and joint position sense were preserved. Past pointing in finger-nose testing was not apparent, but there were slowed and rapid alternating movements. demonstrates the patient’s physical findings.
A provisional diagnosis of mitochondrial disorder was made initially based on ophthalmoplegia, recurrent episodes of regression, and the fluctuation of symptoms with intercurrent illness. Later, hereditaory progressive ataxias were also amongst the differential given the longstanding course of ophthalmoplegia and the predominance of cerebellar involvement.
Extensive investigations were performed to uncover the possible underlying inborn error of metabolism, revealing an elevated CSF lactate at 3.0 mmol/L, while the rest of the metabolic testing came back unremarkable, including plasma lactate, ammonia, urine organic acids, amino acid profiles, CK, α-fetoprotein, vitamin E, uric acid, free and total acylcarnitine profile, homocysteine, 7-Dehydrocholesterol, cholesterol esterification analysis for Niemann-Picks C disease, glucocerebrosidase, galactosidase, beta-glucosidase, peroxisomal studies, skin biopsy, and fibroblast culture for the activity of pyruvate dehydrogenase. Imaging studies showed a minor delay in myelination on the initial MRI study (not accessible at the time of presentation to the tertiary care clinic), while a subsequent imaging study performed at the age of 13 years showed moderate atrophy of the superior vermis and diffuse prominence of cerebellar folia . An MRI of the cervical spine demonstrated a relatively thin thoracic spinal cord. MRS detected a reduced NAA peak in the cerebellum. No evidence of peripheral neuropathy or myopathy was demonstrated on the NCS/EMG. A complete X-ray of the spine confirmed right lower thoracic and lumbar scoliosis of approximately 50 degrees centered at T11-12.
An extensive set of genetic investigations was conducted, including FMR1, NPC1/2, SPG 7 genes, multi-gene panels for spinocerebellar ataxia, and mitochondrial genome sequencing, all of which were inconclusive. Whole exome sequencing revealed a homozygous variant in the NAXE: c.733 A>C in exon 6 (p.Lys245Gln), which was inherited from both parents. This sequence change replaces lysine, which is basic and polar, with glutamine, which is neutral and polar, at codon 245 of the NAXE protein (p.Lys245Gln). This rare variant has an allele frequency of 2.48 E-5 in the gnomAD database. In silico analyses of the c.733 A>C variant using SIFT, Polyphen-2, Mutation Taster, and Panther predicted not tolerated, probably damaging, disease-causing prob.: 0.9999, and probably damaging, respectively. Further in-silico analysis was conducted by submitting the protein variant to ProtVar and Dynamut webtools for effects on Protein structure and stability. The genomic effects of c.733 A>C missense mutation disclosed a CADD phred-like score of 28.9 (probably deleterious as a CADD phred score above 20 is considered significant) while the effect on protein structure with the EVE (evolutionary model of variant effect) score is considered pathogenic with loss of catalytic site (p = 0.01) at p.Lys245Gln and loss of methylation at the same site (p = 0.02). The Dynamut analysis also predicted a destabilizing effect (ΔΔG: −0.403 kcal/mol). These data are summarized in . Thus, there is strong evidence that the genomic variant has significant negative effects on protein structure. The variant was classified as a variant of unknown significance (VUS) in the databases, mainly based on the lack of evidence to determine the role of this variant in disease. There has been a report of a homozygous patient with the same NAXE variant , and another compound heterozygous NAXE patient was identified in a series of patients with Leigh syndrome . We classify the NAXE c.733A>C variant as ACMG 2-probably pathogenic.
Following diagnosis, niacin 40 mg twice daily was added to his mitochondrial cocktail, with good tolerability and no adverse effect. presents the timeline of the clinical course.