An 80-year old man was admitted to a general hospital for polyuria, vomiting, weight loss, worsening asthenia, myalgia and progressive cognitive impairment. He had a personal history of hypertension and type 2 diabetes, treated with losartan and metformin respectively. On physical examination he was sleepy, apyretic, hypertensive (upright blood pressure 150/100 mmHg) and tachycardic (100 beats for minute). He did complain of dyspnea, dry skin and mucosa and muscle weakness, without bone pain and neurological alterations. Biochemical assays revealed hypernatremia (149 mmol/L), severe hypercalcemia (4.08 mmol/L), hypophosfatemia (0.62 mmol/L), elevated levels of PTH (252 ng/L), reduced vitamin D (32 nmol/L) and slight renal failure (urea 8.7 mmol/L, creatinine 112 μmol/L). Blood count, liver and thyroid function were normal . The electrocardiogram did not show remarkable signs of hypercalcemia. A cranial computed tomography (CT) scan excluded acute cerebrovascular events. A CT pulmonary angiography detected partial thrombosis in three segmental branches of the right upper lobe pulmonary artery. Doppler ultrasound (US) revealed a deep vein thrombosis of the left posterior tibial vein. The patient was treated with isotonic saline hydration, furosemide, supplementation of vitamin D and an injection of zoledronate 4 mg, with a mild improvement of hypercalcemia and related symptoms. Daily high-dose unfractionated heparin was also administered. The patient was then transferred to our Endocrine Unit and treated with cinacalcet, with decrease of PTH, calcemia and calciuria values. Amlodipine and insulin were also added for worsening hypertension and diabetes. Neck US revealed an enlarged thyroid with normal vascular pattern and at the lower pole of the left thyroid lobe a hypoechoic vascular nodule (14.7×10.5×9 mm), consistent with enlarged parathyroid. A sesta-MIBI scintigraphy showed a homogeneous tracer uptake over the thyroid in the early images and a remaining modest uptake in the lower left thyroid lobe in the later images; no other abnormal or ectopic uptake was found. Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry revealed an osteopenia; all the radiological exams did not find brown tumors. Because of multiple co-morbidities, further investigations were performed to exclude other endocrine disorders: urinary metanephrine and normetanephrine values were normal, while plasma morning ACTH and daily urinary free cortisol were increased with impaired circadian cortisol rhythm, evaluated in two different measurements; serum cortisol after 1 mg overnight dexamethasone administration was not suppressed . Direct abdomen CT was negative for adrenal diseases. Pituitary magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) evidenced a round mass, about 4 mm, without enhancement after gadolinium injection, in the left lateral portion of adenohypophysis, consistent with microadenoma. Screening for mutations of MEN genes was negative. The other pituitary hormones were normal. Because of the patient’s general conditions and a probably stress-induced hypercortisolism, no other investigations were performed, giving priority to the surgical resolution of PHPT. Bilateral neck exploration was performed with removal of the upper right parathyroid and both the lower and the upper left parathyroid gland, with quick decrease of intra-operative PTH (from 1296 to 39 ng/L). The histological diagnosis was consistent with multi-glandular hyperplasia. Laboratory tests showed a decrease of calcium and PTH levels, treated with oral calcium and calcitriol. However, four days after surgery the patient developed a sinusal tachycardia, mild heart failure and agitation alternating with stupor, without evidence of infection nor of volemic imbalance. Further investigation revealed suppressed TSH, elevated free T4 and T3 values , with undetectable anti-thyroid and TSH receptor antibodies. Thyroid palpation was not painful. The post-operatory 99mTcO4 scintigraphy showed a reduced tracer uptake over the thyroid, especially in the lower left thyroid lobe, consistent with an inflammatory area . Suspecting interference by the iodinated contrast used for pulmonary angio-CT about a month before, urinary iodine excretion was measured, resulting elevated (935 μg/L, normal range 100–200). Considering a possible dual pathogenesis of thyrotoxicosis, both destructive and iodine-induced, the patient was treated with atenolol for symptomatic relief. Two months after surgery, thyroid function and ioduria were normal and beta-blocker was progressively stopped; 1 mg overnight dexamethasone test (DST) was still pathological. After other two months, calcium-phosphate balance was normal and serum PTH was near the lower limit of normal, therefore calcium and calcitriol supplementation were continued. Adrenal function was finally normalized with adequate cortisol suppression after 1 mg overnight DST . Pituitary MRI confirmed the presence of a microadenoma, compatible with a non-secretory incidentaloma, in careful biochemical and radiological follow-up.