A 36-year-old woman with type 2 diabetes mellitus and morbid obesity presented with progressive balance disturbance over several months. She was born premature to healthy non-consanguineous parents, and had an unremarkable family history. On examination, she was alert, oriented, and conversant. She had normal fundoscopy. There were no gross sensory or pyramidal motor abnormalities. Evaluation of coordination with finger-to-nose and rapid alternating movements testing revealed marked left-side dysmetria and ataxia. A gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) study revealed multiple cystic lesions, most notably in the pons and cerebral white matter, and extensive white matter hyperintensity on T2-weighted images . Computed tomography (CT) revealed small calcifications scattered within the centrum semiovale and right thalamus . The patient did not have symptoms of hydrocephalus or increased intracranial pressure. Various neoplastic, neuroinflammatory, and infectious etiologies were initially considered in the differential diagnosis, although serology was negative. Nevertheless, she was started on empiric antimicrobial therapy for suspected toxoplasmosis per recommendations from infectious disease consultation. To facilitate a timely diagnosis, a stereotactic biopsy of right frontal white matter was performed.
Histopathologic examination revealed white matter with a spectrum of microangiopathic changes . The mildest change consisted of dilated vessels with thickened and hyalinized walls. More strikingly, several vessels were severely sclerotic with mural deposition of fibrinoid material with varying degrees of stenosis. Lastly, rare vessels were obliterated, associated with myxoid change in the neuropil. A spectrum of perivascular pathology was also seen. This included frequent hemosiderin-laden macrophages, consistent with chronic microhemorrhage, and intense gliosis with focal formation of Rosenthal fibres. Damaged vessels were often accompanied by perivascular myelin and axonal loss, consistent with ischemic change rather than demyelination . Small calcospherites were scattered throughout the parenchyma randomly. We did not observe any angiomatous proliferations of small vessels. Multidisciplinary review of the pathological findings raised a high index of suspicion for a unifying diagnosis of LCC. Subsequent genetic analysis revealed compound heterozygous n.*9C > T mutation and an n.59 T > C mutation in SNORD118, confirming the diagnosis. This is a novel mutation that has not been previously described and impacts the well-conserved box C motif which associates snoRNP proteins. Based on the known spectrum of mutations causing LCC, this variant is predicted to be pathogenic . In particular, an n.59 T > G SNORD118 mutation has been reported in a patient with LCC, providing further evidence for the pathogenticity of the variant in the present case .