A 22-year old woman presented to our clinic with a palpable mass for 6 months. The mass was painless. Her medical history was not remarkable for any disorder. On physical examination she had a palpable mass filling the left upper quadrant and epigastrium. On laboratory examination she had normal levels of total protein, albumin, globulin, alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, blood urea nitrogen, serum creatinine, carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (Ca19-9), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and alpha-fetoprotein (AFP). She also had negative serology for hepatitis B and C viruses. On ultrasonography there was a hypoechoic, solid mass with sharp contours and heterogenous pattern which had a size of 16 x 10 cm and diffuse cystic-degenerative areas and which appears hypervascular on Doppler USG (A). The described mass was considered to reside exophytically in the left lobe of the liver. An urgent abdominal tomography showed a giant solid mass that originated from the inferior part of the medial segment of the left lobe of liver and that extended inferiorly. Its size was approximately 17 × 15 x 11 cm. It had smooth contours and marked hypervascularity. It contained diffuse cystic-degenerative areas. A giant hepatic adenoma was primarily considered in the differential diagnosis, which also included liver tumors of mesenchymal origin or hepatocellular carcinoma on a non-cirrhotic basis (B).
The patient’s abdominal cavity was explored with a subcostal incision. There was a mass with smooth contours, measuring 15 x 12 cm in the left lobe of the liver, which grew exophytically. Other parts of the liver were normal. The mass’s portion out of the liver was of hypervascular appearance that compressed adjacent tissues but was easily separable from them. The mass was excised with liver tissue and gall bladder, with a negative surgical margin, with the help of an ultrasonic dissector and cautery. There was no additional lesion in the abdominal cavity .
The macroscopic examination of the hepatic resection material revealed a tumoral lesion with a size of 14 × 12 x 13 cm and a cross-sectional color of yellow, which contained diffuse hemorrhagic and necrotic areas, 2 cm apart from the surgical margin. Sections prepared from the tumor showed that it was separated from the adjacent hepatic parenchyma with a clear border but showed infiltration of the parenchyma in a few foci (A). The tumor was highly cellular, the components of which were spindle in shape from place to place and epithelioid in most areas, and they had round-ovoid nuclei and abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm (B). There were interspersed cells that showed nuclear coarsening. Tumor’s background was highly rich in vascularity and there were interspersed free hemorrhagic foci.
Immunohistochemical study showed negative staining with Pan-CK, Hep-Par, CD117. There was diffuse cytoplasmic positivity with HMB-45 (C) and SMA (D). The background rich vascular network was positively stained with CD34, CD31 and Factor 8 while tumor cells were not. Two mitotic figures were noted under 50 gross magnification. Morphological appearance and immunohistochemical study results suggested a PEComa. Although the criteria for malignancy have not been clearly defined for hepatic PEComas, considering a tumor size greater than 5 cm, presence of more than 1 mitosis under 50 GMA, and infiltrative growth pattern, which have been associated with tumor recurrence or metastatic process for soft tissue or gynecological tumors, the case was considered a malignant PEComa.
The patient was discussed in general surgery and oncology councils, which recommend no therapy. The patient recovered uneventfully, and no additional therapy was recommended. She was discharged 3 days after the surgery. She was put under close follow-up; her tri-monthly control tomographic examinations revealed no pathology. She is under follow-up without recurrence 10 months after the surgery .