A 60 year old man of African ancestry presented with retention of urine in April 2020. Further evaluation revealed a PSA of 88 ng/ml, a clinical T2b with histological confirmation adenocarcinoma of prostate Gleason score 7 (3 + 4). A whole-body MRI scan did not show any bone metastasis but reported pelvic lymphadenopathy. He opted for a radical prostatectomy with lymphadenectomy on account of the lower urinary tract symptoms which he had in May 2020. The histology confirmed adenocarcinoma of the prostate Gleason score 7 (3 + 4) and pathological T3b.
He was counseled for adjuvant radiotherapy with antiandrogen treatment but opted for anti-androgen treatment (goserelin injection 10.8 mg every three months), which he had for 12 months but stopped on account of insomnia while on the injections. The nadir tPSA was 0.03 ng/ml.
He presented with recurrence of lower urinary symptoms 3 years (April 2023) after the procedure with dysuria and urinary urgency at the outpatient clinic after defaulting planned regular follow up. There were no obstructive urinary symptoms, and the urinary bladder was not distended on examination. The tPSA was 0.32 ng/ml.
An abdomen pelvic ultrasound scan done revealed the presence of a bladder calculi with a post void residual urine of 8mls.
A pelvic X-ray revealed a large bladder calculus .
Patient was counseled for urethrocystoscopy and possible endoscopic fragmentation of the bladder calculi under spinal anesthesia.
At urethroscopy, a dense bladder neck stenosis was encountered that admitted the guide wire confirming possible stasis as the cause of the calculi formation in the urinary bladder .
An incision of the bladder neck stenosis was done allowing for cystoscopy to be performed with the finding of three bladder calculi .
A decision was taken to have an open cystolithotomy to avoid further disruption of the bladder neck and so an 18F foley catheter was passed for continuous bladder drainage. A careful inspection revealed hypertrophic scar of the previous incision used for the radical prostatectomy. This had not regress since appearing some months after the procedure. An over production of collagen was considered as a possible aetiology of the dense bladder neck stenosis .
At cystolithotomy, the abnormal surgical scar was excised this was however not sent for histology. Three calculi were retrieved. The largest was 4 cm and two smaller- 2 cm calculi . None of the calculi had clips as a nidus.
The urinary bladder was closed in two layers using vicryl 1 suture and the skin closed with Nylon 2–0.
The composition of a calculus was calcium oxalate monohydrate (20 %), Uric acid anhydrous (70 %) and Uric acid dihydrate (10 %) on analysis.
The patient recovered well and was discharged post of day 4 and the urethra catheter removed on the post operative day 14. He had been voiding well with no dysuria or frequency and was continent of urine and was satisfied with the outcome one month after removal of the urethral catheter. A follow up whole body MRI, the staging and imaging modality available, has been requested on account of the current PSA of 0.32 ng/ml to direct further management.
The work has been reported in line with the SCARE 2020 criteria .