An 8-year-old male presented after two weeks of progressively worsening headaches, nausea, and vomiting. Before that, he had fallen, hitting his head on cement. On examination, his speech was intact, and he had no visual changes, facial droop, weakness, issues with memory loss, or altered mental status. There had been no changes in his sense of smell, hearing, or taste.
He was well in school and had been free of any fever, cough, congestion, sore throat, chest pain, diarrhea, dysuria, difficulty breathing, neck pain, or pain elsewhere. There had been no weight loss.
The family history included pancreatic cancer in a maternal grandfather and breast cancer in a maternal grandmother. However, a teenage first cousin had a brain tumor.
The patient had no significant past medical history. He had four healthy siblings.
On examination, he had a blood pressure of 92/42 mmHg, pulse 52, and temperature of 37.2°C. No lymphadenopathy was found. The neurologic examination revealed mild truncal ataxia, an abnormal tandem gait, and a heel-shin test on the left side. His laboratory analyses revealed a normal but slightly elevated lactate dehydrogenase . An initial computed tomography scan revealed a complex multiloculated cystic mass centered within the left cerebellar hemisphere, with moderate mass effect and partial effacement of the fourth ventricle. There was minimal dilatation of the supratentorial ventricular system. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a large, well-circumscribed mass centered within the left cerebellar hemisphere, with apparent exophytic extension through the posterolateral cortical margin and suggested adherence to the overlying endosteal dural layer .
Clinically, a diagnosis of atypical pilocytic astrocytoma was favored. However, the tumor was heterogeneous on imaging, leading to a consideration of other possible diagnoses, such as a medulloblastoma or a malignant glioma.
At surgery, the left-sided intradural, extra-axial tumor was found to have eroded through the dura with a consistency of an extra-axial meningioma. Gross total resection was achieved. MRIs 9 months after surgery revealed no abnormal enhancement or evidence of recurrence.
The sections revealed a tumor with large hypocellular and moderately cellular areas with scattered stellate and spindle cells.
The toluidine blue stain revealed scattered mast cells. Alcian blue staining was extensive. The periodic acid schiff (PAS) showed no loss with periodic acid schiff, diastase (PASD). Stellate and spindle cells showed scattered epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), S100, rare progesterone receptor, no pan-cytokeratin, no CK18, and no calretinin immunoreactivity. There was neurofilament immunoreactivity in one of two blocks, and focally, collagen bundles were found, but no notable collagen IV immunoreactivity was found. No ALK1, CD1a, or CD117 immunoreactivity was seen. CD68 and CD163 highlighted macrophages .
Vimentin immunostaining was extensive. Beta-catenin was cytoplasmic. Langerin was found in scattered cells.
In some areas, several mitoses were found, and the Ki-67 labeling is focused at approximately 13% or higher .
Tumor cells showed no immunoreactivity with SMA, MSA, synaptophysin, glial fibrillary acidic protein, desmin, and CAM 5.2. CD34 was confined largely to blood vessels. Fluorescence in situ hybridization for FUS (16p11.2) revealed no rearrangement of the gene. Subsequently, DNA sequencing revealed no mutations in AKT1, ALK, BRAF, CDK4, CTTNB1, DDDR2, EGFR, ERB2-4, FGFR12 and 3, IGH1 and 2, JAK2 and 3, KIT, KRAS, PAM2K1 and 2, MET, MTOR, PDGFRA, PIK3CA, RAF1, PET, ROS, and SMO genes. Genome-wide DNA methylation at Knight Diagnostic laboratory, attempted multiple times on two different tissue blocks, was unsuccessful due to low DNA concentration. The tumor was classified as a low-grade fibromyxoid lesion.
Six years after surgery, the patient has had no recurrence. He is clinically well and active in sports, requiring balance and fine motor skills.