We report the case of a 60-year-old melanoderm man, with a history of urinary pathology not documented 20 years ago and a peptic ulcer that was also undocumented. No significant family history was reported. He was referred from Keita Health District for abdominal pain that was first localized in the right hypochondrium before becoming generalized, with fever and vomiting, without stopping transit for about 5 days.
On admission, the patient had good general condition as well as well-colored conjunctiva and mucous membranes, with Glasgow score 15, temperature 37.3 °C, blood pressure: 120/80 mm Hg, heart rate 68 beats per minute, respiratory rate 34 cycles per minute, and oxygen saturation 99%. Physical examination revealed a soft but sensitive abdomen with a screaming umbilicus.
Proctological examination revealed a huge anal prolapse.
Laboratory investigations showed that he had a white blood cell count of 28,100/mm3 predominantly granulocytic; anemia at 10.7 g/dl, normocytic, normochromic; hyperplaquettosis at 528,000/mm3; Rhesus blood grouping O negative; normal uremia at 0.23 g/dl; normal serum creatinine at 10.13 mg/l; and normal blood sugar at 1.07 g/l.
An emergency abdominal ultrasound does not objectively detect the presence of the cecum and appendix in the iliac fossa. However, it does objectively determine the normality of the gallbladder. We do not have a computed tomography (CT) scan in the regional hospital center to further support the diagnosis.
All in all, the diagnosis of peritonitis seemed obvious, even though the etiology remains to be determined.
After an intensive preoperative reanimation, a median laparotomy was performed. The exploration showed an acute generalized peritonitis with pus , distension of the colonic frame with a left dolichocolon, false membranes, and a phlegmonous subhepatic appendix perforated. It measures up to 10 cm and is located 3 cm from the ileocecal junction . An appendectomy, a hemostasis, and a promontofixation of the rectum and peritoneal toilet were subsequently performed, followed by installation of a drain in the Douglas cul-de-sac. No postoperative complication was noted, and he was discharged home 8 days after his operation with antibiotic therapy and analgesic.