An 11-year-old Yemeni young girl presented with a history of recurrent urinary tract infections. Her past medical history was insignificant. Radiological investigations revealed that both kidneys are normal in size, position, and echogenicity, with bilateral renal fullness. Voiding cystourethrography was unremarkable, and follow-up ultrasound showed minimal fullness in the right renal pelvis.
At the age of 14 years old, she developed left flank pain along with a frontal headache. Ultrasound revealed a well-defined echogenic lesion measuring three centimeters at the lower pole of the left kidney, demonstrating mild vascularity, which was presumed to be angiomyolipoma. Further follow-up after three months revealed an increase in the size of the mass that measured around 3.22 × 3.8 cm with the same degree of vascularity .
A subsequent computed tomography (CT) scan showed an enhancing mass, measuring 4 × 5 cm, arising from the mid- and lower-left renal pelvis. No macroscopic intralesional fat was identified with no invasion of the renal vessels or enlarged lymph nodes .
By magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), we identified a solitary well-circumscribed left renal hilum mass that measured 5 × 3 × 5 cm. No vascular invasion was identified, and the mass showed avid enhancement in the arterial phase and minimal washout in the delay phase .
The patient underwent laparoscopic radical nephrectomy with an uneventful recovery. On regular follow-up, the patient was found to have persistent right kidney hydronephrosis, along with recurrent urinary tract infections, chronic kidney disease (stage three) with an estimated GFR of 58 ml/min/1.73 m2, and stage 2 hypertension.
A pathology report revealed a well-defined tumor mass measuring 4 × 4 × 4 cm, located at the lower pole of the left kidney, brown, with foci of hemorrhage. No gross invasion of the renal capsule or perinephric fat was identified, and the adrenal glands were unremarkable .
Microscopic examination revealed a well-defined tumor composed of round to polygonal cells with abundant granular eosinophilic cytoplasm and regular, uniform nuclei, arranged in nests, acini, and tubules. Foci of hemorrhage were noted, and rare mitotic figures were identified. There was no evidence of necrosis. The nonneoplastic renal parenchyma shows only glomerular congestion and focal dilatation of the renal calyces. Hale colloidal iron histochemical staining was negative in the tumor cells. The neoplastic cells were also negative for vimentin and CK7 immunohistochemical stains.