An otherwise healthy, 28-year-old Hispanic female with no known past medical history was brought to the emergency department by emergency medical services. According to the history provided, the patient had been walking with a friend before experiencing sudden onset abdominal pain followed by seizure activity. After an episode of emesis and repeat seizure during initial triage evaluation, the patient was taken to the resuscitation bay for further evaluation. Further history-taking from family revealed that the patient had attended a “cosmetic party” earlier that day (within the prior 24 hours) and received gluteal soft-tissue injections.
Initial vitals were notable for tachycardia with a heart rate of 116 beats per minute (bpm), and tachypnea with a respiratory rate of 34 breaths per minute. The patient was also found to be hypoxic at 70% saturation on pulse oximetry. Temperature and blood pressure were 98.3° Fahrenheit and 137/82 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg), respectively. Seizure activity was controlled with 4 milligrams (mg) of lorazepam. The patient remained unable to provide history or follow commands, with continued hypoxia and signs of respiratory distress despite supplemental oxygen with a nonrebreather mask. Due to respiratory failure, rapid sequence intubation was performed. The physical exam was notable for findings suggestive of recent gluteal injections, with surgical pen markings, injection sites, and oozing of clear liquid. After intubation, bloody fluid from the endotracheal tube was suggestive of alveolar hemorrhage.
Chest radiograph obtained immediately after intubation demonstrated left-sided, ground-glass opacities. Computed tomography demonstrated extensive bilateral pulmonary airspace disease as well as opacities in the gluteal area suggestive of cosmetic injections, consistent with the physical exam ( and ). A subsegmental pulmonary embolism was also present. Broad spectrum antibiotics were initiated due to concern for a surgical site infection, given subcutaneous emphysema also present on CT . Blood gas results were notable for a lactic acidosis with a pH of 7.24 (reference range 7.35–7.45). A decreased ratio of arterial oxygen partial pressure to fractional inspired oxygen of 73 was also present, suggestive of severe ARDS. Altered mental status and respiratory failure are suspected to be secondary to effects of silicone emboli.
The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit for further management. The hospital course was complicated by further hemodynamic instability and worsening acidemia. The patient experienced rapidly worsening tachycardia and hypotension, with the heart rate increasing to 144 bpm and mean arterial pressure decreasing to 60 mm Hg within a one-hour time span. Increasing troponin levels from 0.49 nanograms per milliliter (ng/mL) to 1.64 ng/mL (reference range 0–0.5 ng/mL) were also noted. Seven hours after arrival at the hospital, the patient experienced a cardiac arrest. Despite aggressive intervention involving one hour of cardiopulmonary resuscitation and the administration of alteplase for suspected embolism, the patient was pronounced dead.
Review by the medical examiner later confirmed initial clinical impressions. Exam was remarkable for multiple puncture marks at the gluteal region. Multiple cysts filled with viscous material and granulation tissue were present. The patient was noted to have multiple emboli systemically, present in the lungs, kidneys, heart, and brain. Alveolar hemorrhage of the lungs was noted; histological analysis demonstrated lipoid material in the vasculature as well as within macrophages. Microscopic analysis of embolic material was consistent with silicone. The autopsy report identified evidence of silicone embolism to microvascular structures of the brain, with ischemic changes noted.