A 44-year-old man with esophageal cancer was admitted for 2 wk with a fever and cough. He complained of low-grade fever and cough with nonpurulent sputum on December 3, 2021, after catching a cold.
Community-acquired pneumonia was considered, but moxifloxacin was ineffective. Exertional dyspnea appeared 2 wk later. ICI-ILD was suspected, so he came to our hospital.
He was diagnosed with esophageal squamous-cell cancer (T2NIM0) after surgery in November 2020. Then, he was successfully treated with 6 cycles of chemotherapy plus tislelizumab (200 mg, every 3 wk), one cycle of radiotherapy, and 9 cycles of tislelizumab (the final cycle in September 2021).
The patient did not smoke or drink. He had no significant family history.
There were no palpably enlarged superficial lymph nodes. There were no abnormal signs in the chest (including the heart and lungs) or abdominal examinations. There was no edema in either lower extremity.
Both the complete blood count and biochemical analysis results were normal. The lymphocyte subgroup analysis showed that the peripheral lymphocyte count was 870/µL, neutrophil count was 6000/μL, and CD4+ lymphocyte count was 284/µL. The C-reactive protein level was 99 mg/mL, and the ESR was 86 mm/h. Both his procalcitonin and 1,3-β-glucanase levels were normal. His nasopharyngeal swabs for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) RNA and influenza A and B RNA, which were tested by PCR, were negative. The repeated rapid detection of the SARS-CoV-2 antigen was also negative. Arterial blood gas analysis showed hypoxia during inspiration of room air at rest: pH was 7.429, PCO2 was 37.4 mmHg and PO2 was 66.5 mmHg. Both ICI-ILD and infectious pulmonary diseases were suspected. Therefore, he underwent bronchoscopy. There were no significant abnormal manifestations during bronchoscopy. However, Mycobacterium tuberculosis was identified by next-generation sequencing (NGS) analysis of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF), which was harvested from the lingular lobe. The patient was still negative for SARS-CoV-2 RNA and influenza A and B RNA in the BALF NGS analysis.
Chest CT showed multiple reversed-halo cycles and consolidations in both lungs.