A 14-year-old male basketball player with no specific medical history was referred to our hospital with acute pain in the left knee. The pain occurred when he took off after jumping while playing basketball. Physical examination revealed swelling and tenderness on the proximal tibia area. He was unable to extend the knee. The plain radiograph showed a displaced, multifragmentary tibial tuberosity fracture involving the proximal tibial articular surface (Ogden classification type III) .
Two days after admission, under general anesthesia, open reduction and internal fixation were performed in a supine position by a senior pediatric orthopedic surgeon. After a midline skin incision was made, the fracture site was carefully cleared of debris and hematoma. For the reinforced technique of tension band wiring, we identified the tibial tuberosity and its insertion site for the patellar tendon and prepared a 2-mm-sized drill hole in the proximal tibial diaphysis at 2 cm distal to the fracture site. The wire (1.5 mm, 16 gauge stainless steel wire) was inserted between the patellar tendon and tibial tuberosity (insertion site of patellar tendon). Then, the wire wrapped proximally around the patellar tendon at its insertion site on the fractured fragment and passed distally through the 2-mm-sized predrill cortical hole in the figure-of-eight configurations. Tightening the figure of the eight loops draws the fractured fragments together and anatomically reduces under appropriate compression. This reinforced technique of tension band wiring wrapping around the patellar tendon can achieve the reduction and fixation of the fracture simultaneously. We confirmed the fixation stability with a range of knee joint motions. Internal fixation was supplemented by 4.0 mm cannulated at proximal tibia epiphysis . The torn periosteum and patellar tendon were repaired with a suture anchor.
The knee was immobilized in a long leg cast at 5° of knee flexion, which was applied postoperatively. After 2 weeks, active and passive knee range of motion was started. At the postoperative 6th week, a full range of motion was achieved without any pain, and the extension power of the operated knee was equal to that of the contralateral side. The patient was able to return to the pre-injury level of sports activity after 2 months postoperatively. During the yearly outpatient follow-up at the end of the postoperative 2nd year, the patient did not complain of any wire-related pain or any other complications .