A 59-year-old woman was referred to our department for intraperitoneal chemotherapy for gastric cancer with peritoneal carcinomatosis. She had already received two courses of chemotherapy with S-1 plus cisplatin in the previous hospital. Upper intestinal endoscopy showed Borrmann type IV gastric cancer with ulceration at the upper part of the stomach . Pathological diagnosis was poorly differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma with the signet ring cell carcinoma. Staging laparoscopy showed a thickened omentum due to carcinomatosis (“omental cake”) and numerous disseminated nodules in the whole abdominal cavity. An intraperitoneal access port was implanted to allow for chemotherapy administration. After the staging laparoscopy, she received five courses of chemotherapy with intraperitoneal administration of PTX. At first, two courses with intraperitoneal administration of PTX, intravenous administration of oxaliplatin, and oral S-1 were done. Then three courses with intraperitoneal and intravenous administration of PTX and oral S-1 were done. Oxaliplatin was administered intravenously at a dose of 100 mg/m2 on day 1, and PTX was administered intravenously at a dose of 50 mg/m2 on day 1 and intraperitoneally via the access port at a dose of 20 mg/m2 on days 1 and 8, respectively. PTX was diluted in 1 l normal saline over 1 h. S-1 was administered orally twice daily at a dose of 80 mg/m2 per day for 14 consecutive days, followed by 7 days without treatment. These chemotherapy in clinical studies were approved by the institutional review board of The University of Tokyo. Repeat laparoscopy showed disappearance of the peritoneal carcinomatosis , after which she underwent total gastrectomy with lymphadenectomy. Pathological examination revealed no viable cancer cells remaining in the resected specimen . The patient received a total of 38 courses of chemotherapy with intraperitoneal and intravenous administration of PTX and oral S-1 after the gastrectomy, without apparent metastasis or recurrence.
Two years and 6 months after the surgery, she experienced lumbago, with increases in the carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19-9, and CA125 levels observed. Computed tomography showed bone metastases at the thoracic to lumbar vertebrae. A decreased platelet count was noted, indicating DIC, and the patient was hence readmitted to our hospital.
At the time of admission, percutaneous bleeding was observed in her forearm. Blood test showed hemoglobin, 9.9 g/dl; platelet count, 72,000/mm3; alkaline phosphatase, 1969 IU/l; prothrombin time international normalized ratio, 1.17; fibrinogen, 346 mg/dl; and fibrinogen degradation products, 201.1 μg/ml. The patient was diagnosed as DIC, and treatment with gabexate mesilate was initiated. The tumor marker levels, including CEA (426.3 ng/ml) and CA19-9 (2413 IU/ml), were also further increased. Bone scintigraphy and fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography showed multiple bone metastatic lesions in the thoracic to lumbar vertebrae, costae, sternum, iliac bone, scapulae, and femora . DCBM from gastric cancer was clinically diagnosed, and chemotherapy was immediately commenced with a regimen of weekly irinotecan (CPT-11). On day 1, intravenous CPT-11 (100 mg/m2, 80 % dose) was administered, and the regimen was repeated on a weekly basis. After three courses of chemotherapy, she recovered from DIC with relief of the lumbago. The same regimen was repeated in an outpatient setting for 5 months. However, although the patient did not show any signs of peritoneal recurrence, the tumor markers increased and DIC developed again, and the patient died of DCBM 3 years and 5 months after the introduction of intraperitoneal chemotherapy.