A 74-year-old man with a single chamber ventricular pacemaker in situ was referred to our unit for consideration of CRT defibrillator implantation. He had a history of anterior myocardial infarction in 2004. He subsequently developed LV systolic dysfunction (LV ejection fraction 25%), NYHA 2 symptoms and severe mitral regurgitation on a background of prior long-standing atrial fibrillation. Coronary bypass artery grafting with mitral valve repair and support ring placement was undertaken in 2005. The procedure was complicated by perioperative complete heart block. A single chamber pacemaker had been implanted post-operatively and had been programmed VVIR 60–130.
In 2016, he reported NYHA Class III symptoms. Blood pressure was 110/70 mmHg and estimated glomerular filtration rate 50 mL/min/1.73 m2. Right ventricular (RV) pacing burden was >90%. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) demonstrated an LV ejection fraction of 20%. Medications included Irbesartan 150 mg od, spironolactone 25 mg od, warfarin, furosemide 40 mg twice daily, and hydralazine 25 mg three times daily. There were no symptoms of ischaemia and coronary artery angiography was not undertaken.
At the time of device upgrade, venography demonstrated patent left upper limb venous conduits. The existing left pre-pectoral pocket was opened, and the left subclavian vein was punctured and double-wired. The CS ostium was not identified despite attempts by two experienced consultants. Guide catheters utilized included an Attain MB2, Attain EHXL, and Attain Deflectable (Medtronic). Inner catheters were used within each guide in a mother-child configuration. Catheters included an AL1, AL2, MPA, and JR4 (Cordis). At a fluoroscopy time of 40 min, the CS ostium had not been identified.
During attempts to localize the CS, the left inferior phrenic vein (LIPV) was unintentionally cannulated. This was noted to arise from immediately below the junction of the right atrium and inferior vena cava (IVC) . The mid-course of the vessel was noted to pass adjacent to the inferolateral LV wall.
On-table coronary artery angiography for CS localization, epicardial lead placement, and trans-septal lead placement were considered and discussed; however, the patient declined additional procedures. The possibility of using the LIPV for lead placement was discussed with the patient and he consented to proceed in the knowledge that a novel procedural approach, with incumbent risks, was being undertaken.
To progress the case, an RV defibrillator lead was fixed to the inferior ventricular septum. The LIPV was cannulated using an AL1 diagnostic catheter, introduced via the Attain deflectable guide catheter (Medtronic) and wired with a Whisper MS coronary guidewire (Abbott). An Attain Performa quadripolar pacing lead (Medtronic) was passed to a site immediately adjacent to the inferolateral LV wall ( and ). LV capture thresholds and phrenic nerve capture thresholds were successfully assessed during pacing in a number of vector configurations . The lead site was accepted, the device generator was implanted (Boston Scientific, Autogen CRT-D) and the procedure was concluded. Twelve-lead electrocardiograms showing native underlying rhythm, RV, and biventricular pacing following implantations are shown (–).
At 6-week follow-up, the patient reported a marked improvement in breathlessness and improved exercise capacity. Phrenic nerve and LV capture vectors were assessed and found to be largely unaltered from the time of implantation . Transthoracic echocardiography was repeated 10 months after the procedure and LV ejection fraction was reported to have improved, being 44%. Pacing parameters remained stable at follow-up of 22 months after the procedure (LV capture threshold of 2.5 V at pulse width 2 ms, June 2018). As of the current time (March 2019), the patient’s clinical condition remains stable.