A 55-year-old male presented with frontal headaches 3 times a week with progressive memory problems, word-finding difficulties, and new-onset seizures. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed a 7.0 × 6.2 × 4.4 cm enhancing mass extending across the cribriform plate and into the right anterior cranial fossa and right nasal cavity . The patient was initially referred to ENT for biopsy which revealed TCS; he was then referred to the neurosurgical service for further evaluation.
Given the preoperative diagnosis via transnasal biopsy and presumed hypervascularity of the neoplasm, the patient underwent preoperative embolization followed by bilateral frontal craniotomy via a bicoronal incision with pericranial flap preservation. ENT assisted with exposure of the tumor using the transglabellar subcranial approach. Tumor was found to be pale and hypervascular with a dural breach in the low frontal plane with involvement of the superior ethmoid sinus . Endonasally, the right middle turbinate and remaining ethmoid sinuses were resected. Gross total resection was achieved with significant decrease in blood loss once the tumor was completely removed. The inferior right anterior pole of the dura just above the superior ethmoids appeared to have tumor invasion. This area of dura was resected and reconstructed using dural repair graft. Then, tisseal was placed within each intervening layer of dural graft and duragen, which was placed over the dural closure. The pericranial flap was placed in the nasoethmoidal defect and an additional 10-cc tisseal was applied. The frontal sinuses were fully cranialized bilaterally. Excess pericranium flap on the left was replaced over the frontal bone.
Staining was positive for CK-PanAE1-3CAM52, vimentin, EMA, S100, CK 5/6, P63, synaptophysin, chromogranin, and GFAP. Staining negative for CD99 and neurofilament .
The postoperative course was significant for pulmonary embolism and was otherwise unremarkable. Twenty-four months postoperatively the patient is and doing well without any seizure-like activity with return to baseline neurological status. MRI showed no evidence of recurrence with expected postoperative changes . He completed adjuvant chemotherapy with three rounds of cisplatin therapy and radiation therapy consisting of 60 Gy in 30 fractions to the nasal cavity, frontal sinuses, and partial brain. He is back to work and is currently being weaned from antiepileptics.