A 48-year-old Hispanic male presented to the emergency room (ER) with colitis in March 2008. Hematological workup revealed pancytopenia (hemoglobin, 6.9 gm; leukocyte count, 4800/uL; platelet count, 23,000/uL). Computerized tomography (CT) scan abdomen revealed a massive splenomegaly (17 cm). Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy showed hypercellular marrow diffusely infiltrated by small lymphocytes with round to bean shaped nuclei with reticulated chromatin pattern and abundant cytoplasm. Immunohistochemical staining showed monoclonal kappa expressing B cell population positive for CD19, CD22, and CD45 and TRAP while negative for CD23, CD10, CD5, and CD3. Reticulin stain showed diffuse increase in reticulin fibers in the marrow. A subsequent diagnosis of HCL was made and the patient received outpatient 2-chlorodeoxyadenosine (CDA) 0.1 mg/kg for 5 days. As supportive management, he also received 2 units of packed red cells. He was readmitted 3 days after completion of chemotherapy with febrile neutropenia, severe abdominal pain, and skin rash. Infectious etiology work up and biopsy of the skin rash were negative. Broad-spectrum antibiotics and antifungals were given empirically. A CT scan of abdomen revealed thickening of the duodenum. Subsequently an esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) revealed duodenal ulcerative inflammation and biopsies were performed. The duodenal biopsy was positive for chronic inflammatory infiltrate, primarily consisting of atypical lymphocytes and plasma cells with TRAP positivity and hence a diagnosis of duodenal involvement with HCL was made . Repeat bone marrow biopsy done 2 weeks after finishing chemotherapy revealed residual disease. At the 3-month follow-up, the patient was asymptomatic with a normocellular marrow and no residual disease. Labs showed a leukocyte count of 2800/uL, hemoglobin at 10 gm%, and platelet count of 246,000/uL. Repeat abdomen CT scan in March 2009 showed resolution of duodenal thickening and spleen size of 12 cm. Currently, the patient has been in clinical remission for 6 years with 4-6 monthly follow up visits and continues to do well.