A 27-year-old female visited our emergency room (ER) with intermittent abdominal pain and nausea. Her last bowel movement was 2 days before visiting. She had no notable past medical history, including no abdominal operation or growth abnormalities. On her physical examination, she was tachycardic, with a pulse of 136 bpm, but the rest of her vital signs were normal. Abdominal examination revealed distension and epigastric tenderness with peritoneal irritation symptoms. Her laboratory examination results showed slightly elevated C-reactive protein levels (1.8 mg/dL), but the other findings were within normal ranges. Enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed enlargement at the level of the ascending and transverse colon . The transverse colon had an obstructive point with a whirlpool sign. The colonic wall showed no ischemic signs, but the supply vein was dilated. The large intestine was located on the left side of the abdominal cavity, and the small intestine occupied the other side. The duodenum did not cross between the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) and the abdominal aorta but went down straight on the right side of the SMA. The SMA and the superior mesenteric vein (SMV) were located at inverted positions; the SMA was on the right side, and the SMV was on the left. The patient was diagnosed with transverse colonic volvulus, and nonrotation of the intestine was suspected.
A transanal ileus tube was placed endoscopically at the dilated colon to decompress the enlargement. The mucosa of the colon was congestive, but there were no necrotic findings . She was treated conservatively and observed for the next 24 h. However, her symptoms remained, and CT revealed no improvement in the intestinal obstruction and showed increasing ascites. Conservative therapy was determined to be ineffective; therefore, emergency surgery was performed. The laparoscopic view revealed the enlarged transverse colon, and there was no space for the surgical procedure. Consequently, the operation was converted to laparotomy with a middle abdominal incision. The dilated transverse colon was pulled out from the abdominal cavity without any mobilization, and it was rotated with 180° clockwise along a bridging adhesion within the transverse colon itself. The dilated transverse colon was resected and reconstructed with functional end-to-end anastomosis (FEEA). The surgical observation also showed that the mesenteries of the ascending colon to the transverse colon had mobility without fixation to the retroperitoneum. There was no ligament formation requiring Ladd’s procedure. The surgical diagnosis was transverse colonic volvulus, nonrotation type, due to the anomaly of bowel rotation. She was discharged uneventfully 12 days after the surgery.
Six years after the first surgery, the patient present to the ER with abdominal fullness and lower abdominal pain. On physical examination, her vital signs were normal. Abdominal examination revealed distension and light lower abdominal tenderness without peritoneal irritation. Her laboratory data were within the normal range. Enhanced CT revealed the dilated colon with an obstruction at the ascending colon . Although a focal beak sign and narrowing of the vein were noted, there was no sign of ischemia. The appendix was located on the left upper side of the abdominal cavity, unlike in the previous surgery. Clinical diagnosis was volvulus of the cecum and intestinal nonrotation, and emergency laparotomy was performed. In the surgery, the tract from the dilated cecum to the remaining transverse colon was extracted from the abdominal cavity without any resistance . There was torsion of the terminal ileum to the remaining transverse colon with a 180° clockwise rotation. The dilated and twisted tract was removed, and ileocolic anastomosis with FEEA was performed. The anastomotic site of the previous surgery was adhered and fixed to surrounding tissue. She was discharged uneventfully on postoperative day 9. Although the patient was diagnosed with obstruction of the intestine caused by an operative adhesion 7 months after the surgery, conservative treatment relieved her symptoms in 3 days of hospitalization.