A 24-year-old female, right-hand dominant software engineer fell onto her outstretched hand and presented with pain, swelling, and deformity around the left elbow. Initial radiographs showed a closed Monteggia fracture-dislocation (proximal shaft of the ulna with anterior dislocation of the radial head – Bado type 1) . Under regional anesthesia, the fracture was fixed with LCDCP, and the radial head was reduced by closed means . Intraoperatively, we noticed a click at the wrist with pronosupination, and fluoroscopic imaging showed a subtle reducible dorsal subluxation of the distal radioulnar joint. Hence, we performed a closed reduction of DRUJ, and she was given an above elbow slab in full supination. After 3 weeks of the index procedure, the POP cast was removed, and radiographs showed well-reduced radial head and well-aligned ulna fracture. She was started on active and passive range of motion exercises for the elbow and wrist. However, she had persistent wrist pain and stiffness after 2 weeks of physical therapy. Range of motion in the elbow was 0–130o, wrist movements dorsiflexion 0–50o, palmar flexion 0–40o, supination – nil, and pronation 0–40o. Subsequently, we investigated the patient using an MRI, which showed dorsal subluxation of the ulna with TFCC tear in the ulnar attachment of the volar radioulnar ligament . The patient was counseled for arthroscopic TFCC repair and DRUJ stabilization. She underwent wrist arthroscopy assessment through standard portals, and the volar TFCC was repaired using Arthrex Micro Lasso and FiberWire . The DRUJ was stabilized with 1.6 mm K-wire.
At 3 weeks following the second surgery, we removed the K-wire, and she was started on physiotherapy. The patient was routinely followed up thereafter. At her latest follow-up of 3 months, her range of motion in the wrist was dorsiflexion 0–45o and palmar flexion 0–20o. The forearm movements were pronation 0–80o and supination 0–50o . All her movements were pain free. The patient was comfortable, and her radiographs showed a healing proximal ulna fracture. Wrist radiographs showed a well-reduced DRUJ.