A 34-year-old man presented to our institution 17 h after sustaining injury to both the hips in a road traffic accident. The patient was sitting in the passenger seat of a loaded truck. It had a head-on-collision with another truck. He was not under the influence of any drugs or alcohol during the accident. As per history, at the time of the collision, he was seated in the passenger seat with his right hip flexed and the right foot resting on the dashboard of the truck and the left leg abutting the dashboard. The delay in the presentation was due to the patient being attended at a primary care center and subsequently referred to our center for further management. On initial examination, he was hemodynamically stable with a Glasgow Coma Scale of 15. There was no open injury of lower limb but multiple small abrasions all over the body were present. There was no associated injury to the chest or abdomen. The initial management was done as per the Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) protocol. The right lower limb had an attitude of flexion, abduction, and external rotation, the left limb was in flexion, internal rotation, and adduction. Distal to the level of injury the motor function, sensation, and pulse were normal. The patient was then subjected to standard trauma series X-rays. The pelvis X-ray showed bilateral hip dislocation – left-sided posterior and right-sided anterior (obturator type) .
Under total intravenous anesthesia and fluoroscopy guidance, closed reduction was attempted with the patient supine on the operating table. Posterior dislocation was reduced with Allis maneuver and anterior dislocation was reduced using a similar maneuver, but with the application of longitudinal traction and the assistant applying lateral traction on the proximal thigh with a towel. There was no change in the distal neurovascular status. Both reductions were confirmed under fluoroscopy. The right hip which had dislocated anteriorly was found to be stable. The left hip, which had a posterior dislocation posteriorly, was found to subluxate on application of moderate posteriorly directed force in flexed position. Fracture of the posterior wall was suspected on the left side with fluoroscopy which was not discernible in the pre-operative radiograph. The patient was then subjected to distal femur skeletal traction bilaterally with 3 mm Steinman pin with a weight of 15 pounds.
He underwent post-reduction radiograph and computed tomography (CT) scan of bilateral hips to detect any occult or impacted fractures and to plan further management (, ). He was diagnosed with Thompson Epstein fracture type 2 with posterior wall fragment on the left side.
The patient was subjected to regular pre-anesthetic workup and underwent surgery on the 14th day following trauma under general anesthesia. The left hip joint was exposed using the Kocher-Langenbeck approach. Piriformis and external rotators were found to be intact. Stay sutures were applied before their division. The intra-articular osteochondral fragments that interposed between the articular surfaces were removed. The fracture fragments were reduced and provisionally fixed with K-wires. Fixation was done with two spring plates (two holes and three holes). After application of these two spring plates, dynamic stress test was done and the fracture was found to be stable .
After confirming the stability of the fracture to avoid extensive soft-tissue dissection, we decided not put at any secondary stabilizing plate in this case. Wound was closed after achieving hemostasis over a suction drain. Post-operative X-ray is shown in .
The post-operative period was uneventful. Antibiotics were given up to 3 days post-surgery. The patient was discharged after 5 days. Intermittent left hip passive range of motion (ROM) exercises were started on the 5th post-operative day as tolerated by the patient, while maintaining the traction. Stitch removal was done 14 days after surgery. Bilateral skeletal traction pins were removed after 3 weeks and the patient was started on the right hip ROM exercises. The patient was started on partial weight-bearing with walker from 6 weeks after trauma. Complete weight-bearing was allowed 14 weeks after surgery. Serial radiographs were obtained at every visit till union was evident.
At 6 months post-surgery, the patient had excellent and pain-free ROM. He was able to squat without difficulty and commute on a bicycle. He had no complaints resuming his occupation as a truck driver. At 3 years after the surgery, radiologically, there appeared to be some deformity of the left femoral head with early AVN changes . The patient did not report any restriction in performing his activities or daily living or occupation .
Due to the initial delay in diagnosis and treatment of the patient, the patient had been counseled about the high probability of complications. The patient is planned for strict monitoring every 3 months to detect any further deterioration.