A 56-year-old Caucasian man underwent an uncomplicated elective lumbar laminectomy for spinal stenosis, after which he developed a postural headache. Due to 2 months of ongoing post-laminectomy headache, a lumbar MRI was obtained that demonstrated increased extradural fluid around L4-L5 which did not clearly communicate with the thecal sac . A CSF leak was suspected, and the patient was referred for an epidural blood patch. Prior to the blood patch, 3 mL of 1% lidocaine was injected for local anesthesia. The level of L5-S1 was found utilizing fluoroscopic guidance and 1 mL of Iohexol with intrathecal-like spread noted. Then, the blood patch was performed using 20 mL of autologous blood and a 20-gauge 3.5 in. Tuohy needle, utilizing loss-of-resistance technique.
Immediately post-procedure, the patient developed lower extremity spasms with refractory pain. The patient was then promptly referred to the nearby emergency department. Within 6 hours, he was unable to urinate, began repeating words, and he became verbally and physically abusive to staff and family. Nine hours after the procedure, his speech became increasingly dysarthric, which was followed by a generalized tonic-clonic seizure lasting 2 min. He subsequently developed respiratory distress, hypertension, and tachycardia, requiring mechanical intubation. He was also given intravenous levetiracetam at that time and the head of his bed remained elevated above 30 degrees.
Computed tomography (CT) of the head without contrast was obtained just under 12 h after blood injection. This imaging was remarkable for diffuse cortical sulci obscuration, with preserved grey white matter differentiation. Non-contrast 1.5 T magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain was obtained about 14 h after blood injection. On T2 fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR), there was diffuse sulcal and ventricular hyperintensity consistent with diffuse spread of blood products or inadequately subtracted CSF. On susceptibility weighted imaging (SWI), there was diffuse susceptibility artifacts. This imaging was consistent with diffuse infiltration of blood products throughout the CSF. Additionally, MRI of the lumbar spine showed T1 hypointensity and T2 hyperintensity in the epidural and subarachnoid space, with T2 blooming artifact in the thecal sac. Lumbar spine imaging was consistent with blood products in both the epidural and subarachnoid spaces, possibly from mixed intrathecal and epidural blood injection, without hematoma.
The patient had an uneventful hospital course. EEG monitoring, initiated after his generalized tonic-clonic convulsions, revealed no further seizure activity. He was extubated on his third hospital day. He was discharged home on his fifth hospital day. At the time of discharge, he had no focal neurological deficits, but noted parasacral tenderness to palpation. At his three-month follow-up visit, he noted that his headache had completely resolved, and that he had no further seizures or other residual deficits.
The patient provided written informed consent for the publication of this case report.