A 49-year-old female sustained a traumatic aortic transection 14 years prior, managed by a 28 mm × 10 cm Gore TAG endovascular stent-graft (Gore Medical, Flagstaff, AZ, USA). Due to persistent endoleak, she underwent open replacement of her descending thoracic aorta 4 years later with a 26 mm Terumo Vascular Graft (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan). A postoperative left diaphragmatic hernia mandated re-thoracotomy sometime thereafter.
Ten years after her open aortic surgery and two months prior to presenting to our service, the patient presented emergently to another institution with hemoptysis. A pseudoaneurysm at her distal aortic suture line was identified on computed tomography (CT), whereupon she underwent placement of a 26 mm × 26 mm × 10 cm Conformable GORE TAG Endoprosthesis (Gore Medical, Flagstaff, AZ, USA). Her hemoptysis resolved, and she was discharged on empiric broad-spectrum oral antibiotics.
Two months after her endovascular procedure, the patient presented to our institution with dyspnea, recurrent hemoptysis, malaise, and fever. CT demonstrated a pocket of gas adjacent to her thoracic endograft , findings consistent with overt graft infection. The patient subsequently had blood and sputum cultures obtained, which were found to be negative. As part of her preoperative assessment she underwent transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE), which was found to be unremarkable. Flexible bronchoscopy was performed, which identified significant fibrino-purulent exudate in the left mainstem bronchus and a fistulous connection to the mediastinum .
The patient was taken to the operating suite four days after presentation, where she underwent median sternotomy. Cardiopulmonary bypass was established with direct ascending aortic and dual-stage right atrial venous cannulation. Antegrade and retrograde cardioplegia cannulas were placed for the potential requirement of a cross-clamp. The heart was retracted cephalad using the suction positioning device that we routinely use in off-pump coronary artery bypass grafting (Acrobat-i Positioner, Getinge LLC, Wayne, NJ, USA). The retrocardiac pericardium was exposed and opened, facilitating access to the distal descending thoracic aorta just above the diaphragm. Intraoperative transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) estimated the descending thoracic aorta just distal to her prior repair—the site of intended anastomosis—at approximately 18 mm. A partially occluding clamp was then applied to the descending aorta, an aortotomy was made, and an 18 mm Hemashield Gold prosthetic graft was anastomosed to the aorta at this location (Getinge LLC, Wayne, NJ, USA). The prosthetic graft was looped around the inferior wall of the right ventricle, behind the supra-diaphragmatic inferior vena cava, and around the lateral wall of the right atrium to be anastomosed to the greater curvature of the ascending aorta .
The aortic arch was mobilized and transected in zone 2, just distal to the left common carotid artery, using a 45 mm vascular stapler. An extra-anatomic bypass was constructed with a 6 mm Propaten graft from the ascending aorta to the left axillary artery , the latter exposed via a separate left infraclavicular incision (Gore Medical, Flagstaff, AZ, USA).
The patient recovered well and on the fifth postoperative day returned to the operating room for the planned second stage operation. Via a reoperative left thoracotomy, almost the entirety of the patient’s descending thoracic aorta was mobilized and excised, extending from the transected arch at zone 2, to the distal aorta just above the anastomosis to the extra-anatomic prosthetic graft . The excised portion of aorta included the previous surgical graft as well the endograft that had been placed more recently to control the suture line pseudoaneurysm . A latissimus dorsi muscle flap was used to reinforce the posterior wall of the left main bronchus.
The patient made an uncomplicated recovery and was discharged to a rehab facility 11 days after her second operation with broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotic therapy to continue for 6 weeks thereafter. At three month follow up, she remained afebrile with no hemoptysis or shortness of breath, tolerating a diet, and recovering well.