The presented case involves a 74-year-old male, Caucasian patient suffering from progressing swelling and gradually oncoming pain of the upper right extremity. No trauma was recollected. The symptoms had initially occurred the previous night. The patient denied any sore throat or congestion, dyspnea, chest pain or palpitations, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, dysuria, or rash.
The previous medical history included an excised soft tissue sarcoma of the left thigh with postoperative irradiation 5 years ago and regular follow-ups without pathological findings, as well as a benign prostatic hyperplasia and hyperuricemia. Regular medication included an uricostatic agent and an alpha receptor antagonist.
Physical examination indicated an edematous swelling of the right hand and forearm with superficial skin lesions of unknown cause, no reddening, a body temperature of 36.3 °C, a heart rate of 60 beats/min, an oxygen saturation of 94% with a respiratory rate of 19/min, and an arterial blood pressure of 156/69 mm/Hg with palpable pulses of the radial and ulnar artery, generalized tenderness upon palpation, and painfully restricted flection of all fingers. Laboratory tests showed a leukocytosis of 16,510/μl, and elevated levels for the C-reactive protein (CRP, 17.5 mg/dl) and creatine-kinase (CK, 669 U/l).
Computed tomographic imaging with application of a contrast agent (Ultravist® 300, Bayer Vital, Leverkusen, Germany) showed a generalized subcutaneous edema as well as a subfascial fluid accumulation around the musculature of the fore- and upper arm, moreover a reduction of density along the brachialis muscle. The supplying arterial blood vessels (Aa. brachialis, radialis and ulnaris) presented regularly.
Within 6 h a severe deterioration of the clinical findings occurred with progressive swelling and development of a compartment syndrome of the arm: a palm sized livid discoloration located at the medial elbow occurred, multiple blisters, a hypoesthesia of all fingers and heavy pain resistant to analgesics treatment. The radial and ulnar artery were not palpable anymore and no arterial flow was detectable using doppler sonography.
With the clinical symptoms of a compartment syndrome of the upper extremity, the patient was consequently admitted to the theater for emergency surgical exploration, debridement as well as medial and lateral fasciotomy of the fore- and upper arm. An extensive excision of the necrotic tissue was performed. Blood cultures were taken as well as multiple tissue samples for histopathologic and microbiological analyses. Predominately, the forearm flexors appeared at risk (pronator teres, flexor carpi radialis and ulnaris, flexor digitorum superficialis and profundus, palmaris longus, pronator quadratus, flexor pollicis longus). The skin and underlying fascia were affected to a lower extend and excised to healthy tissue. The resulting soft tissue defect was temporarily covered with Epigard®.
After sample collection intravenous antibiotic therapy was started with Clindamycin and Penicillin G.
Postoperatively, the patient was transferred to the ICU. Microbiological analysis revealed group A β-hemolytic streptococcus, susceptible to Clindamycin and Penicillin G, histology a bacterial interstitial myositis with necrotic muscular fibers. Consecutively, the initially elevated blood infection parameters such as leukocyte count, and C-reactive protein levels were continuously decreasing.
However, the biochemical profile showed rising CK levels (5560 U/l) which were treated by fluid resuscitation and high-ceiling diuretics in the following to prevent an imminent crush syndrome. The morning after surgery CK levels had already decreased to 3537 U/l to further drop to 514 U/l the following day and 337 U/l another day later.
Three days after primary surgery, the patient was discharged from ICU and transferred to the general surgical ward for further observation and treatment.
The patient needed ten further visits to the theater for dressing changes but minimal further debridement prior to application of dermatotraction techniques to initiate wound closure as described previously . Dermatotraction involved vessel loops anchored to alternate edges of the wound using skin staples. Remaining soft tissue defects of the upper arm were reconstructed with a pedicled, fasciocutaneous parascapular flap, the defects of the forearm with a free, ipsilateral anterolateral thigh flap (lateral circumflexing femoral artery perforator flap) . On day 43 antibiotic therapy was consecutively switched to oral Ciprofloxacin and continued for 10 more days.
After a total of five sessions of plastic reconstructive surgery, the wounds healed uneventfully, and after physiotherapy the patient was discharged from hospital 63 days after admission. Follow-up appointments were scheduled on a monthly basis at first, with continuing physio- and ergotherapy.
At the final follow-up 14 months after discharge, the flaps presented vital without any signs of inflammation or infection . The range of motion of the affected joints was as follows: elbow: extension/flexion 0°/0°/95°, supination/pronation 60°/0°/60°. Wrist joint: extension/flexion 50°/0°/30°, abduction/adduction 20°/0°/10°. Metacarpophalangeal joints 2–4: extension/flexion 0°/20°/80°.
An active flexion of the proximal and distal interaphalangeal joints 2–4 was not possible, as the superficial and deep flexor muscles of the forearm were significantly weakened as a result of the extensive necrosectomy. The opposition of the thumb was also partially restricted, gripping and writing was however possible even though in a limited fashion.