We report a case of an otherwise healthy 4-year-old boy who presented to hospital with a pruritic rash on day 7 of a 10-day course of amoxicillin for otitis media accompanied by fever (highest 38.7 degrees) and chills. Prior to his hospitalization, the patient had received a 7-day course of amoxicillin for a dental infection without any issues. His first course of amoxicillin was separated from his second by 2 months and 10 days.
On day 7 of his second course of amoxicillin for otitis media, his mother noticed erythematous, raised, pruritic lesions with central clearing on his sternum . They called his family doctor who prescribed 10 mg of oral Rupatadine and instructed them to monitor for signs of improvement. He had taken 20 mg of Rupatadine in total; however, despite treatment, his rash spread to his legs and became more pruritic that same evening, prompting his visit to our children’s hospital.
While in the emergency room, he had 3 episodes of non-bilious, non-bloody emesis and spreading of the rash to his torso, back, bilateral legs, and face . He also became hypotensive (systolic blood pressure of 43 mmHg at its lowest) and developed left hand and elbow angioedema which prevented him from opening his hand. In addition, he reported difficulty walking with pain in his right knee, likely due to joint pain.
He was given one round of 0.15 mg intramuscular epinephrine and intravenous fluids (500 mL of Ringer’s Lactate (RL) followed by 70 mL/hr of maintenance RL for 16 h). His blood pressure (BP) increased to 102/50 after his IV fluid bolus and epinephrine, however his rash remained unchanged. On physical examination, he had palpable, erythematous, blanchable, urticarial-like lesions with central clearing across his forehead, cheeks, upper arms, and thighs. He also had perioral and periorbital angioedema. No synovitis or lymphadenopathy was appreciated on examination. His abdomen was soft, non-tender to palpation, and his chest was clear. He was admitted to hospital with a presumptive diagnosis of anaphylaxis.
His complete blood count demonstrated an elevated leukocytosis of 18.6 × 109 g/L (5-14.5 × 109 g/L) with neutrophil predominance, normal hemoglobin at 132 g/L (115–135 g/L), and thrombocytosis with a platelet count of 653 × 109 g/L (150–400 × 109 g/L). Other than an alanine aminotransferase (ALT) level of 18 U/L (24–45 U/L), liver enzymes were normal. Electrolytes were normal, as was serum tryptase. His creatinine and eGFR were normal at 33 µmol/L (16–35 µmol/L) and 86 mL/min/1.73m2. His C-reactive protein was not elevated (< 5.0 mg/L) on admission, but 2 days after his initial presentation, was elevated at 37.9 mg/L. Other initial investigations revealed a normal chest x-ray, and abdominal ultrasound. His urinalysis showed trace ketones but was otherwise normal. Viral infection workup including Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) PCR, cytomegalovirus IgM serology, Herpes Simplex 1 and 2, and Varicella Zoster was negative. Nasopharyngeal viral swab was negative on two occasions but positive at the time of discharge for norovirus, which family was informed about post-discharge. Blood cultures were negative as was throat culture for Group A Streptococcus. His C3 and C4 complement levels were normal at 1.15 (0.81–1.57 g/L) and 0.16 g/L (0.13–0.39 g/L), respectively. An ultrasound of his left arm revealed an anechoic lesion measuring 2.6 × 2.3 × 0.6 cm, limited to soft tissue and consistent with lymphatic malformation.
While hospitalized, he was treated with 5 mg oral cetirizine daily and 1 mg/kg oral prednisone which helped relieve his rash and elbow/hand angioedema, but he developed angioedema of his eyelids and lips a day after his initial presentation whilst in hospital. His rash had progressed to involve his arms and legs, as well as abdomen, back, and buttocks (genitals were spared) the day of admission but began to clear after day 2 of admission while he was on the antihistamines and steroids. He was assessed by the allergy and immunology consult service who recommended up to 4 times the licenced dose of second-generation antihistamines PRN for symptom relief, and that he be further assessed in our outpatient clinic, a few weeks after discharge. Intradermal penicillin skin testing was performed using histamine 1.0 mg/mL as a positive control 0.1 cc, saline buffer as a negative control 0.2 cc, penicillin G (10,000 units/mL) 0.2 cc, and benzylpenicilloyl polylysine 0.2 cc. His penicillin test was negative, defined as a bleb less than 3 mm and no reaction greater than the negative control (0 mm).
The differential diagnosis at the time included drug related IgE-mediated anaphylaxis versus viral infection -induced urticaria and infection related symptoms versus SSLR to amoxicillin. Anaphylaxis was less likely given he had the amoxicillin for 7 days prior to any symptoms and eventual negative penicillin skin tests. He was discharged home from hospital 6 days after his initial presentation.
A diagnosis of SSLR to amoxicillin was made. His parents elected to forgo a graded oral challenge at the time given his degree of illness and prolonged admission. At this time though not definitively proven, SSLR was felt to be the most likely diagnosis.