A 62-year-old Japanese man presented to a local gastroenterology clinic with narrow stools. He had hypertension and prostatic hypertrophy. His only regular medication was amlodipine. Colonoscopy revealed a sub-circumferential tumor in the sigmoid colon, and the colonoscope did not pass through the tumor. He was referred to our hospital for further examination of a sigmoid colon tumor. Bowel obstruction due to sigmoid colon cancer was suspected, and he was admitted to our hospital. Fasting and fluid administration were performed until surgical resection of the tumor.
Seven days after admission, he had a fever of 38.1 °C with shaking chills but was alert and oriented and not in acute distress. Additionally, his vital signs were as follows: pulse rate 72 beats/min, blood pressure 118/60 mmHg, respiratory rate 16 breaths/min, and oxygen saturation 98% while breathing ambient air. Physical examination revealed redness, swelling, and tenderness at the short peripheral venous catheter insertion site in his right forearm. He did not have a heart murmur, neurological abnormalities, or other abnormalities on physical examination. He denied a history of trauma, intravenous drug use, and contact with animals including dogs.
Laboratory tests showed the following results: white blood cell count 9000/µl (neutrophil 79.9%) and C-reactive protein 5.72 mg/dl. His serum creatinine and liver function tests were normal. A computed tomography scan showed no abnormal findings except for the previously known sigmoid colon tumor.
Because catheter-related bloodstream infection was suspected, a peripheral venous catheter was replaced. Piperacillin/tazobactam (4.5 g every 8 h) was initiated after two sets of blood cultures were collected. The blood cultures were collected from separate venipuncture sites by using aseptic non-touch technique. On the following day, both sets of blood cultures were positive for clusters of gram-positive cocci. Therefore, vancomycin (1 g every 12 h) was initiated additionally.
The isolate was identified using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS), using a MALDI Biotyper (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany, Version 4.0) as S. schleiferi subsp. coagulans (log score 1.945).
The results were confirmed using 16S ribosomal RNA sequencing. Comparison with sequences in the BLAST database revealed that the sequence was 100% identical to that of S. schleiferi (GenBank accession number AP014944.1). The isolate was free coagulase-positive and thus, was identified as S. schleiferi subsp. coagulans. Coagulase activity was tested by using rabbit plasma (Eiken Chemical Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan).
Antimicrobial susceptibility testing was performed using the MicroScan WalkAway system (Beckman Coulter, Tokyo, Japan). The isolate was susceptible to all antibiotics tested including oxacillin, cefazolin, clindamycin, and vancomycin according to the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute M100-S29 . The minimum inhibitory concentration for oxacillin was ≤ 0.25 μg/ml.
The isolate did not produce Staphylococcal enterotoxin (SE, SEA to SED) or toxic shock syndrome toxin-1 (TSST-1) as per reversed passive latex agglutination assay (Denka Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan).
The patient’s antibiotic treatment was switched to cefazolin (1 g every 8 h) on day 5 based on the results of the antimicrobial susceptibility testing. His fever and chills improved following antibiotic treatment. Repeated blood cultures after antibiotic treatment were negative. He was treated for eight days with intravenous antibiotic therapy. The patient successfully underwent laparoscopic sigmoid colectomy without relapse of S. schleiferi bacteremia.