Patient FF presented as a 31-year-old pregnant woman from Johannesburg, who was tested for HIV and found to be HIV-1 seropositive 24 hours before delivery by Caesarean section in 2001. At that time, she was promptly given a dose of nevirapine to prevent perinatal transmission. Further clinical and laboratory testing revealed that FF had AIDS. Her peripheral blood cluster of differentiation CD4+ cell count was 61cells/μL (7%) and her plasma viral load was 51,700 HIV-1 RNA copies/mL. She had florid oral candidiasis and was emaciated. Since initiating combination antiretroviral therapy consisting of zidovudine, lamivudine and efavirenz, her viral load has reached an undetectable level (<20 HIV-1 RNA copies/mL) and her CD4+ cell count has rebounded to 435 cells/μL. FF confirmed that, prior to her marriage to her husband (MM) in 2000, she had tested negative for HIV-1 during a previous pregnancy and that child, from a previous partner, was also negative for the virus. That child was breastfed by FF for at least 12 months and remained uninfected. Our patient reported that since 2000, her husband is the only partner with whom she has had sexual contact.
Patient MM, the husband of FF, presented as a 31-year-old man for HIV-1 testing soon after his wife was found to be HIV-1 seropositive. In an interview, MM stated that he had been monogamous in his marital relationship with FF and that he had no prior sexual partners. MM gave no history of any infectious diseases but had undergone surgery three years previously for treatment of an abdominal gunshot wound. He reported having received a blood transfusion in association with that surgery. At that time in South Africa, the screening for HIV-1 contamination of blood for transfusion was not as thorough as present standards (polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based screening of blood for HIV-1 contamination was being newly implemented in South Africa in 2000; GNV, independent observation). On examination, MM was found to be generally healthy, with vital signs and examination of all systems being normal. MM was found to be HIV-1 seropositive by Western blot. However, he had an undetectable plasma viral load (<50 HIV-1 RNA copies/mL), his CD4+ T cell count of 1123/μL (32%) was well within the normal range, and his CD4+ T cell to CD8+ T cell ratio was not inverted. In accordance with standard clinical guidelines at that time, no antiretroviral treatment was initiated.
During a follow-up period of 10 years , MM consistently maintained an undetectable (<50 HIV-1 RNA copies/mL) plasma viral load. Over this 10 year period, MM tested negative for HIV-1 deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) by PCR on at least eight separate occasions. His CD4+ cell counts (525 to 1123 cells/μL) and percentages (31% to 40%) stayed in the normal range. He remained asymptomatic, free of the opportunistic infections and cancers that characterize AIDS.
To compare their viruses, peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were isolated upon Ficoll gradient separation of whole blood specimens that were collected from MM and FF in 2008. Total nucleic acids (both DNA and RNA) were extracted from the PBMC, and HIV-1 sequences were reverse transcribed, amplified by nested-PCR and then sequenced at Roche Molecular Diagnostics (Pleasanton, CA, USA). Noteworthy is that this successful effort to obtain HIV-1 DNA from MM involved more intensive efforts (for example, isolation of PBMC, extraction of nucleic acids from increased numbers of CD4+ T cells, and nested-PCR) than the standard procedures used for the qualitative HIV-1 DNA measurements shown in Figure .
Analyses were performed on a highly-conserved 255 base pair region of the HIV-1 gag (p24) gene (bases 1305 to 1559 in HXB2) . The gag sequences from MM and FF were compared with other HIV-1 sequences in the Los Alamos HIV database . Phylogenetic analysis revealed that both sequences clustered with HIV-1 clade C viruses (data not shown), a subtype that accounts for roughly half of the HIV infections worldwide . Using the maximum likelihood procedure , the gag sequences of MM and FF were found to cluster together in comparison with 27 other HIV-1 clade C gag sequences from South Africa . In comparison with the consensus HIV-1 clade C sequence, MM differed at one of the 255 bases, while FF differed at six of the 255 bases. Importantly, the one difference in MM’s sequence was present in FF’s sequence. Thus, the gag sequences from MM and FF differed at only five nucleotide positions. Further analyses, performed using the QuickAlign tool in the HIV database, revealed that the majority of published clade C sequences differ from MM’s sequence in this region at greater than 10 of 255 nucleotides . Moreover, less than 1% of the 400 published clade C viruses differed at six or fewer bases in this region. Even fewer would be expected to share only the discrepant nucleotide. These data demonstrate that the HIV-1 sequences from MM and FF are uniquely similar and provide evidence for the possibility that HIV-1 was transmitted between MM and FF.