A 52-year-old male patient was diagnosed with stage IV lung carcinoma in 2018. Lung biopsy, pathology showed adenocarcinoma, ALK-Tissue (+), TTF- 1 (+). The patient has no family history or history of chest disease or psychological disorders. Genetic test results: There was t(2p23) ALK (+) by FISH, with ALK gene translocation. The patient then received oral Crizotinib, during which best overall response(BOR) was SD. PFS was 13.3 months. Treatment was altered to oral alectinib. PFS was 1.7 months. The patient received one course of chemotherapy (pemetrexed plus carboplatin) after the progression of the disease. The count of white blood cells was found abnormally increased two-weeks later, the bone marrow biopsy showed bone marrow tissue, active proliferation of hematopoietic cells, all three lines of hematopoietic cells were visible, without evidence of malignancy. One week later, the patient was treated with thoracentesis drainage for “chest tightness and shortness of breath for 1 month”. The patient had obvious symptoms of chest tightness and shortness of breath, with chest pain, along with dyspnea and sweating. The patient was treated with antiasthmatic and diuretic therapy to alleviate symptoms. No abnormalities were seen in the bone marrow aspiration and biopsy, and the patient’s temperature was normal. The results of procalcitonin and c-reactive protein were under normal range at an outside hospital. Physical examination showed low respiratory sounds in the right lung and dry rales in the left lung. The patient had results of Tumor Abnormal Protein and HSP90 tests at our hospital. The serum Tumor Abnormal Protein was abnormal and has small coagulants. The serum HSP90 level was 132.35 ng/ml (range, 0-82 ng/ml). The patient was enrolled in the “a phase II, multicenter, open-label, dual-cohort study to evaluate the efficacy and safety of LORLATINIB ·monotherapy in ALK inhibitor-treated locally advanced or metastatic ALK-positive non-small cell lung cancer patients in China” with signing informed consent after a week of hospitalization. Maximum white blood cell count was 179.14×10^9/L, considering leukemoid reaction of lung cancer. The amount of white blood cells and the number of neutrophils in patients are presented in and . In the patient’s laboratory examination, we found a transient elevation of serum calcium and serum corrected calcium. Serum calcium, serum albumin and corrected calcium levels in patients are presented in . The patient started to take oral LORATINIB. As the patient’s white blood cell count dropped back, the patient’s symptoms significantly ameliorated and he was discharged with medication. The patient’s vital signs and hematology and blood were monitored during outpatient follow-up, during which the white blood cell count was back to normal. The best efficacy evaluation was the PR . After more than 4 months of oral Loratinib, the patient’s computed tomography (CT) scan showed significant enlargement of nodules in the right pleura and the presence of metastatic nodules in the left adrenal gland. PFS was 4.5 months. Patient described remarkable improvement in symptoms of chest tightness and generalized malaise. Ahead of this, blood routine showed white blood cells increased again in the third month of oral Loratinib. The patient died of respiratory failure and lung infection.