A 47 year-old man was diagnosed with CH at the age of 35. A 1,5 Tesla MRI of the brain in another hospital was reportedly normal. The patient came under our care in 2011. The headache attacks and pattern were compatible with a primary CCH diagnosis according to the criteria of the International Headache Society (ICHD-3 beta, 3.1.2) . The patient described attacks of strictly right-sided orbitotemporal headache associated with ipsilateral tearing and nasal congestion. The attacks lasted from 20 to 60 min, with a frequency up to 4 attacks per day, often including one attack at night. The most consistent trigger was alcohol intake. Subcutaneous sumatriptan 6 mg injections were very effective in aborting attacks, inhaled high-flow oxygen was not. Despite different prophylactic treatments (verapamil up to 480 mg/day, lithium up to 800 mg/day, topiramate up to 400 mg/day) the patient was never longer than 1 month without attacks. By February 2014 the patient developed a continuous interictal pain ipsilateral to the right-sided CH attacks. At that point in time he was under chronic treatment with verapamil (maximal tolerated dose of 560 mg/day) for 6 months with only a mild effect on attack frequency. An indomethacin test (up to 225 mg/day orally) was negative. Because of the change in headache pattern we decided to perform a new brain MRI, which showed a cystic structure in the pituitary gland . The differential diagnosis was between a Rathke’s cleft cyst or a cystic adenoma. Pituitary function tests (PFTs) came back normal, except for an elevated prolactin level (68.4 μg/L, normal values 4–17 μg/L) and a low free testosterone level (4.44 ng/dL, normal values 6–25 ng/dL). This could be due to verapamil-induced hyperprolactinemia or a prolactinoma. There was no galactorrhea, gynaecomastia, or erectile dysfunction (but he acknowledged a low libido), and visual fields were full. The patient was not willing to stop the treatment with verapamil as he feared an increase in cluster attack frequency. The patient was referred to an endocrinologist, who started carbergoline, a dopamine agonist, at a dose of 0,25 mg twice a week. Within a few weeks after the start of the cabergoline treatment the CH attacks subsided completely and verapamil could be successfully stopped. The serum prolactin and testosterone levels normalized. A repeat MRI in October 2015 demonstrated a 30 % reduction in size of the cystic pituitary lesion. At present the patient has been on carbergoline treatment for 1,5 year and the cluster headaches haven’t returned ever since and prolactin levels remained within normal range. Interestingly, the patient reports to experience a new type of unilateral frontotemporal headache attacks since about 6 months. These attacks are milder and shortlasting (seconds), and the pain is rather stabbing. There are no associated cranial autonomic symptoms. These attacks are not disabling and the patient does not need treatment for them. We have labeled these probable short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks (ICHDI-3 beta, 3.5.3) within the given context.