We present the case of a 42-year-old male with a 7-year history of ulcerative proctitis treated with topical mesalamine (suppository 1 g/day) and no previous exposure to immunomodulatory agents or corticosteroids. His medical history was uneventful. He had a family history of IBD but no history of neoplasia or LD. In the last colonoscopy, performed in March 2019, the patient was in endoscopic remission (Mayo subscore 0).
In September 2020 the patient developed diarrhoea with 3–4 bowel movements per day, the stools consisting of watery fluids and mucus, without blood. Three months later, symptoms persisted despite intensive topical and oral treatment with mesalamine (suppository 1 g/day + oral mesalamine 4.5 g/day). At this time, the patient also complained of severe rectal pain, tenesmus and weight loss (10% in 2 months). He denied fever, fatigue or night sweats. Topical budesonide was prescribed without improvement. Oral prednisolone was then started, and colonoscopy performed, revealing a suspicious rectal lesion. The patient was admitted to the hospital to proceed with the investigation and for pain management.
At admission, the patient complained of severe rectal pain, only controlled with tramadol perfusion. On physical examination, the patient was haemodynamically stable and had no fever. There were no enlarged palpable lymph nodes. Abdominal examination did not show any signs of tenderness or palpable masses, but on rectal examination, a palpable firm mass was detected. Blood tests revealed a slightly elevated C-reactive protein (1.17 mg/dL) with normal white blood cell count (10.9 × 109/L). Abdominal X-ray was normal. An urgent computed tomography (CT) revealed the presence of a circumferential lesion located at the lower/mid rectum with associated wall thickening. Significant luminal narrowing was also described . A pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was further conducted, showing a concentric circumferential rectal wall thickening with ulceration beginning at 3 cm from the anal verge and extending longitudinally along 12 cm. This mass invaded the mesorectal fascia and the right sphincter complex, having a defined cleavage plane with the prostate and bladder. Regional lymph node involvement was observed .
Complementary laboratory studies were obtained; namely, tests for sexually transmitted diseases, including human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) types 1 and 2, herpes simplex virus (HSV) type 2, Chlamydia trachomatis and Treponema pallidum, were negative; serology for HSV type 1 and Cytomegalovirus revealed the presence of specific IgG antibodies; serological marker for hepatitis C virus (HCV) was negative and hepatitis B surface antibody was detected for hepatitis B virus (HBV). Evaluation of the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-specific antibody profile revealed positivity for IgG with equivocal IgM. The viral load measurement was further added to the study, confirming the presence of an acute infection (5,972 copies/mL).
A lower gastrointestinal (GI) endoscopy was performed, revealing a circumferential lesion extending continuously from 12 cm above the anal verge to the dentate line, with associated stenosis. The lesion was extensively ulcerated with some areas covered with grey necrotic tissue . The histopathological analysis of the rectal biopsies revealed lymphocyte infiltration in all layers of the rectal wall . In the immunohistochemical staining, cells were immunoreactive for CD20, CD10, bcl-6 and c-myc; the Ki67 immunohistochemical stain depicted 100% proliferative index . Detection of EBV by in situ hybridization to EBV-encoded RNA was also positive . Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis revealed positive C-MYC gene rearrangement in 80% of analysed nuclei. Based on these findings, the diagnosis of a high-grade non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) − DLBCL type was considered. After a lymphoma-negative bone marrow biopsy infiltration and negative neck and thorax CT scan, needed to complete adequate staging, the final diagnosis of primary rectal NHL DLBCL stage IV was established, and chemotherapy with R-CHOP (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone) and high-dose methotrexate was started. Colonoscopy evaluation after 6 cycles of chemotherapy revealed complete endoscopic remission . In the last follow-up visit (November 2021), 4 months after treatment, the patient remains in complete remission, for both the NHL DLBCL and UC.