A 58-year-old female presented to our emergency department with new-onset, generalized tonic-clonic seizures controlled by the administration of midazolam and levetiracetam. Her past medical history included a kidney transplantation due to a focal-segmental glomerulosclerosis six months prior to admission, which was treated with immunosuppressive therapy (mycophenolate, prednisone and tacrolimus). In addition, she received levothyroxine substitution after a total thyroidectomy for papillary thyroid cancer 3.5 years ago and she was treated with amlodipine and metoprolol for mild to moderate mitral insufficiency.
On admission, her vital signs were within normal range. An initial aphasia resolved completely within a few hours, and she did not show any focal deficits on neurological examination. A computed tomography (CT) scan of her head revealed a space-occupying lesion in the left parietal lobe. Subsequent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) tomography of the brain confirmed a ring enhancing mass with central diffusion restriction and perifocal edema in the inferior parietal lobule . In addition, two smaller, hemorrhagic lesions were visible in the postcentral gyrus and in the centrum semiovale on the right side. In the absence of any clinical evidence of inflammation and unremarkable cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis, brain metastasis was considered the most likely differential diagnosis. Accordingly, staging CT (thorax-abdomen) showed a mass lesion in the right upper lobe of the lung, suspicious of bronchial carcinoma. Additional nodular lesions were seen in the left adrenal gland. Clinically, the patient remained stable under antiepileptic therapy. However, follow-up MRI, four days after the initial examination, showed progression of the left hemispheric lesion and the perifocal edema.
Interdisciplinary consensus was urgent resection of the symptomatic brain lesion, which would also enable a definitive diagnosis. A left parietal craniotomy was performed, and the superficial mass was completely resected. Macroscopically, the lesion appeared firm and indurated without any evidence of pus or necrosis. However, histology did not reveal any evidence for a neoplastic lesion. Instead, a collagenous abscess wall containing mixed inflammatory cells, including abundant neutrophils. The Grocott stain confirmed the presence of branched, septate hyphae consistent with aspergillus . Panfungal polymerase chain reaction (PCR) linked immunosorbent assay of the resected specimen and fungal cultures remained negative. In view of the clear histological diagnosis of aspergillosis, additional galactomannan antigen tests were not performed.
The postoperative course was uneventful. Therapeutically, voriconazole was initiated, and due to subtherapeutic drug values complemented by amphotericin B. However, the patient developed serious side effects (fever, shivering, nausea and vomitus) from amphotericin B whereupon the antifungal therapy was adapted to isavuconazole which was well tolerated. Initially, the patient received postoperative empiric antibiotics (ceftriaxone and metronidazole), which were adapted to flucloxacilline and metronidazole after microbiological cultures confirmed growth of staphylococcus warneri and pasteuri species. A positron emission tomography (PET)-CT scan showed metabolically active lesions in the right upper lung and left adrenal gland. Because of the yet unclear etiology, interdisciplinary board suggested a video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) wedge resection of the right upper lung lobe for diagnostic and therapeutic reasons. Pathological analysis of this tissue confirmed the diagnosis of aspergillus fumigatus although microbiological cultures remained negative. Accordingly, a diagnosis of invasive aspergillosis with cerebral, pulmonal and adrenal manifestations was rendered. Over the course, antibiotics were deescalated to clindamycin, antifungal regime was continued with isavuconazole, and the patient discharged.