A 66-year old man underwent elective TPR for benign prostatic hyperplasia. The preoperative blood pressure was 140/85 mmHg, hemoglobin 15.9 g/dL, and hematocrit 48.6%. Surgery was performed with glycine irrigation. Two hours after surgery, the blood pressure was 85/40 mm Hg, hemoglobin 7.2 g/dL, and hematocrit 22.3% . One day later, he reported transient horizontal diplopia when he looked to the right, and the oculomotility was normal. The visual acuity was 20/20 bilaterally, pupillary reflexes were normal, and the intraocular pressure by applanation tonometry was 15 mmHg bilaterally. Slit-lamp examination showed a minimal cataract. Funduscopy showed a congenitally anomalous optic nerve head with small cup-to-disc ratio and no papillary edema.
Two days after surgery he had transient episodes of blurred vision bilaterally and no diplopia. Four days after surgery, upon awakening he experienced sudden and painless amaurosis in both eyes with nausea and vomiting. On examination, he had no light perception bilaterally. Funduscopic examination revealed that both optic discs were swollen with small hemorrhages. Further, an area of parapapillary retinal infarction was present in the left eye . Computerized axial tomography and magnetic resonance imaging scans of the head and orbits were performed and the results were normal. Electrolyte levels were within normal limits (sodium 140 mEq/L, potassium 3.8 mEq/L, chloride 102 mEq/L). There were no responses on visual evoked potentials in both eyes. The rest of the ocular examination was unremarkable. The blood pressure was 90/50 mm Hg, the hemoglobin 7.0 g/dL, and the hematocrit 22.9% , necessitating infusion of three units of packed red blood cells. The blood pressure increased to 120/70, the hematocrit to 31.1%, and the hemoglobin to 10.4 g/dL .
He was examined 3 months later and the visual acuity in both eyes remained no light perception. The pupils did not react to light and the funduscopic examination showed marked optic disc atrophy in both eyes .