A 54-year-old Caucasian man presented with epigastric pain associated with nausea without fever or respiratory symptoms. He had a known history of Bochdalek hernia diagnosed two years prior. Medical records indicated that our patient was seen previously by a thoracic surgeon who recommended nonoperative treatment. It was not known if the extent of herniated viscera had worsened in the interim as imaging studies were not available. A physical examination was significant for diminished breath sounds over his right thorax; his abdominal examination was benign. Laboratory data revealed mild leukocytosis with normal serum chemistry and liver-associated enzymes. Radiographic evaluation with axial CT confirmed a massive hernia of Bochdalek with multiple displaced organs into his right thorax . Initial management included nasogastric decompression and intravenous fluid resuscitation with the presumptive diagnosis of bowel incarceration. After 24 hours, our patient was then taken to the operating theater for repair of the hernia. Given the size of the defect, the surgical approach was a thoracoabdominal incision to allow simultaneous access to both his abdominal and thoracic cavities. At surgery, near complete agenesis of his right hemidiaphragm was noted. Following reduction of his stomach, omentum and bowel, the liver was noted to be grossly abnormal with a macronodular appearance. Further examinationination confirmed acute cholecystitis of the displaced gallbladder . Nearly his entire liver was situated in his lower thorax with its bilio-vascular pedicle stretched as it was pulled into his chest. Following cholecystectomy, a liver biopsy was taken prior to reducing his liver and other organs back into his abdomen. His diaphragm was reconstructed with expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (e-PTFE; 0.2 mm, WL Gore and Assoc., Flagstaff, AZ) . Due to concern for loss of domain and the possible development of abdominal compartment syndrome (ACS), a smaller prosthetic patch was used to close the abdominal fascia to decrease the risk of abdominal hypertension. The right lower lobe of his lung was noted to be hypoplastic; malrotation of the bowel was not observed. Our patient was extubated after surgery and nasogastric decompression was used for 48 hours prior to advancement of oral intake. Postoperatively, our patient was monitored for the development of abdominal hypertension with transurethral bladder pressure measurements for 24 hours . Fortunately, there were no concerns for ACS and our patient had an unremarkable postoperative recovery. At follow-up one year later, our patient noted significant improvement in his activity level as compared to his preoperative state and chest radiography confirmed acceptable separation of his chest and abdominal cavities without recurrence . The liver biopsy returned with the diagnosis of NRH . The pathogenesis of NRH is unknown, but thought to be due to hepatic blood flow disturbances .