A 55-year-old female patient presented to our clinic due to a chronic history of eye movement limitation since childhood. She had difficulty in moving her eyes to the right or left, and therefore relied heavily on turning her neck. This debilitating condition was followed by progressive scoliotic changes in torso during junior high school. Her cognition was intact, and she had no history of seizures or vision loss. Neurological examinations revealed remarkable conjugated horizontal but not vertical gaze palsy (Additional file 1). Although she was fully cooperative, saccade and pursuit movements were rarely completed. Her vestibular-ocular reflex was absent, and her pupils were isocoric with a prompt response to light reflex and convergence. No nystagmus, ptosis, chemosis, periorbital erythema, or extraocular muscle synkinesis were observed. Her vision, including visual acuity and field, were normal. Examinations of muscle tone, muscle power, deep tendon reflex and coordination were all unremarkable.
On reviewing her past medical history, she was born at term to healthy nonconsanguineous parents after a smooth pregnancy. No symptoms indicating central nervous system infection were noted during childhood. She had developed scoliosis since teenage, and X-rays revealed scoliosis of her thoracic and lumbar spine . She had received bracing treatment, but it had a limited benefit in halting progression of her thoracolumbar scoliosis. No diseases involving other systems were recorded, and there was no associated family history. Axial brain MRI showed a midline cleavage at the dorsal aspect of the pons (split pons sign) and butterfly configuration of the medulla , consistent with HGPPS. In sagittal view, the pons and medulla were dysmorphic with flattening of both anterior and posterior contours . DTI was performed using a 3.0-T MR unit (Discovery MR750, GE Medical Systems, Milwaukee, WI). The diffusion-sensitizing gradients were applied along 20 non-collinear directions with diffusion weighting factor b = 1000 s/mm2, plus one b = 0 image. The imaging parameters were: TR/TE = 8000/82 ms, matrix size = 128 × 128, field of view = 240 mm, slice thickness = 3 mm with no intersection gap, number of excitations = 2, number of slices = 67, scan time = 5 min and 58 s. The post-processing software Functool (GE Medical System, Milwaukee, WI) was used to generate fiber tracts. The seed points were placed in the brainstem based on T2-weighted images. The cutoff value for fractional anisotropy was 0.20 (default value). In color-coded DTI, the transverse pontine fibers (labeled in red by their latero-lateral connection) which separated the corticospinal tracts anteriorly from the medial lemniscus and medial longitudinal fasciculus posteriorly in the normal healthy control, were abnormally located anterior to the corticospinal tracts . The medial longitudinal fasciculus was compromised secondary to dorsal displacement of the bilateral corticospinal tracts (labeled in blue by their cranio-caudal orientation) . Interestingly, the pontocerebellar tracts were agenetic compared to the size in the normal healthy control . Another interesting color-coded DTI finding was absence of red dot at the level of the pontomesencephalic junction in our patient . The red dot identified in the normal healthy control represents decussation of the superior cerebellar peduncle, presumably to be fibers normally oriented in a latero-lateral direction. Subsequent tractography revealed that the bilateral corticospinal tracts remained uncrossed at the level presumed to be the pyramidal decussation . On tracing the fibers within the inferior cerebellar peduncle, the targeted fibers, deemed to be primarily dorsal spinocerebellar and vestibulocerebellar tracts, appeared to be smaller in size compared to the normal healthy control . Interestingly, the cortical sensory responses showed abnormally reversed lateralization in the patient . Specifically, although the latencies of all detectable responses were normal (Right N9 = 8.5 ms, N20 contralateral/ipsilateral to stimulus = 16.4 /17.4 ms; Left N9 = 8.9 ms, N20 contralateral/ipsilateral N20 = 17.2/18.0 ms; reference value N9 = 9 ms, N20 = 20 ms), a somatosensory evoked potential study revealed that the cortical sensory response was abnormally ipsilateral .