A 16-year-old male patient who was a college basketball player presented with recurrent anterior shoulder instability of the right shoulder for the past 2 years. He had multiple episodes of dislocation; the most recent episode was 1 month before he presented to us. On clinical examination, the patient had a full range of motion and had a positive apprehension test for instability. Radiological screening with CT and MRI showed glenoid bone loss of 20% and engaging Hill Sachs lesions . Considering the critical glenoid bone loss with engaging Hill Sach lesion and being a contact sport athlete, he was counseled for arthroscopic Latarjet procedure with remplissage of the Hill Sach lesion.
Patient positioning and portal placement
Under general anesthesia and an interscalene block, the patient is positioned in a beach chair position. The arm is prepped and draped held by traction cable with the shoulder in 60° anterior elevation, 10° shoulder abduction and neutral rotation .
A portal: Standard posterior portal known as soft spot, 2 cm medial and inferior from the posterolateral corner of the acromion. Used for visualization and passing switching stick for subscapularis split.
E portal: In the rotator interval, made with the outside-in technique just above the lateral half of the subscapularis.
D portal: Lateral portal made anterior to the long head of the biceps. Used for instruments during coracoid preparation and coracoid osteotomy. Furthermore, used for visualization during the shoulder’s anterior access, exposure, subscapularis split, and fixation of the graft.
H Portal: Anterosuperior portal above coracoid. Used for coracoid drilling and coracoid osteotomy.
J portal: Anteroinferior portal above subscapularis. Used for visualization during the preparation, osteotomy, and transfer of the coracoid graft.
I portal: Ancillary portal. Used to make the subscapularis split, also used for visualization during the preparation of the coracoid holes.
M portal: Anterior portal made medial to the conjoint tendon. Used for the pectoralis minor tendon release and double-barrel coracoid positioning cannula.
T h e a r t h ro s c o p i c L at a r j e t procedure as described by Lafosse was performed. Remplissage of t h e H i l l S a c h l e s i o n w a s performed with a triple-loaded all-suture anchor (Stryker, India). The coracoid graft was prepared, osteotomized, and transferred through the subscapularis split. The coracoid graft fixation was carried out with two cannulated metal screws (Depuy-Mitek) and tightening of the screws was performed. While tightening the alpha screw, we encountered an iatrogenic fracture of the coracoid graft below the alpha screw causing a free floating fracture of the distal tip of the coracoid graft along with the conjoint tendon .
The alpha screw was removed with the MITEK arthrolatarjet screwdriver. Refixation of the conjoint tendon with the inferior coracoid tip was done with a novel double sling technique. The conjoint tendon was secured with cinch sutures using a fiber wire loaded on the Arthrex scorpion suture passer at the proximal aspect of the conjoint tendon and traction load was given to the proximal suture sling. The conjoint tendon along the bone fragment was approximated to the remaining bone block. Second sling fixation was done using a similar technique, cinch sutures are taken distally to the initial sutures and anchored at 5.30 O’clock position using push-lock while maintaining traction on the proximal suture sling. The proximal suture sling was anchored to the 3.30 O’clock position. (-) shows the animated surgical technique of double s l i n g f i x a t i o n o f g r a f t f r a c t u r e f i x a t i o n . Intraoperatively fractured coracoid tip, along with conjoint tendon was found stable as the shoulder is put through all range of movements. shows a post-operative X-ray showing a well-positioned bone block with a single screw. Post-surgery, the patient was immobilized for 2 weeks and rehabilitation was started gradually as per standard protocol followed for arthroscopic Latarjet.
The patient was followed up at 3 months and 6 months. At end of the 3-month follow-up visit, the patient had full ROM and no instability. (-) shows 3-month follow-up after the surgery with an almost full range of movements. Follow-up CT scan at 12 months after surgery showed good bony integration of the main coracoid graft and intact screw, with the fractured coracoid graft close to the main bone block. The proximity of the coracoid tip fragment implied the sling action of the conjoint tendon was maintained . The patient was allowed to return to sports at end of 6 months. The patient has continued to do well at 12-month post-operative with no instability .