A 65-year-old woman first presented with palpitations and dizziness in September 2016. She had no family history of cardiomyopathy, arrhythmia, or sudden death. Her medical history included diabetes mellitus and bilateral cataracts. She was diagnosed with uveitis 1 year prior, which was relieved by the administration of eye drops. A 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a sinoatrial block (SSS) and right bundle branch block . Further sinus arrest (up to 3.9 s) with dizziness was detected on 24-h Holter ECG. No abnormal findings were observed on physical examination, laboratory tests, or echocardiography [left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) 62%]. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging was not performed at the time. The patient underwent a dual-chamber pacemaker implantation.
Two months later, the patient experienced progressive dyspnoea with minimal activity. Electrocardiogram showed atrial pacing rhythm , and laboratory tests revealed abnormal liver function and an elevated level of brain natriuretic peptide (BNP; 291 pg/mL; , ). Echocardiography showed that the LVEF decreased from 62% to 51% in December 2017. She was clinically diagnosed with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction and treated with diuretics and angiotensin receptor antagonists to relieve the signs and symptoms of congestion.
In January 2018, the patient presented with leg oedema. Device interrogation showed a complete atrioventricular block with atrial-paced and ventricular-paced rhythm . Two weeks later, she was hospitalized for worsening heart failure. Pacemaker interrogation and 12-lead ECG showed junctional escape rhythm due to a complete atrioventricular block with atrial and ventricular pacing failure . Echocardiography showed biventricular systolic dysfunction and giant right ventricular thrombus formation. In response to this finding, anti-coagulant therapy with heparin and warfarin was started promptly. Pacemaker re-programming was unsuccessful; the junctional escape rate was 50–60 b.p.m., without additional pacemaker lead insertion. During hospitalization, the patient went into cardiac arrest, as the escape contraction suddenly disappeared. Cardiologists at the referring hospital did not re-insert an additional right ventricular electrode because of the large thrombus formation in the right ventricle (RV). As a result, a temporary pacing electrode was inserted into the coronary sinus, and the patient was transferred to our hospital for further investigation and treatment.
On admission, ECG revealed ventricular pacing rhythm (see , ). Serum levels of angiotensin converting enzyme [upper reference limit (URL), 29.4 IU/L] and calcium (URL, 10.2 mg/dL) were within normal limits at 16.3 IU/L and 8.9 mg/dL, while soluble interleukin-2 receptor (URL, 500 U/mL) and BNP levels were remarkably elevated at 677 U/mL and 844.7 pg/mL, respectively. Coronary angiography revealed no significant stenosis. Echocardiography revealed severe biventricular dysfunction. Left ventricular ejection fraction was moderately to severely reduced (∼30% by visual assessment), and the anteroseptal, inferoseptal, and inferior walls of the left ventricle were severely hypokinetic and regionally dyskinetic due to ventricular aneurysm. The RV was severely dilated, and the basal and longitudinal diameters of the RV were 51 mm (normal range; 25–41 mm) and 88 mm (normal range; 59–83 mm), respectively. Tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE) was reduced to 8 mm. The tricuspid annulus was dilated, and tricuspid valve coaptation was reduced, resulting in severe tricuspid regurgitation. The right ventricular thrombus was thought to be caused by severe stasis flow due to right ventricular dysfunction. Furthermore, it was clinically suspected that inflammation due to cardiac sarcoidosis or eosinophilic myocarditis may have contributed to thrombus formation. A large thrombus formation was also observed in the RV (47 × 26 mm in the apical four-chamber view) and right atrium (RA; see , ). Preoperative contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) was performed to obtain accurate anatomical information confirming thrombus formation in the RA and RV ( and ). There were no other organ findings.
Following discussions within our heart team, it was determined that the patient’s condition posed a significant risk for acute pulmonary thromboembolism, and the efficacy of thrombolytic therapy alone was deemed limited. Additionally, the extent of RV wall thinning and severe RV dysfunction rendered the use of cardioprotective agents, such as beta-blockers and renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system inhibitors, unlikely to improve tricuspid regurgitation. The patient underwent an urgent thrombectomy of the RA and RV to prevent pulmonary thromboembolism, as well as the removal of the jugular vein pacemaker leads. Epicardial pacemaker implantation was also carried out simultaneously with tricuspid annuloplasty. Endomyocardial biopsy revealed infiltrative inflammatory cells and epithelioid cell granulomas, including multinucleated giant cells . Consequently, the patient was diagnosed with cardiac sarcoidosis. After open-heart surgery, the patient experienced cardiogenic shock due to severe biventricular dysfunction with a LVEF of 26% 10 days post-operatively, which was dependent on the intravenous administration of dobutamine and noradrenaline. We initiated immunosuppressive therapy with corticosteroids, including steroid pulse therapy (1000 mg for 3 days) and subsequent maintenance therapy. Notably, the patient’s LVEF improved to 35% following a course of immunosuppressive therapy, including a steroid pulse, and intravenous catecholamine support was eventually withdrawn. The patient was discharged on Day 79 of hospitalization. Guideline-directed medical therapy for heart failure with a reduced ejection fraction was provided (bisoprolol 0.625 mg/day, enalapril 2.5 mg/day, spironolactone 25 mg/day, and empagliflozin 10 mg/day). However, further titration of these drugs was difficult due to symptomatic hypotension. Anti-coagulation therapy with warfarin was continued, and prednisolone was administered at 10 mg/day after discharge. Six months after initiation of steroid therapy, positron emission tomography (PET)-CT detected no uptake of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose in the myocardium (see , ). To prevent recurrence of active inflammation, oral prednisolone 10 mg/day was continued as the maintenance dose.
During outpatient follow-up, our patient presented with gradually worsening symptoms of heart failure. On September 2018, she presented symptomatic sustained ventricular tachycardia (SVT), which prompted upgrading of her pacemaker to an implantable cardioverter defibrillator. However, she was re-admitted with recurrent SVT on 6 February 2019. The patient had refractory ventricular electrical storms shortly after admission. With mechanical ventilation, deep sedation, and intravenous administration of the anti-arrhythmic agents amiodarone and lidocaine, we were able to save her from this life-threatening situation. However, despite intensive care, she became progressively weaker owing to severe biventricular pump failure. The patient developed fever, arterial hypotension, and leukocytosis. Bacteraemia caused by methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus epidermidis and Candida albicans was detected, resulting in a diagnosis of sepsis. The source of the infection was unclear, with catheter-related infection or bacterial translocation from the skin or gastrointestinal tract suspected as potential causes. Treatment was initiated with appropriate antibiotics and catecholamines, along with a maintenance dose of glucocorticoid therapy, but the patient ultimately died of multiple organ failure on 20 March 2019, which was attributed to the combination of severe pump failure and sepsis. On autopsy, there was no evidence suggestive of an infectious source in the implantable devices, leads, heart valves, or elsewhere in the body. Diffuse fibrotic tissues were noted in both ventricles. In particular, the myocardium in the RV was substantially replaced with fibrotic tissues without inflammatory cell infiltration ( and ). Significant fibrotic changes, including those in the anatomical sinus node, were also observed in the RA . Clinicopathological correlation indicated that cardiac sarcoidosis involving the RA and RV initially caused SSS and thrombus formation in the RA and RV, ultimately resulting in biventricular heart failure.