We report a 27-year-old male who presented with a ten years’ history of Type 1 diabetes. He was keen to come off insulin to continue to work as a front line firefighter as an employer’s requirement. He was diagnosed when he presented to a remote hospital with a generalised illness, osmotic symptoms causing hospitalisation for a few days. He could not recollect the events and had no access to his medical records. He was free of complications of diabetes & was maintained on ten units BID of Lispro mix 50 insulin. He never had diabetic Ketoacidosis (DKA) and could miss insulin for 2-3 days with no adverse consequences. Occasionally, he would experience hypoglycemia after exertion. The maternal grandmother had type 2 diabetes treated with oral agents. His BMI was 24 kg/m2 with a bodyweight of 67 Kg. Glycemic control was excellent, as shown by HBA1c of 7.0%. To determine if the pancreatic endocrine function existed in our patient, we measured basal plasma insulin, c-peptide & glucose followed by a carbohydrate-rich meal. We then took serial measurements every 60 minutes up to three hours. We omitted insulin for 24 hours before and during the test. We used Roche E170 (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) Cobas analyser for measurement of glucose, Insulin and c-peptide levels. We used enzymatic reference method with hexokinase, third-generation for glucose and Electrochemiluminescence immunoassay, first-generation for both the insulin and c-peptide measurements. Results confirmed endogenous insulin secretion with a rise in plasma insulin and c-peptide levels in tandem with an increase in glucose levels . This was in the setting of a weakly positive Glutamic acid decarboxylase antibodies (GADA) and Islet antigen-2 (IA-2A) and strongly positive Zn transporter 8 antibodies (ZnT8) confirming auto-immunity . In the context of residual beta-cell function and maternal grandmother known with diabetes, we checked maternal HBA1c which was 7.4%.confirming diabetes With three generations in the family affected by diabetes in a person with residual Beta-cell function and no history of DKA, we performed maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) screen which was negative. We admitted him for a week to withhold insulin under direct observation for safety to decide if he can withdraw insulin, albeit temporarily. He remained well & we monitored capillary glucose, venous PH and urine ketones twice daily. He continued to be free of ketones with normal PH and with a maximal glucose excursion of 15 mmol/L. Our case serves a reminder that the proportion of patients with chronic autoimmune type 1 diabetes are micro secretors of insulin even after a decade of diagnosis which is sufficient to avoid lipolysis and ketosis but insulin & c- peptide levels are not at higher levels expected of patients with type 2 diabetes [-]. Although they have proven the existence of residual beta-cell function in type 1 diabetes, they have not commented if any patient was able to stop insulin. Our patient is managing diabetes without insulin with Sitagliptin 100mg daily since July 2018 with normoglycemia and without any episodes of DKA and HBA1c has improved to 6.4%. Mixed meal test 12 months after stopping insulin still shows micro insulin secretion with slightly lower levels of insulin which could be attributed to lesser glucose peak .