A 33-year-old male, an electrical engineer with a desk job by profession, presented with a history of the left wrist pain with stiffness and restriction of movements for the past 5 months. The pain was persistent with no associated par esthesia or weakness. There was no antecedent history of injury or trauma. The pain was associated with a swelling in the dorsum of the wrist which had progressively increased over time. Overlying skin was normal.
On physical examination, the mass was well- defined, firm, and approximately 2.5 cm (about 0.98 in) in diameter over the dorsum of the wrist with no attachment to skin, but firmly anchored to the dorsum of the wrist and immobile. The dorsiflexion of the wrist was restricted to 10° due to the mass effect. However, no apparent tendon adhesion was noted with full extension over the digits at the inter-phalangeal and metacarpophalangeal joints.
The initial ultrasound (USG) examination revealed a solid hypoechoic lobulated mass lesion measuring 27 × 16 mm seen at the dorsal aspect of the left wrist. Differential diagnosis of giant cell tumo r and soft- tissue sarcoma was placed, and further, investigations were advised. X-ray of the wrist was suggestive of soft-tissue shadow in the lateral view of wrist with no bony abnormality noted.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan ( and ) revealed an irregular intensely enhancing soft- tissue mass at the dorsal aspect of the wrist, interposed between the 4th and the 5th extensor tendon compartments, at the level of the carpal bones. The margins of the mass were well-defined with no evidence of any invasion or encasement of the adjoining vessels or tendons. MRI findings were consistent with a benign soft- tissue neoplasm. To obtain a definitive diagnosis, the patient was scheduled for an excisional biopsy.
The excisional biopsy was done under general an esthesia, 4 cm curvilinear incision was made over the dorsum of wrist, centered over the lesion. Sharp and blunt dissection was done to expose a 3 cm × 3 cm (about 1.18 in) non-cystic hard soft-tissue mass , found attached to the dorsal joint capsule . The lesion was well circumscribed, and complete excision of the encapsulated lesion was done. The adjacent tendons and vessels were taken care of to avoid any damage. The surgery was uneventful with patient being discharged the same day.
The following immunohistochemistry markers were performed:
▪ Smooth Muscle Actin: Patchy strong staining in lesional spindle cells ▪ Calponin: Patchy moderately strong staining in lesional spindle cells ▪ Desmin: Negative in lesional spindle cells . ▪ CD 34: Negative in lesional spindle cells . ▪ S100: Negative in lesional spindle cells ▪ Ki 67: Stains < 1% of the lesional spindle cells.
Sections studied showed well- circumscribed neoplasm composed of interlacing and intersecting fascicles of bland smooth muscle cells ( and ). Few thick-walled blood vessels could be seen . Mitoses were absent. No evidence of atypia / malignancy in the sections studied.
The patient had an uneventful post-operative recovery. He came for a follow-up visit in 2 weeks for suture removal and physical therapy was started. He reported complete recovery of range of motion and wrist function without any complications. There was no recurrence till 1 year of follow-up.