A 63-year-old white German woman presented with a lump in her right breast following routine screening for breast cancer.
Screening mammography demonstrated a very dense calcified 35-mm lobular mass in her medial right breast. An ultrasound scan showed an irregular lesion 11.1 × 20.1 mm .
A clinical examination of her breast revealed a golf-ball-sized mass located at the 6–9-o’clock position in her right breast, arterial hypertension, otherwise no other symptoms or neurological deficits were present.
Intervention: in July 2009, a core needle biopsy of the lesion was performed, histologically showing ductal hyperplasia with metaplastic ossification of breast tissue. No malignant tissue was detected. The specimens were examined by two different pathologists of two different institutes. As differential diagnosis, a metaplastic carcinoma was considered. Complete excision was recommended by the pathologist. In October 2009, complete excision of the lesion with standard safety margins was performed. The diagnosis was metaplastic ossification. Again Figs. and , the specimen was examined by two different pathologists. No postoperative therapy was recommended. Follow-up examinations at intervals of 3–6 months were recommended; after 2 years of uneventful follow-up further examinations were refused by our patient.
One year later our patient presented again with a lump in her right breast about 150 × 80 × 70 mm, extending to the lower part of the axilla with skin ulceration. Positron emission tomography and computed tomography (PET-CT) and staging showed no further metastases .
Pathological examination: the tumor specimen was fixed in 4 % phosphate-buffered formalin and routinely paraffin-embedded. Sections 4 μm thick were stained with hematoxylin and eosin as well as Elastica van Gieson.
Moreover they were immunostained with the avidin biotin-peroxidase complex method using the following antibodies: anti-high molecular epithelial marker (cytokeratins: ck 5/6 and ck pan: AE 1/3), anti-EMA (cytomed, 1:100).
Immunohistochemically, the tumor did not express any epithelial tissue markers at all. Anti-EMA reaction showed no gland development in the tumor mass.
The case with all specimens went again to Canada for a second opinion . The first diagnosis had been confirmed. No further pathological examination was planned.
Surgery and postoperative follow-up: in November 2012, modified radical mastectomy and axillary lymph node dissection were performed, no lymph node metastases were found. Postoperative chemotherapy followed. PET-CT and staging showed no evidence of metastatic or recurrent disease. One year after surgery our patient died of complications due to lung metastases and pleural effusion.