A 17-year-old female patient was admitted to the Department of Cardiovascular Medicine of the First Hospital of Jilin University on September 30, 2022, with complaints of pain and swelling in the right knee for half a month after falling, accompanied by dyspnea for 5 days. The patient fell down while riding an electric bicycle half a month ago and injured her right knee. Her right knee was swelling and painful but did not affect daily activities. These symptoms worsened 5 days ago accompanied by dyspnea. She has no significant past medical history.
Physical examination on admission revealed the body temperature was 36.5°C, the pulse rate was 112 beats per minute, the breathing rate was 20 beats per minute, blood pressure was 107/70 mm Hg (1 mm Hg = 0.133 kPa). She has no jugular venous distention. There were coarse breath sounds in both lungs, but no crackles were heard. Her heart rhythm was regular, and no additional heart sounds and cardiac murmurs were heard. There was no edema in both lower extremities. The right knee was swelling.
Lower extremity vascular ultrasound revealed acute-staged venous thrombosis in superficial femoral vein, popliteal vein and intermuscular vein of right lower extremity. Computed tomography pulmonary angiography (CTPA) indicated the embolism in the middle branch of right pulmonary artery and lower branch of double pulmonary artery. Computed tomography angiography revealed no atrial and ventricular enlargement.
Laboratory findings are shown in Table . D-dimer and fibrinogen (FGB) were significantly increased, whereas cardiac troponin I (cTnI) and B type natriuretic peptide (BNP) was in the normal range. Blood gas analysis suggested a respiratory alkalosis with pH of 7.47 and PCO2 of 34 mm Hg. The patient’s coagulation function, platelet (PLT) amount, PS and PC activity, and antibodies about connective tissue diseases and vasculitis are all normal.
The AT III activity was detected in SYSMEX coagulation analyzer CS-5100-5 with the substrate luminescence method. The patient’s peripheral blood 2 mL was mixed with 0.11 mol/L sodium citrate solution at 9:1, and centrifugation for 15 minutes at a rate of 3000 rpm. The plasma 10 µL was isolated and mixed with the thrombin reagent 600 µL and incubated at 37°C for 3 minutes. Add the color developer 100 µL, and the change of absorbance was detected at 405 nm. The AT III activity was measured at 43.5% (reference range 80–130%).
We then detected the AT III activity of the patient’s mother, a 39-year-old woman. She never felt chest pain or dyspnea and had no history of DVT or PE. The PS and PC activity was normal, and the AT III activity was measured as 43.9%.
The patient is a young woman with no special past history. Her parents are not married to close relatives. There was no obvious risk factor of thrombosis besides the decreased AT III activity. Considering a high possibility of hereditary AT III deficiency, full exon deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) sequencing was further conducted for the patient and her parents . In the PCR experiment, the reaction system includes 10 µM F Primer 1.25 µL, DNA polymerase 0.1 µL, 5 X bµffer A 5 µL, 10 mM dNTP 0.5 µL, 10 µM R Primer 1.2 5 µL, DNA 1 µL, and PCR-grade water 15.9 µL. The reaction conditions are as follows: pre-degeneration at 95°C for 3 minutes, degeneration at 95°C for 30 seconds, annealing at 60°C for 30 seconds, and extension at 72°C for 30 seconds. A total of 30 cycles were carried out, then the reaction system was extended at 72°C for 1 minute and preserved at 4°C. The SERPINC1 (NM_000488) gene single heterozygous mutations of c.331(exon2) T > C, p.S111P (p.Ser111Pro) was detected in both the proband and her mother, while her father was a wild type .
We forecast the mutated gene and protein function through Mutation Taster , PolyPhen-2 and REVEL software. The results indicated SERPINC1 mutation c.331 T > C was harmful. Among them, the pathogenicity rate predicted by Mutation Taster is about 1.000. The closer the probability is to 1, the greater the disease may be, and the more credible the prediction results are. Through Swiss-Model software, the tertiary structure of AT III wild type and mutant type were modeled. The 111th amino acid in the protein encoded by SERPINC1 was changed from serine to proline .
The diagnosis of this patient was pulmonary embolism (low-risk group). After admission, the patient was instructed to raise the right lower limb and received the oxygen inhalation (through a nasal catheter, 3–4 L/min). Initially, the patient was administered a subcutaneous injection of enoxaparin sodium, 40 mg twice a day. However, due to the patient’s deficiency in AT III, the anticoagulant treatment was changed to a subcutaneous injection of Fondaparinux Sodium, 2.5 mg once a day. After discharge, the patient’s treatment was transitioned to oral rivaroxaban, initially at a dose of 15 mg twice a day, which was adjusted to 20 mg once a day 3 weeks later.
We followed up with the patient until February 2023. In December 2022, the lower extremity blood vessel color ultrasound revealed partial recanalization after deep vein thrombosis in the right lower extremity. CTPA results indicated no significant abnormalities in pulmonary artery. In February 2023, the patient’s AT III activity was measured at 48%. The patient remained asymptomatic for dyspnea, and there were no limitations in her daily activities.