A 44-year-old man was brought to a primary care hospital with a rash and vesicle on the left side of his forehead since 3 days. Moreover, he had a headache since 6 days. Serologic tests for VZV (immunoglobulin M [IgM] and immunoglobulin G [IgG]) were conducted using the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay in the primary care hospital. The patient tested positive for VZV IgG and IgM. He was diagnosed with HZO, and treated with antiviral drugs and analgesics. Before hospitalization, he had continuous fever (38°C and higher). After three days of hospitalization, the patient presented with worsening of left-sided frontal headache, nausea, blurred vision, and diplopia. He was transferred to our hospital for further evaluation and treatment.
The patient was alert but febrile (38.3°C) when he arrived at our hospital. There was no marked facial or periorbital swelling, except for the crust on his forehead. The cardiopulmonary and neurological findings were normal. His heart rate, blood pressure, and respiratory rate were 78 beats/min, 110/60 mmHg, and 20 breaths/min. An ophthalmologist examined his eyes and the visual acuity was 6/12 bilaterally. There were no abnormalities in the ocular tissues (cornea, conjunctiva, sclera, uvea, or retina) and no visual field defects. We suspected that his horizontal diplopia and lateral rectus muscle paresis in the left eye were because of 6th cranial nerve (abducens nerve) palsy. There was no evidence of infection in the facial region (except HZO), respiratory tract, urinary tract, or on the skin. Thus, the study focused on fever and cause of 6th cranial nerve palsy.
The white blood cell count was normal (10,100 mm3), but the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (120 mm/h) and C-reactive protein level (10.17 mg/dl) were elevated. Blood culture was performed; however, the patient did not provide consent for a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis. The brain MRI revealed lateral bulging and irregular marginal enhancement in the cavernous sinus, which is consistent with bilateral CST and superior ophthalmic vein thrombosis .
We admitted the patient to the intensive care unit and asked a neurologist and an infectious medicine doctor to assist with the treatment. Patient’s history was taken again and he was kept under observation during the course of the treatment. Although he had no medical history of diabetes mellitus, hypertension, or etc., he did undergo dental treatment about 3 months ago and had experienced pain in the left maxillary area approximately 1 month ago. Given the dental history, high body temperature, and aggravated symptoms, we started his antibiotic treatment despite the antiviral treatment that he had received at the primary care hospital. Second-generation cephalosporin was administered until we received his blood culture results. Streptococcus constellatus subsp. constellatus was detected in the blood culture, therefore we switched from cephalosporin to clindamycin. We performed echocardiography to detect sings of infective endocarditis; however, it did not reveal any special findings. Antithrombotic therapy was performed with low molecular weight heparin. After 7 days of treatment in the intensive care unit, the symptoms improved, and the patient was discharged after being transferred to the general room. No complications were observed during one year of follow-up since the patient was discharged.