A 45-year-old Japanese male patient reported headache for 20 years prior to his visit to our hospital. His headache symptoms came in waves, but the symptoms were essentially continuous. He had a habit of drinking 1 L of beer three times a week, and he had smoked 15 cigarettes per day since the age of 20, but quit smoking at 40 years old. He had a history of bronchial asthma and allergic rhinitis. He had not used headache medication frequently, there were no particular problems with his psychosocial history, but his family history included a grandfather and an uncle who also suffered from bronchial asthma. His occupation consisted mainly of desk work. During and after the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, he worked remotely, and at the time of his visit to our hospital, he was engaged in work on a personal computer most days.
From around March of the year that he visited our hospital, he went to a local clinic because his headache had worsened. Around this time, his symptoms of neck and shoulder heaviness worsened, likely due to stress from his child’s upcoming entrance examination and the death of his parents. In addition, he rarely went out since beginning working at home due to the COVID-19 pandemic. He felt a squeezing pain all over his head and heaviness in both of his shoulders. His headache symptoms were suspected to be TTH, and he was prescribed tiaramide hydrochloride and eperisone hydrochloride, but there was little improvement. In addition, he had severe headache symptoms that kept him in bed in the morning several times a month. He began to fall asleep when he went to events such as graduations, entrance ceremonies, and funeral services. He was referred to our neurosurgery department in May because his headaches did not improve. There were no significant findings on computed tomography (CT), and he was diagnosed with physiologic headache and placed under observation. In June the patient was further referred to our neurology department, where he was diagnosed with TTH with exclusion of intracranial organic lesions with head CT scan as well as the accompanying shoulder stiffness. He was prescribed oral eperisone hydrochloride (50 mg) one tablet three times daily. The stiffness in his shoulders improved slightly, but his headache persisted, and he was now taking loxoprofen sodium hydrate (60 mg) one tablet frequently. Because his headache and heavy-headed feeling did not improve, he was referred to our department in July for botulinum toxin type A (BoNT-A) injection (day T). At that time, the drugs he was prescribed were olopatadine hydrochloride, fluticasone propionate nasal drops, and budesonide and formoterol fumarate hydrate inhalant, which were prescribed for bronchial asthma and allergic rhinitis by a local clinic, in addition to tiaramide hydrochloride, eperisone hydrochloride, and loxoprofen sodium hydrate (60 mg) one tablet three times daily.
At the time of his initial examination, he was 171 cm tall, weighed 62 kg, and had a body mass index (BMI) of 21.2. He had no upper extremity fine motor deficits or sensory deficits. He had multiple myofascial trigger points (TrPs) in the bilateral posterior neck and upper back. Blood tests showed high γ-glutamyl transpeptidase (γ-GTP; 103 U/L), but there were no other findings of note, and the abnormal values were thought to be due to alcohol consumption. A CT scan of the head showed no obvious intracranial lesions. Before the start of treatment, his headache was rated at visual analog scale (VAS) 8.1/10, numerical rating scale (NRS) 8/10, and face scale 18/20. He showed mental distress from a relatively intense headache that was difficult to control, but had no evidence of psychiatric disorders such as depressive symptoms.
Since BoNT-A is not covered by insurance for headache in Japan, at the initial visit he was treated with a total of 10 mL of 1% lidocaine intramuscularly injected into the bilateral splenius cervicis muscles, splenius capitis muscles, semispinalis capitis muscles, and trapezius muscles. He also received 2000 ESWT each into bilateral trapezius muscles at 1.4 bar and 12 Hz with the expectation of a massaging effect on the shoulder girdle. He agreed to undergo the treatment when he received them. ESWT (RPW) was performed using a pneumatic massager with a vibrating head (Stotz Medical AG, Switzerland; Intelect RPW Mobile; medical device approval number: 23000BZX00228000) . Other than that, he had no problem regarding the use of health insurance coverage. In addition to eperisone hydrochloride and loxoprofen sodium hydrate, he was prescribed Kakkonto extract granules 2.5 g three times daily for 56 days, and benfotiamine 34.58 mg, pyridoxine hydrochloride 25 mg, and cyanocobalamin 250 µg (VITAMEDIN® combination capsules B25) one capsule four times daily for 56 days, and was instructed to perform cervical muscle and shoulder girdle stretches and shoulder girdle exercises. At the T + 3 weeks outpatient visit, he underwent ESWT at 1.4 bar, 12 Hz for 2000 shots each to bilateral trapezius muscles, after which his headache improved to VAS 0.8/10, NRS 1/10, and face scale 9/20. He was continued on eperisone hydrochloride and loxoprofen sodium hydrate. At the T + 6 weeks outpatient visit, his headache was VAS 1.8/10, NRS 2/10, and face scale 12/20 before ESWT, slightly worse than that after ESWT at the T + 3 weeks outpatient visit, but significantly better than that at the initial visit. After ESWT of this visit, his headache improved further to the point that he felt no pain in the VAS (0/10) and NRS (0/10) assessment, and he reported his headache at 7/20 on the face scale. Because his headache was improved, the dosages of eperisone hydrochloride and loxoprofen sodium hydrate were reduced by self-adjustment. Because the immediate effect of ESWT wore off after a few days, he was administered ESWT one week later (T + 7 weeks). His headache was VAS 1.3/10, NRS 2/10, and face scale 10/20 before ESWT, which had worsened since the last ESWT, but overall his headache was gradually improving. After ESWT, his headache was lowered to VAS 0/10, NRS 0.5/10, and face scale 7/20, showing an immediate analgesic effect of ESWT. At T + 11 weeks, his headaches had improved, he had decreased his eperisone hydrochloride and loxoprofen sodium hydrate medications, and he was taking very few medications. His headache was VAS 0.4/10, NRS 1/10, and face scale 8/20 before ESWT, and VAS 0.3/10, NRS 0/10, and face scale 7/20 after ESWT. As his headache had improved to the point that he felt little pain even before ESWT, his outpatient visits to our hospital were terminated . He did not develop any side effects associated with the treatment he received, including ESWT.