A 3-year-old, intact, female Maltese was referred to our clinic with vomiting, anorexia, and sudden alopecia. Two months previously, the dog had been prescribed Malarone® (atovaquone, 13.3 mg/kg PO BID; GlaxoSmithKline, London, UK) elsewhere for the treatment of a suspected B. gibsoni infection. She had been administered the drug up until the time of presentation at our clinic.
On physical examination, mild depression, dehydration, and generalized alopecia were evident .
No Babesia organisms were seen on blood smear examination. The results of a real-time PCR test for Babesia spp. (IDEXX Reference Laboratories, Westbrook, ME, USA) were also negative. Serum biochemistry analysis indicated mildly increased concentrations of amylase (2500 U/l; reference range 500–1500 U/l) and lipase (4420 U/l; reference range 200–1800 U/l). Thoracic and abdominal radiographs, as well as an abdominal ultrasound, showed no remarkable findings. A canine pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity assay (SNAP cPLI kit; IDEXX Reference Laboratories, Westbrook, ME, USA) yielded abnormal results, consistent with pancreatitis. Based on the clinical symptoms, results of the SNAP cPLI test, and abnormalities noted on the serum biochemistry analysis, a diagnosis of acute pancreatitis was made.
Cytology performed on skin scrapings and fungal cultures of the samples were negative. Using acetate tape, samples were collected for cytology from each of the affected areas. Numerous cocci were identified on the samples obtained from the alopecic flank. Therefore, the dog was diagnosed with alopecia with secondary superficial pyoderma. Both the pancreatitis and the alopecia were suspected to be “adverse drug reactions” (ADRs). Using a previously created scoring system, we calculated the likelihood of these conditions being the result of an ADR . Based on the history and the results of a physical examination, this dog was assigned an ADR probability score of + 5 , which suggests that the clinical signs could have been caused by the Malarone®.
Initial treatment consisted of intravenous fluid therapy (0.9% NaCl), fresh frozen plasma (Special B canine plasma; Korea Animal Blood Bank), cefixime hydrate (10 mg/kg PO BID; Cefixime, Withus Pharm, Anseong, South Korea), and enrofloxacin (5 mg/kg PO BID; Baytril Flavour Tablets, Bayer, KVP Pharm, Kiel, Germany) to address pancreatitis, as well as melatonin (2 mg PO BID; Circadin, Neurim Pharm, Zug, Switzerland) to treat alopecia. After 10 days, the dog’s clinical signs improved and the hair began to regrow slowly. Serum lipase (558 U/l; reference range 200–1800 U/l) and amylase (636 U/l; reference range 500–1500 U/l) activities measured within normal limits.