A 33-year-old primigravida of Malay origin presents for elective induction of labour at full term. In view of the chronic history of symptoms of neckache, backache, lower limb pain and weakness, this patient was extensively worked up and found to have PMC and hypokalemia periodic paralysis. She was also found to have a coexisting history of cervical myelopathy and an incidental spinal cord lipoma extending from filum terminale at L2 to sacrum shown on her magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) spine done in 2010. Otherwise, her other previous investigations were normal including autoimmune serology, cervical muscle electromyography, nerve conduction and transcranial magnetic stimulation studies.
The anesthesia team was involved early on admission for her perioperative care in order to plan for options of labour analgesia and anesthesia should she require a CS. She had frequently experienced cold and exercise-induced muscle cramps and weakness since young and was diagnosed of PMC by her neurologist. She was asymptomatic at the time of assessment with a normal neurological examination. She denied any personal or familial history of anesthesia related complications. Her baseline ECG and routine blood results were unremarkable. On consult with the neurologist, the risks of anesthesia induced rhabdomyolysis and malignant hyperthermia could not be fully excluded should she undergo general anesthesia.
As the MRI findings of the lipoma was dated back in 2010, we advised for a repeat MRI intrapartum to assess the extent of lipoma, however she was not keen. In view of terminal filum lipoma, the neurosurgery team advised that a standard epidural would be relatively safer than a combined spinal epidural or a single shot spinal in order to spare the dura.
The risks and benefits of each labour analgesia options including Entonox, intramuscular pethidine injections, Remifentanil patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) and regional analgesia (combined spinal epidural (CSE) and standard epidural) were discussed. We advised for an early standard epidural but she opted for Entonox initially.
Should she require a Caesarean section, we also preemptively counselled her for regional versus general anesthesia. We highlighted a range of muscle related risks such as hyperkalaemia, muscle weakness, myotonia, rhabdomyolysis and malignant hyperthermia should she undergo a general anesthetic. We also emphasized high risk of nerve injury should she undergo a central neuraxial block.
Eventually, she opted for a standard epidural during her early second stage of labour. An epidural catheter was inserted after 3 attempts in the intervertebral space between L3 and L4 using the loss-of-resistance technique to saline in the sitting position. A test dose of 1 % lidocaine 3mls followed by a maintenance infusion dose of 0.125 % ropivacaine with 2mcg/ml fentanyl at 10ml/hour was instituted according to our hospital protocol. Hypoesthesia was confirmed at T10 dermatome and the epidural was continued uneventfully.
Due to prolonged second stage of labour and failure to progress, an emergency CS was activated. Prior to surgical incision, a satisfactory sensory block level to T4 dermatome to pin-prick test was achieved with an epidural top up of 20ml of 2 % lidocaine with 2ml of 8.4 % sodium bicarbonate and 1:200,000 adrenaline. Her Bromage score was 3. Utmost care was taken to maintain normothermia and prevent shivering. Efforts included ensuring ambient room temperature in theatre, the use of forced air warming blanket, and the use of prewarmed intravenous and cleaning fluids. Perioperative electrolytes were closely monitored to be within normal range. We also ensure that there was a malignant hyperthermia (MH) rescue kit and ventilator is readily available in event she needs to convert to general anaesthesia. A neonatal team was also on standby. An uneventful caesarean section was performed with the delivery of a healthy male baby. In the recovery unit, normothermia was maintained throughout. The patient was monitored for one hour in the operating theatre recovery unit. On discharge to high dependency unit, her bromage score was 2. She was subsequently transferred to a general ward thereafter.
However, on post-operative day 1 she continued to have prolonged bilateral lower limb weakness of bromage score 2 or medical research council grade 1 to 2 out of 5. She had a full return of sensation and her anal tone was intact and denied any saddle anesthesia, urine or faecal incontinence. There was no sign of return of power even till post-operative day 3. The neurologist suggested an urgent post-operative MRI lumbar spine which ruled out any epidural collection or significant spinal canal narrowing, only reporting superficial oedema and contusions in the lower back which was likely related to the recent epidural. It was unlikely to cause the prolonged paralysis.
The neurologist eventually attributed the weakness to hypokalemic periodic paralysis as a diagnosis of exclusion. The weakness coincided with a borderline low potassium level of 3.5–3.7 mmol/L on post operative day 1–3. Throughout we closely monitored her neurology, temperature, glucose, oxygenation and perfusion at all times. Her power returned fully on post-operative day 4 when the potassium levels increased to 4mmol/L with the help of potassium supplementation. She was discharged a day after. With early counselling and continued support from the multiple disciplines throughout, she felt assured and satisfied with her perioperative care in hospital.