A 35-year-old Japanese woman presented to our facility with low back pain and weakness of her lower extremities. Her past history was non-contributory. No previous abnormalities had been noted during the course of her pregnancy. Her low back pain occurred without any immediate cause in gestational week 29. When weakness of her lower extremities occurred on day three of gestational week 29, causing difficulties with walking and urination, our patient consulted a local orthopedist. Blood tests revealed impaired liver function and a low platelet count, so she was brought to our emergency center.
On her initial examination, tactile and pain sensations were both reduced to 2 out of 10 (sensation graded on a 10-point scale) from the mid-thoracic level down. Manual muscle testing (MMT) for muscles below the level of the iliopsoas showed a marked decrease in strength, with a Medical Research Council scale score of 1. Her deep tendon reflexes were slightly diminished in both extremities. Complete urinary retention was noted and rectal sphincter tone was flaccid. According to the Standard Neurological Classification of Spinal Cord Injury developed by the American Spinal Injury Association (ASIA) and the International Spinal Cord Society (ISCoS), this case was defined as grade B. On hematological testing, her platelet count was markedly reduced to 1.7 × 104 cells/μL. Liver function impairment was also detected (glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase, 537U/L; glutamic-pyruvic transaminase, 294U/L; total bilirubin, 8.1 mg), while her lactate dehydrogenase and cytokeratin levels were elevated to 3766U/L and 1206U/L, respectively.
After admission, HELLP syndrome was diagnosed in the obstetrics department based on the above laboratory test findings . An emergency Cesarean section was successfully performed to bring the pregnancy to an end on the same day. Post-operatively, an MRI scan was performed to assess her bilateral lower limb paralysis . Because a space-occupying lesion was detected in her thoracic spinal canal, she was referred to our department. The lesion was diagnosed as an epidural hematoma based on the MRI findings at this time, and emergency decompression was performed the same day.
Hemilaminectomy was performed for the second to ninth thoracic vertebrae, but the epidural hematoma could not be confirmed, so the procedure was switched to a total laminectomy to allow full assessment. The dura mater was tense and swollen, and the intradural hematoma could be seen through the transparent dura. A subarachnoid hematoma was confirmed on incision of the dura and arachnoid mater, with part of the hematoma extending as far as the ventral side . The hematoma was removed and, after thorough washing, a drain was placed. The operation was completed with suturing of artificial dura mater.
Because pulmonary edema was also present, the drain was withdrawn on the third post-operative day. Use of a wheelchair became possible on post-operative day 10. After eight months, her lower extremity sensation had improved to a score of 8 out of 10, although her muscular strength remained limited to a slight improvement to MMT 3 in her bilateral tibialis anterior, and extensor hallucis longus and extensor digitorum longus muscles. The ASIA/ISCoS classification was grade C. MRI performed two months post-operatively revealed signal hyperintensity within her spinal cord, suggestive of myelomalacia .