A 14-year-old Asian (Japanese) boy was referred to our department for further examination of a left testicular tumor, which had been detected after he presented with sudden pain in his groin 5 days earlier. His left testis showed no swelling and no rubefaction. Four days after the initial visit, he underwent a surgical operation on his left testicular tumor. He had no remarkable medical history including past medical, social, family, and environmental history, except for mild mental retardation.
Ultrasonography (US) showed irregular contrast in his testicular tumor. The laboratory data were nearly within normal limits, including alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) and human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG): 1.0 ng/mL and <0.1 mIU/mL, respectively. His lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) was slightly elevated at 226 U/L. His laboratory data for complete blood cell counts and serum examination were as follows: white blood cell (WBC) 5590/μL, red blood cell (RBC) 483/μL, platelets (Plt) 28.8/μL, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 17 IU/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 9 IU/L, and creatinine 0.43 mg/dL. A urine analysis showed no remarkable findings. Physical and neurological examinations showed normal findings, and his blood pressure was 110/62 mmHg at the time of admission. Because of these findings, we could not rule out teratoma or other testicular malignancies, so a rapid pathological examination during surgery was performed. He was found to be free from recurrence 12 months after surgery using US.
We first performed US to detect the location of the tumor and cut the testicular tunica, after which an additional 4-cm incision was made on his central scrotum. Although the tumor margin was not detected, we extracted the testicular tumor with the surrounding normal testis. The tumor had multiple capsuled cysts containing liquid. An intraoperative rapid pathological diagnosis showed no malignant findings, so we did not perform orchiectomy. On histological examination, the tumor showed spermatogenesis and consisted of intestinal tissue.
The resected specimen was 12×11×10 mm in size, including the tumor and marginal tissue . On histological examination, the tumor consisted of cystic glands covered by columnar epithelium, occasionally mixed with goblet cells and surrounded by a smooth muscle layer. Partial calcification was observed. The specimen contained no other elements of germ layers except for columnar epithelium without atypia and smooth muscle. Based on these findings, the tumor was diagnosed as an enterogenous cyst .