The Surgical Case Report (SCARE) statement guidelines were utilized to report this case.
A nineteen-year-old male, right-hand dominant, presented with right wrist pain and lack of forearm rotation after punching a wall with his fist. He had no previous trauma or medical or surgical history related to that wrist. The patient had no history of smoking or alcohol consumption and no previous corticosteroids intake. On physical examination, his forearm was locked in supination with restricted protonation . The normal prominence of ulna head was absent dorsally and palpable on volar side. Skin and neurovascular status were intact. Initial posteroanterior radiograph demonstrated distal overlap of radius and ulna with associated ulna styloid fracture. A lateral radiograph revealed volar displacement of ulna in correlation to the radius . Closed reduction was attempted under sedation in the emergency department; however, the attempt failed, and the wrist was placed in a temporary splint until the dislocation could be reduced operatively. The patient was then taken to the operating room. A trial of closed reduction under general anesthesia was attempted but also failed. A dorsal approach to DRUJ was utilized over the fifth extensor compartment. The joint was exposed, head of ulna was dislocated volar, and triangular fibrocartilage complex (TFCC) was found intact. Multiple reduction trials were tried using a Freer elevator but failed even after releasing dorsal radioulnar ligament. A second incision on volar side was utilized to approach the joint between Flexor Carpi Ulnaris (FCU) and Flexor Digitorum Superficialis (FDS). Head of ulna was found buttonholing through the capsule and impacted against sigmoid notch of the radius. Reduction was only possible after releasing the volar capsule and disimpacting ulna head. Dorsal radioulnar ligament was repaired; however, the joint was unstable and stabilized with two Kirschner wires across both radius and ulna proximal to DRUJ. The wrist and forearm were placed in a sugar-tong splint in neutral position .
Two weeks later, wound was inspected and pin sites were found dry and clean. Eight weeks after surgery, Kirschner wires were removed, a removable splint was applied, and occupational therapy was started . After one month, the patient noticed significant improvement and was compliant with therapy sessions. His visual analog scale (VAS) score was 0 and Q-DASH score was 22.7. Range of movement was 45/30 for Flexion/Extension arc, 55 degrees of protonation and no supination. Grip strength was 15 kg compared to 42 kg on the other side. Radiographs showed satisfactory alignment of DRUJ. Six months post-surgery, he was satisfied with his wrist motion, participated in all daily activities, and was compliant with therapy sessions. His flexion/extension arc has been improved to 60/50°, protonation/supination arc to 75/40 and Q-DASH score was 18. Range of motion was not changed at one-year follow-up as he could not afford to do physical therapy; however, he was back to regular gym activities. His last Q-DASH score was nine .
The case report was approved by the Medical Research Centre at Hamad Medical Corporation, Doha, Qatar. Reference number: MRC-04-22-253.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal on request.