The patient, a 48-year-old female with photosensitivity, was diagnosed with EPP at the age of 33. She had right breast pain and was diagnosed with breast cancer by the family doctor. She was referred to our department for surgical management. Her mother and two sisters, diagnosed as EPPs, died of liver failure.
There was a mass, 4 cm in size, in the lateral aspect of the right breast. Axillary lymph nodes were normal. She had no abdominal pain and no neurological symptoms.
Tumor markers (CA15-3 and CEA) were in the normal range. There was no elevation of hepatic enzymes and the liver function was preserved. The PP level was elevated to 2924 μg/dL.
Mammogram showed segmental polymorphic calcifications in the right breast (BI-RADS 5) . Ultrasound revealed an axial 45 mm hypoechoic mass with internal coarse calcifications in the right breast (BI-RADS 5) . On contrast magnetic resonance imaging, there was wide-range non-mass enhancement in the upper-outer quadrant of the right breast . Distant metastasis was not observed and liver morphology was maintained and no gallstones were noted on contrast computed tomography . An ultrasound-guided core-needle biopsy showed ductal carcinoma in situ. Therefore, for the right breast cancer (TisN0M0 Stage 0), right mastectomy and sentinel lymph node biopsy were planned.
The following perioperative measures were undertaken, such as re-evaluation of EPP, measures against photosensitivity, and confirmation of drugs used.Preoperative preparation: by consulting with hepatologist, it was confirmed that the current liver function was maintained and that the PP level was stable. Measures against light wavelength: photosensitive symptoms of EPP have been reported to be triggered by wavelengths of light around 400 nm [–]. The day before the surgery, to simulate the procedure, we covered surgical lights, headlights, and anesthesia monitors in the operating room with the special film (Kapton® polyimide film, DU PONT-TORAY CO., LTD.) . The laryngoscope’s light also contained the 400-nm-region wave that was also blocked by attaching the film . We planned to intubate the patient using a videolaryngoscope (McGRATH®) because it was predicted that the view would be dark rendering the intubation difficult. Moreover, we confirmed that the film completely blocked light with a wavelength of 400 nm by a spectroradiometer (MK-350, United Power Research Technology Corp, Miaoli County, Taiwan) . Although the operative field was dim yellow-to-orange because of the influence of the film , there was no difficulty in identifying the tissues, and the surgery was possible as usual. Induction and maintenance of anesthesia: we chose total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA) with target-controlled infusion (TCI). Standard monitors were placed, including blood pressure cuff, pulse oximetry, and electrocardiography. Anesthesia was induced by intravenous administration of fentanyl, propofol, and rocuronium, and maintained with propofol (TCI of 2.5 µg/mL), 0.2 µg/mg/min of remifentanil, and a 50% oxygen–air mixture. Intubation was performed with the film-covered video laryngoscope. To manage postoperative pain, acetaminophen was administrated. The mastectomy was completed with an operating time of 1 h 48 min and total blood loss of 30 g. The patient’s urine volume was 150 ml. The endotracheal tube was extubated without difficulty, and patient reported no complaints of pain or nausea. No cutaneous or oral symptoms of photosensitivity were observed. Sentinel lymph node biopsy: in our hospital, radio isotope (RI) method with phytate colloid, and dye method with indigo carmine are usually used together. Since the risk of indigo carmine was unknown for EPP cases, the RI method alone was used. Postoperative management: to manage postoperative pain, acetaminophen was administered before the end of the surgery. The postoperative course was uneventful, and she was discharged 8 days after surgery without causing porphyria symptoms, such as liver damage .
Final pathological diagnosis was invasive ductal carcinoma with a widespread DCIS. The maximum invasion and extension diameters were 10 mm and 100 mm, respectively. Biomarker analysis using immunohistochemistry showed estrogen receptor (ER) negativity, progesterone receptor (PR) negativity, and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) positivity. There was no vascular invasion and the nuclear grade was 3 (nuclear atypical: 3 points, mitotic figures: 2 points) , and the MIB-1 was positive in 30% tumor cells. No lymph node metastasis was observed and the final stage was pT1bN0M0, pStage I.
For postoperative treatment, chemotherapy and molecular-targeted drugs were examined according to the guidelines . But for patients with EPP, the risk of chemotherapy and molecular-targeted drugs remain unknown, and there are many contraindicated drugs among the supporting drugs (antibacterial drugs and antiemetics). Moreover, she was a patient with early breast cancer (pT1b), so it was thought that the acute attack of porphyria would have had a greater impact on the prognosis than the risk of recurrence. After consulting with the patient, we decided to follow-up without treatment.