A 34-year-old woman with a smoking history but no family history of cardiovascular disease presented with severe chest pain and developed ventricular fibrillation (VF). She had a history of asthma, nasal polyp, and sinusitis. After cardiopulmonary resuscitation, she was transported to a general hospital. Her consciousness and vital signs were normal. Her cardiac enzyme levels were elevated; creatine kinase MB level of 7.1 ng/mL (normal range <5.0 ng/mL) and a troponin I level of 0.23 ng/mL (normal range <0.028 ng/mL). Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed right ventricular hypertrophy (RVH) without ischaemic abnormality. Echocardiography revealed preserved left ventricular function, right ventricular (RV) dilatation, tricuspid regurgitation with peak gradient of 61 mmHg, and RV fractional area change (FAC) of 16.5%. Acute coronary syndrome, pulmonary embolism (PE), and aortic dissection which were emergency diseases had to be ruled out because of her severe chest pain and RV overload. Emergent contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed no PE or aortic dissection. Urgent catheterization showed no coronary stenosis and mean pulmonary artery pressure (mPAP) of 66 mmHg, indicating severe PH. After admission, she suffered from recurrent chest pains, even under treatment with multiple vasodilator drugs, such as benidipine, nicorandil, and nitrates. During the chest pain episodes, ECG showed ST-segment elevation (I, aVL), large T-wave (V3–V6), and ST-segment depression (II, III, and aVF), which were highly suggestive of VSA attacks. She also developed severe hypoxaemia with SpO2 of 92% despite O2 administration at 10 L/min by reservoir mask, for which 2-weeks of inhaled corticosteroid therapy was ineffective. She was transferred to our hospital for further treatment of PH, suspected VSA, and severe hypoxaemia.
On admission, she had no fever, infection symptoms, skin eruptions, lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, or abnormal neurological findings. Her lung sounds were normal, but she had an accentuated second heart sound. Her troponin T level was elevated (0.244 ng/mL, normal range <0.1 ng/mL). She had sputum eosinophilia, and a differential blood count showed hypereosinophilia of 2.0 × 109/L (normal range <0.9 × 109/L), accounting for 17% of total leukocytes (normal range <10%). Serum electrolytes and blood glucose levels were normal. Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody test and specific IgE testing for aspergillus were negative twice. Neither interstitial deletion of chromosome 4q12 nor peripheral blood blast cells was noted. Stool ova or parasites were also negative. Chest CT showed centrilobular nodular shadows, and 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) showed diffuse abnormal accumulation in the lungs . In right heart catheterization (RHC), mPAP, and pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) were 48 mmHg and 12 Wood units (WU), respectively.
For treatment of severe hypoxaemia associated with eosinophilia, we administered oral prednisolone (50 mg/day). Thereafter, her hypereosinophilia, severe hypoxaemia, and recurrent chest pains promptly resolved after initiation of prednisolone. Moreover, echocardiography showed decreased RV dilatation and RVFAC improved to 26%. Three weeks later, ECG signs of RVH disappeared, and we repeated RHC, which showed that her PH was not improved enough (mPAP 37 mmHg). Furthermore, ergonovine provocation test induced severe diffuse coronary spasm of the left coronary artery involving the left main trunk , associated with ST-segment depression in leads V1 and V2. Endomyocardial biopsy showed no eosinophilic infiltration. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging revealed no late gadolinium enhancement. We finally diagnosed that she had EGPA based on her asthma, sinusitis, hypereosinophilia, and chest CT findings. Vasospastic angina and PH were thought to be cardiovascular complications of EGPA (FFS of 1). Thus, we intensified immunosuppressive therapy for EGPA with intravenous cyclophosphamide (IV-CY) pulse therapy (500 mg each month) in addition to prednisolone and oral pulmonary vasodilators.
Six months after discharge, she had no cardiopulmonary symptoms, indicating FFS of 0. The abnormal accumulation of FDG-PET in the lungs had disappeared . Repeated RHC showed that mPAP and PVR were decreased to 34 mmHg and 5.1 WU, respectively. Her troponin T level was normalized (0.007 ng/mL). Neither coronary artery spasm nor ECG changes were induced by ergonovine provocation test .