A 69-year-old Asian man was admitted to our hospital for complaints of epigastric pain. There had been no nausea, vomiting, or melena. At the age of 67, he had a femoral head replacement for aseptic necrosis of his femoral head, and had been treated with oral medicine for gout since the age of 65. A physical examination revealed no abnormal signs other than jaundice and mild fever.
Laboratory data revealed elevated serum hepatobiliary enzyme levels (alanine aminotransferase 247IU/L, aspartate transaminase 123IU/L, γ-guanosine triphosphate 803IU/L, total bilirubin 2.3mg/dL, direct bilirubin 1.2mg/dL), a white blood cell count of 10,200/μL, and serum C-reactive protein levels of 0.24mg/dL. Ultrasonography revealed dilatation of his intrahepatic bile duct and gallstones. Computed tomography revealed stones in his common bile duct. The diameter of the largest stone was 15mm. The wall of his gall bladder was not thickened .
His common bile duct stones were removed by endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) before surgery. ERCP revealed that the diameter of his common bile duct was 11mm and the size of the filling defect in his inferior common bile duct was 15 × 10mm. His intrahepatic bile duct was dilated because of the stones in his common bile duct and cholangitis developed. The anatomy of his biliary tree was not closely investigated in the ERCP.
Cholecystectomy was first attempted laparoscopically. The anatomic relationships between all structures in Calot’s triangle were easily identified . His cystic duct, however, could not be found during surgery. Therefore, the surgery was converted to an open surgery. We mobilized his gallbladder from his liver, at first. We secondly performed a partial cholecystectomy at the body of his gallbladder getting enough distance from his hepatic duct. The neck of his gallbladder was closed by interrupted suture using 4–0 Vicryl after two stones were removed (diameter: 10mm and 15mm, respectively). Intraoperative cholangiography did not reveal a cystic duct; he was diagnosed with a hepaticocystic duct type IIIB . There were no findings suggesting Mirizzi syndrome.
A histologic study of his resected gallbladder indicated mild inflammatory changes without malignancy, compatible with cholecystitis. He was discharged from our hospital on postoperative day 10 without complications. Two months after the surgery, however, he was readmitted to the hospital for fever and jaundice due to bile leakage from the closing point of his gallbladder. He was diagnosed with obstructive jaundice due to a stone remaining in the cystic duct, which was removed by ERCP. He has now been followed up for 1.5 years without biliary complications.