A 32-year-old Japanese woman, gravida two and para one, at 28 weeks of gestation, developed a fever of over 38 °C following right buttock pain without any known cause after waking up. She was brought to our emergency room for increasing pain. A brief history revealed she was being treated with certolizumab pegol for rheumatoid arthritis for 2 years. Her rheumatoid arthritis was graded as Stage II by Steinbrocker’s classification, and she had no lesions on her sacroiliac joints (Larsen grade 0). She was also suspected of suffering from Sjogren’s syndrome and experienced upper respiratory symptoms 2 weeks before the onset of buttock pain.
On initial clinical assessment, her temperature was 37.8 °C and her heart rate was 107 beats per minute. She had no respiratory or abdominal symptoms. She complained of a sharp pain around her right sacroiliac joint that was tender on examination.
Laboratory investigations revealed that her white blood cell count (17,800/μL, normal value < 7800/μL) and C-reactive protein (2.63 mg/dL, normal value < 0.3 mg/dL) values were high at the time of hospitalization. An obstetric sonography showed that she did not have a thickened placenta or any retroplacental collection. The estimated fetal weight was 1245 g. Her right sacroiliac joint demonstrated a high-intensity signal on both T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and short-tau inversion recovery (STIR), which suggested the presence of arthritis . She was diagnosed with right infectious sacroiliitis and admitted to our orthopedic department. Her treatment was initiated with intravenous administration of ceftriaxone (2 g per day). The next day, she complained of decreased fetal movement. A cardiotocography showed fetal tachycardia (180–190 beats per minute). Furthermore, GAS was detected in her blood culture collected on admission. Urine, nasal, and pharyngeal cultures were all negative for GAS. We diagnosed her with GAS bacteremia and performed an emergency cesarean section under general anesthesia. She delivered a female neonate weighing 1286 g with Apgar scores of 3 and 7 at 1 and 5 minutes, respectively. Her umbilical artery pH was 7.344.
After the operation, the patient was moved to an intensive care unit. Ceftriaxone administration was stopped after a day, and her antibiotics were changed to clindamycin (2.4 g per day) and ampicillin (2 g per day) to treat the GAS infection. Her blood gas analysis showed poor oxygenation, and chest x-ray showed mild pulmonary edema; therefore, she was continued on oxygen administration with a venturi mask. Next day post-surgery, her blood tests revealed low albumin (1.7 g/dL) and antithrombin (61%) levels. Hence, an albumin preparation and antithrombin was administered. On the same day, her chest x-ray showed exacerbation of the pulmonary edema. She was then started on continuous positive airway pressure for 2 days. Three days after surgery, she was moved to the general ward once she was stable. Over the following days, the patient progressively improved, and her intravenous antibiotics were discontinued. She was started on an oral administration of amoxicillin (2250 mg per day) and discharged after a 15-day hospital stay . Her sacroiliac joint was rated Larsen grade 0 (normal) upon x-ray after discharge.
A pathological examination of her placenta revealed no evidence of chorioamnionitis, corditis, placental infarction, or placental hemangiomatosis. However, villitis of unknown etiology was partially recognized.
The female baby was evaluated by a neonatologist, and diagnosed with respiratory distress syndrome. She was intubated and administered a surfactant. She had no obvious signs of infection and was treated for extremely low birth weight in the neonatal intensive care unit. Administration of ampicillin (100 mg/kg/day) was initiated as a preventive measure for 4 days. Her blood culture was negative. She was extubated 4 days after birth and discharged from the hospital 81 days after birth. Her weight was 3172 g at discharge.