The patient, now an eighteen year old man, was born after normal pregnancy and delivery and had normal early psychomotor development. From the age of three years he experienced episodic migraine-like headache, which resolved spontaneously at the age of sixteen. From the age of nine he noticed slowly progressive difficulties with handwriting due to focal stiffness and abnormal postures of his right hand. There was no infection or vaccination prior to the onset of symptoms. Subsequently, he developed abnormal postures and involuntary movements in his whole right upper limb described as slow, strained abduction and elevation of the shoulder and flexion of the elbow, wrist and fingers. The motor symptoms gradually progressed and, over a period of approximately one year, involved both upper limbs, the neck and face, truncal muscles and the lower limbs. From the age of twelve years he lost unsupported locomotion. He is now eighteen years old and wheel-chair dependent with severe generalized dystonia. He has completed his primary and secondary education and shows no evidence of cognitive or psychiatric dysfunction.
Physical examination by the authors at the age of fifteen revealed severe generalized dystonia with predominantly tonic features, axial and appendicular rigidity and abnormal posturing involving the neck, trunk and all four extremities (Additional file ). He had facial hypomimia and dystonia, and oromandibular dystonia with severe dysarthria, but no dysphagia or dysphonia. Sensory and cerebellar functions were normal and his cognitive function was unremarkable.
MRI of the brain at the age of nine showed bilateral, high T2 signal lesions of the posterior putamen, which were more pronounced on the left side. Subsequent examinations at the ages of ten, fourteen, seventeen and eighteen years showed progression of the lesions in a posteroanterior fashion gradually involving all of the putamen and extending into the left caudate nucleus . The putaminal lesions appeared cavitated on T1 and FLAIR sequences and showed high apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) on diffusion weighted imaging (DWI). The left caudate lesion appeared oedematous with high T2 signal and heterogeneous water diffusion with low ADC corresponding to the newest parts of the lesion . The nucleus accumbens and pallidum were spared and no other abnormalities were seen in the brain. There was no contrast enhancement on repeated examinations.
Whole body positron emission tomography (PET) imaging with fluor-18-deoxy-glucose (FDG) was performed at the age of eighteen on a Siemens Biograph 40 PET-CT. FDG-PET of the brain showed glucose hypermetabolism in the frontal cortex and hypometabolism in the cerebellum. There was no tracer uptake in the putamen and reduced uptake in the left caudate . PET-CT of the torso showed no abnormalities and ultrasound of the testes revealed no signs of teratomas or other neoplasms.
CSF analysis on several occasions showed normal cell count and mildly elevated protein (0.52-0.53 g/L), but no oligoclonal bands. Antibodies against the NR1 subunit of the NMDA receptor were detected using transfected cells produced by Euroimmun Medizinische Labordiagnostika AG (D-2356 Lübeck) in the patient’s serum and CSF. Screening for other autoantibodies to nervous system antigens was negative including anti-Hu, Ri, Yo, Tr, MAG, myelin, Ma/Ta, GAD, amphiphysin, AMPA, GABA-b receptor, LGI1, CASPR2 and glycine receptors.
He had normal metabolic screening in blood, CSF and urine. Wilson’s and Leigh disease due to mitochondrial DNA or SURF1 mutations were excluded. He was thoroughly evaluated for mitochondrial disease including a muscle biopsy and qualitative/quantitative mitochondrial DNA analysis with normal findings. Analysis of DYT1, RRM2B, SUCLA2 and OPA1 genes was normal.
The patient received five intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) infusions (Kiovig 0.4 g/day) followed by two more infusions a month later and a new screening for anti-NMDAR antibodies one month later (2 months after treatment start) was negative in serum and CSF. Three months after the first IVIg infusion his clinical status and MRI findings, including lesional ADC, are stable but there have not been signs of clinical improvement. He receives regular intramuscular injections of Incobotulinum toxin A in the upper limbs resulting in moderate improvement in motor function.
This work has been deemed quality control by our local ethical committee (Regional Committee for Medical Research Ethics in Western Norway).