A white, 23-year-old female, with no history of coagulation disorders or other diseases, was referred to our hospital with a history of neck pain that commenced 1 year ago, and about 6 months ago evolved with a loss of power and multiple falling episodes.
The general physical examination was normal. In the neurological examination, the patient was completely lucid, tetraparetic, 4/5 on the right and 3/5 on the left and hyperreflexia in the 4 members.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated the existence of a large lesion, suggestive of ependymoma, which extended from the floor of the fourth ventricle, emerged from the foramen of Magendie and descended to the C2 level . No other alteration was observed in the complementary preoperative examinations.
The patient was submitted to median suboccipital craniotomy and C1 laminectomy in the park bench position with the left side down . The procedure was performed with continual electrophysiological monitoring, which showed no evidence of abnormalities over the whole surgery. During resection of the lesion, adhering to the floor of the fourth ventricle, near the vagal trigone, the patient presented great pressure lability, with rapid pressure elevation, blood pressure 230/120 mmHg. After intensive anesthetic management, the lability was corrected and the tumor completely removed without other complications.
As a routine in our department, in the immediate postoperative period, we tried to wake up the patient and extubate. However, the patient did not have a level of consciousness sufficient to tolerate extubation, and was maintained under mechanical ventilation. Therefore a brain computed tomography (CT) was carried out immediately after surgery , which showed multiple supratentorial hemorrhages. The patient evolved with good neurological response, opening her eyes when called and obeying commands. Considering the progressive clinical recovery, the absence of lesions of significant mass and the presence of multiple bleeding focuses, a conservative treatment of the bleeding was chosen. Postoperative exams did not demonstrate any signs of coagulation disorders.
The patient evolved in the days following with spontaneous opening of the eyes, and obeying commands, but continued in mechanical ventilation as she did not protect the airway effectively. Vasoactive drugs (norepinephrine) were introduced to maintain the mean arterial pressure (MAP) >60 mmHg, as pressure lability continued to be present in the postoperative period, with adequate control initially.
On the fourth day after surgery, the patient presented symptoms of pneumonia and was treated with antibiotics with satisfactory response. The patient presented good parameters at the physiological monitoring with electrocardiogram (ECG), respiratory rate, invasive blood pressure (IBP), body temperature, arterial hemoglobin oxygen saturation (SpO2); and adequate intravascular volume. However, on the ninth day of the postoperative period, there was a sudden neurological worsening and anisocoria. A new brain CT was carried out , which demonstrated a diffuse cerebral edema. In spite of the introduction of clinical measures for the control of diffuse cerebral edema, the patient evolved to a condition of brain death.
A pathological anatomical examination confirmed the hypothesis of ependymoma.