An eight-year old female spayed domestic short hair cat was presented to the Small Animal Clinic of the Vetsuisse Faculty of the University of Bern, Switzerland, due to progressive gait abnormalities of both pelvic limbs. The first clinical sign, consisting of frequent stretching of the pelvic limbs, has been intermittently observed by the owner over the last 2 months prior to presentation. One week prior to presentation the cat acutely worsened, was reluctant to jump and to climb stairs and seemed to be painful. Additionally, an increased water-intake and periuria have been observed by the owner.
At the time of presentation, vital parameters were within normal limits. Neurological examination revealed mild ambulatory paraparesis, moderate pelvic limb proprioceptive ataxia, and reduced proprioceptive positioning and hopping response in both pelvic limbs. The remaining neurological examination was unremarkable and no spinal hyperesthesia could be detected on palpation. Neurological findings were consistent with a lesion within the third thoracic and third lumbar spinal cord segments. Initial differential diagnoses included neoplasia, intervertebral disk protrusion and an inflammatory process. Haematology and serum biochemistry revealed mild changes, including eosinophilia (1.94 × 109/l; range: 0–1.5 × 109/l), and an elevated aspartate transaminase (117 IU; range: 12–61) and creatinine kinase (5812 IU; range: 0–596) activity. Serological testing for feline immunodeficiency virus and feline leukaemia virus were negative. Thoracic radiographs revealed no abnormalities of the intrathoracic organs, although a quite well defined, round geographic radiolucent lesion was identified at the base of the spinous process of the second thoracic vertebra (T2) expanding into the area of the vertebral canal . MRI using a 1.0 Tesla open permanent magnet (Philips HFO Panorama, Philips Medical Systems, PC Best, Netherlands) of the thoracolumbar area revealed an extramedullary space occupying lesion at the level of T1/2, causing a severe dorsal compression and deformation of the spinal cord . The lesion was slightly heterogeneous and almost isointense to the spinal cord on T1- and T2-weighted and hyperintense on T2*- and STIR- sequences. The epicenter of the lesion was suspected to be at the level of the dorsal lamina of T2. For a better description of bony involvement and to rule out metastases, the MRI was immediately followed by a CT-examination of the thorax and abdomen. In CT, the above described lesion had a soft tissue density (HU 60–65) . The mass showed severe and relatively homogeneous contrast enhancement.
The final radiographic diagnosis was an expansile extramedullary space occupying mass centered in the cancellous bone of the base of the dorsal spinous process of T2 causing severe compression of the spinal cord from dorsal and dislocation and deformation of the caudodorsal lamina of T1. No signs of metastatic disease were detected. Cerebrospinal fluid was collected from the cerebellomedullary cistern and its analysis was unremarkable.