A 62-year-old caucasian man with no relevant medical history reported difficulty chewing food and perceived voice alteration during his annual periodontal check-up. He also referred stiffness of the tongue, face, and submandibular area. The patient had been diagnosed with severe OSAS two years previously, since when he had worn a CPAP device during sleep. Polysomnography (PSG) showed an Apnea-Hypopnea Index (AHI) of 54.6. The lowest value of SaO2 (%) desaturation was 69, and it was below 90 for 43.5% of the total time asleep. At the first patient wore a mask that covered the mouth and nose with a flow of 9 cm H2O . However, after a control polysomnography at 14 months he was instructed to increase the flow pressure to 11 cm H2O, and for reasons of comfort he opted for an exclusively nasal mask. During the check-up with his periodontist, the mask was adjusted to assess the force exerted on the oral, dental and facial structures . The patient associated the changes in mastication with the pressure exerted by the last nasal mask on the area of the premaxilla and the upper incisors over recent months.
Exploration of the occlusion with the aid of an orthodontist revealed significant changes. An atypical left lateral and anterior open bite was observed, with major buccoversion of teeth 33, 34, 35, 36, along with a slight diastema of the lower incisors, without tooth mobility .
A soft tissue inspection revealed only macroglossia, with the tongue resting on the occlusal surfaces of the teeth of the lower arch . Fortunately, the availability of a set of study plaster models created five years previously allowed us to measure and accurately quantify the expansion of the jaws by using a digital caliper .
External palpation indicated a subcutaneous stiffness of the submandibular area. Orthopantomography was normal, although the lateral X-ray of the skull and cephalometric analysis showed abnormally high angles of inclination of the lower incisor with regard to the axis of the mandibular body and tooth plane .
On the same day as the visit, orthopantomography and lateral cephalometry were performed, revealing a reduction of the upper airway with thickening of the soft tissue. General analytical tests were performed immediately, including hormone profiles. The extremely high values of growth hormone (11.8 ng/mL – normal range 0.02-1.23) and insulin-like growth factor 1 (780.2 ng/mL – normal range 15-246) confirmed the diagnosis of acromegaly and ruled out the rest of entities included in the differential diagnosis, such as pathological tooth migration, jaw expansive process, amyloidosis, hypothyroidism, rhinolalia and systemic voice disorders.
The patient was referred to an endocrinologist who requested a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pituitary gland with intravenous contrast. A significant growth of the left side of this gland (11.5x9.5 mm) was identified and the image was compatible with a pituitary macroadenoma .
To complete the preoperative study, neuronavigation computed tomography with intravenous contrast was performed, which confirmed the left intrasellar tumor. Finally, the patient underwent tumor resection via a transsphenoidal approach, conducted by a neurosurgeon. Postoperative evolution was satisfactory and histopathological analysis confirmed the diagnosis of densely granulated somatotroph pituitary macroadenoma .
A few days after surgery, the patient already noted a marked improvement of all symptoms associated with the acromegaly and decided not to resume CPAP treatment. In addition desaturation data also evolved favorably during follow-up: the lowest SaO2 (%) value was 87.60 and it was below 88% for only 0.02% of the total time asleep. Consequently, the pulmonologist advised the patient to abandon the CPAP. Within only two months, the analytical values showed a clear trend towards normalization: growth hormone (GH) 0.305 ng/mL and insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) 302.6 ng/mL.