Approval and consent for publication of this report were obtained from the patient and his wife.
A 50-year-old man (body weight 55 kg; height 168 cm) with a 3-year history of ALS was scheduled to undergo open appendectomy due to repeated appendicitis. Clinically, he had advanced bulbar symptoms with dysarthria and dysphagia and muscle weakness in both upper limbs. He had no muscle weakness in his lower limbs. His kidney function was normal. Pulmonary function testing indicated that his forced vital capacity (FVC) was 3.15 L and %FVC was 85.6%. Although he accepted future placement of a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy for nutritional supplementation and the necessary equipment for non-invasive mechanical ventilation for pulmonary support, he refused to undergo future invasive mechanical ventilation using an endotracheal tube or tracheotomy in the advanced stages of ALS. In order to avoid the respiratory depression associated with general anesthesia, we decided to administer epidural anesthesia combined with sedation with dexmedetomidine for anesthesia during the surgical procedure.
After obtaining the patient’s informed consent, we transferred him to the operating room and established standard monitoring. After placing the patient in the right lateral position, an 18-gauge Tuohy needle and loss-of-resistance technique with saline were used to obtain epidural access at the T12/L1 vertebral interspace. After careful aspiration to avoid intravascular and intrathecal injection, 11 mL of 1.5% lidocaine with 1:200,000 epinephrine was injected directly via the Tuohy needle. Then, an epidural catheter was placed for intraoperative and postoperative analgesia. We confirmed anesthesia of the T6 to L3 dermatomes using the cold test with ice. Active hip, knee, and ankle flexion were maintained during the surgery. Dexmedetomidine infusion was administered for sedation at 4 μg/kg/h for 10 min and continued at 0.4 μg/kg/h along with 3 L/min O2 via a face mask. The patient underwent open appendectomy without complications. The operative time was 43 min. He had no pain or discomfort intraoperatively. Dexmedetomidine infusion was terminated at the end of surgery. For postoperative analgesia, 0.125% levobupivacaine was continuously infused at 4 mL/h via the epidural catheter. He was monitored overnight in the intensive care unit (ICU) to assess his respiratory status and was shifted from the ICU the day after surgery. The patient walked without support after discharge from the ICU. There was no worsening of motor function in his lower limbs or interference with passing urine both during the effect of epidural analgesia and after it had worn off. The epidural catheter was removed on the fourth day after surgery, and the patient was discharged home on the fifth day after surgery. There were no neurological complications due to epidural anesthesia at the 3-month follow-up after surgery.