The 55-year-old male patient experienced right hip-joint pain after an episode of a fall while walking on the road 5 days prior. There was no history of chronic illness. Despite having a history of BK amputation in the same leg following a right foot crush injury a few years ago, the patient walked independently and carried out activities of daily life with the use of a prosthetic limb.
In the AO classification, the fracture type was A1.2 . The patient was classed as stage I by anesthetic profile according to the American Society of Anesthesiology.
On the fracture table, surgery was intended to fix the fracture using a proximal femoral nail (PFN). To facilitate access to C-arm imaging fluoroscopy while under spinal anesthesia, the contralateral limb was fastened to the leg support device and placed in a 90° hip flexion and abduction posture. After flipping the boot piece upside-down, the wounded leg’s stump was fastened with elastic bandages and Velcro straps, and the knee was flexed . In other words, by inverting the boot piece, the flexed knee was anchored at the boot piece, permitting traction, and manipulation like in a typical femoral IT fracture. Following adequate traction and internal rotation, fracture reduction was confirmed in anteroposterior (AP) and cross-table lateral imaging. The leg was addicted 10–15° to get better access for insertion of PFN. A 3 mm K-wire was used to transfix the fracture. A lateral X-ray confirmed K-wire position . After taking an incision of 4 cm from the tip of greater trochanter, entry was taken under C-arm guidance by the awl. A bent tip guide wire was passed through the entry awl. Following the proximal reaming, a 135 PFN with a size of 12 × 180 mm was inserted. A femoral bolt guide pin and a de-rotation screw guide pin were inserted through the proximal hole within 5 mm in subchondral bone of the femoral head. The 8 mm cannulated femoral bolt coupled with a 6.4 mm cannulated de-rotation bolt was positioned in the usual manner in femoral neck and head and confirmed on the AP and cross-table lateral views under C-arm guide. Traction was gradually released while tightening the screw to achieve appropriate compression at the fracture site. The apposition of anterior cortex was confirmed in lateral view after final fixation of nail.
Postoperatively, plain radiographs showed well-reduced fracture with appropriate internal fixation . During the 12-month post-operative follow-up period, there were no orthopedic complications, such as infection, implant blackout, or progression of the underlying diseases. The fracture was observed to be united at 6 months after surgery. The patient regained his pre-operative gait function and was able to walk with complete weight-bearing on the prosthetic leg.