A 16-year-old female with a history of hypothyroidism, fibromyalgia and polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis presented to the emergency department with a three-week history of frontal headaches worsening in the preceding week accompanied by photophobia, phonophobia, emesis and nighttime fevers to 38.9oC. Additionally, she reported one month of ocular pain with a “black spot” in her left field of vision that began shortly after attending summer camp at a farm in Alabama. One week prior to presentation, she was evaluated by ophthalmology and found to have facial numbness and weakness and diagnosed with chorioretinitis. The initial concern by her retinal specialist was acute multifocal placoid pigment epitheliopathy (AMPEE), an autoimmune chorioretinal disease which can be complicated by neurologic involvement, including headaches. Several months prior to presentation the patient has transient urticarial eruptions on the extremities and trunk that were asymptomatic . Further history revealed that seven months prior to presentation she had contracted pneumonia after traveling to Arizona, New Mexico, and El Paso. The pneumonia resolved with antibiotic treatment.
She had a four-year history of polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis and her anti-nuclear antibody (ANA) titer ranged from 1:320 to 1:640 in a homogenous or speckled pattern. At the time of presentation, her arthritis was being treated with 10 mg of prednisone daily, 10 mg of methotrexate weekly and 10 mg/kg infliximab infusions every six weeks. She was initially treated with 10 mg/kg abatacept infusions every four weeks, but she was switched to infliximab after two years of therapy as she stopped responding to abatacept. Infliximab was selected as the patient declined injectable medication and preferred intravenous infusions. She was also undergoing occupational therapy.
Slit lamp and optical coherence tomography (OCT) exams upon presentation revealed nonspecific bilateral choroidal lesions . Brain and spine MRI showed enhancement of the left temporal lobe, a small infarct in the left medial temporal area, and a thickened and infiltrated infundibulum . Although the patient complained of headaches, the history was complicated by her worsening fibromyalgia. These MRI findings and multiple ophthalmic exams initially resulted in a diagnosis of AMPEE by retinal specialist. Additional imaging revealed a right lower lobe necrotizing pneumonia . Her white blood cell (WBC) count was 11.7 and her erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 46. Her cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) culture, right lung aspirate culture, and urine culture were all positive for Coccidioides immitis. Serology revealed Coccidioides IgG of 1:256 and positive Coccidioides IgM. She had positive CSF serology for cocci with complement-fixation antibody 1:4, IgG 7.6, IgM 3.0. Her right lung biopsy demonstrated necrotizing granulomatous inflammation with fungal organisms compatible with Coccidioides. Her serology was negative for Bartonella, Toxoplasma, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus. Her T-spot was also negative. She was diagnosed with disseminated coccidioidomycosis with Coccidioides meningitis.
The patient was treated with IV fluconazole and amphotericin B for two weeks and has continued treatment with oral fluconazole, initially on 800 mg daily and tapered to 400 mg daily based with plans for her to continue with lifetime fluconazole based on the 2016 Infectious Diseases Society of America (ISDA) Clinical Practice Guideline for the Treatment of Coccidioidomycosis . We. She stopped medications for her JIA during the admission to evaluate a disseminated infection v autoimmune condition such as AMPEE. She was also weaned off prednisone. Recent imaging demonstrated worsening of her arthritis off therapy, and she was started on hydroxychloroquine 200 mg twice daily with close clinical and lab monitoring. The patient was evaluated by a local infectious disease physician and an infectious disease physician at the National Institutes of Health who both recommended against the use of biologic medication given the systemic involvement of Coccidioides. She continues to have chest x-rays and brain MRIs every six months and Coccidioides antibody by complement fixation and immunodiffusion every three months. Her most recent lumbar puncture had normal white count, glucose, protein, and negative Coccidioides by immunodiffusion any by complement fixation. Her serology Coccidioides IgG has improved from 1:256 to 1:2. She currently has no neurologic sequalae and her vision has returned to baseline. She continues to follow with pediatric infectious disease, rheumatology, and ophthalmology.