A 55-year-old Asian woman was admitted to our hospital with complaints of exercise-induced asthma, chest tightness, intermittent dry cough and fatigue. After admission, the symptoms could not be relieved by thoracic drainage decompression. No obvious anomalies were indicated in blood tests. She had no history of meningioma and no complaints of headaches, seizures, back pain, numbness in the hands, weakness or abnormal sensations. Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed the presence of a large mass in the left thorax. The left lung was compressed, and a pleural effusion was observed. Subsequently, the patient underwent surgery to remove the mass. Intraoperatively, a 9-cm mass was found between the lung and the diaphragm; it was tightly adhered to the surrounding lung tissue and not attached to the spinal canal/dura. We observed that the mass had clear boundaries with the lung tissue, and the mass was not in the lung tissue. Therefore, the mass and a small amount of surrounding lung tissue were removed. Postoperative gross findings indicated that the lesion was a grayish-white solid mass with indistinct borders. The boundary of the mass was blurred at low magnification and involved the lung surface pleura ; however, the alveolar structures were normal, and the histomorphology of the mass was distinct from that of alveolar structures. The lesion was surrounded by dilated hemorrhagic areas resembling cavernous hemangioma or hemangiopericytoma . Under high magnification, diffuse tumor cells were observed. In the dense area of the tumor cells, the cells were round or irregular in shape, with less cytoplasm, uniform nuclear chromatin, and visible nucleoli and mitoses (2/10 HPF) . In the sparse area of the tumor cells, the cells were arranged in a fascicular, whorled, storiform and meningithelial pattern , with occasional intranuclear pseudo-inclusions or interstitial hyaline degeneration . The tumor cells had abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm. Further, the nucleoli and nuclear divisions were barely visible. Lots of psammoma bodies were observed in the tumor tissue , but no obvious inflammatory infiltration or necrosis were observed. Immunohistochemistry revealed that the tumor cells expressed vimentin, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), SSTR2, PR, S100 protein and ALK (Clone D5F3). ALK expression appeared in the cytoplasm. In addition, the highest proliferation index by Ki-67 was 15%. On the other hand, the cells were negative for GFAP, SOX-10, inhibin, CD34, STAT6, smooth muscle actin (SMA), desmin, CKpan, D2-40, WT-1, CK5/6 and CD45. Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with PEM in the left thoracic cavity and the pathological morphology was classified as transitional (mixed meningothelial and fibroblastic subtypes) WHO grade 1 meningioma. She underwent a CT of the head after diagnosis; no CNS tumor was observed. No further treatments were planned, and the patient was advised to visit the hospital regularly. During the 12-month follow-up period, the patient underwent CT in other hospitals; no recurrence or metastasis was observed.