A 59-year-old Japanese woman had a 4-year history of exertional dyspnoea. The patient was previously diagnosed with coronary vasospastic angina. She was referred to the former hospital 17 months prior to the current presentation, at which time lung perfusion scintigraphy excluded chronic thrombo-embolism. A right heart catheterization demonstrated an elevated mean pulmonary arterial pressure (PAP) of 58 mmHg and pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) of 928 dynes s−1 cm−5, with a normal mean pulmonary arterial wedge pressure (PAWP) of 9 mmHg and cardiac index (CI) of 3.0 L/min/m2. She was diagnosed with idiopathic PAH, for which treatment with sildenafil and macitentan (10 mg) was initiated, followed by intravenous epoprostenol. On dose escalation of the epoprostenol up to 10 ng/kg/min, her oxygenation worsened and mild pulmonary oedema and pleural effusion developed. The epoprostenol was immediately stopped. On treatment with diuretics, the pulmonary oedema improved. Such a response to pulmonary arterial vasodilation confirmed the clinical diagnosis of PVOD. She was discharged after the careful initiation of low-dose selexipag (0.4 mg).
The patient experienced symptom exacerbation 4 months ago, for which she was hospitalized. The sildenafil was changed to tadalafil (40 mg), and the selexipag dose was slowly increased up to 1.6 mg. She was discharged on home oxygen therapy (3 L/min).
Two months ago, she developed respiratory distress, lower extremity oedema, and fatigue, for which she was transported to our hospital. A thoracic computed tomography (CT) scan revealed mediastinal lymph node enlargement ( and ), a dilated pulmonary artery , mild pericardial effusion, bilateral pleural effusion , and multiple centrilobular ground-glass opacities and interlobular septal thickening . Lung transplantation was deemed not indicated due to her age. Tadalafil withdrawal, incremental oxygen therapy (4 L/min), and mild fluid restriction improved those manifestations. She was subsequently discharged.
The patient was admitted to our hospital for the re-evaluation of pulmonary artery pressure. Her vital signs were as follows: blood pressure 98/46 mmHg, pulse rate 50/min, body temperature 36.3 °C, and O2 saturation 93% on 4 L of supplemental O2 via a nasal cannula. A chest radiograph showed enlargement of the right heart and bilateral pulmonary arteries . An electrocardiogram demonstrated right axis deviation and right ventricular hypertrophy . Echocardiography showed a dilated right ventricle with a flattened interventricular septum leading to a D-shaped left ventricle, mild tricuspid regurgitation, and a tricuspid regurgitation pressure gradient of 65 mmHg . She provided written informed consent, and we performed right heart catheterization. All measurements were performed under the patient’s spontaneous respiration. Oxygen was administered at 4 L/min throughout the procedure. After determination of her baseline haemodynamics, the nitroglycerine was increased every 5 min, followed by an evaluation of PAP and PAWP. The dose of intravenous nitroglycerine was increased up to 1 μg/kg/min, and a complete haemodynamic evaluation was performed. The results are shown in . Intravenous nitroglycerine at 0.2 and 0.4 μg/kg/min reduced PAWP and mean PAP to the minimal plateau level, respectively. The final dose of 1 μg/kg/min yielded a decrease of ∼20% in mean PAP and PVR and a slight increase in CI.
She had a CT scan before and after on the same day as the right heart catheterization. At 1 h after the intravenous nitroglycerine administration, a repeat thoracic CT scan did not indicate apparent pulmonary oedema or pleural effusion compared with that just before the right heart catheterization the same day . Thereafter, the intravenous nitroglycerine was discontinued. No symptoms or signs of deterioration were noted. Neither systemic blood pressure nor oxygen saturation was affected throughout the procedure. After a close examination for persistent low-grade fever, the patient was discharged. Three weeks after discharge, she experienced an exacerbation and was readmitted. Her condition temporarily improved with intensive treatment, but she had a marked exacerbation triggered by defaecation and died 12 weeks after the right heart catheterization.