Patient #1 was a 43 years-old woman referred to our Hospital because of a pseudoaneurysm of the extrahepatic PV, occurred after a duodenocephalopancreasectomy (DCP) performed elsewhere for a solitary neuroendocrine tumour of the pancreatic isthmus .
Patient #2 was a 54 years-old man with pancreatitis and multiple episodes of bleeding after a liver transplantation, because of primary sclerosing cholangitis. He was referred to endovascular treatment because a CT scan found irregularities of the extrahepatic wall of the PV, in contact with a peri-hepatic collection with traces of recent bleeding .
In both cases, the intervention was planned under general anaesthesia. The patient was placed in a slight left-sided position. The 6th-segment branch of the PV was punctured with a 20-gauge Chiba needle (Cook, Bloomington, IN, USA), under ultrasound (US) guidance.
A 10 cm − 5 Fr sheath (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) was introduced and a diagnostic portography was performed through a 4 Fr Vertebral catheter (Cordis, Milpitas, CA).
Then, the trans-hepatic access was progressively dilated and a stent graft was placed between the PV and the superior mesenteric vein.
For patient #1,presenting with a PV of 12 mm of maximal diameter, a 16–13-56 mm stent-graft (Iliac stent graft, Zenith spiral Z, Cook) has been chosen and inserted through a 14 F sheat .
For patient #2, presenting with a PV of 16 mm of maximal diameter, a 20–59 mm stent-graft (iliac stentgraft, Zenith Alpha, spiral Z, Cook) has been used , inserted through a 16 Fr sheat.
For patient #1, before stent placement, two plugs of 16 mm and 10 mm in diameter [Amplatzer II, AVP II; St Jude Medical, St Paul, Minn], were deployed in the proximal splenic vein and in the proximal inferior mesenteric vein, respectively, in order to reduce the risk of post-procedural endoleaks . Conversely, no plugs have been used to plug the splenic vein in patient # 2, as it was not meant to be covered by the stent.
A final control performed though the 14 and 16 Fr sheats espectively, showed patency of the mesenteric and portal veins, with no endoleak, in both cases.
At the end of the procedure, two 0.035″ rigid guidewires (Advantage, Terumo) were placed in the superior mesenteric vein and two percutaneous devices (8 Fr-Angioseal, Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) were loaded, in order to close the trans-hepatic portal access.
The two closure devices were deployed, while an operator was keeping the tension of the suture stitch and the other one was pushing the collagen plug within the liver parenchyma .
In patient #2, one of the two percutaneous closure devices failed to grasp the PV.
Nevertheless, no bleeding was seen though the access and a post-procedural US confirmed the absence of extravasation.
Both patients were prescribed with low-molecular weight heparin (LMWH) and kept under surveillance.
For patient #1, a CT scan performed 12 h after the intervention, showed a patent stent-graft, with partial thrombosis of the proximal portions of the superior and inferior mesenteric veins, with an efficient collateral venous drainage with no venous ischemia of both spleen and bowel. The patient was then transferred to her original hospital, in order to continue observation and medical management.
For patient #2, a CT scan was performed 24 h after the procedure, showing a mild haematoma within the abdominal wall, without signs of active bleeding. In the subsequent 2 months of hospitalization, the patient developed a pancreatic fistula and mild renal insufficiency. Then, he left the hospital to its native Country to continue medical management.