A 51-year-old female presented to the emergency department complaining about generalized abdominal pain on the sixth postoperative day after laparoscopic cholecystectomy. The patient had a clear further medical history, was not taking any medication, and did not have any allergies. Moreover, she reported smoking 1 pack/per day and no alcohol consumption. Vital signs were 101 beats/min, blood pressure 110/60 mmHg, respiration 18 breaths/min, and body temperature 37 °C. Physical evaluation of the patient revealed severe diffuse abdominal pain, muscular defense, and rebound tenderness periumbilicus and in the hypogastrium area. Laboratory results at the time of admission did not reveal markers of inflammation, but highlighted a significant impact on renal function . An abdominal CT scan revealed free intraperitoneal fluid collection and surgical clips in the anatomic region of the liver and in an ectopic position near the ileocecal valve . A diagnostic laparoscopy was decided to evaluate the exact cause of the free fluid with a high suspicion of chyloperitoneum existence.
Particularly, with the patient under general anesthesia, in a supine position, the pneumoperitoneum was obtained using Hasson’s technique via a sub-umbilical curvilinear incision and insertion of an 11 mm Hasson trocar. Another two 5 mm trocars were inserted under direct vision in the previous sites of the laparoscopic cholecystectomy (right midclavicular line and right anterior axillary line). Inspection of the peritoneal cavity revealed a collection of serous fluid in the lesser pelvis while the surgical clips of the laparoscopic cholecystectomy were on site with no sign of bile leak. A more detailed inspection of the lesser pelvis revealed a 2 cm defect in the superior bladder wall . The bladder rupture was repaired in one layer using a 1–0 vicryl suture in a continuous-locking fashion . Afterward, the bladder was filled with saline through a Foley catheter, confirming the adequacy of the repair. Subsequently, the abdominal cavity was irrigated with sterile water and a 20 mm drain was placed in the vesicouterine pouch. The drain was removed on the second postoperative day after no signs of urine extravasation in the abdominal cavity. The patient was discharged home on the fifth postoperative day on oral antibiotics having an uneventful recovery. The urinary catheter was removed 21 days later. Two months after the operation, follow-up revealed an uneventful recovery with no complications.