A 43-year-old man from Qazvin province, Iran, referred to the Cancer Institute of Imam Khomeini Hospital in Tehran following complaints of progressive scalp ulceration (without bone involvement). Soft tissue sarcoma was the diagnosis made after completing the initial procedures and mailing the pathology sample, and he was admitted to the hospital for surgery in early 2023. The day before the surgery, when nurses shaved and trimmed the patient’s hair (which was about 10 cm) to prepare the scalp area, they noticed the presence of a large number of maggots on the wound . The man was assessed and treated by the cancer surgery professors there. The patient did not have any risk factors, such as autoimmune disorders, that raise the chance of cancer, nor did he have a family history of cancer or genetic diseases. Additionally, he had reported having no history of Hypertension (HTN), hyperlipidemia (HLP), or diabetes mellitus (DM). In his biography, he mentioned smoking and alcohol consumption going back 10 years, and he omitted high-risk occupations like working in mines, textile and dyeing industries, or direct sunlight.
Upon further examination, the presence of the larvae was confirmed in the upper part of the head involved in soft tissue sarcoma. The maggots had eaten the lower part of the wound edge. Twenty-seven third-stage larvae were collected from the wound area with forceps, and the area was thoroughly washed with normal saline and bandaged. He underwent skin flapping from the leg area following the surgical excision of the malignant lesion. Following a partial recovery, he was discharged from the surgical department and directed to the radiotherapy and chemotherapy services to complete his treatment. The patient, who lived in a wealthy and luxurious area of Qazvin province, had no contact with animals. Also, he was completely unaware of the presence of larvae before observing these maggots in the wound and felt no movement of the maggots. It is necessary to mention that the patient is alive and continues his treatment.
The larvae were transferred to the medical entomology lab at the Tehran University of Medical Sciences and identified as the Sarcophaga spp. (Diptera: Sarcophagidae). The situation of posterior spiracle that is hidden inside of the cavity, is the most important feature for identifying the Sarcophaga spp. larvae in which the slits run obliquely outwards or downwards . This is the first report of soft tissue sarcoma infestation by maggots of the Sarcophagidae family.