The 62-year-old male patient has no underlying disease. He found his left-hand fingers clumsy and had difficulty performing adduction and flexion while washing his hair on July 23, 2021. Symptoms progressed to his left leg, and he could not maneuver his left leg. He was sent to NCKUH Emergency Room (ER), where the ER doctor considered his symptom as an episode of stroke and arranged a brain computed tomography (CT) scan soon. The CT image showed no sign of intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH). The patient’s initial National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale score was 2 points, and, as a result, he did not receive thrombolytic therapy.
After inpatient admission on July 24, the carotid duplex test showed mild to moderate atherosclerosis without significant hemodynamic change. Dual antiplatelet therapy (aspirin and clopidogrel) was given for stroke. Unfortunately, his symptoms worsened on July 25, 2021, and the patient was paralyzed on the left side of his body with left facial palsy and mild dysarthria. Repeated CT was conducted due to progression of left limb weakness and numbness, and still showed no sign of ICH. Instead, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain without contrast showed acute infarction in right corona radiata, together with stenosis of left vertebral artery and basilar artery. Titrated hydration with dual anti-platelet was kept. Statin was applied for newly diagnosed dyslipidemia, as well as an antihypertensive drug was given.
The patient was transferred to the Ministry of Health and Welfare Tainan Hospital for Post-Acute Care on August 6, 2021, where he achieved partial recovery of muscle power. The patient called at our outpatient department for advanced recovery on August 26, 2021, where neurologic examination revealed muscle power grade 3 at left upper limb and 5 at left lower limb. The patient could walk slowly without a cane but had a limited range of motion for flexion and extension of the left foot. He was strenuous for him to raise his hand by himself. He was admitted for neurologic and motor recovery. Laboratory data revealed normal values in most items (included C reactive protein 0.1 mg/d, Creatinine 1.16 mg/dl, Mean corpuscular volume 89.4 fl), except homocysteine as 15.97 μmol/L (normal range: 5-15 μmol/L).
The brain single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) showed a decrease in right cerebral blood flow of right sensorimotor strip, anterior and posterior cingulate gyri, left medial temporal lobe, corona radiata, basal ganglion, and thalamus, as revealed in Fig. A.
The comprehensive care plan, including physical therapy, occupational therapy, and language therapy, attained limited improvement of the patient’s condition. Thus, ILIB therapy was added asalternative treatment. After three courses of ILIB therapy, the patient’s condition improved. The following muscle strength was grade 5 over his left arm and grade 4 over his elbow and wrist. Motion range of his lower left feet increased, and muscle power improved to grade 5. The second SPECT showed mild improvement of right cerebral hemisphere blood flow, e.g., frontal lobe, anterior cingulate gyrus, corona radiata, basal ganglion, and thalamus, as shown in Fig. B. The patient’s homocysteine level decreased from 15.97 to 10 μmol/L, with stable data result of C reactive protein (0.11 mg/d), Creatinine (1.01 mg/dl), and Mean corpuscular volume (91.0 fl).