A 22-year-old male patient presented with complaints of generalized intermittent headache for past 2 years along with diplopia and diminished visual acuity for the past 3 months without any history of sexual dysfunction or galactorrhea. On physical examination, he was a healthy appearing male with normal male hair pattern and masculinization. Neuro-ophthalmologic examination including perimetry was suggestive of bilateral temporal hemianopia more prominent on the left side, diminution of vision (6/6 right side and 6/18 left side), along with features of early optic atrophy on the left side and left lateral rectus palsy. Basal endocrine investigations revealed normal prolactin (serum PRL 345 mU/L; normal < 360 mU/L), normal thyroid function [total serum T4 10.20 mcg/dL (normal range 3.20–12.6 mcg/dL); serum TSH 1.35 mIU/mL (normal range 0.35–5.50 mIU/mL); serum T3 115.1 ng/dL (normal range 60–181 ng/dL), normal serum cortisol (283 nmol/L; normal range at 0900 h, 200–600 nmol/L)]. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) of the brain revealed an irregular contrast-enhancing calcified lesion at the sellar-suprasellar and left parasellar region with erosion of the posterior and anterior clinoid process and dorsum sellae. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed a large mass which was apparently arising from the sella with a significant suprasellar and left parasellar component with mild compression over the left optic chiasm and deviation of infundibulum to the right. The lesion had heterogenous signal on T1/T2/fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images with multiple gradient echo (GRE) hypointense area inside the lesion with no diffusion restriction, along with significant enhancement of the mass following administration of IV gadolinium [Figure –].
The patient underwent left pterional craniotomy and decompression of the mass. Intraoperatively, the mass was hard, pinkish, partly calcified, highly vascular, and engulfing the left carotid. The sellar floor was thin and partly deficient. Postoperative stay was uneventful. Repeat pituitary test (serum prolactin, TSH, T3, T4, and cortisol) performed 72 h post-surgery showed normal levels.
Histology revealed a cartilaginous tumor composed of minimally pleomorphic chondrocytes lying in a cartilaginous matrix with areas of ossification, permeation of bony trabeculae with hyperchromatic nuclei, and inconspicuous nucleoli consistent with well-differentiated chondrosarcoma [ and ].
Patient was discharged on postoperative day 10. Postoperative CT brain showed that the tumor was completely removed . Clinically, the patient showed significant improvement in visual acuity in the left eye (preoperative 6/18; postoperative 6/9); however, bitemporal hemianopia persisted. He was referred for radiotherapy.