A 45-year-old woman presented decreased visual acuity in both eyes for three days. She visited an ophthalmic clinic where she was diagnosed as having bilateral optic neuritis with central scotoma and was referred to our hospital. A week earlier, she had complained of headaches and visited a neurologist, but no abnormality was found on brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and neurological tests. She had no history of ocular or systemic disease.
Upon our examination, best corrected visual acuity was 0.1 in the right eye and 0.15 in the left eye. The pupillary light reflex was sluggish in both eyes. Slit-lamp examination revealed no signs of ocular disease. Fundus examination was normal. Goldmann perimetry showed bilateral central scotomas and bitemporal visual field defects . The pattern visual evoked potential showed prolonged P100 latency in both eyes; 138 msec in the right eye and 142 msec in the left. Contrast-enhanced MRI of the brain and orbits was performed again due to suspected optic neuritis. T1- and T2 weighted MRI showed a lesion with mixed hypo- and hyperintensity at the optic chiasm, which was thought to be an intratumoral hemorrhage . Contrast-enhanced MRI showed minimal enhancement around the lesion . Sagittal MRI with contrast-enhanced constructive interference in steady state showed the lesion in front of the third ventricle .
We diagnosed her as having bilateral compressive optic neuropathy due to chiasmal tumor and referred her to neurosurgeons for further examination and treatment. Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) performed for differential diagnostic purposes did not show an increased FDG accumulation in the tumor. Her visual acuity had spontaneously improved to 0.9 in the right eye and 0.8 in the left with a disappearance of bilateral central scotoma since her first visit to our clinic. Spinal fluid examination showed laboratory data within normal limits. Pituitary function test showed that TSH was high, at 13.0μIU/ml, but other values were within normal limits.
Despite spontaneous improvement in visual acuity, the patient underwent bifrontal craniotomy to prevent rebleeding 48 days after onset, and the tumor was exposed via an anterior interhemispheric approach. A yellow mass, developed from the anterior wall of the third ventricle to the lamina terminalis on the chiasm, was seen intraoperatively . After the surgery, the tumor could be distinguished from the chiasm and was completely resected with preservation of the optic nerve. Histological evaluation of the mass led to a diagnosis of cavernous angioma. HE staining showed many lumen structures with hemosiderin deposits, as well as infiltration of inflammatory cells . Elastica-Masson staining revealed copious collagen fibers around the lumen structure .
Six months after the surgery, her best corrected visual acuity was 0.9 in the right eye and 0.9 in the left, with slight bitemporal visual field defects .