In January 2011, a 54-year-old Malay man was referred to our hospital for evaluation of palpitation. On examination, his pulse rate was 85/minute with irregular rhythm and his blood pressure was 120/80 mmHg. He was afebrile. A loud first heart sound and a soft mid-diastolic rumbling murmur (grade 2/6 degrees) were auscultated at mitral area with no signs of heart failure. Electrocardiography revealed atrial fibrillation (AF). The laboratory results showed normal hemoglobin, white cells, and platelet counts. Renal test, liver function test, and other laboratory test results were unremarkable. His urine analysis was also normal.
TTE and TEE revealed severe mitral stenosis (MS). His mitral valve was thickened and moderately calcified, and his anterior mitral valve leaflet was “dooming” during diastole suggestive of rheumatic origin. His mitral valve area, which was estimated by two-dimensional planimetry and pressure half-time method, was 0.92 cm2 and 0.91 cm2, respectively. His peak and mean mitral valve gradients were 14 and 9 mmHg, respectively. His left atrium (LA) and right atrium (RA) were dilated. In his RA, we found a large, mobile, homogeneous round mass measuring 40×35 mm. A large LA mass with similar echogenicity to his RA mass was found adhering to interatrial septum and protruding into the left ventricle with cardiac motion . We could not identify any stalk attached to the LA mass by TTE and TEE examinations. In addition, there were no identifiable masses in the left atrial appendage. Spontaneous echocardiographic contrast (SEC) was observed in his LA and left ventricle. Mild tricuspid regurgitation and mild pulmonary hypertension were identified with a peak pulmonary systolic pressure of 26 mmHg (estimation based on a peak tricuspid regurgitation jet velocity of 210 cm/second and an estimated right atrial pressure of 5 mmHg). His inferior vena cava was not dilated and collapsible with respiration, and there was no thrombus. His ejection fraction was estimated as 45 %.
Patients with severe MS and AF are at high risk of developing intracardiac thrombi. Based on the findings by TTE, TEE, and the presence of risk factors (AF), his RA mass was likely to be a thrombus as described earlier. Similar features were found in LA mass and it was thought to be a thrombus as well. However, the characteristic of LA mass adhering to atrial septum mimics atrial myxoma, which is the most common benign cardiac tumor . The shape, mobility, and location of the LA mass made it difficult to rule out atrial myxoma with absolute certainty. Therefore, our patient underwent CMR for additional noninvasive characterization of the biatrial mass. CMR showed a giant right atrial mass measuring 5.3×3.2×3.9 cm and a large left atrial lesion measuring 5.0×2.4×5.1 cm adhering to interatrial septum . Both lesions were intermediate in signal on cine CMR, and not enhanced during early and delayed enhancement CMR. The morphology, location, and avascular characteristics made thrombi the most likely diagnosis. The CMR result was in agreement with TTE and TEE findings.
Based on his history, physical examinations and imaging findings, we recommended thrombectomy and mitral valve replacement. Despite medical advice, our patient declined surgery. We empirically initiated heparin and warfarin administered intravenously to prevent thromboembolism. His international normalized ratio (INR) was targeted at 2.5 to 3.5. Bisoprolol was prescribed for AF rate control. However, his clinical course was complicated by his non-adherence to warfarin. His INR was subtherapeutic (median=1.8). After 2 years of warfarin (partial compliance), serial TTE showed no regression of LA and RA masses. After 3 years of uneventful follow-up, he experienced an episode of transient ischemic attack in February 2014. Subsequently, in December 2014, he had an episode of non-fatal ischemic stroke manifested by right hemiparesis (motor power reduced to 3/5) most probably because of thromboembolism. We counseled him with regard to the danger of the thromboembolism and re-emphasized the need for treatment compliance. Fortunately, he resumed warfarin and did not demonstrate further thromboembolic events. In March 2016 (5 years after the detection of biatrial masses), a follow-up TTE documented complete regression of the LA mass and a near-complete resolution of the RA mass . Thus, the most probable diagnosis of cardiac thrombi was affirmed. He remains well on medical treatment.