In September 2010, a 51-year-old Caucasian man was diagnosed with multiple lymphadenopathy (clinical stage IV). His previous medical history only contained episodes of hepatitis B and C (successfully treated in 1990), and he reported no familial or psychosocial medical problems. The patient had no B symptoms but presented with a poor performance status (Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group [ECOG] 2) and a high Follicular Lymphoma International Prognostic Index score. The pathological examination performed on a lymph node biopsy established the diagnosis of a grade 1–2 FL. As a first-line treatment, the patient received six cycles of rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vindesine, and prednisone (R-CHOP), followed by 2 years of rituximab maintenance. A partial response was achieved after R-CHOP and reached complete response (CR) after the first three rituximab maintenance cycles. In 2013, however, after eight rituximab cycles, new lesions appeared, with notably an enlarged cervical lymph node measuring 2 cm in diameter; at that time, the patient’s performance status was ECOG 2. A cutaneous biopsy confirmed the relapse of the grade 1–2 FL, and a second-line treatment consisting of six cycles of a bendamustine and rituximab regimen was provided. The patient again reached a CR by the end of this treatment. Eight months later, a second relapse occurred, this time with a loss of CD20 expression. Thus, a third-line treatment involving idelalisib was prescribed. However, after 3 months, this medication was determined to be responsible for interstitial pneumonitis and was therefore stopped. Two months later, the patient presented with a third progression, characterized by a severe deterioration of his performance status and the appearance of a retroperitoneal mass. In September 2015, the biopsy of this mass determined that the FL had transformed into a composite lymphoma combining HGBL and lymphoblastic neoplasm expressing TdT. The patient therefore began a fourth-line treatment, including a debulking program and the combination of cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and prednisolone. He died of multivisceral failure a few weeks later.
Immunohistochemical staining was performed using a Roche Ventana BenchMark ULTRA immunostainer (Ventana Medical Systems, Oro Valley, AZ, USA) with the following primary antibodies: BCL2 (anti-BCL2, clone 124, 1:40; Dako, Carpinteria, CA, USA), BCL6 (anti-BCL6, clone GI191E/A8, prediluted; Roche Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN, USA), CD20 (anti-CD20cy, clone L26, 1:800; Dako), TdT (anti-TdT, polyclonal, 1:60; Cell Marque, Rocklin, CA, USA), and CD10 (anti-CD10, clone 56C6, 1:40; Cell Marque). Chromogenic detection was realized using an ultraView Universal Detection Kit (Roche).
For the cytological examination, the lymph node imprints and the ascites cytospin preparation were stained with May-Grünwald-Giemsa.
For immunophenotyping by flow cytometry (FCM), the cells extracted from the ascites fluid were first washed twice, then stained with antibodies using a direct immunofluorescence method involving erythrocyte lysis and washing. The rest of the analysis was performed using a three-laser, eight-color BD FACSCanto II TM flow cytometer and FACSDiva software (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA). The following antibodies were used: V500-CD45 (HI30; BD Biosciences), PE-Cy7-CD19 (J3-119; BD Biosciences), FITC-CD43 (1G10; BD Biosciences), PE-CD23 (EBVCS-5; BD Biosciences), PerCP-Cy5.5-CD38 (HIT2; BD Biosciences), APC-CD10 (HI10A; BD Biosciences), APC-CD22 (S-HCL-1; BD Biosciences), APC-H7-CD20 (2H7; BD Biosciences), FITC-CD44 (J.173; Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA, USA), PE-CD24 (ALB9; Beckman Coulter), FITC-TdT (HT-6; Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA), and FITC-Fab′2 rabbit antihuman kappa/PE-Fab′2 rabbit antihuman lambda light chains (Agilent Technologies).
Cytogenetic analysis was realized on the cell suspensions after 17 hours of unstimulated culture using R-banded metaphase chromosomes. The fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) studies were achieved using two probes (LSI IGH/BCL2 and LSI MYC) according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Vysis Inc., Downers Grove, IL, United States of America (USA)).
Genomic deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) was extracted from tumor cells according to standard procedures using a QIAamp DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). The clonal IGH rearrangements were characterized by the amplification of IGH variable framework regions 1, 2, and 3 (FR1, FR2, and FR3) using multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and heteroduplex analyses as previously described . The PCR products were examined on 6% acrylamide gels with bands of the appropriate size.
The IGHV-D-J gene rearrangements were analyzed by PCR using IGHV family-specific FR1 primers and the antisense IGHJ primer. The positive IGHV products were selected for sequencing. Sequencing reactions were purified and direct sequencing was performed using the ABI PRISM 3100 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). Sequence analysis was completed using the V-QUEST international ImMunoGeneTics information system . Output data from IMGT/V-QUEST was used to determine the IGHV gene use and the percentage homology to the germline.
On the one hand, the first lymph node biopsy in September 2010 revealed a nodular proliferation , with predominantly centrocytic cells expressing Bcl-2 , CD20, and CD10 as well as rare centroblastic cells. The CD21 immunostaining highlighted the follicular dendritic cell meshwork . Furthermore, the karyotype was complex and included the classical t(14;18)(q32;q21) IGH/BCL2 translocation, as confirmed by FISH . Moreover, FISH detected a gain of MYC without rearrangement (190/200 nuclei with 3 MYC signals) . Finally, the FCM performed on the blood and lymph node demonstrated a high CD45, CD10+CD20+CD22+CD24+CD43− population of monotypic B-cells, with surface light chain kappa restriction . On the other hand, in September 2015, the morphological and immunohistochemical analyses of the retroperitoneal mass found a diffuse lymphoid proliferation (without nodular pattern), in which a double tumor population was identified:
Large-sized centroblast cells, which were CD20-negative, PAX-5-positive, and positive for CD10, BCL-2, BCL-6, C-MYC, and MUM1 Blast cells with a rounded nucleus and finely mottled chromatin , which were also present in the ascites fluid and displayed B-cell precursor markers, such as TdT expression .
These two populations were mutually exclusive for Bcl-6 and TdT on a double-staining evaluation, confirming the presence of two cellular contingents .
The FCM performed on the ascites fluid also highlighted a population of immature B cells expressing CD43, CD10, high CD38 and CD24, and TdT. The pan-B markers CD20 and CD22 and the surface immunoglobulins were downregulated .
Moreover, cytogenetic analyses revealed a t(14;18)(q32;q21) associated with a t(8;22)(q24;q11) . The MYC+/BCL2+ “double hit” was validated by FISH .
In addition, PCR and sequencing were used to study the clonal relationship between the three tumors. The PCR analysis confirmed the presence of an IGVH rearrangement in all specimens . Sequence analyses revealed a unique and identical clonal IGVH rearrangement involving the IGVH4–59 subset in all the samples. Moreover, the rearranged VH gene sequences were characterized by 85% homology with the corresponding germline sequences and therefore corresponded to somatically hypermutated V genes. Taken together, these data suggest that the specimens all came from a unique clonal expansion of a hypermutated IGVH4–59 rearranged B cell.