The patient was a 2-year-old male (weight 11.5 kg; height 83.5 cm) who had been delivered vaginally at 31 weeks of gestation with a birth weight of 2258 g. He was suspected to have KOS due to excessive amniotic fluid in the fetal period and his physical characteristics after birth. The diagnosis was confirmed by genetic analysis. Immediately after birth, he had developed severe respiratory distress and had required mechanical ventilation for 20 days; he had been managed in the neonatal intensive care unit for 4 months. Even after withdrawal of mechanical ventilation, oxygen administration had been required for up to 9 months of age, although his respiratory condition thereafter stabilized and continued to be stable in the preoperative period. He had no previous surgical history.
At the age of 2 years, he was scheduled to undergo orchiopexy for bilateral cryptorchidism. Preoperative computed tomography examination indicated deviation of the trachea, with flexion from the ventral to the dorsal side . There were no abnormalities in other examination findings.
Our plan A was to insert LMA after slow induction and plan B was to attempt fiberoptic intubation (FOI) with endoscopy mask. Endoscopy mask allows for continued positive pressure mask ventilation while providing a site for FOI. The patient was given 0.5 mg/kg midazolam orally as premedication 30 min before the operation. Standard monitoring was applied. General anesthesia was induced via a face mask with sevoflurane and nitrous oxide in 30% oxygen. After confirming that mask ventilation was possible, the sevoflurane concentration was gradually increased. After disappearance of spontaneous respiration, an intravenous catheter was inserted and 0.9 mg/kg rocuronium was administered. Subsequently, LMA (size 2.0) was uneventfully inserted. He was then positioned in the lateral position, and caudal anesthesia was administered using ropivacaine (0.25%, 10 mL). Anesthesia was maintained with 3% sevoflurane, air (3 L/min), and oxygen (1 L/min). He was ventilated using conventional pressure-controlled ventilation (PCV) with a positive end-expiratory pressure of 5 cmH2O, peak inspiratory pressure of 15 cmH2O, frequency of 20 breaths/min, and inspiratory time of 0.8 s. Expiratory tidal volume was approximately 110 mL. SpO2 and end-tidal CO2 were maintained at 98–99% and approximately 35 mmHg, respectively. At the end of surgery, muscle relaxation was antagonized by sugammadex sodium (4 mg/kg). After confirmation of spontaneous respiration, the LMA was removed. Anesthesia time was 161 min. Since there were no adverse respiratory events, the patient was transferred to the general ward. His subsequent recovery was uneventful, and he was discharged from the hospital the next day.