A 60-year-old female SLE patient was admitted to our hospital due to fever and paralysis of both of her lower legs. Four years before this admission, she had joint swelling on her fingers, wrists, right shoulder, knees, and non-palpable purpura on the forearms and thighs. Thrombocytopenia, elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate, serum C-reactive protein (CRP), and total serum IgG; as well as reduced complement activity were reported. The patient presented antinuclear antibody (ANA) of 1:320 (homogeneous/speckled type), anti-dsDNA antibody (anti-DNA Ab) of 156 IU/ml, anti-SS-A Ab, circulating immune complex, and prolonged lupus anticoagulant. Based on the 2019 revised European Alliance of Associations for Rheumatology (EULAR) /American College of Rheumatology (ACR) classification criteria, she was diagnosed with SLE. Thrombocytopenia and anti-DNA Ab level were relieved and maintained by the treatment of prednisolone and tacrolimus for more than 4 years . Four days before the admission, however, she became acutely ill with a fever of 38°. Subsequently, the patient suffered from sudden laxative total paralysis in both lower limbs. Her bladder and rectum showed dysfunction with high intensity signal on the cervical cord of MRI . Pleocytosis, along with elevated protein, IgG and IL-6 levels in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) were detected. The patient presented mild leukocytosis with neutrophil predominance, moderate thrombocytopenia, elevated CRP and serum IgG amount, prolonged active prothrombin time, anti-DNA Ab, anti-ribosomal P antibody and marked reduction of complement activity . The diagnosis of transverse myelitis due to the flare of SLE was made; then, standard pulse therapy of methylprednisolone was followed by high-dose of prednisolone, intravenous cyclophosphamide in combination with plasma exchange. In the following months, her refractory neurological and autoimmune symptoms continued to fluctuate, and failed to achieve remission with the appropriate treatments . The apparent histologically normal monocytes continued to cloud the clinical features of the patient whose monocytosis persisted. Flow cytometry analyses revealed an elevated ratio of CD14+CD16+ atypical monocytes, CD14+CD16+ atypical granulocytes as well as CD4+CD8+TCRαβ+ double positive T cells as compared to the healthy control . Increased atypical monocytes excluded chronic myelomonocytic leukemia ; and lupus-like symptoms with monocytosis together with these immune-phenotypes reminded us of previously-reported RALD cases, although these immunophenotypes can be seen in SLE cases. Therefore, we performed Sanger sequencing of KRAS and NRAS genes from the patients’ PBMC , magnetic-activated cell sorting (MACS)-sorted CD3+ lymphocytes and CD14+ monocytes, together with CSF . A point mutation in codon 12 of KRAS (c.G35A, p.G12D) was detected. Since the mutation was almost absent in the buccal mucosa sample of the patient , the mutation is likely to be somatic and not germline, as in RASopathies. A backtrack of the patient’s cell-free DNA obtained by the stocked serum samples showed that the mutation manifested at the time of encephalomyelitis diagnosis, and persisted for 5 years . This mutation seems to be involved in lupus flare of this case, as it was not detected when she was diagnosed of SLE , or in another SLE patient .