A 4-year-5-month old girl was referred to our ward with complaint of anemia for more than three years. She was detected iron deficiency anemia at one year and three months old. She had no dizziness, no cough, no fatigue, no hematuria, no abdominal pain, no melena or bloody stool. Her appetite and normal nutritional status were normal. She was the first child in her family, and her parents and sister didn’t have anemia. Her blood routine test showed the hemoglobin level was 96 g/L, mean corpuscular volume (MCV) was 79.9 fL, mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH) was 24.9 pg, mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration was (MCHC) 312 g/L, which indicated a hypochromic microcytic anemia. She was referred to the hematologist, and the results of etiology tests for anemia were showed in the Table . High resolution melting did not detect hot mutations of thalassemia and the bone marrow morphology test revealed hypochromic microcytic anemia. During the three years, she accepted iron supplementation intermittently. Her hemoglobin level was ranging from 67 to 120 g/L.
She was referred to a gastroenterologist because the stool occult blood test was positive sometimes. She had no history of taking aspirin or any other medicine. Her serum albumin level was 34 g/L. She was diagnosed with gastrointestinal bleeding, and started the initial laboratory tests . The EGD and the colonoscopy didn’t detect ulcer or inflammation. The results of magnetic resonance enterography (MRE) and the ultrasound revealed segmental thickening of small intestinal wall, with the wall thickness of 0.46 cm and mainly involved the mucosal and submucosal of small intestinal. Capsule endoscopy didn’t reach the terminal ileum during the working time and a retention was observed. It revealed superficial ulcers and erosion at the location of stricture near the junction of jejunum and ileum . She had double balloon endoscopy (DBE) through both mouth and anus. However, the DBE didn’t reach the location of stricture, and it did not reveal any other lesions. Based on the small bowel ulcers and stricture, anemia, mild hypoalbuminemia, and obviously increased fecal calprotectin, she was initially diagnosed as chronic non-specific multiple ulcers of the small intestine (CNSU) and very early onset small bowel intestinal Crohn’s disease was the main differential diagnosis. She was advised to have whole exome sequencing because of early disease onset and suspecting congenital disease. She was treated with exclusive enteral nutrition (EEN) and iron supplement after discussing with her parents.
She received EEN and iron supplement for eight weeks. The hemoglobin level was ranging between 90 and 107 g/L, and the repeated fecal calprotectin was still higher than 1800 ng/g. She received infliximab. However, she still had anemia and hypoalbuminemia after three doses of infliximab.
The next generation sequencing revealed two novel compound heterozygous mutations in SLCO2A1: chr3-133,654,624, c.1808G > C (p.R603P), chr3-133,654,616, c.1814 + 2 T > G (splice-5). The two variants were confirmed by sanger sequencing, and were derived from her mother and father, separately . Her sister didn’t carry the variants.
SLCO2A1 expressions in the duodenal tissues were positive in patient and control . The control with the complaint of intermitted abdominal pain for one year, and finally diagnosed with primary dysmenorrhea. CD31 immunostaining indicated the vascular endothelial cells of the capillary vessels in the mucosa of patient and control.
SLCO2A1 mutation is related to the chronic nonspecific multiple ulcers of the small intestine. Combined with her history and character of her endoscopy findings, she was diagnosed as CEAS. There was no effective treatment according to the reported literatures about the treatment for CEAS. Some patients were responsive to the immunosuppressants, but were not responsive to the biological agents. She switched to mercaptopurine with the dose of 1 mg/kg per day. Up to the latest follow up, she didn’t have any abdominal symptoms and her hemoglobin level was increased from 76 g/L to 98 g/L, the serum albumin level was a bit decreased.