A 67-year-old lady who was diagnosed with atrial fibrillation and moderate pulmonary hypertension (PHT) after an echocardiogram 3 years ago presented to us with worsening bilateral ankle oedema, New York Heart Association class III shortness of breath, and palpitations over 3 months. She did not have a past history or a family history of pulmonary disease, thyroid disease, or any other cardiac disease. She also denied any history of recurrent lung infections.
On examination, she was short-statured and cachectic with a body mass index (BMI) of 14.16 kg/m2. There was mild bilateral pedal oedema but no peri-orbital oedema. Her pulse was 118 b.p.m. and irregular. Blood pressure was normal. There was a systolic murmur best heard at the pulmonary area, a loud P2, evidence of right ventricular heave, and elevated jugular venous pressure. She was tachypnoeic with reduced air entry and dullness in the right lower zone but without coarse crepitations, tracheal deviation, or bronchial breathing. Her neurological and musculoskeletal examinations were normal.
Her basic blood analysis including complete blood count, renal functions, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, lipid profile, fasting blood sugar, and liver functions was normal. However, during her stay, aspartate transaminase (AST) and alanine transaminase (ALT) rose to 228 U/L (<40 U/L) and 63 U/L (<40 U/L), respectively. Her clotting profile was normal on admission despite being on warfarin. Her C-reactive protein was elevated at 48 mg/dL (0–5 mg/dL), and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) was low at 0.1 mIU/L (04–4.0 mIU/L). Interestingly, free T3 and T4 levels were normal at 3.54 pg/mL and 1.1 ng/dL, respectively. Ultrasound scan of the thyroid showed only a colloid multi-nodular goitre. Her N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-pro BNP) was only mildly elevated at 358 pg/mL (<125 pg/mL), even though we expected it to be more.
Her electrocardiogram showed evidence of atrial fibrillation, chamber dilatation, right axis deviation, and mild ST depressions with T-wave inversions in inferior leads. However, two samples of troponin I were negative. The trans-thoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed volume overload in the right heart as evidenced by moderately dilated RA, dilated right ventricle (RV) with a diameter of 57 mm at the base, moderate tricuspid regurgitation (TR), and marginally low (14 mm) tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE). It also showed a high probability of PHT (TR velocity >3.4 m/s; TR pressure gradient = 68 mmHg), mildly dilated left atrium (LA) with a diameter of 44 mm in parasternal long-axis view, lower normal left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 50% by Simpson’s method, and a large ASD. There were widespread fluffy shadows, grossly enlarged pulmonary arteries, and the Scimitar appearance in the chest X-ray (CXR). Of note, the classical Scimitar appearance can be easily misinterpreted as double shadowing of atria which is mainly seen in left atrial enlargement.
Trans-oesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) and the subcostal TTE views at the time of the TOE revealed a 46 mm ostium secundum (OS) ASD, visually dilated coronary sinus, and a grossly enlarged RA [mid-level diameter = 66 mm; length = 69 mm; area of 35.77 cm2 (normal < 18.5 cm2)]. It also showed that the RUPV is forming an extracardiac chamber which traverses through the LA, almost creating a supero-posterior Cor Triatriatum Sinistrum, to enter the RA . Trans-oesophageal echocardiogram could not identify the right lower pulmonary vein (RLPV). A high-resolution computer tomography (HRCT) revealed moderate cardiomegaly, diffuse alveolar opacifications due to pulmonary oedema, and bilateral peri-hilar congestion . Her lung function tests showed only a mild restrictive disease which would probably be due to poor effort in execution.
Due to the classical Scimitar appearance in CXR, a computed tomographic pulmonary angiogram (CTPA) was done. It revealed a Scimitar vein draining the right middle and lower lobes into the intra-hepatic inferior vena cava (IVC), the RUPV, and part of the right middle lobe veins draining into the RA via an extracardiac chamber, a grossly dilated RA, mildly dilated RV and LA, and an OS ASD . It also showed an enlarged pulmonary trunk (left = 36 mm and right = 34 mm) and mild atheromatous calcification in the aorta. It was negative for chronic thromboembolism, chronic lung disease, and coronary calcifications. Three-dimensional reconstruction of the CTPA clearly displayed the abnormal venous drainage confirming Scimitar syndrome . Attempts to proceed into a right heart catheterization and pulmonary arterial-venous angiography for further confirmation failed as the patient declined. As per the current recommendations, the diagnosis was made on three-dimensional (3D) reconstructed CTPA and the patient was offered surgical correction due to the following reasons: echocardiographic evidence of Qp:Qs being >1.5:1, evidence of right heart congestion being present in several imaging modalities, and PHT estimated by TR pressure gradient being within correctable limits. Unfortunately, the patient adamantly declined surgical correction. Respecting the patient’s autonomy, we had to resort to conservative management and continued her warfarin to maintain an international normalized ratio (INR) of 2–3 with regular follow-ups. Digoxin 0.25 mg and bisoprolol 2.5 mg were given for rate control, and furosemide 40 mg was added to relieve her right heart failure symptoms. She was not considered for rhythm control for her atrial fibrillation because of the near-normal ejection fraction (EF), high frailty, and increased probability of recurrence due to uncorrected cardiac anomaly.
After 13 months of symptoms and complication-free period, she presented with a massive stroke due to defaulting of warfarin. On admission, the INR was 1.1 and the computed tomography (CT) brain showed a massive right middle cerebral artery (MCA) infarction. Although necessary medical management was administered, she succumbed due to complications.