A 14-year-old Chinese boy suffering from major β–thalassemia was referred to the dental clinic for treatment of rampant dental caries . He has had regular blood transfusions and iron chelation therapy since he was young. He underwent a matched, unrelated-donor bone-marrow transplant with successful engraftment, but developed moderate chronic oral graft versus host disease. His chief complaint was that he could not take cold drinks due to mucosal inflammation. However, he was not fully aware of his serious tooth-decay problem. His tooth brushing, if any, was very unsatisfactory because it was painful. His doctor prescribed chlorhexidine for mouth rinsing. However, he could not use it because of its burning sensation. Due to poor oral condition, the child was emaciated, weak, and fatigue. He did not have any regular dental care or visits for more than three years.
In clinical examination, he was lethargic and underweight. His conjunctiva was pale, a symptom of anemia . Oral examination revealed bruising of the lips and depapillation of the tongue , indicating an underlying condition of anemia. The gingiva was markedly inflamed. No dental abscess was observed. The patient had a full, permanent dentition (except the third molar) with caries on all 28 erupted teeth . The teeth were hypersensitive to cold-water rinsing (no air pressure) with a 3-in-1 syringe. The oral hygiene was extremely poor with thick plaque accumulation on the carious lesions. Halitosis was apparent. The mucosa was atrophic and thin, in particular on the buccal and labial surfaces. A panoramic radiograph revealed extensive caries on the dentition. The dentine caries in most teeth were very soft. By electric pulp test, all maxillary premolars, anterior teeth, and lower-right premolars were found nonvital with apical radiolucencies on several nonvital premolars .
A sialometric assessment was performed on resting and stimulated salivary flow rate, and measurement of saliva acidity was done to assess the salivary function . The patient was asked not to eat and drink within an hour before sialometric assessment. His unstimulated and stimulated saliva flow rates were 6.5 × 10-4 mL/s and 1.67 × 10-3 mL/s, respectively; and they were within the normal range. The salivary pH was found to be 6.5, which was lower than the normal value of 7.4.
The child was diagnosed with rampant caries and, remarkedly, with generalised gingivitis. The aim of the treatment plan was to promote his oral health, mastication, and aesthetics. The initial phase of the treatment was to relieve his discomfort, improve his oral hygiene, and arrest the progression of rampant caries. Definitive dental care should be considered when his medical condition becomes stable and his oral hygiene becomes satisfactory, when he reaches adulthood.
Tailored oral-health education was provided to the patient. To motivate the patient, the dentist decided to review his habits thoroughly, a diet analysis was performed, and he was advised to take less cariogenic nutritive foods such as rice porridge with minced pork. The patient found toothpaste difficult to use because of its texture and mint favor. He was therefore advised to brush his teeth at least twice daily by dipping an extra-soft toothbrush with 0.01 mm slim-tip bristles (Slim Soft, Colgate Sanxiao Co., Yangzhou, China) into 0.06% w/v chlorhexidine digluconate and sodium fluoride (250 ppm fluoride) (Corsodyl Daily Defence Mouthwash, GlaxoSmithKline, Middlesex, UK). An interdental brush was used to clean the interproximal area between adjacent teeth. Three professional applications of SDF (Saforide 38%, Toyo Seiyaku Kasei, Japan) were performed after plaque removal by gentle brushing by the dentist. The second application was provided two weeks afterward; and the third application was performed four weeks after the second application. Xylitol chewing gum was suggested at least six times daily to promote salivary flow.
A follow-up visit was carried out four weeks afterward. The child reported no tooth hypersensitivity. Caries were found arrested and turned coal black in appearance . Some unsupported enamel chipped off from his teeth without any dental procedure. All of the enamel of the upper and lower-left second premolars, and two lower right premolars, was no longer existent, leaving a smooth, hardened, black dentine core behind . The oral hygiene of the patient was significantly improved and following gingival response was noticeable. He was advised to brush his teeth twice daily with fluoride toothpaste, and continue using a interdental toothbrush after every meal.
After the caries became hardened, the first and second molars were stabilized with prefabricated posterior stainless steel crowns (Stainless Steel Permanent Molar Crown, 3 M ESPE Dental Products, St. Paul, MN U.S.A.) for mastication . The upper anterior teeth and three of the premolars were restored with polycarbonate provisional crowns (Polycarbonate Prefabricated Crown, 3 M ESPE Dental Products, St. Paul, MN U.S.A.). Occlusal reduction was minimally performed for crown fitting. Crowns were cemented with restorative glass ionomer cement (Ketac Molar, 3 M ESPE Dental Products, St. Paul, MN U.S.A.). The mandibular anterior teeth were hard and smooth due to inadequate interdental space and they were left uncrowned at this stage. The discoloration of lower teeth was not shown when the boy smiled and he was very satisfied with the provisional treatment and final result.
The upper right second premolars, the upper left canine, the two upper left premolars, and the lower right second premolars were nonresponsive to pulp vitality tests (EPT test). The patient was referred to an endodontist for root canal treatment on his nonvital teeth. The polycarbonate crowns were carefully removed and an access cavity was made through the glass ionomer (Ketac Molar) core. One-visit root canal therapy was performed and the crowns were recemented on the endodontically treated teeth .