A 43-year-old female, presented with symptoms of dyspnoea and palpitations NYHA Class III for the last 2 months. Her past history was notable for having undergone PBMV 6 years ago following which she had remained in functional Class I for 5 years. She started having progressive worsening of dyspnoea which had progressed to NYHA Class III now for the last 2 months. She was in AF, with controlled ventricular rate of 72 b.p.m. and resting room air saturations of 90%. On auscultation, she had a loud S1. A mid diastolic murmur with opening snap could be appreciated at the apex. Bilateral lower zone fine crepitations were present on examining the lungs. Her chest X-ray was suggestive of pulmonary congestion (see , ). Her transthoracic echocardiography revealed rheumatic affection of mitral valve with mitral valve area (MVA) of 0.9 cm2 , mean gradient of 13 mmHg , moderate TR, moderate PAH with Wilkins score of 8/16 [mobility: 2, thickness: 2, calcification: 3, subvalvular pathology: 1, Appendix]. Trans-esophageal echocardiogram (TEE) was done which showed Manjunath Type Ia LA clot . She was on oral anticoagulation, Nicoumalone 2 mg daily, with prothrombin time-international normalized ratio in therapeutic range with time in therapeutic range of 70%. She was on metoprolol extended release 50 mg once a day. She was stabilized first with intravenous furosemide, digoxin, and initial bi-level positive airway pressure support for 3 h. She was switched to intravenous heparin infusion. Routine investigations ruled out anaemia, thyroid disorder, or sepsis that might have aggravated her underlying heart disease. After explaining risks of thromboembolism and open mitral commisurotomy/mitral valve replacement (MVR) as alternative, in view of symptomatic very severe MS, she was taken for PBMV.
Femoral artery access was obtained with 5F sheath. A pigtail catheter was introduced and baseline left ventricular end-diastolic pressure of 6 mmHg was noted. Trans-mitral end-diastolic gradient was noted to be 15 mmHg. The pigtail was then positioned in aortic root in non-coronary cusp. A 0.032″ wire was introduced into the Innominate vein. Mullins sheath was tracked over the 0.032″ wire (see , ). Brockenbrough needle was introduced and together with Mullins sheath, was descended into the right atrium with clockwise rotation from 12 to 5 o’clock position (, ). The interatrial septum was punctured at fossa ovalis after confirming the position in antero-posterior and lateral views (, ). The transseptal puncture technique used in this patient was unique in being more superior and lateral than the conventional technique to avoid inadvertent entry or manipulation of LA appendage during PBMV. The main axis of LA appendage is anteriorly oriented, hence a puncture at the supero-anterior quadrant of the fossa ovalis facilitates to keep the guidewire away from the LA appendage so as to prevent embolization of LA clot. Also, the coiled guide wire was introduced directly into the LV away from the appendage. Septal dilatation was done and 24 mm Accura balloon introduced over the wire. Accura balloon unlike Inoue balloon has single balloon and is easy to use. The balloon was inflated across the mitral valve (see , ) and the mean gradient fell to 4 mmHg. Post-procedure MVA was found to be 1.5 cm2 with mean mitral valve gradient of 5 mmHg , and the patient had an uneventful post-procedure recovery.
Due to a hugely dilated LA, a supero-anterior puncture (see , ) was done to allow a more vertical LV entry over the wire and this facilitated avoiding the LA appendage. Thus when compared with low inter atrial puncture as described by Manjunath, we differ in following:
Puncture technique.
Over-the-wire entry.
Re-intervention in mitral re-stenosis.
Such a technique would be feasible in LA clot Types Ia, Ib, and IIa. As the coiled guide wire is introduced at the fossa ovalis, it is directed vertically down towards the LV. It thus helps to avoid manipulation of structures superior to the plane of fossa ovalis, leaving thrombi of Types Ia, Ib, and IIa if any, untouched. Possible complications in this technique includes formation of atrio-aortic fistula, entanglement of coiled wire into mitral apparatus, clot embolization, and formation of interatrial septal haematoma.
On follow-up visit to the out-patient department, patient was better, in NYHA functional Class II. She had an MVA of 1.5 cm2 and a mean gradient of 6 mmHg. She was continued on oral anticoagulation, metoprolol, digoxin, and diuretics.