A 26-year-old male, a young adult who is a welder by occupation, was brought on new year’s eve of 2017 to the emergency room following a history of RTA when he fell over from his motorbike as he was about to crash into a stationary vehicle and sustained injury to his right thigh, he was brought within 2 h after sustaining trauma and complained of severe pain over his right hip and inability to move his right lower limb. On examination, he was conscious and oriented, hemodynamically stable, and unable to move his right lower limb which was externally rotated and shortened with a diffusely swollen upper thigh. He had tenderness over the right groin area with a palpable lump. Distal neurovascular examination was normal. Radiographic evaluation of pelvis and right thigh revealed right hip anterior dislocation with ipsilateral subtrochanteric femur fracture . The patient was worked up for surgery immediately and emergency surgical intervention to reduce the hip was planned. After inducing anesthesia, no attempts of closed reduction using the various techniques to reduce the anterior dislocation were tried as the patient had an ipsilateral femur fracture because all the forces pass through the fracture site. Therefore, the patient was placed on a radiolucent table and with a help of image intensifier, under strict sterile precaution, initially, one 5mm Schanz pin was placed close to the intertrochanteric region and used as a joystick to reduce the head into the acetabulum but was unsuccessful; hence, another Schanz pin was placed parallelly and connected with each other using a pin to rod connector and then the rod along with the pins was used as an external reduction tool to reduce the right hip in a closed manner without the need of open reduction, thereby reducing the chances of vascular insult on the capsule. The closed reduction was found to be satisfactory as checked under the image intensifier and further reduction of the subtrochanteric region was done and a uniplanar external fixator was applied as a temporary procedure. This emergency procedure was done within 6 h of the insult. After 2 days, the patient was taken up for definitive procedure in the form of external fixator removal and closed reduction and intramedullary interlocking nailing using a cephalomedullary nail but used as IMIL nail with the patient placed on a fracture table under C-arm guidance. Postoperatively, regular wound inspections and dressings were done and wound was found to be healthy. The patient was started on non-weight-bearing mobilization for 2 weeks initially and then was started on weight-bearing as tolerated and gently to full weight-bearing. The patient was also started on physiotherapy in the form of hip exercises at the end of 6 weeks. The patient resumed his daily work and had not faced any challenges. Functional assessment was done using Harris Hip Score at 6 weeks, 3 months, 1 year and 2 years follow-up. Radiological assessment was done at the time of 2 months and regularly until 2 years follow-up to check for fracture union and to rule out AVN of femoral head, secondary arthritis, and implant loosening. At 2 years follow-up, Harris Hip Score was found to be 95 with no restriction of movements and fracture was united completely with no evidence of AVN and secondary osteoarthritis in the femoral head .