A 64-year-old male experienced two shocks from his dual-chamber biventricular ICD. Because of these shocks, he presented to our hospital emergency room (ER). A physical examination found his vitals to be normal. He reported being free from chest pain. His troponin level was mildly elevated. The creatinine level was 1.8 mg/dL. The rest of his basic metabolic profile and complete blood count were normal. An electrocardiogram showed atrial fibrillation with biventricular pacing.
His device was implanted in 2005 due to severe non-ischaemic cardiomyopathy (NICM), sustained ventricular tachycardia (VT), and left bundle branch block (QRS 155 ms). A dual-coil Medtronic 6949 RV Sprint Fidelis DF-1 ICD lead, Medtronic CapSureFix Novus MRI SureScan Model 5076 lead, and Medtronic Attain Model 4193 lead were placed in the RV high septum, right atrium, and coronary sinus (CS) lateral venous branch, respectively. Following failed ICD shocks, a Medtronic 6996 SQ coil was added in 2011 and connected to the superior vena cava (SVC) port in the generator header with successful DFT testing at 25 J. Because of a concern that the patient was pacemaker dependent and secondary indication for his ICD, a new, single-coil Medtronic 6935 RV Quattro DF-1 ICD lead was added in the RV apex in 2013. At this time, his old RV lead was capped, and the old SQ coil was kept connected to the SVC port , with successful DFT testing done at 25 J. The patient had one more generator change in 2017.
He was previously placed on sotalol for recurrent VT with associated multiple ICD shocks, but he later had to be switched to amiodarone and mexiletine because of failure and worsening chronic kidney disease (Stages II and III). A VT ablation was done, but later his VT and ventricular fibrillation (VF) events restarted, and his NICM continued to progressively worsen, resulting in more ICD shocks that caused our patient’s aforementioned presentation to the ER.
Device interrogation revealed that the patient failed his first shock at the maximum output of 35 J. However, the second one with the same output and polarity succeeded. The rest of his device interrogation (threshold, impedance, and sensitivity) for all leads and coils shock impedance were normal. It was therefore determined that he had an elevated DFT that needed to be lowered.
We decided to replace the current 35 J generator, which was close to elective replacement indicator (ERI), with a Medtronic Cobalt DETPB2D1 ICD 40 J generator. Notably, 1 year prior to the ablation procedure, an incidental finding on chest computed tomography revealed extensive occlusion with collaterals of his left axillary vein and subclavian vein. We performed a venogram, which confirmed occlusion (see , ), with possible extent to the azygos vein origin, meaning that adding a second coil to the azygos vein would be challenging. The next options in this patient managment were to reverse polarity of the ICD or eliminate the can from DFT testing. However, they were unlikely to adequately and persistently lower the DFT.
We decided to use a novel method to lower the DFT. We used a Medtronic DF-1 6726 y-adapter (see , ) to combine the RV coils of the Quattro lead and abandoned the Fidelis lead. Because two DF-1 coils are plugged into this y-adapter, they will function as a single, combined coil. A new shock pathway is added in parallel to the functioning Quattro RV coil, and therefore impedance of the combined coil is lower than the individual coil. Furthermore, adding a second coil increases the overall surface area of shockable tissue, making a successful shock more likely. After we merged the RV coils, DFT testing was performed twice successfully at 15 J, thus confirming that the DFT was effectively and sufficiently lowered. The RV lead pacing threshold was 0.8 V at 0.4 ms, 418 Ω impedance, and 8.3 mV sensing.
If merging the RV coils had failed, we would have added a second SQ coil and merged it with the previous SQ coil. Had that failed, we would have done extraction and reimplanted a new coil in the CS vein/branches. These approaches would be more invasive in our patient.
After 9 months, the patient reached end-stage heart failure, during which time he received multiple successful shocks from his ICD. The patient then received a heart transplant. His device and the transvenous leads were successfully removed at the time of the transplantation surgery, except for the SVC coil , confirming that an SVC coil extraction would be challenging.