A healthy, four-year-old boy was referred to the Division of Pediatric Ophthalmology at the Wilmer Eye Institute, Baltimore, Maryland for bilateral partial lens dislocation from an outside ophthalmologist. Two months prior, the patient had failed a vision screening at school and was referred for further evaluation. The child denied any visual symptoms; however, the family noticed that he would sit very close to the television and zone in closely on toys. He had no history of trauma, developmental issues, or hearing deficits. He had a normal genetic screening at birth. Multigenerational family history was negative for any ocular problems other than myopia in his mother.
On initial ophthalmic examination, uncorrected visual acuity was 20/100 in the right eye and 20/250 in the left eye. Pupils were equally round and reactive to light and intraocular pressure was normal by palpation. The child had no measurable stereopsis and suppression of his left eye on Worth 4-dot test. He was orthophoric at all distances. Slit-lamp examination was notable for iridodenesis in both eyes and partially dislocated lenses; inferonasally in the right eye and inferiorly in the left eye. Cycloplegic refractive error was − 14.50DS + 3.75DC x 005° in the right eye and − 19.00 DS + 6.00 DC x 065°.During a later examination under anesthesia, it was noted that the macula OU were within normal limits. Retinal vessels were normal without attenuation OU. Peripheral exam was unremarkable OU. Pachymetry measurements were 575 microns on the right eye and 584 microns the left eye. Axial length was 21.83 mm in the right eye and 21.12 mm in the left eye. He was prescribed glasses and referred for a genetics evaluation.
General physical examination found no evidence of any musculoskeletal features of Marfan syndrome or homocystinuria. Echocardiography revealed normal aortic dimensions. Genetic testing showed negative sequencing for deletion or duplication of fibrillin-1 (FBN-1) and cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS).
Ten months after initial presentation, the patient developed sudden onset of left eye pain and nausea that lasted for approximately an hour. During the episode, his parents noticed that the pupil of the left eye was temporarily dilated, as seen in Fig. , an image captured by the father. Three days later, a second episode occurred, at which time he was evaluated and found to have decreased vision in the left eye to hand motion, a fixed, 8 mm pupil, and an intraocular pressure of 40 mmHg by applanation. Slit lamp examination revealed partial anterior lens dislocation with pupillary block. Patient was placed in a supine position and given hydroxyamphetamine hydrobromide and tropicamide 1% with no resolution of symptoms. A laser peripheral iridotomy was unsuccessfully attempted.
Later that day, he was taken to the operating room. The lens was observed to be of normal size and prolapsed into the pupil space creating pupillary block. A 30-gauge needle with balanced salt solution was used to deepen the chamber followed by injection of Healon into the anterior chamber. Using a 25- gauge vitrector, the lens was removed, followed by a limited anterior vitrectomy. The child was left aphakic.
On post-operative day one, intraocular pressure was 17 mmHg in the left eye with resolution of pain and nausea. Five months after surgery, best-corrected visual acuity was 20/250 in the left eye and intraocular pressure was 12 mmHg. The cornea was clear. The right eye had no similar event and was treated with daily administration of pilocarpine 1% until prophylactic lensectomy two years later. Four and a half years after the initial OS surgery, visual acuity was 20/125 in the left eye with aphakic correction and 20/30 in the right eye with aphakic correction.