A 45-year-old woman was admitted to the Sichuan Provincial People’s Hospital complaining of left lower back pain for one week, accompanied by hypertension (150/79 mmHg). The patient had no previous history of malignancy or family history of renal tumors. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an abnormally enhanced nodule (1.1 cm) in the middle of the left kidney . The patient underwent partial nephrectomy with robot-assisted surgery for tumor removal. Her blood pressure returned to normal (95/63 mmHg) 15 d postoperatively. Follow-up information was obtained through telephone consultations. The patient showed no recurrence or metastasis nine months after surgery, and the blood pressure was normal. Histological examination: Gross examination revealed a 1.2 cm mass, and the cut surface of the tumor was gray and solid, with no areas of hemorrhage, necrosis, or cystic change. Under low power field of the microscope, the tumor was unencapsulated, involved the renal medulla, and had subtly infiltrated the adjacent renal parenchyma . The tumor exhibited a slightly nodular appearance and the stroma showed myxoid degeneration . Under high power, the tumor cells were spindle- or star-shaped and exhibited thin, tapered, hyperchromatic nuclei, indistinct cytoplasmic extensions, and low mitotic activity (< 1/high power field (HPF)). The tumor cells showed slight concentric circular changes surrounding the entrapped renal tubules or vessels . Additionally, small dysplastic vessels were observed .
Immunohistochemical manifestations: The tumor cells displayed a mottled immune response to CD34 and diffused Vimentin expression. Additionally, the cells were positive for ER, PR, CD99, and Bcl-2 . Moreover, the tumor cells were negative for CD117, Dog-1, ALK, P63, Desmin, Calponin, SMA, GFAP, EMA, HMB45, MelanA, S-100, SOX10, CAIX, TSH, PRL, ACTH, GH, CD56, CgA, SSTR-2, Syn, and WT-1 expression. In addition, the tumor cells had a low Ki-67 index and no INI-1 deletion. Entrapped native renal tubules were highlighted using PAX-8, CAM5.2, and PCK; however, they were negative for WT-1.
Genetic analysis: Detection of the BRAF V600E gene was performed using PCR in paraffin sections of the tumor using the Human BRAF Gene V600E Mutation Detection Kit (Fluorescent PCR Method, AmoyDx, Xiamen, China). The results demonstrated that BRAF V600E was wild-type in the adult MST . Subsequently, NGS was performed on the tumor tissue, and normal renal tissue 2 cm from the tumor was used as a control for germline genetic detection. The results of NGS showed that the BRAF V600E mutation was not detected in either MST cells or normal renal tissues, which was consistent with the PCR results. However, we discovered a novel genetic variation in this adult MST. The NGS results of the tumor cells showed that amino acids 842–843 of the platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha (PDGFRA) were deleted, and base A was mutated to base T, inducing the mutation of isoleucine to phenylalanine . Therefore, the tumor cells showed a systemic PDGFRA mutation; however, the corresponding germline mutation was not detected.