A 6-year-old girl presented to us with swelling of her left arm after trivial fall and apparent injury to her left arm. On examination, the child had a swelling with tenderness of her left arm around the shoulder joint with restriction of movement. The child was treated earlier with splinting for 6 weeks by a traditional bone setter. The child had no history of fever, loss of weight, or loss of appetite. X-ray left shoulder showed osteolytic lesion in the left proximal humerus with fracture of proximal humerus . Magnetic resonance imaging (STIR and GRE, axial and coronal) showed a large expansile heterogeneous mass lesion involving the epi-, meta-, and diaphyseal regions of the left proximal humerus measuring 5.4 × 4.8 × 10.6 cm (anteroposterior×transverse×craniocaudal) . The lesion had blood fluid levels, diffusion restriction, and moderate heterogeneous enhancement on post-contrast images .
The child underwent open biopsy from the left proximal humerus osteolytic lesion and histopathology suggested fibrocollagenous tissue encompassing single and clusters of highly atypical cells with foci like osteoid material in between the cells having focal areas of hemorrhage and necrosis. Hence, a diagnosis of TOS was made. By immunohistochemistry, ki-67 index was 40% in the highest areas and p53 was negative (, , ).
Positron emission tomography-computed tomographydone for staging revealed a mildly 18-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) avid expansile lytic lesion (standardized uptake valuemax –6.03) involving the proximal epiphysis, metaphysis, and diaphysis of the left humerus (length 88 mm) with secondary cortical disruption and associated soft-tissue component and non-FDG avid lymph node (7 × 7 mm) in the left axilla. There were no distant metastatic lesions elsewhere.
Chemotherapy was initiated as per children’s oncology group (COG – EURAMOS-1, COG AOST 0331) protocol with high-dose methotrexate, cisplatin, and doxorubicin (MAP regimen). The child underwent 2 cycles of neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by limb-salvage surgery with wide resection of the tumor in the left proximal humerus (1–3cm tumor-free margin) and reconstruction with vascularized fibular graft with plate osteosynthesis and closure. Post-operative histology revealed TOS with 40% necrosis and 60% hemorrhage and margins were free of tumor. She was continued on adjuvant chemotherapy with intensified MAPIE regimen (MAP+ifosfamide and etoposide) as the percentage of tumor necrosis was <90%. She completed 7 adjuvant cycles of chemotherapy with appropriate monitoring for cardiac function, hearing, and renal functions. She is on regular follow-up for 4 years post-treatment and is in remission. She is able to use the limb for daily activities with mild restriction of movements. The post-operative X-rays are shown in (, , ).