A 77-year-old woman, nulliparous, postmenopausal but not undergoing hormonal therapy, with a history of infertility and resection of an ovarian cyst in 1966. In October 2016, the patient presented a non-ulcerated vulvar lesion of 5 cm in diameter on the topography of the right Bartholin gland, with apparent deep-layer infiltration without associated inguinal lymph node enlargement. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) were performed, which showed a tumor measuring 4.0 × 2.7 × 3.8 cm on the topography of the right Bartholin gland topography, involving the distal third of the right labia majora of the vulva, the lower third of the vagina, and the distal urethra, with vulvar uptake with a standardized uptake value (SUV) of 11.22, without metastatic disease, lymph node involvement, or invasion of the mesorectal fascia and pelvic floor musculature. A biopsy of the lesion revealed a high-grade undifferentiated carcinoma in a limited material with no recognizable morphology of ACC.
Tumor resection was performed under general anesthesia and spinal anesthesia. In the perioperative period, tumor invasion of the right ischioanal fossa was evidenced, with involvement of the levator ani muscle, extending up to the bladder, but without bladder invasion. Extended local excision of the tumor was performed with macroscopically free margins, without lymphadenectomy. At the end of the procedure, no gross macroscopic lesions were observed . The intraoperative analysis of a frozen section showed tumor-free surgical margins. We used the V-Y advancement flap from the medial thigh for vulvar reconstruction. Upon macroscopic inspection of the resected specimen, we established that the lesion was a solid mass measuring 5.0 × 4.0 × 3.0 cm, showing ulcerated tumor lesion measuring 4.0 × 3.5 cm, and distant 0.2 cm from the lowest margin.
The microscopic analysis of the histopathological examination revealed a primary ACC of the Bartholin gland, with areas of high-grade morphology, extensive perineural invasion, and presence of angiolymphatic emboli . The areas with conventional ACC had a morphological aspect ranging from tubular and cribriform areas to solid areas, and some transition areas composed of well-differentiated components with HGT were observed . The high-grade components were predominantly composed of solid architecture (71%) and highly atypical pleomorphic nuclei with a high number of mitoses. The immunohistochemical study with p53 showed a diffuse and strong positive reaction in HGT areas, and some tubular and cribriform areas also stained positively for p53 . In both the well-differentiated component and the HGT-ACC, P63 positivity was observed. The deep and circumferential margins of the surgical piece had no signs of neoplasia.
The patient received adjuvant treatment with external pelvic radiotherapy. Intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) was indicated and the dose was 45 Gy divided into 25 fractions of 1.8 Gy over the right inguinal region and the tumor bed. In addition, another boost of 14.4Gy was performed, divided into 8 fractions of 1.8Gy, reaching a total dose of 59.4Gy in the tumor bed, including the urethra. The patient presented good tolerance to the treatment, evolving only to dermatitis and moderate dysuria (according to the scale of the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group [RTOG]), and remained in clinical follow-up for 24 months, with no signs of relapse.
After the follow-up period, the patient remained asymptomatic, but presented signs of recurrence of the disease on PET-CT, with the presence of surgical-site hypermetabolism (SUV: 3.81) and bilateral pulmonary nodules (SUV: 3.35). Cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) chemotherapy was initiated. However, the patient died during treatment due to disease progression. Death occurred 36 months after the diagnosis.