A 76-year old man was referred to the outpatient clinic of the internal medicine department of our hospital because of persisting iron-deficiency anaemia that had been present since 2010. The patient had an extensive history of cardiovascular disease. In 1985 he suffered from an acute myocardial infarction for which he underwent percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty of the circumflex branch of the left coronary artery. He was treated for two thromboembolic events: a deep venous thrombosis of his right leg in 2008 and pulmonary embolism in 2009. Over the past years he developed a therapy-resistant hypertension, which was, which was presumed initially due to white coat phenomenon. Figure A illustrates the 15-hours continuous blood pressure registration at that time, which did not confirm this hypothesis, showing a sustained hypertension pattern. In 2010 he was diagnosed with hypertensive cardiomyopathy that resulted in decompensated heart failure two years later. Furthermore, the patient had a history of type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypercholesterolemia, psoriasis and macular degeneration. His anti-hypertensive medication consisted of amlodipine/valsartan/hydrochlorothiazide 1 dd 5/160/12.5 mg, furosemide 1 dd 40 mg and nebivolol 1 dd 5 mg. Furthermore he was using atorvastatine 1 dd 40 mg, carbasalate calcium 1 dd 100 mg, metformine 2 dd 500 mg, paroxetine 1 dd 10 mg, oxazepam 1 dd 10 mg, pantoprazole 1 dd 40 mg, ferrous fumarate and rizatriptan 10 mg whenever needed.
Upon arrival at the medical outpatient clinic, he complained of dyspnea on exertion that had been stable since he was diagnosed with decompensated heart failure. He also complained of paroxysmal headaches without aberrant palpitations, increased transpiration or paleness. In the context of the persisting anaemia, which was the initial reason for referral, he had not noticed a change in his defecation pattern over the past years and especially no melaena or bloody stool had been present. Further laboratory investigation showed a low mean corpuscular volume and hemoglobin concentration with a low serum iron and ferritin, but a high iron-binding capacity, indicative of hypochromic microcytic anaemia in the context of an iron deficiency . The absolute erythrocyte count was within the normal range. In 2010, no cause for his anaemia was found on gastroduodenoscopic and colonoscopic evaluation. A screening CT-scan of the thorax and abdomen with intravenous and rectal contrast was performed to screen for any possible primary malignancy. The abdominal CT-scan showed a round and sharply demarcated tumour of 1.7 by 2.5 cm in close proximity to the bladder wall on the right side of the patient’s prostate . The average post-contrast radiodensity of the tumour measured 90 Hounsfield units, which did not have additional value for the differential diagnosis due to the contrast. No local lymphadenopathy was detected. The findings of the CT-scan were confirmed by digital rectal examination, where an asymmetrically and irregularly enlarged tumour with a hard node was felt and the patient was referred to the urologist for further evaluation under the suspicion of a prostate tumour.
When he presented at the urology department, his serum total prostate-specific antigen concentration was 2.5 μg/L (reference value for the age of 70 – 80 < 6.5 μg/L). At that time, the patient had no lower urinary tract symptoms and his headache had not worsened during micturition. Cystoscopy revealed an impression of the right bladder wall with no mucosal pathology. Three transrectal ultrasonography-guided biopsies of the lesion where obtained and histological analysis of the material with hematoxylin staining showed partly tube-forming tumorous epithelial cells with intensely stained nuclei that differed in size . Immunohistochemical analysis of the tissue showed hardly any proliferating cells by Ki-67 staining, but intense staining for chromogranin A , synaptofysin and neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM), consistent with the phenotype of a paraganglioma. Immunohistochemistry for markers of prostatic tissue to rule out prostatic cancer, i.e. prostate-specific antigen (PSA) and prostate-specific acid phosphatase (PSAP), were both negative. Further laboratory investigation to determine catecholamine excess was performed by 24-hours urine analysis on their metabolites. In two separate 24-hours urine samples, the concentrations of the fractionated metanephrines were found increased , which could not be explained by a concomitant psychiatric illness the use of sympathomimetic drugs or medicaments. Monoamine oxidase inhibitors were not used. SPECT-scanning with iodine-123-metaiodobenzylguanidine (123I-MIBG), a molecule similar to norepinephrine and taken up in adrenergic tissue showed pathological uptake solely within the paraganglioma . By evaluation of the patient’s serum, hyperparathyroidism was found that could be, in combination with the paraganglioma, indicative of a multiple endocrine neoplasia 2a syndrome (MEN2a). Additional serum analysis showed a corrected calcium concentration of 2.68 mmol/L and moderate hypovitaminosis D . A sestamibi parathyroid scintigraphy was performed with 99mTc-MIBI and substraction with 123I that showed no washout suspected for parathyroid adenoma or hyperplasia. Under the provisional diagnosis of secondary hyperparathyroidism, vitamin D was supplemented, which resulted in a normalization of the corrected serum calcium concentration to 2.45 mmol/L. With a serum calcitonin concentration of 7.4 pmol/L (reference <24 pmol/L) and a carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) concentration of 3.3 μg/L (reference in non-smokers < 5.0 μg/L), medullary thyroid cancer became less likely. Since extra-adrenal pheochromocytomas have been shown to be more prevalent in patients with a hereditary paraganglioma syndrome, genetic screening was indicated. Various schemes for genetic screening based on risk factors for mutations have been proposed, which include screening for RET, SDHB, SDHD and VHL in case of abdominal paragangliomas [,]. Erroneously, all to date known genes that are related to pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas were sequenced, including multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) to detect larger deletions (RET, MAX, SDHA, SDHAF2, SDHB, SDHC, SDHD, TMEM127 and VHL; MRC-Holland kit P226-B2), but none showed pathogenic mutations in their coding sequence or splice sites.
The patiënt was scheduled for preperitoneal endoscopic resection of the paraganglioma and Figure E shows a snapshot of the peri-prostatically localized tumour via the endoscopy camera. Prior to surgery the patient’s blood pressure was lowered according to the scheme proposed by Pacak . First, 4 weeks prior to surgery nebivolol was halted due to the chance of paradoxical hypertensive crises with beta blockade. Alpha blockade with doxazosine was initiated and increased up till 1 dd 32 mg. Secondly, beta-blockade with metoprolol retard 1 dd 50 mg and subsequently nifedipine retard 1 dd 30 mg were added to the regimen, which resulted in a pre-operative blood pressure of 140/80 mmHg. Pre-operative resuscitation with NaCl 0.9% was performed in order to reduce intravascular dehydration. Blood pressure was closely monitored pre-, per- and post-operation. At the start of intubation by the anesthesiologist, blood pressure started to rise . Preperitoneal carbondioxide inflation caused the blood pressure to increase by another 30% systolically and diastolically and manipulation of the paraganglioma resulted in a systolic and diastolic blood pressure above 230 and 100 mmHg, respectively. After removal of the paraganglioma systolic and diastolic blood pressure dropped . During 2 hours post-operative monitoring, blood pressure remained between 120 and 160 mmHg systolically and 60 and 90 mmHg diastolically . Two days after surgery, his blood pressure could be adequately regulated by metoprolol only. One month after surgery, the average blood pressure under metoprolol treatment was 160/100 mmHg with a heart rate of 90 beats per minute and hydrochlorothiazide/valsartan 1 dd 12.5/80 mg was initiated, which resulted in blood pressure of 150/90 mmHg. Pathologic examination of the excised tumour, which had a diameter of 2.5 - 3.5 cm on gross macroscopy, confirmed the diagnosis of paraganglioma . One year after resection of the paraganglioma, the patient was readmitted to the medical ward again with a microcytic anaemia and reticulocytosis. Under the suspicion of gastrointestinal blood loss, gastroduodenoscopy and colonoscopy plus videocapsule endoscopy have been planned. To date, the microcytic anaemia is not believed to be associated with the paraganglioma.