A 15-year-old girl of the Han nationality presented with exertional angina pectoris. She reported no relevant medical history, no smoking or drinking history and no family history of heart diseases. She was also not exposed to drugs, toxins, or allergens. Her echocardiography revealed a left ventricular end-diastolic diameter (LVEDD) of 5.7 cm, and the thickness of the left ventricular posterior wall and interventricular septum at end-diastole was 8.8 mm, while the left ventricular ejection fraction (EF) was 47%. The patient’s cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMRI) revealed myocardial oedema and delayed enhancement of the local subendocardium and epicardium in the inferior basal wall, posterior wall, anterior wall and middle posterior wall of the left ventricle. Coronary computed tomography angiography (CCTA) showed the LCA originating from the pulmonary artery trunk, the presence of an LMCA–pulmonary artery trunk shunt, the establishment of multiple collateral circulations from the RCA to the left anterior descending artery branch and circumflex branch, and compensatory dilatation of the RCA . Direct reimplantation of the anomalous coronary artery to the aorta was performed with the support of extracorporeal circulation. The patient accordingly received medical therapy, including aspirin, a beta-blocker and isosorbide mononitrate sustained-release tablets after surgery. She was then prescribed with dihydrochlorothiazide and spironolactone for 1 month.
After 3 months of ALCAPA repair, the patient complained recurrent precordial pain. She showed no signs of heart failure, and her myocardial enzyme and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) concentrations were normal. Her electrocardiography revealed left ventricular high voltage (R wave(V5) + S wave(V1) >3.5 mv), 0.1 mv ST-segment depression in the V3–V5 leads and T-wave inversion in the I, avL, and V2–V3 leads. Echocardiography demonstrated moderate to severe MR, LVEDD of 5.5 cm and the EF of 55.7%. CCTA demonstrated severe stenosis at the ostial LMCA . Coronary angiography revealed 90% stenosis at the ostium of the LMCA as well as ectasia of the proximal circumflex artery . Pre-PCI IVUS showed an attenuated plaque with a large plaque burden at the ostial LMCA, with the minimum lumen area of 4.2 mm2 (the lower limit of normal is 4.5 mm2). Through the IVUS guidance, a drug-eluting stent (BuMA biodegradable sirolimus-coated stent, 4.0 × 10 mm; SINOMED, Tianjin, China) was implanted in the ostial LMCA, and the final IVUS revealed that the minimum lumen area of 13.4 mm2 . The patient accordingly received dual antiplatelet therapy (e.g. aspirin and clopidogrel), beta-blocker, isosorbide mononitrate sustained-release tablets, spironolactone, losartan potassium, trimetazidine dihydrochloride, and a proton pump inhibitor.
After 5 months of PCI, repeat echocardiography revealed moderate MR, LVEDD of 6 cm and a normal EF of 56.2%. Coronary angiography showed that the LMCA was patent without restenosis . At 2.5 years after PCI, the levels of creatine kinase-MB, cardiac troponin I, and BNP were all normal. Echocardiography showed that the LVEDD had decreased to 5.8 cm, while the EF was 58.8%. CCTA revealed that the LMCA stent was still patent without restenosis. Presently, at 5-year follow-up, the patient is still free of cardiovascular events and is continuing with the prescribed medical therapy, including aspirin, simvastatin, perindopril, metoprolol succinate sustained-release tablets, and trimetazidine.