A 26-year-old female with CF (genotype F508del/F508del), with a baseline forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) of 21% predicted and a 6-l home oxygen requirement, was undergoing evaluation for bilateral lung transplantation. Her medical history included recurrent respiratory infections with multi-drug resistant pathogens, pancreatic insufficiency, malnutrition requiring percutaneous gastrostomy feeds, atrioventricular nodal reentry tachycardia status post ablation, and the recent delivery of a healthy baby. She had no history of biliary tract stones, cirrhosis, hepatitis B, or hepatitis C. As part of the lung transplantation workup a CT scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis revealed a new peripherally enhancing 6.3 cm mass in the right lobe of her liver, and subsequent MRI suggested intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma. At this time, the patient reported feeling a hard mass under her right ribs along with intermittent right upper quadrant pain and fullness, anorexia, weight loss, and daily subjective fevers for several weeks.
Ultrasound-guided biopsy identified the mass as an adenocarcinoma, with positive staining for cytokeratin 7 (CK7), GATA-3, a transcription factor important in the regulation of certain genes, and p40, a marker of squamous differentiation. Notably, the tumor was negative for estrogen receptor (ER), thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1), cytokeratin 20 (CK20), and high risk human papillomavirus ribonucleic acid in situ hybridization (HR HPV RNA ISH), and therefore did not support tumor origin of breast or gynecologic, lung, lower gastrointestinal, or cervical or head/neck, respectively. Serum tumor markers demonstrated normal alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) levels, but a markedly elevated carbohydrate antigen (CA)19–9 level of 5949.5 U/mL (0–36 U/mL), which can be elevated in pancreatic, gastric, hepatobiliary, and colonic malignancies. Given the tumor location, serum markers, and pathology findings, the tumor was thought to be most consistent with a primary cholangiocarcinoma.
The patient underwent complete staging following hospital discharge, where radiation therapy with curative intent was recommended. Ultimately her poor performance status, chronic pulmonary disease, and risk of severe life-threatening infection influenced the decision not to pursue systemic chemotherapy or surgery as the initial treatment modality. However, prior to starting treatment, she developed pneumonia leading to acute respiratory failure requiring intubation. A second CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis (4 weeks from the initial CT) revealed the liver mass had grown to 13.6 × 10 cm and there were patchy pulmonary consolidations concerning for both pneumonia and metastatic disease. Positron emission tomography (PET) scan demonstrated uptake in the lungs bilaterally, mediastinal lymph nodes, right iliac, and right femur, consistent with metastatic disease. Given her critical condition, it was decided she was no longer a candidate for treatment of her cancer. She was transitioned to home hospice where she passed away approximately 10 weeks after the initial CT.
Autopsy revealed a 20 × 17 × 23 cm tan mass in the right lobe of the liver , consistent with intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma , along with metastatic deposits in the heart/epicardium , bilateral lungs , anterior/posterior cul-de-sacs, left ovary, vaginal adventitia, spleen, diaphragm and bone marrow .
Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma can resemble adenocarcinomas from other sites, and because there are no histologic markers that can reliably make the distinction, it is often difficult to distinguish them from metastatic tumors . Due to a lack of a dominant tumor at other possible primary sites at autopsy, and a morphology showing anastomosing glands in a fibrotic stroma with focal squamous differentiation, cholangiocarcinoma was favored in this case.