A 32-year-old morbidly obese (body mass index 43.3 kg/m2) female presented with a 6-month history of headaches, pulse-synchronous tinnitus, and transient visual obscurations; she was diagnosed with IIH because of elevated ICP (>25 cm H2O) and the presence of bilateral papilledema. A trial of acetazolamide provided some improvement, but the patient did not tolerate the medication due to paresthesia. Brain MRV demonstrated a hypoplastic left TS and a dominant right TS with >50% stenosis. Furthermore, catheter cerebral venography showed severe stenosis of the dominant right TS, and venous manometry identified a trans-stenosis pressure gradient (TSG) of 20 mmHg. After a discussion of various treatment options, including ventriculoperitoneal shunt (VPS) placement and venous sinus stenting (VSS), the patient elected to proceed with VPS.
The patient was brought to a hybrid operating room with the capability to perform intraoperative biplane digital subtraction angiography. After induction of general anesthesia, the procedure was performed with the patient in a supine position with the head rotated to the left. As detailed in prior publications,[,] right common femoral venous access was obtained and a shuttle guiding catheter was advanced into the right jugular bulb. Next, three microcatheters were navigated through the shuttle and positioned in the S3 segment of the superior sagittal sinus (SSS), right TS, and right sigmoid sinus (SS); . The microcatheters were each connected to a pressure transducer in preparation for intraoperative pressure recording.
The distal portion of the VPS was performed in a standard fashion. Through a right frontal burr hole, CT-guided frameless stereotactic neuronavigation (Stealth Station® S7, Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN) was used to place a ventricular catheter into the right frontal horn. Then, the ventricular catheter was connected to a pressure transducer, a pre-shunt ventricular CSF and venous sinus pressures were recorded for 5 min. The ventricular catheter was then connected to the distal portion of the shunt, and after confirming distal CSF flow the distal catheter was placed into the peritoneal cavity. A post-shunt venous sinus pressure measurements were continuously recorded for approximately 20 min at 10-s intervals. No significant changes were made in the administered anesthetic agent (sevoflurane) during this time. The CSF pulse wave is comprised three main components: P1 (percussion wave), P2 (tidal or compliance wave), and P3 (dicrotic wave).[,] We defined similar waveform peaks for the venous waveform observed in the intracranial dural venous sinuses: P1 and P2. Intraoperative video recordings of all pressure waveforms were analyzed for amplitude changes of the P1 and P2 waves.
The data were averaged every minute to generate scatter and line plots. A Student’s t-test was used for pairwise comparison of the ventricular CSF and venous sinus pressures before and after CSF drainage. Furthermore, Pearson’s correlations were computed for the ventricular CSF and venous sinus pressures. We used a significance level of P < 0.05.
The mean ventricular CSF, SSS, TS, TS-SS trans-stenosis gradient, and SS pressures were 38.5 ± 3.2 mmHg, 36.4 ± 2.3 mmHg, 34.2 ± 2.3 mmHg, 19 ± 1.8 mmHg, and 15.3 ± 0.7 mmHg, respectively . The pre-drainage ventricular CSF, SSS, and TS pressure waveform morphologies appeared similar to a higher amplitude of P2 compared to P1 [ and ], while the SS pressure waveform had a different morphology .
The TS-SS trans-stenosis gradient, SSS, and TS pressures negatively correlated with the duration of CSF drainage (r = −0.96, P < 0.001), SSS (r = −0.96, P < 0.001), and TS (r = −0.96, P < 0.001), respectively . There was a significant, but relatively weaker, negative correlation between SS pressures and CSF drainage (r = −0.54, P = 0.012). The venous pressure recordings during the past 5 min of CSF drainage was significantly lower than the baseline (pre-drainage) pressures, SSS (20.3 ± 1.3 vs. 36.2 ± 2.1 mmHg; P < 0.001), TS (18.9 ± 1.3 vs. 34.2 ± 2.3 mmHg; P < 0.001), and TS-SS trans-stenosis gradient (3.8 ± 1.5 vs. 18.9 ± 1.8 mmHg; P < 0.001). Notably, this change was not observed in SS pressure recordings (15.1 ± 0.9 vs. 15.3 ± 0.7 mmHg; P = 0.405).
The SSS and TS waveform morphologies had characteristic changes as ventricular CSF diversion progressed . Initially, the amplitude of P2 was greater than P1, but after 3 min of CSF drainage, the P2 amplitude began to decrease. At the 4 min post-drainage time point, the P2 and P1 amplitudes were approximately equivalent in the TS and SSS. At the 5 min post-drainage time point, the P2 amplitude decreased below the P1 amplitude in both the SSS and TS, which persisted throughout the remainder of the recording.