A 50-year-old man with history of systemic hypertension and cigarette smoking presented to the emergency room with epigastric pain that had begun two days earlier. Physical examination was unremarkable. Initial twelve-lead electrocardiogram displayed a 0.5 mm ST segment depression in leads V3 to V5, while cardiac markers showed elevated creatine kinase mass (32.8 ng/ml) and cardiac troponin (67.2 ng/ml). A diagnosis of a non-Q AMI was made. Because epigastric pain became worst, a new electrocardiogram was undertaken, revealing an 1 mm ST segment elevation in leads V2 to V5. Coronary angiography was then performed, which revealed 80% obstruction in left descendent anterior coronary artery, 90% obstruction in first diagonalis, 90% obstruction in right coronary artery and 90% obstruction in the second marginal branch of the circumflex coronary artery, with thrombus. Percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty was performed in this artery and resulted in TIMI flow II.
In the third day post infarction, the patient underwent a transthoracic echocardiogram for the evaluation of left ventricular systolic function. The patient was asymptomatic, blood pressure was 120 × 80 mm Hg, and there were no signs of hemodynamic instability. Transthoracic echocardiogram disclosed mild left ventricular hypertrophy, a moderately depressed left ventricular systolic function due to lateral wall akinesia and severe hypokinesia of the inferior and posterior walls, and a small pericardial effusion. The lateral wall was thin but no signs of impeding left ventricular rupture was detected by two-dimensional imaging. The patient gave informed consent to participate in a research protocol to assess post AMI perfusion by myocardial contrast echocardiography.
Myocardial contrast echocardiography was performed in the third day post-infarction with a commercially available system (SONOS 5500, Philips Medical Systems, Bothell, Washington, USA) equipped with a broadband (1–3 MHz) transducer (S3) and power modulation imaging, which is a pulse cancellation technique that deploys multiple pulses per image line, alternating full- and half-amplitude pulses . The system was adjusted to achieve optimal non-linear signal at a mechanical index of 0.2, frame rate ≥ 25 Hz. To assess the replenishment kinetics, microbubble destruction in the myocardium was induced by manually-deflagrated flash containing five consecutive high-mechanical index (1.0) impulses. Sequences of low-power myocardial perfusion images containing at least 15 cardiac cycles after the flash were acquired in the apical four-, two- and three-chamber views. The contrast agent used was PESDA (Perfluorocarbon Exposed Sonicated Dextrose and Albumin), which is constituted by albumin-encapsulated microbubbles with mean concentration of 1.4 × 109 microbubbles/ml and mean size of 4.6 ± 0.2 microns . A total of 0.1 ml/Kg of contrast agent was diluted in 80 ml of 0.9% saline and administered by continuous intravenous infusion. Real-time myocardial contrast echocardiography demonstrated a perfusion defect in the lateral and inferior walls. In addition, the presence of contrast extrusion from the left ventricular cavity into the myocardium could be observed, forming a serpiginous duct extending from the endocardium to the epicardial region of the lateral wall, without communication with the pericardial space . The hypothesis of an impending rupture of the left ventricular free wall was suggested, and the patient was taken to magnetic resonance within one hour. Magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated the same image of contrast extrusion into the myocardium , thus confirming the diagnosis. Urgent cardiac surgery was indicated. However, while waiting for surgery, the patient presented with cardiogenic shock followed by cardiorespiratory arrest. An immediate pericadiocentesis was performed, but it was followed by the patient's death in spite of resuscitation maneuvers. Anatomopathologic findings were consistent with AMI in the lateral wall and a left ventricular free wall rupture at the infarct site , corresponding to the area seen by contrast echocardiography.