A 46- year-old woman was admitted to this hospital because of acute edema in lower limbs, which was dominant in the left one. She had been treating with antihypertensive drugs due to polycystic kidney disease and hypertension for four years by the time she was admitted to this hospital. She had a history of left and right pneumothorax 12 years and 3 months earlier, respectively. She also mentioned a history of thrombosis in lower limb 4 years earlier and an ulcer in her right shin following warfarin consumption.
There was no history of disease in her parents, two sisters, brother, and her 23 and 26 years old children. Physical examination revealed brown to black papules on her face which were dominant on her cheeks and nose (, , ). Nail hyperkeratosis and several soft pink nodules and papules were also found around the nails of her hands and feet . Her liver was palpable. She was being treated by metoprolol and amlodipine. Color Doppler sonographic examination of lower limbs and pelvis showed large acute thrombosis in femoral veins of lower limbs and left iliac. Chest radiography revealed fine reticular lesions in the field of both lungs. In lung high resolution CT-scan, minute cystic lesions were noticed. Treatment with hourly heparin infusion was started. On the second day of treatment, the patient got dyspnea. Lung perfusion scan was performed. The diagnosis was pulmonary emboli.
Laboratory tests were as follows:
WBC: 6500 x 103/µL Plt: 164000 /µL, Hct: 37% , PT and PTT were in normal range. AST and ALT: normal Cr: 1.4 mg/dl, Ca: 9.5mg/dl, P: 3.7mg/dl.
D-Dimer: 580ng/ml. Antiphospholipid antibody panel:
negative
Fibrinogen: 413 mg/dl (Normal 200-400)
Protein C activity 48% (72-140)
Protein S activity 29% (60-140)
Anti thrombin III 79% (80-120)
Factor 5 Leiden: negative
An abdominal and pelvic sonographic examination and CT-Scan showed several masses suspicious of hamartomas in liver, and the kidneys were similar to the ones in adult polycystic kidney disease. Pancreas and spleen seemed to be normal. In echocardiography, left ventricular hypertrophy was found and the pulmonary artery pressure was 40 mmHg. Brain CT scan revealed no abnormalities. Heparin dosage was increased and after, warfarin therapy initiation, the patient was discharged after 3 weeks. The final diagnosis was tuberous sclerosis, lower limb venous thrombosis, and pulmonary emboli.