The proband was a 13-year-old Chinese boy who was admitted to hospital with a chief complaint of frequent falls in response to sudden stimuli for about 13 years. He was born at term and had an unremarkable antenatal and birth history. In the neonatal period, he showed body rigidity and trembling for a few seconds in response to vocal stimulation but did not show apnoea, and his parents paid little attention at the time. He showed no developmental delays or neurologic deficits, but seemed “timid” when he began to walk at age 1 year and showed body stiffening in response to sudden audible, visual or tactile stimulation, sometimes falling down and becoming pale but without losing consciousness. He often had superficial facial injuries in kindergarten and in primary school. When he was 10 years old, he fell and broke his right forearm, and twice he fell down stairs in response to sudden noises. After that, he was accompanied by a family member when he went outside or walked up and down stairs. About 1 month prior to admission, he fell after being startled and broke his left forearm.
The boy was admitted to several other hospitals over the years. His brain MRI and MRA, 24-h electroencephalogram (EEG), electrocardiogram (ECG) and transcranial Doppler ultrasound apparatus (TCD) results were normal. He was diagnosed with possible epilepsy and prescribed antiepileptics; however, he showed no improvement after 3 months, so the antiepileptics were withdrawn. Physical examination showed a cautious gait with a wide stride, and the nose-tapping test (head-retraction reflex) was positive. The IQ (intelligence quotient) using the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children was 89. To exclude epilepsy, a video EEG was performed. During the test, some stimuli were presented, but no abnormal waves were induced. His ceruloplasmin and lactic acid levels were normal. Hyperekplexia was considered based on his medical history and on repeated normal testing results from several hospitals.
After genetic counselling with a clinical geneticist, genetic analysis for hyperekplexia was performed after obtaining the approval of the ethics committee of the First Hospital of China Medical University. With written consent from his parents, peripheral blood samples were collected from the proband and his parents. DNA was extracted using the Puregene Extraction Kit (Qiagen, Germany).The Agilent SureSelect Human Exon Capture Sequencing platform was used to screen DNA from the proband for the 5 genes involved in the glycinergic neurotransmission system on DNA i.e. GLRA1, GLRB, GPHN, ARHGEF9 and SLC6A5.The obtained data were analysed using Agilent SureSelect Human All Exon V5 software, and the variants were called according to the protocol for the platform. The variants were interpreted according to the guidelines from American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics and patient phenotype . The detected missense mutations were validated using direct sequencing. Direct sequencing was performed on DNA from individuals of all family members using the 3730xl DNA Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA), and the samples were subjected to sequence analysis using Sequence Scanner v1.0 (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). The sequencing procedure or mutation validation were performed by Hicetech Test Laboratory (Beijing, China) which provides the third party inspection services.
The hypothetical effects of the mutations on protein function were analysed using the Polymorphism Phenotyping v2 (PolyPhen-2) prediction tool , SIFT and MutationTaster .
Almost all hyperekplexia cases respond well to clonazepam (CZP). CZP is a γ-aminobutyric acid receptor alpha1(GABARA1) agonist and can enhance GABA-gated chloride channel function. The glycine receptor and GABA receptor are members of same superfamily of ligand-gated ion channels and share common transmembrane topology, structural and functional features. CZP was presumed to compensate for the defective glycine-gated chloride channel function by enhancing GABA-gated chloride channel function in hyperekplexia .
In our patient, after the GLRA1 mutations were identified and hyperekplexia was diagnosed, CZP administration was initiated at 0.02 mg/kg per day, administered in 3 doses, with slight increases every 3 day. After 1 week, the daily dose was 0.05 mg/kg, and his parents reported that the startle response had almost disappeared, but the patient appeared sleepy all day. The dose of CZP was unchanged, and at the 6-month follow-up, the startle responses were almost resolved.
The proband patient had 2 heterozygous missense point mutations in GLRA1 (C.569C > T (p.T190 M) and C.1270G > A (p.D424N) (reference sequence: NM_001146040) that were validated with direct sequencing. His mother had the C.569C > T (p.T190 M) mutation, and his father had the C.1270G > A (p.D424N) mutation . The p.T190 M mutation is located in the ECD, while p.D424N is located in TM4. PolyPhen-2, SIFT and MutationTaster analysis suggested that both of these mutations would negatively affect gene function .
We next reviewed reported GLRA1 mutations in hyperekplexia according to mutation location . About 67.7% (42/62) are recessive, about 29% (18/62) are dominant and about 3.2% (2/62) are novel mutations. Among the recessive mutations, about 52.4% (22/42) are compound mutations (i.e. present in combination with another mutation). The compound mutation in our patient was first reported, we cannot define whether it is dominant or recessive. The mutations were mostly located in the ECD (21/62) and TM2 (13/62), with only 1 mutation in the TM1-TM2 loop and 2 in TM3. About 90.4% (19/21) of the mutations in the ECD domain, about 30.8% in the TM2 domain, all in TM3 and the TM3-TM4 loop, and 75% in TM4 were recessive. The only mutation in the TM1-TM2 loop was dominant; while 69.2% of the mutations in the TM2 domain and about 66.7% in the TM2-TM3 loop were dominant . The mutations and referenced studies are shown in Additional file : Table S1.