A 17-year-old female was referred to our clinical Centre due to difficulty in controlling her blood pressure by means of treatment with angiotensin-converting enzyme (ramipril 10 mg/day), angiotensin receptor blockade (losartan 100 mg/day), calcium antagonist (nifedipine 10 mg/day) and alpha lithic (doxazosin 4 mg/day). The patient was affected by an early onset, extremely aggressive form of AS (X-linked type, due to a nonsense mutation in the COL4A5 gene), with development of severe renal insufficiency requiring treatment with dialysis (three sessions/week). Additionally, the patient had a history of moderate membranous VSD treated by surgery at the age of one year. Physical examination underlined the minuteness of the subject (height 151 cm; weight 44 Kg; BMI 19.3 Kg/m2). Systemic blood pressure was 157/94. The patient presented with perimalleolar oedema of the legs. Heart sounds were rhythmic with no murmur. Basal lung auscultation revealed crackling wheezes. Electrocardiogram revealed sinus rhythm with heart rate 92 beats/min. Chest X-ray revealed a normal heart size, and a more marked pulmonary vasculature, particularly at basal level . Transthoracic echocardiography revealed complete surgical closure of VSD, with no signs of intracardiac shunt . The two ventricular chambers were well balanced and pulmonary arterial pressure - calculated from tricuspid valve insufficiency - was normal. Surgery performed to close the VSD with a bovine pericardial patch had been complicated by development of a transient complete atrioventricular block lasting seven days and promptly treated with a temporary pace maker. The patient was discharged from hospital two weeks after surgery in good clinical conditions. A 24-hour ambulatory blood pressure monitoring (ABPM) was performed to better define daily blood pressure variability, in particular to avoid a possible white coat effect, and evaluate drug-resistance. ABPM analysis highlighted a persistent elevation in both systolic and diastolic blood pressure. Physiological decline in nocturnal pressure was also absent (non-dipper pattern). As treatment prescribed was not capable of adequately controlling the patient's blood pressure, add-on therapy was introduced (2.5 mg/week transdermal clonidine patch applied to the skin every 7 days). After two weeks the patient's blood pressure had normalized. Following the development of cutaneous rush at the site of patch application, after 1 month transdermal clonidine was replaced with oral clonidine (150 mg × 3/day), achieving the same satisfactory effect in controlling blood pressure.