A 78-year-old woman with a history of rheumatoid arthritis was admitted to our hospital with a 3-month history of progressive numbness in both lower extremities and gait disturbance. Neurological examination on admission showed mild paralysis of both lower limbs (manual muscle test: right 2/V; left 4/V) and pronounced numbness in the right lower limb. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a solid mass with clear borders in the dorsal medulla oblongata, appearing hypointense on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI), fluid-attenuated inversion recovery, and T1-WI (WI), and hyperintense on T2-WI, with strong enhancement on gadolinium (Gd)-enhanced T1-WI . Computed tomography (CT) of the head showed a low-attenuating lesion in the same region. Cerebral angiography did not show any vascular abnormalities. Neither whole-body CT nor chest X-ray revealed any obvious abnormalities, including bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy . No dissemination was evident on MRI of the whole spinal cord . Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed moderately elevated levels of both protein (227 mg/dL) and lymphocytic cells (52/μL), while concentrations of various markers including angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) and soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sIL2-R) remained with normal limits. However, β2-microglobulin (β2-MG) was slightly elevated. Preoperative differential diagnoses included malignant glioma, malignant lymphoma, metastatic tumor, and infectious or inflammatory diseases. To confirm the histological diagnosis and plan effective treatment for the primary disease, we performed surgical biopsy of the enhanced lesion under a midline suboccipital approach with image-guided navigation . Intraoperative findings demonstrated that this lesion was gray to yellowish in color and extremely firm without bleeding [ and c]. Histopathological examination with hematoxylin and eosin staining demonstrated noncaseating granuloma consisting of epithelioid cells with infiltration of macrophages, multinucleated giant cells, and lymphocytes [-]. Taken all these results into account, the final diagnosis was sarcoidosis limited to the medulla oblongata. Corticosteroid therapy was started with prednisolone as a therapeutic maneuver at the same time for diagnostic purpose. Three months after starting that treatment, MRI showed a marked reduction in the size of the Gd-enhanced lesion on T1-WI [-]. The perioperative course was uneventful, and numbness in both lower extremities and gait disturbance resolved gradually. The patient remained clinically stable, and all residual lesions had completely disappeared in MRI by the 1-year follow-up [-].