A 70-year-old man in his sixth year of remission from acute myeloid leukemia was referred to the pain clinic in July 2017 from the department of neurology for shooting and radiating pain in the left posterior compartment of the leg and sole of the foot that was progressively worsening. The pain intensity was 7/10 according to a numerical rating scale, and the nature of the pain was spontaneous, lancinating, and was accompanied by a sensation of extreme cold. Examination revealed mild calf muscle atrophy of the left leg and decreased power (grade 3/5) on plantar flexion and inversion of the left ankle. The left deep tendon ankle reflex was absent.
The electromyography/nerve conduction studies showed reduced response of the left posterior tibial nerve. A lumbar spine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed diffuse lumbar disc degeneration and mild bulging of the L2-3 disc with left foraminal extension, which were insufficient to explain the patient’s symptoms. On infrared thermography, hypothermia in the left leg was observed . Laboratory findings, including complete blood cell count, C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, etc. were all normal. Symptomatic pain management with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, high doses of gabapentin, tricyclic antidepressants, and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors were ineffective. Opioid (oxycodone hydrochloride) was effective only at high doses (80 mg/day). Additional lumbar epidural block and piriformis injection based on the patient’s symptoms before the electromyography/nerve conduction studies were done, but the patient’s pain was not alleviated.
Based on the electromyography/nerve conduction results, we planned for sciatic nerve block. Before the block, we examined both sciatic nerves using ultrasound and found an enlarged hypoechoic and edematous mass on the left sciatic nerve at mid-thigh level . The sciatic nerve block was conducted using guided ultrasound in the sub-gluteal region. Mepivacaine (10 ml, 0.5%) was injected on the thin triangular shaped nerve inside the fascial plane between the gluteus maximus and quadratus femoris muscles. After the sciatic nerve block, the pain was temporarily relieved.
MRI of the left thigh showed diffuse swelling and internal enhancement of the left sciatic nerve, with peri-lesional fluid collection at mid- to distal-thigh level . Cerebral spinal fluid and bone marrow studies were conducted to exclude the possibility of relapse of leukemia in peripheral nerves, and no abnormal findings were observed in the test. However, neuroleukemiosis was confirmed by histology of biopsy obtained under general anesthesia in October 2017. Based on the biopsy findings, the patient was started on chemotherapy (cytarabine). The neuropathic pain and motor weakness persisted. After two months from time of referral, he died of pneumonia.