Our patient is a 5-year-3-month-old boy. He presented to the pediatric emergency department with dysphagia that had been evolving for two days preceded two months before by fatigue, lower limb pain, difficulty walking, and progressive inflammatory polyarthralgia facial erythema, but without any tingling, itching, or burning sensation. He had no medical or family history of angioedema and had not taken any medication for months before developing the current symptoms. Vital signs were stable on arrival. The child was afebrile. He had a heliotrope rash with facial swelling predominant on the lips, periungual telangiectasia, and Gottron’s papules over the bilateral interphalangeal and metatarsophalangeal joints . He had more pronounced proximal muscle weakness in the lower limbs (Childhood Myositis Assessment Scale [CMAS] 32/52). He had no urticaria, calcinosis, cutaneous ulcers, or lipodystrophy. Both the joint and the pleuropulmonary examinations were normal.
The electroneuromyography showed myogenic changes in all four limbs. Laboratory findings showed elevated levels of creatine phosphokinase (CPK) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) (640 IU/L and 1467 IU/L, respectively) and a mild inflammatory syndrome (erythrocyte sedimentation rate [ESR] = 35 mm and C-reactive protein [CRP] = 24 mg/l). The electrocardiogram was normal. Only anti-SAE antibodies were positive immunoblot. Anti-Mi2 alpha, anti-Mi2 beta, anti-TIF1 gamma, anti-MDA5 and anti-NXP2 antibodies were negative. Serum C1 esterase inhibitor concentration and serum C4 were not dosed.
The diagnosis of juvenile dermatomyositis with anti-SAE was retained according to the criteria of EULAR/ACR 2017 .
The patient received methylprednisolone bolus therapy (20 mg/kg/day for three days), followed by oral prednisone at a dose of 2 mg/kg/day. The dose was gradually tapered in combination with weekly intramuscular methotrexate at a dose of 15 mg/m². The oral methotrexate is not available in Morocco. Dysphagia disappeared within 48 h. Two weeks later, there was an improvement in the muscular score (CMAS 47/52) and a significant regression of facial angioedema. However, facial erythema persisted for several months despite local and systemic treatment explained by poor compliance.