A 42-year-old Caucasian woman, with no relevant past medical history, received a lumbar paravertebral injection of lidocaine, thiocolchicoside, and l-acetylcarnitine at a private orthopedic practice, for persistent low back pain. Approximately 30 minutes after her injection, the patient experienced a rapidly deteriorating neurological condition, with confusion progressing to coma. Upon her arrival at the Emergency Department, the patient was taken in charge by the Medical Emergency Team. At early assessment, she was comatose, with fixed bilateral mydriasis, trismus, and mixed acidosis at hemogasanalysis. Endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation were performed, followed by a brain CT scan. During the CT scan, the patient developed seizures, treated with intravenous midazolam. After admission to the Intensive Care Ward, deep sedation with midazolam and remifentanil was started, in addition to levetiracetam and high-dose dexamethasone, as recommended by the local reference guidance center in Rome, which was deliberately consulted.
The initial CT scan indicated a thin frontal sub-thecal isodense layer, associated with multiple small air bubbles in the supratentorial ventricular system, in the perimesencephalic, peripontine, and basal cisterns and in a few periencephalic sulci . The presence of air bubbles was confirmed by MRI, with no further significant addition. Cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) analysis and cultures were performed. Electroencephalography (EEG) 12 hours after admission revealed epileptic bilateral fronto-temporal encephalopathy, so that lacosamide was added. Levetiracetam daily dose was also adjusted, based on results of plasma concentration assays. Onset of fever was treated with antipyretic drugs and non-pharmacological interventions. No pathogens were grown on CSF and blood cultures.
To assess neurological impairment, pharmacological sedation was progressively de-escalated 48 hours after ICU admission; only on day 6, however, after adequate pharmacological control of epilepsy, improvement of her neurological status was observed, with cranial reflexes evocable, and simple order execution; extubation was performed and conventional oxygen therapy started.
Further neurological and psychiatric assessment revealed retrograde amnesia (past 2 years), mild apraxia and anisocoria. EEG controls evidenced persistent asynchronous epileptic abnormalities, associated with right temporal focuses. Rehabilitation with physiokinesis was started. On day 8, the patient was discharged in ameliorated general and neurological conditions, with a diagnosis of chemical meningo-encephalitis. Before discharge, she reported receiving a first adenoviral vaccine dose for SARS-CoV-2 a few hours in advance of receiving her spinal injection. Neither her blood parameters, nor EEGs and neuroimaging, however, revealed any alteration possibly suggestive of a post vaccine adverse reaction. At follow-up visits, the patient reported rescuing her ordinary work activities after 60 days, with no retrograde amnesia left.