A 56-year-old White, British female was referred from her local hospital to our regional neurosurgical center with a 4-week history of progressive lower back pain and sciatica, associated with (in the latter 2 weeks) lower limb weakness and sensate urinary retention and incontinence, as well as fatigue and general malaise. An unenhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbar–sacral spine was performed, demonstrating an intradural T2-hyperintense lesion displacing the cauda equina at the L4–S1 vertebral levels.
The patient was afebrile on presentation; however, blood tests revealed a white cell count (WCC) of 24.42 × 109/L, with a neutrophilia of 19.66 × 109/L. MRI also demonstrated an enlarged bladder and so the patient was catheterized, draining 675 ml; she was able to feel the catheter pass. She had no medical history of note and was, until this point, very active, fit, and well.
The patient was subsequently transferred to our regional neurosurgical center for assessment and overnight contrast-enhanced imaging. On arrival she was assessed by the neurosurgical team and found to have the following:
Reflexes were brisk in knee extension and ankle jerk bilaterally, plantars remained downgoing, and sensation was reduced to light touch in the L5 and S1 dermatomes bilaterally. Perianal sensation was intact to both light touch and pin prick, and anal tone was found to be normal on digital rectal examination. The remainder of the neurological examination was normal.
Contrast enhanced MRI imaging of the whole spine was performed out of hours, showing that the previously demonstrated collection was peripherally enhancing , thus indicating a potentially infective process (although a ruptured spinal dermoid/epidermoid cyst remained in the differentials). The patient was commenced on intravenous broad-spectrum antibiotics with central nervous system (CNS) penetration [intravenous ceftriaxone 2 g once daily and intravenous vancomycin 1.5 g (adjusted according to level checks) once daily] at this point.
Given the patient’s good premorbid health status and evidence of neurological compromise, a decision was made to surgically evacuate the presumed subdural abscess. The patient was taken to the operating theater and right-sided hemilaminectomies of L4, L5, and the top half of S1 were performed to gain access. The underlying dura was noted to be thickened and inflamed and, following a small durotomy at the L5/S1 level, a large volume of frank pus was released from the subdural space The subdural space was washed thoroughly with saline and a severely hyperemic nerve root was visualized and protected. Organized and very adherent pus was left in situ due to the risk of neural injury from too aggressive a removal. The dura was closed with 5-0 polydioxanone suture (PDS) and overlain with a hemostatic patch (Hemopatch).
The patient was continued on intravenous ceftriaxone and vancomycin and has made an excellent neurological recovery, with no pain, deficits, or postoperative complications. Initial cultures were negative for a causative organism, however 16S ribosomal DNA reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (rDNA RT–PCR) revealed a 99% sequence homology to Streptococcus species S. pneumoniae, S. mitis, S. pseudopneumoniae, and S. oralis.
Repeat MRI imaging performed 2 weeks postoperatively demonstrated excellent evacuation of the abscess with a very small residual collection that was managed with long-term (8 weeks) intravenous antibiotics (ceftriaxone 1 g once daily), delivered in an outpatient setting. The patient made a full neurological recovery and was followed-up in the outpatient setting 12 weeks following her initial surgery; she was pain free with normal inflammatory markers and a normal neurological examination. There have been no further consultations and a telephone call at 20 weeks confirmed that she remains well.