A 55-year-old man with a 3-year history of chest pain but no history of myocardial infarction or any intervention was admitted to our hospital, after experiencing exacerbation of pain for 5 days. The electrocardiogram (ECG) showed ST-segment depression in lead V2-V5 < 0.1 mV and transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed left anterior wall hypokinesis. The physical exam and the laboratory findings including cardiac troponin I were unremarkable. The selective coronary angiography revealed a severe bifurcation lesion of Medina type 1,1,1 involving the left anterior descending branch (LAD) and diagonal 1 (D1) . Cardiac catheterization was then performed via the right radial artery using a 6 Fr EBU 3.5 guiding catheter (Medtronic, USA). Both LAD and D1 lesions were individually crossed with Balance Middleweight guidewires (Abbott, USA) and sequentially predilated with 2.0 × 15 mm semicompliant balloons (Boston Scientific, USA). Two Element stents (2.75 × 24 mm distally and 3.0 × 16 mm proximally, Boston Scientific, USA) were deployed in the proximal LAD with the crossover technique . Both stents were postdilated at high pressure with a 3.0 × 15 mm noncompliant (NC) balloon (Abbott, USA). Despite careful withdrawal of the trapped D1 wire, a deep engagement of the guiding catheter occurred. It was then noted that the proximal edge of the stent exhibited features of longitudinal compression . Following postdilatation in the deformed stent using a 3.0 × 15 mm TREK NC balloon (Abbott, USA, Fig. e), the end-angiographic appearance was acceptable . The patient was treated with 75 mg of clopidogrel for 1.5 years and 100 mg of aspirin lifelong.
Ten months later, the patient represented with acute coronary syndrome. The ECG showed ST-segment depression in lead V2-V5 = 0.2 mV and the cardiac troponin I was 0.23 ng/ml. The urgent coronary angiography showed a suboccluded proximal LAD due to the severe ISR . Following gentle wiring and predilatation, optical coherence tomography (OCT, St. Jude Medical, USA) showed that the proximal segment of the stent was longitudinally compressed and that there were multilayered stent struts protruding into the lumen . The joint decision of our cardiology team was in favor of a drug-coated balloon. Thus, the postdilatation was performed with a 3.0 × 12 mm NC balloon (Yinyi, China), followed by a 3.0 × 26 mm SeQuent Please paclitaxel-eluting balloon (B. Braun Melsungen, Germany) at 16 atm with sustained insufflation for 30 s . With the excellent angiographic result , subsequent OCT imaging showed the improved apposition of the compressed segment and the reduced strut accumulation . The procedure was uneventful, and the patient was discharged after a few days. At the six-month follow-up, he remained angina free, and the angiographic results demonstrated no residual stenosis.