Female infant, aged seven months, brown, weighting 4.5 kg, 57 cm high, born of
natural birth, with 26 weeks and two days of gestational age, in a reference
hospital in Belém, Pará, Brazil. After birth, she was referred to a neonatal
intensive care unit (NICU) in the same service, and remained hospitalized for four
months due to acute respiratory distress symptom (ARDS) and late neonatal
sepsis.
After this period, she was transferred to the neonatal intermediate care unit, and
stayed there for 45 days with prematurity chronic lung disease and swallowing
coordination problems, with indication for surgical gastrostomy (GTM) with
fundoplication; however, she was hemodynamically stable, with no need for antibiotic
therapy. During this period, transfontanellar ultrasound was performed and showed
periventricular hemorrhage restricted to the general matrix, and echocardiography
showed foramen ovale pervium (diameter of the atrial derivation smaller than 2mm,
and minimum hemodynamic impact), with 44 weeks of corrected age. Vaccines were up to
date, and the infant also received palivizumab, according to the age group.
After surgical procedure (GTM), she was transferred to the pediatric nursery for care
and diet progression. On the fifth post-operative (PO) day, she was stable, GTM had
good aspect and diet was full. The perspective was for hospital discharge, and the
family would be trained to posteriorly use the homecare service.
On the seventh PO, day 1 (D1), she presented with high fever, between 38 and 38.5°C,
alternated irritability and periods of lethargy, dry cough, decreased oxygen
saturation (O2 Sat), up to 85% during the coughing attacks, and watery
diarrhea (four episodes). Oxygen therapy was implemented with a nasal catheter (5
L/min), with improved O2Sat (97%). Initial lab tests did not show major
changes (, , and ).
Thoracic computed tomography (CT) was requested and showed multiple confluent acinar
opacities, with formation of areas of consolidation and air bronchogram, associated
with diffuse ground-glass opacities, especially in posterior segments of the upper
and basal lobes, bilaterally . Such
findings had been present in a previous CT, with corrected age of 35 weeks, however,
in lower proportion and compatible with chronic lung disease. Cranial CT had no
changes.
With the suspicion of COVID-19, oropharyngeal aspiration was used, as well as reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) tests for the SARS-CoV-2 virus,
influenza A and B, metapneumovirus, adenovirus, parainfluenza types 1, 2, 3 and 4,
respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). The result was positive only for SARS-CoV-2, and
the test was performed in Laboratório Central do Estado (Lacen, state of Pará).
According to the hospital’s protocol, cefepime, azithromycin and oseltamivir were
administered. There was no bacterial growth in the cultures (stool, blood and
urine). Serology for the Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, toxoplasmosis,
rubella, viral hepatitis (A, B, and C) and parvovirus B19 did not reveal recent
infections.
On day 3 (D3), the patient became worse and presented a hypoxic crisis associated
with lethargy, apnea, tonic-clonic seizure and signs of circulatory shock. She was
transferred to the Pediatric ICU (PICU) after the installation of advanced life
support. At the physical admission test in the PICU, the infant presented with
continuous high fever (T: 39.1°C), without recrudescence with antipyretics (dipyrone
and paracetamol). She showed minor reaction to manipulation, with sinus tachycardia
(heart rate [HR]: 210 bpm), perioral cyanosis, paleness, mottled skin, peripheral
capillary perfusion <2 seconds, and systemic blood pressure (SBP) of 61×25
mmHg.
The patient was submitted to mechanical ventilation (MV), in the assist-control mode,
with pressured-controlled ventilation (PCV A/C), fraction of inspired oxygen
(FiO2) of 40%, inspiratory pressure of 14 cmH2O, positive
end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 7 cmH2O, respiratory rate of 25 and
inspiratory time of 0.65 seconds. Ther was pesence of biliary output with brownish
clots in the nasogastric tube and diuresis, however, reduced (1.2 mL/kg/h and
glomerular filtration rate [GFR] of 33 mL/min/1.73 m2).
A central venous catheter was inserted in the right subclavian vein for the infusion
of fluids and vasoactive drugs. In the laboratory analysis
,
, she presented with hyperglycemia, hypernatremia, hypermagnesemia, mixed
acidosis using the Stewart-Fencl-Figge method, and neutrophilic leukocytosis (, , and ).
Fluid resuscitation was carried out with 40 mL/kg, however, without improvement in
circulatory shock signs. Inotropic support with epinephrine 0.05 mcg/kg/min was an
attempt, with progressive titration up to 0.3 mcg/kg/min, however, without response.
Then, the choice was therapy with norepinephrine (vasopressor), with initial dose of
0.05 mcg/kg/min until 0.5 mcg/kg/min, with pressure levels in the lowest limit (BP:
50×35 mmHg). Calcium correction was performed, and free water correction was
maintained for the reduction of 8 mmol/L in 24-hour natremia, in association with
basal electrolytes. It was, then, associated with hydrocortisone, in a shock dose of
100 mg/m2/day. The patient presented improved HR, peripheral capillary
perfusion (PCP) and SBP; however, she presented with oligoanuria. Then, the choice
was for expansion with physiological saline 20 mL/kg, red blood cell concentrate (10
mL/kg), and continuous furosemide, with initial dose of 3 3 mg/kg/day, with no
response, and indication for peritoneal dialysis. Functional echocardiography showed
distensibility index of inferior vena cava (dIVC) of 8%, using the Feissel method,
global diffuse hypocontractility, without suggestive reinforcements of endocarditis,
and mild pericardial effusion (<2 mm). The patient then evolved to refractory
shock, without any response to the therapeutic measures available in the service,
thus leading to death two days after pediatric intensive support.