A 59-year-old Asian woman presented with multiple facial masses for 15 years and blurred vision of the left eye for 3 months.
The patient presented with a 15-year history of facial swelling that progressively invaded bilaterally from the inner canthi and eyelids outwards. In recent years, the swelling gradually turned into pendulous masses causing severe disfigurements, brow ptosis, and palpebral fissure distortion . Three months prior to admission, the patient complained blurred vision with pupillary axis obstruction of the left eye. The patient reported no pain or itching on the lesion.
The patient denied any previous medical history.
The patient denied bad personal habits and any family history.
Physical examination showed non-pitting masses in the bilateral periocular regions including the inner canthi, upper and lower eyelids, and zygoma, and in the left temple region with a clear boundary , which were rigid and had no associated tenderness. She showed no signs of rosacea and no other abnormities were found on her body or limbs.
Routine blood and urine examinations, coagulation function and biochemistry parameters, and tumor markers showed normal results.
Cranial magnetic resonance imaging indicated that the bilateral periorbital and the left temporal soft tissues had swelling without cranium and intra-orbital invasion, and T1 weighted imaging and T2 weighted showed iso-intensity signals .
Postoperative histological findings showed a large amount of histiocyte infiltration in clear-cut granulomas , and infiltration of lymphocytes, foam-like histiocytes, multinucleated giant cells, and mast cells around blood and lymphatic vessels . Tissue edema was observed in the dermis with lymphatic vessel dilatation and the focal perilymphatic granulomatous reaction. Immunohistochemical staining showed positive expression of CD68 in perivascular, perilymphatic, and perifollicular histiocytic infiltration as well as fibrosis reaction . The dilated lymphatic vessels were formed by the D2-40 positive lymphatic endothelium .