A 67-year-old male presented with transient reduced orientation and short-term memory loss. The symptoms lasted for 24 hours during which he also suffered loss of face and object (building) recognition. The patient reported complete amnesia for this episode. Additional amnestic evaluation revealed a period of transient global amnesia of several hours occurring one and a half years ago. His medical history stated diabetes mellitus type II and hypercholesterolemia. Neurological examination at the time of evaluation showed no abnormalities.
Electroencephalography was performed which showed a normal background activity and no signs of epileptic or epileptiform discharges. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a nonenhancing lesion with high signal intensity on T2-weighted images and low signal intensity on T1-weighted images of the left mesial temporal lobe [Figure -]. Diffusion-weighted imaging revealed no abnormal restricted diffusion. A diffuse low-grade glioma (LGG), dysembryoplastic neurepithelial tumor (DNET), or postictal changes were included in the radiological differential diagnosis. Subsequent MRI scan 1 month later demonstrated an essential unchanged situation, which suggested the lesion to be of glial origin rather than postictal (sub-) cortical changes.
A left-sided anterior temporal lobectomy in combination with resection of the radiologically thickened hippocampus was performed. Intraoperatively, a grayish tumorous tissue of soft consistency was removed suspicious for LGG. A gross total resection was achieved.
A postoperative MRI scan within 72 hours depicted a small area with an increased T2 signal intensity with no abnormal diffusion restrictions, suspicious for residual tumor [Figure -]. Postoperatively, the patient suffered subtle dysphasia, which showed complete remission after 3 days. The patient was discharged from the hospital on the fifth postoperative day.
The obtained tissue showed high cellularity with subpopulations of cells with enlarged nuclei and perinuclear clearing in accordance with a “fried-egg” appearance. The NeuN stain identified multiple neurons. Glial cells stained positive with GFAP, and Ki-67-staining showed an increased proliferative activity in the enlarged atypical cells. The histological diagnosis was an LGG, WHO II, molecularly characterized by the absence of: IDH1/2 mutation, 1p/19q codeletion, or MGMT promotor hypermethylation. See for the histology staining.
Further genomic analyses using next generation sequencing revealed no mutation in the ATRX, CDKN2a, CIC, FUBP1, NOTCH1, PTEN, and TP53 coding genes and no mutations in the mutational hotspots of BRAF, H3F3A, EGFR, IDH1/IDH2, and PIK3CA. Copy number variation analyses of chromosomes 1, 7, 9, 10, 12, and 19 showed an imbalance of chromosome 7 including EGFR, CD6, and Met with a loss of chromosome 10.
The patient was diagnosed according to the 2016 update of the World Health Organization classification of tumors of the central nervous system; IDH wild-type (IDHwt), and diffuse astrocytoma. Considering the distinct high-grade molecular traits, the patient was treated postoperatively according to the Stupp protocol; concomitant temozolomide 75 mg/m2/day for 49 days and radiotherapy with a total dose up to 59.4 Gy in 33 fractions followed by 6 cycles of temozolomide.