A 47-year-old man presented in July 1999 with melena. A small bowel series and CT abdomen showed a jejunal mass and a 5 × 5 cm complex hepatic mass. A biopsy of the liver lesion revealed a spindle cell tumor. Laparotomy was performed, and the 7.5 cm jejunal mass was resected. A total of 4 liver lesions were noted, but not resected. The histopathology confirmed a gastrointestinal stromal tumor with clear resection margins. He subsequently had 4 cycles of attempted cytoreductive chemotherapy using doxorubicin and dacarbazine. A repeat CT scan showed progression of the liver metastases. An extended right hemihepatectomy was performed in December 1999 with successful excision of all 4 liver metastases.
The patient remained well until review in August 2001 when he complained of lethargy, right upper quadrant abdominal pain, diplopia and blurred vision in the left eye. Examination revealed weakness of the right lateral rectus ocular muscle, an amelanotic left choroidal lesion, hepatomegaly and a subcutaneous nodule in the gluteal region. An enhancing lesion in the infero-lateral region of the right globe was confirmed on CT which was thought to be the cause of the ocular muscle weakness. The CT scan also demonstrated a recurrence of multiple hepatic metastases. There were no intracerebral lesions. The gluteal lesion was biopsied and confirmed recurrence of GIST (CD117 positive). A positron emission tomogram (PET) scan also confirmed disease recurrence in the same distribution. Lumbar puncture and MRI scan of the brain excluded the presence of leptomeningeal or cerebral metastases. The patient was commenced on imatinib mesylate (STI-571, Gleevec, Novartis) 400 mg bd in September 2001 as part of a clinical trial. He felt much improved by November 2001 when a repeat CT abdomen showed stable disease but PET scan now showed no FDG uptake. By January 2002 his diplopia had completely resolved but the left-sided choroidal lesion remained unchanged on fundoscopy. The buttock lesion had also resolved.
A progress CT in December 2002 showed minor enlargement of one of the liver lesions. A PET scan however continued to show no areas of abnormal FDG uptake. The patient at that time had developed a right-sided foot drop. MRI of the brain and spine demonstrated a left parasagittal tumor with radiographic features consistent with a meningioma (see Figure ). Imatinib was ceased preoperatively as per the trial protocol. A craniotomy was performed on the 28th January 2003 with complete resection of the lesion. Histopathology demonstrated metastatic GIST (CD117 positive) (see Figures and ). Post operatively the patient developed recurrent diplopia (due to recurrent right lateral rectus weakness) with blurred vision off imatinib. This was recommenced at a dose of 400 mg bd on the 14th February 2003 after being ceased 6 weeks earlier because of the documented disease progression in the brain as required by the trial protocol. Drug supply was obtained through a compassionate use program. Repeat fundoscopy in February 2003 showed the choroidal lesion had enlarged. His foot drop persisted, however his diplopia again had completely resolved by March 2003.
Mutational analysis on the tumor blocks was carried out. An in-frame GCCTAT insertion/duplication in exon 9 of c-kit in the original jejunal tumor, the liver and the cerebral metastases were detected (See Figure ). No mutations were found in exons 11, 13 or 17 in any of the samples.
Due to limited drug supply available on compassionate use (pending local approval for reimbursement), the patient's dose of imatinib mesylate was reduced to 400 mg per day in March 2003. Six weeks later, his diplopia had returned and a progress CT abdomen demonstrated a minor progression of the liver lesions. His liver function tests remained normal. A subsequent PET scan again showed no abnormal uptake despite disease progression on the CT scan. His dose of imatinib mesylate was increased initially to 600 mg per day with resolution of the diplopia.
By May 2003 his foot drop had worsened and his dose of imatinib mesylate was increased back to 800 mg per day. Despite the increase in dose, his foot drop worsened. A repeat CT brain demonstrated a recurrence of the cerebral metastasis with surrounding vasogenic oedema in the previous site of resection. A repeat abdominal CT showed no significant change in the size of the liver metastasis and mild shrinking of the nodule in the buttock.
Due to limited treatment options available for the cerebral metastasis, a re-resection of the cranial metastasis was offered. A repeat MRI of the brain in late July 2003 confirmed the presence of the left parasagittal lesion with surrounding edema but no mass effect. Repeat craniotomy and incomplete debulking of the parasagittal metastasis was performed on the 9th September 2003. A small residual area of tumor was seen on the postoperative scan. Abdominal imaging two months later showed that two of the liver lesions had increased in size with the other areas stable. He was not a candidate for further hepatic resection as there was insufficient liver reserve due to the past surgery. Radiofrequency ablation was declined as the patient did not have symptoms referable to the area.
The patient remained well until December 2003 when he experienced symptoms of headaches, worsening diplopia, right foot drop and left arm weakness. MRI scan confirmed recurrence of the cerebral metastasis with extension across the falx cerebri. He declined cranial radiotherapy treatment at the time and instead underwent a third resection of the lesion in January 2004 where incomplete debulking was achieved with early improvement of his limb weakness. In April 2004 the patient enrolled into a randomised placebo controlled clinical trial of a novel multi-kinase inhibitor SU-11248 (Pfizer) for the treatment of imatinib refractory GIST. However his condition slowly deteriorated and he died in July 2004.