A 42-year-old previously healthy man received his second dose of an inactivated SARS-CoV-2 vaccine (Beijing Institute of Sinovac Products Co., Ltd., Beijing, China) on July 11th, 2021. One week later, he developed paresthesia of the feet and hands, associated with distal weakness in the wrists and lower limbs below the knee joint, which evolved over a period of 6 months. He reported impaired manual dexterity and gait unsteadiness with increasing difficulties being faced in his work. He had a good general health status with a weight of 80.0 kg, height of 1.75 m, BMI of 26.12 Kg/m2, no other complaints, and his family history was unremarkable. Upon admission to our hospital, neurological examination showed normal cranial nerve and cognitive function. His Medical Research Council (MRC) score for strength was 4+/5 on bilateral extension, abduction of fingers, hip flexion, and ankle and toe dorsiflexion. Proprioception and light touch sensation were intact. Tendon reflexes of the lower limbs and upper limbs were not elicited and were decreased, respectively. Mild interosseous muscle atrophy and bilateral pes cavus without evident peroneal atrophy were noted.
A subsequent electrophysiological study showed that the compound muscle action potentials of the median, ulnar, tibial, and peroneal nerves were all absent. The distal latencies of the axillary nerve were increased (9.1 ms on the right, 9.5 ms on the left) with low amplitude compound muscle action potentials (4.9 mV on the right, 4.7 mV on the left). Sensory action potentials were absent in both the median and sural nerves. F-waves were unobtainable . On electromyography (EMG), fibrillation potentials and positive sharp waves were present in the left extensor digitorum communis and gastrocnemius, right interosseous muscle, and tibialis anterior. Neurophysiologic evaluation showed severe demyelination with axonal sensorimotor polyneuropathy, symmetrical upper and lower extremities, and more distal involvement. Nerve high resolution ultrasound showed an increase of the cross-sectional area at all nerves in the extremities. Brachial 3.0 T magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed mild swelling of the bilateral brachial plexuses without marked gadolinium-DTPA (diethylenetriamine penta-acetic acid) enhancement of the nerve ganglion .
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis exhibited albuminocytological dissociation (protein 0.961 g/L, 1 cell) with no oligoclonal banding on immunofixation. The CSF paraneoplastic panel, flow cytometry, and cytopathology were within normal limits. Other investigations to determine the causes were conducted. Cardiac ultrasound, head MRI, cervical MRI, electroencephalogram, and lower extremity vascular results were unremarkable. Serum determinations of perinuclear staining antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (P-ANCA), antinuclear antibodies, myeloperoxidase antibodies, cytoplasmic-ANCA and proteinase 3, rheumatoid factor, anti-O, alpha-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, myelin associated glycoprotein, serum and urine protein immunofixation electrophoresis, serum and urine light chain, thyroid function tests, vitamin B12, and antibodies against hepatitis viruses were normal or negative; anti-ganglioside, anti-neuronal nuclear and plasma membrane antibodies, and titrations for syphilis, and HIV antibodies were negative in the blood specimens. His fasting blood-glucose (7.31 mmol/L) and glycosylated hemoglobin (9.9%) were elevated, suggesting a new onset of diabetes. Due to severe neuropathy, he was immediately scheduled for extensive genetic testing. Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification analysis for investigating PMP22 gene deletion/duplication was performed, finally, duplication of the p11.2 region of chromosome 17, the hallmark of CMT1A, was found.
Over the next 9 months, treatment with B vitamins and blood glucose control was unsuccessful, and his condition worsened with progressive numbness, weakness of the limbs and muscle atrophy of the hand. He had bilateral pes cavus. Motor examination revealed mild distal upper (MRC grade 4/5) and distal severe lower limb (2/5) symmetrical weakness. The CSF was acellular with a total protein concentration of 1.323 g/L. Serum and CSF testing for antiganglioside antibodies and antibodies directed against myelin or proteins localized to the Ranvier node were negative. The report by a top electrophysiologist at another hospital in Shanghai, China, showed multiple peripheral nerve damage involving demyelination of motor and sensory nerves with axonal damage . Overall, findings were compatible with inflammatory peripheral nervous system disorder and the presentation was thought to be a post-vaccination reaction. After diagnosing CIDP superimposed on CMT1A, intravenous human immunoglobulin (IVIg) was administered at a standard dosage (0.4 g/kg over five consecutive days), followed by oral mattemycophenol ester 0.75 g bid and prednisone 50 mg qd. After a month his clinical condition improved [corresponding to two points on the score in the Inflammatory Neuropathy Cause and Treatment (INCAT) disability scale ]. He regained hand function, walked freely. He stopped taking oral medication and remained clinically stable during the following 3 months.
Unfortunately, after a 3-month plateau, the patient was infected with COVID-19 (confirmed by nasopharyngeal swab PCR). About 1 week thereafter, the patient had a relapse, with severe, rapidly progressive quadriparesis and hand and feet numbness lasting over 8 weeks, that lead to loss of ambulation. His muscle strength was 4/5 in the proximal lower and upper limbs, and was 0/5 in the distal lower limbs. The patient had significant weight loss (10 kg). Neurologic examination revealed bilateral pes cavus, marked peroneal and interosseous muscle atrophy , bilateral weakness of ankle dorsiflexors with foot drop, superficial sensory loss in a stocking distribution, and abolished vibration sense and joint position sense at the distal extremities of both lower limbs. CSF analysis disclosed moderately raised protein counts (1.048 g/L) with no pleocytosis. Neuroelectrophysiology and brachial plexus magnetic resonance data were similar to those obtained 14 months prior.
He, once again, had a relatively rapid and progressive clinical improvement with IVIg (27.5 g per day for 5 days) and intravenous methylprednisolone (500 mg/day for 5 days), which were started 9–10 weeks into this new relapse. The intravenous medication was gradually replaced by oral drugs (corticoids). He was discharged from hospital and oral immunosuppressants were added (mycophenolate mofetil tablets). There was a gradual restoration of limb movement and locomotion (with support). The INCAT disability scale score was reduced by 1 point. The timeline with clinical course is shown in .
One year after discharge (2024.2), the patient’s distal limb numbness and weakness did not worsen, and he did not take any drugs. He usually used bilateral support to walk outdoors, fine movements of both hands were not flexible, and daily life is partially self-reliant.