We present a case of a 52-year-old man who presented to our outpatient clinic complaining of a painful lump in his left lateral abdominal wall. The patient noticed the development of a small nodule about one year ago, and he also stated that the lump was gradually increasing in size. The patient did not refer any previous abdominal trauma or any further pathologies. Palpation revealed a 4 × 5 cm nodular mass protruding through the left upper lateral abdominal wall. The mass was firm, tender, and not fix to the skin of the abdominal wall.
Computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen with contrast revealed a 32 × 45 mm cystic mass located between the external and internal oblique muscles . Abdominal Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) demonstrated a well-circumscribed 4 × 5 cm cystic mass, arising in the abdominal wall. The lesion was hyperintense on T2 , and fat-suppressed sequences suggested cystic degeneration . Clinical appearance and radiological findings were not specific for a particular entity. Our differential diagnosis included a chronic haematoma or a cystic tumor of the abdominal wall.
The patient underwent total resection of the mass under local anaesthesia . The choice of local anaesthesia was based on the patient's preference, the small size of the tumor, and the fact that it was located at the abdominal wall. During the operation, the tumor was intermuscular and found between the external and the internal oblique muscle. The mass was not strongly attached to the surrounding tissues and was easily mobilised and excised in healthy margins. He was discharged the following day in excellent clinical condition.
Macroscopic examination of the resected specimen revealed a well-circumscribed nodular mass measured 6.5 × 4.5 × 3.5 cm . Histopathology findings were characterized by interlacing bundles of spindle cells of varying cellularity and peripheral lymphoid cuffs .
The neoplastic cells were immunoreactive with S-100 protein and vimentin. The resected margin was reported clear (R0). Postoperative period was uneventful, and one-year follow-up was unremarkable.