An 82-year-old woman with hypertension was hospitalized because of fever (39 °C). The abdomen was tender, without signs of peritonitis. Blood tests revealed an increased white blood cell count of 15,790/μl, C-reactive protein 24.52 mg/dL, hemoglobin 8.2 mg/dL, carcinoembryonic antigen 8.9 mg/dL, and CA19-9 level 22.4 mg/dL. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a 10 cm in diameter liver abscess and inflammation of the colon . Lower gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a type 2 tumor in the transverse colon. Pathology revealed well-differentiated adenocarcinoma. The endoscope was passable, but the tract was becoming narrower . The patient required early surgery and we performed preoperative examination in parallel with treatment of the liver abscess. Furthermore, it was necessary to improve her general condition for the operation.
At diagnosis of the liver abscess, tazobactam/piperacillin (TAZ/PIPC) antibiotics were started empirically. Klebsiella pneumoniae was detected in the admission blood culture, and we confirmed it to be susceptible to TAZ/PIPC.
We considered performing percutaneous transhepatic abscess drainage (PTAD), but decided against this initially because it was deemed to be less effective to drain due to the presence of a septum in the abscess . However, approximately 2 weeks after admission, the inflammatory response was elevated again and fever also was observed. A CT scan showed that the liver abscess was slightly enlarged without shrinkage. PTAD was performed because antibiotic treatment alone was not sufficient to cure the liver abscess . A white viscous pus discharge was observed, and K. pneumoniae was detected in the blood and discharge cultures. After drainage, the fever resolved and the inflammatory response improved markedly.
TAZ/PIPC was administered for a total of 28 days. The abscess drainage tube showed a very small amount of drainage with improvement in inflammation and the patient's general condition. Contrast studies were done at 12 days after insertion and the tube was removed after confirmation of abscess resolution. Approximately 4 weeks after the start of treatment, the patient underwent standby surgery for transverse colon cancer (hepatic flexure; ), consisting of laparoscopic converted to open right hemi-colectomy (D3). Operative time was 195 min and estimated blood loss was minimal. The procedure was converted due to strong adhesion of the tumor to the duodenum.
The patient progressed well postoperatively, except for a minor postoperative wound infection, and was discharged approximately 20 days postoperatively.
No cancer/hepatic abscess recurrence was noted at followup approximately 1 year postoperatively. The case has been reported in line with the SCARE criteria .