A previously healthy 4-year-old boy of Indian origin was admitted to our hospital with a 2-day history of vomiting, diarrhoea, and fever, complicated by sudden disturbance of consciousness on the day of admission. He was fully vaccinated (excluding rotavirus vaccine, which was not a routine component of the UK schedule at the time), and had no recent history of foreign travel or animal contact. On admission, he had a temperature of 39.6 °C, heart rate of 155 beats/min, respiratory rate of 30 breaths/min, oxygen saturation of 99 % in room air, and blood pressure of 92/59 mm Hg. He appeared mildly dehydrated. He was drowsy with transient periods of agitation and had a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 13 (eyes 4, verbal 4, motor 5). His parents reported that he was awake but lethargic. He was unable to recognise them and lost the ability to make eye contact. He looked confused, uttered meaningless or incoherent words and phrases and could not respond to questions in an appropriate manner.
Laboratory blood testing showed haemoglobin 11.9 g/dL, leucocyte count 11,100 cells/μL, platelet count 225,000 cells/μL, serum sodium 131 mmol/L, potassium 4.3 mmol/L, chloride 92 mmol/L, urea 8.3 mmol/L, creatinine 54 μmol/L, alanine aminotransferase 105 U/L, ammonia 85 μmol/L, and C-reactive protein 25 mg/L. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination revealed no leukocytes, protein 0.15 g/L, and glucose 3.6 mmol/L. Cranial computed tomography (CT) showed no evidence of an intracranial lesion. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain performed on day 4 of hospitalization (6 days after his symptoms began) showed a marked hyperintensity in the splenium of the corpus callosum (SCC) on T2 and diffusion-weighted images with corresponding diffusion restriction on Apparent Diffusion Coefficient (ADC) mapping . Initial electroencephalograph (EEG) 2 days after admission exhibited widespread, excessive slow wave activity, more prominent in the right hemisphere. The patient did not experience any seizures, and the abnormality was not evident on a subsequent EEG performed 30 days after discharge. Rotavirus RNA was detected by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in a stool specimen, but was not detected in CSF. The rotavirus genotype was identified as G1P8.
An infusion of intravenous isotonic fluid (0.9 % sodium chloride and 5 % glucose) was administered. Intravenous ceftriaxone, clarithromycin, and aciclovir were started on the day of admission due to persistent disturbance of the level of consciousness and suspected acute encephalitis. His clinical condition improved over the subsequent 5 days, with gradual resolution of his symptoms, and antimicrobial treatment was discontinued once CSF culture confirmed no bacterial growth and PCR was reported negative for herpes simplex virus. No neurological complications were evident upon discharge. The patient had not had any recurrence of symptoms when seen for follow-up 8 weeks later. A follow-up MRI was therefore not performed.