A 37-year-old woman with advanced, progressive, premature ASCVD and severe hyper-Lp(a) was admitted to the Lipoprotein Apheresis Unit at the First Department of Cardiology in Gdansk. She had a past medical history of non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction, which was treated with a two-staged percutaneous coronary intervention of the right coronary and circumflex arteries and implantation of two drug-eluting stents. This was followed by an incident of unstable angina with left anterior descending artery angioplasty and additional drug-eluting stent implantation. Atheroma plaques in both the internal carotid arteries, with 50%–69% stenosis, were also confirmed.
The patient has none of the following cardiovascular risk factors: cigarette smoking, arterial hypertension, diabetes, and obesity. In addition, she did not present a clinical phenotype of familial hypercholesterolemia. The maximal untreated low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) level in this patient was 160 mg/dl and a family history of hypercholesterolemia was negative. However, her father had experienced myocardial infarction at 40 years of age, without having Lp(a) measured, which indicated a family history of premature CVD. She had a history of miscarriage and three unsuccessful in vitro fertilization (IVF) procedures. The most common causes of thrombophilia were excluded, namely Leiden mutation, antiphospholipid syndrome, mutation in the prothrombin gene, antithrombin deficiency, and protein C and S deficiency. However, a methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase C677 mutation and a plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 (PAI1) 4G/4G homozygous mutation were confirmed.
The patient’s untreated LDL-C and Lp(a) levels were 160 mg/dL and 249 mg/dL, respectively. The corrected LDL-C level, calculated using Dahlén’s formula was 83 mg/dL {LDL-C = laboratory LDL-C−[Lp(a) mass × 0.30]} (, ). The patient was administered with 20 mg of rosuvastatin and 10 mg of ezetimibe daily, which reduced the LDL-C level to 54 mg/dL. A further increase in the rosuvastatin dose resulted in recurrent muscle pain.
Considering the severe hyper-Lp(a) and advanced premature CVD, the patient was initiated on regular biweekly LA after the myocardial infarction episode. Cascade filtration technique (MONET/Fresenius), a method of selective, extracorporeal removal of pro-atherosclerotic lipid particles was used. In MONET system after separation plasma is transferred through the second polysulphone filter, which allows albumin, HDL, and smaller immunoglobulins to pass, whereas Lp(a), LDL, VLDL and chylomicrons, are retained. LA-induced median Lp(a) reduction prior to the pregnancy was 65% (IQR 58–71). After 2 years of regular LA, the patient underwent an IVF procedure with pre-implantation genetic diagnostics. Directly before embryo transfer in September 2021, the patient stopped taking statins. Weighting the risk of potential uterine bleeding and loss of pregnancy, and the risk of CVE, shared decision-making brought us to suspending LA procedures after confirmation of pregnancy. The IVF procedure was successful, and she became pregnant. The patient was treated with subcutaneous enoxaparin (60 mg) and continued aspirin (75 mg) daily. Owing to a diagnosis of gestational diabetes at 8 weeks’ gestation, a long-acting insulin analog therapy was initiated at 8 units and gradually increased during the pregnancy.