A 42-year-old Caucasian man of Portuguese origin, with serologic evidence of past hepatitis B infection, presented to his general practitioner with a one-week history of sore throat, fever, and fatigue. Pharyngitis was diagnosed, and amoxicillin-clavulanate prescribed. Ten days later, the patient was admitted to our hospital with swelling of his tongue and lips and a widespread itchy maculopapular rash. A grade two allergic reaction to amoxicillin-clavulanate was diagnosed, and intravenous clemastin was given, with rapid subsequent improvement of the swelling and rash. However, the patient remained febrile (38.5°C) with continuing exudative pharyngitis and painful bilateral cervical lymphadenopathy (up to three cm in diameter). Laboratory results were as follows: Hemoglobin, 136 g/L; white blood cells, 7.0 g/L with 7% non-segmented neutrophils and 15% lymphocytes; C-reactive protein, 168 mg/L; ASAT, 500 U/L; ALAT, 400 U/L; γ-GT, 1200 U/L; and total bilirubin, 36 μmol/L. A pharyngeal swab yielded mouth flora only. The patient remained hospitalized for investigation of the non-resolving mononucleosis syndrome (tonsillar pharyngitis, fever, and lymphadenopathy) with a presumptive diagnosis of viral infection complicated by drug allergy.
Review of systems only revealed loose feces for one week and was considered as a minor side effect of the antibiotic therapy.
The following day, the patient collapsed with hematochezia that resulted in a decrease in his hemoglobin to 66 g/L. He was hemodynamically stabilized with intravenous saline and blood transfusions. Computed tomography showed extravasation of contrast medium into the cecum, and active bleeding was confirmed by angiography . After angiographic occlusion of a branch of the ileocaecal artery, bleeding stopped and did not recur. Colonoscopy revealed a large caecal ulcer with irregular margins and a fibrinous base , located at the site of the hemorrhage.
A biopsy of the ulcer showed acute inflammation in the lamina propria, consisting of an increase in polymorphonuclear cells without a concomitant increase of lymphocytes and plasma cells, associated with crypt abscesses and flattened epithelial cells , compatible with an edge of the ulcer. The adjacent colonic mucosa showed a mildly inflamed lamina propria with regenerative glands . Although lymphocytes and plasma cells were not increased in the lamina propria, immunohistochemistry with anti-CD3, -CD4 and -CD8 demonstrated fewer CD4+ T cells than CD8+ T cells . Grocott, periodic acid Schiff (PAS), Giemsa, and Ziehl-Neelsen stains, as well as immunohistochemical methods using antibodies to CMV, HSV-1, and HSV-2, did not reveal any pathogens. P24 antigen was undetectable. Tissue culture was not performed. The CMV viral load in the blood was very low (29 copies/mL).
Serologic investigations to identify a cause for the patient's mononucleosis syndrome indicated only past infections with EBV, CMV, and T. gondii (the presence of IgG, but not IgM antibodies). However, the patient was found to have a low CD4 count (180/mm3, 10% of total lymphocytes), and a fourth-generation HIV test was positive. The patient's history suggested that he had acquired his HIV infection recently. He reported having had a negative HIV rapid test (Determine) five months earlier and had had unprotected sex with a man one month previously. Primary HIV infection was confirmed by a very high viremia (3.6 × 107 copies/mL HIV-1 RNA tested by CAP/CTM, Roche) and an evolving immunoblot (INNOLIA, Innogenetics) on the blood sample obtained one day before his gastrointestinal hemorrhage.
In view of a persisting mononucleosis syndrome and a further decrease in his CD4 count (101/mm3, 7%), antiretroviral therapy with emtricitabine, tenofovir, and lopinavir/r was started. The pharyngitis, fever, and lymphadenopathy improved rapidly. On follow-up five months later, his viremia was less than 40 copies/mL, and his CD4 count was 310/mm3.