A 26-year-old male Indigenous Australian was transferred to our tertiary hospital with an anterior ST-elevation myocardial infarction associated with an out of hospital ventricular fibrillation (VF) arrest. He developed central chest pain whilst playing a competitive football match prior to the cardiac arrest. Initial bystander cardio-pulmonary resuscitation was commenced and he received one 150 joule direct current shock from an automated electrical defibrillator for VF with return of spontaneous circulation. His initial vital signs in the ambulance included a heart rate of 78 b.p.m. (regular) and blood pressure of 125/88 mmHg with no clinical signs of cardiac failure. The patient’s cardiovascular risk factors included an active smoking history and a family history of ischaemic heart disease; the patient’s uncle underwent coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery. There was no family history of sudden cardiac death.
The initial electrocardiogram (ECG) performed by the paramedics demonstrated sinus rhythm with anterolateral ST-elevation . Upon diagnosis of ST-elevation ACS, the patient was thrombolysed with 50 mg of tenecteplase as the patient was more than 2 h away from a primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) capable site. In addition to thrombolysis, 4000 international units of intravenous heparin and oral aspirin 300 mg were also administered. Post-thrombolysis, due to <50% ST-segment resolution and ongoing chest pain, the patient proceeded to our tertiary centre for rescue PCI.
Bloods tests on admission revealed a haemoglobin of 150 g/L, platelets of 26 600/μL, and a troponin I of 5.08 μg/L. A bedside echocardiogram demonstrated severely reduced left ventricular ejection fraction of 15% with severe hypokinesis extending from the mid-anterior wall to the apical and inferoapical segments (see , Video S1).
Coronary angiography demonstrated thrombotic occlusion of the proximal left anterior descending (LAD) artery with heavy thrombus burden and prominent vascular ectasia of all three coronary arteries (see and , Videos S2 and S3). The left circumflex and right coronary artery demonstrated thrombolysis in myocardial infarction 3 flow with no stenosis despite significant ectasia. Thrombus aspiration was not performed due to the perceived high risk of systemic cardioembolic events. Percutaneous coronary intervention was not attempted due to significant vascular ectasia preventing stent apposition within the grossly dilated vessel wall. Due to continuing chest pain, ST-segment elevation and persistent thrombotic vessel occlusion, the patient was referred for urgent CABG surgery. Long-term LAD graft patency (following possible future thrombus resolution) was discussed, should non-obstructive coronary artery disease (CAD) be identified at surgery. On balance, given the patient’s young age and desire to minimize further myocardial injury, surgery was agreed as the most appropriate immediate therapeutic option.
Prior to surgery, an intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) was inserted, with a noradrenaline infusion running at 2 μg/min. Then, the left inferior mammary artery was harvested and anastomosed to the distal LAD successfully. Post-pump trans-oesophageal echocardiogram revealed reduced left ventricular ejection fraction of 40–45% with significant improvement in the anterior wall contractility. The patient remained in the intensive care unit (ICU) for 48 h post-surgery where a therapeutic heparin infusion was administered for the 48 h. Prior to discharge to the ward, the noradrenaline infusion was ceased and the IABP removed. Post-operatively in ICU, the rheumatology team consulted and alternative causes for the CAE such as vasculitic, connective tissue disease, and autoimmune conditions were ruled out.
The patient experienced an uncomplicated post-operative course and was discharged home after 10 days in hospital. The final ECG demonstrated normal sinus rhythm with no abnormalities . On discharge the patient was prescribed dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) of aspirin 100 mg daily and ticagrelor 90 mg twice daily to continue for a duration of 1 year given the presentation of ACS. For management of the heart failure with reduced ejection fraction, perindopril 2.5 mg daily, bisoprolol 1.25 mg daily, and spironolactone 12.5 mg daily were prescribed with view for uptitration to maximal tolerated dose. Atorvastatin 80 mg was prescribed for aggressive secondary prevention of ACS. The patient was referred for ongoing outpatient cardiology and cardiothoracic surgery clinic review.