Progressive fatigue, shortness of breath, weight gain, leg swelling, orthopnoea, and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea.
A 58-year-old Caucasian man presented to the heart failure clinic with progressive fatigue, shortness of breath, weight gain, leg swelling, orthopnoea, and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea for several months. On review of symptoms, the patient had no palpitations, carpal tunnel symptoms, neuropathy, or back pain.
Approximately ten months before this clinic presentation, the patient had first received a diagnosis of HF with reduced ejection fraction (EF) of 15% to 20%. At that time, he underwent left heart catheterization which showed no obstructive coronary artery disease. The patient was started on appropriate guideline-directed medical therapy (GDMT) with only mild improvement in his EF. The patient was followed in the heart failure clinic and had recurrences of acute on chronic heart failure episodes. Unfortunately, due to borderline hypotension, he was unable to reach maximum doses of GDMT which ultimately had to be stopped.
His past medical history was significant for non-ischemic cardiomyopathy (EF 15%-20%), left ventricular hypertrophy, implantable cardioverter defibrillator in situ, atrial fibrillation, moderate to severe mitral regurgitation, prior left atrial thrombus, and prior tobacco use disorder. Other than atrial fibrillation, he had no significant history of other arrhythmias. He worked as a construction worker. His family history was notable only for his father who underwent a coronary artery bypass graft at age 59 years.
Physical exam was notable for the patient appearing well-nourished; however, jugular venous distension, a holosystolic murmur consistent with known mitral regurgitation, abdominal distention, and bilateral lower extremity edema were present. Vital signs depicted borderline systolic blood pressure of 95/70 mmHg with a mean of 78 mmHg, normal heart rate, normal respiratory rate and saturation on room air, and normal temperature.
The patient’s presentation to the clinic with progressively worsening heart failure symptoms prompted admission to the hospital.
Electrocardiogram showed AV-paced complexes and low voltage in both limb and precordial leads. He underwent right heart catheterization which was consistent with cardiogenic shock with central venous pressure 18 mmHg, polymeraseacidicprotein 43/25 with mean of 32 mmHg, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure 23 mmHg, fick cardiac output of 4.6 L/min, and cardiac index of 2.1 L/min/m2. Transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated a reduced EF of 10%, concentric hypertrophy with interventricular septal thickness of 1.9 cm and posterior wall thickness of 1.4 cm, moderately reduced right ventricle (RV) function with a dilated RV, moderate mitral regurgitation, and trivial pericardial effusion . Diastology additionally showed an E/A ratio of 3.3, severely reduced mitral annular tissue velocities (e' medial of 3 cm/s and e' lateral of 5 cm/s), E/e' of 25, and deceleration time of 141 ms . The increased myocardial wall thickness on echocardiogram as well as parameters consistent with restrictive pathology led to a detailed amyloidosis workup. A technetium pyrophosphate scan (Tc PYP) showed a heart/contralateral lung ratio of 1.77 and visual grade 3 as per the Perugini scale, highly suggestive of cardiac amyloidosis . Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (cMRI) showed global myocardial delayed hyperenhancement and failure to null most likely due to cardiac amyloidosis . Amyloid light chain amyloidosis work-up including kappa and lambda light chains levels, serum protein electrophoresis, and urine protein electrophoresis was unremarkable. The native heart tissue pathology showed diffuse amyloid deposits between the myocardial fibrils, confirmed on Congo red staining . Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry was also performed on peptides extracted from the Congo red-positive areas of tissue and was consistent with ATTR-CM. The spectrometry did not detect an amino acid sequence abnormality in the transthyretin protein, suggesting ATTRwt as the diagnosis. Genetic testing was performed and was unremarkable, showing two variants of unknown significance, c.3262-3C>G in the LAMA4 gene and p.K963E in the RBM20 gene. Screening of the TTR gene was unremarkable ruling out hereditary TTR cardiomyopathy.