In May 2021, a 58-year-old, otherwise healthy right-handed female presented to our department with a recurrence of a lipoma on the volar side of her left wrist. The patient reported the recurrence five days after the initial surgery, performed at a different hospital in March 2021, and noticed continued growth until admission. The patient’s chief complaints were pain, decreased function, and discomfort during daily activities. Physical examination revealed a palpable mass with a diameter of approximately 5 cm extending from the wrist to the base of the left hypothenar eminence . No signs of median or ulnar nerve compression were observed upon examination. The patient had no history of trauma, congenital malformation, or other diseases. Ultrasound examination in June 2021 at our clinic revealed a homogenous mass measuring about 6 × 3 × 1.5 cm without increased vascularization, iso-echoic to the surrounding subcutaneous fatty tissue . The radiologist suggested that it was most likely a lipoma, but its location made imaging somewhat difficult, and an MRI was advised as well. Because histological examination of the removed tissue from the original surgery revealed a lipoma, an MRI was deemed unnecessary, and the patient was scheduled for re-excision of the lipoma in her wrist. In November 2021, a revision excision was performed on the patient. As this was a revision surgery involving exploration, the re-excision procedure utilized blockade of the brachial plexus with sedation to ensure the patient’s comfort. The surgical approach involved a new incision was made in along the length of the wrist, as in opening both the carpal tunnel surgeries, and proceeded diagonally towards Guyon’s canal to remove the lipoma to ensure a comprehensive view of the lipoma for proper extraction . During the operation, it was found revealed that the lipoma was larger than expected anticipated based on imaging and had grown into both the carpal tunnel and Guyon’s canal. The ingrowths into and between the carpal tunnel and Guyon’s canal were excised, and any remaining strands were also removed. The lipoma extended until just proximal to the superficial palmar arc. Intraoperatively, the median nerve appeared more fatty than normal. Histology confirmed that the mass – which weighed around 19 g and was 5 × 3.5 × 1.5 cm – was removed in toto with the associated capsule . After the surgery, the patient was referred to a hand therapist and had a follow-up with the operator six weeks post-operatively. Postoperative outcomes of the lipoma excision and revision surgery include assessments of pain levels, hand and wrist function, patient-reported quality of life, scar appearance, neurological status, and documentation of any complications. At the initial follow-up, the patient had diminished flexion of the fingers and dorsiflexion of the wrist due to scar tissue from the excision and post-operative swelling and immobilization . Physical therapy check-ups were initially performed every other week and then monthly to improve wrist strength, flexibility, and flexion of the fingers. At six months post-op, the patient had achieved 20 degrees wrist extension with the help of silicone treatment of the scar tissue . With exercises, the patient was able to achieve full flexion of all digits except for fourth digit. During the last postoperative visit with the hand therapist, the patient conveyed overall contentment with the surgical revision, postoperative care, and outcomes, reporting high satisfaction levels in pain relief, functional improvement, and cosmetic results, with a minor concern specifically related to limited range of motion of the fourth digit that did not impact or limit daily activities. The patient successfully completed physical therapy and regained normal strength and range of motion without limitations of daily activities. However, a slight limitation of the end range of motion of flexion of fourth digit was noted, which was not present prior to the operative treatment.