In February 2019, a 66-year-old man visited the First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical University due to a 2-month history of cough, sputum, and shortness of breath. The chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed a suspicious central right lung mass, with hilum of right lung, bilateral lung, and mediastinal lymph node metastasis; right-sided pleural effusion; and a small amount of pericardial effusion and atelectasis of the middle and lower lobes of the right lung . The patient was a former heavy smoker with a smoking index of 20 packs/year. Cytological examination of pleural fluid revealed the diagnosis of malignant pleural effusion with the tumor cells positive staining for NapsinA and thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1; ). The patient was diagnosed with a metastatic lung adenocarcinoma (cT4N2M1, stage IV).
The patient immediately received one cycle of pemetrexed disodium (500 mg/m2) plus carboplatin (AUC 5) after diagnosis while waiting for the results of next-generation sequencing (NGS). Molecular analysis of pleural fluid by NGS based on a nine-gene panel was performed and showed the common EGFR exon 19 mutation (p.E746_A750del). The patient then received continuous oral icotinib (125 mg tid). After 1 month, CT showed a partial response (PR; ). The clinical and morphological response was confirmed after 6 months since icotinib treatment. The patient continued icotinib beyond slow progression after 17 months of icotinib. The tumor continued to grow slowly over 3 months , and a lung biopsy was obtained. The lung biopsy showed enteric differentiation components, which exceeded 50% . Unfortunately, cell block at diagnosis was not available for further examination. Abdominal CT and colonoscopy examination revealed no evidence of gastrointestinal disease. Immunohistochemical (IHC) assays showed that the tumor was positive for TTF-1, NapsinA, CK7, and CDX2 and negative for programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1; SP263 antibody), resulting in a diagnosis of an intestinal-type adenocarcinoma of the lung. IHC analysis for DNA mismatch repair proteins (MLH1, PMS2, MSH2, MSH6) revealed that the patient had proficient DNA mismatch repair (pMMR) positive for all microsatellite markers . To identify actionable mutations, the tumor biopsy specimen was sequenced by capture-based next-generation DNA sequencing with a panel containing 1,021 cancer-related genes [ Beijing Geneplus Technology Co., Ltd.]. The mean effective depth of coverage of the sequence was 800×. A total of 35 somatic mutations were identified, including EGFR E19del, an acquired EGFR T790M mutation, and MLH1 (c.332C>T, p.A111V mutation) with the highest variant allele fraction (VAF) of 45.2%, MSI-H, and high tumor mutation burden (TMB-H; 29.76 Muts/Mb) . No germline mutation in the coding region of MSH2, MSH6, MLH1, or PMS2 was identified. The patient received osimertinib (80 mg daily), which allowed an improvement for 3 months until reassessment CT revealed pulmonary progression , accompanied with increased hemoptysis and cough. From November 2020 to April 2021, he received two cycles of nedaplatin (180 mg)–pemetrexed (900 mg)–bevacizumab (600 mg) therapy, then four cycles of combination therapy with nedaplatin (180 mg) plus pemetrexed (900 mg), and one cycle of pemetrexed (900 mg) monotherapy. Pulmonary CT scans showed PR after first cycle of nedaplatin–pemetrexed–bevacizumab treatment and disease progression in May 2021 [progression-free survival (PFS) 6.5 months, ]. Then, the patient received camrelizumab (anti-PD1, 200 mg) monotherapy (PFS 1 month) and camrelizumab (200 mg, q 3 weeks) plus pemetrexed (900 mg) therapy . The patient’s condition worsened with multiple complications, including hemoptysis, pneumonia, and pulmonary fungal infections. He received supporting treatment and underwent another next-generation DNA sequencing test, which included 73 cancer-related genes (Beijing Geneplus Technology Co., Ltd.) with peripheral blood. The NGS results of plasma circulating tumor DNA showed loss of the T790M mutation with sustained presence of the EGFR exon 19 mutation (4.6% abundance, ). The patient started to receive gefitinib (250 mg/day) and everolimus (10 mg/day) therapy. He died 2 months later and had an overall survival of 30 months.
Descriptions of adjuvant therapies or systemic therapies are available in 34 PEAC patients derived from the literature and the case report reported above. The treatment regimens are summarized in (–). Two cases with early-stage diseases received adjuvant chemotherapy with a regimen of unspecified drugs. As for patients with advanced disease, 22/34 received lung cancer-oriented chemotherapy, 2/34 received immunotherapy plus platinum-containing chemotherapy, 1/34 received icotinib without EGFR mutation and then nivolumab monotherapy, and 6/34 patients received colorectal cancer-oriented chemotherapy.