A 40-year-old Pakistani Asian woman was admitted to the medical unit of Khyber Teaching Hospital, Peshawar, Pakistan in April 2016 for the diagnostic workup of ascites and massive splenomegaly with pancytopenia. Her retrospective history revealed that she had an episode of hematemesis 10 years previously, for which she had an upper gastrointestinal (GI) endoscopy. The endoscopy showed esophageal varices. However, after her endoscopy, she lost contact with the hospital and was not seen again. During that time interval, she admitted to having on/off upper abdominal pain.
During her current visit to our hospital, she reported melena, weight loss, mild-moderate epigastric pain, anorexia, and worsening ascites. She denied any bleeding from any other orifice, menstrual irregularities, altered bowel habits, and chest or urinary symptoms. Her family history was significant for pulmonary tuberculosis. However, she denied any fever or cough.
On examination, her vital signs were within normal limits. She was lean looking, anemic, and mildly icteric. She did not have spider nevus, palmar erythema, leukonychia, palpable lymph nodes, purpura, or any bony tenderness. However, she had tense ascites and massive splenomegaly but her liver span was normal. The rest of her general physical and systemic examination was unremarkable.
Her full blood count revealed: hemoglobin (Hb) 9.5 gm/dl, white blood cell (WBC) 4000/mm3, platelets 70,000/mm3 and reticulocyte count of 2.4 %. Her bone marrow examination was consistent with features of hypersplenism/peripheral destruction and reduced iron stores. An ultrasound of her abdomen and pelvis was notable for ascites, enlarged spleen measuring 22 cm with multiple splenic infarcts, dilated portal vein, and a large aneurysm in her splenic artery. Her liver parenchyma and its margins, and her hepatic veins, kidneys, gall bladder, pancreas, and pelvic organs were all reported to be normal. An ascitic fluid analysis revealed hemorrhagic and exudative fluid with negative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for Mycobacterium tuberculosis. An ultrasound elastography (FibroScan) of her liver showed early liver fibrosis; however, her liver function tests were normal and her autoimmune profile for liver diseases such as primary biliary cirrhosis, primary sclerosing cholangitis, and autoimmune hepatitis was negative. She did not have any serological evidence of chronic hepatitis B or C. Other investigations such as erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), anti-nuclear factor (ANF), Coombs test, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), blood sugar, lipid profile, and electrolytes were normal.
A repeat upper GI endoscopy was notable for three columns of large esophageal and a bunch of fundal varices, which were band ligated under endoscopic guidance. Both computed tomography (CT) of her abdomen and pelvis followed by CT angiography of her abdominal vessels showed a giant saccular splenic artery mid segment aneurysm measuring 12.2×9.4 cm with peripheral mural thrombosis and calcification, a smaller splenic artery distal segment aneurysm, and gross splenomegaly with infarcts. Other findings included another aneurysm in her portal vein at the level of bifurcation in the porta hepatis measuring 3.4×2.6 cm and two small hepatic hemangiomas in the hepatic segments eight and five measuring 1.2 cm and 1.6 cm respectively. She was thus diagnosed as having a giant splenic artery aneurysm and a smaller portal vein aneurysm leading to non-cirrhotic portal hypertension, splenomegaly, and hypersplenism.
She was taken to our vascular team and had a laparotomy. Elective aneurysm resection with concomitant splenectomy was performed using an upper median laparotomy and direct approach through the bursa omentalis . The operative findings included a giant SAA in the mid-distal segments with a lot of adhesions in the surrounding areas, omental thickening, and a pressure effect on her portal and splenic veins leading to extrahepatic portal vein obstruction and resultant portal hypertension. The SAA, which was heavily calcified and embedded in her pancreatic tissue, had evidence of intramural hematoma and perianeurysmal blood leakage . The size of the aneurysm and active bleeding from the aneurysmal sac distorted and obscured local anatomy, precluding selective ligation of her proximal splenic artery and making supraceliac aortic clamping before opening of the aneurysmal sac necessary.
Her portal vein aneurysmal dilatation was assumed to be secondary to the pressure effect caused by the SAA and was left unattended. During the operation she developed shock due to massive intraoperative bleeding and received approximately 3410 mL (6 pints) of packed cells and inotropic support. She was moved to our surgical Intensive Care Unit (ICU) where she had an uneventful recovery. Histopathology of the excised SAA revealed signs of medial necrosis.
She was reviewed 2 months after the operation. On her first follow-up visit in July 2016, she was generally in good health. She reported symptomatic improvement. Her ascites had subsided and her full blood count had returned to normal. A repeat CT angiography showed a remarkable reduction in the size of portal vein aneurysmal dilatation. Her portal vein aneurysm had regressed remarkably, from a size of 3.4×2.6 cm before splenectomy to a size of 1.3×1.1 cm after splenectomy. We will review her again after 6 months. Duplex ultrasound and/or CT angiography will be used to monitor her in general and her portal vein aneurysmal dilatation in particular.