A 62-year-old woman (height 163 cm, weight 59 kg, BMI 22 kg/m2) with no previous medical history or history of medications was scheduled to undergo hysterectomy, total cystectomy, and ileal conduit surgery for bladder cancer. The patient was managed by epidural anesthesia (Th12/L1) and general anesthesia. Just after massive intraoperative bleeding, 1500 mL of colloid fluid, 8 units of red blood cells (RBCs) and 6 units of fresh frozen plasma (FFP) were administered. The total amount of bleeding was 3640 mL. After the surgery, she woke up smoothly, and extubation was performed in the operating room. She was then admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU). During her stay in the ICU, 2 more units of RBCs were provided. ICU staff noted that pain control by epidural anesthesia was sufficient, but she complained of nausea once. She was discharged from the ICU on postoperative day 1 (POD 1), and urologists started to manage her on their own ward . She did not receive antithrombotic therapy for prevention of venous thrombosis postoperatively.
On POD 4, she complained of severe abdominal pain (numerical rating scale (NRS) score: 10/10) 40 min after removal of the epidural catheter. She was unable to walk or eat despite pain relief provided by intravenous infusion of acetaminophen and NSAIDs. On POD 12, computed tomography (CT) showed a hematoma extending from inside the rectus muscle to subcutaneous tissue, and the surgeon started to administer tramadol (50 mg/day). On POD 16, CT showed that the size of the RSH was unchanged , and the NRS score was high (resting: 2/10, moving: 10/10). The anesthesiologists were consulted regarding pain management. On POD 17, a rectus sheath catheter was placed under ultrasound guidance. A high-frequency linear probe was placed transversely with the rectus muscle immediately lateral to the umbilicus. An 18-G Tuohy needle was inserted in-plane to the US transducer and advanced until the tip had reached the posterior rectus sheath. Then, 20 mL of 0.375% ropivacaine were injected, and the catheter was passed through the needle to 5 cm within the rectus sheath. A total of 150 mL of analgesics (146 mL of 0.2% ropivacaine and 4 mL of fentanyl at 200 μg) were continuously administered at a rate of 4 mL/h. The NRS score decreased immediately just after ropivacaine injection (resting 0/10, moving 2 or 3/10), and she was able to walk and eat. She had no further need for oral or intravenous analgesics after the block procedure. After removing the catheter on POD 28, she had no complaints of abdominal pain and was discharged from the hospital without catheter site infection.