A 13-year-old Inuit girl (60 kg) presented to a remote nursing station in Arctic Canada. She had admitted to suicidal ideation and overdose, but was unable to disclose the time of ingestion or exposure. Family suspected that she had ingested clonidine and methylphenidate, thought to be the only medications accessible at home. She was otherwise healthy and had no prescribed medications. She had no known drug allergies and did not use alcohol, or any illicit substances.
On arrival to the nursing station, she was lethargic but rousable and followed commands. Her vital signs were stable, and she had a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 10. There was no evidence of meningismus or focal neurological deficits, and both cardiopulmonary and abdominal examinations were unremarkable.
Due to resource limitations, initial investigations were limited to point of care testing which included venous blood gas, electrolytes, glucose, creatinine, complete blood count and INR (international normalized ratio) (see Table ). Results were notable for an elevated creatinine (2.32 mg/dL), elevated INR (5.0) and low serum bicarbonate (17 mmol/L). Alcohol, acetaminophen, salicylate level and chemistries including transaminase levels and lactate were not available.
Two hours after her arrival, the nurses requested a transfer to the closest acute care hospital which was 2600 km away. While awaiting the transport team, she deteriorated clinically, becoming hypotensive (blood pressure 85/50) and neurologically unresponsive. Repeat neurologic assessment at 24 h after arrival had significantly worsened revealing nonreactive, dilated (6 mm) pupils and decerebrate posturing to pain. Available point-of-care laboratory testing was repeated revealing an INR was 5.4. An advanced care transport team (physician and respiratory therapist) arrived 28 h after presentation to the nursing station. Upon their arrival, they established an advanced airway and given the concern for increased intracranial pressure (ICP) based on the clinical picture, mannitol (500 mg/kg), phenytoin and ceftriaxone were administered. She received empiric treatment with vitamin K 10 mg IV (intravenous) for the elevated INR.
In discussions with the regional poison centre, the elevated INR and creatinine following overdose were suspicious for unrecognized acetaminophen toxicity. Aproximately 28 h after the patient’s initial presentation, N-acetylcysteine (NAC) was started empirically at a 140 mg/kg IV loading dose and continued at 70 mg/kg IV every 4 h.
The patient arrived at the pediatric tertiary care hospital 38 h after her initial presentation. Her neurologic examination revealed a GCS of 3 with pupils fixed and dilated 5 mm bilaterally, as well as intermittent posturing. Cough and gag reflexes were present. Laboratory investigations corroborated the suspected diagnosis of acetaminophen-induced acute liver failure. A CT (computed tomography) brain scan showed diffuse edema with effacement of sulci and basal cisterns, and uncal herniation . Given these findings, she was transferred to a pediatric quaternary care center for evaluation for liver transplantation where she was assessed by neurology, neurosurgery and the liver transplant team. At 60 h post-initial presentation, her neurologic exam demonstrated fixed, dilated and non-reactive pupils, with flaccid tone in the upper extremities and increased tone in lower extremities, but without spasticity or clonus. She had a negative vestibulo-ocular reflex (no eye movement with “doll’s eyes” maneuver), absent gag and cough reflexes, but intact corneal reflexes. An EEG (electroencephalogram) showed continuous generalized slowing consistent with severe metabolic encephalopathy. Additional investigations to rule out alternative etiologies for acute liver failure included viral serologies, autoimmune and metabolic markers, and liver ultrasound, none of which revealed an alternative diagnosis. Given her poor neurologic prognosis, she was deemed ineligible for liver transplant and the withdrawal of life sustaining therapies was recommended.
The family agreed and requested that other family members be present prior to removal of life-sustaining therapy. Given the family’s request to wait a few days until others could arrive, she remained on full ventilatory support and continued to receive intensive care treatments, including NAC 70 mg/kg IV every 4 h until day 5, mannitol for neuroprotection (500 mg/kg IV), vitamin K (10 mg IV) and fresh frozen plasma (10 ml/kg) for coagulopathy. On day 4 her transaminases stabilized, and synthetic liver function studies improved. On Day 6, she spontaneously opened her eyes and lifted her fingers. She made continued neurologic improvements and 8 days post admission she was purposefully moving all extremities. With her remarkable clinical improvement, the care plan was changed from withdrawal of life sustaining treatments to full medical treatment. She was successfully extubated on day 11 following initial presentation and later continued recovery on the pediatric inpatient ward. She was discharged home 34 days following her initial presentation with a near complete neurologic recovery, save for a right third and sixth cranial nerve palsy.