Introduction and patient information: An 11-year-old girl was brought to pediatric emergency for the assessment of fever with generalized tonic-clonic seizures and inability to walk. Her serological evaluation revealed hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia . Workup for fever was normal which subsided on antipyretics. Radiological examination of hip showed bilateral displaced femur neck fracture (, ).
Clinical findings, timeline, and diagnostic assessment: The diagnosis of pseudohyperparathyroidism was made and the patient started on oral calcitriol 0.25 mcg daily along with oral calcium. She was born of non-consanguineous marriage full-term normal pregnancy with no immediate neonatal problems. She had received adequate sun exposure with appropriate development (weight and height for age was within normal percentile range) and no signs of liver/renal disease with no dysmorphic features.
Biochemical investigations revealed normal complete blood count, Sr. Vitamin D3 levels, Sr. TSH, free thyroxine (Ft4), urinary calcium/creatinine ratio, liver and renal functions, and arterial blood gas. However, serum calcium was low, while phosphorus, alkaline phosphatase, and PTH levels were elevated, .
She was started on oral calcitriol 0.75 μg thrice daily and oral calcium, and after 3 weeks of therapy, her serum calcium levels had risen to 9.2 mg/dl, and serum phosphorus and alkaline phosphatase levels had fallen to 6.2 mg/dl and 238 IU/L, respectively. The level of PTH remained grossly elevated (240 ng/L).
Therapeutic interventions: The patient was managed with bilateral skin traction till normalization of biochemical profile. After correction of biochemical profile, fracture was managed with closed reduction and fixation with three partially threaded cancellous (PTCC) screws about 3 weeks after trauma (, )
On traction table under spinal and epidural anesthesia, both the fractures were reduced by closed reduction under fluoroscopic guidance and 3 mm × 6.5 mm partially threaded cannulated cancellous screws were inserted in inverted triangle fashion. Reduction was reconfirmed under C-arm.
Follow-up and outcomes: Postoperatively, hips were kept in abducted position with abduction bar. She was kept nil weight-bearing for 3 months. At latest 1-year follow-up, she was able to sit cross-legged and squat [, ].