A 63-year-old male with no significant past medical history presented for evaluation of a skin lesion on the lateral aspect of the right thigh existing for six
months . He denied any known trauma to the skin and believed that the lesion started as a pimple which he
subsequently popped and noted drainage. Over the next few months, he noticed ongoing intermittent drainage and lack of healing along with intermittent pruritus.
He was then referred to a dermatologist and underwent a skin biopsy with findings suggestive of cryptococcal infection .
The initial work-up indicated causes for possible immunodeficiency .
A chest radiograph was also performed followed up by computed tomography (CT) with significant findings .
Further fungal culture from the skin lesion grew cryptococcus neoformans on RemelTM Agar, and no susceptibility testing was performed.a Given image findings
and acetylcholine receptor antibodies, the patient underwent a CT-guided needle biopsy of the mediastinal mass .
The final pathology showed a tumor consisting of a mixed epithelial and lymphoid neoplasm with a dense hyalinized fibrous capsule with morphologic features supporting a thymoma type B3 over a thymic carcinoma. After a full informed consent discussion, the patient elected to undergo the oncology recommended chemotherapy with cisplatin, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide for four cycles followed by attempted resection. Only partial resection was possible with further pathology showing thymic carcinoma and background thymoma B3. He was then lost to follow-up due to the coronavirus pandemic for six months, but returned, eventually completing radiation with adjuvant chemotherapy with carboplatin and paclitaxel.
The patient tolerated treatment well. He is currently being monitored off cancer therapy with periodic surveillance imaging. The cutaneous cryptococcosis was treated with oral fluconazole 400 mg daily with a resolution of the lesion after four weeks. He continued suppressive therapy for the duration of chemotherapy. The patient has had no recurrence of cutaneous cryptococcosis.