A 31 year-old-woman who had a past history of left oophorectomy was admitted to our hospital with marked hirsutism and menstrual disorder as well as significant hypertension.
Three years and six months before the admission, the patient had irregular menses and excess hair growth on her face, neck, chest, abdomen and thighs. Her face became round. Her skin became thin and bruised easily. Then she turned to a local clinic where physical examination showed that she had a blood pressure of 160/120 mmHg. Meanwhile, gynecologic ultrasonography demonstrated a 25 × 20 × 15 cm left ovarian mass. Routine laboratory workup revealed the following: leukocytosis (11.2 × 109/L) with neutrophilia (76.6%), hypokalemia (3.3 mmol/L) and elevated fasting glucose (6.4 mmol/L). Hormonal assays were not conducted. She received left oophorectomy and pathology result was luteinized thecoma of the ovary with focal coagulative necrosis and calcification. Since the patient desired future fertility strongly, she refused total abdominal hysterectomy with contralateral oophorectomy. Postoperatively, the patient’s symptoms of hirsutism and round face were resolved. Her menstrual period and blood pressure returned to normal. Two year later, she gave a natural childbirth and had no difficulty in breast-feeding.
Four months prior to admission, the patient had hirsutism and menstrual disorder again. Simultaneously, she noted a left abdominal mass. From then on, she found her face became round gradually. Her blood pressure went up to 180/110 mmHg, resulting in blurred vision. Her body weight dropped by 3 Kg druing four months while her height did not change. A mass (11 × 8.1 × 5.6 cm) beside abdominal aorta was detected by ultrasound. Lab tests showed her tumor markers (serum Ca-125, Ca19-9, Ca153, CEA and AFP) and 24-hrs urinary VMA were within normal limits. Antihypertensive drug Doxazosin 4 mg/d was given, but her hypertension was not well controlled. For further diagnosis and treatment, the patient was admitted to our hospital.
During physical examination her blood pressure was 195/130 mmHg. She was 147 cm tall and weighed 54 kg (body mass index 25.0). She had hirsutism and her skin was thin with scattered ecchymosis. She had a round and plethoric face, central adiposity, buffalo hump and supraclavicular fat pads. A mass of 7 × 5 cm could be palpated in the left mid-abdomen. There were no purple striae and hyperpigmentation.
Her baseline labs showed normal WBC count (6.66 × 109/L) with neutrophilia (74.7%), hypokalemia (3.11 mmol/L), impaired glucose tolerance (fasting glucose 6.7 mmol/L, 2-hrs postprandial glucose 10.6 mmol/L) and alkalosis (pH 7.54, base excess 9.0 mmol/L). Urine potassium level was within the normal range (50 mmol/24 hr, reference range 25–100) but was relatively high given her hypokalemia. An endocrinological evaluation revealed elevated morning plasma cortisol (31 μg/dl, ref. range 5–25), and overnight dexamethasone (1 mg) failed to suppress plasma level of cortisol. Urinary free cortisol was extremely high (1024.8 μg/24 hr, ref. range 30–110) and plasma ACTH was relatively low (16 pg/ml, ref. range 0–46). In addition, her testosterone level rose to 98 ng/dL (ref. range 14–76) with normal LH, FSH, prolactin and estradiol. Pelvic CT scan showed no recurrent or residual mass in the left adnexa location and the right ovary and the uterus were of normal appearance . However, abdominal CT scan demonstrated two masses beside abdominal aorta, multiple intra-hepatic hypodense nodules, and retroperitoneal lymph nodes enlargement , all enhanced with contrast media . These were compatible with metastatic disease. At the same time, mild adrenal atrophy without ascites was detected in her CT scan. Her previous ovarian tumor sections were re-examined and the pathology result was corrected to steroid cell tumor, NOS (cpinephroma) associated with active cell growth and necrosis . The patient was strongly interested in tumor-reductive surgery. During a pre-surgical work-up, the patient had positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) which revealed abnormally hypermetabolism in the retroperitoneal masses and nodes suggesting metastatic lesions . Therefore, she underwent excisions of abdominal paraaortic neoplasms and multiple intra-hepatic nodules as well as retroperitoneal enlarged lymph nodes. The cut surface of the neoplasms showed a solid mass including hemorrhagic and necrotic contents with calcific deposits. The resected specimens showed very similar appearances of histopathology to the previous ovarian tumor. Neoplastic cells were calretinin, CD99, α-inhibin positive, cytokeratin (CK), vimentin weak positive and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) negative by immunohistochemical staining. These findings were consistent with the diagnosis of malignant steroid cell tumor (NOS) with late intra-abdominal metastasis.
By the 4th postoperative day, her morning plasma cortisol fell to 6 μg/dl while plasma ACTH was up to 41.7 pg/ml. Meanwhile, her plasma testosterone fell to 50 ng/dl and urinary free cortisol fell to less than 36 μg/24 hr . During postoperative follow-up (four months after surgery), she showed regression of Cushing syndrome and regained normal menses and blood pressure. Furthermore, her hirsutism disappeared completely. Nevertheless, one year after surgery, metastatic tumors appeared again in the abdominal cavity. Although the patient was given radiotherapy at once, she died of tumor metastatic recurrence sixteen months after surgery.