A 51-year-old Iranian woman presented with 2-month history of progressive unremitting back pain, exacerbated at night, superimposed on a creeping paraparesis. She also suffered from episodes of urinary retention for which she had undergone thorough clinical examination and a series of investigation including neuroimaging, cerebrospinal fluid analysis and also serologic surveys to find the aetiology. MR imaging of the brain and spine revealed one non-enhancing cystic lesion without surrounding enhancement located within the left cerebral hemisphere and another one at the level of conus medullaris in the spine . No infectious aetiology had been found despite performing detailed investigation to detect any sign of cysticercosis, brucellosis and/or HTLV infection. The tissue biopsy of the involved area was not obtained as she had not consented to it. An extremely painful induration with indistinct border was found over the dorsum of the left hand. X-Ray imaging showed osteolysis of the second metacarpal bone . The other sites of body skeleton were normal on examination despite her complaint about the agonizing pain over most parts of her body. 99 m Tc-DTPA revealed increased uptake of radiotracer in axial skeleton and left hand area and, also a photon-deficient area adjacent to the lower pole of the left kidney suggestive of a space occupying lesion originating from that kidney .
Complex cystic renal mass lesion was revealed on ultrasonography which was found to be hypervascular on contrast-enhanced CT scan. The result of imaging investigations was compatible with renal cell carcinoma diagnosis, till otherwise proved. In the meantime, the patient was hospitalized for nutritional supplementation and other supportive care. Radical nephrectomy was done afterwards and the histology confirmed renal cell carcinoma with sarcomatous component. Early in postoperative period she developed .thromboses in proximal veins of left lower extremity for which she received enoxaparin 60 mg twice daily subcutaneousely. She also had severe hypercalcemia probably due to paraneoplastic effect of the tumour producing PTHrP, and widespread bony metastases as the intact PTH assay was undetectable. She received appropriate treatment for her hypercalcemia. The patient and her family refused to accept further treatment when they were informed regarding the natural course and poor prognosis of the illness and the limitations of the currently available treatment, and she was lost for further follow up.