On September 2014, a 56-year-old immunocompetent French Caucasian man was admitted into the Emergency Department for 3-week history of headache, acute decrease of psychomotor performance and fever at 40 °C. In his medical past-history, he underwent a surgical patch closure of atrial septal defects for patent foramen ovale at 9 years old and dental care at 5 months before his admission. Laboratory investigations revealed an elevated leukocyte count at 12.6 × 109/L with an elevated neutrophil count at 8.4 × 109/L, a normal platelet count at 180 × 109/L, an elevated C reactive protein rate at 97 mg/L and negative blood culture. A brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a right occipital cerebral abscess (27 × 36 × 43 mm, hyper intense T2) .
He underwent surgical brain abscess drainage. Bacterial cultures of surgical deep samples of brain abscess were positive for Streptococcus intermedius and Aggregatibacter aphrophilus as identified by the matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time of flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry and confirmed with molecular identification (16 s gene sequencing). The patient was treated first with an empiric antibiotherapy with cefotaxim 4 g every 8 h associated with metronidazole 500 mg every 8 h and cotrimoxazole 800/160 mg every 8 h. One week later, the antibiotic treatment was modified for ceftriaxone 2 g/day associated with metronidazole 500 mg every 8 h and rifampicin 300 mg every 8 h.
A transthoracic echocardiographic examination and a body scan revealed no abnormality. A transesophageal echocardiography showed a high right left shunt suggestive of atrial septal patch dehiscence without direct sign of. An 18F-FDG-PET/CT showed an intense linear hypermetabolism opposite the interauricular septum compatible with an endocarditis on the intracardiac device . Transesophageal echocardiography after 6 weeks of antibiotic treatment showed a filamentous image opposite the mitral valve and no vegetation image was found. A second 18F-FDG-PET/CT kept showing hypermetabolism on the surgical patch closure of atrial septal defects. The patient was treated by antibiotics for 8 weeks.
At the end of antibiotic treatment transthoracic echocardiographic examination showed an exclusive right left shunt, confirming dehiscence of the surgical patch closure of atrial septal defects. Surgical removal of surgical patch closure of atrial septal defects was necessary on April 2015 with replacement by a bovine pericardial patch. No antibiotics were given during explantation. Explanted atrial surgical patch closure of atrial septal defects looked swollen and calcified with negative bacterial cultures. The patient recovered without further complication. His hemiparesis fully disappeared; he only kept discrete amnesic and attentional failures. He presents a sequelae of attentional and memory deficits at 1 year of follow-up.