An 86-year-old Caucasian female presented with presyncope. She had type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and atrial fibrillation (AF). Her routine medications were ramipril 2.5 mg once daily (OD), bisoprolol 1.25 mg OD, metformin 500 mg twice daily (BD), and apixaban 2.5 mg BD. Her blood pressure was 180/97 mmHg with a bradycardia of 32 beats per minute (bpm). The rest of her cardiac and systemic physical examination was unremarkable. Electrocardiograph (ECG) revealed complete heart block alternating with slow AF and ectopics with a variable heart rate between 29 and 33 bpm. Her investigations including thyroid functions and electrolytes were normal. She was admitted to the Coronary Care Unit (CCU) with a plan for in patient PM insertion. Her preliminary transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed a mildly dilated LV with a normal ejection fraction.
She underwent a single-chamber VVI PM insertion. Post pacemaker chest X-ray and pacing checks were normal. On the same day, the patient felt unwell and dizzy but she attributed it to her anxiousness. On the subsequent day, she had an episode of collapse in the CCU. Interrogation of the PM revealed runs of polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (VT) . The initial ventricular rate, which was set for 35–40 bpm was increased to 90 bpm, to counter the rate-related occurrence of polymorphic VT. She remained well thereafter and was discharged the following day.
Five days post discharge, she presented again acutely unwell, with new onset of worsening breathlessness. Her clinical examination revealed a heart rate of 90 bpm with a blood pressure of 165/90 mmHg and a respiratory rate of 43 per minute with mild pedal edema. Auscultation of her lungs revealed bilateral mid to lower zone crackles and crepitation’s favoring pulmonary edema. The rest of her systemic examination was normal. Her on air oxygen saturation was 85%. Her high-sensitivity troponin was elevated at 90.7 ng/L. The rest of her investigations were normal. Her ECG showed a pacing rhythm and her chest X-ray demonstrated pulmonary edema, pleural effusion, and cardiomegaly. As the pacing lead position was doubtful a noncontrast ECG gated computed tomography (CT) chest was done, which ruled out perforation and confirmed the PM lead position . Her PM interrogation showed 100% ventricular pacing with normal parameters and no arrhythmias. Her TTE revealed a severely impaired LV function with akinetic apex and apical ballooning. She underwent a coronary angiogram, which demonstrated normal epicardial vessels. TTE with contrast enhancement confirmed the classical features keeping in with Takotsubo cardiomyopathy (Additional file ).
She was offloaded with intravenous furosemide and she required oxygen at 3 L/minute to maintain her saturation. Following stabilization she was initiated on heart failure medication with sacubitril/valsartan 24/26 mg BD, eplerenone 12.5 mg OD, bisoprolol 1.25 mg OD, bumetanide 1 mg OD, and her apixaban 2.5 mg BD was continued. She was discharged on day 7 with a planned follow-up with the heart failure team and the pacing team. A repeat TTE 1 month later revealed improved cardiac functionality with with an ejection fraction (EF) of 45%. There was also resolution of the apical ballooning and akinesis noted previously (Additional file ).