The case involves a 62-year-old woman found to be positive for fecal occult blood by medical examination. An endoscopy by her previous doctor showed a tumor in the ascending colon, and the biopsy showed poorly differentiated cancer. The patient was referred to our institution for surgery. Her blood test results were as follows: carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), 76.1 ng/mL (normal range < 5.0 ng/mL) and carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19-9, 192 U/mL (normal range < 37 U/mL). A colonoscopy showed a semicircular type 3 tumor contralateral to the Bauhin valve in the ascending colon . A biopsy supported a diagnosis of poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma or NEC. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed wall thickening with contrast effect in the ascending colon, enlargement of the peripheral lymph nodes and a uterine leiomyoma. On an 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron-emission tomography (FDG-PET) scan, we observed FDG uptake at the lesion in the wall of the ascending colon (standardized uptake value[SUV]max 22.9), peripheral lymph nodes (SUVmax 23.8), peritoneum of the left upper abdomen (SUVmax 13.4), and pelvic floor on the left dorsal side (SUVmax 5.2) . From these results, the tumor was preoperatively diagnosed as an ascending colon malignant neoplasm with peritoneal dissemination. The ileocecal resection of the specimen was performed to confirm the diagnosis. At the time of the operation, numerous intra-abdominal nodules were observed, indicating peritoneal dissemination , although a pathological diagnosis was not performed.
Postoperative pathological findings showed no adenoma or adenocarcinoma component in the tumor of the ascending colon. Immunohistochemical analysis was performed, and the results were as follows: keratin-positive, chromogranin-negative, synaptophysin-positive, CD56-positive, alcian blue/periodic acid Schiff-negative, and MIB-1 index of 57% . Based on these results, we ultimately diagnosed the patient with LCNEC. She had a good postoperative course and was discharged from the hospital 10 days after surgery.
Because of the diagnosis of peritoneal dissemination, the patient requested to undergo a total peritoneal resection at another hospital. After one course of chemotherapy (irinotecan plus cisplatin), FDG-PET re-examination showed FDG uptake in the left inguinal lymph node. She underwent a total peritoneal resection, uterine adnexal resection, removal of the left inguinal lymph node, and hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (mitomycin C). Postoperative pathological examination revealed that the peritoneal nodules diagnosed as leiomyoma without any malignant findings, with spindle-shaped cell intermingling with eosinophilic spore bodies. The left inguinal lymph node was diagnosed with a metastatic tumor from LCNEC. In summary, the final diagnosis was LCNEC in the ascending colon with inguinal lymph node metastasis accompanied by DPL. Following two courses of irinotecan plus cisplatin as postoperative chemotherapy, she has received capecitabine monotherapy since March 2019. As of 18 months post-primary surgery and 15 months post-peritonectomy she was free of apparent recurrence or metastatic findings.