A 65 year-old woman was injured when an automobile pushed her against a concrete wall. Vital signs were normal but a pelvic fracture was suspected because of severe pain in the lumbar region and she was brought to the critical care center.
Her consciousness was clear and hemodynamics stable. Severe pressure pain was present on the anterior surface of the pubic bone and near the right sacrum. Macroscopic hematuria was found when a urethral catheter was inserted. A contrast enhanced CT (CECT) was performed on admission but the CT did not capture contrast leakage from the bladder. However, a pelvic X-ray post CT showed contrast leakage in the extraperitoneal space at the anterior of the bladder. An extraperitoneal bladder rupture was diagnosed. The open-book type pelvic fracture was treated with Hoffman's external fixation. Macroscopic hematuria was gradually improved and disappeared on day2.
On day 4, retrograde cystography and CT cystography were performed. An urinoma was found to extend from the anterior surface of the pubic bone to the medial side of the left thigh. In a sagittal reconstruction CT image, a leakage site of the contrast medium was observed at the lower anterior surface of the bladder. The base of the bladder had descended to the inferior margin of the pubic symphysis. The patient's general condition was very good and no symptoms of infections were found. Urine drainage through a urethral catheter was good. Therefore, we though that this urinoma was spontaneously discharged through a urethral catheter, and the bladder laceration to extraperitoneum was spontaneously healed. Non-surgical management was selected. CT cystography were performed on day 21. As shown in Fig. , the urinoma had become enlarged. The base of the bladder had descended to lower than the CT on day 4. Surgery was performed.
A midline incision of the lower abdomen was made and the incision was extended through a front of the pubic symphysis to the left thigh. Surgical findings revealed that the bladder was not anchored because of severe lacerations in the urogenital diaphragm, and had a laceration of about 3 cm in the anterior surface of the bladder neck. The findings also showed a partial laceration of the left femoral adductor muscle at the pubic insertion and an urinoma cavity extending from the anterior surface of the pubic bone to the left thigh. The wall of the urinoma consisted of membranous tissue with a flat smooth surface. The laceration of the bladder was closed by sutures. The membranous tissue of the urinoma wall was partially resected and the remaining membranous tissue was extensively coagulated. Four suction drains were placed and the urinoma cavity was closed. The retropubic suspension procedure was also performed to prevent postoperative urinary incontinence. Sutures were placed on either side of the bladder neck, taking bites through the paravesical fascia and anterior vaginal wall. The most distal suture is placed at the level of the bladder neck. Each suture was then passed into an appropriate site in the cartilaginous portion of the symphysis.
Pathological findings of the urinoma wall showed histology with severe hyperplasia of collagen fiber and fibroblasts.
The postoperative course was uneventful. When cystography was performed on postoperative day 16, no leakage of the contrast medium was found. The urethral drain was removed 3 weeks postoperatively and the Hoffman's external fixation was removed on day 55. Urgent incontinence was seen one time just after the catheter removal and urinary incontinence was not seen thereafter. She was discharged on foot on day 65. Neurogenic bladder did not occur during follow-up period.