A 48-year-old man presented to our hospital with the chief complaint of sudden lower abdominal pain. He had a history of right forearm artery rupture and was diagnosed with vEDS by genetic testing at the age of 43 years, which revealed missense variants in COL3A1. The patient was followed up regularly at our hospital.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen revealed ascites and free air, particularly around the sigmoid colon. These findings suggested a sigmoid colon perforation . Although surgery for a patient with EDS carries the risk of fatal complications, emergency surgery was performed on the same day because the patient developed peritonitis. Contaminated ascetic fluid was observed in the abdominal cavity when the abdomen was opened through a lower abdominal midline incision. Part of the wall of the sigmoid colon was thinned, and a perforation was observed in this area . The perforated area was covered by the greater omentum or mesenteric fat. We resected a part of the sigmoid colon and constructed a colostomy using the remnant sigmoid colon. We checked the remaining colon by inspection and palpation, and found several areas of wall weakening. Because these areas were considered to be at risk of future perforations, we reinforced them with seromuscular layer sutures. A drain was placed after washing the abdominal cavity with 10 L of saline. The operative time was 208 min, and the intraoperative blood loss was 830 ml. The tissue was very fragile and even slight traction could cause tissue damage and hemorrhage; therefore, surgery was performed cautiously. The specimen after sigmoid colon resection showed a 2-cm-sized depression around the perforation . Histopathological findings showed an abscess and exudate in the serosa of the perforation and thinning of the intrinsic muscular layer in the depressed area .
The patient was doing well postoperatively. However, on the ninth postoperative day, the patient developed sudden abdominal pain with cold sweats and decreased blood pressure. Enhanced CT revealed intra-abdominal hemorrhage due to the rupture of a dissecting aneurysm in the splenic artery , which was distant from the surgical site. Preoperative CT showed no splenic artery aneurysm. Rupture was not considered to be caused by direct surgical invasion. After an immediate consultation with an interventional radiologist, urgent transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) was performed. First, the splenic artery was embolized . However, during catheterization, the arterial dissection spread to the common hepatic artery, root of the proper hepatic artery, and gastroduodenal artery, owing to the fragility of the arterial wall . Although the complications associated with extensive embolization were a concern, embolization of these arteries was necessary to save the patient’s life . After embolization, angiography showed that the left hepatic blood flow was maintained from the inferior phrenic artery , and the right hepatic inflow was maintained from the superior mesenteric artery via the peribiliary vascular plexus in the hilar area . After TAE, the patient had no liver dysfunction or ischemia of the gastrointestinal tract, and was discharged from the hospital on the 19th postoperative day.