A 57-year-old man presented to our hospital complaining of bowel movements accompanied by perineal pain. Although his PSA level was 0.657 ng/mL, a digital rectal examination showed that the prostate was as stone hard. T2-weighted low-signal and diffusion-weighted high-signal MRI showed a mass in the right lobe of the prostate. Prostate needle biopsy suspected BCC. Immunohistochemical staining was negative for PSA, chromogranin A, synaptophysin, and uroplakin, but positive for p63, bcl-2, and Ki67 (>20%). CT and fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography/MRI suspected right seminal vesicle invasion; however, no metastasis was observed . Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with BCC of the prostate (cT3bN0M0) and was scheduled to undergo radical prostatectomy. The final pathological diagnosis was BCC of the prostate, with extraprostatic extension, positive resection margins, lymphatic and venous invasion, and perineural invasion. Right internal iliac lymph node metastasis was pathologically observed. Immunohistochemical staining was negative for PSA, but positive for p63, bcl-2, and Ki67 (>20%).
Two months after surgery, CT showed local recurrence on the dorsal pubis, sacral bone metastasis, and left obturator nerve lymph node metastasis . Since no effective treatment for BCC of the prostate has been reported, we performed the OncoGuide™ NCC Oncopanel System, a genomic profiling test by Japan's national cancer center, to search for targets of treatment. Accordingly, our findings revealed SMARCB1 (SWI/SNF related, matrix associated, actin dependent regulator of chromatin, subfamily b, member 1) deletion, for which no recommended treatment has been established. Therefore, we decided to use radiotherapy (66 Gy to the entire pelvis) to treat local recurrence and metastatic lesions, which reduced the size of these lesions . During the 8 months after radiotherapy, the patient showed no signs of disease progression.
Because a genomic profiling test revealed SMARCB1 deletion, we examined the protein and mRNA levels of SMARCB1 and GLI1 (GLI family zinc finger 1; a gene repressed by SMARCB1). RT-PCR was used to analyze samples from resected tissues during a prostatectomy. In this case, the tissues had lower SMARCB1 and higher GLI1 compared with prostate adenocarcinoma tissues in ISUP grade groups 1–5 . Furthermore, SMARCB1 and GLI1 were evaluated by immunohistochemical staining . In this case, SMARCB1 was negative and GLI1 was strongly positive when compared to prostate adenocarcinoma tissues in ISUP grade groups 1–5.