A 49-year-old Chinese man had symptoms of cough and hemoptysis for 2 mo.
A 49-year-old Chinese man presented to the hospital with 2 mo of cough and hemoptysis, but without fever or chest pain. Daily blood loss was estimated to be 20-30mL. During a visit to a different hospital on March 10, 2020, chest computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a mass and atelectasis in the right upper lobe . BALF was obtained by brochoscopy; however, the bacterial culture of BALF was negative. The patient was diagnosed with pulmonary infection and treated with oral cefixime capsules (0.2g every 12h) and azithromycin (500 mg/d) for 1 wk. However, there was no improvement and the patient was in a poor general status. He had dyspnea when walking hastily or going up stairs and had chest pain. Chest CT on April 23, 2020 showed aggravation of the original lesion, especially in the right upper lobe . He was admitted to our respiratory department for further evaluation on April 25, 2020.
The patient had no previous medical history, and no history of drug allergy.
The patient worked as a welder and lived with his wife and children. He had no history of cigarette smoking or alcohol abuse. There was no family history to note.
On admission, the patient was afebrile and vital signs were normal. Breath sounds were decreased in the right lung, and neurological examination was unremarkable.
The oxygenation index in blood gas analysis was 265 mmHg . Leukocytosis was 14.36 × 109/L, C-reactive protein was 117.50 mg/L, and procalcitonin was 0.126 ng/mL, and liver and kidney functions were normal. GeneXpert MTB/RIF, quantitative immunoglobulins, 1-3-β-D-glucan, galactomannan (GM), cryptococcal and deep sputum bacteriological culture antigen were all negative.
Positron emission tomography (PET)-CT was ordered on the suspicion of lung cancer. PET-CT showed that most of the mass lesions in the posterior segment of the right upper lobe had significantly increased glucose metabolism inhomogeneously with peripheral exudative changes, which were suspicious for infection on April 27, 2020 .
The patient was inhaled oxygen 4 L/min and treated empirically with simultaneous cefoperazone-tazobactam and teicoplanin for 7 d, but he continued to experience cough and hemoptysis with elevated C-reactive protein (109.92 mg/L) and procalcitonin (0.189 ng/mL). Meropenem and teicoplanin were then administered. In addition, bronchoscopy was performed to obtain specimens including BALF and lung tissue. Transbronchial biopsy of soft tissue of the right upper lung showed chronic inflammation with acute activity and fibrous tissue hyperplasia with focal necrosis. GeneXpert MTB/RIF, GM (1-3)-β-D-Glucan, fungi and acid-fast bacillus stains, and BALF culture for bacteria were negative. However, mNGS analysis of BALF detected N. asiatica and N. beijingensis. The patient developed a new symptom of headache at the same time. Cranial enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was ordered on the suspicion of intracranial Nocardia infection and it showed multiple lesions in the left occipital lobe, right cerebellar hemisphere and left frontal lobe on May 13, 2020 . Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) obtained by lumbar puncture identified no white or red blood cells, glucose 3.42 mmol/L and protein 0.54 g/L. The bacterial culture, cryptococcal antigen, virus DNA and exfoliative cell examination of CSF were all negative, as was NGS analysis of CSF .