We report the case of a 30-year-old woman previously diagnosed with a congenital supracoeliacal aortic stenosis. Twice in the last 7 years before presentation, she underwent percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) and aortic stenting with excellent clinical results. She was referred to our cardio-obstetric clinic due to a recent increase in SBP above 190 mmHg without treatment and plans to become pregnant.
She presented to us with complaints of leg paraesthesia that only occurred after sitting for long periods of time. She denied any claudication, abdominal angina, or other complaints.
Physical examination was remarkable for a body mass index of 33 kg/m2 and elevated BP in both arms (right arm 177/117 mmHg and left arm 180/121 mmHg). Four extremities BP measured in supine position revealed a maximal pressure gradient of 19 mmHg between the upper and lower limbs as well as pathological ankle–brachial indexes (ABI) bilaterally. The rest of the physical examination was unremarkable.
A 24-h ambulatory BP measurement (24h-ABPM) confirmed the presence of severe hypertension (mean 24-h SBP of 157 mmHg and DBP of 120 mmHg). Transthoracic echocardiography showed normal left ventricular (LV) function (LV ejection fraction: 64%), with concentric LV remodelling but still normal LV muscle mass (indexed LV muscle mass: 66.5 g/m) and normal left atrium size (left atrial volume index: 27 m/m2). Echo Doppler of the abdominal aorta and renal arteries showed a supracoeliacal flow acceleration (from 100 to 360 cm/s during systole) compatible with a high-grade stenosis with turbulent flow and reduced resistance indexes in the renal arteries (resistance index: 0.39 right and 0.40 left).
A computed tomographic (CT) angiography of the aorta was performed showing an aortic stent in a supracoeliacal position without evidence of in-stent thrombosis. However, the inner diameter of the aorta cranial to the stent was normal (15 mm) but became significantly reduced (7 mm) at the level of the stent corresponding to 79% of in-stent re-stenosis ( and ). After discussion with the vascular surgeon, a repeat PTA was performed. The BP gradient measured invasively between the descending aorta and the right arm showed a difference of 15 mmHg. The patient underwent in-stent re-stenting (BeGraft Aortic Stent 16 mm × 58 mm) with a residual gradient of 9 mmHg after the intervention .
Four extremities BP measurements after the intervention showed a reduction of the BPs and a normalization of the ABI bilaterally . A 24h-ABPM confirmed the reduction (mean 24-h SBP of 135 mmHg and DBP of 101 mmHg), but her BP profile remained significantly elevated with Grade 2 hypertension according to ESC/ESH 2018 guidelines. We started an antihypertensive treatment with Labetalol 200 mg b.i.d. with successful BP control (mean home BP values: 125/82 mmHg).