A 20-year-old male athlete who had been complaining of a dull achy pain in his right deltoid region sustained a displaced closed right humeral shaft fracture following a throw in a baseball game . He was seen at a local hospital after the injury and was placed in a coaptation splint. On initial examination, gross motor and sensation were intact. To rule out malignancy, an magnetic resonance imaging was obtained which did not demonstrate any pathological lesions. In an effort to speed recovery and maintain maximal function, he underwent ORIF. An anterolateral approach to the humerus was made, and the fracture was reduced and compressed using a large fragment plate and screw construct.
Six weeks following the surgery, the patient began to jog and lightly throw a baseball. He began light weight lifting and continued home PT to strengthen the elbow and shoulder. By 3months’ post-operative, the fracture had united. The patient returned to college baseball 6 months postoperatively. Eleven months following the fracture repair and 5months following return to baseball, the patient felt a “pop” with immediate pain in the posterolateral aspect of his right arm following a throw. Radiographs of the right humerus revealed two new fracture lines. A computed tomography scan confirmed anew spiral fracture of the midshaft of the humerus extending from the second proximal screw to the lag screw. The hardware remains intact, and there is no evidence of hardware failure or loosening . Vitamin D levels were obtained and were found to be low. The patient’s 25-OH Vitamin D level was found to be 24.3 ng/mL, while the reference range was 32.0–100.0 ng/mL. His serum calcium was within normal limits, at 9.5 ng/mL. In addition, a thyroid function panel was within normal limits. The thyroid panel was obtained, to rule out hyperthyroidism, as this can lead to secondary osteoporosis. The patient was, therefore, started on Vitamin D, given a one-time dose of 50,000U followed by 2000U daily. The patient was placed in a sling, for 1month, following refracture. The patient began physical therapy 3weeks following the refracture. Initial therapy consisted of numerous stretching activities in addition to using resistance bands for shoulder and elbow range of motion exercises. Throughout the recovery process, he attended therapy 3times a week. The patient had full shoulder and elbow range of motion at 4weeks’post-refracture. At 3months’post-reinjury, the fracture appeared to be healed . He was cleared for light sporting activities at 3-month post-reinjury. At this time point, the patient began throwing exercises at this time with the collegiate baseball athletic trainer. He began performing four sets of 10 throws, from a distance of 60 feet. The intensity of throwing at this time was 50% of full strength. He performed throwing exercises 3days a week. After 2weeks of these throwing exercises, he began six sets of 10 throws with each set having an increase of intensity by 5–10%, where he had perform his last set at 85% of maximum throwing strength. 2weeks into his therapy, he also began to perform the following weight training, in three sets of 10 repetitions: Seated rows, lat pull downs, and tricep extensions. The patient continued to exercise and work with the college’s athletic trainer. After 3months of working with physical therapy and the collegiate athletic trainer and at 6months following re-injury, he was back to throwing at 100% intensity. He gradually increased throwing distance and weight training over 4months of therapy. He continues to take 2000U of Vitamin D3, once a day. Today, he is 1year out from the recurrent stress fracture and is throwing a baseball at 145 feet with original pre-injury intensity. He finished his senior year of college back on the baseball field, as his teams start catcher. Imaging of his humerus at 1year post-recurrent stress fracture is demonstrated in .