A 55-year-old Hindu female presented to the emergency department of our center with generalized body swelling and abdominal pain. The pain was burning type mostly located towards epigastric region. It was not associated with nausea, vomiting, waterbrash and diarrhea. She was a diagnosed case of chronic liver disease (CLD) for four years whose etiology was unknown till then. She gave negative history for alcohol consumption and use of liver toxic drugs. There was no family history of liver disease. There was jaundice present in whole body, pallor and bilateral pitting pedal edema on general examination. Her vitals were stable at admission. On per abdominal examination, the abdomen was distended with flanks full. There was generalized tenderness and shifting dullness was present. There were no signs of hepatic encephalopathy (HE). The higher mental function and rest of central nervous system examinations were normal.
The baseline investigations are shown in .
As from clinical examination and investigations, she presented as CLD with decompensating features like ascites, jaundice and coagulopathy. The ascitic fluid analysis showed total count of 100 cells/cubic mm and discrete leukocyte count of 80% lymphocytes and 20% neutrophils. The patient was not in spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP). Similarly, ultrasound of abdomen and pelvis revealed, coarse echotexture of liver parenchyma with irregular outline suggestive of CLD and moderate ascites. The previously done esophago-gastro-duodenoscopy showed small esophageal varices. These investigations were done to confirm the liver pathology and to evaluate the etiologies for chronic liver disease as presented by the patient. He was diagnosed as CLD-Child Pugh C with decompensating features and anemia of chronic disease (ACD) from iron profile studies.
As etiology for CLD was unidentified, etiological workup was done for the differentials like chronic viral hepatitis, WD, alcoholic liver disease and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. The etiological workup is given as follows .
The classical finding Kayser–Fleischer (KF) ring is shown in and . After the etiological workup was done, she was diagnosed as Wilson disease (WD) based on American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases (AASLD). Simultaneously, based on Leipzig scoring, diagnosis of WD was established as the score was 5. There were no neurological features present on the case.
She was treated with tablet Zinc 50 mg BD (twice a day). As she was stable on general examination and vital parameters, she was discharged on zinc 50 mg BD with the advice for follow up in medical OPD after 1 month.