A 59-year-old man was diagnosed as having middle thoracic esophageal cancer and had undergone video-assisted thoracic subtotal esophagectomy with gastric tube pull-up via the retro-sternal route at our hospital. The postoperative pathological result of esophageal cancer was stage II (pT1bN2M0). Although a submucosal tumor was observed in the gastric pyloric region before the operation, endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration showed no malignant finding, so a decision to reconstruct the gastric tube was made. However, 6 months after surgery, follow-up upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a tumor that was identified as a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma (tub2) by biopsy. Computed tomography showed that there was no obvious lymph node metastasis or distant metastasis , and the patient was diagnosed as having clinically stage IB (cT2N0M0) gastric cancer within the gastric tube. Because of patient’s request to perform the surgery 3 months later, we scheduled an operation after preoperative chemotherapy and two courses of S-1 + L-OHP therapy were performed. After preoperative chemotherapy, the size of the tumor had shrunk . The operation was performed 10 months after the previous esophagectomy. First, we performed an upper midline abdominal incision so that the abdominal cavity could be observed. There was no obvious peritoneal dissemination or liver metastasis. After removing the adhesion around the front of the gastric tube, the right gastroepiploic artery and vein and the right gastric artery and vein were separated and ligated. Then, the duodenum was divided 1 cm distal to the pyloric ring by using an Endo GIA linear 45-mm stapling device with the Camel cartridge (Ethicon, NJ, USA). Next, we performed a midline sternotomy to expose the gastric tube, which was separated from the pleura, pericardium, sternum, thymus, and other organs. After exfoliation around the gastric tube, ICG 10 mg/2 mL was injected for blood flow evaluation via the peripheral blood route. The ICG fluorescence was illuminated by using a near-infrared laser beam with a laparoscopic system (KARL STORZ GmbH & Co. KG, Tuttlingen, Germany). Imaging was generated by using a high-end full high-definition camera system (IMAGE 1 SPIES™; KARL STORZ) connected to a laparoscope with a 30° field of direction and 10-mm diameter equipped with a specific filter. After injecting the ICG solution, blood flow was confirmed in about 20 s from the cervical esophagus to the upper region of the gastric tube approximately 7 cm through the esophagogastric anastomosis . We judged that blood flow was good if it was confirmed blood flow within 30 s; hence, we judged that enough blood flow could be secured, and 4 cm of the proximal gastric stump region from the esophagogastric anastomosis was preserved. Reconstruction by performing a Roux-en-Y gastro-jejunostomy was accomplished via the ante-sternum route without vascular anastomosis . The operation time was 359 min, and the blood loss was 560 mL. Pathological examination of a specimen identified pT1bN0M0 pStage IA gastric cancer (tub1). On postoperative day 8, X-ray examination of the upper gastrointestinal tract was performed; no stenosis of the anastomosis and remnant gastric tube was observed, and there was no suture failure of the anastomosis . The postoperative course was stable, the patient was discharged on the 14th postoperative day, and he was doing well 15 months after surgery without recurrence.