A 63-year-old gentleman presented to the surgery department with complaint of a non-healing 3 × 3 cm ulcer at the epigastrium for last 6 weeks. The patient had undergone laparoscopic cholecystectomy four months back at a private hospital for symptomatic cholelithiasis. Cholelithiasis manifested as right upper abdominal pain for 6 months and was confirmed using ultrasonography. The patient was a farmer by occupation and did not consume alcohol and did not smoke. He consumed a mixed diet. There was no history of any malignancy or malignancy related deaths in the family. The histopathology report of the laparoscopic cholecystectomy specimen available with the patient was suggestive of gallbladder adenocarcinoma. The operating surgeon had referred the patient to a tertiary care centre for appropriate management. However, the discharge summary from the private centre did not mention which port site was used for removal of the gallbladder or whether any type of retrieval bag was utilized during the surgery. Contrast Enhanced Computed Tomography (CECT) of the abdomen showed an irregular heterogeneous soft tissue lesion in the anterior abdominal wall of size 3.5 × 3 cm in the epigastric region. There was no lesion in the gall bladder fossa. A positron emission tomography (PET) highlighted a fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) avid lesion in the epigastrium only, with no uptake in the gall bladder fossa. Incisional biopsy from the epigastric mass revealed moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma with lymphatic invasion. A working diagnosis of epigastric port site metastasis from a primary from gall bladder adenocarcinoma was kept (TxNxM1). He underwent a completion radical cholecystectomy, which included hepatoduodenal ligament clearance and wedge resection of the liver. Wide local excision of the epigastric port site ulcer and mass was also done. The closure of the defect was carried out with sub-lay placement of mesh and abdominal wall rotation flap. The umbilical port site was also excised. Histopathologic examination of the excised epigastric port site specimen reported moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma reaching up to the skin. Two of the four margins (right and inferior) were microscopically involved, and the deep resected margin was free of tumour (R1 resection). The resected hepatic segment showed only focal areas of macro-vesicular steatosis with periportal mild chronic inflammation and none of the lymph nodes were positive for malignancy. Patient made an uneventful recovery. After retrieval of the histopathology report, we had discussed the need for a revision surgery for excision of the margins, however did not consented for a re-excision. An oncology consultation was sought, and after a thorough discussion with the medical oncologist, the patient was planned for concurrent chemoradiotherapy. He received 6 cycles of concurrent chemoradiotherapy (Gemcitabine and Cisplatin; Radiotherapy total of 50.4 Gy in 1.8 Gy per fraction) at our centre. The patient remained asymptomatic on follow up visits during the next 12 months with no evidence of locoregional recurrence.
The patient was lost to follow-up thereafter and then presented to us almost 18 months after the operation with the complaint of bilateral axillary painless swellings for 3 months. Fine needle aspiration cytology from the bilateral axillary swellings was suggestive of metastatic adenocarcinoma. CT of the abdomen and chest was suggestive of well-defined soft tissue lesions in bilateral axilla measuring 4 × 4 cm on the left side and 6 × 4 cm . PET scan of the patient was suggestive of bilateral axillary FDG positive deposits. After an extensive discussion with the oncologist, the patient was offered the option of bilateral axillary lymphadenectomy followed by chemoradiotherapy. The patient underwent bilateral axillary lymphadenectomy (Level I, II and III) and right sided wide local excision of skin and subcutaneous tissue because of fixity of lymph nodes to the skin.
During the post-operative period, the patient developed a seroma in the right axilla, which was managed by serial aspiration and compression. Histopathological examination (HPE) of the specimen from the left side identified 15 lymph nodes, out of which 10 showed metastatic adenocarcinoma with perinodal extension and presence of perineural and vascular invasion. 3 out of 11 lymph nodes on the right side showed adenocarcinoma deposits with peri nodal extension along with fibrosis and involvement of skin . After 3 months, the patient developed bilateral upper limb lymphoedema, which was managed by compression therapy and garments. The patient was advised to undergo a PET scan at the 6 month follow up visit. The scan revealed that the disease had spread to distant sites in the body. These included left lobe of liver, anterior abdominal wall, peripancreatic region, left external iliac and bilateral inguinal lymph nodes and multiple muscles throughout the body . He was further advised radiotherapy/ chemotherapy after consultation from the oncologist at our institute, but he refused any further treatment. One month later, the patient succumbed to the disease.