A Sicilian seventy-year-old man was admitted to the Infectious Diseases Unit of the University Hospital of Palermo (Sicily, Italy) in July 2017 referring progressive asthenia and irregular fever not responsive to antibiotic therapy lasting 2 months. The patient suffered from diabetes mellitus, mild kidney disease, and HCV-related liver cirrhosis (Child-Pugh B7), for which had been treated with sofosbuvir and ledipasvir for 24 weeks until December 2015.
About 3 months later the end of the HCV-treatment, the patient suffered from a marked worsening of thrombocytopenia, not considered related to liver cirrhosis and not responding to steroid therapy for which he had been treated with romiplostim whenever platelet count was under 20,000/mmc.
At admission in our division, the patient had fever (BT 37.8°) with a pulse rate of 78 bpm, blood pressure and respiratory rate were normal. No other symptoms were reported except asthenia. At the physical examination he had no respiratory alterations, systolic heart murmur at apex (grade II/VI), hepatosplenomegaly and grade 1-encephalopathy with bradilalia and minimal flapping tremor.
Laboratory tests revealed pancitopenia (WBC 3100/mmc -neutrophils 46%, lymphocytes 33%-, Hb 8.1 g/dl, platelets 46,000/mmc), an increased C-reactive protein (33 mg/l), D-dimer 6980 UI/l and INR 1.5, eGFR 63 ml/min/1.73m2, AST/ALT 2xN, modest hypoalbuminemia with polyclonal gammopathy.
The abdominal ultrasound exam showed an increase in splenomegaly (17 cm) compared to the previous ultrasonography from 1 month earlier (14.5 cm). Thoracic CT scanning was normal. Trans-thoracic echocardiography excluded vegetations. Blood culture, brucellosis serology, HIV-IgG and HBsAg were negative. Leishmania serology resulted positive in enzyme-linked-immunosorbent-assay (IgG 1:12800), immunofluorescent antibody test (IgG 1:25600) performed as previously described and Western Blot.
Leishmania infantum DNA was detected in peripheral blood by Real-time Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) targeted on a 117 bp fragment in the mini circle kinetoplast DNA (kDNA), carried out as previously described by Vitale et al. .
A bone marrow aspirate was not performed because of low platelet count. Liposomal amphotericin B was started at the dose of 3 mg/kg from day 1 to 5 and a further dose on day 10 for a total dose of 18 mg/kg.
The blood cells count and the clinical conditions of the patient progressively improved until reaching normal values; L. infantum real-time PCR on peripheral blood at the end of the treatment was negative.