Two 27 year-old male MZ twins were referred to our Unit for molecular analysis of the NF1 gene. The probands were born after an uncomplicated pregnancy to healthy non-consanguineous unaffected parents, with no prior family history of NF1. The twins have an unaffected brother 4-years older who suffered mild psychomotor delay and dysphasia in early childhood. The twins grew to adulthood and they are currently still living together.
Both twins presented with minimal cutaneous manifestations, including approximately 15 CLS and a few cutaneous neurofibromas (detailed clinical data is reported in Table ). A relevant tumour phenotype was observed in both twins. In "Twin 1", MRI performed at 20 years of age detected one PNF of the left sciatic popliteal nerve and many small neurofibromas in both legs surrounding the femoropopliteous vessels. Although the PNF was resected due to the distal pain in the leg, at 22 years of age a further surgical intervention was performed to resect a tumour detected by MRI in the same region. Pathological analysis of the resected tissue diagnosed a MPNST of the sciatic popliteal nerve and a PNF. Although the patient was subjected to a cycle of radiotherapy after surgery, the MPNST recurred twice 2 and 4 years later. These tumours were treated surgically, leading to the amputation of the left leg in the last operation. In "Twin 2", MRI examination at 20 years of age identified bilateral PNFs of the sciatic nerves and at 24 years of age, the tumour in the left leg was surgically resected due to its rapid growth and malignant radiological aspect. The pathological analysis of the resected tissue diagnosed high grade MPNST of the left sciatic nerve and hence, a cycle of radiotherapy was administered after surgery.
A pulmonary metastatic MPNST was detected in both twins at 27 years of age. "Twin 1" developed the metastasis in the lower lobule of the right lung, while "Twin 2" presented the metastasis in the upper lobe of the left lung. The concordant and discordant manifestations associated with NF1 in these twins are presented in Table .
Lymphocyte RNA was obtained from fresh peripheral blood and RT-PCR was performed to amplify overlapping cDNA fragments that covered the entire gene. The PCR products were analyzed by Denaturing High Performance Liquid Chromatography (DHPLC) and the positive fragments in the DHPLC analysis were sequenced. The mutations found were confirmed by direct sequencing of the genomic DNA and in this way, the c.4537 C→T mutation (Arg1513X) was found in exon 27a of the NF1 gene from both twins. The mutation was not present in the twins' parents or brother.
Twins' zygosity was confirmed by analysing 14 polymorphic microsatellite markers at different chromosomal loci. Informed consent for genetic analysis was obtained from all family members included in this study.