The patient is a 55-year-old-male with a past medical history of HIV with an undetectable viral load on highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) for over 15 years. He previously took elvitegravir/cobicistat/emtricitabine/tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (Stribild ®) but a recent change in the regimen included only an alternate formulation of the tenofovir: tenofovir alafenamide (Genvoya ®). Both regimens still contained cobicistat, a potent CYP450 inhibitor. Six months prior to presentation to endocrinology, he developed a Baker’s cyst of his right knee confirmed via doppler ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the right knee. He underwent two triamcinolone acetonide injections over the next two months. Between the knee injections, he used fluticasone nasal spray for nasal congestion. In the weeks after his second knee injection he noticed easy bruising , a bruise on his left leg became infected and progressed to a slow-healing ulcer , and over the next 2 months he experienced significant weight gain, cushingoid facies and facial plethora . Five months later he developed sudden-onset shortness of breath and was found to have a PE via Computed Tomography Angiography (CTA) of the chest and a deep vein thrombosis (DVT) via doppler ultrasound of the lower extremities. At this time violaceous striae were noted on his abdomen ( and ). The day after he was discharged home, he used his fluticasone nasal spray intermittently for 9 days. After this hospitalization his infectious disease physician referred him to endocrinologist for workup of ICS which was diagnosed along with hypothalamic pituitary adrenal (HPA) axis suppression with results as follows: Morning cortisol was undetectable at <0.5 mcg/dL (normal 4.0–22.0 mcg/dL), ACTH was also undetectable <5 pg/mL (normal 6–50 pg/mL), DHEA-sulfate was low at 12 mcg/dL (normal 38–313 mcg/dL), and urinary triamcinolone acetonide was elevated (1.3 mcg/dL, normal < 0.10). He was prescribed hydrocortisone 20mg PO in the morning and 10mg PO in the late afternoon; his HIV regimen was subsequently changed from elvitegravir/cobicistat/emtricitabine/tenofovir alafenamide to an unboosted regimen with bictegravir/emtricitabine/tenofovir alafenamide. At several months follow-up, his urine studies show undetectable level of triamcinolone and his 8 am labs, with hydrocortisone held, were as follows: ACTH 25.4, cortisol 6.1, aldosterone 2.9, renin 0.776, sodium 141, and potassium 4.1. Additionally, his symptoms – namely his easy bruising, wide violaceous striae on the chest and abdomen, Cushingoid facies and facial plethora have improved, as seen in , and he reports feeling much better. His steroids have been down titrated to 10 mg PO twice a day with the eventual goal of weaning off completely.