A 9-year-old male with Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) was admitted to the emergency department with the complaint of acute chest pain (ACP) that had been present for the last six hours. He denied any viral prodrome, palpitations, shortness of breath. His medical history was significant for receiving a diagnosis of DMD at five years of age, due to the deletion of exons 22–28 of the DMD gene. After diagnosis, deflazacort therapy started at a dose of 18 mg per day and was continuously taken. Left ventricular (LV) functions (LV ejection fraction of 62%) and wall motions were within normal limits on an echocardiogram obtained 12 months before the admission to the emergency department.
The physical examination at the current admission revealed he was afebrile, blood pressure was 126/84 mmHg, heart rate was 90 bpm, and respiratory rate was 26 breaths/min. Cardiac examination revealed a new-onset cardiac murmur and a gallop rhythm. The initial 12-lead electrocardiogram revealed convex ST elevation in leads II, III, aVF, and V6, with reciprocal ST depression in V1-3 leads . Laboratory analysis revealed an elevated serum troponin T (3.24 ug/L; normal range, 0.0–0.014 ug/L), serum CK-MB (300 ug/L; normal range, 0–5 ug/L), and brain natriuretic peptide (1860 ng/L; normal range, 0–125 ug/L) levels. Acute phase reactants, including C-reactive protein, were within normal limits. Molecular testing for myocarditis-associated viruses was negative for all viruses. The Troponin T values obtained in additional samples collected at the 6th and 12th hours afterward were also markedly elevated (i.e., 4,5 ug/L and 7,1 ug/L, respectively). The chest radiography was unremarkable and transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) demonstrated inferolateral and anterolateral hypokinesia with depressed LV function (ejection fraction of 46%) and mild mitral regurgitation. An ECG-gated coronary computed tomography angiography (CTA) was performed with the suspicion of acute myocardial infarction. Coronary CTA ruled out acute coronary syndrome. Cardiac MRI (Magnetic Rezonance Imaging) was obtained on the same day. Cardiac MRI revealed mid-wall to sub-epicardial late gadolinium enhancement at the basal to the mid inferior lateral wall of the left ventricle and corresponding hyperintensity on T2-weighted imaging, consistent with acute myocarditis. Moreover, LV papillary muscles were also affected .
A diagnosis of acute myocardial injury associated with DMD was made. He was treated with anticongestive therapy (including enalapril, spironolactone and carvedilol). Additionally, deflazacort treatment was stopped, and he was treated with 2 mg/kg/day of oral methylprednisolone. Chest pain resolved the next day, and ST-segment elevation returned to normal on the third day . Troponin T decreased in the sixth hour of oral methylprednisolone treatment, and on the fifth day, troponin T was 0.18 ng/ml. TTE on the fifth day revealed improved LV function (ejection fraction of 54%) and the patient was discharged on the sixth day of hospitalization. Cardiac MRI obtained in the fourth month after discharge showed significant improvement in the pathological findings in the LV walls . LV ejection fraction was 56% with TTE at the first year follow-up.