A 41-year-old male patient presented to our department with the symptom of anal bleeding. The digital rectum examination revealed a palpable mass. Colonoscopy was performed, which showed a well-defined mass located on the left-anterior aspect of the anal canal at ~5 cm from the anal verge and biopsies were taken. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) and MRI scan confirmed the presence of an intraluminal mass with a diameter of 5.5 cm. The histological examination of the biopsy revealed a GIST immunohistochemically positive for CD117 and CD34.
Due to the size of the tumor, the decision to treat the patient with neoadjuvant therapy with imatinib 400 mg once a day for 3 months was taken, in order to avoid colectomy and facilitate local resection of the tumor. The posttreatment MRI demonstrated a notable reduction in tumor size (2×2×1.8 cm). Based on this finding, the patient was scheduled for surgery, and a transanal local excision of the tumor was performed .
Gross pathological examination of the specimen revealed a 4×2×1.8 cm mass , in which a tan-white 1.9 cm lesion was recognized on sectioning. Histological examination of this lesion showed a tumor composed of spindle or polygonal cells, with eosinophilic cytoplasm, poorly defined cell membranes, and round or elongated nuclei forming palisades with occasional perinuclear vacuolization. The neoplastic cells were arranged in intersecting bundles and occasionally in whorls. No necrosis was observed. The mitotic rate was mild (<5 mitoses per 50 high-power fields), and there was no evidence of tumor cells in surgical margins (R0 excision; and ). Immunohistochemically, neoplastic cells were diffuse and strong stained for C-KIT (CD117) and CD34 but not for smooth muscle actin (–).
The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on the first postoperative day. Adjuvant therapy with imatinib resumed and a routine follow-up with a CT scan and colonoscopy was scheduled every 6 months. At present, 18 months postoperatively, the patient remains free of disease.