An 8-year-old neutered male domestic shorthair cat was presented with a 1-week
history of anorexia, vomiting and lethargy. On presentation, the cat weighed 5.7 kg
with a body condition score of 7/9; rectal temperature was 39.2°C (102.5°F). The cat
had no history of surgical procedures other than castration. Physical examination
was unremarkable and it showed no signs of icterus. Mild leukocytosis was noted in
the complete blood count, and mild hypoalbuminemia and elevated serum amyloid A were
observed on serum biochemistry .
Abdominal ultrasonography revealed ascites, and a hyperechoic structure that was
suspicious for cholelith. No gallbladder could be identified. Ascites was collected
by ultrasound-guided abdominocentesis from the caudal abdomen and identified as
exudative with degenerate neutrophils, macrophages and intracellular bacteria (cell
count 71,890/µl). Bilirubin concentration was normal (0.1 mg/dl). Bacterial culture
of ascites was positive for Enterococcus faecalis with scant growth
and sensitivity to ampicillin and enrofloxacin.
Sixteen-slice contrast-enhanced CT (Aquilion; Canon Medical Systems) revealed two
choleliths in the common bile duct (CBD) and duodenum. The diameters of the
choleliths were 8 mm and 6 mm, with attenuation values of 242 Hounsfield units (HU)
and 265 HU, respectively. Ascites was seen surrounding the liver, which appeared
normal. No gallbladder was apparent in the cranial abdominal region.
On day 1, exploratory laparotomy was performed because bacterial peritonitis was
suspected, based on examination findings. General anaesthesia was induced with
propofol (7 mg/kg IV [Propoflo; Zoetis]) and maintained with sevoflurane (Sevoflo;
Zoetis) in oxygen. Analgesia was provided by robenacoxib (2 mg/kg SC [Onsior;
Novartis Animal Health]) and a continuous rate infusion of fentanyl (20 µg/kg/h
[Fentanyl; Terumo]) and ketamine (0.6 mg/kg/h [KETALAR; Daiichi Sankyo])
intraoperatively and buprenorphine (0.02 mg/kg IV q12h [Lepetan; Otsuka
Pharmaceutical]) postoperatively. During surgery, a perforation of the CBD
approximately 5 mm in diameter was identified, and a 6 mm yellow cholelith was found
in the peritoneal cavity. Bile ascites (bilirubin; 3.1 mg/dl) was detected in the
perihepatic space, and the distal part of the CBD from the rupture site was dilated
and tortuous. No gallbladder structures or ectopic gallbladder were visualised
around the gallbladder fossa .
Catheter insertion was attempted from the rupture in the CBD, but passage into the
duodenum proved impossible, so choledochotomy of the dilated part was performed to
insert a 6 F catheter; duct patency was confirmed by antegrade flushing of the CBD
with saline. The rupture site and the incision in the dilated CBD were closed in a
simple interrupted suture pattern with 4-0 polydioxanone (Monodiox; Alfresa Pharma)
and 7-0 polydioxanone (PDSII; Ethicon) .
The liver appeared normal, but a liver biopsy was not performed. The cat recovered
uneventfully and was eating well on day 2. The cat was discharged 6 days
postoperatively and was treated with ampicillin (20 mg/kg IV q12h [Viccillin; Meiji
Seika Pharma]), enrofloxacin (5 mg/kg SC q24h [Baytril; Bayer]) and prednisolone
(0.5 mg/kg SC q24h [Prednisolone KS; Kyoritsu Seiyaku]), to reduce the postoperative
inflammatory response from day 2. Orbifloxacin (3.5 mg/kg PO q24h [VICTAS SS;
Sumitomo Pharma Animal Health]), prednisolone (0.2 mg/kg PO q24h [Predonine;
Shionogi Pharma]) and ursodeoxycholic acid (8.9 mg/kg PO q24h [URSO; Mitsubishi
Tanabe Pharma]) were continued for 7 days after discharge. Cholelith analysis showed
a composition of 55% cholesterol, 10% calcium carbonate and 35% other material.
Three months postoperatively, CT cholangiography was performed without anaesthesia to
confirm gallbladder agenesis and evaluate bile duct patency. Meglumine iotroxate
(100 mgI/kg [Biliscopin DIC 50; Bayer]) was administered over a 30 min period, as
described by Tanaka et al. CT was performed 45 and 60 mins after the start of contrast
medium injection and analysed using DICOM imaging software (Osirix version 3.9.2
64-bit open-source DICOM viewer; Osirix Imaging Software). The biliary ducts were
well visualised at 45 mins after contrast injection, revealing intrahepatic ducts,
three hepatic ducts and the CBD, but no gallbladder was visualised in the
gallbladder fossa .
In addition, two cystic dilations were found at the ends of the cystic ducts, with
diameters of 5.45 mm and 3.64 mm, respectively. These were considered to represent
vestigial remnants of a hypoplastic duplicated gallbladder. No ectopic gallbladder
was identified in the abdominal cavity. A diagram of the biliary tree of the case is
shown in .
The CBD was not dilated (2.1 mm) or obstructed, and contrast medium entered into the
duodenum at 45 mins. At 60 mins, more contrast medium was excreted into the
duodenum, resulting in insufficient contrast enhancement in the intrahepatic bile
ducts .
No adverse reactions to meglumine iotroxate were observed, and no recurrence of
choleliths was confirmed. The cat remained alive and asymptomatic 13 months
postoperatively.