The patient was a 37-year-old woman (G3, P2), and written informed consent for publication was obtained. She has been taking oral prednisolone for controlling membranoproliferative nephropathy from the age of 19 years. Her past history included uneventful vaginal delivery at the age of 26 and cesarean delivery for preeclampsia at the age of 31. On this occasion, she was admitted to our hospital at 27 weeks and 3 days of gestation due to deterioration of kidney function and hypertension. On the day of admission, she received the first anesthetic evaluation, and her information was uploaded after excluding personally identifiable items in our list of high-risk pregnant women on the BCT.
At 30 weeks and 1 day of gestation, a stuff of the obstetric anesthesia team found that she had been taking icosapentate for hypertriglyceridemia through the regular anesthetic evaluation preparing for a possible cesarean delivery and discontinued its prescription after discussing with the relevant department. At that time, it was planned that anesthetic method for cesarean delivery was general (≤ 7 days) or regional (> 7 days after stopping icosapentate) according to the Japanese guideline . Then this plan was recorded in her medical chart and updated in the BCT.
At 30 weeks and 4 days of gestation, because of progressing hypertension and deteriorating kidney function, cesarean section on 30w6d, after administration of betamethasone for two days to avoid infant respiratory distress syndrome, was scheduled. Although it was Saturday when her cesarean section was fixed, a resident of the obstetric anesthesia team visited the patient and explained general anesthesia for cesarean section. He also proposed transversus abdominis plane block for postoperative pain management and uploaded her acceptance on the BCT.
In Sunday morning, a senior anesthesiologist found the updated information on the BCT at home and left his comment that anesthetic plan should be reconsidered after checking the indication of peripheral nerve block for the patient receiving icosapentate before the surgery. After reading this comment, another resident, who was in charge on Sunday, confirmed that transversus abdominis plane block was relatively contraindicated in such situations. Therefore, he re-visited the patient to change the anesthetic plan for postoperative pain treatment from transversus abdominis plane block to intravenous patient-controlled analgesia. As she accepted this modification, the modified plan was updated on the BCT.
On the day of surgery (Monday), the patient started fasting from 12:00 AM and was later placed under general anesthesia to undergo cesarean section. The surgery was completed without any complications. Postoperative pain management was well-controlled by intravenous patient-controlled analgesia.