A 5-year-old pancreatic-insufficient female with non-modulator-amenable (genotype 1717/1G>A/Q439X) CF required port-a-cath insertion in July 2022 due to established severe upper lobe bronchiectasis requiring regular intravenous antibiotic therapy. Prior sputum cultures demonstrated (January 2018), (March 2018), (May 2019, March 2023), (June 2017, March 2018), (November 2021, March and November 2022, January and February 2023), (September 2023) and complex (February 2023). Her previous cough swabs had repeatedly cultured . She had recurring emesis prior to CF respiratory exacerbations. In January 2023, she was admitted, electively, to a regional paediatric CF centre for empirical intravenous antibiotics (ceftazidime and tobramycin) for worsening cough and emesis. Examination revealed widespread crackles and mild intercostal retractions; she was non-coryzal. Her port-a-cath was accessed for antibiotic administration, and within minutes of saline being instilled she developed a pyrexia (38.6 °C) with associated rigours. Thereafter, blood cultures (BACT/ALERT PF Plus) were collected centrally via the port-a-cath and from peripheral venous sites. Empiric peripherally administered ceftazidime (50 mg kg−1, 8 hourly) and tobramycin (10 mg kg−1, daily) were commenced intravenously as per local CF antimicrobial guidelines.
Following positive growth signal on the bioMérieux BACT/ALERT 3D instrument, the broth was cultured on solid agar plates for 48 h, with blood and MacConkey plates incubated in air at 35–37 °C, blood agar incubated anaerobically at 35–37 °C and chocolate vancomycin agar incubated in 5–10 % CO2 at 35–37 %. Following 29 h of incubation at 35–37 oC, the port-a-cath blood cultures returned as positive. Gram-negative bacilli were seen on microscopy. The bacilli were subsequently identified from isolates cultured on nutrient agar as by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) using a BrukerMALDI Biotyper with BDAL (library version 12). This was later confirmed using whole-genome sequencing, again identifying the bacilli as .
Following the initial Gram-negative bacilli result, a gentamicin lock (1.5 ml of 9 mg ml−1 concentration) was commenced into the port-a-cath, as per the manufacturer’s volume instructions, for 24 h. Repeat blood cultures were collected from the port-a-cath. The peripheral blood cultures remained sterile and no further pyrexia or rigours occurred. The clinical microbiology team were consulted regarding identification and treatment. As the European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing (EUCAST) and Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) do not publish either breakpoints or consensus epidemiological cut-off (ECOFF) values for spp., presents antimicrobial susceptibility results using EUCAST pharmacokinetics–pharmacodynamics (non-species-related breakpoints). Following a literature review and local availability, 1.5 ml ciprofloxacin locks were instilled using a 0.125 mg ml−1 concentration, per the port-a-cath manufacturer’s volume instructions.
Repeated port-a-cath blood culture, with appropriate discard of instilled antibiotic lock, continued to yield Gram-negative bacilli at 16 h of incubation (45 h from admission), again subsequently identified as . The patient’s sputum was sent for microbiological analysis and spp. were not cultured. Swabs sent for culture of her nebulizer device were sterile. Investigations on the day of presentation returned a white cell count of 12.8×109 (range 5–12×109), and a C-reactive protein of 21 mg l−1 (normal 0–5 mg l−1). As she remained systemically well, this case was likely an isolated port-a-cath infection without peripheral bacteraemia. Colonization of the line without infection is also possible, but no alternative cause for her pyrexia was identified. Typically, this patient does not develop pyrexia during pulmonary exacerbations of CF. The results were further discussed with the clinical microbiology team. Subsequent paired surveillance blood cultures following 3 and 7 days of antibiotic locks remained sterile. The ciprofloxacin locks were administered for a total of 2 weeks. The patient remained otherwise well and apyrexial throughout the admission. A follow-up port-a-cath blood culture at 6 and 12 weeks post-discharge, at the time of her subsequent routine admissions, yielded no growth and thus successful eradication.