A 27-year-old male patient presented with a large bulge from the right lateral abdominal wall extending from the twelfth rib to 4 inches below the iliac crest (overhanging the iliac crest). The patient had a two-wheeler accident 2 years ago. He had sustained a fracture of the pelvis with extensive degloving injuries involving the right buttock, upper and lateral aspect of the thigh. The patient had also developed a bulge in the right lateral abdominal wall. He had undergone approximately twenty interventions for treatment of the various injuries to achieve pelvic stability and healing of the degloving injuries. Subsequently he had undergone an open mesh repair for the post traumatic lumbar hernia. However, the surgery for lumbar repair was followed by a recurrence within 6 months. The hernia increased in size over the last one and a half years to assume the present size at presentation . Patient did not have any gastrointestinal symptoms. Contrast enhance computed tomography (CECT) was done which revealed a large defect in the right lateral abdominal wall with extensive herniation of small bowel loops and large bowel (ileocecal junction, caecum, and ascending colon) . The size of the defect measured 10 to 11 cm anterior-posteriorly and 12 to 13 cm craniocaudally starting just inferior to the 12th rib and extending inferiorly up to the iliac crest. Anteriorly, it extended upto 12 cm from the midline whereas posteriorly it extended up to 10 cm from the midline . The patient underwent open mesh repair under general anesthesia. He was placed in left lateral position. The extent of the sack was marked. A transverse elliptical incision was marked over the maximum convexity of the bulge . The sac was identified and dissected from the over lying skin and attenuatedmuscle up to the neck . Anterior and posterior margins were identified. The inferior margin was the entire length of the iliac crest up to the anterior-inferior iliac spine. The superior border of the defect was almost up to the twelfth rib with a narrow sliver of muscle in between. The sac along with its contents was reduced without opening it. No attempt was made to open the sack in view of the right colon being a content. A polypropylene mesh measuring 15 by 15 cm was placed over the sac and fixed all around, ensuring an overlap of at least two inches beyond the defect. Inferiorly it was fixed with four bone anchors placed at a distance of one and a half inches from each other to the iliac crest . Superiorly, the mesh was fixed to the twelfth rib. As the width of the twelfth rib is narrow, two trans-osseous holes were created in the anterior two thirds of the twelfth rib. Fiber threads were passed through the holes and used to fix the superior border of the mesh Anteriorly, the mesh was fixed to the lateral border of the external and internal oblique muscles with interrupted 2-0 polypropylene stitches. Posteriorly, the mesh was fixed to the paraspinal muscles with interrupted 2-0 polypropylene stitches . Continuous suturing of the anterior and posterior border was avoided in view of the fact that the muscles were attenuated and had poor holding strength. A 12 French negative suction tube drain was placed over the mesh and brought out through a separate incision inferior to the main incision.
Flaps were created from the remnant surrounding muscle, both superiorly and inferiorly. These flaps were double breasted horizontally and fixed with 2-0 polypropylene interrupted sutures. Another 12 French negative suction tube drain was placed over the double breasted muscles and brought out through a separate incision. Subcutaneous tissues were approximately 2-0 polyglactin sutures. Skin was approximated with 2-0 monofilament non-absorbable sutures. Suture removal was done on the twelfth postoperative day after complete healing of the incision . The patient is following up for the last six months with no evidence ofrecurrence.