A 69-year-old Asian woman, who was a housewife, visited the emergency room with a complaint of headache in the right occipital region.
The patient was scheduled for varicose vein stripping surgery. Preoperative evaluation revealed degenerative spondylosis of the lumbar spine and scoliosis in the lumbosacral spine. However, there was no contraindication for regional anesthesia, and surgery under spinal anesthesia was planned.
The procedure was performed aseptically, and 10 mg of 0.5% bupivacaine was injected into the subarachnoid space using a 25 G spinal needle at the L4-5 level, which resulted in initial anesthesia at the L2 level. Therefore, for sufficient level of anesthesia, dexmedetomidine was injected as a 0.5 mcg/kg bolus over 10 min, followed by 0.3 mcg/kg/h infusion for 55 min. No additional drug was injected into the subarachnoid space. During surgery, the patient did not complain of symptoms such as headache and nausea. As the anesthesia level decreased to about T12 without any symptoms in the recovery room, the patient was shifted to a private room. The patient was discharged without specific symptoms on the following day. After 4 d, the patient visited the emergency room with complaints of headache, nausea, and anorexia.
The patient had a history of hypertension and dyslipidemia, which were treated with candesartan cilexetil 8 mg and rosuvastatin 5 mg, respectively, PO once a day.
The patient’s personal and family histories were unremarkable.
The patient was 154 cm, 59 kg, alert, and afebrile. Neurologic examination revealed no specific findings. No remarkable skin lesions were noted.
Spinal tapping was performed to evaluate complications, such as bacterial meningitis. The results showed lymphocyte-dominant white blood cell (WBC) count, normal glucose levels, and slightly elevated protein and adenosine deaminase levels in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) .
Computed tomography showed no specific findings such as cerebral hemorrhage.
Considering the history of spinal anesthesia, PDPH was initially suspected. However, the headache was limited to the right side, and there was no relief of symptoms with change of posture and motion, such as upright/seated/supine posture, and the likelihood of PDPH was low. Based on the lymphocyte-dominant WBC count and elevated adenosine deaminase level, tuberculous meningitis was suspected.
Anti-tuberculous agents (isoniazid 75 mg, ethambutol hydrochloride 0.275 g, pyrazinamide 0.4 g, and rifampicin 0.15 g) were administered PO once a day prophylactically.
After 2 d, PCR test result for varicella-zoster virus (VZV) was positive. Results of PCR tests for S. pneumonia, H. influenza, N. meningitidis, Group B streptococcus, and L. monocytogenes were negative, and other tests, including Gram staining for Gram positive/negative bacilli and cocci, fungal culture, and acid-fast bacilli stain test, were negative.