An woman in her early eighties was referred to the department of neurosurgery, Izumi Regional Hospital, Japan from a neurologist on June 2020. She was a known case of cystic brain lesion since 2003. She presented with mild headache and dizziness for a week. The patient’s history included diabetes and hypertension over 20 years. No abnormality was found on neurological examination including eye movement or cerebellar function.
MRI on June 2020 showed a cluster of cystic lesion, 28 mm in diameter as whole, in the left mesencephalothalamic region . The lesion was extended from the pontomesencephalic junction to the dorsal surface of pulvinar of thalamus. The cysts’ content was hypointense on T1-weighted and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) MRI and hyperintense on T2-weighted MRI [-]. There was no hyperintensity on FLAIR surrounding the lesion suggesting edema or gliosis. The similarity of MR intensity of cyst content to cerebral fluid on all MR sequences, lack of perilesional edema, and absence of gadolinium enhancement strongly suggested this lesion to be asymptomatic giant PVSs. Smaller PVSs were seen in other brain regions including bilateral-hippocampi, basal ganglia, white matter under convexity gray matter, and left frontal operculum [-]. T2-weighted and FLAIR MRI also showed age-matched brain atrophy and hyperintensity in periventricular and subcortical white matter suggesting leukoaraiosis. Brain and neck MR angiography showed no particular abnormality . Retrospective review of the medical record and image archives found four previous MR studies on September 2003, May 2014, February 2016, and July 2017 [-] in our and other hospitals due to chronic headache and uneasiness caused by suggestion of brain tumor by a previous attending. 3D volumetric analysis of the giant PVSs using Synapse Vincent software (Fuji film, Tokyo) showed a very slow enlargement, 6.54 ml in September 2003–9.83 ml in June 2020. It has grown with slope of linear function: y (ml) = 0.1752x+6.0012 (x: year-2000), R2 = 0.9072 .
The patient is now scheduled to have another MRI study 2 years later for early detection of symptomatic enlargement including obstructive hydrocephalus resulting from aqueductal stenosis.