A 51-year-old, morbidly obese male, with past medical history of long-standing hypertension and type 2 diabetes mellitus, consulted because of 3 weeks of gait ataxia, sphincter incontinence, and episodic dysarthria of several minutes duration. Initially, the patient was managed by the Neurology Service, who observed wide-based gait, inability to perform tandem gait, globally reduced reflexes and glove and stocking sensory disturbances. Complementary studies revealed polyneuropathy, likely of diabetic origin, and vetebrobasilar insufficiency. The patient was therefore managed as an ischemic syndrome.
Nevertheless, the patient also underwent a computerized tomography (CT) scan, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which showed an isodense lesion . The latter appeared to be located in the left lateral ventricle, where it obstructed the foramen of Monro, thus creating mild hydrocephalus. Subsequently, the patient was transferred to the Neurosurgical Department with the presumptive diagnosis of left ventricle neurocytoma for further management.
Because the patient suffered progressive clinical decline, characterized by dysphasia and paresis of the lower extremities, we placed a ventriculostomy to control his malignant intracranial hypertension. Twenty-four hours later, the patient underwent biparietal craniotomy. We performed a transcallosal approach with microsurgical technique; an anterior longitudinal callostomy was performed, and a fibroelastic intraventricular mass of whitish coloration, limited by a vascular pedicle, measuring approximately 6 × 3 × 4 cm was resected. Gross total resection was achieved, and there were no postoperatory complications.
Biopsy revealed a tumor with small, rounded nuclei and scarce cytoplasm, and cell groups surrounded by abundant fibrillary matrix and cystic areas. Immunohistochemistry was positive for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and negative for neurospecific enolase, which was compatible with grade I subependymoma, according to the World Health Organization (WHO) classification .
The patient is currently asymptomatic of his neurosurgical condition, with complete resolution of his speech and sphincter disorders, and he is completing rehabilitation at the Costa Rican National Rehabilitation Centre for his sensory and motor deficits in the lower extremities. Postoperative imaging did not show tumor recurrence a year after surgery.