This patient was a 46 years old lady with a past history of bilateral knee osteoarthritis who presented on February 2021 with a chief compliant of intermittent edema in both lower extremities for nearly one year. She began to notice significant and progressive foamy urine from one month before presentation. The patient was then admitted for further examination. She denied fever, bone pain, fatigue or change in body weight. She also denied chronic use of pain killers or Chinese traditional medicine. Her social history and family history were unremarkable.
Physical examination at admission indicated a chronically ill-appearing lady in no acute distress, with stable vital signs. She was awake, alert and oriented. Pulmonary, cardiac and abdominal examinations were unremarkable. There was no increase in jugular venous pressure. Moderate pitting edema was noted in both lower extremities. Neurological examination was unremarkable. Results of lab tests at admission including complete blood count (CBC), renal and liver panels, electrolytes, autoimmune-antibodies, and serum complements were all within normal ranges. Serum albumin was 27.1 g/L. 24 h urine protein excretion (24 h UPE) was 11.2 g. Urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio (ACR) was 4818.53 μg/mg. Estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) was 77.5 ml/min/1.73m2 by CKD-EPI equation . Serum protein electrophoresis (SPE) found monoclonal (M) proteins in γ region, which was further confirmed as IgA λ type by immunofixation electrophoresis (IFE). Levels of serum free light chain (FLC) for λ and κ chains were 196 and 23.1 mg/L, respectively. Plasma brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) level was normal. Electrocardiogram did not find any abnormality. Echocardiography revealed normal cardiac function, without increase of echo brightness in cardiac walls. Aspirate bone marrow smear found plasma cells accounted for 5%. Flow cytometry analysis of bone marrow indicated 0.49% abnormal plasma cells. The first renal biopsy was performed. Light microscopic examination showed the specimen contained 11 glomeruli with mild mesangial matrix expansion and focal interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy (about 5%) . Glomerulosclerosis or arteriolosclerosis was not noticed. Homogenous amorphous material was observed in segmental mesangium, blue with Masson stain, and positive with Congo red. Amyloid deposits on Immunofluorescence (IF) staining were positive with λ type light chain and negative with κ light chain. IF staining was nonspecific for IgG, IgA, IgM, C3, and C1q. Electron microscopy (EM) analysis found focal subepithelial deposit of randomly disposed, non-branching fibrils (9.2–10.0 nm in diameter) and segmental podocyte foot process effacement. The patient was diagnosed λ Type renal AL amyloidosis . Based on 2012 Mayo Prognostic Staging system , she was classified as Stage I and low risk, and the predicted median survival would be 94 months.
After thorough discussion with the patient and her families about treatment options including autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (AHSCT) and available chemotherapy regimens, the patient refused AHSCT due to finical reasons and chose chemotherapy. CyBorD regimen consisting of cyclophosphamide 300 mg/m2 BSA (body surface area), bortezomib 1.3 mg/m2 BSA and dexamethasone 20 mg, was started in March 2021. The treatment was once per week, and four weeks per course. Her contaminant medicine included losartan 75 mg once daily.
The chemotherapy was well tolerated. Any adverse event such as infection or peripheral neuropathy was not observed during the treatment. Changes of important lab variables over time during the follow up duration are shown in Fig. (A-C). At the end of the second course of chemotherapy, her serum κ/λ FLC ratio returned to normal level (0.41) and maintained afterwards. Aspirate bone marrow smear did not identify plasma cell dyscrasia, nor did bone marrow flow cytometry. Complete hematologic response (CR) was achieved. At the end of the third course of chemotherapy, the IFE result became negative and maintained afterwards. Urinary κ/λ FLC ratio was also in the normal range (1.28). Despite the satisfactory efficacy in hematology, her consistently had large amount of proteinuria which kept over 10 g/day. Serum creatinine (Cr) fluctuated within normal range. She still had intermittent mild to moderate edema in both lower extremities. Chemotherapy was stopped after completion of six courses, and the patient continued with her losartan treatment. Three months later, regular follow up indicated her proteinuria was still 10.8 g per day.
To further assess the underlying reasons for such consistently large amount of proteinuria, a second renal biopsy was performed in December, 2021(nine months after the first). Light microscopy examination showed the specimen contained 23 glomeruli, among which 13 were globally sclerotic and obsolescent, and one had fibro-cellular crescent formation . The percentage of focal interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy increased from 5% at the first biopsy to 10–15%. Mild and uneven thickening of arteriole wall was noticed. Amyloidosis material deposits were observed in mesangial zones, capillary wall, and interstitial zones. We used a published semi-quantitative scoring system to assess changes of the amyloid load, and found the amyloid score (AS) increased from 1.37 at the first renal biopsy to 3.0 at the second biopsy (for representative images, please see Supplementary Fig. ), suggesting an mild to moderate increase of amyloid load. Precursor of the amyloidosis was again confirmed as λ type light chain by IF. Focal deposits of randomly distributed, non-branching fibrils (10.0 nm in diameter) were seen under EM, dominantly in subepithelial zones. Taken together, compared with the first biopsy, the second biopsy revealed mild to moderate increase of amyloid material deposits, significant glomerulosclerosis, and mild increase of interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy (IFTA). The results of SPE, IFE, aspirate bone marrow smear, and bone marrow flow cytometry during this admission were all negative. Serum levels of λ and κ FLCs were 56 and 41 mg/L, respectively, with a κ/λ ratio of 0.75. AHSCT was again proposed, however, refused by the patient and her families. Chemotherapy was stopped due to the concern about the potentially higher risk over benefit of continuous chemotherapy. The patient continued with losartan which had been titrated to 75 mg twice daily. She is under our close follow up and has been doing well. The latest 24 h urine protein excretion was 9.9 g.