A 4-year-old male Muslim boy from Lilong, Manipur, born of non-consanguineous marriage presented to the Orthopedic OPD with swelling on the left side of the upper back . The patient’s mother noticed a small, painless, and non-tender swelling arising from the undersurface of the left scapula when the child was 1½ years old while giving him a bath. It was not associated with fever or inflammation of the overlying skin. The swelling gradually increases in size thereby causing increasing prominence of the inferior and medial portions of the left scapula ultimately leading to snapping sound on shoulder movement. There was no marked elevation of the medial border of the scapula on pushing against the wall except for soft tissue retraction making it more prominent, the pseudowinging scapula. All neuromuscular examinations were normal. It was also associated with pain which was not severe enough to restrict shoulder movements. He had slight discomfort on lying down in supine. The child’s own self-esteem became affected as his friends starting making fun of it. The parents had not consulted any doctor on account of financial constraints and the hope that the swelling may subside spontaneously as the patient grows older. At the time of presentation in our OPD, the swelling measured about 3 cm in length (medial to lateral) situated at the ventral aspect of the scapula near the inferior angle. Having explained the need for proper workup of the condition and having taken valid consent, routine investigations, X-rays, and computed tomography (CT) scan ( and ) were taken with financial assistance from the authors. Imaging reports revealed a large pedunculated (mushroom-like) bony outgrowth from the ventral aspect of the left scapula near the inferior angle with continuous medulla with the parent bone. Excision of the swelling was done with the patient in semiprone position (the child being small built, prone position was inconvenient) with the left upper limb fully internally rotated to elevate the medial border of the scapula. A 5 cm incision was placed parallel to the lower half of the medial border of the left scapula , trapezius incised along the skin incision. Rhomboideus major was then incised and the swelling was exposed by retracting the soft tissues subperiosteally. The whole swelling was excised using osteotome . The incised muscles were properly re-sutured and bleeders cauterized. The excised tissue measured 4 cm × 3 cm × 2.5 cm , with the cartilage cap measuring about 3 mm in thickness . Histopathological examination showed thin cartilaginous cap with enchondral ossification toward the base, with underlying trabecular bone along with hematopoietic marrow and fat spaces, which confirmed the clinical diagnosis of osteochondroma .
Pendulum exercise was started after 48 h postoperatively. There was dramatic improvement in symptoms following excision. The patient is being followed up regularly keeping in mind the higher chance of recurrence as compared to those in older children. There was no sign of recurrence till the last follow-up visit at 6 months following surgery.