Emaciation and severe malnutrition with a T-tube for biliary drainage placed for almost 2 years.
A 52-year-old female patient presented with emaciation and severe malnutrition and a T-tube for biliary drainage, which was placed for almost 2 years when she walked into our ward. She visited the local hospital 2 years ago because of obstructive jaundice with right epigastric pain for 3 mo. She underwent a cholecystectomy at the local hospital, which revealed a gallbladder filled with tumour-like tissue, leading to the diagnosis of gallbladder adenocarcinoma. A choledochoscopy showed a common bile duct (CBD) filled with adenomatoid tissue. After removing the tumour tissue, T-tube drainage was performed. Two months later, she came back to hospital to pull out the T-tube. A second choledochoscopy showed that the CBD was filled with adenomatoid tissue and biopsy showed severe dysplasia of the biliary papilloma. The patient and her family members felt hopeless and decided not to pursuit any further treatment. However, the patient still survived 2 years later and she came to us for help. She presented with severe malnutrition and recurrent infections with minimum haemoglobin and albumin of 3.7 g/dL and 2.8 g/dL, respectively.
Unremarkable.
Physical examination showed that the skin surrounding the T-tube appeared with grey-white, hyperplastic granulation tissue with a stench .
Haematological examination revealed an erythrocyte count of 2.38 × 1012/L and a haemoglobin level of 4.6 g/dL. Liver function tests showed an elevated alanine aminotransferase level of 66 IU/L and asparagine aminotransferase level of 42 IU/L. Bilirubin levels were normal, and hypokalemia was not observed. Tumour marker tests showed that carbohydrate antigen 19-9 was 731.3 U/mL and carcinoembryonic antigen was 4.36 ng/mL. Other tumour markers, including α-fetoprotein and cancer antigen 125, were normal. Tests for hepatitis B and C virus were negative.
The enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the upper abdomen revealed a neoplasm with a diameter of 15 cm locating in the gallbladder area surrounding the CBD where a drainage tube was placed . The intra-hepatic bile duct was slightly dilated, while the extra-hepatic bile duct was obviously expanded. The skin biopsies suggested atypical glandular tissue which was considered as an adenocarcinoma originating from the biliary system.