In 2019, a 13-year-old girl was brought to our orthopedic emergency following a road traffic accident. She was hit by a car following which she fell into a ditch and sustained injuries to her right ankle. On examination, she had swelling, tenderness, and ecchymosis on the dorsal and medial aspect of right ankle with no neurovascular problems. She was unable to bear weight and her ankle range of motion was painfully restricted.
Radiographs of right ankle and foot showed a displaced distal tibial physeal injury of medial malleolus with fracture line passing through epiphysis with a metaphyseal fragment (Salter–Harris Type IV) . We could make out a step in the outline of the talar dome which raised a suspicion, and a CT scan was ordered to better delineate the injury.
The CT scan demonstrated an oblique fracture line splitting the talar body into medial and lateral fragments with the fracture line passing from proximal medial to distal lateral direction. This fracture line was in line with the fracture of the distal tibia physis .
The patient was planned for open reduction and internal fixation as there was significant depression (5 mm) in the talar dome. Under general anesthesia and caudal block, in supine position with tourniquet control, a 6 cm long longitudinal incision was given just medial to tibialis anterior (TA) tendon, centered over the ankle joint. The extensor retinaculum was incised, and TA tendon retracted laterally. The joint capsule was incised in line with the skin incision exposing the distal tibial epiphysis and body of talus.
The talus fracture was reduced using Kirschner wires (K-wires) as joy sticks and fixed with three 1.6 mm K-wires. Two K-wires were passed parallel to the joint surface and a third K-wire was passed from proximal medial to distal lateral direction thus obtaining a “cross” configuration. The medial malleolus fragment was then reduced to distal tibia and fixed with two K-wires from medial to lateral direction in an “all epiphyseal” manner so as to avoid damage to the physis. The metaphyseal fragment was small and not deemed suitable for fixation . The reduced talar fragment served as a guide over which the medial malleolus fragment was reduced congruently.
The stability of fixation was confirmed under vision by moving the ankle joint. Layered closure was done followed by immobilization of ankle in neutral position in a below knee plaster slab. The post-operative period was uneventful. Suture removal was done at 2 weeks and range of motion started at 6 weeks. The wires from tibia were removed at 6 weeks, while the talus wires were removed at 8 weeks.
Satisfactory radiological healing was seen at 3 months and protected weight-bearing was started. Weight-bearing was gradually progressed, and the patient went on to have a good functional recovery.
At 1 year follow-up, the distal tibial and fibular physes were seen to be near closure. A varus of 5° at distal tibia along with a minimal step in talar dome was noted but accepted without resorting to any further intervention, as the patient had no functional limitation. The patient was ambulating full weight-bearing without pain. She could squat with the heel off the ground. The range of motion was 20° of dorsiflexion (10° less as compared to opposite side) and 45° of plantar flexion (comparable to opposite side) (, ).