A 42-year-old woman presented with a left upper abdominal distention, early satiety and discomfort. There was no family history of hematological or splenic disorders. There was no evidence of thrombocytopenia, hemorrhagic episodes, hepatomegaly or lymphadenopathy. The patient had received estrogen therapy as treatment for endometriosis for 10 years, but she discontinued this medication 12 years prior to her presentation to our unit. The patient had a palpable mass in her left upper abdomen. The mass could be palpated approximately 9 cm below the left costal margin. Her full blood count was in the normal range.
Initially a spiral computed tomography (CT) scan with IV contrast showed multiple hypodense lesions with centripetal filling in delayed venous phase compatible with hemangiomas. Two large lesions were located in the right hepatic lobe and multiple smaller ones in the caudate and left lobe. All these hepatic lesions were consistent with the features of hemangiomas.
The CT scan also showed a large hemangioma-like formation in the left abdomen. It was difficult to determine whether this originated from the spleen or from the left adrenal gland, and a large cyst of the right ovary, suspicious of endometriosis , was also observed. The MRI scan, undertaken subsequently, was no more helpful and also raised the suspicion of an adrenal tumor.
Selective arteriography of renal arteries, SMA (superior mesenteric artery), and the celiac trunk, undertaken to clarify the vascularity of the lesion, showed a giant splenic hemangioma with its vascular supply deriving from the splenic artery .
We decided to proceed to splenectomy because of the possibility of malignant transformation and of rupture and massive bleeding, complications which have been reported by other authors [,,]. The patient underwent elective splenectomy and right ovarectomy. The spleen was 20 cm at its largest dimension, with areas of rupture and creation of local central hematomas . Pre-splenectomy vaccination was administered 2 weeks prior to surgery.
Histology of the spleen showed a large hemangioma with central foci of hematoma . At the periphery of the hematoma and inside the splenic parenchyma, there were many blood-filled spaces surrounded by dilated vessels . The internal surface of the ovarian cyst was lined with cylindrical endometrial epithelium and with endometrial stroma and occasional endometrial glands underneath. The histological findings confirmed the diagnosis of a cavernous hemangioma with hemorrhage and hematoma formation and of an ovarian cyst with endometriosis. The postoperative course was uneventful and 1 year after surgery the patient has remained symptom free.