A 68-year-old female patient presented to the emergency department of our hospital with recurrent chest tightness and shortness of breath. On admission physical examination, systolic murmurs could be heard in the apex of the heart. The patient had no other comorbidities except hypertension. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed severe mitral regurgitation and mitral leaflet cystic nodules, suspected to be benign tumor or infective endocarditis with vegetations. Transesophageal echocardiography revealed multiple cystic structures with significant separation in the A1, C1, and P1 leaflets by the mitral Carpentier nomenclature . The cavity was filled with blood and connected with the left ventricle. The volume of the cystic structure was enlarged in the systolic phase and decreased in the diastolic phase of the heart. The larger one was located in the P1 area, about 18.3 × 14.2 mm in size, and smaller in the A1 area about 9.9 × 5.4 mm . The conclusion of echocardiography showed that mitral valvular leaflet tumor should be considered first after excluding infective endocarditis. The patient experienced some examinations related to infective endocarditis, such as cranial Computed tomography (CT), brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and blood culture, etc. But the results did not fulfill the modified Duke criteria for the clinical diagnosis of infective endocarditis. Preoperative coronary Computed tomography angiography (CTA) showed no obvious abnormalities in the coronary arteries, and polycystic structures could be seen at the position of mitral valve , and more imaging evidence could not be provided due to poor image quality. Then we planned to perform valve tumor resection and mitral valve repair. However, no tumors and infectious vegetations were found on the valve leaflets during the operation. The cystic structure described by echocardiography was caused by prolapse due to leaflet degeneration . In order to maintain the integrity of the leaflet structure, we performed folding repair for the mitral leaflet. The patient was recovered well after operation, and the result of echocardiography evaluation was satisfactory.