A previously healthy 60-year-old Caucasian woman presented to our hospital with a year-long history of right-sided otalgia diagnosed as otitis media. Despite multiple courses of antibiotics, the symptoms persisted. Two months prior to admission, she complained of difficulty balancing and non-specific spontaneous involuntary movements in her lower extremities. She had no history of seizure or headache. She reported no constitutional symptoms or respiratory complaints. Her past medical history was significant for a 60-pack year smoking history.
Our patient was born in rural Western Canada and moved to Eastern Canada as a child. She resided with her family adjacent to a pig farm but did not work directly with livestock. She returned to rural Western Canada as a young adult and was living there at the time of admission. She has never travelled outside of North America. She had no family history of neurological conditions or malignancy.
A neurological examination (including a fundoscopy) demonstrated normal cranial nerves. Sensory and motor examinations were unremarkable. Examination of her reflexes revealed hyper-reflexia (without muscle spread) throughout her lower extremities. Bilateral ankle clonus was present (greater than six beats) along with fasciculation in her right hand. A positive Romberg’s sign and a wide-based ataxic gait were also noted. Cardiovascular and respiratory examinations were unremarkable and chest radiography performed prior to admission was normal.
Computed tomography (CT) of our patient’s head demonstrated multiple bilateral well-defined cystic lesions involving both her supratentorial and infratentorial regions. The cysts were mostly thin-walled of varying sizes, and some were calcified. No paralesional edema or mass effect was present .
Magnetic resonance imaging of her brain with gadolinium contrast confirmed the presence of over 30 intracranial cystic lesions with differing fluid levels . Radiographic findings were consistent with multiple stages of neurocysticercosis evolution. However, no intra-lesional scolices or extraparenchymal involvement were seen. A skeletal survey was performed to assess for peripheral calcified lesions, with negative results. Our patient was diagnosed with presumptive neurocysticercosis and empirically started on albendazole, prednisone, and seizure prophylaxis while awaiting results from tests for T. solium serology.
Results of laboratory investigations, including renal function, hepatic enzymes, and cerebrospinal fluid analysis, were all within normal limits. When results of the cysticercosis serological tests came back negative despite an extensive burden of brain disease, whole-body CT was performed to check for other lesions that would be more amenable to biopsy.
Whole-body CT revealed right hilar enlargement (2 × 3 cm) associated with soft tissue nodules in her chest wall and abdomen. Equally concerning were infiltrates with irregular density along both adrenal glands and a low-density mass arising from the lateral capsule of her left kidney.
A biopsy of an anterior chest wall nodule demonstrated high-grade poorly differentiated carcinoma with necrosis . The specimen stained strongly positive for thyroid transcription factor-1 and synaptophysin on immunohistochemistry . A diagnosis of stage 4 metastatic small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma was made and our patient was referred for medical and oncological palliative radiation treatment. With palliative oncological therapies, her ataxia improved transiently but the spread of her malignancy continued, leading to her death 9 months after her original diagnosis.