A 7-year-old male castrated domestic shorthair cat weighing 5.1 kg presented to The Ohio
State University Emergency Service with a 5-day history of inappetence. On physical
examination, a firm, mid-abdominal mass was palpated. The cat exhibited mild discomfort upon
abdominal palpation. Complete blood count (CBC) (ADVIA 2120i Hematology System; Siemens) and
serum biochemistry (COBAS 6000 c501 Chemistry Analyzer; Roche) were clinically unremarkable.
Abdominal radiographs were performed and a rounded, soft tissue mass was seen in the
mid-right ventral abdomen . Thoracic radiographs were performed and were clinically unremarkable. An
abdominal ultrasound (Aplio a550; Canon Medical Systems) was performed and a cystic,
lobular, mid-abdominal mass was identified . The mass was surrounded by hyperechoic
mesentery and fat, and was adjacent to several loops of small intestine. Small ovoid
hypoechoic structures were observed deep to the cystic mass, likely representing jejunal
lymph nodes.
A sedated CT scan (GE Light Speed, dual source totaling 128-detector) of the abdomen was
performed with contrast (Iohexol 2 ml/kg IV [Omnipaque; GE Healthcare]). A
4.7 × 5.7 × 2.8 cm, cystic, irregularly marginated, homogeneous, soft tissue-attenuating
mass was observed in the central abdomen . Fluid was obtained from the mass via ultrasound-guided fine-needle
aspiration. Cytologic evaluation revealed a highly proteinaceous (6.0 g/dl) fluid with
low-to-moderate cellularity (4380 nucleated cells/µl) and evidence of recent hemorrhage.
An exploratory laparotomy was performed, revealing an 8 cm in diameter, thin-walled,
broad-based, lobulated, cystic mass arising from the root of the mesentery. The base of the
mass was firmly attached to the mesenteric root and was intimately associated with the
cranial mesenteric artery. No other structural abnormalities within the abdomen were noted.
Owing to close association of the mass with the cranial mesenteric artery, en bloc resection
was not performed. The mass was drained, debulked and omentalized. Ampicillin with sulbactam
(30 mg/kg IV [Unasyn; Pfizer]) was given at induction and every 90 mins intraoperatively.
The cat recovered uneventfully and was discharged approximately 24 h postoperatively.
Histopathologic evaluation of the mass revealed neoplastic endothelial cells and abundant
inflammatory cells, including nodular aggregates of lymphocytes and hemosiderin-laden
macrophages within the neoplasm, accompanied by mature adipose tissue and fibrous connective
tissue. The neoplastic endothelial cells were observed to wrap around trabeculae filled with
eosinophilic extracellular fibrillar matrix (collagen), forming channels and clefts. The
neoplastic cells had one ovoid nucleus, 1–2 prominent nucleoli with stippled chromatin, a
moderate amount of eosinophilic cytoplasm and distinct cell borders. Red blood cells (RBCs)
and inflammatory cells were rarely present within the channels. Anisokaryosis and
anisocytosis were both marked, and the mitotic count was 2 per 10 ×400 fields. Additionally,
multifocal areas of hemorrhage, fibrin and coagulative-to-liquefactive necrosis were also
present. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed, and ~90% of the neoplastic cells
demonstrated strong cytoplasmic labeling for CD31 and factor VIII. Based on the
minimal-to-absent RBCs within the channels formed by the neoplastic cells and the
preliminary IHC results, an initial diagnosis of lymphangiosarcoma was favored. The absence
of lymphatic vessel endothelial receptor-1 (LYVE-1) IHC expression with positive tumor IHC
labeling with antibodies against CD31 and factor VIII were consistent with a diagnosis of
hemangiosarcoma.
Twenty-nine days following surgery the cat was re-evaluated. After discussion of the
treatment options for management of the residual gross disease, injectable chemotherapy
(doxorubicin hydrochloride 1 mg/kg IV q3weeks for five treatments [Doxorubicin; Novaplus])
was started. Maropitant citrate (1 mg/kg IV [Cerenia; Zoetis]) was administered with each
chemotherapy treatment as the cat reportedly had occasional vomiting. Prior to the third
treatment, 71 days postoperatively, thoracic radiographs were repeated and were
unremarkable. A repeat abdominal ultrasound was performed and the previously observed
cranial mesenteric mass had completely resolved. Suspected persistent focal peritonitis and
steatitis with scant peritoneal effusion was observed and the spleen appeared mildly
enlarged (13 mm thick). The cat completed the doxorubicin protocol as intended without any
adverse events. Repeat staging was performed 145 days after histopathologic diagnosis.
Thoracic radiographs were unremarkable. An abdominal ultrasound was performed and no
evidence of recurrence was observed. The spleen was similarly enlarged. A mildly enlarged
(4.2 mm wide) lymph node was observed at the ileocolic junction and aspirated; however, the
sample was hypocellular. The persistent focal peritonitis or steatitis and scant peritoneal
effusion was also observed in the cranial abdomen. The jejunal lymph nodes within this
region remained normal in size (up to 2.4 mm wide).
The cat presented for repeat staging 240 days after the histopathologic diagnosis. Thoracic
radiographs were clinically unremarkable. On abdominal ultrasound, multiple heterogenous,
enlarged jejunal lymph nodes were observed, measuring up to 10 mm wide. The previously
enlarged ileocolic lymph node had progressed to 5.6 mm wide. The primary mass continued be
unobservable on ultrasound. A jejunal lymph node was aspirated and cytologic evaluation was
consistent with a sarcoma with concurrent macrophagic inflammation and chronic hemorrhage.
There were insufficient lymphocytes present to confirm aspiration of lymphoid tissue,
suggesting possible effacement of the lymph node with neoplastic cells.
Doxorubicin chemotherapy (1 mg/kg IV q3weeks [Doxorubicin; Novaplus]) was restarted 247
days after histopathologic diagnosis for an additional five intended doses. A CBC performed
at the time of the cat’s second doxorubicin treatment revealed a moderate non-regenerative
anemia (hematocrit [HCT] 22%; reference interval [RI] 27–45%) and mild thrombocytopenia
(117 k/µl; RI 128–444). Prior to the third doxorubicin treatment and 269 days after the
histopathologic diagnosis, repeat staging was performed. Thoracic radiographs were
unremarkable. Abdominal ultrasound showed static jejunal and ileocolic lymphadenopathy.
Serum biochemistry showed azotemia (blood urea nitrogen [BUN] 37 mg/dl [RI 18–39] and
creatinine 1.6 mg/dl [RI 0.7–2.0]). Plasma protein was 7.5 g/dl (RI 5.6–8.3) and the urine
specific gravity (USG) was 1.045. Two-hundred and eighty-nine days after histopathologic
diagnosis and prior to the fourth doxorubicin treatment, a CBC continued to indicate a
stable, non-regenerative anemia (HCT 24%) and mild thrombocytopenia (107 k/µl; RI
128–444).
Repeat staging was performed prior to the fifth doxorubicin treatment, 331 days after
histopathologic diagnosis. CBC showed a persistent but stable non-regenerative anemia (HCT
24%; RI 27–45%) and thrombocytopenia (88 k/µl; RI 128–444). Serum biochemistry showed
azotemia (BUN 44 mg/dl [RI 18–39]; creatinine 1.7 mg/dl [RI 0.7–2.0], potassium 3.3 mEq/l
[RI 3.4–5.4]). Plasma protein was 7.0 g/dl (RI 5.6–8.3) and the USG was 1.046. Thoracic
radiographs were unremarkable and abdominal ultrasound revealed the metastatic jejunal and
ileocolic lymphadenopathy was static in size. The owner elected to forego additional therapy
or monitoring.
Four hundred and thirty days following the histopathologic diagnosis, the cat presented
with decreased appetite, excessive grooming and vomiting. CBC demonstrated severe anemia
(HCT 10%; RI 27–45), mild lymphopenia (0.56 k/µl; RI 0.60–5.70) and thrombocytopenia
(96 k/µl; RI 128–444). Serum biochemistry revealed azotemia (BUN 93 mg/dl [RI 18–39],
creatinine 2.1 mg/dl [RI 0.7–2.0]). Abdominal ultrasound showed a large, multi-cavitated
mass (approximately 3.6 cm in diameter) in the caudal abdomen . The mesenteric lymph nodes and ileocolic
junction lymph node remained hypoechoic, heterogeneous and rounded, and a large volume of
peritoneal effusion was present. The liver was effaced with round to amorphous and
coalescing, well defined hypoechoic to anechoic structures.
Based on the presence of marked progressive disease, the cat was euthanized at home 432
days following the histopathologic diagnosis. Necropsy revealed a large mass that expanded
into the mesentery and effaced the majority of the mesenteric lymph nodes. Numerous masses
were present through all lobes of the liver and a mass in the spleen was noted. Positive
labeling for CD31 and the absence of LYVE-1 labeling by IHC confirmed both the primary
mesenteric mass and multifocal liver masses as hemangiosarcoma.