In March 2009, a 39-year-old female sought treatment at the emergency department of the Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Sherbrooke, reporting a 5-day history of diarrhoea, lower abdominal cramps, nausea, one episode of bilious vomiting and low-grade fever of 38 °C. She was having 10 or more diarrheic stools per day as well as during the night, and had noticed blood mixed with the stools on several occasions. She denied any infectious contact, recent antibiotic treatment or travel outside the province of Quebec. She was living on a hog farm and usually drank water from a private well. One year prior to the consultation, the patient had a diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome and a colonoscopy performed then was normal. For the past few months, she was experiencing three loose stools a day. The patient had also been diagnosed with gastroesophageal reflux disease, hypothyroidism and refractory interstitial cystitis, and had a total hysterectomy. Her daily medication included esomeprazole, levothyroxine, phenazopyridine, amitriptyline, pentosan polysulfate sodium and pregabalin. Physical examination showed sinus tachycardia with normal blood pressure and a temperature of 37.5 °C. The abdomen was diffusely tender but soft with normal bowel sounds. The complete blood count, serum electrolytes, creatinine, and liver and pancreatic enzymes were normal. A pelvic and abdominal ultrasound showed only a left ovarian cyst. The patient was admitted to our hospital for intravenous hydration and observation. Because of the persistence of symptoms five days after admission, a colonoscopy was performed and revealed mild inflammation in the left colon. Biopsies confirmed discrete acute focal colitis. The Clostridium difficile toxin assay and a stool examination for ova and parasites were negative. Blood cultures were also negative. Stool cultures done two days apart were negative for species of Salmonella and Shigella, Escherichia coli O157:H7 and Yersinia enterocolitica, but showed a ‘Campylobacter-like’ organism. Because the patient’s symptoms were not compatible with a viral infection, no viral detection tests were performed. The patient slowly improved without antibiotic treatment and was discharged nine days after admission with complete resolution of her symptoms.