A 74-year-old Caucasian man was referred to the emergency department in May 2018, presenting with mild and reversible neurological symptoms. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed multiple ischemic strokes. The patient was taking aspirin 100 mg daily as secondary prophylaxis for ischemic and valvular cardiopathy treated with percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) and stent positioning in 2007, and with an aortocoronary bypass operation and biological aortic valve replacement for bicuspid aortic valve in 2008. In addition, patient history was notable for an urothelial carcinoma of the bladder with radical cystectomy 2 years prior to the actual hospitalization. A cardioembolic origin of the cerebral ischemic was suspected, but atrial fibrillation could not be confirmed during repeated cardiac evaluations. Aspirin was replaced by the direct oral anticoagulant rivaroxaban. In the following 2 months, the patient had two recurrent episodes of myocardial ischemia: the first involving a thrombotic occlusion of the right coronary artery (RCA) and the second due to a reocclusion of the same vessel despite adequate triple antithrombotic therapy with aspirin 100 mg, clopidogrel 75 mg, and rivaroxaban 20 mg.
A low platelet count was already noted at the time of these investigations (95 × 109/L), further decreasing down to 63 × 109/L at the time of the second discharge.
A comprehensive hemato-oncological workup was carried out to investigate the persistent thrombocytopenia and spontaneous cutaneous bleeding events of World Health Organization (WHO) grade 2 while on antithrombotic triple therapy. Comprehensive laboratory studies revealed moderate thrombocytopenia of 52 × 109/L, with the other two lines preserved. No schistocytes or dysplastic elements were observed in the peripheral blood smear. Furthermore, coagulation studies revealed markedly reduced fibrinogen levels (0.5 g/L; normal range 1.7–4.5 g/L), elevated D-dimer levels of 6.97 mg/L (normal range < 0–5 mg/L), a reduced Quick value of 59% (normal range 70–100%), and a shortened activated partial prothrombin time (aPTT) of 21 seconds (normal range 25–37 seconds), but no relevant rivaroxaban activity (39 ng/mL). Vitamin K, haptoglobin, direct Coombs test, careening for anti-PF4 antibodies, and ADAMTS13 activity were within the normal range. The clinical presentation and the laboratory results revealed a picture compatible with overt DIC; consequently, the patient underwent a neoplasia screening. A bone marrow biopsy showed no signs of dysplasia or pathological lymphoid and plasmacellular infiltrates. Karyotype analysis confirmed a normal male karyotype. However, next-generation sequencing showed mutations in TET2 and EZH2, compatible with a diagnosis of clonal hematopoiesis of indeterminate potential (CHIP), which, despite its greater risk for hematological malignancies, has been shown to increase mortality from nonhematological cancers and cardiovascular disease , could not alone explain the repeated cardiovascular events experienced by our patient and the coagulation activation.
. Given the high clinical suspicion of an underlying neoplastic disease or chronic infection responsible for the observed coagulation activation, a fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) was performed, and showed few retroperitoneal and left supraclavicular lymph nodes with moderate metabolic activity . The biopsy and histological workup resulted in the diagnosis of a poorly differentiated carcinoma of urothelial origin , that is, a relapse of the known bladder urothelial carcinoma. In our institution, the treatment of choice for a patient with metastatic urothelial cancer would have been combination chemotherapy with gemcitabine and either cisplatin or, alternatively, carboplatin in case of ineligibility for cisplatin. However, owing to concerns regarding the hematotoxicity of standard chemotherapy, and the high risk of bleeding in case of worsening of the thrombocytopenia in a patient in need of antithrombotic prophylaxis, we decided to treat the patient with immunotherapy only. The first administration of atezolizumab, an anti-PD-L1 monoclonal antibody, resulted in an improvement of the chronic DIC with normalization of the platelet count and marked reduction of the D-dimer levels from 15 to 1 mg/L . After the first 3 months of treatment, the patient underwent a restaging through a FDG-PET scan, which showed a good metabolic response, without any sign of dimensional increase or appearance of new lesions. The DIC remained well controlled, giving us the opportunity to switch the antithrombotic therapy from aspirin plus low molecular weight heparin to aspirin plus rivaroxaban 20 mg/day.
No further thrombotic events or bleeding events occurred after treatment initiation. In October 2020, after almost 24 months of anti-PD-L1 treatment, the patient is still receiving atezolizumab and is doing well. The patient himself is very happy with his treatment, since he has had no secondary effects related to the administration and he has not been hospitalized again.