A 25-year-old Chinese woman in her 28th week of pregnancy was admitted to the local hospital with a complaint of severe and unremitting headaches, nausea, and vomiting. The patient was given metoclopramide (dose 10 mg) by intramuscular injection to alleviate her symptoms, with no effect. She was then transferred to Jiaxing Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital. After admission, she presented sudden convulsion, aconuresis, and unconsciousness. Blood pressure, pulse, and temperature were 90–100/60–70 mmHg, 90–100 bpm, and 36.7–37 ℃, respectively. The patient was administered intravenous mannitol (1 g/kg over a 15-min period).
The patient’s medical history revealed that her last pregnancy was terminated by artificial abortion in August 2017. There had also been one previous artificial abortion 3 years earlier. After the last artificial abortion, the patient's menstrual cycle was regular, and there was no irregular uterine bleeding. The patient had no other special family, medical, and surgical history. After leaving college, she worked as a secretary and she was registered as a resident of Jiaxing Zhejiang. The patient had never smoked or consumed alcohol.
Blood pressure, pulse, and temperature were 90/58 mmHg, 110 bpm, and 36.3 ℃, respectively. On examination, she had no signs of brain trauma. Meningeal signs were positive, with cervical rigidity. Coma was absent; there was a minimally reactive 6-mm right pupil with pupillary reaction to light and a reactive 5-mm left pupil with a faint pupillary reaction to light. In muscle group I the muscular tension in the limbs was increased. The Glascow Coma Scale score was 5. She had normal heart sounds and normal breath sounds of the lungs. The abdominal examination revealed central obesity and a bulky uterus with a size corresponding to 28 weeks of gestation. No adnexal masses were noted. Computerized tomography (CT) scanning of the brain revealed a hemorrhagic mass in the right occipital region extending into the ventricle system, with herniation of the brain. Uterine ultrasonographic depicted 28-week-old fetus and the absence of any abnormal mass.
A tentative plan was made for an emergency cesarean delivery and craniotomy, hematoma clearance, and decompression . The fetus was delivered, with Apgar scores at 1.5 min of 2 and 3 and a body weight of 1180 g, and the newborn was admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit. The uterus, pelvis, and abdomen showed no definitive abnormalities. Areas of focal hemorrhage were removed and brain pressure relaxed; all vital signs were within normal limits.
The patient recovered consciousness, and the neurological symptoms were relieved at 1 day after the surgery. Re-examination of the CT scan of the brain showed that the right occipital hematoma was essentially removed, and CT scan of the lung showed a mass in the upper lobe of the right lung consisting of irregular, multiple bilateral pulmonary nodules .
Pathological examination of the brain hemorrhagic mass showed a histological pattern and structure of metastatic choriocarcinoma. Immunohistochemistry was: CK(pan)(+), HCG(+), and HPL(+) .
The patient began chemotherapy at 7 days after the surgery with a regimen of etoposide and cisplatin (EP) in the first two courses of treatment (etoposide 100 mg/m2, cis-platinum 20 mg/m2). She received an injection of palonosetron hydrochloride (dose 0.25 mg) intravenously about 30 min before each chemotherapy course. The duration of one course was 2 days, and the interval between each course was 1 week. She was started on the EMACO regimen as the third course of treatment (etoposide 100 mg/m2, methotrexate 100 mg/m2 with methotrexate 200 mg/m2 for 12 h, folic acid 15 mg and actinomycin D 0.5 mg, alternating with cyclophosphamide 600 mg/m2 and vincristine 1 mg/m2). Prior to chemotherapy, her β-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-HCG) level was 12,162.53 U/L; after two courses of therapy the serum β-HCG level had changed significantly (66,486.37 U/L); and after the third course, β-HCG level had dropped by more than tenfold. The patient’s general condition was not poor. Laboratory tests showed that the leukocyte level had fallen to 2.7–3.2 × 109/L, but all other results (liver and renal functions, urinalysis, serology, microbiology) were about normal. The patient was administered recombinant human granulocyte-colony stimulating factor by hypodermic injection to promote the leukocyte level, resulting in to 8–15 × 109/L. After eight cycles of chemotherapy, the β-HCG level had returned to normal (3.68 U/L) . The patient was administered ten cycles chemotherapy and was fortunately able to tolerate full-dose chemotherapy.
After eight weeks, the newborn baby was discharged in good condition, and she is developmentally normal with no cognitive or motor delays. The patient remains disease free based on the β-HCG level and radiology examination for 1 year. The β-HCG level and the results on the CT scans of the brain and lung are within the normal range.