A 20-year-old male suffered cardiac arrest immediately after developing chest pain and dyspnea during sleep. Spontaneous circulation was recovered after cardiopulmonary resuscitation. While the patient was being transferred to the emergency room, defibrillation was performed twice due to ventricular fibrillation . The patient did not have underlying diseases or a social history of smoking or alcohol use. Interestingly, the patient's maternal uncle suffered a sudden cardiac death in his 5th decade. On admission, the index patient was in a stable hemodynamic state despite being in a confused mental state and being intubated. Diagnoses were proposed, including acute coronary syndrome and inherited primary arrhythmia syndromes. The initial ECG showed a normal sinus rhythm with a first-degree AV block (PR-interval was 240 ms), and a type 2 Brugada pattern was observed in the V1 lead . The V1 and V2 showed dynamic changes that is more like type 1 Brugada pattern ECG The hematological test revealed increased white blood cells to 13,900 cells/mm3. The CRP level was within the normal range, and there were no abnormal results for liver function tests, renal function tests, and coagulation profiles. The serum sodium, potassium, calcium, and magnesium were 142 mEq/L, 3.4 mEq/L, 8.1 mg/dl, and 1.6 mg/dl, respectively. Serum troponin I and T were elevated to 1.823 ng/ml and 0.279 ng/ml, respectively. CK-MB and pro-BNP were within normal ranges (3.59 ng/ml and 28 ng/ml, respectively). The chest radiograph was normal. The brain CT scans and chest CT angiography were nonspecific. Echocardiography revealed no structural heart disease. The coronary angiography showed no significant stenosis. Therapeutic hypothermia management was performed. Prominent J wave accentuation with PR-interval prolongation was identified during the therapeutic hypothermia . In a follow-up ECG, a spontaneous type 1 Brugada pattern was identified with an incidental atrial fibrillation The patient was diagnosed with BrS and underwent implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) therapy. After the ICD, the patient suffered ICD shocks due to ventricular fibrillation (VF) during sleep . Therefore, we prescribed quinidine (200 mg twice a day) and cilostazol (100 mg twice a day), which diminished the Brugada pattern on the ECG. After receiving the prescription, VF did not occur again.
The proband had a father, a mother, a brother, three paternal aunts, one maternal aunt, and two maternal uncles. We performed genetic tests using next-generation sequencing (NGS) in all first-degree relatives and evaluated the ECGs of almost all family members . All the ECG of the first-relatives were obtained in the usual V1,V2 location and in the 3rd intercostal space to identify the coved pattern ECG. The other family member screening ECGs were obtained in the usual V1, V2 location. The index proband and one maternal aunt had a type 1 Brugada pattern in V2. One maternal uncle, who experienced aborted sudden cardiac death, had a suspicious BrS-pattern on the ECG in V1. One paternal female cousin showed a type 2 Brugada pattern in V2. The other family members did not show Brugada pattern.
The proband and the mother had the SCN5A-R376H (c.1127G>A) and RyR2-D4038Y (c.12112G>T, variant of unknown significance) variants. They did not show features of catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. The father and brother had the DSP-Y1101C (c.3302A>G, variant of unknown significance) variant. They did not show features of arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy. The proband did not have DSP-Y1101C. SCN5A-R376H was a likely-pathogenic variant for BrS. All the mutations were heterozygous. Genetic tests were not conducted on the other family members.