A 47-year-old woman, gravid 3 para 1, visited our hospital with complaints of abdominal pain and distension for 5 days. She was suffered with constipation accompanied by defecation for more than 1 year, menstrual exacerbation, no blood stool and fever, the menstrual cycle was also stably. She had a history of cesarean section 25 years ago and hysteromyoma excision 20 years ago. Physical examination only show left lower abdomen tenderness without peritoneal irritation. Digital rectal examination revealed no abnormalities. Her cancer antigen 125 level was 60.62 U/ml. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed wall thickening from the upper rectum to sigmoid, secondary low intestinal obstruction and multiple myoma in the uterus . Colonoscopy showed a stenosing tumor formation in the upper rectum, but the mucous membrane is smooth . Biopsies only found nonspecific inflammation. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) also revealed neoplastic lesions of the sigmoid and rectum .
A primary diagnosis of intestinal obstruction secondary to rectal endometriosis was made according to the laboratory and instrument examinations. After 7 days of colon decompression and nutrition support therapy, the patient's abdominal distension was significantly relieved, CT reexamination showed that the dilatation of the colon was significantly less than before . An operation of laparoscopic partial rectal and sigmoid colon resection and total hysterectomy was performed successfully. The specimen was removed through a small abdominal incision (about 5 cm). During the operation, we found a stenosis recto-sigmoid mass and multiple adenomyoma of the uterus. The mass had adhesion with the posterior lamina of right broad ligament and the posterior uterine wall, without infiltration into the rectovaginal septum .
Postoperative pathology showed endometrioid structures between the rectal muscle walls, chronic inflammation of the remaining mucous membranes, multiple endometriosis of the uterus and ovaries, confirmed the diagnosis of rectal endometriosis . The patient discharged 10 days post operation. After 12 weeks of follow-up, the patient did not complain of special discomfort and recovered well.