A 37-year-old male patient presented to the ultrasound department for regular ultrasonographic follow-up, without complaints of specific discomforts.
The patient underwent allogeneic kidney transplantation (donation after cardiac death) because of IgA nephropathy, chronic renal insufficiency and uremia at our hospital 6 mo ago.
The patient was diagnosed with renal hypertension 10 years ago, and his blood pressure was stable after dialysis with medication administration. He was diagnosed with renal anemia 10 years ago and was treated with hemopoietin regularly. He was diagnosed with renal osteopathy 10 years ago, and his condition was stable with oral administration of calcium tablets.
Personal and family history were unremarkable.
The patient’s body temperature was 36.3 ℃, heart rate was 90 bpm, respiratory rate was 18 breaths per minute, and blood pressure was 105/64 mmHg. One 15-cm oblique scar could be seen in the right lower abdomen. Arteriovenous fistula could be seen in the left forearm.
The post-transplant serum creatinine fluctuated around 90 μmol/L during follow-ups. However, the creatinine at this time was 165.4 μmol/L, which was higher than the normal level.
Two artery trunks of the renal graft anastomosed with the side of the external iliac artery were detected during the ultrasonographic examination (1-5 MHz convex transducer, iuElite; Philips, Bothell, WA98021, United States) . Color aliasing indicating high-velocity turbulent flow at the proximal site of the main renal artery trunk (donor portion) was detected, with peak systolic velocity (PSV) of 674 cm/s on pulsed-wave Doppler (PWD) . The renal artery to external iliac artery PSV ratio was larger than 3:1, which further confirmed stenosis at the site. Stenosis at the proximal site of the main renal artery trunk (donor portion) was considered. Multiple hyper-echo plaques attached to the wall of the main renal artery trunk were detected after meticulous scanning with the high frequency 9-3 MHz linear probe . The largest plaque of the proximal site of the main renal artery trunk close to the anastomosis was about 0.7 cm × 0.3 cm, and the plaque size of the middle segment of the main renal artery trunk was about 0.9 cm × 0.3 cm. The residual lumen at the proximal site of the main renal artery trunk was about 0.2 cm in diameter, and one 1.2 cm × 0.8 cm external protruding cystic structure was detected at the anastomotic site between the main renal artery trunk and the external iliac artery. Blood flow signals inside the cystic structure were visible in color Doppler flow imaging, showing as swirling pattern, and to-and-fro disorganized arterial spectrum was detected with PWD . Hypo-echoic thrombus with thickness of 0.3 cm was observed inside the cystic structure, and an EPSA at the anastomotic site caused by renal artery atherosclerotic stenosis with thrombosis formed inside was considered . The spectral waveform of the perforating area inside the renal allograft was observed, showing as prolonged acceleration time longer than 70 ms . Stenosis rate of 90% at the proximal site of the main renal artery trunk accompanied with a pseudo-aneurysm at the anastomosis with the external iliac artery was confirmed by further computed tomography angiography and digital subtraction angiography .