A 29-year-old Caucasian woman was seen for her routine annual gynecologic examination, and conventional cytological screening of her cervix uteri revealed a pathologic finding scored as grade IIID under the Papanicolaou system. Repeat screening performed one year later revealed a grade IV pathologic finding, suggesting a high-grade squamous intra-epithelial lesion. Our patient refused the recommended diagnostic and therapeutic procedure of conization, and she was placed on a non-specified homeopathic therapy consisting of a vitamin C-containing regimen and subcutaneous administration of mistletoe lectins.
At the time of the first pathologic Papanicolaou test, our patient reported a normal menstrual cycle, no pregnancies, no use of oral contraceptives, no presence of any previous diseases or any surgery, no allergies, no smoking, and no use of illicit drugs. There was no evident lack in body hygiene. Except for her father's stomach cancer, her family and cancer-specific anamneses were unremarkable. On the basis of her grade V in Papanicoleau test, she was sent to our hospital's out-patient department.
A gynecologic examination at that time revealed obvious tumor growth confined to her cervix with no signs of extension to her vagina. A cervical biopsy showed moderately differentiated (tumor grade II) large-cell non-keratinizing squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix uteri. Neither lymphatic nor venous vascular space involvement was reported, but dense inflammatory cell infiltration of the tumor stroma was noted. Clinical staging was completed by cystoscopy, proctoscopy, and chest radiography (as allowed for accurate clinical staging by the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics [FIGO]), which revealed stage IB2 cancer. Additional information was obtained by extended staging procedures, including computed tomographic (CT) and laparoscopic sampling of her para-aortic lymph nodes (the results of which would have had no influence on the assigned clinical stage according to FIGO guidelines).
However, our patient refused to undergo any further diagnostic procedures and instead underwent complementary medical treatment. This included regional hyperthermia, which led to her self-admission to a local hospital. She presented there with reduced physical status, large edema of the legs, and moist rales in her lungs. She also reported lower abdominal pain. Her clinical work-up revealed significant progression of her disease, which now included bilateral parametrial involvement, broad involvement of her dorsal bladder wall, infiltration of her outer rectum wall, pericardial and pleural effusion, bilateral hydronephrosis with laboratory signs of uremia (serum creatinine 17.4 mg/dL, serum uric acid 106 mg/dL), and tumor anemia with hemoglobin at 71 g/L. Two courses of hemodialysis were performed initially, followed by a right-sided nephrostomy after the failure of ureteral stenting due to tumor extension to her bladder. It was decided to commence hemodialysis on the basis of the patient's request for consequent evidence-based, palliative medical care after restoration of her renal function.
Restaging was performed, which indicated involvement of her bladder wall and adhesions to the ileocecal area . All three para-aortic lymph nodes removed during re-laparoscopy were positive , while no signs of distant metastasis were seen on the radiologic studies. The tumor was restaged to FIGO IVa, and concurrent cisplatin-based chemoradiation was recommended. Our patient, however, opted against our treatment recommendation and traveled to the Philippines for an alternative holistic treatment schedule involving several courses of Horvi-Reintoxin enzyme therapy, which consists of enzymatically processed snake poison that is purported to specifically inhibit glycosylation in tumor cells, thus conferring anti-tumoral activity.
Our patient was repeatedly admitted to both Brixen and Innsbruck hospitals for erythrocyte transfusions because of spontaneous uterine hemorrhage and further local tumor progression . Acute life-threatening hemorrhage prompted us to perform three sessions of arterial embolization: first, in both uterine arteries; second, in both internal pudendal arteries and re-embolization of her right uterine artery; and third, in her right superior and inferior vesical arteries and re-embolization of her left internal pudendic artery. In parallel, our patient continued her holistic alternative medical treatment, first with active fever treatment, during which pyrogenic lysates of bacteria were administered and second with combined application of Carnivora-Mistletoe-Ukrain (that is, capsules with plant extracts, subcutaneous injections of mistletoe lectins, capsules with extracts of celandine and Chelidonium majus), all of which are purported to have antitumoral activity.
Seven months later our patient was admitted to the hospital with clinical signs of chronic large bowel obstruction, and laparotomy and side-to-side ileoascendostomy became necessary, during which her left ureter , descending colon, rectosigmoid and ileocecum appeared fixed by tumor masses and obstructed by large, lymphatic fluid-containing cysts . Our patient overcame a postsurgical bowel paralysis and recovered fairly well. However, during the following days, palliative care was required for salvage from dyspnoea by bilateral pleuracentesis , from mechanical and paralytic small and large bowel obstruction by distigmine bromide administration, and from recurrent visceral abdominal and neurogenic pain by morphine hydrochloride. On the basis of a CT scan, a paralytic ileus, together with metastasis to her spleen and her liver , were diagnosed. One month later our patient died as a result of tumor cachexia, chronic small and large bowel ileus, septicemia and consecutive multiple organ failure. In her last will, she refused autopsy.
For HPV testing, we isolated DNA from the paraffin-embedded tumor shown in Figure . With group-specific nested polymerase chain reactions for the detection of α-HPV DNA , we tested for the presence of 18 high-risk HPV types (16, 18, 26, 31, 33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 52, 53, 56, 58, 59, 66, 68, 73, and 82) and 18 low-risk HPV types (6, 11, 40, 42, 43, 44, 34, 54, 55, 57, 61, 70, 71, 72, 81, 83, 84, and 89). Our patient's tumor exclusively contained type 18 HPV DNA.