A 7-year-old Chinese boy was born to healthy non-consanguineous parents. The patient developed weakness in both lower limbs at the age of 2. When he was 6, the patient showed typical Gowers’ sign (difficulties going upstairs, gait with peculiar oscillating characters, and characteristic ways to rise from the floor). With the deterioration of the disease, the patient cannot run or jump at present, and reduced strength in both upper limbs renders the patient unable to hold objects stably. The boy was born in good condition, and his family history was not significant.
The patient showed bilateral gastrocnemius muscle hypertrophy, contracture of the bilateral ankle joint, and foot drop. In addition, the patient had a significantly increased serum CK (creatine kinase) value, about 34 times the average level. We preliminarily diagnosed the patient with DMD according to the characteristic signs we observed. We performed electromyography and magnetic resonance imaging on the patient. The results also showed pathological changes of bilateral lower limbs that supported our diagnosis. Unexpectedly, we also found multiple abnormal signals in the patient’s frontotemporal and parietal lobes, brainstem, right basal ganglia, and right cerebellar hemisphere .
To further clarify the diagnosis, we performed a WES examination on the patient and their parents after obtaining the consent of their families. The results showed that the patient had a repeat of exon 3 to exon 9 of the DMD from the patient’s mother, consistent with our previous diagnosis. Interestingly, we also found another variant, a heterozygous nonsense mutation c.418G > T in exon 6 of PDCD10, absent in the patient’s parents. (The pedigree chart in this family is shown in Fig. ). Since the variants of PDCD10 are related to CCMs, combined with the vascular abnormalities found in the patient’s head, we clarified that this patient is with both DMD and CCMs.
Because the patient did not show the symptoms of CCMs, we adopted a conservative strategy and recommended the patient review regularly to observe progression. As for DMD, it is still incurable. We had symptomatic treatment for the patient, but the muscle weakness shown by the patient was not relieved. The patient’s family refused further treatment for personal reasons and was automatic discharge. A follow-up visit was not available.
It is worth noting that the patient is 115 cm ( -3SD) in height and 18.1 kg (-3SD) in weight, with prominent short stature and retarded bone maturation. We performed some endocrine tests, such as thyroid function and growth hormone levels. However, the results could not explain these abnormalities.