A 44-year old previously healthy Sinhalese male presented on the third day (day 3) of the illness with high fever, headache, arthralgia and myalgia affecting all limbs and watery loose stools. Upon examination he was not dehydrated, there were no skin sepsis/rashes, pulse rate was 76/min, blood pressure was 110/80 mmHg and cardiovascular, respiratory and abdomen examination findings were unremarkable. The test for dengue NS1 antigen was positive on the same day (SD bioline NS1 kit, Standard Diagnostics Inc., Korea). His leukocyte count was 6.64 × 109/l on the day 2 and 80.9% of that were neutrophils. We started managing him symptomatically for dengue as per the current (2012) national guidelines which is similar to the World Health Organization’s 2009 guidelines for the management of clinical dengue . The timeline below illustrates the sequence of salient events of his illness. We describe the events in detail following it.
On day 4 of the illness his platelet count dropped sharply from 190 × 109/l to 47 × 109/l, hematocrit showed > 10% rise from the day 2 value (baseline) for a brief period and he developed a mild cough. There was a moderate amount of free fluid in the peritoneal cavity but no pleural effusion in the ultrasound scan report. DHF was diagnosed. The patient had fever until day 5, after which it subsided from day 6 to day 8 of the illness. On day 5 there was a clinical bilateral pleural effusion as well, which was confirmed by ultrasound scan and by chest X-ray. On days 5–7 platelet count was 24-28 × 109/l and then gradually rose. However he never had clinical bleeding manifestations.
On day 5 he complained of severe myalgia of both lower limbs especially in the thighs more on the left and there was severe tenderness and non pitting edema of the lower limbs. He could not walk during the days 5–10 of the illness. There was pain (without other signs of inflammation) in the intravenous cannula site in the right forearm and the cannula was removed. Creatine kinase was twice of the normal upper limit (372 IU/l, normally < 170 IU/l) and it had risen to a peak of 917 IU/l on day 8 and dropped to 235 IU/l on day 11. Urine myoglobin test was unavailable. We initially suspected the possibility of dengue myositis but considering the persistence of high neutrophil percentage, searched for evidence of sepsis as well. Ultrasound scan (USS) of both thighs done on day 7 confirmed inflammation of multiple muscles (heteregenous echogenicity) with subcutaneous tissue edema, there was fluid in between muscle compartments. Day 9 ultrasound scan demonstrated 1.4 × 5.3 mm fluid collection in left thigh muscles in addition, but without other evidence of abscess formation. Serial 12 lead electrocardiograms (ECG = EKG) and a 2D echocardiogram were done to exclude any possible myocardial involvement and the results were normal. On day 8 he developed a 3 mm size vesicles in the right forearm and a macular rash in both legs.
His C-reactive protein (CRP) level had risen from 37.4 mg/l (normally < 6 mg/l) on day 7 to 215.3 mg/l on day 9. On day 9 procalcitonin level was 13.5 ng/ml (> 2.0 ng/mL is highly suggestive of systemic bacterial infection). Leptospirosis is another locally prevalent infection that can give rise to a similar clinical picture . IgM test for leptospirosis was negative on day 9. Blood culture became positive for MRSA on the same day. Intravenous (IV) vancomycin and ciprofloxacin was started considering antibiotic sensitivity and minimum inhibitory concentrations, and continued for the next 21 days. He had high fever again from day 9 to day 12 and there was another fever spike on day 15 and thereafter he was fever free until day 30 (while he was on intravenous antibiotics).
On day 9 we detected bilateral inguinal lymphadenopathy. On day 11 he developed a small < 4 mm diameter abscess at the site of the first intravenous access and a large 3 cm diameter one above the ankle on the left. On day 12 the latter was drained and the pus culture yielded MRSA sensitive to the same antibiotics. When repeated on day 23 (13 days after start of intravenous antibiotics) USS showed the inflammation of thigh muscles partially resolved and no fluid collections.
Blood cultures repeated on day 15 and day 22 were negative. IgM rapid test for dengue (SD bioline IgM/IgG kit, Standard Diagnostics Inc., Korea) gave negative results on days 15,21 and 22, in contrary to our expectations. However, on day 28 ELISA for dengue Ig M (MAC-ELISA) and Ig G test in 1:1280 dilution done at the national Medical Research Institute became positive confirming the diagnosis of DHF.
Day 17 USS of the chest showed pleural effusions had resolved.
His weight of 79 kg upon admission had reduced to 65 kg on day 29. He managed to regain 3 kg in the next 21 days. The antibody tests for HIV-1 and HIV-2 were negative.
Immediately after stopping IV antibiotics again on day 30 and 31 the patient developed small fever spikes. The repeated blood culture, CRP and procalcitonin levels and full (complete) blood count did not show evidence of infection and he was sent home on oral ciprofloxacin and co-trimoxazole on day 33. On day 50 he was reassessed. His repeated full (complete) blood counts, liver and renal function tests, CRP and repeated 2D echocardiography were all normal. The wound of the drained abscess was also partially healed. Swabs were taken for MRSA from the nostrils, throat, both axillae and groin regions. He came back with reports after a week. In the groin swab there was MRSA but not in others. A new one centimeter diameter abscess and a 2.5x1cm abscess was detected 2 cm proximal to the previous large abscess in the left lower limb and the abscesses were drained. 4% chlorhexidine body wash was prescribed to eliminate MRSA from his skin. Thereafter he has defaulted follow up. Four months after his first admission his abscesses were healed and he was apparently healthy.