A 22-year-old woman sustained a closed right talar neck fracture, Hawkins type II, after falling from height. A pre-operative study was performed with anteroposterior and lateral ankle X-rays, as well as a computed tomography. There were three major talar fragments including an intermediate anteromedial displaced articular, head, and body . We performed a temporary posterior leg plaster and symptomatic care with limb elevation until surgery.
Surgery was performed with the patient supine, with an ipsilateral thigh tourniquet. To preserve the soft tissues and obtain an anatomic reduction, an arthroscopically assisted technique was employed, with a gravity irrigation system, without foot distraction devices. The conventional anterolateral and anteromedial portals were used. As the articular fragment was in anteromedial position, we first performed an anterolateral portal with irrigation and drainage of the fracture hematoma, to visualize directly the fragment with 4.0mm arthroscope. As the fragment was greatly displaced, we did a percutaneous reduction with fluoroscopy control, to achieve a better articular space work. Then, conversion to a minimally invasive approach from anteromedial portal (about 4cm) was performed, allowing to directly maintain the reduction of the intermediate articular fragment, confirm a stepof inferior to 1mm, debride synovium, and remove small articular fragments .
After fluoroscopic evaluation of global talar shape and reduction of the three fragments, provisional fixation with guidewires was performed. First, two 1.6mm guidewires were inserted medial and laterally in the dome articular fragment. Articular insertion site was arthroscopically controlled and directed to the posterior talar process with fluoroscopic control. We checked again the reduction, shape, and length of the talus. Next, another two 2.5mm guidewires were inserted percutaneously under fluoroscopic control, from the talar head into the posterior aspect of talar body to maintain reduction. After drill, two 3.0mm self-drilling self-tapping cannulated headless compression screws (DePuy Synthes) were inserted over the first two guidewires to fix the articular fragment to talar body, with direct visualization of articular screw position. Finally, other two 4.0mm cannulated partial threatened screws (Stryker) were used to complete the fixation .
We did not identify any other associated injuries, namely, osteochondral or ligament lesions.
The patient was kept non-weight-bearing; the ankle was protected with a posterior splint until stitches were removed in 2 weeks. Then, the patient was allowed to partial weight-bearing with a walker boot and crutches until computed tomography confirms fracture healing at 8 weeks. During this time, the patient was encouraged to do active motion of foot and ankle. Then, walker boot was removed and the patient-initiated partial weight-bearing with crutches, with progression as tolerated. Sports-related rehabilitation started at 6 months.
The radiological evaluation at 8 weeks revealed fracture healing with reduction maintained. A positive Hawkins sign was observed, indicative of intact blood supply. No degenerative changes of subtalar or talonavicular joints were observed on radiographs at 6-month follow-up .
At 6-month follow-up, one of the positive findings in clinical evaluation was a slight deficit of strength in supination, 4/5 according to the Medical Research Council scale. The inversion subtalar joint movement was also slightly restricted, compared to contralateral. However, the patient showed an important clinical improvement with rehabilitation program.
There were no swelling, no tenderness or pain, and no scar-related complaints. No differences in the hindfoot alignment were seen .
The patient had a visual analog scale of 1 and a foot and ankle outcome score of85% (symptoms and stiffness 86%, pain 89%, function and daily living93%, function, sports, and recreational activities65%, and quality of life subtotal69%).
At final follow-up, she started running without complaints and will progress to contact sports activities. At this point, she was very satisfied with the results and motivated to return to pre-injury activity level.
No post-operative complications occurred. Table 1 summarizes the radiological and clinical outcomes at final follow-up.