A 43-year-old Caucasian man presented with a moderate loss of visual acuity in his left eye (20/40) and normal right eye acuity (20/20). His medical, family, and psychosocial history was irrelevant. He did not have a history of medication use or previous diseases other than common childhood infectious diseases. For 12 months he complained of blurring, progressive alteration of night vision, and reduced contrast sensitivity in both eyes, with a much more pronounced effect in his left eye. Clinical diagnosis of DHRD was made after full ophthalmologic examination and detailed retinal imaging. Figure shows OCT and fundus autofluorescence in both eyes. ERG, including mesopic and photopic full-field ERGs as well as multifocal ERGs (mfERG), were performed at baseline and 7 days after treatment. Genetic analysis confirmed the common heterozygous DHRD mutation in EFEMP1: (2p16.1) (p.R345W; c.1033C > T).
He was offered NSLT for his left eye. After written informed consent and full explanation of methods and procedure were completed, he underwent the treatment in his left eye, which applies ultra-low energy laser pulses in 24 spots around the macula of one eye (0.15–0.45 mJ), using 400 μm diameter laser spots, 3 nanosecond pulse length, 532 nm wavelength and energy titrated to the patient. Clinical follow-up was conducted at 60 and 180 days after treatment. Table summarizes the clinical ophthalmological testing performed during follow-up. Visual acuity improved from baseline by two letters. There was a subjective improvement in blurring in his left eye. No morphological changes were apparent on fundoscopy, but increased autofluorescence in the treated eye was observed on imaging . Rod-mediated and cone-mediated ERG b-wave amplitudes showed an increase from baseline in both the treated eye (300%) and fellow eye (50%) . mfERG amplitudes did not change significantly from baseline, but the implicit time of the main positive component decreased by 8 milliseconds compared to baseline in the treated eye and by 5 milliseconds in the fellow eye . Subjective and clinical improvements persisted unchanged at 6-month follow-up. The rod-mediated and cone-mediated ERG b-wave amplitude remained unchanged (300% increase) in the treated eye and returned to the pre-treatment value in the fellow eye.