A 66-year-old man with a history of smoking and allergic rhinitis for the last 14 years presented at our clinic in May 2012 due to dyspnea and productive cough lasted for 6 months in spite of treatment with inhaled fluticasone (1000 µg/day)/salmeterol (50 µg/day). His chest X-ray in October 2012 showed multiple infiltrative shadows . A chest computed tomography revealed patchy infiltrations with ground glass attenuations predominantly around the pleura with air bronchograms inside in the left upper lobe . A physical exam revealed wheezing in all lung fields. He had neither nasal polyposis nor signs for atopic dermatitis or peripheral neuropathy. His white blood cell count was 14,600/µL with eosinophil count of 5,563/µL (38.1%). Serum immunoglobulin E (IgE) was 2,356 IU/mL (normal value <175) and Candida albicans specific IgE was positive (1.06 UA/mL, normal value < 0.34) but all other specific IgE antibodies were negative. His serum showed no evidence of parasitic infection, and was negative for antinuclear antibodies, myeloperoxidase-specific antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies (< 0.5 U/m, normal value <5), while positive for rheumatoid factor (RF, 26.2 IU/mL, normal value <15). Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) from the left upper lobe was predominantly eosinophilic (69.3%) without significant pathogens. A transbronchial lung biopsy from the left upper lobe revealed eosinophilic inflammation without evidence of vasculitis or granuloma. Bone marrow aspiration was performed and was negative for malignancy and the FIP1L1-PDGFR fusion gene.
After ruling out other known causes of eosinophilic pneumonias, a diagnosis of CEP was made based on the duration of clinical symptoms (>2 weeks), abnormal chest radiographic findings, eosinophilia, and evident eosinophilic infiltration in the lung. His respiratory symptoms quickly resolved with prednisolone (PSL) therapy but relapsed in April 2013. BALF from the right upper lobe was eosinophilic (16.9%) despite oral prednisolone therapy. Continuous prednisolone therapy was necessary because of 2 flares including abovementioned flare that occurred during the tapering . In September 2017, subcutaneous injection of mepolizumab (100 mg every 4 weeks) was initiated to control CEP and to reduce the corticosteroid dose; PSL was tapered by 1 to 2 mg per 4 weeks without worsening of respiratory symptom; however, in January 2018, after 5 injections with mepolizumab and during PSL tapering at the dose of 2 mg/day, he developed polyarthralgia and joint stiffness. In May 2018, PSL was tapered off without worsening of respiratory symptom. His arthralgia in bilateral proximal interphalangeal joints continued but he was not treated as RA because signs of active synovitis were absent and his hand X-ray did not show bone erosion. However, his arthritis gradually exacerbated and the number of affected joints increased. Finally in July 2018, a diagnosis of RA was made based on the criteria of American College of Rheumatology/European League Against Rheumatism; namely, arthritis in 8 small joints, positive rheumatoid factor (22.6 IU/mL), and articular symptoms lasting longer than 6 weeks. Methotrexate was started at 8mg/week and increased to 12mg/week. In August 2018, his treatment was switched from mepolizumab (total of 10 injections) to benralizumab (initial 2 doses, 30 mg every 4 weeks; subsequently, 30 mg every 8 weeks) because it was difficult to completely rule out the possibility that his arthritis was an adverse reaction related to mepolizumab. Meanwhile, his arthritis gradually resolved with methotrexate. In May 2019, benralizumab was discontinued after 5 injections because no respiratory symptoms were noted during benralizumab therapy. Although his eosinophil count increased from 0% to ~10% at 3 months after the last benralizumab injection, no respiratory symptoms appeared for more than a year.