A 57 year-old woman had a traffic accident with traumatic brain death and was selected for organ donation. The woman was older than the upper age limit of 55 for heart donation.
Next, a careful cardiac history took form, with no background data of cardiac symptoms at rest or under effort. There was a history of mild systemic hypertension. A 12 -lead electrocardiogram resulted in non-specific T wave changes, often seen in brain death.
At time when doses of intravenous inotropic agents have been lowered to as low as is compatible with adequate blood pressure and cardiac output (noradrenaline 0.13 γ/Kg/min + dobutamine 2.8 γ/Kg/min) and after adequate fluid infusion a TT echocardiogram was taken demonstrating normal global and segmental ventricular function, no valvular disease .
To rule out moderate or severe heart and coronary disease, a TE Dipyridamole stress echo (6 minutes accelerated protocol) was performed .
The echo images were tape-recorded and periodically digitized. During the procedure, pressure and ECG were recorded every minute . Results of the transesophageal dipyridamole stress echo are shown in Additional Files (video clips) , ,, and . There was a normal response of the left ventricle during stress. Brachial blood pressure was measured with cuff sphygmomanometer. In every phase of the stress echo, the projections of the 4 chambers and of the apical 2 chambers were recorded to calculate the left ventricular telesystolic volume. This allowed us to calculate the systolic pressure/left ventricle telesystolic volume ratio in every moment when increasing the cardiac frequency during the stress and building, off-line, the force-frequency relation (FFR) of the left ventricle .
Wall motion was normal at baseline and at peak stress (WMSI = 1 at baseline and peak stress), without signs of stress inducible ischemia (Additional files , , , and ).
The pressure/volume relation was 9.6 mmHg/ml/m2 at baseline, increasing to 14 mmHg/ml/m2 at peak stress, FFR slope = 28 mmHg/ml/m2 /bpm demonstrating absence of latent myocardial dysfunction .
Systemic blood pressure decreased from 120/60 mmHg at baseline to 100/45 mmHg at peak stress.
LVEF % increased from 63% at baseline to 77% at peak stress.
Based on the dipyridamole stress results, despite the age beyond the 55 years limit, the heart was chosen for orthotopic heart transplantation, and was explanted with standard technique.
The recipient was "marginal" for co-morbidity. He was a 63 year old man with multiple myeloma and cardiac amyloidosis, chronic severe heart failure, NYHA class IV, LVEF = 13% (TT echocardiography, Figure ) .
The operation was performed by way of a median sternotomy incision, with cannulation of the aorta and both venae cavae. The implantation procedure required one hour. The incision was closed after placement of temporary pacing wires and chest drainage catheters .
After the transplant, the patient underwent a routine treatment and follow-up procedure.
Standard postoperative treatment was performed, mobilization and physical therapy was begun the day 7 after surgery.
Early immunosuppressant regimen was started according to the standard protocols.
The transplanted heart was assessed normal for dimensions and ventricular function at TT echocardiography on post-transplant day 7 (Additional files and ).
Coronary artery disease of the transplanted heart was ruled out at coronary angiography one month after transplant; left ventriculography showed normal global and segmental LV function .