This study was a prospective and observational study, approved by ethics committee of the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University and all methods were performed in accordance with the relevant guidelines and regulations.
A 28-year-old female was transferred to our Emergency Department with aphasia and right limb weakness of about 6 hours’ duration. The patient had no medical history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, heart disease, or blood disease. National Institute of Health stroke scale (NIHSS) score was 22. Emergency multiple-mode cranial computed tomography (CT) showed left MCA hyperdensity sign and low brain tissue density over more than 1/3 of the MCA territory . CT angiography revealed left MCA occlusion , whereas CT perfusion imaging showed cerebral hypoperfusion over the entire left MCA territory . Due to unknown stroke onset time and the large region of low brain tissue density on cranial CT, the patient did not receive intravenous thrombolysis and endovascular therapy. Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (DW-MRI) confirmed acute ischemic stroke . The patient was transferred to the Department of Neurology Ward Stroke Unit for further treatment.
Neurologic examination showed somnolence, dysphonia and dysphagia, sensitive bilateral pupil light reflex, eyes right gaze disorder, shallow right nasolabial fold, grade 0 right upper and lower limb muscle strength, normal left upper and lower limb muscle strength, positive right Babinski sign, and normal left Babinski sign. The patient was unable to cooperate for sensory examination. The NIHSS score was confirmed as 22. The patient received conventional medical treatment including mannitol, albumin, and furosemide for alleviating brain edema. A nutrient solution was administered through a gastric tube. Ganglioside was infused to protect against further brain injury and rosuvastatin to protect the vascular endothelium. A second-day repeated cranial CT showed MCA distribution infarction with brain edema and hemorrhagic transformation . Through strict medical management, the patient's medical condition improved. Third- and tenth-day repeated cranial CT also found a large infarct core complicated with brain edema and HT , whereas CT angiography indicated normal cervical artery patency . Laboratory tests and further imaging exams were conducted to elucidate the cause of ischemic stroke. Laboratory test results are detailed in the Table . Echocardiography was normal and first-time Holter electrocardiography revealed sinus rhythm of the heart with occasional ventricular premature beats, paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia, and frequent atrial premature beats with paroxysmal atrial tachycardia and intermittent T wave change. A TCD saline bubble study was negative and also indicated that peak systolic velocity (PSV) of the left MCA was greater than the right MCA (257 cm/s vs 135 cm/s). Cerebral digital subtraction angiography was also conducted to assess etiology, but results showed dilated left MCA with no vascular malformations . In light of medical history, laboratory examination results, infarct pattern, and cerebral angiography, the patient was diagnosed with probable cerebral embolism of unknown origin. Due to the large infarct lesion and HT, the patient did not receive antithrombotic therapy. A 1-week MR angiography study showed spontaneous complete recanalization of the left MCA and MCA dilatation . Arterial Spin Labeling (ASL) images showed higher blood flow of the left MCA distribution than the right . A repeated Holter examination about 2 weeks after presentation showed sinus rhythm of the heart with occasional ventricular premature beats and atrial premature beats. A 2-week repeated TCD revealed that the velocity of the left MCA had improved to 137 cm/s, about equivalent to the right MCA (141 cm/s). Two-week repeated susceptibility weighted imaging (SWI) showed hemosiderosis associated with HT, and MR images showed alleviated brain infarct core and brain edema . The patient's general condition was also improved, with NIHSS score falling to 14. The patient was then transferred to a rehabilitation center. Six weeks later, repeated MR angiography showed similar bilateral MCA structure but fewer branches from the left MCA .