A 48-year-old male presented to the ED with complaint of cough and worsening dyspnea on exertion (DOE). Specifically, he was told he had an elevated D-dimer and troponin that were confirmed the day before during outpatient laboratory testing. The patient had been seen the previous day by the pulmonology clinic due to chronic cough and DOE for 11 months. At that time, he had blood work (including D-dimer and troponin) and a computed tomographic pulmonary angiogram (CTPA), which was negative for pulmonary embolism or gross cardiac abnormality, but showed bilateral ground-glass opacities consistent with pulmonary edema or pneumonitis. Specifically, the patient’s CTPA results indicated a normal heart size without pericardial effusion or evidence of right heart strain, without mention of cardiomegaly or visualized cardiac thrombus. Given the abnormal labs resulted after his discharge home from the pulmonology clinic, when his D-dimer and troponin were reported as abnormal, he was called by the pulmonologist who requested return to the ED for further evaluation.
On arrival to the ED, the patient stated he was experiencing worsening DOE and mild chest pressure. He denied any radiation, pleuritic, or positional components of the pressure. He also denied any lightheadedness, syncope, diaphoresis, nausea, pain or swelling in his lower extremities, orthopnea, or paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea.
On chart review, we learned the patient had been seen in the lower acuity area of our ED six weeks prior for his chronic cough and reported DOE. His workup included a negative chest radiograph (CXR) and computed tomography of the chest with intravenous contrast. Given the patient’s lack of chest pain and previous “clean” health history, with complaint of cough, no further evaluation was completed during the initial ED presentation. With a negative workup at that time, the patient was advised to take an antihistamine for chronic sinusitis and referred to the pulmonology clinic for further evaluation. Of note, the patient was also seen by otolaryngology during the course of his symptoms and had a negative nasopharyngeal scope.
The patient had no other significant past medical or surgical history and no known drug allergies. His medications included albuterol, cetirizine, ipratropium, montelukast, omeprazole, tiotropium, prednisone, and over-the-counter testosterone supplements. Of note, these respiratory, gastric reflux, and seasonal allergy medications had only been added in recent months in attempts to treat his ongoing symptoms of cough and DOE. He denied any smoking history or recreational drug use; he did admit to consumption of three to five alcoholic beverages per day. He was employed as a commercial airline pilot and, prior to the onset of these symptoms, he was quite active and exercising daily. His family history was negative for venous thromboembolism, early cardiac disease, pulmonary disease, or aortic disease.
The patient’s vital signs were significant for an oxygen saturation of 88% on room air, heart rate 108 beats per minute, and blood pressure 138/90 millimeters of mercury. On physical exam, he was a healthy appearing, middle-aged male with conversational dyspnea. Head and neck exam were largely unremarkable. Chest exam revealed rales present in the mid and lower lung fields, bilaterally. Heart exam revealed a tachycardic rate with a regular rhythm and no murmurs or gallops. Lower extremities were symmetric, non-edematous, and non-tender bilaterally. Distal pulses were intact. Skin and neurological exams were normal. Given his hypoxia and conversational dyspnea, he was placed on supplemental oxygen and a point-of-care echocardiogram was performed by the emergency physicians (EP) ( and , ). POCUS revealed a dilated, globally hypokinetic left ventricle with a significantly reduced ejection fraction (EF). There was also a large, mobile, left ventricular (LV) mass initially concerning for neoplasm or thrombus. No pericardial effusion was visualized. It was evident that the EF was significantly reduced, estimated to be about 30%. Of note, the attending EP was a general EP without fellowship training or focused practice in POCUS who was supervising general emergency medicine residents.
Given these findings, we discussed the case with the cardiology service. Cardiology suspected thrombus more likely than mass due to the acute, decompensated heart failure. Medical management was initiated, including a heparin infusion. The patient was admitted to the cardiology service. Upon admission, transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed an EF of 29% with a large, mobile LV mural thrombus. Coronary catheterization revealed minimal coronary artery disease. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging showed an EF of 16%, LV mural thrombus, and evidence of LV non-compaction. The patient was ultimately diagnosed with non-ischemic dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), of uncertain etiology. He was discharged home with a life vest, optimal medical therapy, and was advised to stop using alcohol as well as testosterone supplements. At three months post discharge he remained on medical therapy, including anticoagulation. He was found to have a persistently diminished EF of 30% without signs of LV thrombus on repeat TTE.