In December 2013, a 58-year-old man presented with daily recurring hives that covered almost the entire body, increasing in size in the groin area on both sides, sparing the face. The pruritus was mild to nonexistent.
His past medical history included type 2 diabetes mellitus, reflux esophagitis, malignant melanoma, steatosis hepatis, and a deep venous thrombosis. The patient’s initial laboratory values showed a slightly elevated CRP and leukocytes in the normal range . Initially, the symptoms were interpreted as a reaction due to ACE inhibitor therapy, though no angioedema was present, and the patient received pulse therapy with high-dose systemic corticosteroids and oral antihistamines. The patient was advised to change antihypertensive therapy .
At the next visit in March 2014, there was no significant improvement in symptoms despite changes in the antihypertensive treatment, and the patient was diagnosed with chronic spontaneous urticaria. The patient had received prednisolone and antihistamines at various doses up to that time, but only prednisolone at higher doses (75 mg/d) reduced the daily hives significantly. A prednisolone weaning scheme was initiated, and the patient received treatment with desloratadine 3 times daily. As there was no improvement, therapy with omalizumab 300 mg was initiated in August 2014. The therapy did not lead to a reduction of symptoms. New cutaneous manifestations were present on the day of administration of the second dose, so the treatment was discontinued thereafter and the patient continued treatment with antihistamines at higher doses. In November 2014, the persistent urticarial symptoms were documented again .
The patient first revisited the clinic again in June 2017. He still showed recurrent macules and urticarial skin lesions, but at this visit, complete suppression of the urticarial lesions was documented with antihistamine treatment with desloratadine 3 times daily.
Since the last presentation in 2014, several unexplained anaphylactic reactions (Grade I) were documented. A skin biopsy was taken from the trunk to determine possible differential diagnoses. It showed an increased number of mast cells by tryptase staining. The bone marrow biopsy showed no signs of mastocytosis. Consequently, the diagnosis of cutaneous mastocytosis was made (serum tryptase: 5,5 µg/l; KIT D816V mutation: negative; immunofixation normal). In addition, the patient suffered from myasthenia gravis at that time and was treated with high-dose corticosteroids and azathioprine. This led to an improvement of the myasthenia gravis as well as the recurrent urticaria.
Only moderate urticarial outbreaks were documented during annual follow-up examinations. Regular blood tests documented discrete IgM-gammopathy (kappa) for the first time in April 2018, which was absent again in October 2018 and reappeared in April 2019.
At a follow up visit in May 2020, the patient, who was still receiving immunosuppressive therapy with azathioprine 100 mg twice daily, reported an increase in urticarial symptoms since January that were not improved by taking high-dose antihistamines. Furthermore, he complained of recurrent joint pain and chills. Again, a skin biopsy was taken to rule out urticarial vasculitis and further diagnostic workup revealed B-cell lymphopenia.
Because ongoing therapy with high-dose antihistamines did not improve symptoms, therapy with omalizumab 300 mg every 4 weeks was resumed in May 2021. Initially, the patient reported improvement in symptoms, but on the third dose, the patient reappeared with hives. Therefore, the omalizumab dose was increased to 450 mg in November 2021, but this also did not improve the hives. Local skin findings again showed multiple hives all over the body . Azathioprine, which is used for the therapy of myasthenia gravis, was reduced to 50 mg daily during this period.
In February 2022, the blood count showed persistent B-cell lymphopenia and an additional decrease in T-suppressor cells and NK cells, IgM gammopathy was at that time clearly detectable, and thus the patient fulfilled the two obligatory and at least two minor criteria for the diagnosis . The possible diagnosis of a Schnitzler syndrome was first made. An abdominal sonography showed no enlargement of the spleen but the already known steatosis hepatis. Regular hematological controls were initiated. In March, therapy with anakinra 10 mg 1 × daily was started and the patient continued to self-administer the daily injections. For the first 5 days, the patient had been symptom free for an extended period—substantiating the diagnosis of Schnitzler syndrome. Unfortunately, the patient then developed large erythematous reactions at the injection sites, resulting in a completely red and swollen abdomen and both thighs, accompanied by pain and fever . The patient had to discontinue further injections, and the hives recurred , while the erythematous reactions gradually disappeared over the next two weeks . Since anti-IL-1 therapy was effective, we decided to initiate therapy with canakinumab 150 mg/ml subcutaneously. At the follow-up 4 weeks after initiation of therapy, the patient was completely symptom-free for the first time in years . Therefore, therapy with canakinumab, a longer-acting drug with long admission intervals (8 weeks) was continued.