A 19-year-old Irish Caucasian woman presented to the hospital with a three-day history of abdominal pain and fever. The pain was gradual in onset and associated with nausea and one episode of vomiting. She had no urinary symptoms, and her last menstrual period had finished the previous day. She had no surgical history, and her medical history was significant only for viral meningitis two years previously. She denied any history of sexually transmitted disease or recent urinary tract infection. She was not taking regular medications and had no allergies. On examination, her vital signs were normal except for mild pyrexia of 37.4 °C. Examination of the abdomen revealed a tender mass in the right iliac fossa.
Laboratory investigations included a white cell count of 10,500 cells/mm, hemoglobin of 13.3 g/dl, and platelets of 212,000/mm. Urea and electrolytes were within normal ranges. Urine analysis was negative for leucocytes and urinary βHCG was negative.
A computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis was requested and showed a 10.4 × 4.5 × 3.8 cm loculated cystic mass in the right pelvis that appeared to contain the tip of the appendix . The patient remained febrile. Clinically, we made a working diagnosis of an appendix mass but considered a tubo-ovarian abscess as a differential. The patient was treated with intravenous antibiotics, and radiological drainage of the abscess was arranged. An ultrasound-guided drain was placed in the largest locule via the right iliac fossa. Unusually, 30 ml of serous fluid but no pus was aspirated. The drain was removed after three days with no further output. Drained fluid was sent for culture, and peripheral blood cultures showed no growth after 72 hours of incubation. After five days, intravenous antibiotics the patient was clinically well. She was discharged and readmitted two weeks later for an interval diagnostic laparoscopy, as we were now suspicious of a non-infective pathology based on the drain output. The patient consented to an appendicectomy if no other pathology was found.
At laparoscopy, a multiloculated, thin-walled and translucent cystic mass was seen in the right iliac fossa . Adherent to the cystic mass was a spherical, smooth-walled cyst in continuity with the tip of the appendix. The rest of the appendix, caecum, and large and small bowel appeared grossly normal. Both ovaries and the uterus were visualized and found to be normal. The diagnosis was not clear at this point, but our differential included a mucinous cystadenoma or adenocarcinoma (pseudomyxoma peritonei). The lesion appeared very friable, and we were concerned we would rupture it and contaminate the pelvis with the cyst fluid. We made a decision to convert to an open procedure using a Lanz incision to safely perform an appendicectomy and remove the cystic mass. The incision incorporated the previous drain site.
Macroscopy showed a 12-cm appendix with an attached 4 × 4 × 3 cm smooth cyst containing clear fluid. Numerous smaller translucent cysts up to 0.7 cm in diameter were loosely attached to and easily separated from the larger cyst . We concluded that the radiological drain had entered one of these cysts. Histological analysis revealed cysts lined with flattened mesothelial cells, and the walls were composed of loose connective tissue with occasional chronic inflammatory cells . These findings were consistent with a histological diagnosis of a multiloculated benign cystic mesothelioma. The appendix showed resolving appendicitis with perforation at the tip. The patient was discharged well on the second postoperative day and was also well at six-week and three-month follow-up.