A 38-year-old Caucasian woman with a history of TOT surgery 2 years ago presented to our hospital with complaints of urinary incontinence that emerged during coughing, walking, and physical exercises or activities. She had also experienced dysuria and urine leakage during sexual intercourse. Therefore, she had not had regular sexual intercourse for 2 years. Prior to her admission to our hospital, she was diagnosed as having SUI and used duloxetine (80 mg, daily) for 3 months. She took no other medications on a regular basis. She had performed Kegel exercises routinely. However, her symptoms persisted. She was a housewife, with no history of alcohol consumption or tobacco smoking. She had had two deliveries: one vaginal birth and one cesarean delivery. There was no similar history of illness in her family.
On admission, her temperature was 36.6 °C, pulse was 82 beats/minute, and blood pressure was 110/65 mmHg. She was fully conscious and responsive. Psychologically, she was depressed. On systematic physical examination, no abdominal tenderness and no anatomic anomalies were detected. No murmurs or arrhythmia were detected during auscultation of her heart. Respiratory frequency was 14/minute and no wheezing or rales were detected. On neurological examination, her muscle strength and tone were normal. Ulnar, patellar, and Achilles reflexes were all normal (2+). A urogynecological physical examination revealed SUI without any urogenital prolapse. In laboratory analysis, her total white blood cell count was 6.9 × 103/mm3, hemoglobin was 12.1 g/dL, alanine aminotransferase was 38 u/l, aspartate aminotransferase was 35 u/l, C-reactive protein was 1.1 mg/l, creatinine was 0.6 mg/dl, and serological tests were negative: hepatitis B surface antigen (HbsAg), anti-hepatitis C virus (HCV), and anti-HIV. Urine analysis showed microscopic hematuria and urine culture was sterile. Post-void residual volume was insignificant. A diagnostic cystoscopy was performed and sling material which crossed her bladder neck from 3 o’clock to 10 o’clock was identified . The mesh material was cut with an endoscopic internal urethrotomy knife and retrieved by using foreign body grasping forceps. Other mesh parts were excised through a transvaginal midurethral incision. New TOT material was placed and the procedure was terminated. Our patient was discharged on the first postoperative day. First week, 3-month, and 6-month follow-up visits showed complete absence of urinary incontinence and other urinary complaints.