A 65-year-old Caucasian man was referred to the Department of Otolaryngology because of a neck mass for the past six months. He reclaimed a left-side total parotidectomy surgery, without available documentation, more than ten years ago. He didn’t confess to any adjuvant therapy and was not under any follow-up. The initial physical exam revealed a bulging mass on the left posterior triangle of the neck which was non-tender, soft, and irregular on palpation. There was also another small subcutaneous lesion in the parotid masseteric region on the same side, and facial neurological examinations were normal.
Post-contrast neck computed tomography (CT) scan; demonstrated a very large cystic cervical mass (46 × 23 mm) with papillary projections in the antero-lateral aspect of the left neck zone Vb . Moreover, there was a small heterogeneously enhancing nodule with small central cystic components in the left pre-auricular region (at the site of the prior surgical bed) . In order to complete the restaging workup, a spiral lung CT was taken, which showed no distant metastases.
Ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration of the neck mass was done, and microscopic examinations revealed a hyper-cellular smear with a bloody background, composed of large polygonal oncocytic cells with abundant cytoplasm, round to oval large nuclei and distinct nucleoli, without mitotic activity, arranged in sheets, cohesive clusters, and isolated cells. These findings were more in favor of an oncocytic carcinoma.
After general anesthesia, the patient underwent left radical neck dissection (level I-V) and revision parotidectomy procedure, because of the probability of metastasis and recurrence of the previous surgery site, as well as, the adhesion of the remnant parotid tail to the submandibular gland.
Grossly the main specimen consisted of multiple fragments of tan-brown rubbery tissues, aggregating to about (13.5 × 6.5×3cm). On cut sections, the mass was friable and heterogeneous, with hemorrhagic foci, containing a centrally-located (3.7 × 1.5×1cm) hemorrhagic cystic space .
Histopathology sections revealed a multi-nodular proliferation of neoplastic cells infiltrating adipose-muscular tissue , with variable architectural patterns including papillary, cribriform, closely packed micro-cysts and tubules lined by bland-looking cells with abundant colloid-like Periodic acid Schiff (PAS) positive and diastase resistant bubbly secretions . The neoplasm was associated by hemorrhagic foci, hemosiderin depositions, and cholesterol clefts with no evidence of lymph node residue. Tumor cells had eosinophilic and vacuolated cytoplasm with a high nuclear to cytoplasm (N/C) ratio, relatively monomorphic round vesicular nuclei, and small distinct nucleoli . Foci of HGT, including of desmoplastic stromal reaction, comedo-type necrosis, nuclear pleomorphism, and loss of secretory activity with perineural invasion were noted . Nevertheless, evaluation of the pre-auricular mass revealed a low-grade conventional SC without HGT or even neural invasion .
By immune-staining tumoral cells were strongly positive for Ck7 and S100 , patchy positive for Mammaglobin and GATA3, while negative for GCDFP-15 , DOG1 , ER, AR, Synaptophysin and P63. Histomorphology and immune-staining results were consistent with the final diagnosis of SC.
Unfortunately, the patient didn’t consent for adjuvant radiation therapy.12 months later throughout the follow-up, he developed a new recurrence at the cervical adipo-muscular site (level IV-V-VII) without lymph node involvement. Surgery was done again to remove the mass. However, the surgery was complicated due to thoracic duct injury, and developed a chylous fistula which needed 2-weeks of hospitalization and reoperation.