A 53 years old female patient was presented in the Department of Oral Medicine & Pathology and Hospital Dentistry and referred to the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery of the Dental School of University of Athens, in January 2018, with chief complain of extreme tooth mobility in the mandible, periodical swelling in the gum area, difficulty chewing and pain in the anterior mandible. The patient also mentioned that the most of the symptoms started when shortly after the orthodontic treatment was initiated.
The patient was referred in our department due to the aggravated medical history and the need of surgical management of the hopeless teeth in the mandible.
Thorough medical and dental history was taken and revealed a number of conditions affecting the dental and oral surgery procedures. According to the patients’ medical file, she was diagnosed with breast cancer in July 2007. The patient undergone partial mastectomy and then she completed successfully six cycles of chemotherapy (3 cycles of 5 fluorouracil -epirubicin -cyclophosphamide and 3 cycles of docetaxel- epirubicin), radiotherapy and hormonal control until August of 2013. In September of 2015, bone metastasis in the spine were observed in a regular recall for the malignancy. The patient undergone radiotherapy in the lower spine and started chemotherapy with Vinorelbine, Cyclophosphamide, Exemestane until August 2018. The patient received antiresorptive agent (denosumab) from October 2015 until April 2017, medication with denosumab interrupted for three months and resumed until February 2018.
The patient also mentioned that she started orthodontic therapy in May 2017 in order to align the anterior teeth in the mandible, for better function and aesthetics. The orthodontic treatment was ongoing when the patient presented with extreme tooth mobility and swelling in the anterior mandible.
Clinical examination of the patient showed multiple fistulae in the anterior region of the mandible, severe mobility of the teeth #35-45, pain in the chin area and progressive swelling of the anterior mandibular region . The swelling according to the patient was treated conservatively with antibiotic medication. After that the patient referred for radiological examination with Dental Scan. The CBCT of the patient revealed large radiolucent areas involving the root of the teeth #35-45 and several defects on the buccal cortical plate in the region, finding that are consisting with the clinical diagnosis of MRONJ .
The clinical and radiological findings in addition with patient’s medical history led us to the diagnosis of MRONJ stage II based on the staging system developed and updated by Ruggiero et al. in 2014. The patient was informed of her condition and the treatment plan proposed included extraction of the hopeless teeth and surgical management of the region in order to limit the expansion of the MRONJ. Absence of antiresorptive medication for the past 10 months was favorable for surgical management after 4 months (since September 2018) of irresponsive conservative treatment.
The patient was informed of the complications of the surgery and also the high relapse rates and gave written consent in order to proceed to the first surgery in January of 2019. Under local anesthesia, a crestal incision was made and teeth #35-32 and #41-45 were extracted. A wide flap was developed in order to recognize the necrotic bone and remove the granuloma tissue surrounding the sockets . The bone removal stopped when vital, vascularized bone recognized clinically. All sharp bony edges were smoothened in order to facilitate optimum environment for soft tissue healing . Releasing incisions were made in order to achieve primary closure. Two-layer suturing technique was used in order to achieve tension free closure of the flaps . Tooth number #36 was spared due to lack of mobility despite the moderate prognosis. A biopsy of soft and hard tissue was performed. Histopathologic examination showed necrotic bone with empty osteocyte lacunae, absence of osteoblastic and osteoclastic activity and bacterial colonies adherent to the necrotic bone surface . In addition, a dense and fibrotic connective tissue with diffuse inflammatory infiltration was also noticed. A final diagnosis of MRONJ was revealed.
Two weeks after surgery, failure to achieve primary closure of the soft tissue and exposed bone was observed in the area close to the tooth #36. Also increasing mobility and inability of restoration in this particular tooth was observed. Soft tissue was left for healing for another four weeks with no result. Therefore, a second localized surgical intervention was performed in order to extract tooth #36 and promote primary soft tissue healing in the region. The region was scraped until clinically vital bone was reached and granuloma tissue was removed from the sockets. The flaps sutured with double layer technique and covered the exposed alveolar ridge.
Two weeks later in the scheduled recall, soft tissue healing and integrity was excellent and no sign of inflammation observed. Regular recall of the patient every two months was scheduled and no prosthetic rehabilitation was advised.
Seven months later the patient complained about mild pain in the left mandibular area. Clinical examination revealed fistulas in the specific area . Antibiotics were subscribed in order to control the inflammation and radiological examination with CBCT was programmed. CBCT showed a large radiolucent area in the left side of the mandible matching the radiological findings of MRONJ . The patient was informed of the relapse and the need of a third surgical procedure.
Under local anesthesia, a large flap in the edentulous alveolar ridge was raised in order to debride thoroughly the region. Bone sequestrum and plenty of granuloma tissue were removed. The inflammatory granuloma tissue was discovered in all residual sockets and bony undercuts . It is noTable that minimal or not at all bone healing was observed even though the patient had the last dose of antiresorptive medication 14 months before the relapse. Deep periosteum releasing incision was made in order to cover the area with tension free flaps. Sutures were removed two weeks after the surgery and the patients had no relapse in the 13 months observation period followed . Nine months after the last surgery the patient was restored prosthetically with a removable denture . The restoration was designed in order tο minimize the pressure in the soft tissue. Trauma in the mucosa from dentures is a very common trigger factor of MRONJ that has to be eliminated in every case. Radiological examination 3-years after first surgery shows no sign of sequestrum or other defect in the mandible . Frequent recalls were programmed for the patient and thorough oral hygiene was performed periodically.