A 31-year-old, otherwise healthy man presented to our clinic with a 7-day history of central scotoma and metamorphopsia in his right eye. A local dermatologist had diagnosed an erythema involving maculopapular and vesicular eruptions on both hands, feet, and inside his mouth as HFMD 2 days before his visual symptoms began . A few days before the erythema’s onset, the patient had complained about severe fatigue, sore throat, fever, and chills. Two weeks before symptoms’ onset, his 4-year-old daughter presented similar symtoms and signs of HFMD.
At his initial ophthalmologic examination, best corrected Snellen visual acuity was 20/400 in the right and 20/20 in the left eye. Intraocular pressure was 15 mmHg in both eyes. Goldmann peripheral visual field testing was within normal limits in the left eye and revealed a central scotoma in the right eye . Slit lamp examination showed no cellular infiltration in the anterior chamber in either eye. Fundus examination of the right eye revealed central and parafoveal retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) irregularities and yellow retinal dots . Fundus autofluorescence (FAF) demonstrated focal dots of decreased FAF surrounded by increased FAF corresponding to funduscopically detected focal alterations in the retinal RPE, and yellow retinal dots . The left eye revealed no abnormalities. Spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) demonstrated irregularities in the ellipsoide zone, as well as hyperreflective dots in the RPE . Fundus fluorescein angiography (FAG) exhibited central hypofluorescence in the macular area in the early phase, and focal hyperfluorescence in the late phase corresponding to RPE defects observed in FAF . No macular exudation, extramacuar abnormalities or signs of vasculitis were observed. Indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) showed central hypofluorescence in the early and late phase .
One month after initial ophthalmologic examination, visual acuity of the right eye improved spontaneously and reached 20/25 (left eye 20/20). Dermatological lesions subsided and only fingernail onychomadesis persisted. SD-OCT revealed persistent RPE changes . The focal areas of increased autofluorescence changed to areas of decreased autofluorescence - changes that were associated with a subjectively improved vision and alleviated scotoma.
Three months after his initial ophthalmologic examination, the patient was symptom-free. Interestingly, SD-OCT now revealed subretinal fluid, which increased until 6 months after the initial examination . FAG und ICGA showed no signs of choroidal neovascularization . Since the patient was symptom-free, no systemic or local therapy was prescribed. A year after his initial examination, the right eye’s visual acuity was stable at 20/20, there was no detectable scotoma , and the subretinal fluid had resolved spontaneously while FAF exhibited persistent areas of hypoautofluorescence .
In addition to the conventional examinations, we conducted OCT-A (Zeiss Cirrus 5000 AngioPlex®) at his initial examination and at all follow-ups. Corresponding with the area of focal dots of decreased FAF surrounded by increased FAF and central hypofluorescence in the FAG and the ICGA, the choriocapillaris (CC), detected by OCT-A, revealed reduced flow at initial examination . Over time, CC architecture recovered nearly completely , whereas anomalies in FAF, FAG and ICGA also changed, but remain.