A 62-year-old retired male with only mild hypertension was brought to the emergency department 1 h after bee stings to the ear and face. The initial symptoms were nausea, vomiting, and headache. On examination, he was found to have dysarthria, bulbar weakness, and right hemiparesis involving the arm and leg. The National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale score was 5. His blood pressure on presentation was 120/77 mmHg. The electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with a heart rate of 72 beats per minute. His initial non-contrast head CT was negative for hemorrhage or any acute processes. To treat a possible allergic reaction, he was given intravenous methylprednisolone and calcium gluconate. Given the possibility of acute stroke, intravenous alteplase (0.9 mg/kg) was also administered. Unfortunately, his symptoms did not improve.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain was performed, which showed acute infarcts in the left medulla oblongata .
Head and neck CT angiography (CTA) was performed, which showed significant stenosis in the basilar artery, and occlusion in the V4 segment of the left vertebral artery . Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) showed significant stenosis in the V4 segment of the right vertebral artery, occlusion in the V4 segment of the left vertebral, and left posterior cerebral arteries . Thrombectomy was initially considered, but it was aborted due to hemodynamic instability. CT brain the next day showed acute infarcts in the left parieto-occipital region and the left thalamus . Repeat magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) head and neck was performed 25 days after presentation, which showed persistent stenosis in the V4 segments of the bilateral vertebral arteries, but patent bilateral posterior cerebral arteries .
He had a normal hepatorenal function, interleukin-6, fibrinogen, urine analysis, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and coagulation testing. He was discharged to an acute rehabilitation facility. Unfortunately, at a one-year clinical follow-up, he had persistent neurologic deficits. He required percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy due to dysphasia and tracheostomy. He was also unable to ambulate independently.