A 35-year-old male patient presented to our hospital with abdominal pain that transmitted to his left flank for the past two weeks, exacerbated during the last 2 days, and was accompanied by nausea and vomiting. His generalised, persistent abdominal pain was not associated with position or food ingestion. Additionally, it did not improve with symptomatic drugs. The patient had a history of NF1 and underwent surgical excision of a cervical neurofibroma a and fatty mass years ago. The patient had no significant drug history or family history and denied smoking or drinking alcohol.
Upon clinical examination, a pulsatile, mobile mass was palpated in the upper left flank, and multiple skin lesions were observed. Physical examination also revealed whole body, several café-au-lait skin macules and a subcutaneous neurofibroma. His vital signs included a body temperature of 37°C, 96% oxygen saturation, 130/80 mmHg arterial blood pressure, and a heart rate of 90 beats per min. Complete blood count tests, serum creatinine, urinalysis, and serum electrolytes were all within normal limits.
The patient underwent an abdominal doppler ultrasound which revealed a large aneurysm of the left renal artery with a patent artery lumen. The kidney was 12 cm in length with normal cortico-mudular differentiation. A multi-slice computed tomography angiogram (CTA) was conducted, which demonstrated a large RAA [Figure ]. Furthermore, a multi-slice computed tomography with contrast further identified the size of the aneurysmal cavity [Figure B] in comparison to the aorta and displacement of the left kidney [Figure A]. Radioisotope renography showed a functional left kidney.
The patient was scheduled for surgery with the intention to excise the aneurysm and re-implant the left kidney directly into the left iliac fossa. Consent to perform nephrectomy was obtained in case auto-transplantation was not possible. A left pararectal incision and a retroperitoneal approach was used. The renal vein was found to be elongated, stretched, and compressed by the lesion. During surgical exploration, the aneurysm involved the entirety of the renal arterial trunk and its branches, excluding the possibility of re-implanting the kidney. As a result, a total nephrectomy was conducted. No blood transfusions were required. Repeated lab results included a haemoglobin level of 12.6 g/dl, a haematocrit of 37%, a white blood cell count of 8.82×103/ul, a platelet count of 292×103/ul, and a creatinine level of 0.68 mg/dl. The patient had an uneventful hospital stay and was discharged on the third post-operative day with no complaints.
Gross examination of the resected left kidney (142 g) revealed a congested pelvicalyceal system. The dissected aneurysm consisted of an open cystic cavity measuring 12 ×8.5 × 6 cm which contained a gelatinous haemorrhagic clot (11 ×6 × 5 cm) [Figure ]. The aneurysm wall, 1 cm thick, showed fibrosis, calcification, and yellow-coloured tissue. Histological examination of multiple sections from the dissected kidney demonstrated mild focal chronic inflammation with focal haemorrhages. No neoplastic changes were seen. Histological examination of a thick segment of RAA demonstrated fibrosis, calcification, and haemorrhage that replaced most of the arterial wall with missing tunica media and intima. A skin biopsy taken from the patient’s skin lesions was consistent with neurofibroma.