A 67-year old Caucasian male of German descent presented to the emergency department of an external hospital at December 8th 2006 due to severe upper back pain. His past medical history was unremarkable. He had no history of previous TB or TB exposure. His complaints had emerged over the past six month and were accompanied by slight night sweats and a moderate weight loss. Physical examination and routine laboratory studies on admission including hemoglobin, white blood count and C-reactive protein (CRP) were within normal range. Conventional radiographs of the chest and the thoracic spine revealed a compression fracture of the third thoracic vertebra (Th3) and a solitary pulmonary nodule of the left upper lobe . On the basis of this coincidence, a pathological vertebral fracture secondary to metastatic lung cancer was suspected. The further work-up included a computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest and of the spine, which confirmed the thoracic vertebral compression fracture. Moreover, it revealed lytic destructions of the posterior margins of both adjacent vertebral bodies and showed an intraspinal soft tissue mass expanding between Th2 and Th5. Additionally, a tumorous lesion of the ventral left upper lobe was observed. Apparent mediastinal lymphadenopathy was interpreted as metastatic disease of the mediastinal lymph nodes . Bone scintigraphy was not suggestive of malignancy and detected only minor degenerative alterations of the upper spine. Both repeated transbronchial biopsies, which had been obtained by flexible bronchoscopy, and repeated CT-guided transthoracic needle biopsies of the pulmonary nodule failed to establish a specific histological diagnosis, and were read as "necrosis compatible with necrotic tumor tissue".
Given the progressive back pain and supposed spinal instability, the patient was referred to another external hospital, where a palliative irradiation of the upper thoracic spine was initiated and a cumulative dose of 36 Gy was applied over three consecutive weeks. However, the patient's condition deteriorated and he soon developed paresthesia and paralysis of both lower limbs. At this point, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spine revealed an extensive intraspinal abscess, which resulted in compression of the upper thoracic spinal cord. Hence, the patient was immediately referred to the neurotraumatological service of our university hospital for surgical treatment.
Upon arrival at our institution on January 10th 2007 the patient presented with incomplete paraplegia at the level of Th3. Promptly, spinal decompression surgery including laminectomy of Th2 to Th4, revision of vertebra Th3, and thoracic spondylodesis from Th1 to Th6 was performed. The histology of the removed intraspinal soft tissue mass was read as an unspecific chronic inflammatory and granulating process. No malignancy or specificity was evident. Routine cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cultures were sterile. No further CSF analyses were performed. Soon, after an initial post-operative improvement, the patient deteriorated again and developed a persistent dorsal swelling, reddening, and fluid collection that was suggestive of a paravertebral abscess . Thus, surgical revision was repeated. Again, routine CSF cultures grew no microorganisms and no further CSF analyses were prompted. Nevertheless, temperatures >38.0°C persisted despite the use of various antimicrobial regimes. Repeated routine blood cultures remained sterile and infectious endocarditis was ruled out by transesophageal echocardiography. A CT scan of the brain, which was performed due to persistent headaches, showed no abnormalities, while a follow-up CT scan of the chest showed multiple novel opacities with tree-in-bud sign .
When the patient was finally referred to the pulmonary department for further evaluation of the initially suspected metastatic lung cancer on February 28th 2007, he had developed a new brachiofacially accentuated, right-sided hemiparalysis and aphasia. Now, MRI of the brain revealed multiple fresh ischemic bihemispheric and pontine lesions. Again, infectious endocarditis was ruled out.
The patient was febrile with a temperature of 39.3°C despite an antimicrobial regime consisting of Imipeneme/Cilastatin, Vancomycin, Ciprofloxacin, and Metronidazole, which had been administered for the past two weeks. At this time, the major findings on physical examination included cachexia, signs of respiratory distress (a respiratory rate of 25/min, productive cough, but insufficiently coughing up), moderate fluid overload (bilateral basal pulmonary rales, peripheral edema), and a dorsal paravertebral reddish and fluctuating swelling at the site of prior surgery, but no meningeal signs. Furthermore, we observed oral candidiasis and a unilateral segmental herpes zoster rash at the lower back that both indicated relevant immunosuppression. Now, routine laboratory studies showed markedly increased inflammatory activity (CRP 22 mg/dL), but a normal white blood count of 4,900/μL. HIV serology was negative. Remarkably, the interferon-γ release assay QuantiFERON®-TB Gold In-Tube was negative (IFN 0.189 IU/mL).
However, complicated and disseminated TB with bone, soft tissue, CNS, and pulmonary involvement was suspected by thoroughly reviewing the patient's previous history and medical course. We immediately prompted retrospective polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis of the surgically resected tissue regarding the presence of Mycobacterium-tuberculosis-(MTB)-complex DNA and initiated microbiological sampling for the confirmation of the suspected diagnosis. Aspirates of the dorsal fluid collection suggested an abscess (purulent appearance, low glucose concentration of 0.3 mmol/L), but no CSF fistula (low β-trace-protein of 3.8 mg/L). No microorganisms were detected on gram stain or acid-fast bacilli (AFB) smear. CSF was obtained by lumbar puncture and showed signs of purulent meningitis (800/μL predominantly polymorphonuclear cells, low glucose concentration of 0.8 mmol/L, elevated protein level of 1.5 g/L). CSF microscopy (gram stain and AFB smear), routine cultures, and PCR for MTB-complex DNA were negative. As the patient was suffering from severe respiratory distress, bronchoscopy was considered potentially harmful and therefore abandoned. Instead, repeated morning fasting gastric acid aspirates, which may be considered as swallowed respiratory secretions according to the German authorities , were obtained for TB cultures in order to evaluate for the dissemination of viable mycobacteria via the respiratory route. AFB smears of repeated gastric acid aspirates were negative. Subsequently, both PCR results of the resected intraspinal tumor tissue and the aspirate of the paravertebral abscess indicated the presence of MTB-complex DNA. After two weeks TB cultures grew MTB from both the abscess and gastric acid aspirates and after six weeks from CSF, too. The MTB isolate was fully susceptible to all first line antimycobacterial drugs. All samples had been negative on AFB smears with both auramine and Ziehl-Neelsen staining .
On March 7th 2007, a total of 57 days after referral to our hospital, and three months after the first presentation to the external hospital, isolation and antimycobacterial treatment with rifampicine, isoniazide, pyrazinamide, and streptomycin were initiated. Due to apparent meningitis, extensive cerebral vasculitis, and suspected arachnoiditis, an adjuvant treatment with oral corticosteroids was administered and tapered after three weeks . Lumbar puncture was repeated one week after treatment initiation and showed clearly improved findings (290/μL mixed mono- and polymorphonuclear cells, negative AFB smear, negative TB cultures after eight weeks). Within the following weeks the patient's general and neurological condition gradually improved. Isolation was terminated and mobilization into a wheel chair was achieved after four weeks of treatment due to intensive physical therapy (See additional file : Table S1 - Summary of the patient's diagnostic and therapeutic in-hospital course). Unfortunately, at April 12th 2007 the patient died due to a lethal episode of ventricular fibrillation with cardiac arrest. Autopsy confirmed all clinically suspected TB-related diagnoses: spinal TB (Pott's disease) with subsequent tuberculous meningoencephalitis, extensive cerebral vasculitis , spinal arachnoiditis, paravertrebral tuberculous abscess, miliary pulmonary TB , and a tuberculoma of the ventral left upper lobe . Death occurred secondary to CNS dysregulation with elevated intracranial pressure .