A 72-year-old woman presented with headache and was admitted to our hospital. Neurologic and physical examinations demonstrated no abnormality. Computed tomography scans showed an abnormal mass lesion in the right frontotemporal convexity region. The lesion was surrounded by marked cerebral edema. Mass effect was noted on the midbrain. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging showed a mass with a similar signal intensity on the T1-weighted image and high signal intensity on the T2-weighted image , respectively. Contrast-enhanced axial T1-weighted images showed a well-enhanced, dural-based mass compressing the right temporal and frontal lobes, and extending into the sylvian cistern and filling the cortical sulci. It is specifically these subarachnoid components of the tumor in the sulci that showed relatively little mass effect. Coronal and sagittal enhanced T1-weighted images also showed unusual enhancement patterns . Cerebral angiography showed a mild tumor blush supplied by the right middle meningeal artery and middle cerebral artery.
The patient underwent a right frontotemporal craniotomy, and the tumor was partially resected. The removed specimens consisted of the tumor tissues only, and did not include the surrounding brain tissues. Microscopically, dyscohesiveness of tumor cells was observed. The tumor was globally composed of rhabdoid cells showing large eosinophilic cytoplasm and eccentrically placed, medium-sized round nuclei with prominent nucleoli . There were many tumor cells with an inclusion-like round structure in their cytoplasm. The patterns seen in conventional meningiomas, such as whorl or psammoma body formations, were not observed. Neither necrosis nor microvascular proliferation was present in the tumor, although scattered mitotic cells (3 mitoses per 10 high-power fields) were seen. Immunohistochemically, the cytoplasm was strongly positive for vimentin . Epithelial membrans antigen was focally expressed. GFAP, S-100, and AE1/3 were negative. The MIB-1 staining index was approximately 8%. Postoperative course was uneventful and MR images demonstrated resection of the temporal mass lesion . The patient was discharged home for outpatient radiotherapy treatment. MR imaging performed 24 months later did not revealed regrowth of the residual tumors.