A 47-year-old right-handed Japanese man was admitted to Keio University Hospital with acute onset of sensory aphasia.
Fourteen days before his admission the patient began to have difficulties in operating computers and document processing software. The symptoms worsened over the next 10 days, without headache, fever, or seizure. Three days before his admission, at evening, he suddenly became incoherent and agitated in association with impaired auditory comprehension. He underwent a brain MRI at another hospital; he was suspected of having a herpes simplex encephalitis (HSE), and then he was referred and admitted to the department of neurology at our hospital for further evaluation and treatment. Prior to admission he had no hypoglycemic episodes, preceding viral infection, recent medication changes, or other precipitating events leading to seizure.
He had a past medical history of type-2 diabetes since the age of 41 years, for which he had been treated with acarbose, but he had no other history including cardiomyopathy, atrial fibrillation, migraine, sensorineural hearing loss, seizures, or psychiatric illness. His growth and development were normal. His mother suffered from type-1 diabetes and deafness, which had begun in her 40s, and suddenly died of unknown cause at the age of 68 years. He had no habit of smoking, drinking, or the use of illicit drugs.
On admission (day 1), the temperature was 36.6 °C, the blood pressure 110/65 mmHg, the pulse 84 beat per minute, and the oxygen saturation 97% while he was breathing ambient air. The height was 154 cm, and the weight was 42 kg; the body mass index was 17.7, but physical examination was otherwise unremarkable. On neurologic examination the patient was awake but agitated and uncooperative. He was able to speak fluently but he had paraphasia and preservation; naming, repetition, and auditory and reading comprehension were severely impaired, implying sensory predominant aphasia. Motor and sensory examination was grossly intact. The neck was supple.
All results of the blood tests on admission were unremarkable, including serum CK level (71 U/L), except an elevated level of HbA1c (7.3%). Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination revealed 1 white blood cell/μL, and a protein level of 46 mg/dl. Oligoclonal bands were negative. A polymerase chain reaction testing was negative for herpes simplex virus. CSF levels of pyruvic and lactic acid were not examined. A brain MRI obtained on admission showed increased diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI)/fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) signal in the left anterolateral temporal lobe mainly affecting the cerebral cortex with underlying subcortical edema . Apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) maps showed mild reduction in ADC values in the left anterior temporal cortex suggesting cytotoxic edema, but increase in ADC values in the underlying subcortical white matter suggested vasogenic edema. A MRA did not show vasospasm or vascular occlusion. An electroencephalogram (EEG) recorded on day 4 showed sporadic sharp waves at the left fronto-parietal region.
After admission the patient was empirically treated with intravenous administration of acyclovir and oral levetiracetam (1000 mg/day) for possible HSE. He underwent a whole-body CT and a random skin biopsy but the results were both unremarkable. For possible autoimmune encephalitis, he was also treated with intravenous high-dose methylprednisolone (IVMP: 1000 mg/day, 3 days) on day 10; however, the follow-up brain MRIs obtained on day 7 and day 14 showed a continuous spread of the lesion posteriorly along the cerebral cortex. The follow-up EEG recorded on day 27 showed focal periodic epileptiform discharges (FPEDs) at the left temporal region. The dosage of levetiracetam was increased to 3000 mg/day. However, the brain MRI obtained on day 28 showed a newly appearing lesion in the right anterior temporal lobe . Because multifocal cortico-subcortical MRI lesions are characteristic features of anti-γ-aminobutyric acid A receptors (GABAaR) encephalitis , the patient was also treated with a total of 5 cycles of plasma exchange (PLEX) between day 33 and day 42, without obvious beneficial effects.
In the evening on day 43 the patient began to complain of feeling dizzy. Two days later dysarthria and cerebellar ataxia became clear. The brain MRI obtained on day 45 showed extensive increased DWI/FLAIR signals in the cerebellum mainly along the folia, without apparent reduction in ADC values . A few days later, the patient became mute and somnolent. An EEG revealed FPEDs mainly at the left frontal region. On day 48 CSF lactate and pyruvate levels were 10.2 mmol/L and 0.33 mmol/L, respectively; CSF lactate/pyruvate (L/P) ratios were markedly elevated (30.9). The follow-up brain MRI obtained on day 52 showed expansion of cerebellar lesions, which predominantly affected the folia with edema. Tonsil and nodule were involved, but the deep cerebellar nucleus or cerebellar peduncle were not involved .
Based on possible maternal inheritance of diabetes, short stature, elevated CSF L/P ratios, cerebral SLLs, and the lack of evidence of cardiogenic embolism, the patient underwent a genomic analysis, which demonstrated a m.3243A > G mutation with 17% heteroplasmy in leukocytes, confirming the diagnosis of MELAS.
After the treatment with taurine (12,000 mg/day), L-arginine (12,000 mg/day), vitamin B1 (100 mg/day), and carnitine (3000 mg/day), the patient became able to follow simple commands, and he was transferred to a rehabilitation center on day 146. These drugs were well tolerated and there were no adverse events. The brain MRI obtained 4 months after admission showed diffuse brain atrophy including the cerebellum. The modified Rankin Scale at the last follow-up (9 months after admission) was scored 4, with residual cognitive deficits. Nerve conduction study, needle electromyography, and audiometry were not performed during the course of the disease because no consent was obtained for these studies.