A 61-year-old man with an unremarkable medical history was admitted to a nearby local hospital for a high fever that developed 7 days after being bitten by his dog. Capnocytophaga canimorsus sepsis was the clinically assumed diagnosis, despite no evidence of an immunocompromised history, and the patient received antibiotic therapy. For diagnostic confirmation, a blood sample was sent to the National Institute of Infectious Diseases for polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing. The day after admission, he developed renal dysfunction (serum creatinine, 4.96 mg/dL and anuria) and thrombocytopenia (14,000/μL). Therefore, he was transferred to our institution for intensive care. On admission, he had no consciousness disturbance, and normal vital signs (respiratory rate, 12/min; heart rate, 74 b.p.m.; blood pressure, 126/80 mmHg; and body temperature, 36.7°C). His left little finger had a black wound from the dog bite, without obvious local sign of infection. Laboratory data revealed leukocytosis (11,700/μL), thrombocytopenia (3,000/μL), a high level of lactate dehydrogenase (5673 U/L), acute kidney injury (serum creatinine level, 6.54 mg/dL, anuria), and coagulopathy (fibrin/fibrinogen degradation products, 56.6 μg/dL). The fibrinogen level was not decreased (296 mg/dL) . Schistocytes were also detected in the peripheral blood sample. The patient was diagnosed with severe sepsis and antibiotic therapy was started with meropenem and clindamycin. Continuous renal replacement therapy was applied for acute kidney injury with anuria, uncontrollable acidosis, and electrolyte abnormality. On day 3, he presented with altered mental status and hypoxic respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilatory support. Further laboratory data showed progressive anemia, hyperbilirubinemia, a sustained high level of lactate dehydrogenase, and schistocytosis . A clinical diagnosis of severe sepsis complicated with TMA was made based on these findings.
As the patient's condition deteriorated rapidly, we decided to initiate PE, despite the lack of a definite diagnosis from among several TMA disorders, including thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, hemolytic–uremic syndrome, atypical hemolytic–uremic syndrome, or other secondary TMA. We continued PE from days 3 to 6 based on the clinical improvement, which resulted in significant platelet count increase and improved renal function, hyperbilirubinemia, and schistocytosis . The blood culture on admission at the previous hospital showed Capnocytophaga species, and the PCR results also detected C. canimorsus. The antibiotic therapy was changed to ampicillin–sulbactam on day 10 and continued to day 14. A disintegrin-like and metalloprotease with thrombospondin type 1 motifs 13 (ADAMTS13) activity on day 3 (without preceding plasma transfusion) was reported as 39% on day 12. Renal replacement therapy was discontinued on day 21. He was discharged in good condition on day 44. The patient was finally diagnosed with secondary TMA due to C. canimorsus infection.