The patient was an 80-year-old woman with a progressive cataract in the left eye (Emery–Little classification: grade 4 nucleus). In the left eye, the corrected distance visual acuity (CDVA) was +1.6 logMAR and corneal astigmatism was −1.75 D. The preoperative number of corneal endothelial cells was 2,571 cells/mm2 in the right eye and 2,653 cells/mm2 in the left eye. The patient’s past medical history was unremarkable.
During cataract surgery for the left eye, posterior capsule rupture occurred. As a result, part of the lens nucleus dropped into the vitreous cavity. Anterior vitrectomy and removal of residual cortex from the lens capsule for lens dislocation with posterior capsule rupture were performed by two-way divided irrigation and aspiration using a corneal side port.
Irrigation to the anterior chamber was then performed with an anterior chamber (23 G) maintainer inserted through a newly created side port at the corneal limbus . A vitreous cutter (23 G) and light guide (23 G) were inserted to perform vitrectomy through the corneal incisions created for cataract surgery .
After vitrectomy, the dropped lens nucleus was floated on PFCL . The floating lens nucleus was removed using a bimanual phacoemulsification technique while anterior chamber irrigation continued . Due to the convex shape of the PFCL interface , the lens fragment was unable to be visualized below the iris. However, it was able to be located by changing the direction of the infusion port and the fluid stream into the eye .
The PFCL was removed, peripheral vitrectomy with scleral depression was performed, and the lens cortex entangled in the peripheral vitreous was removed. The intraocular lens was secured in the ciliary sulcus and the wound was closed. Mydriasis was maintained throughout the surgery.
At 1 month postoperative, the CDVA was +0.3 logMAR with −2.75 –2.25 D ×120 and the intraocular pressure (IOP) was 14 mmHg. At 2 months postoperative, the CDVA was +0.1 logMAR with −2.00 –2.00 D ×120 and the IOP was 14 mmHg. Further, the cornea was maintained as compared with preoperative, with a corneal endothelial cell number of 2,604/mm2 and corneal astigmatism of −1.75 D.