We present a 6 years old boy, presented soon after birth with erythematous eruption and hemorrhagic blisters (pernio), initially on the palms. Subsequently the rash spread over the entire body, accompanied with solitary subcutaneous nodules and violaceous periorbital swelling. His rash was worse during fever episodes. He was hospitalized multiple times at a tertiary pediatric unit with the clinical picture of severe inflammation. No immunisations were administered after the age of 3 months . Three consecutive skin biopsies were performed from active efflorescences. They showed inflammation with the presence of lymphocytes, neutrophils, macrophages and mastocytes (CD117+). Some parts showed leukocytoclasis. Several autoimmune and autoinflammatory syndromes were considered in the differential diagnosis, including Sweet syndrome, Mevalonate kinase deficiency, CINCA/NOMID and leukocytoclastic vasculitis.
At the age of 1 year 5 months, he was started on methylprednisolone 1 mg/kg.d-1 with a reasonable effect on the rash and fevers. However, all attempts to taper the dose led to immediate relapse of the symptoms. Succesively, hydroxycloroquine and methotrexate were attempted as GC sparing agents, but they were soon withdrawn due to lack of any clinical effect.
The boy presented to us at the age of 2 years and 10 months. He was looking pretty unwell, with elevated daily temperatures reaching 39.9 °C, persistent skin eruption with nodules, livid and red papules and macules on the head, body, upper and lower extremities, palms and soles. Purple periorbital swelling was also present . Hypertrichosis was noted all over the body. Subcutaneous adipose tissue was significant for lipodystrophy. The arms, shoulders and face had well demarcated outline of the muscles, which gave the false impression of increased muscularity. The parents recalled episodes of joint pain and swelling of knees and fingers, but there was no objective evidence of contractures or joint space narrowing. The face was characteristic for atrophic facial musculature and absence of buccal fat pads, thus giving him an appearance of an old-man. He also had hypertelorism and epicanthus. Other symptoms were cough, tachydyspnea and hepatomegaly. The patient appeared very stunted for his age group. Age- and sex-specific growth evaluation showed significant short stature (− 4.1 SDS) and a decreased weight (− 2.3 SDS), . His bone age, according to Greulich and Pyle’s atlas, was 1 year 3 months (<− 2.0 SDS). Blood workup showed elevated CRP - 114.09 mg/L (0–5.0), neutrophilia, anemia with serum iron level < 2 mcmol/L (7.2–21.5). Thorough investigation showed no cardiac, pulmonary or neurologic involvment at the time.
CANDLE syndrome was suggested as the most probable diagnosis after discussion and evaluation of the patient’s medical history and current status. Blood samples from the child and both parents were sent to NIH for genetic testing. The patient was found to have compound heterozygous mutations in the PSMB8 gene (p.A92V/p.K105Q). Both parents are carriers of one mutation.