A 57-year-old man with a history of intravenous (IV) heroin use presented to the emergency department (ED) with a chief complaint of progressive dyspnoea. Other symptoms included chest pain on exertion, orthopnoea, and lower extremity swelling over the past 8 months. He also reported multiple instances of subjective fevers shortly after IV injection of heroin when reusing cotton filters. The patient’s medical history was significant for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, coronary artery disease status post-drug-eluting stent placement, ventricular fibrillation cardiac arrest status post implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) placement, heart failure of probable ischaemic aetiology with reduced (last 40%) ejection fraction and polysubstance use disorder, including active use of intranasal cocaine, non-prescribed methadone, and IV heroin.
Presenting vital signs included: 134/90 mmHg, 105 beats/min, 36.2°C, 18 breaths/min, and oxygen saturation of 100% on room air. Physical examination revealed bilateral lower extremity oedema and track marks in the antecubital fossae. Admission labs were notable for anaemia (haemoglobin 10.4 g/dL), an elevated white blood cell count with bandemia (14.9 k/μL with 16% bands), as well as negative human immunodeficiency virus antibody and Aspergillus galactomannan antigen testing. Serial electrocardiograms and cardiac enzymes did not show evidence of ischaemia. A computed tomography pulmonary angiogram revealed new bilateral lung consolidations, left upper lobe cavitation, and bilateral septic pulmonary emboli (Videos 1 and 2 and , , ). Two sets of blood cultures drawn on hospital days (HD) 1 and 3 speciated Enterobacter cloacae resistant to first-generation cephalosporins. No growth was observed in fungal blood cultures drawn on the same days. A transthoracic echocardiogram showed a severely reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (<30%), new tricuspid regurgitation, and two mobile echodensities on the right atrial ICD lead (Video 3 and ).
Upon presentation to the ED, ceftriaxone and doxycycline were initiated given concern for pneumonia on chest X-ray. With the development of hypotension and worsening tachycardia on HD 2, antibiotic coverage was empirically broadened to vancomycin/cefepime, then narrowed to cefepime monotherapy based on culture data. On HD 7, the patient underwent percutaneous laser lead extraction, with a set of cultures originating from the leads exhibiting no bacterial growth. Subsequently, the patient had a prolonged hospital course complicated by nosocomial infections, eventually passing away from septic shock.