A 64-year old man was admitted to our hospital due to a spontaneous sudden and severe headache with nausea and vomiting. The patient was healthy, with no prior history of hypertension or diabetes. A physical examination revealed that the patient was conscious and able to answer questions accurately, and that her limbs were flexible with normal muscle strength grade V, a positive Kernig’s sign, and a Hunt-Hess grade of II. Standard digital subtraction angiography and three-dimensional (3D) rotational angiography were performed and an 8 mm left posterior communicating artery segment aneurysm was found. The patient had a seizure immediately following 3D angiography for about 40 s and the immediate follow-up angiography showed contrast extravasation from the tip of identified aneurysms . The rate of contrast emission was 3 mL/s with a total volume of 18 mL for the 3D rotational angiography, and 3 mL/s with a total volume of 5 mL for standard digital subtraction angiography; the pressure was 200 psi. An additional movie file shows this in more detail [see Additional file 1]. The consequent vital sign of the patient became unstable. Urgent embolization under general anesthesia was planned, but the relatives refused interventional operation considering the high risk of procedure and poor condition of the patient.
The rupture point was determined by inspection of extravascular blood in 2D angiography and match on the 3D aneurysm geometry. The aneurysm volume geometry for this patient was obtained by three-dimensional angiographic data. The aneurysm model was imported into the ICEM CFD (ANSYS Inc., Canonsburg, Pa, USA) to create 2.5 million finite volume tetrahedral element grids with 3 prism layers elements for computational fluid dynamic (CFD) simulations. The software, ANSYS CFX 14.0 (ANSYS Inc.) was then used to solve the flow governing Navier-Strokes equations with the assumption of laminar, incompressible, and Newtonian blood flow. The density and dynamic viscosity of the blood were specified as 1060 kg/m3 and 0.004 N · s/m2, respectively. The blood vessel wall was assumed to be rigid with no-slip boundary conditions. The pulsatile velocity profile obtained by transcranial Doppler from a normal subject was applied for the inflow boundary conditions. Three cardiac cycle simulations were performed for numerical stability and the last cardiac cycle was collected as output.
The hemodynamic characteristics at rupture point and the whole aneurysm dome were calculated for comparison. In each area, peak systolic, end diastolic and time-averaged wall shear stress (WSS) was measured. Oscillatory Shear Index (OSI) was also calculated to investigate the changes in the WSS vector within the cardiac cycle. The intra-aneurysmal flow structure was also evaluated to determine the flow impingement and the contour of velocity was depicted on a cutting plane.
Demonstrated in Fig. , the rupture point was identified at the distal tip of aneurysm dome. The area of rupture point showed a low WSS distribution both at peak systole and end diastole . The time-averaged WSS at rupture point was only 2.7% of the value at the whole aneurysm dome . The entire aneurysm dome showed low OSI except the area of rupture point. A markedly high OSI was found at the area of rupture point, which was seven times higher than that at aneurysm dome. . The intra-aneurysmal flow structure was relatively simple and stable comparing the blood streamlines between peak systolic and end diastolic . On the cutting plane, no concentrated flow impact on the area of rupture point at both peak systole and end diastole .