A 2-year-old female patient reported a chief complaint of swelling in the left submandibular region since 4 days. The patient underwent surgery for CH 18 days after birth. Extraoral examination revealed swelling in the left submandibular region extending from the midline to the angle of the mandible. Swelling was rubbery in texture and firm in consistency. Left side submandibular and sublingual lymph nodes were palpable. Based on previous history and clinical details, CH was given as a provisional diagnosis.
Excisional biopsy was done, and the gross specimen, along with stereomicroscopic examination revealed multiple cystic spaces of varying shapes and sizes filled with brownish material. Histopathological examination revealed fibrocellular connective tissue stroma consisting of multiple dilated, thin-walled sinus-like spaces filled with eosinophilic acellular material ( and ). Sinuses were surrounded with flat endothelial cell layers . Multiple small to large, intertwining cavernous spaces resembling lymphatic channels in loose fibrocellular connective tissue stroma were appreciable ( and ). The connective tissue stroma is composed of thin bundles of collagen fiber bundles associated with fibroblasts having spindle to oval nuclei along with lymphatic spaces lined by thin, attenuated endothelium having flat nuclei. The lymphatic spaces are filled with eosinophilic amorphous material containing lymphocytes, red blood cells (RBCs), and a few eosinophils. Scattered lymphoid aggregates found in the form of germinal follicles were also evident . Deeper connective tissue stroma shows adipocytes and muscle bundles having normal architecture surrounding the sinusoidal spaces . Masson's trichrome staining ( to ) confirmed the presence of smooth muscles in the fibrous lymphatic walls, which is a characteristic feature of CH. D2-40 immunohistochemistry was done to confirm the presence of lymphatic channels, and continuous linear expression was observed, confirming the presence of lymphatics. Hence, the final diagnosis of CH was given. Recurrence of a similar swelling was again reported on the right region of the neck. Gross , as well as histopathological examination , again revealed similar macroscopic and microscopic details as that of the previous biopsy.