A 29-year-old Chinese woman living in Shenzhen, China, presented to our hospital with pain and limited movement in her left hip for one month previous. She had no relevant medical history, with no history of injury or alcohol or steroid use. She visited other hospitals and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs were given, however there had been no improvement. According to her history, she had direct contact with goats at her mother’s house one month previous. Her mother is a shepherd in rural area in Henan province in northern China and she fed some baby lambs during the visit. On admission, she was afebrile and all vital signs were stable. Her left hip was positioned at a 45-degree flexion and 20 degree external rotation. There was tenderness around the left groin region. Left hip rolling and axial loading tests showed marked tenderness over her left hip. Active and passive movements of her left hip were limited because of significant pain. The rest of her physical examination was unremarkable. Blood tests revealed her white cell counts, liver and renal parameters to be within normal limits and her rheumatoid factor was negative. Her erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) were elevated, as shown in Table . An initial X-ray of her pelvis was unremarkable . A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of her left hip showed marked joint effusion and synovitis. Our clinical diagnosis was that of left hip septic arthritis.
In view of her significant symptoms, a left hip arthroscopy and synovectomy was performed on the day after admission. Intraoperative findings showed turbid joint fluid together with significant synovitis. A joint fluid culture and synovial tissue culture showed the presence of Brucella melitensis. A standard tube agglutination test was positive at a titre of 1/200.
A standard antibiotic regimen was initiated after operation, including gentamicin at 120mg daily for 2 weeks, doxycycline at 100mg daily and rifampicin at 450mg for a total of 12 weeks.
Serial blood tests showed ESR and CRP were improved after treatment and she returned to normal activity two months after treatment was initiated. An X-ray of her pelvis showed a mild osteopenic change over the left femoral head but joint space had been preserved .