A 44-year-old previously healthy female patient was referred due to bilateral hand weakness. Five weeks ago, she was in a motorcycle accident and transiently lost of consciousness for few minutes. CT brain did not show any intracerebral hemorrhage. A plain film of right leg showed right displaced medial malleolar fracture. Her serum sodium at admission was 140 mmol/L. She underwent internal screw fixation of the fracture under the spinal block and 5% dextrose in 0.9% saline was given only on the operation day. During the sixth day of hospitalization the patient experienced headache and multiple episodes of vomiting attributable to post-traumatic brain concussion, conservatively managed with 5% dextrose in 0.45% saline and antiemetics for 2 days. Computed tomography of the brain obtained on the first and the seventh day of hospitalization was unremarkable.
One week after discharge, her family noticed that she had emotional lability, uncontrollable laughter, and crying without context with generalized weakness and fatigue. Physical examination showed pseudobulbar affect, motor power grade V all, and hyperreflexia. She revisited the hospital. Her serum sodium at that time was 140 mmol/L. An MRI of the brain reveals T2/FLAIR signal hyperintensity at the bilateral caudate and putamen , along with hyperintensity on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) . These findings were suggestive of extrapontine myelinolysis. Blood specimen and cerebrospinal fluid were investigated for other causes including meningitis/encephalitis panel, autoimmune encephalitis panel, anti-aquaporin 4 antibody, anti-MOG antibody and anti-nuclear antibody. All panel and immunologic studies were negative. She was diagnosed with ODS, and the treatment options were discussed. A daily intravenous dose of 1 gram of methylprednisolone (IVMP) was chosen and administered for three days, resulting in some improvement.
Over the course of a 3-week observation, the patient experienced progressive bilateral hands weakness, frequently dropped objects. She still could not walk due to right medial malleolar fracture. Her family noticed a change in her speech, which was described as slower and mildly hoarse, along with progressive worsened uncontrollable laughter and crying. The patient reported no headache, numbness, neck pain or weakness of other sites. Her serum sodium was 139 mmol/L. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis revealed an unremarkable profile and negative autoimmune and encephalitis panel. She was referred to our hospital. Physical examination revealed mild spastic dysarthria and inappropriate laughing. The motor strength of the intrinsic muscles of the right hand was assessed as grade III on the dorsal interossei, palmar interossei, and adductor digiti minimi, while grade IV on the abductor pollicis brevis and opponens pollicis muscles. Meanwhile, the intrinsic muscles of the left hand displayed a grade IV rating in all tested muscle groups. Pathological reflex was positive for Hoffmann and Tromner’s reflex. Sensory function, including pinprick sensation and proprioception, was intact. The nerve conduction study and electromyography performed on both upper extremities were unremarkable, except for poor activation when the patient was asked to perform maximum contraction. This suggests an upper motor neuron lesion as the cause of bilateral hand weakness. A cervical spine MRI showed mild spinal canal stenosis, which was insufficient to explain the bilateral hand weakness. However, a repeated MRI revealed several new T2/FLAIR hyperintensities in the bilateral precentral gyri, including the bilateral hand knob areas, the anterior limb of the left internal capsule, and the pons. .
After discussing with the patient, plasmapheresis was employed because some improvement was previously observed during IVMP administration suggesting a benefit in immune modulation. Following 5 cycles, there was a notable clinical improvement, as evidenced by the regained motor power, and the ability to perform activities such as writing and signing letters. A subsequent MRI examination at 6-month post-plasmapheresis showed the resolution of the lesions in the precentral gyri, basal ganglia, and pons. .