A 29 year-old male presented a right flank mass and lower extremity edema in August 2015. He had no past medical history of illness, but a family history of uterine myoma in his sister, aunt, cousin, and grandmother and of skin leiomyomatosis in his grandmother, father, and uncle. His sister was later diagnosed with RCC in May 2016 . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the abdomen revealed an 8 cm-sized mass in the right kidney that invaded the renal vein into infra-diaphragmatic IVC, obstructing and causing thrombosis of the infrarenal inferior vena cava and both iliac veins, with conglomerated lymph nodes (LNs) at retrocaval and aortocaval stations . Kidney mass biopsy revealed type 2 papillary renal cell carcinoma.
Because the massive thrombus and lymph nodes were deemed unresectable, he was administered temsirolimus from September 2015, but best response was stable disease. However, the primary mass and lymph node had enlarged in March 2016, indicating progressive disease .
Because there is no standard treatment after temsirolimus in non-clear cell RCC and he maintained a good performance status, he underwent retroperitoneal lymph node dissection, IVC tumor thrombectomy, and radical nephrectomy in March 2016. Pathologic diagnosis was papillary type 2 RCC . However, 1 month after surgery, follow-up CT demonstrated multiple liver metastases . Axitinib was started in May 2016, but the disease progressed, in liver, retroperitoneal LNs, and spine .
Considering his age at onset and family history of skin disease and uterine myoma, and tumor histology, HLRCC was suspected, and thus he and his family underwent germline FH mutation testing, which demonstrated the presence of mutation in FH exon 5 (c.688A > G, p.Lys230Glu). Although this specific mutation has not been reported in HLRCC, mutation in FH c. 689 A > G (p.Lys203Arg) had been reported to be pathogenic (rs752232718), and thus, we considered his kidney cancer was HLRCC-associated RCC. Immunohistochemical staining with anti-FH antibody (mousemonoclonal, clone J-13, 1:10000, SC-100743, SANTACRUZ, CA, USA) demonstrated no expression of FH in tumor cells . Based on a preliminary report, in which it was suggested bevacizumab and erlotinib in combination may be effective in HLRCC-associated RCC , we administrated bevacizumab (10 mg/kg every 2 weeks) and erlotinib (150 mg daily) from June 2016. After treatment, metastatic lesions in liver, LNs, and bone decreased rapidly, achieving partial response . As of Dec 2017, 18 months after start of bevacizumab plus erlotinib, this good response is maintained and the patient remains symptom free.