A 36-year-old Caucasian male with asthma and Crohn’s disease (Montreal classification A2L2B1), was under azathioprine until 4 years ago when it was discontinued due to clinical and endoscopic remission. His asthma was under control since childhood. He was not on medication and had no known drug allergies. The patient was asymptomatic.
In routine analysis, it was noticed a new-onset cytocholestasis (aspartate aminotransferase 86 U/L, alanine aminotransferase 240 U/L, gamma-glutamyl transferase 288 U/L, alkaline phosphatase 794/L) without hyperbilirubinemia or coagulopathy.
The patient denied any history that can suggest viral prodrome, sick contacts, recent travel, medication ingestion (comprising herbal or over-the-counter), exposure to well water, exposure to recreational drugs, tattoos, alcohol, high-risk sexual behavior or blood transfusions.
Normal.
Antinuclear antibody was positive (1:100, speckled pattern) as well as anti-smooth muscle. All other liver-related autoantibodies were negative (anti-mitochondrial, anti-liver-kidney microsomal, anti-soluble liver antigen and antineutrophil cytoplasmic). Immunoglobulin G (IgG) levels were elevated (3650 mg/dL). Serology for human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis A virus, Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, and herpes simplex virus type 1 and 2 were negative. Polymerase chain reaction considering hepatitis B, C and E viruses were negative, too. Alpha-1 antitrypsin, ceruloplasmin and iron tests were all normal. The same could be perceived for thyroid function.
Blood tests presented an absolute white blood cell count of 33.46 × 109/L. Differential count indicated 89.5% of eosinophilia, as well as an absolute eosinophil count of 30 × 109/L. In addition, immunoglobulin E (IgE) levels were elevated (8803 kU/L). Blood cultures and parasitological examination of the stools were negative. FIP1L1-PDGFRA fusion transcript was not detected.
The abdominal ultrasound showed a liver with a normal appearance and no intra-or extrahepatic biliary ductal dilation.
A liver biopsy was then performed, revealing infiltration of the portal tracts and intralobular hepatic parenchyma by numerous eosinophils . Lymphoplasmacytic portal tract inflammatory infiltrate with interface hepatitis was identified as well as small aggregates of plasma cells. The interlobular bile ducts appeared intact and iron and copper stains were negative. Furthermore, bone marrow biopsy showed marked eosinophilia, with normal maturation and absence of blasts .