A 59 year old Sri Lankan man volunteered to take part in a clinical study of bone loss in men infected with HIV. He had been diagnosed with HIV infection five years earlier. He also had a history of bronchiectasis and infection with Mycobacterium avium intracellulare (MAIC). He had been treated with zidovudine, lamivudine and indinavir for four years. Ritonavir 100 mg twice daily was added two years earlier. Ritonavir is a potent cytochrome P450 inhibitor that inhibits the metabolism of indinavir allowing it to be taken in smaller doses at less frequent intervals . He also was taking clarithromycin and ethambutol for MAIC prophylaxis and cotrimoxazole for Pneumocystis jiroveci prophylaxis. His CD4 count was 41 cells/μL and viral load undetectable at time of study entry. Both parameters had been stable at these levels for more than 12 months prior to study entry.
Biochemical tests at the time of study entry and subsequently are shown in Figure . At the baseline visit he had vitamin D deficiency [25-hydroxyvitamin D (25OHD) <25 nmol/L] with secondary hyperparathyroidism and a raised alkaline phosphatase (ALP). Liver and kidney function were normal. Bone mineral density (BMD) at the total hip was measured with a Lunar Expert dual energy x-ray absorptiometer and was 0.613 g/cm2. He subsequently received 400 mg calcium daily and 50,000 IU vitamin D (cholecalciferol) monthly. After four months his 25OHD level had increased although it was still below the recommended level of 50 nmol/L . The secondary hyperparathyroidism and elevated ALP persisted.
After 14 months he developed recurrence of MAIC infection, and treatment was commenced with ciprofloxacin, rifabutin, and ethambutol. Blood tests at this time showed normalisation of ALP but a low 25OHD level despite reported full compliance with medication. Over the next nine months his blood tests showed worsening vitamin D deficiency, development of hypocalcaemia, secondary hyperparathyroidism, and progressive elevation of ALP. After 21 months, he developed lower back pain and generalised myalgia. Magnetic resonance imaging showed a fracture of the endplate of L1. His symptoms and biochemical tests were consistent with osteomalacia although confirmatory bone biopsy was not performed. BMD at the total hip decreased by 17% between 12 and 23 months.
When the diagnosis of osteomalacia was recognised at 23 months, he was treated with a loading dose of 600,000 IU of cholecalciferol and thereafter 100,000 IU per month, and 1 g of calcium daily. This produced a rapid normalisation of his serum calcium, phosphate, ALP and 25OHD, and resolution of the musculoskeletal symptoms, although serum parathyroid hormone remained mildly elevated.