A 30 year-old male patient was referred to our tertiary surgical department with progressive pain to the upper abdomen. A hepatic mass was diagnosed 9 months previously. Fine needle biopsy confirmed the mass to be an FNH. At that time “watchful waiting” was recommended. A mass could be palpated in the right upper quadrant during physical examination. Blood chemistry including liver enzymes were within normal limits. A large mass was seen in the right liver lobe during ultrasound (US) . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed a 10 × 11 cm mass in the right liver lobe with a significant increase in size compared to the MRI findings about 9 months earlier. A contrast enhanced computed tomography (ct) with angiography was ordered to better study the proximity of the mass to the large liver vessels . The case was discussed at the interdisciplinary board. The risk of complications following surgical resection was deemed high due to the proximity of the mass to the central hepatic vessels. TAE was favored. TAE was performed by an experienced interventional radiologist using Embazene® microspheres as reported elsewhere [–] . Routine Ct on post-interventional day one was within normal limits . The patient developed pain to the right upper quadrant on day two following TAE with fever (39 °C axillar). The right upper quadrant was tender on palpation. Blood chemistry revealed elevated liver enzymes: bilirubin 1.22 mg/dl (normal limit: 1.2 mg/dl), GOT: 1692 U /l (normal limits 10–50 U/L), GPT: 1569 (normal limits: 10–50 U/l), GGT 165 (normal limits: 0–66 U/l), AP 558 (normal limits: 0–98 U /l). Inflammatory markers were also elevated: white blood count (WBC): 21.1/ nl (normal limits 4–12/nl) and c-reactive protein (CRP): 16 mg /dl (normal limits: 0–0.5 mg/dl). Acute cholecystitis was suspected on abdominal ultrasound. A ct scan was ordered to exclude post-interventional complications. Acute cholecystitits was confirmed on ct. Besides, a large volume of gas was found at the FNH site without an abscess formation. The patient was placed on intravenous broadband antibiotics and closely monitored. Symptoms and blood chemistry normalized so that the patient was discharged 12 days after TAE. Follow-up continued in out-patient center. The gas formation was completely resorbed 3 weeks later . Cholecystectomy was performed 6 weeks after TAE. Histopathology of the removed gallbladder showed signs of chronic cholecystitis.