A 58-year-old female presented with 40-pound weight loss over several months with new lower extremity edema, dyspnea on exertion, and flank pain. A CT scan revealed a 12.2 cm × 8.1 cm left renal mass with regional adenopathy and a bulky thrombus extending cephalad within the inferior vena cava (IVC) to the junction of the IVC and right atrium with occlusion and distension of the IVC with maximum thrombus diameter of 49 mm . Upon contrast administration, the thrombus showed strong uniform enhancement, confirming suspicion of tumor thrombus. No bland thrombus was identified, so anticoagulation was not initiated. A transthoracic echocardiogram revealed no tumor within the right atrium. Serum hemoglobin was 7.8 g/dL, corrected calcium level was 9.8 mg/dL, absolute neutrophil count was 9.88 × 109/L and platelet count was 474,000/uL. She underwent a CT of the chest and MRI of the brain without evidence of metastasis. A core needle biopsy of the renal mass showed clear cell renal cell carcinoma, WHO/ISUP grade 3 with focal grade 4 and with no identified sarcomatoid elements.
Her Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status was 3, so she was deemed not a surgical candidate. Given her IMDC poor-risk classification, she was offered systemic immunotherapy with the possibility of consolidative surgery if she had a radiographic response. She received 4 cycles of nivolumab and ipilimumab and her re-staging CT revealed stable locoregional adenopathy; the renal mass slightly decreased to 9.1 cm in diameter. The thrombus, however, had regressed from the cavo-atrial junction to the suprahepatic IVC with a marked decrease in diameter so that it no longer obliterated the IVC . She then received 4 cycles of nivolumab monotherapy dosed 480 mg every 4 weeks. She had marked improvement in her ECOG performance status to 1 and resolution of lower extremity edema and dyspnea. A second follow up CT re-demonstrated the regressed and non-enhancing tumor thrombus, with persistence of the primary renal mass, which measured 10.4 cm.
She subsequently underwent a left radical nephrectomy and IVC thrombectomy through a chevron incision. There were dense adhesions near the renal hilum and bulky lymphadenopathy which required en-bloc ligation of the hilum. Hilar and para-aortic lymph node sampling was performed. The tumor thrombus remnant was estimated to be 5 mm in diameter. After obtaining proximal and distal vascular control, the vena cava was entered at the renal vein ostium. A long, thin, firm, intravascular thrombus was encountered, which was densely adherent to the endothelium without a discernable surgical plane It was deemed unable to be extracted without resection of a substantial portion of the sub-diaphragmatic vena cava. Samples were sent to pathology. The renal vein and vena cava cuff were resected and reconstructed with running non-absorbable suture. Her post-operative course was uneventful. All systemic therapy was discontinued after surgery and she remains without evidence of disease longer than 1 year after her original diagnosis.
Final pathologic analysis revealed a 6.3 cm ISUP Grade III clear cell renal cell carcinoma with focal rhabdoid features (5%) and sinus fat invasion of the left kidney. The primary tumor demonstrated areas of necrosis as well as a dense neutrophilic infiltration alongside viable tumor without evidence of treatment response . The resected residual renal vein thrombus was characterized by hemosiderin-laden macrophages and other signs of treatment effect, but no viable tumor was present within the IVC cuff or main renal vein. There was viable tumor thrombus present within segmental renal veins of the renal sinus. The 13 sampled regional lymph nodes had no evidence of carcinoma or treatment effect to suggest any previous malignant infiltration.
PD-L1 immunohistochemistry on the renal tumor showed absence of staining in most of the tumor. Subsequently, multichannel immunofluorescence for Pan CK, CD8, PD-L1, FoxP3, Batf3, and DAPI was performed on the residual renal tumor and remaining segmental renal vein tumor using the PerkinElmer Vectra Polaris system . The primary renal tumor appeared to be immune-excluded and lacked infiltration of CD8+ T cells or Batf3+ dendritic cells. In contrast, within the residual segmental renal vein tumor thrombus, we observed a marked infiltration of CD8+ T cells, FoxP3+ regulatory T cells, and Batf3+dendritic cells. The non-inflamed renal tumor lacked PD-L1 expression whereas the tumor thrombus remnant showed interspersed strongly positive PD-L1 expressing cells in stromal areas .