A 31-year-old woman presented to our hospital with neck pain for approximately one month, headache for 20 days, and right upper limb weakness for 7 days. She had a 22-day history of cesarean section. There was no history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, or cardiac arrhythmia.
On physical examination, she was afebrile, with a blood pressure of 134/94 mm Hg. She had clear consciousness. The neurological examination indicated normal cranial nerves and neck stiffness. The right upper limb muscle strength was at level 4, and the right Babinski sign was positive. There was no sensory loss or cerebellar signs. There were numerous subcutaneous neurofibroma and café-au-lait spots on the skin, similar to her mother and grandmother.
Lumbar puncture revealed that the cerebrospinal fluid pressure was lower than 50 mmH2O. Her gene sequencing showed that c.3916C > T in the NF1 (17q11 NM_000267.3) gene Exon29 was a heterozygous point nonsense mutation; P (Arg1306*) amino acid at the transcriptional level and premature termination of protein translation. A cervical magnetic resonance scan showed an abnormal signal (5*1.2 cm) inside and outside the spinal canal at the C1-3 level . The lesion was closely related to the adjacent right vertebral artery, which was considered a vascular malformation. Then, the patient was transferred to the neurosurgical ward. Digital subtraction angiography showed a giant AVF that extended from C1 to C3 inside and outside the spinal canal . Right vertebral angiogram showed an enlarged right vertebral artery V1 that drained into a massively enlarged venous plexus through a fistula at the C1 to C3 levels. Right thyroid angiography showed that the right thyrocervical and costocervical trunks were involved in the blood supply.
The endovascular intervention strategy was to occlude the feeding arteries and varix. The 6F- and 5F-guided catheter was introduced into the right and left vertebral arteries, respectively. Two Echelon-14 microcatheters were advanced to the right vertebral artery V2 and approached to reach the fistula through a 6F guiding catheter. We deployed 7 coils altogether at the site of the fistula for the obliteration of varix through the second microcatheter . Then, the AVF disappeared when Onyx glue was used under fluoroscopic control. After intervention, the subject’s symptoms improved, and she was discharged.
After the 6-month follow-up, the patient reported intermittent headache for approximately 2 months. A follow-up angiogram showed a right vertebral artery V5 issection aneurysm and no contrast filling of the initial AVF. The doctor recommended follow-up observation.