A 38-year-old Caucasian man presented with fever, cough, and mild fatigue with a 10-day duration. Past medical history was remarkable for hepatic steatosis, without abnormal liver tests but with hypercholesterolemia in treatment with statins, and negative for alcohol consumption. Physical examination showed jaundice and hepatosplenomegaly; body mass index (BMI) was 29.4 kg/m2.
Laboratory results are presented in Table . Serum electrolytes, renal function, and blood gases were normal. Test for Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), hepatitis A, B, and C virus, and autoimmune workup were negative.
Peripheral blood (PS) smear analysis showed 15% blasts, therefore he was hospitalized and underwent a bone marrow (BM) aspiration .
The cytomorphologic evaluation of BM revealed increased cellularity, 40% blasts positive to myeloperoxidase (MPO), with Auer rods, a picture compatible with AML.
The flow cytometry immunophenotyping of the BM sample revealed 54% of myeloid blasts (CD34+/−/CD117+/−/ CD133+/−/CD38+/CD11b+/ CD4+/CD33+/CD14+/ CD13+/HLA-DR+), with MPO expressed on 80% of leukemic cells.
Conventional cytogenetic analysis was attempted but yielded no metaphase cells for analysis, while molecular analysis, performed using real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), showed the presence of the CBFB–MYH11 fusion gene.
Abdominal ultrasonography examination described hepatomegaly (longitudinal diameter of right lobe 19.5 cm), splenomegaly (longitudinal diameter 18 cm), upper limits portal vein diameters (portal vein 13 mm, splenic vein 9.2 mm, superior mesenteric vein 9.5 mm), normal portal vein mean velocity (21.5 cm/second), increased thickness of the gallbladder wall (9 mm), enlarged abdominal lymph nodes (maximum diameter 20.9 mm), normal biliary ducts and a liver stiffness value of 8.16 kPa using acoustic radiation force impulse (ARFI) . Abdominal magnetic resonance confirmed the dimensional findings and excluded biliary tree dilatation. In order to explain the cause of abnormal liver tests and to exclude preexisting liver disease, a liver biopsy was performed. It showed massive sinusoidal and portal infiltration by leukemic cells . Many eosinophils were also observed. Leukemic cells were immunoreactive for MPO , CD33 , HLA-DR , CD38 , and, in part, for CD34 . Virtually all blasts expressed Ki67 . Additional features consisted of cholestasis, macrovacuolar steatosis and perisinusoidal fibrosis equal to stage 2 on the Ishak Fibrosis Score (fibrous expansion of most portal areas, with or without short fibrous septa).
The patient started intensive front-line induction therapy according to “3 + 7” regimen with reduced doses of antracycline to limit hepatic toxicity [daunorubicine 45 mg/m2, days 1–3 plus citarabine (Ara-c) 100 mg/m2 continuous infusion (CI) days 1–7].
We observed a progressive reduction of the values of AST, ALT, alkaline phosphatase, and bilirubin, and a complete normalization was obtained on day +15 from the beginning of chemotherapy. Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) became normal too.
After induction therapy, abdominal ultrasonography examination was performed, revealing reduction of abdominal organ sizes. The liver and spleen diameter was 14.5 and 14 cm, respectively, normal portal vein diameters and thickness of the gallbladder wall, not evaluated portal vein mean velocity, abdominal lymph nodes diameters, and liver stiffness value. The ultrasound scan was repeated after two consolidation chemotherapy cycles and it showed complete normalization of all parameters, an event that was not mentioned in the previous study but now evaluated .
After induction, the BM evaluation showed a morphological complete remission (CR) of AML, but the persistence of leukemia at the molecular biology analysis, with a minimal residual disease (MRD) of 39.19 copies (cp)/104 ABL cp.
After induction, the patient received two consolidation chemotherapy courses: the first with daunorubicine 50 mg/m2 (days 5–6) plus Ara-c 500 mg/m2 bid (days 1–6) and the second with high doses of Ara-c 2 g/m2 bid (days 1, 3, 5). Molecular biology examination confirmed the MRD persistence after both consolidation cycles (66 and 42.62 cp/104 ABL cp, respectively); therefore, the patient was considered eligible for allogenic stem cell transplantation (allo-SCT).
He received conditioning chemotherapy with Thiothepa Busulfan Fludarabine (TBF) scheme (Thiotepa 5 mg/kg/, on days 7 and 6; Busulfan 3.2 mg/kg/day, and Fludarabine 50 mg/m2/day from day 5 to day 3), followed by allogenic stem cells infusion from sibling donor on day 0.
The BM evaluation on day +20 post-SCT showed a morphologic CR with complete chimerism. During allo-SCT hospitalization, he developed febrile neutropenia responsive to antibiotic therapy. No hepatic complications were observed. The patient was discharged from the hospital and started standard follow-up.