A 75-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital for the treatment of recurrent HCC located in segment 2 of the liver (S2). The patient had been diagnosed with hepatitis B virus-related liver cirrhosis 17 years earlier and with HCC (S2 and S7) 8 years earlier. Since then, RFA (percutaneous [four times] and laparoscopic [two times]) and transcatheter arterial chemoembolization (TACE; seven times) had been performed repeatedly for HCC. During laparoscopic RFA for recurrent S2 HCC, the left lateral lobe of the liver was mobilized. For recurrent HCC located in S2 of the liver, TACE was repeatedly performed; however, the therapeutic response was insufficient, and the patient was referred for further treatment.
Abdominal enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed a 1.5-cm mass in the left lateral lobe of the liver (S2) with arterial phase enhancement followed by washout in the portal phase . A laboratory analysis provided the following results: serum levels of α-fetoprotein (AFP), 124.9 ng/mL; des-γ-carboxy prothrombin (DCP), 29 mAU/mL; platelet count, 106 × 103/μL; serum aspartate aminotransferase, 39 U/L; alanine aminotransferase, 15 U/L; total bilirubin, 1.2 mg/dL; albumin, 3.6 g/dL; and prothrombin time, 13.6 s. The indocyanine green retention rate at 15 min (ICG-R15) was 30.7%, and the ratio of the 99mTc-galactosyl human serum albumin (GSA) scintigraphy taken up by the liver to that taken up by the liver plus heart at 15 min (LHL 15) was 0.86. The Child-Pugh score was Grade A, and liver damage, as defined by the Liver Cancer Study Group of Japan , was Grade B.
Given that the liver function was severely impaired and the patient had already undergone RFA and TACE several times, we decided to perform RFA, not liver resection, for the treatment of this TACE-refractory small HCC. Because the tumor was adjacent to the heart , percutaneous RFA was considered to carry a high risk, laparoscopic RFA was selected. The left lateral lobe of the liver had adhered severely to the diaphragm, stomach, and lesser omentum due to mobilization of this portion during a previous session of laparoscopic RFA . We peeled away those adhesions and observed the S2 HCC tumor just below the heart . To avoid thermal injury of the stomach and heart, we first mobilized the left lateral lobe and made space between the tumor and the heart. We then placed gauze and some water between the stomach and left lateral lobe of the liver to prevent thermal injury of the neighboring organs. After observation of the tumor and liver parenchyma using a laparoscopic ultrasonography (US), we inserted a 2-cm cooled-tip needle (Radionics, Burlington, MA, USA) vertically into the liver to prevent heart injury under visual guidance, as the tumor was detected on the surface of the liver . After the insertion of the electrode into the lesion, we confirmed the position of the needle by US and started ablation, increasing the power to 60 W and then 100 W. The duration of the ablation (at 100 W) was 8–10 min, and the temperature was closely monitored. During the procedure, there were no major complications.
At 1 week after the treatment, the patient complained of dysphagia and thoracic pain. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a perforated esophageal ulcer at the esophago-gastric junction, and the liver could be directly seen through the perforated ulcer . Contrast-enhanced CT revealed localized free air between the left lateral lobe of the liver and the esophagus . Laboratory data revealed no exacerbation of the inflammatory response, such as via an elevated white blood cell or neutrophilic leukocyte count or C-reactive protein levels. Because inflammation was localized due to the severe intra-abdominal adhesion, we decided to treat the patient conservatively with fasting, administration of proton pump inhibitors and antibiotics, and enteral nutrition via a nasogastric tube. The perforated region of the esophagus gradually scarred over, and exacerbation was not observed after the initiation of oral intake. After discharge from our hospital, the patient complained of difficulty swallowing, and upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed esophageal stenosis. Although the patient later required balloon dilatation to treat the esophageal stenosis, the perforation was cured conservatively , and there has been no evidence of HCC recurrence.