A 76-year-old obese man was admitted for inpatient management regarding a non-healing DFU. This ulcer was located at the plantar posterior right heel. His previous treatment involved regular care at a comprehensive wound care clinic, in which he returned for frequent debridement and assessment of topical wound care for more than 4 months. Hindering factors included lack of wound care assistance at home and inadequate offloading.
His past medical history included T2DM, DPN, chronic venous insufficiency with lymphedema, in addition to other co-morbidities. His DM was followed by a general medicine practitioner, using metformin and lifestyle modifications. His A1c value during the hospital admission was 5.6%. He had severe DPN. On exam there was absent protective sensation distal to the patella as demonstrated with the Semmes-Weinstein 10-g monofilament. Vibration was absent distal to the ankle joint according to the 128 Hz Tuning Fork. Manual manipulation indicated absent proprioception distal to the ankle joint. Muscle strength was found to be 5/5 with dorsiflexion and plantarflexion, and 4/5 with forced eversion and inversion. His distal lower extremity pulses were palpable.
At the plantar posterior right heel there was an ovoid shaped ulcer that probed to the calcaneus [Fig. ]. It measured approximately 5.5 × 2.5 cm [13.75cm2]. There were no acute clinical signs of infection. A magnetic resonance imaging was equivocal for “early osteomyelitis” versus reactive edema. The bone culture obtained was positive, and infectious disease treated the bacterial infection with 6 weeks of intravenous antibiotics. The patient followed with podiatry for wound care.
Daily wound care consisted of a silver alginate dressing. Offloading was emphasized with this new treatment plan. He was offloaded with a DARCO® HeelWedge™ shoe (Huntington, West Virginia) [Fig. ] and the assistance of a walker. The patient admitted to being the principal household driver and he drove frequently for recreation, boasting of driving millions of miles over his lifetime. Given the ulcer was located on the right lower extremity at an area of pressure with automobile pedal usage, temporary driving restrictions were given. He was advised not to drive during the healing process. In 6 months the ulcer closed [Fig. ]. He was to remain in his offloading shoe for tissue remodeling and advised to monitor his foot for pressure throughout the day with different activities.
Approximately 1 month later, the patient called for an urgent appointment when his ulcer reoccurred [Fig. ]. He admitted to driving more than 14 h over a couple days. He felt driving played a significant factor in his re-ulceration because of how his foot rested when using the foot pedals. He confirmed prior to his travels, there was no ulcer. He further confirmed that there was no change in his pattern of wearing his offloading shoe and using his walker. The patient returned to his prior treatment plan and proceeded to heal.