An 83-year-old man was referred to our hospital for the occasional finding, with routine blood tests for oral anticoagulant therapy monitoring, of severe increase of the prothrombin time (PT). The patient also complained weeklong history of fever (up to 39 °C), diarrhoea and vomiting. His medical history included chronic ischemic heart disease, valvular heart disease (mitral valve replacement in 2001 with mechanical prosthesis), permanent atrial fibrillation, arterial hypertension, chronic cerebrovascular disease, peripheral atherosclerosis of the lower extremities, stage 0 chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, stage IIIb chronic kidney disease, chronic gastritis, gastric resection for perforated gastric ulcer in 1975, cholecystectomy for cholelithiasis in 2009, benign prostatic hyperplasia, recent bacterial pneumonia (four months earlier). The patient was admitted to the Department of Internal Medicine.
At presentation the patient was febrile (37.5 °C); physical examination revealed abdominal distension, diffused tenderness and bloating. No stool passage had been observed since the previous day. Blood tests confirmed severe prolongation of PT (22.48, with normal liver function tests), and showed an increase of C reactive protein (CRP, 12.54 mg/dl), normal leucocyte and neutrophil count with mild lymphopenia (860/mm3) and monocytosis (1040/mm3), acute kidney failure with creatinine 1.7 mg/dl, no acidosis nor increase in lactic acid. Chest X-ray showed mild pulmonary congestion. Abdominal X-ray showed small intestine loop dilation and air-fluid levels, suggesting intestinal obstruction; abdominal computed tomography confirmed these findings and showed wall thickening of the terminal ileum, which the radiologist described as compatible with either inflammatory bowel disease or intestinal ischemia. No surgical indication was established by the general surgeon.
We deemed inflammatory bowel disease unlikely because of the advanced age and the acute onset; intestinal ischemia was also considered improbable because of the intestinal region involved (terminal ileus, with no apparent involvement of the caecum and ascending colon) and because of normal lactate levels. An acute intestinal infection was considered the most likely diagnosis. Samples for blood cultures, stool cultures, stool ova and parasite test and Clostridium difficile toxin assay were collected. Empirical antibiotic therapy with metronidazole and piperacillin-tazobactam was started at admission and vitamin K was administered.
We observed an initial favourable response to therapy: the patient became afebrile, CRP levels decreased (from 12.54 mg/dl to 5.11 mg/dl); constipation resolved, with appearance of loose stool, that rapidly progressed to overt diarrhoea. Microbiologic tests all came back negative. This positive trend was however transient, and on the fifth day since admission, the patient developed fever (38.2 °C) and a drop in peripheral oxygen saturation was observed. Samples for blood and urine cultures were collected and came back negative; chest X-ray showed a basal opacity of the right lung. Levofloxacin was then added to ongoing therapy. No response to therapy was observed and during the next three weeks the patient was persistently febrile, respiratory function progressively worsened and bilateral opacities appeared at the chest X-ray controls; furthermore, the stool remained loose or liquid. Several microbiologic tests were performed and they all were negative: two more blood culture sets (obtained during temperature spikes), two more stool cultures, stool ova and parasite test and Clostridium difficile toxin assay, urine culture, serology for Chlamydia, Legionella and Mycoplasma, Legionella and Pneumococcal urinary antigen, serum galactomannan assay, stool cultures for Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Quantiferon. Echocardiography was negative for vegetations. Colonoscopy was also performed to investigate persistent diarrhoea and showed a single linear erosion in front of the ileocecal valve, compatible with infectious colitis, with no abnormal findings in the terminal ileum; two biopsies of the caecum were performed.
Antibiotic therapy was repeatedly modified: initial therapy with piperacillin-tazobactam, metronidazole and levofloxacin was replaced with cefepime and linezolid, then with meropenem, linezolid and azithromycin, lastly with meropenem and ceftaroline. None of these changes resulted in clinical improvement.
At the same time, the patient’s general conditions worsened: heart failure progressed with development of anasarca, respiratory function was impaired so that respiratory support by non invasive continuous positive airway pressure was needed. Furthermore, consciousness was progressively compromised, with the onset of delirium.
After almost three weeks of persistent fever, samples were then collected for Adenovirus and Rotavirus stool test, assays for detection of influenza from nasal and throat swabs, Brucella and Leishmania serology, CMV DNA detection in blood. CMV DNA test was positive, with 57,679 copies/ml, while all other tests were negative. The patient was then assessed for risk factors for immunodeficiency: HIV serology was negative, CD4 count was normal (925/mm3) and the patient had never been on immunosuppressive drugs and had no history of organ transplantations or malignancy. CMV serology showed low immunoglobulin M (IgM) titre and high immunoglobulin G (IgG) titre, suggesting reactivation of CMV infection. To assess the patient for further organ involvement, ophthalmologic evaluation was performed and no ocular manifestations of CMV infection were detected. Histological examination of colon biopsies showed mild non-specific chronic inflammation, but no CMV-induced cytopathic alterations; immunohistochemical study was negative for CMV antigens and PCR on biopsy specimens was negative for CMV.
Antibiotic therapy was then stopped and the patient was started on antiviral therapy with ganciclovir. Quick defervescence followed, the patient remained stably afebrile and consciousness steadily improved. Over the next three weeks, we observed a progressive recovery in respiratory function, with almost complete resolution of lung opacities, and a decrease in watery diarrhoea, although it did not resolve completely during hospital stay. CMV DNA was no longer detected in blood after 14 days since the start of antiviral therapy. The patient was kept on intravenous therapy with ganciclovir for a month and was then discharged from hospital in stable and globally improved clinical conditions, with the indication to continue antiviral therapy with oral valganciclovir, which was prosecuted for at least three and a half months until admission to the Neurology Department for a serious ischemic stroke. The patient was then lost to follow up. Our patient experienced mild elevation of alkaline phosphatase (up to 199 U/l) and gamma-glutamyl transferase (up to 83 U/l) as the only side effects of ganciclovir, without indication to interruption of antiviral therapy. A spontaneous decrease of both was later observed, with a progressive return to normal levels.