A 46-year-old man with a recent diagnosis of hiatal hernia was admitted to the Respiratory Diseases Unit of the University Hospital of Modena, Italy for several dramatic episodes of hemoptysis during the previous 30 days, severe anemia (6,9 g/dl) and initial signs of hemodynamic instability (shock index = 1,4). The past medical history revealed that the patient had undergone cardiac surgery for aortic coarctation at the age of 18 without complications neither during the immediate post-operative course nor in the following 20 years follow up period. He was referred to the Respiratory Intensive Care Unit of our Department where blood transfusion was immediately started. A chest X-ray was performed but no significant abnormalities were detected. Thus he underwent urgent digestive endoscopy that revealed a grade B esophagitis according to Los Angeles classification without any evidence of recent bleeding. Fiber bronchoscopy was then immediately conducted showing limited traces of blood in the bronchial tract afferent to the left upper lobe while no sings of active bleeding was found . He eventually underwent a contrast-enhanced CT scan of the chest that showed an aneurysmal dilatation of the descending thoracic aorta communicating with the left upper bronchus, whose upper posterior hemorrhagic leak determined initial left upper lobe compression and ground-glass opacities with scissural delimitation . Given the evidence of a communication between aortic aneurism and lung parenchyma or either the tracheobronchial tree the patient was referred to the Cardiac Intensive Care Unit. Thoracic endovascular aortic repair (TEVAR) was preferred rather than a more invasive open surgical approach due to the persistent hemodynamic instability of the patient. Aortobronchial fistula was thus successfully treated with endovascular stent-graft without complications. The patient survived the intervention with uneventful postoperative course and good recovery in less than 30 days. Strict follow up was then started.