In 1999, a 14-year old girl of Turkish origin presented with vertigo and generalized tonic-clonic seizures. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) analyses showed multiple hyperintense lesions in T2-weighted images (bi-hemispheric periventricular white matter, frontal cortex, left insular cortex, left brainstem). A symptomatic treatment with valproate was initiated. In 2002, three years after onset of central nervous system (CNS) inflammation, a mild thrombocytopenia (110 × 103 cells/μL) occurred for the first time, but no further diagnostics were carried out. In the next years, she experienced various neurological symptoms such as hypoesthesia, weakness of her right arm, vertigo and double vision. These relapses occurred in a frequency of one to six events per year. MRI analyses showed a slow progression of inflammatory gadolinium-enhancing (Gd+) lesions, mostly localized in subcortical and periventricular areas . Conventional angiographies (2004 and 2008) revealed no signs of vessel stenosis, sinus thrombosis or other signs indicative of primary CNS vasculitis. Under the assumption of a relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis, these clinical symptoms as well as future ‘relapses’ were treated with intravenous steroids until 2011.
Initiation of immune prophylactic immunomodulatory therapy was refused by our patient until 2008. In this year, immune modulatory treatment with glatiramer acetate was initiated, but was terminated by the patient after two weeks because of needle phobia. In 2009, the patient presented with additional anemia. After detection of warm agglutinins and a positive Coombs test, a diagnosis of ES was established. To exclude differential diagnoses, antinuclear antibodies, double-stranded DNA and rheumatoid factor were analyzed. Low serum levels of IgG and IgA allowed a retrospective diagnosis of common variable immunodeficiency, a condition often occurring in combination with ES . Investigation of peripheral blood T cell subsets (CD4-/CD8-, CD3+, T-cell receptor αβ+) by flow cytometry was used to differentiate from autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome . Treatment was initiated with oral administered corticosteroids and azathioprine. The latter needed to be stopped due to elevated liver enzymes .
After our patient’s first presentation to the clinic in 2011, an extensive clinical re-evaluation was performed due to increasing doubts concerning the initial diagnosis of multiple sclerosis. Analyses of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) showed lymphocytic pleocytosis, intrathecal synthesis of IgG and IgM, impairment of blood-brain-barrier integrity and positive oligoclonal bands (June 2011: 52cells/μL, 44lymphocytes/μL, 1110mg/L protein, 10 oligoclonal bands (8 isolated in the CSF), 73.52% CD4+ T cells (normal 73.84 ±9.48%), 6.80% CD8+ T cells (normal 22.40 ±9.29%), CD4/CD8 ratio 10.9 (normal 3.81 ±1.52), 11.87% CD19+ B cells (normal 0.79 ±0.79%), 0.24% plasma cells (normal 0.042 ±0.042%)). A synopsis of results of clinical chemistry and CSF analysis during the time course is shown in Table .
In 2011, 16 lesions were evident on T2-weighted and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery images, with three new Gd + lesions localized in her right cerebellar hemisphere, right frontobasal region and right frontal cortex. Measurements of visual, sensory and motor evoked potentials showed no abnormalities. A differential diagnostic, including serological, microbiological and virological analyses from both her blood and CSF, revealed no signs for a systematic vasculitis, infection or any underlying specific autoimmune diseases. After another relapse presenting with unsystematic vertigo, we ultimately clarified the nature of her inflammatory leukoencephalopathy by performing a brain biopsy. This showed severe perivascular inflammatory infiltrates as well as diffuse cellular infiltration within the parenchyma. The infiltrates were dominated by small mature CD3+ T cells and high numbers of CD138+ plasma cells whereas only low B-cell numbers could be observed. Plasma cells expressed lambda and kappa light chains. The proliferative index was between 5% and 7%. Immunohistochemical stainings for different pathogens (herpes simplex virus 1 and 2, Epstein-Barr virus, JC virus and toxoplasma) were negative. Additional stainings revealed no signs of demyelination, vasculitis or a brain-derived neoplasia.
A diagnosis of lymphoplasmacellular encephalitis was made; inflammatory demyelinating disorders, vasculitis, neoplasias or infections were excluded. Based on the detection of CD20+ B cells and CD138+ plasma cells both by flow cytometry assessment of her CSF and by immunohistochemical stainings, we initiated treatment with anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody rituximab. This treatment regimen could be beneficially used in CNS inflammation and has already been reported to be effective in cases of ES [,]. Treatment was effective in terms of peripheral B cell depletion and led to the stabilization of her blood cell counts . Despite the ongoing peripheral depletion of B cells, our patient developed new symptoms and two new Gd + MRI lesions eight months after starting treatment (April 2012; Figure ). CSF analysis still showed elevated cell counts and normal protein levels (13cells/μL, 13 lymphocytes/μL, 254mg/L protein, intrathecal synthesis of IgG and IgM, five isolated oligoclonal bands, 87.97% CD4+ T cells, 0.57% CD8+ T cells, CD4/CD8 ratio 9.94, 3.5% B cells, 0.1% plasma cells; for details see Table ). Although treatment with rituximab was effective in her ‘periphery’, it was not able to fully reduce B- and plasma cell counts in the CNS as reflected by CSF analysis . Therefore, we initiated treatment with cyclophosphamide at a dosage of 350mg/m2 on three consecutive days, followed by monthly intravenous applications of 600 to 750mg/m2, adapted to leukocyte levels. Cyclophosphamide is an alkylating immunosuppressant widely used for the treatment of cerebral vasculitis. Over 12 months of follow-up, this therapy has maintained a stable disease course and MRI findings.