A 31-year old Caucasian woman sustained T-12 complete paraplegia after a road traffic accident on 18 February 1994. She was riding her bicycle coming back from her mother's home when she was hit by a heavy goods vehicle and dragged under the lorry for about 120 yards. There was degloving injury with extensive soft tissue loss of right thigh, trauma to right femoral artery, fracture of lateral femoral condyle (right). She underwent vascular surgical repair of right femoral artery and plastic surgery for right thigh. Following transfer out of intensive care unit, she had MRI of dorso-lumbar spine. There was flattening of spinal cord from T-3 to T-7 by a small epidural haematoma. She had developed complete paraplegia at T-9 level. After undergoing rehabilitation, she was discharged home on 15 December 1994 and was managing neuropathic bladder by self-intermittent catheterisation, Intravenous urography, performed on 14 July 1994 , 02 April 1997, 27 September 2000 and 08 October 2003 showed normal kidneys and normal bladder.
In 2004, this patient developed frequent blockages and bypassing of catheter; therefore, suprapubic cystostomy was performed on 26 March 2004. In January 2005, this patient attended spinal unit with history of suprapubic catheter not draining urine and she was leaking urine per urethra. Cystoscopy revealed that the suprapubic catheter was in proper place. There were no stones in the bladder. The urethra was patulous. A 14 French Foley catheter was inserted per urethra. Both suprapubic and urethral catheters were draining clear urine. This patient was happy to manage with urethral and suprapubic catheters, which were connected to separate bags and attached to right and left leg respectively. In August 2006, she was prescribed trospium chloride, 20 mg, twice daily. Video-urodynamics, performed on 21 November 2007, showed no detrusor overactivity. There was incontinence due to weakness of urethral sphincter. She was advised to consider following treatment options:
Managing with two catheters Closure of urethra but this would risk making the bladder over-active.
This patient decided to continue with urethral (size 14 French) and a size 22 French suprapubic Foley catheter drainage. Both catheters were draining urine and there was very little urine leak per urethra.
In September 2008, this lady attended spinal unit with history of suprapubic catheter not draining urine at all. The suprapubic catheter was flushed with sterile saline but it would not go in. The impression was blockage of suprapubic catheter. Therefore, the catheter was removed and a 22 French silicone Foley catheter was inserted. Surprisingly, the new catheter also failed to drain urine. This catheter was taken out and inspected; the catheter was found to be patent. Another catheter was inserted and cystogram was performed on 18 September 2008. Cystogram revealed hourglass bladder. The balloon of suprapubic Foley catheter was seen in the upper compartment and the urethral Foley catheter was located in the larger inferior compartment of hourglass bladder (, and ).
Ultrasound examination was performed on 30 September 2008. The suprapubic catheter tip and balloon were located in upper compartment of hourglass bladder, whereas the urethral catheter was placed in the inferior compartment, which appeared to be the main lumen of bladder . Computed tomography (CT) cystogram was performed on 17 October 2008. Coronal and sagittal multiplanar reconstruction of the images confirmed the hourglass shape of urinary bladder ( and ). The urethral catheter was lying in the lower part of hourglass bladder while the suprapubic catheter was placed in the upper part, which was smaller. When the bladder was distended, the waist of hourglass bladder measured 3 cm.
Cytology of urine specimen sent on 11 November 2008, showed benign urothelial and squamous cells with numerous erythrocytes and occasional inflammatory cells. No malignant cells were present .
This patient continued to manage her bladder with suprapubic and urethral catheters. The suprapubic catheter required careful positioning while changing. It was likely that on the occasion when suprapubic catheter failed to drain any urine, the balloon of suprapubic catheter had probably been inflated right at the waist of the hourglass bladder with the tip bent over the inflated balloon.