A 65-year-old female presented with complaints of a painless mass on the left gluteal region of the buttock that increased in size over several months. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a subcutaneous tumor with a maximum diameter of 11 cm. The tumor had a cystic appearance and contained liquid with slightly high-signal intensity on the T1-weighted image and high-signal intensity on the T2-weighted image. The periphery of the cystic wall was thick with a solid neoplastic lesion and intermediate signal intensity on T1- and T2-weighted images. The tumor extended to the fascia of the great gluteal muscle and the gluteal muscle was displaced. 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography (CT) showed a high standardized uptake value maximum at the periphery of the tumor .
The histologic evaluation of a needle biopsy was characterized by a proliferation of malignant pleomorphic cells, thus suggesting a high-grade malignancy. No lung metastasis was identified. The tumor resection was planned with the resection of underlying gluteal muscle as well as the surrounding skin and subcutaneous tissues >3 cm from the tumor, resulting in a full thickness defect in the buttock 17 cm in maximum diameter. A transposition flap reconstruction was designed in which tissue was donated from the lateral thorax. The flap had no circulatory impairment after the operation .
During rehabilitation there were no restrictions for the post-operative sitting and standing protocols, the purpose of which is to protect the flap. Limitation on daily activity was recommended. The majority of the gluteal muscle was resected; however, the patient felt no specific disturbance after the resection of the great gluteus muscle and the patient’s gait was not affected.
The histopathology report confirmed an undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma. The surgical margin had no tumor cells and post-operation radiotherapy was not performed. The patient was satisfied with the aesthetics of the flap because most of the surgical scar was covered by underwear.