A 70-year-old woman presented with headache, weakness, fatigue, right palpebral ptosis and diplopia. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the sella revealed a sellar mass involving the pituitary gland and infundibular stalk, which also extended into the right cavernous sinus and the sphenoid sinus. The neurologists demonstrated infiltrations of the right II, III, IV, V and VI cranial nerves .
A week after occurrence of right palpebral ptosis, the patient received immediate transsphenoidal decompression surgery. The histological examination revealed that the mass was the infiltration of a high-grade B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma involving respiratory system epithelial cells.
After the transsphenoidal operation, the patient was transported to our endocrinology clinic. Her skin was pale and she had right palpebral ptosis. No lymphadenopathy or goiter was found. She did not have galactorrhea. Her axillary and pubic hair was scant. Her blood pressure was 120/70 mmHg with a pulse rate of 80 beats/per minute (hypertension and bradycardia existing before the operation, were improved postoperatively). Examination of the chest, abdomen and cardiovascular system was normal.
As per whole blood count, hemoglobin was 12.3 g/dl, hematocrit was 38%, white blood cell count (WBC) was 11,760/mm3, lymphocytes were 1400/mm3, neutrophils were 9660/mm3 and platelet count was 123,000/mm3. The biochemical analysis results of the blood were as follows: glucose: 90 mg/dl, blood urea nitrogen (BUN): 22 mg/dl, creatinine: 0.7 mg/dl, sodium: 141 mEq/L, potassium: 4 mEq/L, serum osmolarity: 295 mOsm/kg H2O, with a paired urine osmolality of 173 mOsm/kg, free T4: 20.4 pmol/L, thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH): 0.705 mIU/L, cortisol at 8 am, 16.7 mcg/dl, adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) at 8 am, 41 ng/L, luteinizing hormone (LH): 0.1 mIU/ml, follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH): 1.8 mIU/ml, estradiol: 8.1 pg/ml, prolactin (PRL): 102.4 ng/dl. Low levels of urine osmolality after overnight water deprivation along with normal plasma osmolality suggested DI. Desmopressin treatment was not administered because the daily urine volume did not exceed 4 liters (her weight was 56 kg).
Hyperprolactinemia was attributed to the stalk compression which interrupted dopamine transport to lactotrophs. The low levels of FSH and LH observed in this post-menopausal woman suggested infiltration of the anterior pituitary by lymphoma. Because primary sellar lymphoma is very rare and histological examination of our patient revealed that the mass was due to infiltration of a high-grade B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma involving respiratory system epithelial cells, computed tomography (CT) of the paranasal sinus and MRI of the thorax and abdomen were performed.
Although MRI of the thorax and abdomen did not show any abnormalities, when the paranasal sinus CT scan was performed, we concluded that the primary lymphoma originated from the sphenoid sinus and infiltrated the pituitary gland. When bone marrow aspiration was performed, lymphoma infiltration to the bone marrow was detected and the thrombocytopenia was thought to be resulting from lymphoma infiltration of the bone marrow. Chemotherapy and radiotherapy to the sellar area were planned, but the patient died and her family did not permit an autopsy.