A 31-year-old man, native from Senegal and living in Spain for one year, came to the emergency room reporting non-productive cough, asthenia, evening fever and profuse sweating of one month duration, with progressive dyspnea limiting ordinary activity from the day before admission.
Patient’s condition met the Beck’s triad including arterial hypotension (a blood pressure of 85/65 mmHg), muffled heart sounds and mild jugular engorgement.
Chest X-ray and computed tomography revealed a significant increase in the cardiac silhouette with bilateral pleural effusion and without pulmonary lesions. The electrocardiogram showed a heart rate of 100 beats per minute, with low voltage, a right bundle branch block and electrical alternans.
Transthoracic echocardiography described severe pericardial effusion with echocardiographic signs of hemodynamic compromise, right ventricular diastolic collapse, and right atrium systolic collapse, as well as a dilated inferior vena cava and global hypokinesia that conditioned a severely depressed left ventricular ejection fraction (30%) .
To investigate the etiology of pericardial effusion and cardiac tamponade, an ultrasound-guided percutaneous puncture pericardiocentesis and pericardial biopsy with a pericardioscope through the subxiphoid route were performed. Pericardial effusion had serohematic appearance and the cytochemical and cytological study showed increased cells, predominantly lymphocytes and macrophages, with elevated adenosine deaminase levels (120,2 U/L). Conventional bacteriologic cultures of pericardial effusion were negative. Acid-alcohol-fast bacilli were not observed in the Ziehl-Neelsen stain. The pericardial sample was processed for culture in liquid medium (Bactec MGIT 960) and in enriched solid medium (Coletsos and Löwenstein-Jensen). Since only one sample was available for all microbiological processes, direct PCR and liquid culture were performed from the same sample. The direct MTBC PCR (FluoroTypeMTB-Hain) from the pericardial effusion was negative. Liquid medium culture was positive for mycobacteria after seven weeks of incubation, and PCR performed at this moment from this liquid medium was also positive for MTBC. Rapid confirmation of presumptive positive liquid cultures of Mycobacterium tuberculosis, based on the detection of the MPT64 antigen, was negative from the liquid medium, but positive from direct colony.
The strain was sent to the Mycobacteria Laboratory of the National Center for Microbiology (Carlos III Health Institute), where it was identified as M. africanum, and it showed to be sensitive to isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide, streptomycin, and ethambutol.
Genomic epidemiologic analysis was carried out (Tuberculosis Genomics Unit of the Biomedicine Institute of Valencia) using the whole genome sequencing technique for a subsequent genomic analysis of single nucleotide point mutations (SNP). The species and lineage identified were M. africanum subtype II. The analysis of genetic distances showed it was a single sample, not belonging to any transmission group of the Valencian Community included in the Tuberculosis Genomics Unit’s database. The strain was found at a distance greater than 300 SNPs from the closest strain. No specific SNPs were identified that confirmed resistance to the different first and second line antituberculosis drugs.
IFN-γ production was determined by QuantiFERON-TB Gold Plus (QFT-Plus) in the patient’s blood using ESAT-6 and CFP-10 antigens and was negative.
Pericardial biopsy revealed non-necrotizing chronic granulomatous pericarditis.
The HIV serology test was negative.
Antituberculous therapy including isoniazid, rifampin, ethambutol, and pyrazinamide was started, as well as adjuvant treatment with corticosteroids.
The patient was switched to isoniazid and rifampicin after an initial two-month regimen with four drugs and completed 10 months of therapy, with a favorable outcome. The patient underwent periodic transthoracic echocardiograms. One month after hospital admission, the pericardial effusion had improved, and a preserved left ventricular ejection fraction was observed.