A 64-year-old non-smoking man was admitted into our hospital as a result of a mass in the left lower lung lobe identified by chest radiography in physical examination. Chest CT revealed only two masses in the left lower lung lobe, with no metastases in the mediastinal lymph nodes . The patient was thus performed lobectomy of the left lower lung. Mediastinal lymph node dissection (LND) demonstrated no evidence of residual lung squamous-cells , but 2 of 4 interlobar lymph nodes were involved, and the lesions were staged as pT3N1M0, IIIA squamous-cell NSCLC. Afterward, the patient had received adjuvant chemotherapy using paclitaxel and carboplatin for four cycles from June 2017 to August 2017. Chest CT in August 2017 revealed no metastases in the lung or mediastinal lymph node . Three months after treatment, the CEA level was found to increase to 61.61 ng/ml. In addition, positron emission tomography-CT revealed fludeoxyglucose F18-positive lesions in the anastomotic region and right iliac bone region , respectively, which were suspected of disease recurrence. Moreover, tests for EGFR mutation and ALK fluorescence in situ hybridization showed negative results. To alleviate bone pain, palliative radiotherapy was applied in both the anastomotic region and the right iliac bone region. However, chest CT in January 2018 revealed many new lung nodules in the entire lung . The patient was then treated with rh-endostain (30 mg d1–7 CIV) combined with docetaxel (120 mg d4 IV) every 3 weeks. Eventually, the patient suffered from rapid disease progression and symptom aggravation, cough, and dyspnea were included . Biomarkers, including PD-L1 expression, tumor TMB, and high microsatellite instability, could be used to forecast the therapeutic effect of immune checkpoint blockade . To further identify the potential therapeutic targets, immunohistochemistry was used to analyze the PD-L1 and MMR-related proteins, including MSH2, MSH6, MLH1, and PMS2 . PD-L1 expression was determined using the companion diagnostic PD-L1 IHC 22C3 pharmDx assay. PD-L1 expression was determined based on percentage of tumor cells with positive membranous staining and was reported as the tumor proportion score (TPS). Among them, PD-L1 was weakly stained, TPS was 2%; by contrast, four MMR-related proteins were strongly stained, suggesting no MMR deficiency in the tumor. Moreover, the next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology, along with a gene panel involving 416 genes associated with cancer, was utilized to analyze the postoperative tumor samples from patients in January 2018. The large panel can comprehensively and accurately detect variations involving gene mutations, amplifications, and fusions with clear clinical relevance to tumors. Typically, the libraries were prepared using the Hyper Prep Kit (Kapa) before sequencing on the Hiseq 4000 NGS platforms (Illumina). More importantly, the co-mutations of TP53 (pY220C, MAF = 11.07%) and KRAS (pG12V, MAF = 19.37%) were detected in the tumor; Unfortunately, the results showed no detected mutations in core genes associated with lung cancer (EGFR, ALK, c-Met, ROS1, BRAF and STK11). TMB was referred to as the total counts of non-silencing somatic mutations in the coding regions. Panel TMB was counted by summing all base substitutions and indels in the coding region of targeted genes, including synonymous alterations to reduce sampling noise and excluding known driver mutations as they are over-represented in the panel, as previously described .In our case, the TMB was 3.2 mutations/Mb (< 10), which belonged to the low tumor mutational burden (TMB-low). Therefore, a decision was made to proceed with chemotherapy combined with immunotherapy according to the following regimen, gemcitabine (1.4 g d1,8 IV) combined with pembrolizumab (150 mg d1 IV) every 3 weeks for 4 cycles, before pembrolizumab (150 mg) every 3 weeks since April 2018. The symptoms of cough and dyspnea in the patient were reported to be substantially alleviated. After two cycles of treatments, CT revealed a decreased size and number of lung nodules, and the response had persisted at 7 months, which had met the criteria of RECIST partial response .