A 66-year-old male patient with a HeartMate II model LVAD (Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL) 4 months postoperative from implant was planned for robotic prostatectomy for prostate cancer after multidisciplinary oncologic case discussion, with a goal for a surgical cure in order to obtain candidacy for heart transplantation. His past medical history included viral cardiomyopathy with severe left ventricular dysfunction (EF 20%), ventricular tachycardia status post-implanted cardiac defibrillator (ICD), stage 2 chronic kidney disease, and hypertension.
Preoperative evaluation with a ramp transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) demonstrated an optimal pump speed of 5300 revolutions per minute (RPM). This type of TTE is a protocolized assessment of LVAD operation during which continuous evaluation of the heart is used to determine an optimal RPM at which the patient’s ventricular function, aortic opening, and cardiac output are optimal . The TTE showed minimal left ventricular contraction, mild aortic insufficiency with preserved valve opening approximately every 2–3 beats, moderate right ventricular dysfunction, mild tricuspid regurgitation, and no mitral regurgitation. He was admitted to the hospital the night prior to the procedure for LVAD interrogation, which showed flow rate 4.2 L/min, speed 5300 RPM, pulsatility index (PI) 4.5, and power 3.9 W. Pulsatility index is a dimensionless measure of left ventricle (LV) contribution to cardiac output as it describes how pulsatile flow through the pump is at a given time. PI is dependent on the relationship between the pressure generated by the LV and the pressure generated by the LVAD. In a state with low pulsatility index, the left ventricle does not generate a pressure sufficient to exceed aortic root pressure and therefore results in the aortic valve not opening during systole with low PI. ICD interrogation showed no recent VT events, VT threshold at 170 beats per minute with anti-tachycardia pacing available, 10 years battery life, and less than 0.1% ventricular pacing. Anticoagulation was managed with warfarin, physical exam was unremarkable given his past medical history, and electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm.
Warfarin was held the night prior to the surgery. On the morning of prostatectomy, prothrombin international normalized ratio (INR) resulted as 3.2. He was given prothrombin complex concentrate (PCC; CSL Behring, King of Prussia, PA). PT-INR was again drawn upon arrival in the operating room and resulted at 1.4.
The intraoperative team included the urologic surgeon, general anesthesiologist, pharmacist, and a cardiac perfusionist. After placement of ASA standard monitors, a 20-gage right radial arterial line was placed under ultrasound guidance. Central venous access was obtained via the right internal jugular vein. Additional variables monitored included near-infrared cerebral oximetry (INVOS, Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN), bispectral index monitor (Medtronic Inc, Minneapolis, MN), and LVAD power index and rotation speed communicated to the anesthesia team by the cardiac perfusionist.
Anesthesia was induced using fentanyl 1.5 mcg/kg, propofol 1 mg/kg, and rocuronium 1.2 mg/kg, which resulted in relative hypotension that responded to a bolus of 250 ml of 5% albumin. Rapid sequence induction was chosen to rapidly secure the airway and reach a stable plane of anesthesia using a volatile anesthetic (sevoflurane). Albumin was chosen as it is our institutional colloid of choice. Full details of the anesthetic record are provided in Fig. .
Surgical insufflation of the abdomen resulted in an acute rise in blood pressure, which was associated with the decrease in LVAD flow rate and increased power requirement presumed due to high afterload. This was treated with 0.75 mg/kg bolus of propofol and initiation of dobutamine and nicardipine infusions with good effect. The patient was placed in a Trendelenburg position in a stepwise manner while monitoring hemodynamics and LVAD indices. Trendelenburg positioning was associated with a rise in the central venous pressure (CVP), though this was tolerated. The LVAD showed the following parameters: pulsatility index 3.9, flow 4.5 L/min, rpm 5300, and power 3.8 W.
Approximately midway through the procedure, the pulsatility index began to decrease and central venous pressure (CVP) increased by 50%. This generated concern for worsening right ventricular function creating decreased left ventricular and LVAD preload. Cardiac anesthesia was called for intraoperative transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE). TEE demonstrated mild bowing of the intraventricular septum into the right ventricle and moderate right ventricular dysfunction (see Fig. ). Inhaled epoprostenol was initiated to further optimize the right ventricular function. Vasoactive medications (nicardipine; dobutamine) were continued. The LVAD pulsatility index, flow, and RPM returned to their prior values .
Robotic prostatectomy was completed in the standard fashion. Ten minutes prior to abdominal desufflation, nicardipine infusion was paused and dobutamine infusion rate was reduced. At the time of desufflation, there was an acute drop in arterial blood pressure which required initiation of phenylephrine and epinephrine infusions as well as a crystalloid bolus of 250 ml. Neuromuscular blockade was reversed using sugammadex (Merck, Kenilworth, NJ), and the patient was extubated. All vasoactive medications were able to be discontinued at this time, and the patient was transported to the cardiac surgery intermediate care unit in stable condition.
Postoperatively, he did not require vasoactive infusions. PT-INR was drawn postoperatively at 5 h after administration of prothrombin concentrate and resulted at 1.5. His preoperative dose of warfarin was resumed on the evening of postoperative day 0, and INR on postoperative day 1 was 2.0. The remainder of his postoperative laboratory studies was stable from preoperative values. He was discharged home on postoperative day 2. Subsequent evaluation by urologic surgery has determined that the procedure was curative. He is currently undergoing evaluation for cardiac transplant.