A 44-year-old male patient diagnosed with vitiligo at 10 years old, came to the emergency department due to excessive thirst and polyuria of 8 to 10 L/day. The patient had a family history (father and 3 siblings) of type 2 diabetes mellitus and autoimmune hypothyroidism.
He was subsequently hospitalized in the endocrinology service with diagnosis of polydipsia-polyuria syndrome and high suspicion of diabetes insipidus. On physical examination the following were noted: Blood pressure, 110/70 mmHg; heart rate, 65 bpm; respiratory rate, 16 breaths per minute; body weight, 81 kg (178.5 lb); height, 170 cm; and BMI, 28 kg/m2.
In the preferential examination multiple irregular hypopigmented maculas were found in different parts of the body, compatible with vitiligo .
Also decreased the baresthesia and pallesthesia sensitivity in feet. The remainder of the examination was unremarkable. Biochemical and hormonal examinations revealed the following: serum Na, 141 mEq/l; serum K, 3.84 mEq/l; fasting blood glucose, 110 mg/dl; serum creatinine, 0.81 mg/dl; thyroid profile with free t4, 1.25 µg/dl (normal range: 0.8–1.7 µg/dl); TSH, 2,248 µUI/ml (normal range: 0.4–4 µUI/ml); antimicrosomal antibodies, 32.9 U/ml (normal range: <60 U/ml); and HbA1c at 6.2%.
Given the presumptive diagnosis of diabetes insipidus, the patient underwent a water deprivation test (Miller test), and after the subcutaneous administration of 5U vasopressin (desmopressin phase), he was subsequently diagnosed with partial central diabetes insipidus .
To identify the etiology, we requested a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pituitary with gadolinium , which revealed the presence of two microadenomas (4×2 mm and 2×3 mm) in the posterolateral region of the adenohypophysis, a filiform neurohypophysis with decreased signal intensity, and normal thickness of the pituitary stalk. Likewise, due to blood glucose and HbA1c values, he was diagnosed with prediabetes.
The patient received initially pharmacological treatment based on chlorpropamide 100 mg QD, carbamazepine 200 mg TID and hydrochlorothiazide 25 mg QD, because desmopressin was not available at that time. In addition, it was recommended to limit the intake of foods rich in sodium and simple sugars, as well as to undertake regular physical activity and maintain an adequate state of hydration.
The patient had favorable response to the treatment, and was discharged with good tolerance and adherence to the medication. Ophthalmological and auditory evaluation was performed, and showed no abnormalities. However, during the outpatient controls, he had multiple episodes of polyuria requiring hospitalization, that were attributed to the decompensation of the underlying disease, the last being 13 years after diagnosis with polyuria of up to 15 L, which was associated with a weight loss of 10 kg, and strikingly, random blood sugar of 310 mg/dl. This was the last cause of hospitalization for glycemic management.
Because the patient had a family history of autoimmune hypothyroidism, as well as a personal history of vitiligo and idiopathic central diabetes insipidus by probable autoimmune etiology, we suspected a presentation pattern of latent autoimmune diabetes in adults (LADA 2). In line with this, we requested antibodies to glutamic acid decarboxylase 65 (GAD-65) and islet antigen 2 (IA-2) antibody, both of which were negative.
Consequently, type 2 diabetes mellitus was diagnosed considering that the patient was overweight and had a family history. The results of the blood tests were obtained as follows: HbA1c was 8.2% and basal C-peptide was 0.32 nmol/l.
Glycemia was controlled by administration of metformin 850 mg QD and progressive titration of the insulin dose until a schedule of insulin NPH 20 units in the morning and 10 units at night was established. During hospitalization, the drugs used for the management of diabetes insipidus were replaced by intranasal desmopressin 10 µg at night because this medication was already available in our country, with no adverse reactions.
One month later during his out-patient control, he reported two episodes of hypoglycemia and a result of fasting blood glucose of 83mg/dl, so we decided to withdraw insulin therapy. The next control in six months revealed serum sodium of 139 mEq/l, fasting blood glucose of 133 mg/dl, and HbA1c of 6.9%. Currently, the patient is asymptomatic and follows his out-patient controls by our service.