In October 2019, a 34-year-old Caucasian woman came to the our institution for a multinodular growing polypoid mass in her lumbar region , present for an unknown period of time. The patient was obese (Body Mass Index (BMI): 32.5) and a smoker; the remaining medical history was unremarkable.
An incisional biopsy diagnosed a DFSP. The patient underwent proper staging before surgery with head, chest, and abdominal computed tomography (CT) that showed absence of metastasis (T1a, N0, M0; stage 1A, according to the American Joint Committee on Cancer [AJCC] criteria).
Therefore, a wide local excision was performed with 3 cm clinically healthy tissue margins down to the muscle fascia. The histopathological specimen measured 9 × 9.5 cm and included skin, subcutaneous tissue, and muscle fascia. Fresh-frozen sections were not available. The defect was repaired using a combined approach with a new artificial bilaminar dermal matrix (Pelnac®, Gunze Ltd., Osaka, Japan) and a negative-pressure wound therapy (NPWT) system (V.A.C.®, KCI, San Antonio, USA) . The dermal regenerative template was secured on the wound with multiple staples, and the NPWT system (at 100 mmHg continuous negative pressure) was applied directly over the fenestrated silicon layer of the dermal matrix. The dressing was changed twice a week for 15 days. After the final histological examination revealed tumor-free margins, a split-thickness graft (STSG) was harvested from the right gluteus (because it is a covered area and it allows a unique operative position and medication) and fixed to the new derma with NPWT. Both surgical procedures were performed with local anesthesia, with good compliance by the patient. Postoperative radiotherapy was not necessary.
At 15-day follow-up, the wound had healed without complications or adverse events, with satisfactory aesthetic outcome and without limitation of back motion or pain. After 6 months of follow-up, the patient was free from disease, with excellent quality of life , and was satisfied with the treatments received.