Six years ago, a 17-year old adolescent male of Middle-East origin was brought to our emergency room at the Department of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, Malmö, Sweden, by his mother and stepfather. Over the previous weeks, he had reported being observed by authorities and criminal gangs. He talked to himself, felt that TV broadcasts referred to his mother, and had aggressive outbursts.
Our patient lived with his mother, stepfather, and a 15-year-old brother. He had no family history of psychiatric disease. His psychomotor development had been normal. After his parents’ divorce, our patient moved from a Middle-Eastern country to Sweden with his mother and brother. He started to use illicit drugs before age 13. Contacts with social authorities and a regional addiction center were established.
In our emergency room, our patient’s mother reported that he had been smoking cannabis daily for 4 years, up to 3g per day. For the past 2 years, he had also misused tramadol, taking 200–1,000mg daily. He had tried lysergic acid diethylamide, cocaine, hallucinogenic mushrooms, ecstasy, inhalants, and different analgesics. For the 3 weeks preceding the emergency room visit, he had abstained from cannabis and tramadol after being enrolled in a youth service program related to a conviction for robbery and cannabis possession. Five days prior to admission, he still screened positive for tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). Upon examination, our patient was mute, reacted inappropriately, and presented a depressed mood. A urine toxicology test was negative for THC and other substances. After evaluation, he returned home with a short-term prescription of one antipsychotic medication in a very low dose (levomepromazine, 10mg at night, for 2 consecutive days) and alimemazine (20mg as needed, for 2 days), and with a short-term outpatient appointment.
Six days later, still with pronounced ideas of reference, he was voluntarily admitted to the Addiction Centre of our hospital. A urine toxicology test was still negative. After 4 days of inpatient care with persistent delusions, he was transferred to the Department of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry. He reported feelings of being observed by staff and by perceived cameras in street lights, and he laughed without obvious reason. Results from a blood screen, computed tomography of his brain, and an electroencephalogram (EEG) were normal. Our patient’s delusions and hallucinations gradually diminished. After 10 days of inpatient care without specific psychopharmacological treatment, he communicated almost adequately and was discharged to a residential addiction treatment center.
One week after his arrival at the treatment institution, our patient’s behavior was again altered. He was assessed at the local Department of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, where he isolated himself, and presented bizarre body postures and inappropriate laughs. A urine toxicology test was negative for THC and other drugs. His arm appeared to be paralyzed and he collected saliva in his mouth. After consultation with pediatric expertise, he was transferred back to the Department of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry in his hometown, after receiving an intramuscular injection of 10mg of olanzapine.
Upon arrival, he was mute and sat completely still, eyes closed, with saliva running down his chin. He also presented with urine and fecal incontinence, and with asymmetric convulsions in his arms and legs. His blood pressure (130/60mmHg) and heart rate (80 beats per minute) were normal. Results of an EEG and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his brain were normal. A pediatric neurologist did not find signs of physical illness. Possible differential diagnoses included substance-induced psychosis, depressive stupor, catatonic schizophrenia and neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS). A nasogastric tube was introduced for nutrition. He received 20mg of diazepam daily. Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) was initiated along with risperidone, initially 1mg per day. During the next 5 weeks, he received ECT 12 times with bilateral stimulation. Risperidone was gradually increased to 3mg per day. After the seventh ECT treatment, he opened his eyes and started to communicate with his hands. After the eighth ECT, the nasogastric tube was withdrawn and the diazepam dose was reduced by half. Occasionally he talked about the mafia, laughed inappropriately, and expressed doubts about his medication. After the ninth ECT, the risperidone dose was increased to 4mg per day, and our patient gradually improved. Colleagues from the outpatient Psychosis Team confirmed the preliminary diagnosis of catatonic schizophrenia. Our patient fulfilled diagnostic criteria of catatonic schizophrenia according to the International Classification of Diseases 10th Revision (ICD-10 ), including the general schizophrenia criterion (criterion A), at least four out of seven cluster B criteria (criteria number 1, 3, 4, and 5), and the C criterion excluding another factor likely to cause catatonic behavior. Thus, he was diagnosed with catatonic schizophrenia (F20.2) and cannabis dependence (F12.2) upon discharge from inpatient treatment, with a prompt appointment with the Psychosis Team.
During the first few weeks after discharge, our patient relapsed into tramadol and cannabis abuse. Paranoid delusions and hallucinations re-appeared, and 4 months after discharge he was re-hospitalized. Symptoms improved and he was successfully discharged to another residential addiction treatment institution.
Five years ago, having been abstinent from illicit drugs for almost 4 months, our patient started work. The follow-up contact with the Psychosis Team was limited to occasional telephone appointments and finally ceased. Our patient met and moved in with a girlfriend. He started formal training to become a nursing assistant, and maintained good relationships with his girlfriend and friends.
Two years ago, our patient started to feel stressed; his girlfriend’s parents expressed doubts about his employment, and he worked and studied at the same time. He started to be absent from classes and suffered from insomnia and weight loss. When his girlfriend traveled, he became suspicious, developed delusions about being poisoned, and changed to vegetarian food. When his girlfriend returned home, he was irritable and expressed ideas of references related to TV broadcasts.
Our patient started to spend time with his mother, who reported that he occasionally presented bizarre postures and screamed without reason. On one occasion, he also behaved aggressively towards his mother, and held a knife against his own neck. He was transported by the police to the psychiatric emergency room, where he presented with bizarre facial expressions, inappropriate laughs, paranoid and bizarre delusions, and aggressive and disrupted behavior. Results from a urine toxicology test were negative. He was admitted for compulsory psychiatric treatment, including temporary physical restraint and acute intramuscular treatment with zuclopenthixol. Subsequently, his medication was changed to risperidone in doses increasing to 6mg per day per os. Our patient’s mother was opposed to the medication. After two weeks of inpatient treatment he was discharged in a somewhat improved condition.
Owing to anxiety and sleeping problems, our patient returned to the psychiatric emergency unit on several occasions after discharge. He was prescribed levomepromazine without significant effect. One week after discharge, he was brought to hospital after an overdose with a prescribed medication, reportedly levomepromazine. He denied any suicidal intent and his urine toxicology screen was negative. Our patient was again hospitalized for compulsory psychiatric treatment. He was paranoid and dysphoric. Again, his mother was opposed to pharmacological treatment. After 5 days he was discharged with a prescription for risperidone, 25mg weekly, to be administered via the intramuscular route by the Psychosis Team.
During the next 4 months, he was seen by a senior consultant at the Psychosis Team on five occasions. Initially he presented with a somewhat dysphoric mood, and inadequate smiles were reported. He was continuously opposed to the medication, and requested a change from injections to oral medication. He started treatment with risperidone, 2mg daily per os. At follow-up, 1 year ago, he reported taking his medication and felt well.