A 63-year-old female visited our hospital for recurrent abdominal radicular pain that had lasted for approximately 2 mo. She had no other accompanying signs or symptoms.
On initial CTA, a thick circular mass with patchy high density enhanced signal was found around the lower thoracic aorta and upper abdominal aorta. The mass showed heterogeneous enhancement on the contrast-enhanced CT scan . Based on the patient’s medical history and imaging test results, we initially thought that the patient had an aortic hematoma, and two stents (CUFF, 24 mm × 80 mm and 28 mm × 80 mm; AnkuraTM, LifeTech Scientific Co., Guangdong, China) were inserted into the aorta through endovascular interventional surgery. However, the patient’s abdominal pain was not alleviated after discharge, leading to rehospitalization approximately 1 mo later.
The patient had a history of hypertension for more than 10 years and was maintained on oral irbesartan and felodipine. She had undergone radiofrequency ablation for atrial fibrillation approximately 2 years prior, and took warfarin postoperatively. There were no other known chronic diseases.
There were no positive findings on physical examination, except an irregular heart rate.
Laboratory test results showed carbohydrate antigen 125 Level of 124.4 U/mL (normal range: 0-35 U/mL) and serum ferritin level of 806 ng/mL (normal range: 7-323 ng/mL). Serum levels of alpha-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen 19-9, and carbohydrate antigen 15-3 were all in normal range. D-dimer was 522 µg/L (fibrinogen equivalent units). The results of routine blood tests, liver and kidney function tests, and routine urinalysis were all in normal range.
Contrast-enhanced ultrasonography (US) was initially performed at the time of second hospitalization. On two-dimensional US, a heterogeneous echogenic mass was seen around the stent and was larger than it had been 1 mo prior, as measured by CTA. According to the principles of ultrasound, solids reflect ultrasound more strongly than liquids, thus presenting a higher signal. The principle of medical ultrasound imaging is also based on this theory. This implies that hyperechoic regions are mainly composed of solid tissue, whereas hypoechoic regions have more liquid components. On contrast-enhanced US (CEUS), the ultrasound contrast agent (SonoVue®; Bracco Imaging, Milan, Italy) was injected in a bolus through the peripheral vein. Delayed contrast filling was observed in the part with the lesions, and the contrast medium was dispersed rather than forming cords or clumps. No contrast medium was found in the hypoechoic area, which differs from typical endoleaks. The contrast-enhanced images closely resembled a malignant tumor . Positron emission tomography (PET)/CT showed a mass surrounding the descending aorta with a heterogeneous but clear boundary. The high-density part of the mass had increased fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) metabolism, whereas the low-density part had decreased FDG metabolism. Malignant tumors were initially considered. A nodule with high FDG metabolism was observed in the left upper lobe, and was considered as metastatic foci. No abnormal increase in FDG metabolism was observed in the rest of the body, including the brain .