A 56-year-old Japanese man was admitted to our hospital because of high fever and consciousness disorder. He developed drowsiness and did not respond well to simple questions. He had been diagnosed with lung adenocarcinoma of the right lower lobe with upper right hilar lymph node metastasis (cT2N2M0). He was a taxi driver and had smoked until he was 55 years old (1 pack per day × 35 years). He had no other medical history or family history. He underwent right lobectomy 10 months prior to admission and had been treated with three courses of chemotherapy with a combination regimen of cisplatin plus vinorelbine, although positron emission tomography showed disease progression with multiple new metastatic lung lesions. Subsequently, he received three cycles of chemotherapy with a combination regimen of carboplatin plus nab-paclitaxel. He had received his first treatment with atezolizumab 17 days earlier for metastatic lung adenocarcinoma. His fever occurred about 1 week prior to admission. Neurological examination showed a consciousness disturbance (Glasgow Coma Scale E3V3M6) and motor aphasia. He did not show signs of pyramidal tract involvement, involuntary movement, ataxia, sensory disturbance, or autonomic disturbance. No other abnormal findings, including nuchal rigidity, were found.
Magnetic resonance imaging with gadolinium contrast of the brain on admission showed no abnormalities . A cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) study demonstrated a cell count of 20/μl, protein of 166 mg/dl, and glucose of 73 mg/dl. The level of interleukin 6 (IL-6) in CSF was increased to 82.9 pg/ml (normal level < 8.7 pg/ml ). The CSF was negative for bacterial cultures and polymerase chain reaction for herpes simplex viruses 1 and 2 and cytomegalovirus. Serum antibody tests for paraneoplastic neurological syndrome including anti-Hu were negative. Thus, metastatic brain tumor, bacterial meningitis, herpes simplex encephalitis, and paraneoplastic neurological syndrome were ruled out. Our patient was diagnosed with encephalitis induced by atezolizumab, and steroid pulse therapy with 1000 mg of methylprednisolone for 3 days was started on the second hospital day. His symptoms including high fever, consciousness disturbance, and motor aphasia improved immediately the next day. After the steroid pulse therapy, oral administration of prednisolone 30 mg (0.5 mg/kg) was started and tapered. The CSF findings, except for mild pleocytosis (12/μl), were normalized on day 8. The value of IL-6 was decreased to 2.3 pg/ml. Oral administration of prednisolone ended on day 13. A subsequent CSF study on day 14 showed an almost normalized cell count (7/μl) and a normalized value of IL-6 (3.9 pg/ml) . He was discharged on day 16 without neurological sequelae. After discharge, he was treated with combination chemotherapy with a regimen of docetaxel plus ramucirumab for lung adenocarcinoma without relapses of encephalitis.