A 3-year-old male neutered Lurcher presented for investigation of ongoing ocular discomfort following a full-thickness corneal perforating injury to the right eye 10 days prior.
A complete ophthalmic examination was performed by an ECVO resident and ECVO board-certified diplomate. On distant examination, blepharospasm and epiphora were noted in the right eye. Neurophthalmic examination revealed intact palpebral reflex, menace response, and dazzle reflex bilaterally. The right pupil was miotic compared to the left. Slit-lamp biomicroscopy was performed (Kowa SL-17, Kowa Optimed Europe Ltd, Berkshire, UK) and revealed a re-epithelialised 9 mm linear, full-thickness corneal lesion in the latero-paraxial cornea of the right eye. Iris rests were seen on the corneal endothelium behind the lesion. No foreign bodies were noted in the cornea nor in the anterior chamber. There was a mild, cellular, aqueous flare. The intraocular pressure (IOP) was measured using rebound tonometry (iCare Tonovet, iCare, Vantaa, Finland) and was 5 and 17 mmHg in the right and left eye, respectively. The pupil did not fully dilate in response to multiple applications of the mydriatic agent tropicamide (Minims tropicamide 1%, Bausch and Lomb, UK), and as such, peripheral examination of the lens could not be performed. Of the lens that was examinable, there were no abnormalities seen. Anterior exudative uveitis was diagnosed secondary to a previous full-thickness corneal perforation. The left eye had a normal ophthalmic examination.
Topical treatment was instigated with chloramphenicol (Clorogen, 0.5%, FDC International Ltd, UK) every 6 hours, dexamethasone phosphate (Maxidex 0.1%, Novartis, UK) every 12 hours, and a topical cycloplegic, atropine sulfate (Minims atropine sulfate 1%, Bausch and Lomb, UK) every 24 hours for 5 days. Systemic anti-inflammatories were started concurrently: meloxicam (Loxicom, Norbrook, UK) 0.1 mg/kg per os q24 hours until review. Clinical remission of the uveitis, as evidenced by normalization of IOP and absence of aqueous flare, was achieved within a week, and medications were tapered down and stopped over the subsequent 2 weeks.
Six weeks following the initial trauma and 3 weeks after cessation of medication, the patient was re-presented with a red and painful right eye. Ophthalmic examination revealed an incipient anterior and posterior capsular and subcapsular cataract in the right eye. Anterior non-exudative uveitis was present. The IOP was 8 and 20 mmHg in the right and left eye, respectively. Gonioscopy was performed in the right eye using an 18 mm Koeppe goniolens (Goniolens, Eickemeyer, Surrey, UK), which did not reveal additional abnormalities. Medical management was re-started with topical anti-inflammatories: prednisolone acetate eye drops (Pred Forte 1%, Allergan, Marlow, UK) to the right eye q8 hours and oral anti-inflammatories: meloxicam (Loxicom, Norbrook, UK) 0.1 mg/kg per os q24 hours until review.
On re-examination 2 weeks later, the right eye presented with blepharospasm, increased blink frequency, and reflex lacrimation. Complete mydriasis was achieved during the consultation with tropicamide (Minims tropicamide 1%, Bausch and Lomb, UK), facilitating full examination of the lens periphery, revealing an intralenticular foreign body associated with a progressive incipient cortical cataract at the 6 o’clock position . An ocular ultrasound (M9 portable ultrasound machine, Mindray, Huntingdon, UK), using the linear array probe in B-mode was performed prior to surgery, which confirmed the presence of the intralenticular foreign body and cataract.
Phacoemulsification was performed in the right eye by an RCVS specialist in ophthalmology with a two-handed approach in a routine manner with no complications. The foreign body was successfully removed via the main port, and an artificial intra-ocular lens was inserted (Univers 41D 4 mm flexible IOL, Dioptrix, Toulouse, France). The foreign body grossly appeared to be a 3.5 mm piece of organic plant material . Culture of the cataractous material revealed no aerobic bacterial or fungal growth; however, there was a light growth of anaerobic Gram-positive rods (further speciation was not performed by the laboratory). The anaerobic Gram-positive rods were found to be sensitive to metronidazole, amoxicillin-clavulanate, chloramphenicol, clindamycin, and cephalosporins. Post-operative management comprised of: cephalexin (Cephacare, Animalcare, York, UK) 15 mg/kg per os q12 hours, meloxicam (Loxicom, Norbrook, UK) 0.1 mg/kg per os q24 hours, chloramphenicol eye drops (Clorogen 0.5%, FDC International, Fareham, UK) to the right eye q6 hours, brinzolamide eye drops (Azopt 1%, Alcon, Birmingham, UK) to the right eye q8 hours, prednisolone acetate eye drops (Pred forte 1%, Allergan, Marlow, UK) to the right eye q4 hours and sodium hyaluronate eye drops (Clinitas 0.4%, Altacor, Berkshire, UK) to both eyes q6 hours.
At 50 months following surgery, the eye remained visual and comfortable with normal IOP and no evidence of uveitis.