A 50-year-old female was initially admitted to a local hospital in her hometown with a 3-month history of nausea, emesis, asthenia and moderate backache. High levels of serum calcium (4.3 mmol/L, with the normal range at 2-2.8 mmol/L) and PTH (129.5 pmol/L, normal, 1.6–6.9 pmol/L) were detected. Although neck ultrasonography revealed an increase in the volume of the parathyroid glands, no further examinations were performed at the time to determine whether there was a possibility of ectopic lesions. A left-sided parathyroidectomy and bilateral subtotal thyroidectomy were subsequently performed and pathological examination revealed parathyroid adenoma (2 × 1.5 cm) and nodular goiter. The patient’s hypercalcemia was resolved with decreasing levels of PTH observed after the operation. However, the woman developed more sever nausea and asthenia one month later, and her levels of serum calcium and PTH increased again.
After the patient was referred to our hospital, our priority was to lower her serum calcium levels while initiating diagnostic procedures to elucidate the lesion site as soon as the hypercalcemic crisis had been diagnosed. Physical examination showed that the patient’s vital signs were normal but reveled that she had difficulties in walking. However, no lumps were identified on her neck. Laboratory assessments revealed a serum calcium level of 4.63 mmol/L (normal, 2.11–2.52 mmol/L), urinary calcium level of 15.7 mmol/24 h (normal, 2.5–7.5 mmol/24 h), serum PTH of 1562.3 pg/mL (normal, 8.5–88 pg/mL), serum BUN of 13.9 mmol/L (normal, 2.6–7.5 mmol/L), and serum creatinine of 174 umol/L (normal, 41–73 umol/L).
X-ray revealed a previously undetected fracture of the left superior pubic ramus, and examination of bone mineral density (BMD) using dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry revealed decreased density in the lumbar spine (T score = − 2.6). Furthermore, ultrasonography of the patient’s urinary system revealed the presence of bilateral renal calculi. Although cervical ultrasonography did not detect any abnormalities, computed tomography (CT) of the chest showed a low-density mass in the upper-middle mediastinum, approximately 6.7 cm×4.8 cm in size , importantly, 99mTc-hexakis-2-methoxyisobuthylisonitrile (99mTc-MIBI) scintigraphy showed increased uptake in a location identical to that in the CT scan image . To exclude the diagnosis of multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN), pituitary magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and abdominal CT were performed. The images of pituitary and adrenal glands were normal, but abdominal CT revealed a sign of acute pancreatitis . However, serum amylase and lipase levels were normal, and no family member carried a medical history of hyperparathyroidism, pituitary tumor, thyroid medullary carcinoma, or pheochromocytoma.
Subsequently, the patient underwent right thoracotomy and a mass measuring 6.8 cm×4.9 cm×5.3 cm was resected. The lymph node dissection was not performed since there were no obviously swollen lymph nodes seen around the tumor. Levels of serum calcium (2.42 mmol/L) and PTH (19.2 pg/mL) returned to normal after the operation. Over subsequent days, blood calcium concentrations declined, and intravenous infusion of calcium gluconate and oral vitamin D3 was administrated to correct these abnormalities. Postoperative pathological evaluation of the resected specimen disclosed a parathyroid adenocarcinoma due to vascular invasion and Ki-67 positivity in approximately 10% of the tumor cells . Other immunochemical examinations showed PAX-8 (+), PTH (+), galectin-3 (-), syn (-),CgA (+), cyclin D1(+), and CEA (−).After 20 days of hospitalization, the patient was discharged and treated with oral calcium carbonate (3 g/day) and calcitriol (0.5 ug/day). She did not exhibit any signs of recurrence during a six-month follow-up.