A 50-year-old Caucasian man presented in January 2017 with papules, nodules and erosive lesions on the skin of the upper trunk, on the lips, oral cavity, pharynx, larynx, and on the genital mucosae. On clinical examination, the skin showed papules, nodules on erythematous base in a seborrheic distribution . The erosions on the lips and mucous membrane lesions were painful . The Nikolsky’s sign in our patient was positive. At physical examination no other remarkable sign was detected. The patient suffers from hypertension and a diagnosis of multiple superficial BCCs was set 2 months before. In his family no one else had similar cutaneous symptoms and there is no history of autoimmune diseases.
The patient was being treated with Imiquimod for multiple superficial BCCs for 3 days before the onset of the lesions . The findings of routine laboratory tests, chest radiography and abdominal computed tomography scan were within normal limits .
The diagnosis of pemphigus vulgaris was based on the typical clinical and morphological criteria. Histopathological examination showed an intraepidermal acantholytic blister compatible with PV . Direct immunofluorescence (DIF) displayed a weak intercellular deposition of IgG and C3 . Indirect immunofluorescence (IIF) on a monkey esophagus substrate showed epithelial intercellular IgG with a 1:160 titer. Of note, Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was negative for both Dsg 1 and 3 (1.6 and 0.8 U/ml, respectively; negative, <14 U/ml; indeterminate, 14 to 20 for Dsg1 and negative < 7 U/ml; indeterminate, 7–20 for Dsg3) (MBL, Nagoya, Japan) instead, a 170 kDa band, obtained by IgG, was seen by immunoblotting (IB) with keratinocyte extracts . The negative results on Dsgs were also confirmed by IB and different commercial Dsg1 and 3 ELISA kits (Euroimmun, Padova, Italia). Since epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) presents a molecular weight marker similar to the unknown antigen, we also performed an IB on keratinocyte extracts using an anti-EGFR antibody as control . The results showed that the autoantigen did not comigrate with EGFR. The non-desmoglein autoantigen prompts us to term the case as atypical pemphigus vulgaris. The patient, after interrupting Imiquimod application, started treatment with prednisolone (80 mg iv/day) for 7 days, gradually tapered and finished after 4 weeks, with complete clearing of skin and mucosal lesions. The patient reported no physical or psychological sequelae, and he did not have any problem in returning to his everyday life. After reaching clinical remission without therapy, the patient underwent regular follow-up visits and after 2 years did not develop any relapse .