A 43-year-old woman was diagnosed with a nodular stage IIB NRAS-mutated melanoma of her left thigh, according to the AJCC 8th edition (T3bN0M0). She first underwent a wide resection of the primary lesion and started infusions of anti-PD1 antibodies (nivolumab 480 mg monthly), as part of a therapeutic trial. She developed thyroiditis after 2 infusions of nivolumab with successive phases of hyper- and then hypothyroidism which was treated with thyroid substitution. The occurrence of a grade III immune thrombocytopenia (platelets count: 27 000/mm3 without autoantibodies) subsequently led to the interruption of nivolumab after 4 infusions and was resolved with systemic corticosteroids (1mg/kg) and eltrombopag olamine (75mg daily). Three months after treatment discontinuation (7 months after initiation of nivolumab), she developed edema of the legs and face, along with a weight gain (+ 8 kgs), asthenia, dyspnea, and cough. Laboratory tests showed a drop of serum-albumin levels from 40g/l to 23g/l, normal hematocrit count without hemodynamics disturbances (122/69mmHg, 100 bpm), without signs of enteropathy, neither heart, kidney or liver failure. All hormonal tests (TSH, cortisol) and serum protein electrophoresis were normal. There was no proteinuria and urinalysis results were normal. The CT-scan revealed mild bilateral pleural effusion and mild ascites due to anasarca . Echocardiography also found a slight pericardial effusion without cardiopathy. Colonoscopy was normal. A scintigraphy with marked albumin (99mTc) showed a capillary hyperpermeability (Landi’s test). Thoracentesis allowed a 600cc fluid evacuation. Cytology was normal but triglycerides’ levels were elevated at 25g/L (N<1,1 g/L) in favor of chylothorax with normal levels of triglycerides in blood.
The diagnosis of a secondary form of capillary leak syndrome (CLS) with chylothorax induced by nivolumab was made in the absence of infection, vaccine and other inducing drugs. Cytokines levels were as follows: normal IL-6 levels (<3,6pg/ml) and elevated vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) levels (109 pg/ml, N<60 pg/ml).
High doses of corticosteroids (1mg/kg) and intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIG) (0.4 g/kg for 5 days) followed by IVIG (1g/kg/day for two consecutive days monthly) for 5 months, along with a fat-free diet and iterative pleural puncturing provided the resolution of the edema, the chylothorax and the ascites. At last follow-up (one year after nivolumab discontinuation), there was no evidence of melanoma progression according to CT-scan.