A 76-year-old male with a history of a C3–C6 ACF 2 years ago presented with dysphagia for three months. Cervical X-rays showed anterior migration of the expandable cage . On admission, routine laboratory work was unremarkable (white blood cells were 6.2 k, C-reactive protein was 0.5, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 2). The cervical computed tomography (CT) showed anterior extrusion of the expandable cage into the hypopharynx, resulting in esophageal impingement; thus, we suspected esophageal breach-erosion preoperatively. We had ENT perform a nonrigid laryngoscopy that showed no signs of hypopharynx or esophageal breach/perforation.
During the intubation, the anesthesiologist directly visualized the expandable cage within the esophaguahypopharynx . Nevertheless, the patient underwent an uneventful surgical removal of the cage. Notably, following cage removal, ENT could not identify a perforation of the esophagus/hypopharynx [ and ]. Further, the ENT placed a Levine catheter to assist by infusing methylene blue orally whether or not there was an identifiable site of perforation; none was found. It was, therefore, presumed that the esophageal wall collapsed down around the site of the breach, resulting in its occlusion following cage removal.
Postoperatively, a nasogastric tube was maintained just in case an esophageal perforation had been missed; this would reduce the potential for developing mediastinitis. On the third postoperative day, the patient developed chest pain, difficulty in breathing, and tachypnea. The emergency chest CT scan documented no mediastinitis, but the electrocardiogram/cardiac workup was diagnostic for myocardial infarction. After a three days stay in the cardiac intensive care unit, he returned to the neurosurgical floor.
On the 11th postoperative day, ENT performed another laryngoscopy; this was negative. The barium swallow that followed was also normal. The patient was maintained on antibiotics for 14 days in total and ultimately discharged on the 15th postoperative day, fully recovered and without dysphagia.