A 76-year-old male presented to the emergency department in our tertiary care center with left-sided cervicofacial subcutaneous emphysema. The questionnaire revealed he had sustained a routine dental filling of tooth #34 a few hours before. A small retraction cord (#00) was used without an air-driven high-speed hand piece. However, an air syringe was used to do the filling. In that case, a rubber dam could not be placed due to the presence of an old subgingival defective restauration in place. The procedure was done under local anesthesia without any ventilation, positive pressure event or CPAP use. About an hour after, cervical swelling and tenderness progressed. There were no other complaints. He had the same filing with the same procedure on the tooth #44 two weeks before.
He was otherwise known for hypertension, dyslipidemia and moderate chronic renal failure (baseline serum creatinine: 130 μmol/L). He had no history of head and neck pathologies or surgeries. He had known mild allergies to sulfamethoxzaole/Trimethoprime and to amoxicillin, but no to penicillin. The patient was on simvastatin and had no recent change to his medication.
Physical examination revealed extensive, mainly left sided cervicofacial subcutaneous emphysema with associated erythema and tenderness on palpation. Vitals were: blood pressure 195 over 97 mmHg, heart rate 60 bpm and body temperature 37.5 °C.Oral cavity and teeth were unremarkable. There was no evidence of airway obstruction or respiratory distress. The remainder of the physical examination was within normal limits.
Blood tests showed a mild neutrophil-driven leucocytosis (white blood cells count of 11.6 × 106 (normal 3.8–10.6 × 106/mm3) with 7.8 × 106 neutrophils) along with a marked elevation of creatinine kinase at 3714 (normal < 185 units/L) and patient’s baseline at 216). C-reactive protein was within normal limits. A chest x-ray (CXR) confirmed diffuse cervical emphysema and pneumomediastinum .
A cervicothoracic computed tomography (CT) was ordered and showed a significant quantity of air in the superficial and deep spaces of the neck and mediastinum reaching the lobar bronchi bilaterally, suspicious of an aggressive infectious process according to the radiologist report .
A developing necrotizing fasciitis could not be ruled out considering the extensive clinical and radiological subcutaneous emphysema associated with the leukocytosis and the significant rise in CK levels. Antibiotic therapy consisting of piperacillin/tazobactam, vancomycin and clindamycin was administered and an urgent surgical cervical exploration was performed, revealing air bubbles that had dissected the involved deep spaces but no evidence of tissue necrosis nor exudative fluid. Hemocultures and surgical wound cultures eventually came back negative. A CXR on postoperative day 2 showed a marked decrease of the cervical subcutaneous emphysema .
The patient was discharged two days later with moxifloxacin for a total of 7 days. Under infectious disease specialist’s advice, moxifloxacin was chosen because of the patient’s allergy to amoxicillin and of its daily dosage. The patient was seen for follow-up at 3 months and was doing well without any sequelae except the well-healed scar.