A 64-year-old woman was diagnosed with locally advanced DTC with invasion to the trachea, esophagus, and left recurrent nerve ). Bronchoscopy revealed that the invasion to the trachea was under half the tracheal circumference, and the distance from the vocal cord to the oral end of the tumor, invasive to the mucosa of the trachea, was 3 cm. Her past medical history included non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus controlled using insulin injections for a year. She underwent total thyroidectomy with bilateral modified radical neck dissection, followed by a window resection of the trachea invaded by the tumor. A one-stage reconstruction was then performed using an auricular deltopectoral flap. The patient was finally diagnosed with papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC), pT4aN1bM0, stage IVA, according to the 7th edition of the Union for international cancer control TNM classification of malignant tumors. The operation was macroscopically curative, although a final histopathological estimation of the tracheal margin was positive. Three months after the operation, apart from tracheal anastomosis and the newly emerged lung metastasis, a recurrent tumor was detected outside the left piriform fossa ). Therefore, the patient was given 100 mCi of I-131 therapy. No accumulation of I-131 was detected. Nine months after the operation, the patient felt apparent dyspnea and a dull pain in the right shoulder. A CT scan revealed prominent tumor progression in both the neck and the lung, and bone scintigraphy showed bone metastasis in the right scapula ). EBRT was performed for the recurrent neck tumor (60 Gy) and the right scapula (36 Gy), and docetaxel was administered once per 3 weeks for 24 months. Docetaxel was temporarily very effective for the local recurrence, although the lung metastasis was remarkably enlarged ). Three years after the operation, the patient was started with the newly emerged TKI sorafenib, but because of the progression of lung metastasis, it was terminated in 9 months ), although bone scintigraphy demonstrated the disappearance of bone metastasis. Therefore, 45 months after the operation, lenvatinib was started. There are strict regulations regarding the use of lenvatinib at our facility, which must be adhered to . Within 2 months after the start of lenvatinib, recurrent tumor and lung metastasis was remarkably decreased [partial response (PR), Figs. and (F)], but 1 month later, coughing and dyspnea appeared and XP demonstrated pneumonia. A CT scan demonstrated a pin-hole perforation of the trachea ). The symptoms disappeared 1 month after lenvatinib was terminated, and the tracheal fistula naturally closed ). Lenvatinib was then restarted, following which the local recurrence decreased and most metastatic tumors in the lung disappeared within 3 months ). However, because of the exacerbation of diabetes involving a foot ulcer, the administration was again halted for 2 months, which led to the exacerbation of lung metastasis ). After restarting the administration, diabetes, hypertension, and urinary protein as adverse events were well controlled by drugs and nutrition counseling and lung metastasis was controlled; CT scan demonstrated no recurrence in the neck, and bone scintigraphy revealed no bone metastasis ). Till the present, lenvatinib has continued to be effective (PR) 1 year and 9 months after the initiation of the drug ). Time-course result of patient remedy and effect, including thyroglobulin level, is shown in Fig. .