A 43-year-old male was brought to a trauma center emergency department as a victim of a fall down from two stories height. There were no complaints before the fall, his fall was mechanical, and as per the witnesses, he was acting normally before the fall.
Initial examination revealed a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score of 3/15, his pupils were dilated and fixed, and he had no gag or corneal reflexes. His vital signs were as follows oxygen saturation was 98% on room air, his blood pressure was 128/72 mmHg, and his heart rate (HR) was 99 bpm. A trauma code was announced and ATLS Approach was followed.
While on a monitor, his HR reached 174 bpm with regular wide complex waves. A rhythm strip was printed and confirmed the diagnosis of wide complex tachycardia, likely representing VT with a pulse. At that time his blood pressure was 160/110, and his GCS remained at 3/15. The rhythm was treated as unstable VT because of the level of consciousness. The patient received 100 J synchronized cardioversion without improvement. Higher joules were not delivered due to a concern of further elevation in intracranial pressure (ICP). Instead, he received the management of high ICP in the form of Mannitol 1g/kg, and rapid sequence intubation was done for airway protection using Propofol 2 mg/kg and Fentanyl 3 microgram/kg. After passing the tube, hyperventilation was initiated with a respiratory rate (RR) of 20 breaths per minute, targeting ET CO2 of 35 mmHg. After that, spontaneous restoration of sinus rhythm was achieved without further synchronized cardioversions or requiring antiarrhythmic medications.
After intubation and stabilization, extended focused assessment with sonography for trauma (eFAST), chest x-ray, and pelvic x-ray were done with no findings. The secondary survey showed scalp laceration and left ear bleed, the rest of the exam was normal.
Laboratory: Complete blood count (CBC), renal function tests (RFT), liver function test (LFT), and electrolytes all proved to be unremarkable.
Disposition: The patient was not a candidate for neurosurgery intervention and maximum medical management was provided. He was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU).
Hospital course: During the ICU length of stay, the patient was in maximum medical therapy for high ICP, and no arrhythmia was recorded. The patient underwent two brain death assessments done by a neurocritical consultant and both were positive. His brain death certificate was signed by two consultants and an organ donation protocol was initiated. By day 5 of admission, the patient was transferred to an organ transplant hospital for organ donation.