A 48-year-old Caucasian woman presented to the outpatient clinic with a history of recurrent irritation, redness and foreign body sensation in her right eye. Ophthalmologic examination revealed a primary pterygium on the nasal side of her right eye, measuring 3 mm at the limbus and 4 mm into the cornea. No other abnormalities were detected in the eye. She denied any systemic, ocular or medical histories. The pterygium was excised by a senior resident under topical and subconjunctival anesthesia (lidocaine 2% and epinephrine 1/200,000). A conjunctival autograft was performed to cover the conjunctival defect using sutures without any adjunctive therapies such as intraoperative mitomycin C or cauterization, nor postoperative beta radiation.
The operation ended smoothly. We gave the patient a combination therapy of levofloxacine 0.5% and dexamethasone 0.1% eye drops four times daily after surgery with antibiotic ointment.
The outcome looked satisfactory the day after surgery without any complaints or complications. Three days later, however, the graft shrank and appeared grey and dry. Areas of bare sclera have appeared around the graft with congested conjunctiva. After asking her again, she denied any history for medical, ocular conditions or taking medications. An extensive therapy of topical steroids, antibiotics, and artificial tears was given.
One week later, the patient came to the department complaining of mild discomfort, foreign body sensation and a black dot at the surgical site. Her corrected visual acuity was 20/25 just as before the operation, the intraocular pressure was 16 mm Hg. On slit lamp examination, the conjunctival sutures were no longer in place and a well-demarcated focal area of scleral thinning was visible measuring approximately 2 ∗ 2.5 mm surrounded by congested edematous conjunctiva. The thinned sclera was dry and the uvea was visible through the base of the lesion . There was no ciliary injection, no papillary or follicular reaction at the palpebral conjunctiva. No cells or flair in the anterior chamber, B-scan was normal. The rest of the eye exam was normal.
The patient was referred to the Internal Medicine Department in order to rule out autoimmune or any infectious diseases. Medical history, physical examination, and laboratory tests (blood count, biochemistry, rheumatoid factor and antinuclear antibody screening) were all in normal ranges.
We made a diagnosis of scleral dellen and continued the mentioned medications with hourly lubrication. After two weeks of conservative treatment, scleral thinning did not decrease in size despite the intensive ocular lubrication in the treatment.
Finally, we decided to do a surgical management with a rotation flap of adjacent conjunctiva.
The medication regime contained levofloxacin 0.5% and dexamethasone 0.1% eye drops four times daily with unpreserved artificial tears 24 times a day after surgery. The outcome was good as the patient symptomatically improved and the thinning area decreased in size. Four weeks after the procedure, the thinned sclera appeared regularly thick and white in color with no more visible uvea .