A 78-year-old female presented to the emergency department with subacute intractable left lower extremity neuropathic pain, back pain, and left foot drop. The patient reported a fall 20 years ago in Iraq, sustaining a left acetabular fracture; the fracture was treated non-operatively at that time. Specific treatment modalities are unknown. The patient reports ambulating with minimal difficulty but has had intermittent left hip pain since her initial fracture. In the past 6 months, she has had increasing back pain, left-sided radiculopathy-like pain, and excruciating pain over her left foot. She also developed a left foot drop in the past 2 weeks before presenting to the emergency department. Her neuromuscular examination revealed strength scores in the left lower extremity of four for hip flexion, five for knee extension, zero for ankle dorsiflexion, one for great toe extension, and four for ankle plantar flexion. She had hypersensitivity in superficial peroneal, deep peroneal, sural, saphenous, and tibial distributions. She had a brisk capillary refill and a palpable dorsalis pedis pulse.
An initial pelvic radiograph showed no fracture or soft-tissue abnormality but significant hip arthrosis and sclerotic changes around the greater sciatic notch on the left innominate bone . The primary team performed computed tomography (CT) with oral contrast of the abdomen and pelvis. CT demonstrated post-traumatic changes involving the left iliac bone with a lytic lesion containing cystic or soft-tissue components favored to represent tumor or infection . The lesion extended from the supra-acetabular region into the pelvis and under the psoas muscle posteriorly . The intraosseous component measured 5.8 cm × 3.6 cm, the soft-tissue component measured 5.0 cm × 3.5 cm, and the craniocaudal height measured up to 7 cm. The patient had no history of cancer. The patient had pain with palpation of the groin and deep pressure over the anterior superior iliac spine and greater trochanter.
Orthopedic oncology was consulted for concern of tumor or infection within the acetabulum. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with contrast was then performed to evaluate and determine if biopsy or aspiration was required . MRI suggested a nonaggressive mass, given that it was partially visualized on a prior examination from 2014. Likely etiologies such as peripheral nerve sheath tumor, vascular aneurysm, and an organized hematoma were considered – mucinous or myxoid-type neoplasm was less likely. A CT-guided biopsy was performed, which revealed coagulated blood and no malignancy raising suspicion of a vascular lesion. A CT angiography (CTA) with intravenous contrast of the pelvis was then performed and revealed a mass within the left iliac bone concerning for external iliac artery pseudoaneurysm . The mass on CTA was seen close to the neurovascular bundle, suggesting that the sciatic nerve palsy symptoms were secondary to mass compression of the sciatic nerve. Duplex imaging revealed a 4 cm pseudoaneurysm . No orthopedic intervention was planned, and vascular surgery was consulted, given the diagnosis of pseudoaneurysm. Endovascular repair of the external iliac artery using a covered stent was performed without complication. The patient began acetylsalicylic acid and apixaban on discharge.
The patient’s stent healed uneventfully. An MRI at 18 months showed improvement in the previous erosive remodeling due to pseudoaneurysm . A post-operative pelvis radiograph at 18 months demonstrated interval stent placement and stable bony changes without further erosion or compromise . The interosseous component was overall smaller in size compared to the previous CT. The patient has not maintained regularly scheduled follow-up, but she has been to the hospital multiple times since stent placement for other concerns. In the most recent consult notes, the patient’s motor symptoms have fully resolved 2 years post-repair. Extensor hallucis longus and tibialis anterior motor function have returned. She maintains intact sensation throughout the ankle and foot.