This 45-year-old male denied having any systemic diseases or any surgical history prior to admission to our center for a thoracoscopic lung segmentectomy for cryptococcus infection. Epidural catheter insertion for perioperative analgesia was performed prior to the induction of general anesthesia without sedation. The first attempt of epidural catheter insertion was performed with a Tuohy needle using the loss of resistance to air technique at the T7–8 interspinous space. However, an intermittent fluid drip was discovered as the Tuohy needle was advanced. A dural puncture was suspected, and the procedure was then repeated through the T8–9 interspinous space. However, an intermittent fluid drip was found once again as the Tuohy needle was advanced, so the procedure was abandoned. Both general anesthesia and the surgery were performed uneventfully.
The patient complained of both headache and dizziness when he sat up in the ward after the operation. The symptoms were attenuated when he was in a supine position. PDPH was suspected and hydration and analgesics were prescribed. By the fifth postoperative day, the patient was unable to either stand or walk for more than 5 min without recurrence of the headache. A neurologist was consulted, and meningitis was considered as a differential diagnosis. Brain and whole spine MR imaging were ordered for further evaluation.
The MR images revealed dural sinus engorgement, contrast enhancement along the neural sleeves of the left C6–7, as well as bilateral C7-T1, T1–2, T2–3, T3–4, T4–5, and T5–6. High signal intensity stripes with a length less than the width of the thecal sac were found, and type C lesions were defined . MR myelography (MRM) depicted the lesions causing CSF leakage along the C-T spines . Epidural fluid accumulations at the dorsal aspect of the T1–9 spinal canal were observed . The diagnosis of SIH was made, and EBP treatment was arranged. CT-guided EBP was chosen because a blind technique might have made it difficult to distinguish the epidural space from the intrathecal space. For the EBP injection, the C7-T1 interspinous space was not chosen because the space was not obviously palpable. The approach from the T1–2 interspinous space was tried, but the Tuohy needle was too short to reach the epidural space, so consequently the Tuohy needle was inserted into the T2–3 epidural space assisted by both a fluoroscopy and CT-epidurography . Autologous blood (18.5 ml) was slowly injected into the T2–3 epidural space. The patient’s headache and dizziness improved greatly after EBP, and he was also able to both stand and walk around without any obvious signs of discomfort. After 16 months of follow-up, the patient’s symptoms had not relapsed.