A 66-year-old man visited our hospital because of abnormal lung shadows found on screening chest X-ray examination. Positron emission tomography (PET) and computed tomography (CT) showed multiple nodules in bilateral lung lobes and a solitary mass in the splenic hilum . Lung biopsy from the left middle lobe showed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma , the cells of which were immunohistochemically positive for cytokeratin (CK)- Wide Spectrum Screening (WSS) and CK-7 . Based on these findings, this patient was diagnosed as having primary NSCLC with multiple metastases to bilateral lobes and abdominal lymph node, since the mass in the tail of the pancreas was initially considered to be splenic hilum lymph node metastasis. Mutation of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and the expression of anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) were negative. The PD-L1 immunohistochemistry (IHC) was then performed using anti-PD-L1 antibody (Dako, Carpinteria, CA, clones: 22c3, pharmDx assay; Dilution 1:50). Sections (4-μm thick) were prepared from formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues, and staining for 22c3 was performed on the Dako Link-48 autostainer system. PD-L1 expression was positive in nearly all cancer cells . Lymphocytic infiltration was abundantly observed in cancer tissue by immunohistochemical analysis using leukocyte common antigen (LCA) . Pembrolizumab monotherapy was then given. After 8 months, almost complete remission was observed in the lung tumors , whereas the size of the pancreatic mass did not decrease on CT examination. This pathology raised the possibility that this pancreatic tumor might be a primary pancreatic malignancy independent of NSCLC. Contrast-enhanced CT showed a hypodense mass with peripheral irregular enhancement in the tail of the pancreas . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) also showed a high-intensity mass on T2 and diffusion-weighted imaging, suggesting high cellularity with a cystic component . From these findings, this tumor was diagnosed as a primary pancreatic neoplasm unaffected by pembrolizumab, such as PDAC or a neuroendocrine tumor. After appropriate informed consent was obtained from the patient, distal pancreatectomy with splenectomy was performed about 1 year after initial diagnosis. The resected specimen showed a solid tumor, 42 mm in size, on the ventral side of the tail of the pancreas, with slight invasion into the stomach wall . Histopathological examination showed pleomorphic atypical cells, including spindle-shaped cancer cells and osteoclast-like giant cells (OGCs) , which infiltrated to surrounding parenchyma and the splenic vein. Regional lymph nodes showed metastatic foci. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for CK-WSS and CK-7 , and PD-L1 was also highly expressed in the tumor cells . There was small number of lymphocytes which were positive for LCA around the tumor cells, indicating scarce lymphocytic infiltration . Based on these findings, this malignancy was diagnosed as a UCOGC that arose from the pancreas. Furthermore, since these pathological characteristics were extremely similar to those of the pulmonary cancer, the diagnosis of the lung tumor as NSCLC was reconsidered. Finally, it was determined that UCOGC was the primary tumor that originated from the pancreas, and the pulmonary lesions were metastatic foci from the PC, and that pembrolizumab had little effect on the primary, but, curiously, was dramatically effective for the metastases. Microsatellite instability (MSI) is a biomarker for immunotherapy, representing the DNA mismatch repair (MMR) deficiency which predicts the favorable response of pembrolizumab to some solid malignant tumors [, ]. In the present case, MSI was also investigated by polymerase chain reaction (PCR)- based testing which evaluates the five poly-A mononucleotide repeats (BAT-25, BAT-26, NR-21, NR-24, NR-27) , although repeat length alterations were not seen both in the metastatic and primary cancer specimen. This patient remains alive, and there are no signs of recurrence 6 months after the operation without anticancer therapy.