A 14-year-old Madhesi boy presented with a swelling in the left side of his neck for 2 years . The swelling was insidious in onset and gradually increasing in size. There was no significant past medical or surgical history. He did not smoke tobacco. He was a student. He was not on any medications. There was no family history of any genetic diseases or malignancy.
On examination, a single swelling of approximately 5 cm × 4 cm in size was located in the posterior triangle on the left side of his neck. The swelling was mobile, non-tender, and firm in consistency. The rest of the head and neck examination was normal. On neurological examination, he had normal muscle strength, no sensory deficits, no pathological reflexes, and no long tract signs. Magnetic resonance imaging showed a well-defined T1-weighted isointense and T2-weighted hyperintense ovoid cystic mass with enhancing solid component within, measuring 6 × 4.5 × 2.5 cm involving the left posterior cervical space with extension into left C5–C6 neural foramina causing its widening. The mass was displacing the carotid space anteromedially. It was also abutting the posterior border of left sternocleidomastoid muscle causing its displacement anteriorly. Inferiorly, the mass extended into the left supraclavicular region . His vital sign were stable. He was afebrile, pulse was regular and 80/minute, blood pressure was 110/80 mmHg, and respiratory rate was 14/minute.
No other clinical or radiological features of neurofibromatosis such as light brown spots on the skin, freckles in the armpit and groin, small bumps within nerves (neuromas), scoliosis, hearing loss, cataracts at a young age, balance problems, flesh-colored skin flaps, muscle wasting, vestibular schwannoma, meningioma, glioma, neurofibroma, or posterior subcapsular lenticular opacities were seen.
The total leukocyte count and peripheral blood smear were normal. Urinary catecholamines level was normal. Fine-needle aspiration cytology of the swelling was done. The findings were consistent with schwannoma. An excision of our patient’s schwannoma was planned. A supraclavicular incision was made and subplatysmal flaps were elevated both superiorly and inferiorly. The sternocleidomastoid muscle was retracted medially and the tumor was excised completely. Although this extradural tumor extended through C5–C6 foramina, a laminectomy was not needed. The tumor was pulled out through the foramina . His postoperative course was uneventful and he was discharged on sixth postoperative day without any change of neurological status. Neither any neurological complications nor any recurrence were seen in our patient after 1 year of follow-up .
Histopathological findings were consistent with the diagnosis of schwannoma. Microscopic examination of the specimen revealed tissue surrounded by fibrous capsule. The tumor tissue showed predominantly cellular (Antoni A) admixed with hypocellular areas (Antoni B). Antoni A areas consisted of compact spindle cells having prominent nuclei. The nuclei were arranged in a palisading pattern .