A 75-year-old Japanese man presented at our hospital due to progressive dyspnea and edema of his face and upper extremities. His medical history included chronic renal failure with peritoneal dialysis. On a physical examination, there was facial swelling and venous dilation of the neck and the chest wall. Other physical examination results were normal. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed a 55 × 40 × 38-mm tumor located at the anterior mediastinum. This tumor involved the SVC, both brachiocephalic veins, the pericardium and the right upper lung lobe . His blood examination results revealed an increased C-reactive protein level without leukocytosis. The findings of serologic tumor markers were negative.
We performed a video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) biopsy from the right thoracic cavity to make a definitive diagnosis. The tumor was poorly differentiated thymic carcinoma. There was no significant distant metastasis. Therefore, we performed surgical resection for this thymic carcinoma located at the mediastinum with invasion of the SVC and both brachiocephalic veins.
SVC replacement using an expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) (16 mm inside diameter) was chosen. The surgery was performed through a full median sternotomy and transmanubrial approach without using an artificial heart and lung. Pericardiotomy was performed to clarify the tumor involvement at the epicardium. Tumor invasion was not found in the pericardium. The tumor involved the SVC, right brachiocephalic vein (RBCV) and left brachiocephalic vein (LBCV) . First, we performed a venovenous shunt between the distal LBCV and right auricle. We checked the pressure of both internal jugular veins throughout the operation. Next, the RBCV was anastomosed to the distal end of an expanded PTFE graft (16 mm inside diameter). The proximal end of the graft was anastomosed to the root of the SVC. The LBCV was anastomosed to the distal end of an expanded PTFE graft (16 mm inside diameter). The proximal end of the graft was anastomosed to the right auricle . The tumor had invaded the right upper lobe of the lung. Finally, we performed en bloc resection of the tumor with part of the right upper lobe of the lung. The operative time was 6 h 15 min, and the amount of intraoperative bleeding was 1360 mL.
Pathologically, complete resection was achieved. The pathological diagnosis was stage IIIA poorly differentiated thymic carcinoma (p-T3N0M0 stage IIIA). The patient was discharged from our hospital 22 days after surgery. This surgery was successful, with no postoperative complications.