A 12-day-old boy presenting with stiffness in the lower and upper extremities since birth was transferred from a local hospital to our department. He was born at full-term without asphyxia to a G2P1 mother, with a birth weight of 3,600 g and an Apgar score of 9 and 10 at 1 and 5 minutes, respectively. Placenta, umbilical cord and amniotic fluid appeared normal. The parents were unrelated and healthy, and had no family history of epilepsy. On admission, the patient presented with head tilting backwards, staring, apnea and hypertonia in upper and lower limbs. He had a modified Ashworth scale score of 4 according to following findings: clenched fists with fingers fully flexed into the palm; flexed upper limbs to the chest; tonic extended lower limbs with flexed toes; and absence of sucking reflex, rooting reflex and Moro reflex. His temperature was 37 °C, heart rate 100/min, blood pressure 86/50 mmHg and SpO2 60%.
Blood, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), urine and stool testing results were unremarkable. No growth was reported in blood and CSF culture. Cardiac enzyme profiling, electrolyte analyses, blood amino acid and acylcarnitine spectrum analyses for inherited metabolic diseases, and comprehensive panel of urine organic acids were unrevealing. Thyroid, liver and renal functions were normal. Cytomegalovirus and herpes virus, and their respective antibodies were negative as determined by PCR and ELISA, respectively. Chest radiography, electrocardiography, echocardiography and head MRI did not identify abnormalities. The automated auditory brainstem response was normal. Video electroencephalogram (EEG) was recorded and showed intermittent or continuous discharges (hypsarrhythmia) of generalized or multi-focal spike-waves and spike-and-slow waves , in line with epileptic encephalopathy.
The neonate was intubated and ventilated immediately after admission, and nasogastric feeding instituted. Phenobarbital, diazepam and vitamin B6 were initiated, which however did not show effect in seizure control (over 10 episodes/day). Diazepam was discontinued and a bolus intravenous injection of midazolam (0.15 mg/kg) was given followed by slower maintenance (0.2 mg/kg/h), which led to seizure reduction to ~ 10 episodes/day. On day 5 of admission, levetiracetam and clonazepam were added to the regimen, which significantly reduced seizure severity and frequency (5–6 episodes/day). Midazolam was tapered off in 2 weeks. Eighteen days after admission, the patient was extubated. Consent to taking a genetic test was obtained from the parents, and blood was drawn for whole-exome sequencing which was performed by Beijing Fulgent Technologies Inc. (Beijing, China). A heterozygous missense mutation, i.e., c.2021C > A (p. Thr674Lys) in GRIN2D in the patient was detected while such a mutation was not found in the parents . The patient was discharged 1 month after hospitalization with continuous nasogastric administration of levetiracetam and clonazepam at home. Two weeks after discharge, the patient died of sudden cardio-respiratory arrest.