A 23-year-old Chinese woman with overall poor physical development was admitted to the hospital because her blood sugar had increased over 9 years. In addition, her left thigh was swollen and painful, and her lower extremities showed edema.
The patient had been diagnosed with type I diabetes 9 years before she came to the hospital. However, she was not treated with regular insulin injections outside the hospital, and her blood sugar was not well controlled. One year ago, she felt tired after exercise and could not lie down at night; she also felt squeezing in her chest area during defecation. She felt pain in her left thigh pain and increased tension that had occurred more than 3 mo earlier accompanied by tenderness, edema in both lower extremities, paleness, swelling, and ulceration. Initially, she could walk autonomously but gradually became unstable while standing, even finding it difficult to squat during bowel movements.
“Cataractectomy” was performed 1 year ago.
Menarche had not occurred to date, and she was diagnosed with a naive uterus outside our hospital. The family history was unremarkable.
The parameters of vital signs were as follows: Heart rate, 107 beats/min; BP 110/78 mmHg; height, 145 cm; and weight, 45 kg. The skin and mucous membranes of the whole body were pale. There was no pubic or axillary hair, and multiple areas of the skin were damaged and crusted. On auscultation, the breath sounds in both upper lungs were thick and weak, and moist rales were heard in both lower lungs. The abdomen was distended. The liver and spleen were unaffected and moved upon respiration. There was positive dullness and pitting edema of both lower limbs. There were no other obvious abnormalities.
The patient’s laboratory results are listed in Table . Endocrine examination revealed hypothyroidism and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. The patient’s brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) was severely elevated.
Electromyography showed that the conduction velocity of both upper limbs was slowed and accompanied by low amplitude M and F waves; edema of both lower limbs could not be detected. Computed tomography (CT) showed enlarged liver, spleen, and multiple lymph nodes with pleural effusion and ascites. We did not find monoclonal plasma cell proliferation by lymph node biopsy, bone biopsy, or flow cytometry. A 12-lead electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia . It is worth noting that echocardiography showed left ventricular dilation with systolic dysfunction, and the left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was only 38% . Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed interstitial edema of the myocardium, myocardial native T1 values globally increased, and late gadolinium enhancement could represent definite myocardial necrosis .