A 31-year-old woman presented at the hospital’s emergency department with prominent, sub-acutely evolving psychiatric signs and symptoms including bizarre behaviour, delusional thoughts and alternating states of agitation and mutism. Besides that, she showed short-term amnesia, fever and complex epileptic seizures. Her family reported that she had already complained about insomnia and general discomfort for the past 2 weeks; otherwise there was no history of any diseases and no use of concomitant medication. The neurological examination revealed no further abnormalities, especially no meningism and no focal deficits.
Emergency brain MRI showed diffusion-restriction on diffusion-weighted images in insular cortex, and hyperintensity on fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) and T2-weighted images in insular cortex and hippocampus . F18-FDG-PET showed hypermetabolism in insular and prefrontal cortex . CSF analysis revealed a mild pleocytosis comprising mononuclear cells. Diagnosis was made by the detection of anti-NMDAR antibodies in CSF and serum. Tumour screening by whole body imaging revealed a tumour of the right ovary that was subsequently resected and histopathologically proven to be a teratoma.
After tumour resection and multimodal immunotherapy (plasmapheresis for 4 days followed by intravenously applied corticosteroids over 5 days at a total dose of 4 g) the patient improved substantially. In serum samples, anti-NMDAR antibody titres decreased from 1:160 to 1:20 . After 3 months the patient still had slight disability, was able to look after her own affairs without assistance, but was unable to carry out all previous activities, mainly due to memory deficits (corresponding to a modified Rankin Scale score of 2). At this point of time insular abnormalities on diffusion- and T2/ FLAIR-weighted MRI had disappeared, whereas hippocampal FLAIR/ T2-hyperintensity remained . In both areas prominent glucose hypometabolism was observed; glucose-metabolism in prefontal cortex was normal .