A 46-year-old female presenting with disturbance of consciousness, right hemiparesis, and aphasia was admitted to our hospital. Neurological examinations revealed a National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale score of 31. Initial CT analysis showed a bilateral elongated styloid process (right 31.1 cm and left 33.2 cm). Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging revealed acute cerebral infarction in the left frontal lobe. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) showed occlusion of the left ICA and a near occlusion of the right ICA. MRA also revealed the intimal flap and intramural hematoma in the bilateral ICA . Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) was performed on the patient followed by an infusion of intravenous tissue plasminogen activator. DSA showed occlusion of the left ICA and near occlusion of the right ICA. After the patient was administered 200 mg aspirin plus 300 mg clopidogrel, CAS was performed on the left ICA. An occlusion in the parietal branch of the left MCA was identified after the left ICA was recanalized (thrombolysis in cerebral infarction scale: TICI 2b). The branch of the left MCA was too distal to perform recanalization therapy. Subsequently, CAS was performed on the right ICA after the flow deteriorated . After 5 days, there was an asymptomatic occlusion in the right ICA due to an in-stent thrombus. The left ICA was kept patent. CBCT revealed the detailed relationship between the elongated styloid process and the ICA in a neutral position. Specifically, they were positioned very closely together, especially on the left side . According to CBCT, the distance between them changed on rotation of the head to the right and the left side. We made the fusion image in a neutral position and after the left/right rotations using clinical software (syngo InSpace 3D/3D fusion; Siemens AG, Forchheim, Germany) as previously reported. The precise registration was performed manually by superimposing the overlapping facial bone and styloid process from two CBCT images. Afterward, we evaluated how the distance of the leading edge of the stent changed. We defined the forward movement as “+” and backward movement as “−.” The left carotid stent moved −15.4 mm when the head was rotated to the right and +3.68 mm when the head was rotated to the left. The right carotid stent moved +3.96 mm when the head was rotated to the left and −3.24 mm when the head was rotated to the right. The fulcrum of movement was located at the attachment point of the styloid process and carotid stent. It was suggested that mechanical stress was emphasized at this point. The movement of the carotid artery was more remarkable in the left carotid artery. The right hemiparesis and aphasia gradually reduced over time and the patient moved to the rehabilitation hospital 42 days after administration with a Modified Rankin Scale score of 3. After finishing her rehabilitation, the patient underwent a styloidectomy. The patient did not experience a recurrence of stroke.