A 4.5-month-old Caucasian boy was admitted to the hospital with a 2-week history of fever following vaccination and 5 days of jaundice and drowsiness. There was no complaint of vomiting, diarrhea, convulsions or any other neurologic presentations. The parents declared that abdominal distension had been noticeable since birth. He was the only child of first cousins and was born by normal delivery after a 40-week gestation (birth weight: 3750 g, percentile: 61, z score: 0.29; birth height: 51 cm, percentile: 26, z score: −0.65; birth head circumference: 36 cm, percentile: 62, z score: 0.31). Neonatal jaundice was not announced. At 4 months, the infant had weighed 8500 g and by admission he weighed 8000 g.
There was not any significant family history except for leukemia in the patient’s maternal uncle who died at the age of 17.
On examination, the patient appeared pale, icteric, and ill and had mild respiratory distress. The abdomen appeared severely distended and enlarged spleen and liver were found by palpation. No rash was observed and no lymphadenopathy could be found.
Upon admission the patient had abnormal coagulation tests, elevated liver enzymes, direct hyperbilirubinemia, low albumin, and high ferritin values . He was anemic from the beginning, and values of platelet, neutrophils, and lymphocytes that were normal gradually decreased during admission. Figure shows the peripheral blood smear of our patient stained by Romanovski method.
Attempts to find a septic source, including Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) and cytomegalovirus (CMV) polymerase chain reactions (PCRs) and blood culture were unsuccessful. Hypertension was observed and worked up; echocardiography and renal artery sonography were normal. Bone marrow aspiration was nonspecific. Due to primary suspicion of HLH, cyclosporine and dexamethasone were prescribed. Methylprednisolone pulses and intravenous immunoglobulin (Ig) were also tried. This treatment is approved by ethics committee of Children’s Medical Center, Tehran, Iran. Unfortunately, the patient died with a clinical picture of cardiopulmonary compromise due to hepatic failure 17 days after admission. Results of molecular analysis were ready after the patient had passed away.
The whole exome sequencing (WES) process was performed with NovaSeq6000 Paired-end sequencing platform and read length of 150 bp paired-end (PE). The library type was SureSelect V6-Post and the coverage was 100×. The analysis of the WES data revealed a novel homozygous mutation in LIPA gene exon 4: NM_001127605:c. G353A (p.G118D), which converts the glycine amino acid to aspartic acid . The parents’ heterozygous status for this variant was confirmed by Sanger sequencing method .
The sequence analysis by in silico tool Polymorphism Phenotyping (PolyPhen) predicted that this missense mutation is probably damaging with a score of 1.000 (specificity of 100%). The same analysis with Protein Variation Effect Analyzer tools (PROVEAN) predicted a deleterious effect with PROVEAN score of −5.515 (cutoff: −2.5) [–].
We searched PUBMED and SCOPUS for English language sources in April 2020, using the keywords HLH OR hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis and Wolman. All the found articles were read and the relevant ones were included. The search was repeated in July 2021 before final edition, and two articles was added to the main reviewed articles.