A 54-year-old man presented to the emergency department because of a pain and coldness of the right foot lasting for 4 days. The pain was not improved by standing. He was obese (body mass index of 32.4 kg/m2), had no previous medical history, and no cardiovascular risk factors. In particular, he never smoked. In addition, he was not taking medications or illicit drugs and had an occasional consumption of alcohol. He did not have prior symptoms suggestive of lower limb arterial insufficiency. On admission, the patient reported hypoaesthesia and weakness of the right foot in the absence of paraesthesia. Eighteen days earlier, he developed flu-like symptoms, a dry cough, anosmia, and ageusia, all of which was resolved after a week. On admission, he was slightly hypertensive (143/88 mmHg), tachycardic (109 b.p.m.), tachypnoeic (26/min), and afebrile (37.4°C). On clinical examination, the right femoral pulse was weakened, and more distal pulses in the right leg were absent. There was a marked thermal gradient at the level of the right knee, with a livedo below the knee and at the level of the foot. The skin recoloration time on the foot was >10 s. The hypoaesthesia and paresis of the right foot that the patient complained of were found on physical examination. Examination of the contralateral lower limb as well as of the upper limbs was unremarkable. Cardiac auscultation revealed regular tachycardia with no audible murmur. The rest of the examination was normal. The electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia, in the absence of other abnormalities.
Blood tests showed a slight leukocytosis (13.6 × 109/L; normal range 4–11 × 109/L), an increased C-reactive protein (24.40 mg/L; 0–10 mg/L), hyperkalaemia (5.3 mmol/L; 3.6–4.6 mmol/L), hyperglycaemia (19.1 mmol/L; 4.1–6 mmol/L), and a mild increase in creatinine kinase (369 U/L; 47–222 U/L). Fibrinogen was mildly increased (4.2 g/L; 1.5–3.5 g/L), activated partial thromboplastin time was slightly below the norm at 24.4 s (26–37 s), and platelet count was normal. In view of the strong clinical suspicion of lower limb arterial thrombosis, and according to the institutional protocol, D-dimer levels were not measured and a computed tomography angiogram (CTA) of the abdominal aorta and the lower limbs was performed, showing a subocclusive suspended thrombosis of the right common iliac artery, and an occlusion of the right internal iliac artery, profunda femoral artery, and popliteal artery, without outflow below the knee . On the left limb, the CTA demonstrated a non-occlusive thrombosis of the common femoral artery. On CTA there was no evidence of vascular disease; in particular no calcifications or atheromatous lesions were identified. Testing for SARS-CoV-2 by real-time reverse transcription–PCR (rRT–PCR) with a nasopharyngeal swab performed in the emergency department was negative. This swab was done 18 days after the onset of flu-like symptoms, and the patient had no symptoms related to an upper airway infection at that time of testing.
He was treated by emergency surgical embolectomy, followed by below-the-knee endovascular intervention due to distal embolization post-surgery, as well as therapeutic anticoagulation, with normalization of the limb perfusion.
A complete cardiovascular assessment consisting of echocardiography, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging, and Holter monitoring could not identify sources of embolism. Carotid and vertebral Duplex ultrasound showed no evidence of vascular disease. Type 2 diabetes was newly diagnosed and required treatment with insulin. Nasopharyngeal swabs for SARS-CoV-2 by rRT–PCR were performed three times in total, each of them returning negative. Nevertheless, based on the high clinical suspicion and the unexplained arterial thrombosis, a SARS-CoV-2 antibody test was performed, which was strongly positive with IgG (index value: 11.18; >1) and IgA (index value: 13.88; >1), confirmed by immunofluorescence assay. An antibody test for lupus anticoagulant was initially positive but turned negative thereafter. At day 11, the patient was discharged home on vitamin K antagonist (VKA)-based anticoagulation.