A 30-year-old Japanese man who had undergone herniorrhaphy for an omphalocele immediately after birth was referred to our hospital. He presented to our hospital with 1 year of infertility after his marriage. Multiple semen analyses revealed azoospermia, but a scrotal examination revealed no abnormalities in the testes or in the vas deferens or epididymis on both sides. Magnetic resonance imaging of the scrotum revealed no abnormal findings in the seminal vesicles, the prostate or the ejaculatory ducts. An endocrinological examination demonstrated that his serum follicle-stimulating hormone, luteinizing hormone and testosterone levels were within the normal range (4.1 mIU/ml, 3.6 mIU/ml and 7.48 ng/ml, respectively). The surgical scar from his omphalocele repair was found in the midline of the abdomen , far from the scrotum and the groin. He had no history of inguinal herniorrhaphy or vasectomy. A histopathological section of a right testicular biopsy revealed normal spermatogenesis (Johnsen score count 10) . Following the pre-operative diagnosis of obstructive azoospermia, reconstructions of both seminal tracts were performed because the patient and his wife strongly wanted to pursue the possibility of a natural pregnancy. Intra-operative vasography demonstrated that both vasa deferentia were interrupted at the internal inguinal rings . The abdominal end of the left vas could not be identified, but the abdominal end of the right spermatic duct was found in the abdominal cavity. The discharge from the stump of the testicular end of the vas had no sperm, whereas the right epididymal tubules were dilated with motile spermatozoa. Therefore, we performed a right-sided vasovasostomy and ipsilateral epididymovasostomy simultaneously. Disappointingly, post-operative semen analyses demonstrated azoospermia. Finally, he fathered a child by intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) using testicular sperm that had been retrieved and cryopreserved at the time of the testicular biopsy.