The patient is a 20-months-old boy born to non-consanguineous parents at 39 weeks of gestational age by iterative caesarean section, which followed a normal pregnancy. His birth weight was 2.650 Kg, birth length 46 cm, occipitofrontal circumference (OFC) 34.5 cm, Apgar 10/10. At birth, he presented facial dysmorphysms, inverted nipples, and ventricular septal defect (VSD). The cerebral ultrasonography showed a slight hemorrhage of the germinal zones. Furthermore, a congenital hip dysplasia was diagnosed. He came to our attention for developmental delay, congenital heart defect and hypogenitalism. Weight was 10.2 kg (10th percentile), length 81 cm (25th percentile) and OFC 48 cm (25–50th percentile). He had mild hypertelorism, flattened nasal bridge, slightly pronounced chin, inverted right nipple, small penis, small hands and mild generalized hypotonia. Due to his phenotype, our geneticist (DM) recommended to perform a karyotype analysis; the analysis showed a mosaic karyotype 49,XXXXY[12]/48,XXXY[8]. Considering this cytogenetic result and according to the literature, an X-ray examination of arms was performed and this ruled out radioulnar synostosis. Moreover, a brain MRI was performed. A moderate ventriculomegaly with predominant expansion of the posterior segments and slight asymmetry was found. Small focal hyperintensities of the frontal, parietal and posterior periventricular white matter were detected; they are associated with a mild reduction of white matter. The myelination was normal for his age. There were no alterations of the cerebellar and brainstem signal. The MRI showed an asymmetric dysmorphic appearance of the posterior cranial fossa, small in size, with dysmorphism of cranio-cervical junction (CVJ) and reduced visualization of cerebrospinal fluid spaces . A cranio-cervical Computerized Tomography (CT) was performed to better assess the anomalies of the skull base and it confirmed a dysmorphic aspect of the posterior fossa and occipital condyles, slight morphological asymmetry of C1, regular morphology of C2 and slight lateralization to the right of the odontoid’s apex .