A 22-month-old male was admitted to our Department of Gastroenterology because of a more than one-year history of abdominal distension with anaemia. His symptoms of abdominal distension was obvious after eating and improved slightly after defecation and flatulence. Meanwhile, the patient’s stool appeared yellow and loose with visible food residue and was voided twice to four times a day.
In the past, the patient was once admitted to the local hospital with cervical lymphadenectasis and mild anaemia. At that time, he received oral iron treatment at home, but his abdominal distension showed no remission. The patient’s first admission to our hospital was due to recurrent fever for over half a year in May 2018, and he was diagnosed as bronchopneumonia with pleural effusion and liver and cardiac damage according to the examination results. The patient was born through a full-term natural delivery and showed no abnormalities in the perinatal period. He had repetitive respiratory tract infections, and fever always occurred after vaccination. Perianal abscess resection was performed at the ages of 6 months and 8 months. His parents and sister were healthy.
Physical examination indicated that the patient’s weight was 10 kg (z score: − 1.55), and his height was 80 cm (z score: − 2.05). Hardened, enlarged lymph nodes were found on the neck and bilateral sides of the groins. Abdominal distention extended from the xiphoid to the bilateral sides of the groins where the vena epigastrica was exposed. The patient’s abdominal circumference was 50.5 cm. The soft liver and spleen extended 4 cm below the rib cage. We also found that he had two surgical scars because of a perianal abscess.
The abdominal CT suggested hepatosplenomegaly, a slightly thickened and strengthened intestinal wall of part of the abdomen (the left abdomen was more obvious), and multiple lymph nodes in the mesenteric, retroperitoneal and bilateral inguinal region . The patient’s routine examination results are shown in Table . His bone marrow aspiration revealed that the proliferation of granulocytes, erythroid cells and megakaryocytes was obviously active, and platelet clusters could be seen, ruling out haematological diseases. To determine the cause of abdominal distension, we performed endoscopy and two colonic biopsies were taken from different parts of the intestine, which identified mucous hyperaemia in the membrane with ulcers and erosions from the ileocaecum to the rectum . The pathologic changes are shown in Fig. . However, the patient began to present fever with a temperature peak of 39.5 °C on the third day after endoscopy; treatment with meropenem controlled this condition of fever, but his gastrointestinal symptoms did not improve. Considering that he may have immunodeficiency, we tried the empiric treatment of immunoglobulin replacement. To identify the underlying disease, exome sequencing was performed after obtaining written informed consent from the patient’s parents. A novel frameshift mutation c.888-892delTAAAG (p. Asp296Aspfs*12) in exon 3 of the XIAP gene was identified . This deletion results in a shift in the reading frame and formation of a premature stop codon at the 888–892 position of the DNA strand, which corresponds to the 296-protein chain codon. As a result, peptide breakdown occurs earlier than the normal, which indicates the pathogenicity of this mutation. The patient’s healthy mother and sister were heterozygous carriers . For future monitoring, we recommend that the patient should conduct regular hospital follow-up, recheck the gastroenteroscopy regularly to observe the progression of gastrointestinal inflammation and injury, and histopathological examination will be conducted to keep abreast of the progress of the disease. However, his parents decided to pursue no further therapy (including HSCT) because of the expense, and the patient is currently experiencing recurrent infections again and undergoing follow-up at the outpatient clinic.