This is a 48-year-old female patient who was referred after a biopsy of her right axillary mass revealed synovial sarcoma.
The patient incidentally noticed a painless mobile lump in her right axilla about 6 months prior to her biopsy. The mass did not change in size over this period. It was associated with increasing numbness involving her right ring and little fingers that was bothering her during her daily activities especially during the last 2 months. She reported no other masses in her breasts or elsewhere.
Her referring surgeon evaluated her initially for the possibility of breast cancer by ultrasound and mammogram; both of which were negative. So, he performed FNA initially which was inadequate. Then, core-needle biopsy was performed which revealed monophasic synovial sarcoma.
Physical examination of the right axilla showed: 5 × 5 cm ill-defined mobile mass with smooth surface located in the apex of the axilla with no overlying skin changes. No adjacent masses or regional lymph nodes including axillary and cervical lymph nodes were felt. Her peripheral neurovascular examination was unremarkable except for mild decrease in superficial touch sensation in her right little and ring fingers.
Staging studies were performed including MRI of the axilla and CT angiogram for local vascular assessment. CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis with bone scan showed no evidence of metastasis.
MRI showed well-defined oval-shaped heterogeneous soft tissue mass in close proximity to the axillary artery with no definite encasement. The mass measured 3 × 3.3 cm in axial diameter and 4 × 4 cm craniocaudally . The mass was isointense on T1 and slightly hyper intense on T2 with vivid enhancement post-gadolinium administration.
CT angiogram showed mild mass compression at axillary/brachial arteries transition with patent peripheral vessels .
Based on the radiological and the histopathological findings, the plan was to proceed with mass excision after exploration of the axillary artery and the surrounding brachial plexus. However, forequarter amputation and the need for adjuvant radiation were to be considered subsequent to the surgery.
The patient provided consent for the plan, and she was made aware that some neurological deficit is to be expected after surgery among other complications.
The tumor was exposed through extensile deltopectoral approach after developing intermuscular planes and reflecting pectoralis muscles. The tumor was located anteromedial to the third part of the axillary artery pushing the medial root of the median nerve anterolaterally and the origin of the ulnar nerve medially . We were able to dissect out the axillary artery and the median nerve easily away from the tumor. However, the ulnar nerve was intimately adherent to the tumor capsule, so we decided to sacrifice it to achieve tumor free margin . Grossly, the tumor capsule was dissected out completely. No other masses were detected in the surgical bed.
The patient had unremarkable postoperative course. However, she lost her ulnar nerve function with loss of sensation involving her right little and ring fingers.
Her final histopathology revealed monophasic synovial sarcoma with microscopically free margins. The patient did not receive postoperative radiation. Upon follow-up, 9 months after surgery, no clinical or radiological recurrence was observed.