A 40-year-old white man presented to an outside emergency department in June 2018 with sudden-onset right calf pain, swelling, and redness. He had a history of juvenile polyposis syndrome, for which he underwent a partial colectomy as a child, and alcohol use disorder (in remission). He received surveillance colonoscopies at recommended intervals due to his history of polyps, the most recent of which had been unremarkable. Upon presentation, a venous ultrasound revealed an acute, occluding thrombus of his right popliteal, tibial, and peroneal veins. There was no preceding history of trauma or immobilization. He was discharged on rivaroxaban 15 mg twice daily and advised to follow-up with his primary care provider.
One week later, he presented again to an outside emergency department with a 3-day history of melena. An initial laboratory workup was significant for hemoglobin of 5.3 and mean corpuscular volume (MCV) of 55.7, for which he received 3 units of transfused red blood cells. Following stabilization and cessation of rivaroxaban, an abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a mass-like transmural thickening of the gastric antral and pyloric walls with tumor protrusion into the duodenal bulb. Also visualized were multifocal bilateral segmental and subsegmental pulmonary emboli, as well as a non-occlusive thrombus extending from his right renal vein into his suprarenal inferior vena cava (IVC). He underwent placement of an IVC filter. Subsequent upper endoscopy revealed diffusely irregular, raised gastric mucosa across the entire gastric body, with the appearance of a soft carpeted mass . This finding was suggestive of malignancy. A biopsy specimen of the mass showed gastric mucosa with prominent foveolar hyperplasia, focal granulation tissue, ulceration, reactive glandular changes, and evidence of chronic active inflammation . However, despite the suspicious gross appearance, there was no evidence of dysplasia or malignancy. Immunostaining was negative for Helicobacter pylori. Based on these findings, a probable diagnosis of MND was established. He was discharged on high-dose orally administered pantoprazole and scheduled for repeat upper endoscopy in 1 month.
Approximately 3 weeks later, he once again presented to an outside emergency department with the chief complaint of lumbar and suprapubic pain. An abdominal CT scan again showed a non-occlusive thrombus of his right renal vein, which was now noted to extend slightly above the IVC filter. Also visualized were abdominal varices and cavernous transformation of his portal vein suggestive of previous portal vein thrombosis. Upon this finding, he was admitted to our institution as a direct transfer for symptomatic renal vein thrombosis. A low-dose heparin drip was initiated immediately. Following transfusion of 1 unit of packed red blood cells, his hemoglobin remained between 7.2 and 7.6, and he had no ongoing melena. A comprehensive metabolic panel was notable for serum albumin of 2.4. A serum gastrin level was also elevated to 244 (upper limit of normal, 150). During his admission, he developed painful bilateral lower extremity and scrotal edema, which was managed non-pharmacologically. An urgent repeat upper endoscopy was recommended, but he declined this procedure due to concerns about the risks of endoscopic mass removal. Further intervention was deferred to his primary gastroenterologist, although treatment with cetuximab was discussed as an eventual option. He was bridged to orally administered anticoagulation without incident and was discharged on apixaban 5 mg twice daily for an indefinite duration. During a several-hour window when he was not anticoagulated, further laboratory evaluation of his hypercoagulability was performed; the results are shown in Table .
At 1-month follow-up with his primary care physician, he was tolerating apixaban well, with no further gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding. He was adhering to a high-protein diet with subjective and objective improvement in his edema. His hemoglobin improved to 8.8 and his albumin to 3.2. There were no other significant changes in his laboratory results. He continued to decline repeat endoscopy or mass removal. However, he expressed plans to seek care from an out-of-state oncologist and/or gastroenterologist with expertise in treating MND.