A sixty-five-year old Han Chinese man presented with cough, expectoration, chest pain and fever lasting twenty days to the emergency room. His medical history was notable for hypertension over the previous ten years, and a forty-year smoking history (20 cigarettes per day). He did not have previous exposure to respiratory therapy solutions and had not taken any antimicrobial agents in the past five years. Pleuritic chest pain was the most prominent symptom. The cough was dry initially, but about five days later became productive. He had a sudden onset of a high fever to 39°C, which resulted in rigors. Upon initial presentation, he received antibiotic therapy of intravenous penicillin sodium for seven days, lavo-ofloxacin for five days and cefotaxime sodium for seven days in turn, but his symptoms did not improve, resulting in admission to our hospital.
His initial physical examination upon admission revealed a temperature of 38.8°C; blood pressure, 120/85 mmHg; respiratory rate, 23 breaths per minute; and pulse, 90 beats per minute. Evaluation for a source of the fever demonstrated a right-sided lobar pneumonia on chest X-ray. A thoracic computed tomography (CT) scan supported the diagnosis of right-sided lobar pneumonia . Subsequently, a CT-guided lung biopsy was done, which confirmed it to be lobar pneumonia in the period of gray hepatization . Two biopsy specimens from separate sites grew R. pickettii in pure cultures, which was identified by the API 20NE system (bioMérieux France, No.0041445). He received an antibiotic course of intravenous cefepime for six days. A repeat thoracic CT scan revealed the presence of a right-sided abscess . A centesis was performed and the purulent fluid grew R. pickettii. The chest tube placed for drainage remained in the cavity of the abscess for rinsing with sterile sodium chloride solution. Because the pathogen had not responded to two antibiotic treatments, its antimicrobial susceptibilities were studied by the disk diffusion method of the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) (9). The breakpoints used to determine resistance and susceptibility to the antibiotics were provided simultaneously . In this case, the R. pickettii isolate was susceptible to cefoperazone sodium-sulbactam sodium, ceftazidime, and imipenem according to the disk diffusion method. The pathogen was resistant to amikacin, ceftriaxone, ciprofloxacin, mezlocillin, aztreonam, and gentamicin. Our patient received an antibiotic course of intravenous cefoperazone sodium-sulbactam sodium for eighteen days and imipenem-cilastatin for twelve days. A repeat chest X-ray performed forty-eight days later revealed resolution of the pulmonary abscess and improvement of pneumonia. The patient remained afebrile and free of respiratory symptoms at follow-up two months later.