A 70-year-old man visited his doctor because of right hypochondrial pain, and a giant tumor in the abdomen was identified on computed tomography (CT). In addition, two EGCs were revealed by upper endoscopy, and he was referred to our department. His medical history was type 2 diabetes mellitus and postoperative state of appendectomy, and he had no family history. His height was 158 cm, his weight was 59.7 kg, and his BMI was 23.9, and he had a fist-sized palpable elastic hard mass on the right abdomen. Laboratory tests showed low levels of albumin (3.4 g/dL) and hemoglobin (10.6 g/dL), and high levels of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) (18.9 ng/mL). Upper endoscopy revealed a 30-mm-sized 0-IIc lesion in the anterior wall of the angular incisure and a 15-mm-sized 0-IIa lesion in the lower anterior wall of the gastric corpus (both tub2). A submucosal tumor-like ridge in the lower body of the stomach was suspected to be an exclusion by the aforementioned giant tumor .
Abdominal enhanced CT confirmed the curvatures of the anterior wall of the angular incisure as a thickening of the wall with a contrast effect. Lesions in the lower body of the stomach could not be identified. The abdominal mass was recognized as a malformed tumor with a maximum diameter of 13 cm, and with a solid component that was lightly contrast-enhanced in its interior, which was located outside the stomach wall on the greater curvature side of the angular incisure. The boundary with the abdominal wall was unclear, and infiltration of the abdominal wall was suspected . The preoperative diagnosis was GIST and two EGCs (M, Ant, 0-IIc, cT1bN0M0 cStage I; M, Ant, 0-IIa, cT1aN0M0 cStage I). Distal gastrectomy, D1 + lymph node dissection, and cholecystectomy were performed for the diagnosis of gastric GIST and EGCs. Reconstruction was performed by Billroth I. The giant tumor was identified as a large fist-shaped mass located in the greater curvature of the angular incisure that was adhered to the transverse colon and the transverse mesentery . The surgery time was 3 h and 45 min, and the blood loss volume was 232 ml. Although the preoperative and intraoperative diagnosis was GIST, macroscopic findings of the resected specimen showed there was no continuity between the giant tumor and the stomach wall .
Histopathological findings are shown in Figs. , and . The gastric lesions were diagnosed as two primary EGCs (M, Ant, type 0-IIc, 32 × 30 mm, tub1 > tub2, pT1b (SM2), INFb, Ly1a, V1a, CY0, N1 (1/40), M0, pStage IB; and M, Ant, type 0-IIa + IIc, 10 × 10 mm, tub1, pT1a (M), Ly0, V0, CY0, N0, M0, pStage IA), and their histopathology was conventional tubular adenocarcinoma . The smaller lesion (type 0-IIa) was an intramucosal well-differentiated adenocarcinoma, while the larger one (type 0-IIc) infiltrated into a submucosal layer with lymphovascular invasion. The extragastric giant tumor was a moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma with hemorrhage and extensive necrosis . Immunohistochemically, caudal type homeobox-2 (CDX-2) and cytokeratin 20 (CK20), representing an intestinal phenotype, were positive in both the gastric lesions and the giant tumor . In addition, enteroblastic differentiation and a yolk sac tumor-like components with Schiller–Duval bodies were observed in the giant tumor. Approximately half of the cancer cells in the giant tumor were immunoreactive for SALL4 and some were AFP-positive . Both human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) and synaptophysin were negative. Except for the giant lymph node metastasis, no metastasis was observed in the other 39 dissected lymph nodes. Because the lymph node metastasis was solitary and large, a whole-body search was performed by colonoscopy and PET-CT during the early postoperative period to detect other primary sites; however, there was no primary site other than the stomach. Therefore, we concluded that the giant tumor containing carcinoma with enteroblastic differentiation was a lymph node metastasis from the EGC.
Postoperative delayed gastric excretion occurred (Clavien–Dindo classification II), and decompression by gastric tube was need for 5 days. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 16. Postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy was not performed, and the patient was followed up. However, 6 months after surgery, his markers had risen. CT showed liver metastasis with a portal vein tumor plug, and SOX (S-1 + oxaliplatin) therapy was started . The patient is alive 1 year after the surgery with stable disease (RECIST guideline version 1.1).