A 75-year-old man presented with a pancreatic tumor measuring 58 mm on the head of the pancreas that was incidentally detected by abdominal ultrasonography. The patient had no significant past medical history, and his general physical examination was normal. No abnormal laboratory findings were observed.
Enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed a 58 mm multilobular cystic lesion with a 17 mm mural nodule in the pancreatic head. Furthermore, prominent calcification was observed on part of the cyst wall .
Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) showed a multilobular cyst in the branch duct with communication between the cystic lesion and the main pancreatic duct. Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) showed an area of hyperintensity in the mural nodule in the pancreatic head, but the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) was decreased. In terms of the distal pancreas other than calcification of the pancreatic head cyst wall, speckle images were not observed on DWI or ADC .
Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) revealed a multilobular cystic lesion with a 17 mm mural nodule (white arrow) in the pancreatic head. Furthermore, prominent calcification was observed on part of the cyst wall. In contrast, calcification suggestive of chronic pancreatitis other than calcification of the pancreatic head cyst wall was not observed in the distal pancreas. EUS also revealed communication between the cystic lesion and the main pancreatic duct .
Thus, the lesion was preoperatively diagnosed as IPMC of the pancreatic head and classified as T1N0M0 stage IA according to the 8th Union for International Cancer Control (UICC) guidelines.
Subsequently, the patient underwent pancreaticoduodenectomy and regional lymph node dissection. At the postoperative follow-up, the patient was followed with adjuvant chemotherapy adjuvant chemotherapy using S-1, which is an oral fluoropyrimidine derivative that combines tegafur with 2 modulators of 5-fluorouracil metabolism, 5-chloro-2,4-dihydroxypyridine and potassium oxonate. The patient exhibited no evidence of recurrence or metastasis after 10 months of follow-up.
Histologically, a 60 × 50 mm multilobular cystic lesion was observed in the pancreatic head. The cut surface of the resected specimen from the pancreas head showed a large multilobular cystic mass filled with mucin and mural nodules. The partition wall of the multilobular cystic lesion was exceedingly hard, demonstrating calcification .
Microscopically, the tumor displayed the presence of large pools of extracellular mucin containing scattered neoplastic cells. The tumor cells were composed of tall papillae lined by columnar cells with pseudostratified nuclei and basophilic cytoplasm with variable amounts of apical mucin. Calcification was observed on part of the wall forming the mucin pools. Infiltration of inflammatory cells into part of the wall forming the mucin pools was also observed . In terms of metastasis in the resected lymph nodes, lymph node involvement was not observed.
Immunohistochemically, the cancer cells exhibited strong expression of “intestinal” differentiation markers, including CDX2, MUC2, and MUC5AC .
Therefore, the final histopathological analysis of the specimen revealed colloid carcinoma derived from the intestinal type of IPMN was T1N0M0 stage IA according to the 8th UICC guidelines.