An 82-year-old man with no symptoms visited our hospital for routine postoperative follow-up examinations after esophagectomy for esophageal cancer. At the age of 70, he had undergone thoracic esophagectomy trans right thoracic approach with gastric tube reconstruction via the antethoracic route. The follow-up upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed a Type 0-IIc lesion measuring 30 mm in length in the lower part of the gastric tube , and histopathological examination of biopsy specimens revealed features consistent with poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. The primary lesions could not be detected by computed tomography (CT), and there was no obvious lymph node metastasis or distant metastasis. We made the diagnosis of gastric tube cancer, B-12-O, Type 0-IIc, T1b, N0, M0, cStage IA (Japanese Classification of Gastric Carcinoma). Ideally, total resection of the gastric tube would have been indicated for the lesion, as it was a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with submucosal invasion. However, because of the advanced age of the patient (82 years), high surgical invasiveness of total resection of the gastric tube, and relatively early stage of the diagnosed cancer, we considered distal gastric tube resection with preservation of the RGEA as a potentially suitable surgical strategy for the patient. To examine the feasibility of performing such a surgical procedure, we repeated the upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and clipped the oral side of the tumor to confirm the location and extent of the lesion . Thereafter, an upper gastrointestinal series was performed to reconfirm the location of the clip, and we recognized that distal gastric tube resection could be surgically performed . 3D-CT angiography showed that the dominant region of supply of the RGEA was distributed towards the upper part of the gastric tube . Therefore, we determined that preservation of the RGEA would be required to perform distal gastric tube resection. A midline incision was made along the previous surgical scar, the abdomen was opened, dissection was performed around the gastric tube, and the RGEA was exposed. The RGEA supplying blood to the gastric tube was identified and preserved. The extent of the tumor was determined by palpation of the endoscopic clip, and elevation of the small intestine up to the chest wall was also confirmed. The dissection line of the gastric tube was determined to allow complete resection of the tumor, and several vessels branching from the RGEA and entering the gastric wall in the resection area were ligated. We did not perform the lymph node dissection and the sentinel node navigation surgery because of no perigastric lymph nodes recognized during the surgery and the risk of conversion to total resection of the gastric tube due to RGEA injury. The stomach on the oral side and duodenum on the anal side of the tumor were divided using an automatic suturing device, and the distal gastric tube resection was completed. The duodenal stump was closed as a blind end. The small intestine was pulled up to the chest wall and an antecolic Roux-en-Y reconstruction was completed . The operation time was 252 min, and the blood loss was 44 ml. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 12. The histopathological diagnosis was gastric tube cancer, B-12-O, pType 0-IIa, por2 > tub1, pT1bN0M0, pStage 1A (Japanese Classification of Gastric Carcinoma) . No adjuvant chemotherapy was administered. The patient has remained free of recurrence until now, 17 months since the surgery.