The 20-year-old male patient was diagnosed with spindle cell sarcoma of the right femur in Aug. 1998, when he was 16 days old, at Mackay Memorial hospital (consent was obtained from his mother for the publication). Due to right thigh enlargement with a palpable mass, excisional biopsy were performed, and pathology disclosed a spindle cell sarcoma with hypercellularity . The patient was administered five courses of combination chemotherapy with vincristine, adriamycin, and cyclophosphamide. Debulking excision of the tumor was performed when he was 11 months old. He was regularly followed up at the orthopedics department over the next 20 years and he recieved reconstruction surgery, after which he was able to walk and run. Until 5 months ago, January 2018, he complained of progressive right thigh pain with radiation to the right lower leg, which continued for 5 months. The patient also complained of right leg numbness and weakness. Follow-up magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an infiltrative tumor mass measuring 3.6 × 3.3 × 10.4 cm in the medial proximal right thigh. The patient underwent tumor excision in May 2018. A tumor was removed from beneath the sciatic nerve and the pathology report showed recurrent sarcoma with a round cell pattern .
Two months after the surgery, the patient complained of progressive right thigh swelling with tenderness and swelling of the glans penis with painful nodules. Leg computed tomography (CT) revealed a huge intraoseous cystic lesion in the right femoral shaft. Penile swelling was thought to be an balanitis at first. Urologists were then consulted for the penis lesion and 2 firm nodules about 1 to 2 cm in size were identified on the glans of the penis. No discharge, ulceration or necrosis was noted on the the overlying skin of the glans . Morning erection were unaffected; however, 3 days later the nodules had not shrunk and became a mild purple in color . Furthermore, progressive penile pain and swelling from the glans to the shaft was noted . Priapism with venous thrombosis was suspected; He compained of voiding difficulty and urine retention, but only a 14 Fr Foley tube could be inserted due to compression. In Aug. 2018, one week after admission, biopsies of the right leg and penis were performed. During the operation, a 16 Fr cystoscope could only reach the distal urethra and a 6 Fr ureteroscope revealed mucosal swelling throughout the urethra. Gross hematuria with blood clot retention in the urinary bladder and right inguinal lymph node enlargement was noted. Two weeks after admission, a suprapubic cystostomy was performed for blood clot evacuation, as it was difficult to insert a cystoscope into the urethra. An open biopsy of the right inguinal lymph node was also performed. The penile biopsy showed a hypercellular lesion with an infiltrating border, spindle fascicles with collagen deposition, and cellular pleomorphism. Histopathological examination of the recurrent tumor on the right thigh, penile lesion and inguinal lymph node showed presence of the same type of enlarged bizarre tumor cells with prominent cellular atypia. Immunohistochemistry staining of the recurrent tumor and metastasis lesion showed Gata3 (−) CD45 (−) ALK-P (−) melanA(−), S100 (−) and INI-1 with an intact expression. A FISH (Fluorescence in situ hybridization) study showed the absence of the ETV6-NTRK3 gene (a characteristic gene fusion identified in infantile fibrosarcoma). Thereby ruling out urothelial carcinoma, lymphoma, inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor, melanoma, infantile sarcoma and epithelioid tumor. The final pathology was penile metastasis and inguinal lymph node metastasis of high-grade pleomorphic/epithelioid sarcoma . Compared to previous tumor morphology , the tumor recurred became of spindle cell with round cell pattern. And then, it transformed with biphasic bizarre anaplastic epithelidoid cell in 2 months.
Four weeks after admission, the patient still had persistent priapism with gross hematuria, and poor appetite with progressive cachexia. The biopsy wound over the glans developed gangrene . Fever with pneumonia occurred during the hospitalization. The patient died due to septic shock with respiratory failure 35 days after the penile swelling first ocurred.