An 81-year-old Central European man was hospitalized in a tertiary hematology and oncology center for diagnostic work-up and treatment of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Past medical history revealed a chronic kidney disease (G2), arterial hypertension, hyperlipidemia, benign prostatic hyperplasia, and hepatic steatosis. The patient was married and had no history of smoking, drugs, or alcohol abuse. The patient’s height was 1.80 m, his weight was 90 kg, and his body mass index (BMI) was 27.8 kg/m2. The patient worked as a farmer and was retired for more than 15 years. Due to the high age of the patient, family history could only be collected to a limited extent. As far as can be ascertained, the family history did not reveal any risk factors or cancer.
On day 13 after initial admission, the patient suddenly developed right-sided hemiparesis and global aphasia [National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) 17, Modified Rankin Scale (mRS) 5]. Initial imaging showed no signs of early ischemic changes on non-contrast-enhanced computed tomography of the brain (NCCT; Alberta Stroke Program Early CT score 10) and an occlusion of the left cervical carotid artery, but no intracranial large vessel occlusion on CT-angiography (images not shown). Due to the sudden onset of symptoms and the severity of the symptoms, the occlusion of the left internal carotid artery was classified as acute, and the patient was transferred to our comprehensive stroke center for endovascular treatment. Upon arrival at the comprehensive stroke center, the patient was conscious with vital signs including temperature of 36.6 °C, heart rate of 100 beats per minute (bpm), blood pressure of 150/93 mmHg, and oxygen saturation of 99%. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a sinus rhythm without any signs of myocardial ischemia. Relevant laboratory values are listed in Table .
To treat the occlusion of the left internal carotid artery, endovascular therapy under general anesthesia was initiated. Catheter angiography confirmed the cervical occlusion of the left internal carotid artery caused by a limited subpetrous dissection. Mechanical recanalization was performed using catheterization with aspiration only. Owing to thrombocytopenia with a platelet count of 29 G/L, secondary to AML, neither a stent was implanted nor systemic thrombolysis administered as bridging. Final angiographic runs showed no evidence of a cervical or intracranial vascular occlusion (corresponding to a reperfusion according to the extended Thrombolysis in Cerebral Infarction grading, eTICI 3). Onset to recanalization time was 265 minutes.
The patient showed clinical improvement in aphasia and hemiparesis immediately after extubation. NCCT 24 hours after endovascular stroke therapy did not display signs of infarction or intracranial hemorrhage. On day 2 after endovascular stroke treatment, the patient was transferred to the hematology ward (NIHSS 5, mRS 3). A follow-up MRI was performed on day 10 after endovascular stroke treatment to evaluate the extent of a possible infarction and intracranial hemorrhage as possible contraindications to the continuation of chemotherapy. No hyperintensities on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI), or changes of fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images as evidence of acute or subacute ischemia were detected . Time-of-flight MR angiography did not show a renewed occlusion.
In the following days, the patient gradually deteriorated, particularly in terms of apraxia and higher-order language deficit with impaired speech fluidity, comprehension, and repetition. Consequently, the patient was readmitted to the stroke unit on day 23 after the index event (NIHSS 7, mRS 5). Delirium, seizure, or a metabolic cause for these new symptoms were ruled out by means of clinical diagnostics, laboratory tests, and electroencephalogram (EEG). Repeat MRI was performed without signs of diffusion restriction, apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) pseudonormalization, or a renewed occlusion of the left internal carotid artery. However, new subtle hyperintensities of the white matter, sparing the cortex and U-fibers, were visible on FLAIR images; strictly limited and localized unilaterally to the vascular territory of the left anterior circulation.
The patient’s symptoms gradually improved with best medical treatment (platelet function inhibitor, statin, and antihypertensive drug) as well as physical therapy, occupational therapy, and speech therapy. A detailed list of the medication the patient received in the comprehensive stroke center is listed in Table . The patient was transferred from the stroke unit to hematology to continue cancer treatment on day 32 and discharged home on day 40 after endovascular stroke treatment (NIHSS 7, mRS 3).
On day 92 after acute stroke treatment, the clinical and imaging follow-up of the patient was carried out. The patient presented in a significantly improved condition without a walking aid and other support. The patient reported that in everyday life he needs help doing housework, getting groceries, or preparing food, but is not dependent on assistance with banking and legal transactions or maintaining personal hygiene (mRS 2). MRI on day 92 showed that the faint, diffuse hyperintensity in the left anterior circulation territory on FLAIR had not resolved and had not further increased in intensity or spread to other areas of the brain. An additional MRI of the brain was performed 313 days after acute stroke treatment. Compared with the MRI from day 92, there was no change in the imaging findings. With the exception of the restrictions in daily activities already existing on day 92, the patient continues to be self-sufficient.