A 29-year-old nulligravida initially presented as a preconception consult prior to in-vitro fertilization . Her medical history was significant for two unprovoked deep vein thromboses, the first at 19 years old which prompted further workup. She was diagnosed with thrombotic APS by history and persistent laboratory criteria, treated with enoxaparin acutely and transitioned to lifelong coumadin therapy after failure of a direct oral anticoagulant . She discontinued her coumadin in anticipation of pregnancy and was taking enoxaparin 40 mg twice daily. Her APS labs at the time of preconception visit were lupus anticoagulant ratio of 1.85 (normal <1.20 using Dilute Russel Viper Venom time), anticardiolipin IgG 87 MPL U/mL and IgM >150 MPL U/mL (reference: negative <13, indeterminate 13–20, low-med positive >20–80, high positive >80), anti-beta-2-glycoprotein-I IgG was negative, however IgM was 145 GPI IgM unit (normal 0–32 units). Her ANA was positive with a titer of 1:640, nucleolar pattern, and anti-DS DNA antibodies were negative. In early pregnancy, her medications included twice daily enoxaparin 60 mg and hydroxychloroquine 200 mg. At 12 weeks gestation, LDA 81 mg once daily was added. At 15 weeks gestation, she was diagnosed with chronic hypertension by new onset elevated blood pressures and nifedipine 30 mg daily was started. Fetal anatomic survey at 20 weeks demonstrated normal fetal growth, however, by 21 weeks 6 days, ultrasound showed normal fetal growth but absent end-diastolic flow of the umbilical artery Doppler waveform, and the patient was admitted to the hospital. A preeclampsia workup was completed due to worsening hypertension, which demonstrated new onset proteinuria. Blood pressure control was obtained by increasing nifedipine to 30 mg twice daily. After lengthy discussions with the patient regarding options for care and consultation with a multidisciplinary team, enoxaparin was increased to therapeutic dosing of 70 mg twice daily, hydroxychloroquine 200 mg twice daily and LDA 81 mg daily was continued, and pravastatin 20 mg daily was added . Due to the diagnosis of preeclampsia with severe features and placental insufficiency with abnormal umbilical artery Dopplers at a previable gestation, the decision was made to perform therapeutic plasma exchange based on the experience of plasmapheresis use in catastrophic APS.
The therapeutic plasma exchange (TPE) procedures were carried out using a Spectra Optia apheresis system (Terumo, BCT, Lakewood, CO, USA), and a tunneled Hickman venous catheter was used for vascular access. According to the plan of the multidisciplinary team, the long-term schedule was for TPE every 48 h. At each session, 100% plasma volume was exchanged with 5% albumin solution (80% of plasma volume) and 0.9% NaCl saline solution (20% of plasma volume). Daily laboratory testing at our institution included levels of ionized serum calcium (reference range: 1.18–1.30 mmol/L) and fibrinogen levels (reference range 160–450 mg/dL). Protocol dictates that fresh frozen plasma be used for plasma volume replacement when fibrinogen levels less than 150 mg/dL, but this replacement was not needed during the course of treatment.
Intermittent absence of end-diastolic flow (AEDF) was seen on repeat ultrasound at 22 weeks 4 days, but by the following day, the umbilical artery Dopplers had normalized. Antenatal corticosteroids for fetal benefit were administered at 23 weeks gestation. Ultrasound for estimation of fetal weight was performed every 3 weeks and umbilical artery Doppler velocimetry for vascular resistance indices was measured three times per week. The amniotic fluid volume fluctuated between normal and mild polyhydramnios throughout the hospital stay. At 26 weeks of gestation, antiphospholipid antibody labs were drawn pre (10:19 a.m.) and post (11:56 a.m.) TPE. Levels were 74 MPL U/mL and 32 MPL U/mL for anticardiolipin, 74 GPI IgM unit and 28 GPI IgM unit for beta-2-glycoprotein-I, and 43.40 s and 33.80 s for DRVVT (normal 28–40 s) . A rescue course of fetal corticosteroids was administered at 31 weeks gestation. At 32 weeks gestation, anti-Xa levels were drawn pre (08:30 a.m.) and post (12:45 p.m.) TPE for delivery planning. The measurements were 1.76 IU/mL and 0.58 IU/mL before and after TPE, respectively. The morning dose of enoxaparin was henceforth scheduled to be given following TPE for the remainder of the pregnancy.
The patient tested positive by an amplified DNA test for COVID-19 at 31 weeks gestation but was asymptomatic other than mild rhinorrhea. At 32 weeks 4 days gestation, the estimated fetal weight was 1,733 g and the umbilical artery Dopplers deteriorated to intermittent AEDF. Continuous electronic fetal monitoring was initiated, and fetal decelerations resulted in proceeding with delivery. The patient underwent induction of labor and, at 32 weeks 6 days of gestation, vaginally delivered a viable male infant weighing 1,590 g, with Apgar scores of 9 and 9 at one and 5 min, respectively. The infant tested negative for antiphospholipid antibodies. The patient was continued on nifedipine postpartum and bridged from enoxaparin to warfarin. She underwent TPE prior to and immediately following delivery. The patient was discharged on hospital day 84 and postpartum day 6. The infant was discharged on hospital day 20 after an uneventful neonatal ICU course.