A 64-year-old female had renal stones of 3.3 and 2.2 cm in diameter in her right kidney for 5 years . She developed right back and hip pain, which persisted for 1 month. Her body temperature was 37.4°C, and right costovertebral angle tenderness was detected. In examining her blood sample, white blood count and C-reactive protein level were elevated to 8260/μL and 8.33 mg/dL, respectively. In an abdominal X-ray, one stone appeared to have descended into the ureter ; however, computed tomography revealed that it had actually migrated into the right psoas muscle and caused a psoas abscess and perirenal abscess . The other stone was located into the renal parenchyma of the upper pole, and was slightly protruding outward from the capsule of the kidney .
A drainage tube was percutaneously inserted into the psoas abscess, 50 mL pus was discharged immediately, and cefotiam (2 g per day) was empirically administered. After Enterobacter aerogenes was identified as the pathogen, cefotiam was continued based on the results of a drug susceptibility test. The amount of pus being discharged gradually decreased, and the perirenal and psoas abscesses both disappeared on computed tomography 11 days after the insertion of drainage tube. Since her symptoms had completely resolved and inflammatory markers in the blood examination were also within normal ranges, the drainage tube was removed.
However, the iliopsoas abscess recurred 1 week after the removal of drainage tube. Her body temperature was 37.5°C, and her white blood cell count and C-reactive protein level in a blood examination were 8350/μL and 6.37 mg/dL, respectively. Therefore, we planned laparoscopic fenestration of the iliopsoas abscess, laparoscopic removal of the migrated stone, and laparoscopic nephrolithotomy for the other stone.
Under general anesthesia, the patient was placed in a lateral position, the retroperitoneum was dilated by a balloon dissector through a 2.5-cm skin incision between the tip of the 12th rib and anterior superior iliac spine, and ports were inserted as shown in Figure a. A laparoscopic electrode, vessel sealing device, 10-mm flexible laparoscope, and conventional laparoscopic instruments were used. However, since severe adhesion was found between Gerota's fascia and the iliopsoas muscle (Video ), we changed to transperitoneal approach. The port positions are shown in Figure b. No adhesions were detected intraperitoneally, and the ascending colon and duodenum were easily dissected from Gerota's fascia and retracted medially. After dissection between the inferior vena cava and right kidney, a psoas abscess was fenestrated using a laparoscopic electrode and vessel sealing device. The migrated stone was easily detected in the psoas muscle and removed . Laparoscopic nephrolithotomy was then performed for the other stone located in the renal parenchyma. Gerota's fat was adequately removed at the upper pole, and the stone was then easily detected. After the stone was removed, and the renal parenchyma was sutured . Cefotiam was administered during the perioperative period. After surgery, her temperature and inflammatory markers were within normal ranges. Her postoperative course was uneventful, and the psoas abscess has not recurred for 3 years. A component of the removed stones was calcium oxalate.