The patient, who was a 65-year-old male, was admitted to the hospital on 27th July 2021, mainly due to intermittent upper abdominal discomfort with nausea and vomiting for more than 10 days. After admission, gastroscopy showed an irregular bulge 38–41 cm from the incisors, which bled easily when touched. Pathological biopsy results showed poorly differentiated cancer. Enhanced chest computed tomography (CT) showed cardia and gastric fundus wall thickening, which was considered as Ca. There were multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the left cardia, lesser curvature, greater gastric curvature, and hepatic hilum. The upper gastrointestinal angiography findings were consistent with the gastric fundus body area of the cardia (carcinoembryonic antigen 72-4 concentration: 18.4 U/mL). The rest of the laboratory examinations showed no abnormalities. The examination did not reveal any contraindications to surgery. Thus, on 4th August 2021, partial esophagectomy and total gastrectomy with the jejunum, followed by jejunal anastomosis, The stomach was separated from the esophagus to the lower pulmonary vein level, and the perigastric vessels and mesentery were cut off. The esophagus and whole stomach were cut off, and the jejunum and proximal esophagus were manually anastomozed end-to-side (type B-II). as well as lymph node dissection were performed. The left cardia, right cardia, lesser curvature, greater gastric curvature, hepatic hilum, and lymph nodes adjacent to the inferior pulmonary ligament and subcarina were successfully operated. The postoperative pathological report showed hepatoid adenocarcinoma of the esophagogastric junction (pT4N3M0, stage IV). The patient recovered well and was discharged from hospital. Three weeks after surgery, the patient was admitted to the hospital because of chest tightness and fatigue, and he could not lie in a supine position.
The patient had a 2-year history of cerebral infarction, which was managed with long-term aspirin; a 7-year history of hypertension with a blood pressure of up to 160/90 mmHg, which was managed with regular oral nifedipine sustained-release tablets; and a 5-year history of type 2 diabetes mellitus, which was managed with oral repaglinide for blood glucose control.
The children and wife are healthy and have no history of disease. Parents and siblings have no history of disease.
A physical examination revealed that the patient was clammy with a cold body, orthopnea, a blood pressure of 70/50 mmHg, a heart rate of 170 beats/min, expansion of the cardiac borders on both sides, distant heart sounds, bilateral lung breathing Low voice, dullness on percussion of bilateral lungs, and palpable pitting edema in the lower extremities.
The pericardiocentesis tube drained 1500 mL of milky white fluid intermittently, Laboratory examinations showed that the triglyceride concentration was 637 mg/dL, and the protein content was 43.2 g/Lin the Pericardial effusion. The right thoracic drainage tube drained 1200 mL of pale yellow pleural fluid,The Rivalta test of pleural effusion was negative, and it was considered to be leakage.
Urgent chest CT showed bilateral pleural effusion and massive pericardial effusion, as well as insufficiency of the middle and lower right lung lobes . Echocardiography showed a large amount of pericardial effusion. Right thoracentesis and pericardiocentesis were urgently performed. Systemic vascular ultrasound showed right internal jugular vein and subclavian vein thrombosis (partial type), right brachial vein thrombosis (complete type), bilateral lower-extremity intermuscular vein thrombosis (complete type), and right small saphenous vein thrombosis (complete type).
The patient was diagnosed with 1) chylopericardium, 2) bilateral pleural effusion, 3) venous thrombosis of the lower extremities, 4) right brachial vein, internal jugular vein, and subclavian vein thrombosis, and 5) esophagogastric junction hepatoid adenocarcinoma (pT4N3M0, stage IV).
Considering the patient’s diagnosis of chylopericardium, a high-protein/low-fat enteral diet and partial parenteral nutrition were administered. After consultation with the interventional department, an inferior vena cava filter was implanted, and systemic thrombolysis and anticoagulation were performed. One week later, the patient’s symptoms (chest tightness and dyspnea) improved, and the pericardial drainage volume was 5 mL/day (pale yellow in color). After 24 hours of clipping, the patient had no discomfort. Echocardiography showed no obvious effusion in the pericardium or thoracic cavity, so the patient was extubated and discharged.
According to the pathological stage, postoperative adjuvant therapy should have been carried out, but considering the weak physical condition, the patient refused chemotherapy, but the patient reported taking oral Chinese medicine after surgery.There was no recurrence of chylopericardium in the three-month and six-month follow-up of the patient, and the patient’s tumor showed no signs of recurrence.