A 55-year-old lady presented to the clinic with occasional headaches. She did not have family history of cerebral aneurysms. An outside computerized tomography scan showed hyperdensity in the right supraclinoid region. As further evaluation, she underwent diagnostic digital subtraction angiography (DSA). A persistent trigeminal artery communicating between cavernous portion of the left internal carotid artery (ICA) and basilar artery was noticed . The presence of PTA was confirmed on injection of ICA and vertebral artery injection [-]. A three-dimensional reconstruction showed the aneurysm of size 11.2 × 5.5 mm along with presence of PTA filing the upper extent of basilar artery and posterior cerebral artery bifurcation [ and ]. The aneurysm was saccular in morphology .
On performing aortic arch injection, the origin of innominate and left common carotid arteries appeared extremely close. This represented a bovine arch configuration. A direct origin of the vertebral artery from the left aortic arch was also noticed (type III aortic arch). A fetal posterior communicating artery (Pcom) was also present. After appropriate counseling and consent, she underwent therapeutic angiography. A 5 mm × 16 mm size pipeline flex flow diverter device was deployed across the aneurysmal ophthalmic ICA segment and coils of microsphere 4 mm × 7.5 cm, two target −360 coils: 4 mm × 15 cm and one target helical ultra 3 mm × 8 cm were gradually placed into the aneurysm sac . During coil placement, no contrast extravasation or distal thromboembolism was noticed. Contrast stasis within the aneurysm was noticed subsequently.
A follow-up angiogram at 6 months demonstrated complete occlusion of the left ICA aneurysm and no residual filling or intrastent stenosis was noticed. This angiogram revealed a new second aneurysm arising from the right supraclinoid ICA . It measured 3.5 mm × 1.5 mm [ and ]. It was decided to follow the patient with serial angiograms. Angiography at 6 months showed good reconstruction of the left ICA with the pipeline flex device. Progression of the right supraclinoid ICA aneurysm in size and morphology was noticed [ and ]. Two blebs measuring 3.1 mm and 2.2 mm were noticed on the aneurysm dome and the base of aneurysm measured 5.4 mm. Contralateral persistent trigeminal artery and fetal Pcom artery were noticed intact with good flow.
A single SURPASS flow diverter device measuring 5 mm × 20 mm was placed across the right supraclinoid ICA aneurysm origin [ – black arrows]. All the tines of the device were not approximated to the endothelium. Balloon angioplasty was, hence, performed with a 4 mm × 10 mm balloon.
A 6-month follow-up angiography showed that majority of this new aneurysm was thrombosed, with an extremely small residual 0.9 mm aneurysm on the right side ICA [ and ]. It was decided to conservatively manage this residual aneurysm with subsequent angiography. Our total follow-up duration for this patient was 18 months with DSA performed after every 6 months.