A 52-year-old Caucasian male presented in our department in March 2015 with a 5-year history of increasing stiffness, swelling, deformity, and range of motion (ROM) limitation of his right knee, with painful limitation during daily life activities. He did not report any previous trauma, knee sprain, or surgery. The patient reported several treatments in the past years (i.e., physical therapy, painkillers, hyaluronic acid injections, and steroid injections), with partial and temporary benefits.
Physical examination revealed varus deformity of the knee, painful ROM limitation, quadriceps muscular atrophy, and diffuse pain at palpation. Radiographic examination showed moderate-severe osteoarthritis of the knee with varus deformity . Considering the patient’s young age and his request for less invasive surgery than total knee arthroplasty (TKA), an OWHTO was suggested. The patient was thoroughly informed of the risks, benefits, and low long-term success rate.
A kinematics-based image-free navigation system with HTO software was used. The bone substitute graft was a dehydrated equine cancellous bone wedge (Osteoplant; Bioteck, Italy) and NHA bone paste augmentation (Nanostim Synthetic Bone Paste; Medtronic, Tennessee). The fixation was performed using a Position HTO Plate. Post-operative radiographs showed correction of the varus deformity. The patient was dismissed from hospital 2 days after surgery with a knee brace and non-weight-bearing. The patient followed a standard rehabilitation protocol, the knee brace was kept in full extension for the first 2 weeks and unlocked during the following 2 weeks; at the 4th week, it was removed. After 6 weeks, partial weight-bearing with crutches was initiated. Full weight-bearing was permitted in the 8th post-operative week. No intraoperative or post-operative complications occurred. Finalizing the rehabilitation protocol, the patient reported complete symptoms resolution and returned to daily life activities. We did not report any complications during clinical and radiographic follow-up.
At 3-year follow-up, the patient revealed a progressive clinical worsening with stiffness, swelling, and pain that did not respond to medical therapy. Physical examination revealed ROM painful limitation, diffuse pain at palpation, and quadriceps muscular atrophy. Radiographs showed good healing of the osteotomy with moderate-severe osteoarthritis . Due to the patient’s symptoms, the tibial osteotomy was converted to TKA. During the revision surgery, a bone biopsy of the bone graft site was performed after plate removal. The sample was decalcified using a histological decalcifying agent and cut into 4 µm thick sections using a microtome. The sections were stained with hematoxylin-eosin (HE) and observed at x200, with both polarized light and light microscopy. In and , the same region is shown under light microscopy and under polarized light. Histological findings were as follows: Non-viable bone areas surrounded by viable bone tissue, no inflammatory cells detected around the non-viable bone areas. These findings suggest the presence of residual non-viable bone from the bone substitute graft. Augmentation with NHA bone paste achieved good osteoinduction, the absence of inflammatory infiltrates showed good integration of the bone substitute insert.