A 54-year-old woman presented with a 2-year history of progressive dyspnoea on exertion. At the time of presentation, she had intermittent (angina) chest pain, pedal oedema, and dyspnoea at minimal exertion. For the last 2 months, she had anorexia and weight loss (4 kg in 1 month). There were no documented episodes of fever. Her past medical history was significant for hypothyroidism, well-controlled on levothyroxine supplementation.
On evaluation, the patient was normotensive, pulse regular, and afebrile. Systemic examination was unremarkable except for mild bilateral pedal oedema. Electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm and was otherwise unremarkable. Her erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 56 and C-reactive protein (CRP) 22.4 mg/L; normal <7.5 mg/L. Her N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide level was 74.6 pg/mL. HIV antibodies were negative by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Two-dimensional echocardiography revealed mild pericardial effusion with pericardial thickness of 0.58 cm. Inferior vena cava was dilated (2.12 cm with no respiratory variation) and significant trans-mitral and trans tricuspid respiratory flow variation suggestive of effusive constrictive pericarditis. Though annulus reversus could not be documented (e’l = 8.70 cm/s and e’s = 7.72 cm/s), e’l and e’s were almost equal and e’l was reduced. E/e’ were 8.48 for septal and 7.53 for lateral annulus. Contrast-enhanced tomography of thorax revealed mild pericardial effusion with thickened pericardium [along right ventricular (RV) free wall 6.9 mm and along left ventricular (LV) free wall 7.5 mm] with biatrial enlargement; it also revealed few homogenous subcentimetric prevascular, pre-, and para- tracheal lymph nodes without any necrosis. There was left-sided pleural effusion along with atelectatic bands in bilateral lung bases, left lingula, and bilateral upper lobes and traction bronchiectasis along medial segment of right middle lobe. Overall the computed tomography (CT) images were suggestive of chronic infective aetiology.
Cardiac catheterization revealed equalization of diastolic pressures with significant respiratory variation in LV and RV pressures. Coronary angiography revealed normal epicardial coronaries. These findings strongly suggested a constrictive physiology.
As tuberculosis is the commonest aetiology of constrictive pericarditis in the Indian subcontinent, and as there was evidence of lung involvement, the patient was started on ATT (isoniazid + rifampicin + pyrazinamide + ethambutol for 2 months followed by isoniazid and rifampicin for 4 months). The patient improved over the next 4 months, there was return of appetite with weight gain; and the repeat echocardiography was normal with no features of either constriction or effusion. Repeat ESR was 31 and CRP came down to 8 mg/L. Repeat CT also revealed normalization of pericardial thickening and enhancement when compared with the earlier. It also revealed clearance of pleural effusion, lymphadenopathy, and lung findings when compared with the earlier CT. To evaluate the symptoms and to document the functional capacity of the patient, treadmill test was done which was normal with good functional capacity.