A 71-year-old woman presented to the emergency department at Tishreen University Hospital in 2021 with repeated attacks of right upper quadrant abdominal pain radiating to the back and right shoulder and worsened by fatty meals. The patient was a non-smoker and non-alcoholic. She did not use any specific drugs and had no history of allergy. She underwent surgical excision for a skin tumor located in the right deltoid region, 7 years ago. There was no tumor history in her family; particularly no history of skin tumors. On physical examination, there was tenderness in the right upper quadrant with a positive Murphy's sign. Laboratory tests showed an elevation of white blood cells (26,400 mm3) with granulocytes (45%) and lymphocytes (54%). Other Routine blood values were within normal limits. Abdomen ultrasound showed a polypoid mass protruding in the lumen of the gallbladder and located in the fundus area. Diagnosis of acute cholecystitis was made and the laparoscopic cholecystectomy was done. The gallbladder was sent to the pathology department. The excised gallbladder measured 8 cm × 2.5 cm with a wall thickness of about 0.3 cm. The serosa was unremarkable. Inspection of the luminal aspect of the gallbladder revealed a 2.5 cm measured, white, brownish mottled polypoid lesion, located in the fundus region. The surrounding mucosa was velvet and black in color . There was necrotic mucinous material in the lumen. Microscopic examination of the polypoid lesion revealed proliferation of variably large nests of malignant epithelioid cells with large hyperchromatic nuclei and prominent nucleoli. The cytoplasm was eosinophilic with occasional coarse brown pigments [A] [B]. Our initial diagnosis on the HE stained sections was malignant melanoma. To confirm our diagnosis immunohistochemical stains were applied. The tumor cells were positive for melanoma cocktail [C] and were negative for pan-cytokeratin [D]. No molecular test was performed, as it was not available in our lab. There was no medical record for the patient in our hospital. By contacting the in-charge surgeon, we were informed that the patient had a history of cutaneous malignant melanoma, seven years ago, in the right deltoid region. That time, the tumor was excised and followed by chemotherapy with paclitaxel plus carboplatin. Our final diagnosis was metastatic malignant melanoma to the gallbladder, presented as a polypoid lesion and accompanied by acute cholecystitis. The patient was discharged 3 days later, without any complications. Four weeks later, her course was complicated by the development of increasing neurological symptoms. Unfortunately, brain metastases were found on CT scan.