A 43-year-old female was referred to our department for evaluation of recurrent febrile attack for 3–4 days, leg pain, and urticarial eruption. No family history of recurrent febrile attack was reported. Three years before the visit, a weekly febrile attack of > 39 °C occurred that lasted 3–4 days. Her symptoms started with urticarial rash in the trunk and legs associated with high fever and progressing leg pains. The urticarial rash initially occurred once every 2 weeks but gradually increased in frequencies. Febrile attacks were accompanied with coxalgia and urticarial eruption not resolved after the fever declined. On physical examination, her blood pressure was 120/72 mmHg, pulse rate was 92 beats/min and respiratory rate 24/min. Chest and abdominal examinations revealed no findings; however, a tenderness was observed in the left hip joint. The temperature at the first visit was 37.1 °C; however, she presented with febrile attack (> 39 °C) 10 days before the first visit. The urticarial rash appeared over the entire body, including the trunk and both upper and lower extremities . It had aggravated by coldness and accompanied by arthralgia and bone pain of both femurs. The febrile attack lasted for 3–4 days, whereas urticarial rash did not resolve completely. Laboratory findings showed leukocytosis (11,900/μl) and elevated C-reactive protein levels (6.18 mg/dl) and serum amyloid A (SAA, 32.5 μg/ml). Markers for autoimmune diseases, including an anti-nuclear antibody and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody were negative. There was no M protein in immunoelectrophoresis. Liver and renal functions were negative. Serological testing was negative for HBV, HCV, and Syphilis. Neither cytomegalovirus antigenemia nor EBV or Parbovirus B19 DNA were detected. Interferon γ release assay for Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection (T-SPOT) and B-D-glucan tests were both negative. Although one of the diagnostic criteria for SchS requires findings of monoclonal gammopathy, serum immunoelectrophoresis showed no evidence of monoclonal gammopathy. In addition, bone marrow aspirates showed no abnormality.
PET/CT showed the diffuse fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in the bone marrow of both femoral and pelvic bones . MRI of both femurs show diffusely abnormal signal in the medullar bone of both femoral bones. Histological findings of the biopsied urticarial lesions showed a neutrophilic urticarial dermatosis demonstrating perivascular and interstitial neutrophilic infiltrations without leukocytoclastic vasculitis . Based on the urticarial rash, recurrent fever, abnormal bone remodeling with bone pain, and elevated acute phase reactants, SchS was suspected, despite the absence of monoclonal gammopathy. The patient had been treated with high-dose prednisolon, antihistamines, omarizumab, and cyclosporine A; however, she was unresponsive to these various treatments. The observation that she did not respond to any conventional medications indicated the possibility of autoinflammatory diseases. Therefore, written informed consent for gene analysis for autoinflamatory genes was obtained from the patient, and the ethical approval for the study was obtained from the Fukushima Medical University Ethics Committee for this retrospective study (No 2019–188) and in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. In order to exclude the mutations in the genes of autoinflammatory diseases, the genetic screening was performed in genomic DNA samples from the patient whole blood under analysis by next-generation sequencing. A panel was created to identify possibly disease-causing mutations in 14 autoinflammation/immune-related genes (MEFV, TNFRSF1A,NLRP3,NLRP12,VK,PLCG2,NOD2,TMEM173,PSMB8,PSMA3,PSMB4,PSMB9,POMP,NLRC4). However, neither mutation nor rare variant was found in these genes (data not shown). Despite the lack of diagnostic criteria for the typical SchS (absence of monoclonal gammopathy) and CAPS (absence of NLRP3 mutation or somatic mosaicism), we did not exclude the possibility of antoinflammatory diseases including SchS. Neutrophilic urticarial with systemic inflammation (NUSI) characterized by urticarial skin lesions with neutrophilic infiltration likely mediate by IL-1 . The differential diagnosis of NUSI should be considered in this case with antihistamine or immunosuppressant-resistant urticaria with systemic inflammation . Exclusion of known inflammatory diseases is necessary for the diagnosis of NUSI . Although inflammatory arthritis could be associated with NUSI , bone pain with bone remodeling, one of the clinical findings of SchS, may not be present with NUSI. The lack of monoclonal gammopathy does not necessarily deny SchS because monoclonal gammopathy may not be present at disease onset . She fulfilled the diagnostic criteria for SchS except monoclonal gammopathy.
After these extensive diagnostic workouts, the SchS diagnosis was suspected by bone pain with compatible imaging findings.
Recent guideline suggests a diagnosis of IL-1-neduated autoinflammtory disease such a situation . She suffered from sustained recurrent fever, urticarial rash, and bone pain with the elevated levels of acute phase reactants for more than 3 years. The association of AA amyloidosis was reported in untreated patients with SchS sustaining elevations of acute phase reactant, SAA, contribute to the AA amyloidosis development as a precursor protein for AA amyloid .
Therefore, Il-1β monoclonal antibody, canakinumab (Iralis<, Novartis) 150 mg was subcutaneously injected with a 4-week interval. Skin rash and bone pain were resolved within 2 days of the first injection. Inflammatory markers, such as CRP and SAA, were normalized after 7 days from the first injection. The patient noticed significant improvement and recurrent febrile attack was completely disappeared.