A 51-year-old Iranian married man in Fars province in the south of Iran presented with complaints of nausea, generalized headache, vomiting, malaise, and significant weight loss of about 13 kg in the past 1 month. He had a weight of 65 kg, height of 175 cm, blood pressure of 120/80 mmHg, pulse rate of 68 beats per minute, and blood glucose level of 143 mg/dl. General examination was unremarkable, except for fullness in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen.
A review of his medical history showed that he had diabetes mellitus for 1 year. Social history of the patient was negative for alcohol consumption and cigarette smoking. His family history included diabetes mellitus in his mother, and his drug history consisted of metformin 500 mg daily. For better evaluation, the patient was admitted, and the subsequent laboratory results revealed severe hypercalcemia of more than 15 mg/dl and phosphorous 4.5 mg/dl. He had abnormally low PTH level of 4.37 pg/ml, as well as a low 25 (OH) vitamin D level of 14 nmol/l. Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) was 47 mg/dl, creatinine was 4.12 mg/dl, and potassium was 4.1 meq/l .
Serum normal saline 200 cc/hour was infused, and calcitonin 250 unit every 6 h for 48 h was prescribed; recheck of calcium twice showed 26 mg/dl and 27 mg/dl, so double lumen was inserted and two 2-h hemodialysis sessions were performed. After that, the calcium level decreased, but it was still high (16 mg/dl), so denosumab 60 mg was injected, and serum calcium decreased to 13.5 mg/dl; ultimately, the calcium level gradually decreased to 11.9 mg/dl.
Given the acute kidney damage, abdomen-pelvic sonography was performed; it revealed evidence of multiple mostly hypoechoic structures with foci of calcification, the largest of which was about 72 mm × 62 mm in the right lobe of the liver, suggestive of liver metastasis. Both kidneys were normal in size with severely increased parenchymal echogenicity, suggestive of parenchymal damage. In addition, there were a few stones of up to 6 mm in the lower pole of left kidney. His prostate was enlarged in size at about 30 cc with heterogeneous parenchymal echogenicity.
Bone scan showed diffuse metastatic calcification in both lungs and stomach, and diffuse heterogeneous uptake in the liver, which seemed to be a metastatic lesion and mild degenerative process in the right hip .
Percutaneous biopsy of the liver mass demonstrated a well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumor (low grade) confirmed by immunohistochemistry (IHC) with strongly positive chromogranin and synaptophysin stain, negative CK20, CK7, LCA, and Ki-67 index of < 3%. After consultation with the oncology team, long-acting octreotide 30 mg monthly was suggested. The patient was discharged, but a few days later, he complained from perioral, hand, and feet paresthesia and numbness and developed symptomatic hypocalcemia; his corrected calcium level was 6.5 mg/dl, phosphate level was 2.5 mg/dl, 25 hydroxy vitamin D level was 22.8 ng/ml, and the PTH level was 107 pg/ml. He received intravenous and oral calcium accompanied by 50,000 units of oral ergocalciferol weekly. The symptoms were relieved, and the calcium level was corrected.
For further evaluation of the underlying malignancy, computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis without contrast was performed; it showed a heterogeneous solid mass lesion, which measured 51 mm × 47 mm in the body of the pancreas containing calcification, suggestive of malignant pancreatic mass lesion. The liver had heterogeneous parenchymal density with multiple varying size hypodense lesions in both lobes; the largest was 73 mm × 67 mm in the left lobe and the foci of calcification in the mentioned lesions were also seen .
Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) was performed for the patient, which demonstrated a large heterogeneous mass lesion with irregular outline and good demarcation in the body of the pancreas. Diffuse foci of calcification were seen; it was 51 mm × 37 mm. The lesion had attachment with the common hepatic artery. Proper hepatic artery seemed to be involved. There were multiple large heterogeneous mass lesions in the left lobe of the liver; the largest one was 53 mm × 51 mm. In addition, the splenic vein was involved .
Octreotide scan revealed a large donut-shaped octreotide avid lesion in the epigastric region at the right side of the mid-abdomen with multiple foci of varying size with abnormally increased radiotracer uptake in the epigastric region and both lobes of the liver .
Measurement of other probable hormone secretion of NET, such as gastrin and vasoactive intestinal peptide, was not performed because our patient did not have signs and symptoms consistent with these secretions.
The patient was followed by an oncologist and treated with long-acting octreotide 30 mg monthly and everolimus 10 mg daily. He consulted with a transplant surgeon who recommended hemi-pancreatectomy and liver transplantation, but the patient and his family refused this surgical management. Six months later, again he was admitted with nausea, vomiting, and constipation with severe hypercalcemia and acute kidney injury. He had a calcium level of 14.4 mg/dl, phosphate level of 2.7 mg/dl, creatinine level of 2.75 mg/dl, and PTH level of 5 pg/ml. Hydration, medical treatment, and some sessions of hemodialysis were performed for him. After 10 days, he was discharged with calcium of 8.5 mg/dl and creatinine of 1.29 mg/dl.
Now, he has a normal calcium level and is treated with everolimus 10 mg daily and insulin Glargine and Aspart for blood sugar control.