The Chinese patient, a seven-year-old boy, has been suffering of recurrent muscle weakness for 4 years before being admitted to the hospital. The boy was the second child born to a nonconsanguineous couple. Transient walking difficulties and paralysis episodes were examined at 3 years of age. During the episodes recorded throughout hospitalization, the child was floppy and hypotonic, with global muscle weakness that predominated in the lower limbs. Multiple attacks occurred every year without identifiable triggers, and each episode lasted for approximately several days. Neurological evaluation revealed hypotonia, hyporeflexia, and reduced motor activity during these episodes. Blood tests showed the decreased levels of potassium to 1.8–2.1 mmol/L (normal range: 3.5–5.5 mmol/L) and increased levels of creatine kinase (CK) to 211–1036 U/L (normal range: 24–190 U/L) during the episodes. The complete blood count, blood gas analysis, liver and renal function, glucose, other electrolytes, thyroid hormone, and serum aldosterone levels were unremarkable. Electrocardiogram showed sinus arrhythmia. Muscular features quickly improved following an intravenous infusion of potassium chloride. The patient was asymptomatic between the episodes. Clinical examination and serum CK and potassium levels were normal between the paralysis attacks. His father showed attacks of muscle weakness following strong physical exertion. However, serum potassium levels during attacks were not detected.
Peripheral blood samples were obtained from the patient and his parents. Genomic DNA was extracted from the blood samples. Whole-exome sequencing (WES) was performed on the proband, and Sanger sequencing was further performed to verify the candidate variants. WES was performed based on the NovaSeq 6000 Sequencing platform, the IDT XGen Exome Research Panel was used to capture libraries, and paired-end clean reads were used for comparison with the human reference genome (GRCh38/hg38). Variations were annotated using ANNOVAR and picked up with a minor allele frequency of ≤ 0.005 in the single-nucleotide polymorphism database. The pathogenicity of the variants was evaluated according to the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) guidelines, as well as the clinical phenotype of the patient. “Ada” and “RF” scores were used to evaluate potential splicing variants predicted by dbscSNV. Sanger sequencing was further performed to validate the candidate variants identified by WES. A novel heterozygous variant, NM_000069.3:c.497 C > A(p.Ala166Asp), was detected in exon 4 of the CACNA1S gene in the proband, which was inherited from his father . This novel missense variant has not been previously reported in the gnomAD database. It was predicted to be pathogenic by using PolyPhen-2, SIFT, and MutationTaster and was classified as likely pathogenic according to ACMG guideline. The REVEL score is 0.932. The amino acid residues of the missense variant are highly conserved in various species . The 3D models of Cav1.1 protein were further visualized. The encoded amino acid sequence at position 166 changed from hydrophobic alanine to hydrophilic aspartic acid owing to the c.497 C > A variant .
As shown in Fig. , the variant of the patient was located in a new region of the Cav1.1, the S4 voltage-sensor transmembrane segment of domain I, a domain that had never been associated with HypoPP. To evaluate the genotype-phenotype correlation, we systematically reviewed CACNA1S gene variants in the PubMed database until May 2023 with detailed phenotypes [, , –, –]. We demonstrate that variants of HypoPP appear to be preferentially clustered in the S4 transmembrane segments. Variants located in the inter-segment linker of S5–S6 of DII–DIV and in the C-terminal were more likely to be associated with malignant hyperthermia susceptibility. Individuals carrying CACNA1S truncated variants were more likely to be diagnosed with congenital myopathy .
After excluding endocrine and renal causes of the hypokalemic episodes, based on the typical clinical manifestations of the recurrence of flaccid paralysis episodes with a decreased serum potassium level, a response to potassium supplementation, and the genetic finding of a novel variant of CACNA1S gene, the patient was diagnosed with hypokalemic periodic paralysis. Subsequently, the boy was advised to take oral potassium supplementation.
Attacks of weakness may be triggered mainly by exhaustion, high-carbohydrate and sodium meals, alcohol consumption, cold exposure, stress/excitement/fear, use of corticosteroids, and anesthetic procedures. The patient was instructed to avoid these classical triggers. He also received nutritional and psychological counseling and guidance on lifestyle changes to avoid episodes of attacks. The patient did not receive acetazolamide or potassium-sparing diuretic therapy. Currently, attacks are prevented by lifestyle changes and nutritional counseling and clinical examination and potassium levels were normal between the episodes.