A 72-years old female patient was transferred with a status after previous episode of conservatively treated acute cholecystitis in cholecystolithiasis to our outpatient clinic for elective cholecystectomy. Medical history was significant for KMS of the left arm and the left upper thoracic wall with recurrent thrombophlebitis of the left arm and thoracic veins. In addition, there were numerous bleeding complications afterdental extraction, open appendectomy in 1962 (and) Caesarean section in 1968 (in which 60 red blood cell packs had been necessarily transfused) previously.
Furthermore, medical history comprisedstatus after upper GI bleeding in Mallory-Weiss syndrome in 2006, chronic anemia in vitamine-B12 lack, type-A gastritis, hypothyreosis, arterial hypertonus, initial stage of liver cirrhosis, chronic renal insufficiency – stage II (as well as) allergy against macrolide and penicillin antibiotics.
The medication prescribed by the family practitioner comprised L-thyroxin, an ACE inhibitor, hydrochlorothiazide and clopidogrel (platelet aggregation inhibitor) to avoid exaggerated platelet aggregation. The patient was provided with a compression sock for the left arm.
Due to the symptomatic cholecystolithiasis after an episode of an acute cholecystitis, indication for an elective laparoscopic cholecystectomy was derived.
At the regional hospital, angio-MRI (
–) of the upper abdomen including MRCP was performed, which revealed cholecystitis in cholecystolithiasis and commencing liver cirrhosis. As part of the preoperative work-up, echocardiography was performed, by which heart insufficiency due to volume load by arteriovenous shunts caused by KMS and “Cirrhose cardiaque” could be definitely excluded. As marker of an intravasal activation of coagulation, increased prothrombin fragments, D-dimers and a decreased antiplasmin concentration as well as increased capacity of fibrinolysis were detected. A secondary thrombocytopenia or a decline of fibrinogen and factor XIII as well as an acquired von-Willebrand’s syndrome were excluded.
Hemostaseological consultation recommended pausing platelet inhibition over 7 d by means of “bridging” with low molecular heparin and inhibition of hyperfibrinolysis with drugs (tranexamic acid) until the 3rd postoperative day or depending on symptomatology and hemostaseologic monitoring. For perioperative antibiotic prophylaxis, Imipenem was used.
The camera trocar was placed in the perumbilical region according to the left-sided manifestation of the vascular malformation known from the angio-MRI (
–). Under diaphanoscopic control , two further epigastric working trocars were placed slightly more to the right side. Intraoperatively , gall bladder was characterized by acute as well as chronic inflammation aspects. The liver showed macroscopically venous malformations and a commencing parenchymatous alteration with small nodules. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy was performed with no complications; placement of drainage was renounced.
Histopathological investigation revealed chronic fibrosing cholecystitis with thickening of the wall with no hint for malignancy.
Patient’s further clinical course was uneventful – she could be discharged with subjective well-being, no wound problems and excluded excessive activation of coagulation as well as stable hemogram on the 3rd postoperative day.