We describe the case of an 83-year-old male patient diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease and type 2 diabetes mellitus, under treatment with ropinirole, carbidopa/levodopa, and metformin/sitagliptin. The patient did not consume alcoholic beverages, herbal products, tobacco, and had no other toxic habits.
Currently, he is being followed up by the Hematology Service for nondeficiency arregenerative anemia in the context of a chronic lymphoproliferative syndrome in treatment with rituximab and with unfilial gastrointestinal bleeding. The patient underwent an exploratory laparotomy to determine the origin of the bleeding, after which paracetamol and enoxaparin were prescribed for seven days.
The patient came for consultation one week after the operation, where an acute alteration in liver function tests was observed: AST: 128 U/L (14–35 U/L), ALT: 177 U/L (10–49 U/L), GGT: 650 U/L (<73 U/L), ALP: 428 U/L (46–116 U/L), TSH: 1.57 mU/L (0.55–4.78), with normal total bilirubin, and without associated symptoms.
Prior to surgery, and after the administration of two doses of rituximab, he had an unaltered liver profile, with negative serologies and a hemogram with hemoglobin: 8.1 g/dL (12–15.5 g/dL) and a hematocrit: 23.5% (34–46%).
In view of these new analytical findings, it was decided to perform an abdominal ultrasound, in addition to requesting serologies for hepatitis A, B, C, E, and cytomegalovirus. The ultrasound showed a liver with smooth contours, with discretely granular parenchyma and lithiasic residues inside the gallbladder. The negative results of the serologies for the different hepatitis viruses ruled out the viral origin of the infection. The serologies were repeated and again the same results were obtained. Autoimmune etiology was ruled out due to negative results.
After seven days a new analytical control was performed, showing normalization of transaminases AST: 13 U/L, ALT: 54 U/L, with persistent elevation of GGT: 317 U/L and ALP: 218 U/L. Total bilirubin remained in normal values. Two months after the onset of the episode, the patient continues with elevated GGT and ALP values: 132 U/L and 110 U/L, respectively. The evolution of the liver function parameters analyzed is shown in .