A 47-year-old Japanese male with no significant past medical history presented in July 2021 complaining of neck swelling. After visiting his primary physician, the patient underwent computed tomography (CT), which showed multiple swollen lymph nodes in both sides of his neck, mediastinum, abdomen, and pelvis . He was admitted for further evaluation and management, and was referred to an otorhinolaryngologist. Subsequent cervical lymph node biopsy revealed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma.
Thereafter, the patient underwent whole-body 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT), which revealed, in addition to the already identified lymph nodes, multiple FDG accumulations in the bones throughout the patient’s body .
However, given that the primary lesion could not be identified at the time, he was referred to our hospital in August with a diagnosis of CUP with multiple lymph node and bone metastases.
Physical examination showed multiple palpable lymph nodes in both sides of his neck. No other remarkable abnormalities had been found. He had no previous medical history and no family history of cancer including prostate cancer.
Initial laboratory tests showed elevated levels of lactate dehydrogenase (431 U/L), alkaline phosphatase (355 U/L), uric acid (7.2 mg/dL), C-reactive protein (3.3 mg/dL), blood sugar (190 mg/dL), and glycated hemoglobin (8.1%, NGSP) but decreased levels of albumin (3.4 g/dL).
We conducted a comprehensive evaluation for tumor markers and found elevated levels of carcinoembryonic antigen (8.6 ng/mL), carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (66 U/mL) and CA125 and remarkably high levels of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) (782 ng/mL).
Given that the patient was complaining of bone pain, radiation therapy (RT) for bone metastases [left ischium 20 Gy/4fr, thoracic spine (Th2–Th8) 30 Gy/10fr, right femur 25 Gy/5fr] was started. Irradiation and oral Meloxicam 10 mg/day improved his bone pain. For his diabetes, oral antidiabetics (Metformin 500 mg/day and Sitagliptin 50 mg/day) were started, resulting in good glucose control and glycated hemoglobin was normalized 3 months later.
The CT and PET/CT performed so far, as well as palpation of the prostate showed no obvious abnormalities. However, given that we suspected PrCa as the primary site based on the elevated PSA levels, prostate biopsy was performed in September 2021. Concurrently, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed that the central to transitional area of the prostate protrudes toward the bladder, and diffusion-weighted images (DWI) and apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) mapping showed diffusion disorders PI-RADS score 5 (Prostate Imaging Reporting and Data System) .
Tissue obtained through biopsy revealed poorly differentiated ductal adenocarcinoma Gleason score 5 + 5. There were no other types of histological variants—apart of adenocarcinoma—in the prostate biopsy specimen. Immunohistochemical analysis was negative for pan-cytokeratin(CK) 7 and CK 20, positive for PSA and α-methylacyl coenzyme A racemase (AMACR) staining of the prostate and the cervical lymph node biopsy specimen , and a definitive diagnosis of multiple lymph node metastases and bone metastases of PrCa (T1cN1M1b, stage IV; UICC 8th edition, 2017) was confirmed.
The patient was then started on androgen deprivation therapy (ADT: luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LH-RH) antagonist once every 4 weeks) plus abiraterone (1000 mg/day) and prednisone (5 mg/day).
Since treatment initiation, the patient’s PSA has decreased and eventually normalized, and systemic lymph node swelling has subsided significantly . The patient has had no complaints of pain related to bone metastases, and his treatment can continue even half a year later.