The patient is a premenarchal, 6-year-old female who presented to the emergency department (ED) with her mother because of mild discomfort with urination and “pimples” causing pain in the vaginal area. The patient was previously healthy and denied increased urinary frequency or urgency, vaginal bleeding, vaginal discharge, malaise, and fever. The patient and her mother denied inappropriate contact or touching. On physical examination, the patient was comfortable, smiling, and playful. The external pelvic examination was notable for multiple raised lesions on the labia minora and erythema of the external genitalia. No vesicles or vaginal discharge were observed. At the ED, a clinical diagnosis of genital warts was made.
Social Work and the Department of Child Protection and Permanency were contacted. The patient and her mother were referred to a state-designated child protection center that provides crisis intervention and child abuse assessments. At the state-designated child protection center, a team of trained professionals conducted an evaluation and was able to ascertain a history of abuse from the patient by an adult, male family member living in the household. The center conducted a thorough physical examination and infection screening.
Two months after initial presentation and evaluation at the child protection center, the patient's symptoms worsened secondary to an increase in the size of the lesion. The patient was able to urinate but unable to sleep at night secondary to pain and irritation caused by rubbing. On examination, the patient had warts in the vestibule that carpeted the space between the labia minora and fourchette, obliterated the vaginal introitus, and appeared to obscure the urethra.
The patient then underwent an exam under anesthesia (EUA) and excision of vaginal lesions, as seen in , in the lithotomy position by pediatric surgery and the gynecological team. Direct visualization of the area, without use of a hysteroscope, did not reveal any gross internal vaginal lesions. A sterile urinary catheter was placed. The condylomas were removed using smooth pickups and Metzenbaum scissors with careful visualization of the urethra, as in . First, a 2 cm area of condyloma at the inferior portion of the vaginal introitus was removed. A second 2-3 cm lesion around the urethral meatus and third small lesion of the right labia minor were excised. Hemostasis was achieved with pressure and Surgiflo at the excision sites. A Vaginal ThinPrep Pap Test was performed and resulted in HPV 18 positive and low grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (LSIL) including cellular changes associated with HPV and cervical intraepithelial neoplasia I (CIN I). The surgical pathology consisted of red-tan, glistening, soft tissue that measured 1.2 × 1 × 0.4 cm when aggregated and was determined to be condyloma acuminatum. The patient was awakened from anesthesia and brought to the recovery room in stable condition.
At the postoperative follow-up visit, the mother and patient reported a smooth recovery with minimal pain. Exam of the surgical site in the supine frog-leg position showed that it was well healed with minimal residual disease. The patient was instructed to follow up with gynecology every 6 months and with pediatric surgery as needed. Given this patient falls outside CDC guidelines for vaccination and her pathology results, we plan to recommend HPV vaccination at the patient's next visit [, ].