A 74-year-old Asian woman presented to our hospital with a lump in her right breast, for which partial mastectomy and axillary lymph node dissection (ALND) were performed. No medical or family history for the patient was noted. Pathological analysis showed invasive ductal carcinoma, solid-tubular type, pT2N1aM0 with stage IIB. Immunostaining results were 90% estrogen receptor (ER)-positive, 5% progesterone receptor (PgR)-positive, and 5% Ki-67-positive, but HER2-negative expression. The patient refused both chemotherapy and radiotherapy as postoperative treatment and so only an aromatase inhibitor was administered.
Two years and one month after the first operation, computed tomography (CT) imaging showed an irregular mass in the pectoralis major muscle layer and enlarged axillary lymph nodes. On the basis of the diagnosis of local recurrence, total mastectomy combined with pectoralis major muscle resection and ALND was performed 2 years and 3 months later. Pathological analysis showed recurrent invasive ductal carcinoma and more than five metastatic axillary lymph nodes, HER2−, 90% ER, 5% PgR, and 20–30% Ki-67 index. The patient again refused the chemotherapy and was therefore only treated with postoperative radiotherapy (50 Gy in 25 fractions).
Two years and ten months after the first operation, CT imaging showed two metastases in the right lung and a small metastatic lesion in liver segment VII/III . We recommended changing the currently used aromatase inhibitor, and a fulvestrant was initiated. After the liver metastasis worsened slightly , palbociclib was added starting 3 years and 8 months later, and 4 years and 3 months later, the lung metastases completely disappeared . Although strong myelosuppression emerged as an adverse event, forcing a change from palbociclib to abemaciclib 4 years and 8 months later, even the liver metastases had completely disappeared by 6 years and 1 month later . Integrated positron emission tomography (PET)–CT performed 6 years and 3 months later revealed no sign of metastasis or recurrence in any organs. .
Figure charts the patient’s clinical course from admission to the time of writing.
Six years and nine months after the first operation, an analysis by flow cytometry of the patient’s PBMC was also performed. We confirmed that the population of immunosenescent T cells with a phenotype CD8+CD28− (CD8+ Tsen) was 46.2% and not increased compared with a 67-year-old healthy volunteer . CD8+ Tsen populations were also not increased (30.7%) in another 72-year-old patient with breast cancer with bone metastases who had no previous treatment with cytotoxic agents and is currently treated with abemaciclib . In contrast, an elevated level of CD8+ Tsen to 64.8% was observed in a 66-year-old patient with breast cancer with solitary lung metastasis who had previously been administrated with multiple cytotoxic agents and was currently treated with abemaciclib . No differences in the proportions of natural killer (NK) and regulatory T (Treg) cells were observed among these patients (data not shown).
As of 8 years and 1 month after the first operation and 6 years after the first recurrence, no signs of cancer relapse have been detected and the patient continues to be treated with fulvestrant and abemaciclib with performance status of 0.