An 84-year-old female was referred to our hospital for the management of an early gastric cancer. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy showed an 18 mm depression lesion on the posterior wall of the lesser curvature of the middle third of the stomach. Examination of biopsy specimens revealed a moderately to poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. Clinical diagnosis of the tumor invasion was mucosal layer. Then, the tumor was endoscopically resected with the endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD). The pathological results revealed that the tumor was 32 mm in diameter with submucosal and vascular invasion; thus, there was need for an additional surgical treatment. Contrast-enhanced multidetector-row computed tomography (MDCT) showed no lymph node swelling and no metastasis in other organs. A preoperative diagnosis of stage I gastric cancer was made (8th UICC-TNM classification). Three-dimensional CT (3-D CT) angiography also revealed angioplany of the ectopia common hepatic artery branch of the left gastric artery. According to Adachi’s classification, the anomaly corresponded to type VI (group 26) .
Laparoscopic distal gastrectomy with suprapancreatic lymph node dissection and common hepatic artery preservation was performed based on the vascular anatomical anomaly. First, the right and left greater omentum and lymph nodes were dissected along the gastroepiploic artery and infrapyloric vessels, and the duodenum was transected using an endoscopic linear stapler. After that, suprapancreatic lymph node dissection was done. The lesser omentum was divided with precautions taken for preservation of the common hepatic artery. At the right of the left gastric artery, the adipose tissue containing suprapancreatic lymph nodes (#8a) was dissected along the pancreas, together with the right gastric artery. The anterior superficial tissue of the left gastric artery was divided like a double door and the left gastric artery encircled . The tissue was separated to the distal side of the left gastric artery, and the gastric branch from the left gastric artery was dissected . The tissue containing stations 8a, 9, and 7 was removed along the right diaphragmatic crus. After lymph node dissection along the lesser curvature, the stomach was divided on the proximal side of the ESD scar using an endoscopic linear stapler. The excised specimen was removed through the extension of the umbilical port wound. A Roux-en-Y reconstruction was performed. The operation time was 443 min with minimal blood loss. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 11 after an uneventful postoperative course. The pathological examination revealed that there was no residual tumor and no lymph node metastasis in the resected specimen (pT1bN0M0 pStage IA).