A 34-year-old woman (height = 160 cm; weight = 50 kg) was scheduled for emergency surgery due to an open fracture of her left tibia and closed fracture of her right femur, which were sustained during a traffic accident. She had no past medical history. There were no other organ injuries, including those of the neck, face, thorax, or abdomen. The results from an ECG and chest radiograph revealed no acute or pathologic lesions.
After obtaining informed consent for surgery and anesthesia, the patient entered the operating room and routine monitoring, including capnography, a 3-lead ECG, non-invasive blood pressure monitoring, mechanosensor-neuromuscular transmission (M-NMT) module, and Entropy module on Datex-Ohmeda, was performed. Her initial blood pressure (BP) was 120/70 mmHg, heart rate (HR) was 93 beats/min, and her pulse oximetry oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 99%. After preoxygenation with 100% O2 at 8 L/min delivered through a mask for a few minutes, a remifentanil infusion (0.02 mcg/kg/min) was started and 80 mg of propofol was administered intravenously. After LOC, supramaximal stimulation using NMT was checked; thereafter, 35 mg of rocuronium was injected. Tracheal intubation using a cuffed 7.0-mm endotracheal tube was performed without difficulty. Anesthesia was maintained with 1.5 L/min of O2, 1.5 L/min of medical air, 1.0 to 2.0 vol% of sevoflurane, and a 0.02 - 0.10 mcg/kg/min remifentanil infusion. Thirty minutes after intubation, surgical drapes and other preparations were completed and an incision was performed. Her vital signs and other monitored parameters were within a 20% range of the preoperative levels.
However, 45 min after intubation, the response entropy (RE) abruptly increased up to 100 and the state entropy (SE) to 91. NMT was exhibited in 4 of the counts with a 46% train of four (TOF) ratio, even though capnography showed no sign of spontaneous breathing. There were no significant changes in her vital signs. Even though 3 vol% of sevoflurane was temporarily administered, the entropy did not change. Because there was no other evidence of ROC, we applied additional EEG monitoring and used the Root with SedLine monitor and confirmed a PSI of 50% and EMG of 23% . We assumed that the elevated EMG activity might cause an unusual elevation in the readings from the Entropy monitor. Thereafter, 10 mg of rocuronium was injected. After a few tens of seconds, TOF of NMT and RE/SE values on the Entropy monitor decreased gradually and simultaneously. When the NMT count reached 2 (2 mins after rocuronium injection), 59% of RE, 58% of SE, 40% of PSI, and 0% of EMG were assessed. Coincidently, the surgeon started to hammer on the nail in the patient’s tibia. He hammered regularly using the continuously repeated “hit - hit - pause” method. The “pause” step occurred at approximately 1.8 Hz of frequency. Within a minute, 3 TOF counts of NMT, 94% of RE, 79% of SE, 47% of PSI, and 0% of EMG were assessed . However, after a few minutes, the value of entropy decreased by less than 60. Twenty minutes later, the TOF count reached 4 and RE/SE values on the Entropy monitor increased to above 90 again while the PSI values were maintained below 50. Therefore, we discontinued monitoring with Entropy.
No other specific events occurred during the remaining intraoperative period. The patient did not complain of recall in the postoperative period. Upon discharge from the PACU, the last memories the patient had prior to sleep were the events of the surgical time-out just after entering the operating room. The first memory the patient had after awakening was the instruction from the medical staff to open her eyes in the recovery room. The patient did not dream during surgery. Mild surgical pain and dry mouth were the only discomforts the patient complained of in the recovery room.