A 52-year-old Chinese man presented at the clinic reporting a mild cough with yellow color sputum and exertional dyspnea for 2 weeks. He denied any fever, chest pain, night sweats, or weight loss. He was a heavy smoker (45 pack-years) and had a history of a splenectomy for abdominal injury 23 years ago. After a failed 3 day-course of antibiotic treatment at the clinic, he was referred to our hospital for further examination and treatment. Upon physical examination, the body mass index (BMI) was 17.97, SpO2 was 98% when breathing ambient air, the respiratory rate was 20/min, and the blood pressure was 119/77 mmHg. Chest auscultation demonstrated faint wheezing in left lower lobe. A computed tomography (CT) scan was performed, which revealed two low-density endobronchial masses located in the middle segment of the left main bronchus and the posterior basilar segmental bronchus of the left lower lobe. The neoplasms measured the CT-attenuation value -70HU, −98HU in density with air trapping and atelectasis in the segmental bronchus of the left lower lobe. The complete blood count showed that the white blood cell count increased to 16 * 10^9/L, the platelet count increased to 549 * 10^9/L, whereas other blood cell counts were within the normal range. No abnormalities were observed in liver function, renal function, blood lipids, blood glucose, C-reactive protein, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate. The tumor markers alpha fetoprotein (AFP), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), carbohydrate antigen 125 (CA125) and carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (CA19–9) were in the normal range, and no acid-fast bacilli were found in sputum smears. Subsequently, the patient underwent a flexible bronchoscopy, which confirmed an exophytic spherical lesion that caused almost complete occlusion of the middle of the left main bronchus , however, the cytological diagnosis failed by using bronchoscopic brushing cells.
In view of the above, interventional bronchoscopic management was undertaken to remove the neoplasms. First, we therapeutically resected the neoplasm, of which the base was located in the lateral wall of the left main bronchus using electrosurgical snare under flexible bronchoscope . Then, the spherical and pink neoplasms were taken out by cryotherapy . Subsequently, another yellowish dumb-bell neoplasm was found in the superior segment of the left lower lobe and the main part of the neoplasm was removed by electrosurgical snare, electrocautery, and cryotherapy. Only the C branch of the superior segment of the left lower lobe could not be completely resected or ablated because the neoplasm originated distally. Histopathological examination confirmed that both tissues from the left main bronchus and the superior segment of the left lower lobe were consistent with lipoma .
After bronchoscopic intervention, the patient recovered and was discharged. After 18 months of follow-up, the patient was free of symptoms and CT revealed that bronchiectasia remained in the superior segment of the left lower lobe , however, no mass lesion was present in the left main bronchus.