A 48-year-old Asian woman initially underwent a tumorectomy 12 years ago, with a pathological diagnosis of fibroadenoma (pericanalicular pattern dominant). Five years later, the patient consulted another doctor regarding a growth in her left breast. A biopsy was performed, and a diagnosis of phyllodes tumor was made. The patient subsequently underwent a partial mastectomy. Five months after the mastectomy, her left breast began to show enlargement again. The attending physician suspected a relapse and proposed total mastectomy. The attending physician then referred the patient to our hospital for total mastectomy and reconstructive surgery.
The tumor of the left breast was elastic and hard, and it had mobility. The patient’s laboratory data were within normal ranges. Ultrasonographic images showed a large segmental tumor . The inside of the tumor was heterogeneous and had hypoechoic characteristics. Computed tomographic images also showed a large tumor of the left breast . There was no lymph node metastasis or distant metastasis. Magnetic resonance imaging scans showed a large tumor that was well-defined but attached to the greater pectoral muscle . We performed a total mastectomy and reconstructive surgery with the rectus abdominis muscle. The pathological diagnosis was malignant phyllodes tumor . There was a significant amount of mitosis but no evidence of infiltration to the surrounding muscle .
The patient had follow-up visits approximately 2–4 weeks after each surgery, with additional visits several months later. However, the patient often presented at our hospital prior to follow-up appointments with a chief complaint of breast enlargement. Because we could not predict relapse, it was not clear what follow-up period should be used. Ultimately, we decided to follow the patient within several weeks after the surgery. In total, the patient would have six episodes of relapse. The periods between consecutive episodes of relapse were short, with the smallest period being 20 days. The areas of relapse in the breast were different every time: sometimes under the nipple and another time near a drainage tube scar from a previous surgery. In every incident of relapse, the pathological diagnosis was always malignant phyllodes tumor. Despite attempting radiation therapy after previous surgeries, tumor control was not obtained. The sixth surgery was performed to treat a relapse under the nipple, with adjuvant radiation therapy also delivered. The patient currently lives relapse-free. Distant metastasis was not observed during any period in this case.