A 3-year-old female toddler was brought to our burn unit after sustaining a scalding burn injury to her upper trunk, face and scalp from a hot stew 10 days back. Initially the injury resulted in admission to a primary care hospital. During her stay at the primary hospital wound care, analgesia, and IV ceftriaxone were administered. On the 10th day, she was referred to our center for surgical treatment.
Upon presentation the patient exhibited stable vital signs. PR = 108, RR = 24, Temp = 36.4 °C, Physical findings included a mixed superficial and deep partial-thickness burn wound over the scalp, forehead, cheeks, neck, and shoulder. Importantly, the eyelids and eyelashes were spared, allowing proper eye lid closure . The conjunctiva and sclera were normal.
Base line investigations: Showed normal parameters beside leukocytosis .
Subsequently the patient was admitted to the pediatric burn ward and management was started with daily wound care, dressing changes, analgesia and feeding.
On her third day of admission she began to exhibit photophobia with aversion to light and irritability, excessive crying and frequent eye itching was as reported. Physical examination revealed bilateral conjunctival erythema and injection. Along with bilateral whitish opacity involving the bilateral cornea and pus accumulation in the anterior chambers (, ). An orbit ultrasound was performed , confirming a diagnosis of bilateral endophthalmitis. Culture couldn't be obtained due to limited resources in our setup. Urgent ophthalmologist consultation settled the diagnosis of post-traumatic endophthalmitis/OU.
Prompt treatment was initiated with empirical broad spectrum antibiotics. Intravitral injection of Ceftazidime and Vancomycin was given for 2 rounds. Ceftazidime and Vancomycin eye drop QID and TTC eye ointment QID was continued for 10 days. The treatment led to marked improvement all of the symptoms and regain of her vision except mild corneal opacity . The patient was later discharged after getting split thickness skin graft for the unhealed part of the burn wound over the anterior chest and is continuing follow up with ophthalmologist for the corneal scarring.