A 4 year-old female fiery-shouldered conure (Pyrrhura egregia) was submitted to the diagnostic service at the Faculté de médecine vétérinaire for post mortem examination in September 2015. The animal was bought in December 2014 from a breeder located in Ontario, Canada. The animal travelled by air to Montréal, Québec, Canada, where quarantine was established for 30 days. The new owner noted brittle feathers, but the overall behavior was normal. The new owner’s farm consisted of breeding pairs from different species (conures, amazon parakeets). The animal was housed in a controlled environment with adequate ventilation and temperatures. Cages were cleaned every 4 days with a mixture of water and vinegar. Recycled paper was used as litter. Birds had unlimited access to water and dry food (Roudy Bush). Couscous, fresh fruits and fresh vegetables were available 5 h a day. The animal was newly introduced in the owner’s farm with a male from the same species previously purchased in Québec, Canada. No breeding was reported before death. Overall, the animal health surveillance program was minimal and consisted mainly of weighing the animal twice a year. No significant weight loss of the bird was reported prior to its sickness. The owner reported that the animal was drowsy and presented labored breathing when resting over a period of one week and it died before its physical examination could be conducted or a blood sample could be collected.
The animal’s body was in good condition with ruffled feathers on the head, back and distal third of the wings. In the coelomic cavity, the liver was enlarged, with irregular edges and multiple adhesions to the coelomic wall. The liver contained numerous irregular, slightly elevated, white nodules measuring between 0.1 and 0.3 cm in diameter, which were randomly distributed in the parenchyma . Similar nodules were observed at the surface of the air sacs. The lungs and kidneys were congested.
Tissues were fixed in 10 % buffered formalin, paraffin embedded and cut at 3 µm thickness for microscopic evaluation. The liver was severely infiltrated by macrophages and multinucleated giant cells, forming numerous round, irregular foci which were often centered around eosinophilic material and cellular debris (granulomas) (a, b). The macrophages were large with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm. There was a mild and multifocal periportal fibrosis with mild biliary duct hyperplasia and lymphohistiocytic infiltration. The liver capsule was slightly edematous and thickened by fibrin. Ziehl–Neelsen staining revealed the presence of numerous intracytoplasmic, acid-fast bacilli in the macrophages and multinucleated giant cells (c). Similar granulomas were also observed in air sacs, kidneys and, rarely, in the vascular walls. Additional lesions included lymphohistiocytic infiltration of the pericardium and peribronchiolar tissue.
Liver tissue was submitted to the molecular diagnostic laboratory of the Faculté de médecine vétérinaire of Université de Montréal for further characterisation of the mycobacterium specimen. First, DNA was extracted from a liver tissue homogenate using the QIAamp DNA mini kit (Qiagen) with the Qiacube apparatus following the manufacturer’s instructions. Thereafter, a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay was conducted based on an adapted protocol from Hashimoto et al. which was designed to sequence the 16S ribosomal RNA gene, allowing for the identification of a broad range of mycobacterial species . The obtained PCR amplicon was sequenced and this sequence was submitted to GenBank’s Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (blast) for comparison. The sequence demonstrated 100 % homology to M. xenopi sequences.
Tissue samples (liver, kidneys and lungs) were submitted for routine bacterial culture. The samples were cultivated on Columbia agar 5 % sheep blood at 35±2 °C with 5 % CO2 to evaluate the possibility of a bacterial infection. Fungal culture was also performed on Sabouraud agar at 30 °C for 21 days. No growth was observed overall.
Frozen sections of the liver, lungs and digestive tract were also submitted to the Laboratoire de Santé Publique du Québec (LSPQ) for mycobacterial isolation to confirm the presence of M. xenopi in the affected lesions. Liver and lung samples were processed at Hôpital Honoré-Mercier’s microbiology laboratory in St-Hyacinthe prior to submission to the LSPQ. Ground pieces of digestive tract (3 ml) were incubated with 0.9 % hexadecylpyridinium chloride (HPC) (Sigma Chemical) at 37 °C for 24 h and then centrifuged at 900 for 30 min. The pellets were collected and re-suspended in sterile water (1 ml). Liver, lung and treated digestive tract samples were incubated in liquid Bactec MGIT 960 system (Becton Dickinson Microbiology Systems) and solid Middlebrook 7H10 agar and Löwenstein–Jensen medium.
Pure and confluent mycobacterial cultures were obtained for the liver and digestive tract samples. Mixed culture was observed for lung tissue containing slow-growing mycobacteria with few Gram-negative bacteria. DNA was extracted using the BioRobot M48 (Qiagen) as per laboratory protocol. Identification was performed by 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene sequencing. Sequence alignment has shown a 100 % identity with the sequence of the type strain M. xenopi ATCC 19250.
The final diagnosis was consistent with disseminated avian mycobacteriosis due to M. xenopi.
In the four months following the diagnosis, four other birds from the owner’s farm that had died were sampled. PCR assays were conducted on different samples (liver, digestive tract, lungs) for mycobacteria and these were negative.