A 31-year-old man with no medical history was presented to our emergency department (ED) with disturbance of consciousness and generalized seizure. After having a fever, he had been out of contact for 3 days and his colleague found him unresponsive in his apartment. Soon after arriving at the ED, he showed generalized tonic-clonic seizure (GTCS) starting from his left limbs, which ceased after intravenous diazepam 10 mg. Weakness, pyramidal signs, and meningeal irritation signs were not seen. Laboratory examination showed systemic inflammation: white blood cells 26,100/μL and C-reactive protein 8.56 mg/dL. Creatinine was 1.69 mg/dL, urea nitrogen was 41.0 mg/dL, and creatine kinase was 60,264 IU/mL, showing dehydration and rhabdomyolysis presumably due to prolonged impaired consciousness. Lumber puncture was unremarkable except for increased opening pressure (30 cmH2O): cells 2.4/μL, protein 26 mg/dL, glucose 97 mg/dL, and IgG 2.0 mg/dL. Culture of cerebrospinal fluid was negative. Serum HIV, herpes simplex virus, and varicella zoster virus antibodies were negative. Anti-nuclear, anti-double-stranded DNA, anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase, anti-thyroid peroxidase, anti-thyroglobulin, and anti-neutrophilic cytoplasmic antibodies were negative as well. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed no intracranial lesion or abnormal gadolinium enhancement . Interictal electroencephalogram showed generalized periodic delta waves predominantly on the bilateral frontal areas .
Despite administering 1000 mg of fosphenytoin for the seizure, he repeated GTCS on day 2. He was intubated and mechanically ventilated on that day due to GTCS accompanied with respiratory depression. Although valproate 900 mg through the nasogastric tube and intravenous propofol was started and the dose of propofol was gradually increased, GTCS recurred on day 5 and levetiracetam 1000 mg and intravenous midazolam was added to control the seizures. Even with these medications he repeated GTCS during day 7 through 14, which obliged us to increase the dose of midazolam to the maximum and levetiracetam to 3000 mg, and also add carbamazepine 400 mg and zonisamide 600 mg. Tracheotomy was performed on day 15 because of prolonged mechanical ventilation. During days 15–19, EEG showed periodic sharp discharges predominantly on the bilateral frontal regions every 0.5–1.0 s even during the patient did not manifest apparent seizure , suggesting the condition of non-convulsive status epilepticus (NCSE). Propofol was transferred to thiopental and its dose was increased to the level that leads to a burst and suppression pattern on EEG during days 20–25.
During this period, repeat head MRI and lumber puncture showed no cause of the status epilepticus. Chest and abdominal computed tomography (CT) and positron emission tomography (PET) did not represent neoplastic lesions. Based on several recent reports, we presumed some occult autoimmune disorders were behind this patient’s refractory status epilepticus and immunomodulative therapy could be effective. The patient received intravenous methylprednisolone (IVMP) on days 25–27 (methylprednisolone 1000 mg/day for 3 days), but his EEG continued to manifest epileptic discharge when the general anesthesia was tapered. We administered plasma exchange (PE) on days 31–35 and intravenous immunoglobulin therapy (IVIG) on days 36–38 (0.4 g/kg for 3 days), under the informed consent of his family . He came to show gradual improvement of consciousness and decreased epileptic discharge on EEG around day 35, making it possible to taper the anesthesia. Mechanical ventilation was discontinued on day 42, and the sedative agents for general anesthesia were withdrawn by day 44.
The patient gradually regained his ability of daily life and showed well-preserved memory function and his computer skills for the job, but mild anterograde amnesia, irritability, and difficulty in concentration remained. Although the patient was discharged home on day 189, refractory focal onset seizures with impaired awareness were seen every 2–3 days which required valproate 1200 mg, levetiracetam 3000 mg, zonisamide 400 mg, lamotrigine 200 mg, and clobazam 7.5 mg.