A 56-year-old male patient presented with acute heart failure. He was a heavy smoker with severe chronic alcohol abuse and a prior splenectomy secondary to trauma. Otherwise, clinical history including cardiovascular diseases was unremarkable. He began three days before admission with progressive dyspnoea. On initial evaluation, he was anxious and with an overall poor general condition. The pulse was regular and on chest auscultation, we found basal crackles.
The electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with normal heart rate and an R-loss from V1 to V3 as well as an ST-Elevation in the leads V2 and V3. Laboratory analysis showed a greatly increased troponin T (57 717 pg/mL reference < 16.8). Renal and hepatic function was almost normal [glomerular filtration rate (GFR): 86.7 µmol/L reference > 90; creatinine: 86 µmol/L reference 62–106; aspartate transaminase (ASAT): 0.47 µmol/L reference < 0.85; gamma-glutamyl-transferase: 2.1 µmol/L reference 0.17–1.19; bilirubin: 9 µmol/L reference < 21]. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a dilated left and right ventricle with severely reduced systolic function (left ventricular end-diastolic diameter: 7 cm, interventricular septal thickness at end-diastole: 10 mm, left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF): 10%, stroke volume 25 mL, right ventricular end-diastolic diameter: 5.1 cm, tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion: 9 mm) and apical akinesia. Moderate functional mitral and tricuspid regurgitation were noted and the systolic pulmonary artery pressure was estimated as 25 mmHg.
Coronary angiography performed on the day of admission revealed a moderate stenosis of the proximal left anterior descending artery (LAD) and an occlusion of the first diagonal branch (RD1). Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) with placement of a drug-eluting stent (DES) was performed successfully in the RD1 lesion, the LAD stenosis was left since it was assessed as non-significant. One day later, due to clinical decline, a second-look coronary angiography was performed. An acute thrombotic occlusion of the LAD close to the RD1 intervention site was detected and had to be interpreted, most likely, as a post-interventional complication. Of course, also coronary embolism had to be considered as an alternative cause. Nevertheless, another PCI with DES placement in the LAD was performed successfully. Unfortunately, on the third day, the patient went into cardiogenic shock with signs of hypoperfusion and peripheral vasoconstriction (Killip-Kimbal IV, Stevenson class C: cold and wet). Blood pressure was 96/80 mmHg under continuous infusion of noradrenaline (0.28 µg/min/kg). A chest X-ray displayed biventricular cardiac enlargement and pulmonary congestion; serum lactate was 4.8 mmol/L (Reference < 2.2 mmol/L). The patient rapidly went into multiple organ failure with impaired renal and hepatic function (GFR 9.6 mL/min, creatinine 530 µmol/L, ASAT 213 µmol/L, bilirubin 59 µmol/L), most likely caused by congestion. Due to anuria continuous veno-venous haemofiltration became necessary and the patient had to be intubated and required mechanical ventilation to control aggravating hypoxia.
Haemodynamic evaluation by right heart catheterization revealed a cardiac output of 1.1 L/min (Reference 4.5–5 L/min) and a cardiac index of 0.5 L/min/m2 (Reference 2.5–4 L/min/m2). We, therefore, decided, after excluding another coronary event, to place a percutaneous left ventricular mechanical circulatory support device (Impella® CP 3.5 L), which could be removed after approximately 24 h. Haemodynamic monitoring in the intensive care unit (ICU) was realized by pulmonary artery catheter and, due to the complexity of the case, was continued even after Impella® CP explantation for recompensation and tapering off the catecholamines.
During further disease course, new onset of typical atrial flutter and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation with haemodynamically relevant tachycardia up to 170 beats per minute occurred and, again, led to clinical decline with the need to re-escalate catecholamine doses. Since electrical cardioversion was intended, transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) was performed to exclude LAA thrombus. Although thrombi or sludge could be ruled out by TOE, a discrete membranous ostial stenosis of the LAA was noticed as an incidental finding. The latter caused an accelerated bidirectional flow pattern at the LAA ostium with a velocity of up to 1 m/s, resulting in complete perfusion without stasis in any part of the LAA, despite typical atrial flutter ( and , , ). We performed synchronized electrical cardioversion, which had to be repeated four times, supported by full titration of antiarrhythmic medication with amiodarone (continuous intravenous amiodarone 900 mg/d up to 10 g, following a maintenance dose of oral 200 mg/d) to establish stable sinus rhythm.
With continuous veno-venous haemofiltration, mechanical ventilation, and application of noradrenaline up to 0.6 µg/min/kg, milrinone up to 0.49 µg/kg/min, and vasopressin up to 1 IU/h (maximum doses each), the patient’s haemodynamics could be stabilized. The cardiac output normalized to 5.97 L/min and cardiac index to 3.05 L/min/m2. During the severe course of the disease, cardiopulmonary resuscitation had to be performed once on day 17 because of an episode of ventricular fibrillation. For this reason and due to the severely reduced LVEF, an internal cardioverter defibrillator was implanted.
Since the patient was in persistent delirium, we also performed a cranial computer tomography, which revealed former bilateral frontal infarctions.
Fortunately, after a total of 28 days of ICU treatment followed by rehabilitation, the patient experienced full clinical recovery. The left ventricular function increased slightly to an LVEF of 25%. Laboratory parameters of hepatic function normalized and renal function recovered to a GFR of 78 mL/min. Because of paroxysmal atrial flutter and atrial fibrillation, we applied anticoagulation with unfractionated heparin during the ICU stay. The patient was discharged on oral treatment with apixaban (5 mg twice a day). In addition, the patient received a guideline-directed medical heart failure therapy including angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ramipril 2.5 mg), beta blocker (bisoprolol 5 mg), aldosterone antagonist (eplerenone 25 mg), and sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitor (empagliflozin 10 mg).