A 66-year-old Japanese man complained of increasing muscle stiffness of the four extremities and difficulty in relaxing his grip, which had been present from early childhood. His parents were consanguineous and his family had no neuromuscular disease . In his youth, mild muscle weakness and muscular hypertrophy had developed. Later in his life, gait disturbance due to muscle stiffness, severe in the starting period and relieved on continuation of walking, developed. The patient was diagnosed as having myotonia congenita at the age of 22 without any complications . He was treated with acetazolamide and phenytoin with relief of the symptoms. In spite of the symptoms, his daily activities were almost normal including working as a gardener, except that his myotonic symptoms got worse at low temperatures. There was no paralytic event during the entire disease course. At the age of 62, his muscular symptoms worsened on discontinuation of phenytoin due to membranous nephropathy, so he was admitted to our hospital. On admission, he had a Hercules-like appearance with hypertrophy of the limbs and axial muscles including the pectoralis major muscles. Physical examination revealed eye closure myotonia, percussion myotonia and grip myotonia. The myotonia improved with muscle exercise or repeated effort, the so-called “warm-up phenomenon”, and was aggravated by exposure to cold. Ocular movement was restricted in every direction with relief on repetition. Dysphagia and dysarthria were also present only when he was exposed to cold. Muscle manual testing was normal at ordinary temperatures.
The other neurologic findings were all normal. There had been no paralytic event or systemic abnormality. Laboratory examination showed an increased level of serum creatine kinase, 388 U/l (normal value < 279 U/l), which decreased with rest in hospital. Electrocardiography, ultrasound cardiography and chest X-raying were normal. Needle electromyography of the left biceps brachii muscle and quadriceps femoris muscle showed myotonic discharges (Additional file ). T1-weighted images of Cranial MRI revealed hypertrophy of all extraocular muscles . His myotonic symptoms improved since the start of administration of mexiletine (300 mg/day).
Genetic analysis: Whole-exome sequencing revealed a heterozygous mutation of the SCN4A gene (c.2065 C > T, p.Leu689Phe). However, we found no mutation of the CLCN1 gene. Then, we confirmed the SCN4A mutation by direct sequencing . Mutation analysis showed no mutation of the DMPK or ZNF9/CNBP gene.
A muscle biopsy was performed on the right biceps brachii muscle, followed by light microscopy and routine electron microscopy. On HE staining, variation in diameter of muscle fibers including hypertrophy (over 100 μm, about a half of muscle fibers) and atrophy was observed . Internal nuclei, chained nuclei , fiber splitting , pyknotic nuclear clumps , endomysial fibrosis and mild fatty replacement were observed in all areas. Sarcoplasmic masses were absent. On modified Gomori trichrome staining (mGT), ragged-red fibers could not be observed but fibers exhibiting slight marginal hyperstaining were observed . NADH-TR staining showed disorganized intermyofibrillar networks including a moth-eaten appearance and lobulated fibers . Myosin ATPase staining showed reduction of type 2B fibers and predominancy of type 2A fibers . On electron microscopy, atrophic fibers exhibiting Z-streaming were observed (Additional file ). Tubular aggregates were absent in all examinations.