A 26-year old Latina female sought medical attention at our emergency department with progressive throat pain and chest pain for 1 week. She then developed fevers, dizziness, shortness of breath, and abdominal pain with nausea and vomiting 2 days prior to admission. She did not seek prior medical attention and used over-the-counter ibuprofen for the fevers. The patient denied any recent travel, unusual food consumption or animal exposures.
Further history revealed that the patient’s 10-year old sister was recovering from an upper respiratory infection with fevers, throat pain, cough and shortness of breath for 1 week. Past medical history was significant for congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Our patient denied current usage of tobacco, alcohol, or intravenous drugs. She had no known drug allergies and had been taking physiologic doses of hydrocortisone 30 milligrams (mg) per day and fludrocortisone 0.5 mg per day for her congenital adrenal hyperplasia. The patient disclosed to the medical team that she had run out of her hydrocortisone and fludrocortisone approximately 4 to 6 weeks prior to admission.
Initial vital signs in the emergency department demonstrated a temperature of 102.0 °F (38.9 °C), heart rate of 102 per minute, respiratory rate of 28 per minute, oxygen saturation of 95 % while breathing 6 liters of oxygen per minute via face mask, and blood pressure of 50/21 millimeters of mercury. On examination, she was ill appearing and diaphoretic. There was jugular venous distention by visualization of the neck veins and distant heart sounds upon auscultation. Aggressive intravenous fluid hydration, vasopressor medications, and intravenous hydrocortisone were initiated for suspected septic shock and adrenal crisis. Supplemental oxygen was provided by face mask. Empiric antibiotic treatments with vancomycin, levofloxacin, fluconazole, and metronidazole were initiated based upon consultation with the infectious diseases specialist. Blood and urine cultures were collected in the emergency department before antibiotic administration. Pertinent laboratory findings in our patient on admission and during hospitalization are shown on Table . A 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) showed 1–2 mm ST segment elevations in precordial V2-V6 leads as shown in Fig. . Pericarditis with tamponade was suspected by the emergency room personnel. An emergent bedside transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) was performed by a technician which revealed a small pericardial effusion. A portable chest radiograph was remarkable for vascular congestion only. Two hours after her arrival to the emergency department, the patient developed cardiac arrest. Adult cardiac life support was initiated in which intubation and cardiopulmonary resuscitation were performed. Intravenous epinephrine was given for pulseless electrical activity. Pulse was restored after three minutes of treatment. An emergent bedside pericardiocentesis with drain placement was carried out by the on-call cardiologist. Three-hundred milliliters of serosanginous pericardial fluid were extracted. A repeat bedside TTE revealed minimal residual effusion of the pericardium with normal ventricular function. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit with the diagnosis of effusive-constrictive pericarditis complicated by tamponade, cardiac arrest and adrenal crisis.
Additional samples of blood and urine were collected for screening of bacterial (Streptococcus, Staphylococcus, Meningococcus, Haemophilus, Legionella), fungal (Histoplasma, Aspergillus, Candida, Cryptococcus, Coccidiomycosis), viral (herpesviruses, human immunodeficiency virus, Epstein-Barr virus, hepatitis A, B, and C, Cytomegalovirus), and mycobacterial (Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Mycobacterium avium complex) infections with negative results. Serological paired complement fixation antibody titers for coxsackie A and B were sent on days 1 and 7 of hospitalization. A panel of serological tests for rheumatologic, autoimmune and malignant diseases were performed as well. All pericardial fluid stains and cultures were negative for bacterial, fungal and mycobacterial diseases. Rheumatologic, autoimmune and malignancy workups were negative. Our infectious disease specialist suspected coxsackievirus infection given patient’s presentation and history of recent sick contact with her younger sister. Coxsackie titer antibodies were negative for group A serotypes A2, A4, A7, A9, A10 and A16. Coxsackie B titer antibodies on day 1 were: B1 (<1:8), B2 (1:16), B3 (1:8), B4 (<1:8), B5 (1:16), and B6 (1:16). Coxsackie B titers on day 7 of hospitalization were: B1 (1:8), B2 (1:16), B3 (1:8), B4 (1:8), B5 (1:16), and B6 (1:16). Real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of pericardial fluid for enteroviruses was sent on admission but our outside reference laboratory did not have the capability in performing the test. Viruses were not isolated on the viral culture of the pericardial fluid. With continued supportive medical care for the complications following suspected coxsackievirus B infection, our patient made a full recovery after 17 days in the hospital. Five months after her hospitalization, a repeat TTE showed normal left ventricular function and pericardium in our patient.