A 48-year-old woman was transported by ambulance to our hospital for heavy uterine bleeding and impaired level of consciousness. She had no underlying conditions except for adenomyosis, for which she was scheduled to undergo hysterectomy in 2 months at another hospital due to recurrent excessive menstruation. Upon arrival, her Glasgow Coma Scale was E4V4M6, and she was pale. She had a fever of 39.1 °C. Laboratory test results revealed a decreased hemoglobin concentration (Hb) (8.2 g/dL; normal 10.8–14.9 g/dL) and elevated D-dimer levels (79.3 µg/mL; normal < 1.0 µg/mL), white blood cell count (WBC) (18,060/µl; normal 3300–8600/µl), and C-reactive protein level (CRP) (20.1 mg/dL; normal < 0.3 mg/dL). Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pelvic area revealed adenomyosis; left ovarian tumor; multiple uterine myomas; and both old and new bilateral renal infarctions . She was admitted to the gynecology department and administered an antibiotic agent (200 mg/day cefmetazole sodium) for 5 days. She denied a history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, or diabetes based on her annual medical checkups as well as a family history of cerebrovascular disease. One day after admission, uterine bleeding stopped, and her consciousness improved. However, her Hb levels furtherly decreased to 6.9 g/dL. Therefore, 4 units of red blood cell concentrates were transfused.
However, 5 days after the initial bleeding, she had another episode of heavy uterine bleeding, and 20 min later, she became unconscious with left hemiparesis and dysarthria. Her National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score was 13. Brain MRI revealed bilateral multiple CIs indicating right middle cerebral artery occlusion. In addition, her diffusion-weighted image Alberta Stroke Programme Early CT Score was 6. Endovascular thrombectomy was subsequently performed, and her Thrombolysis in Cerebral Infarction grade was 3 . After endovascular therapy, her NIHSS score improved to 2. Heparin was administered as anticoagulant therapy to prevent CI. Transesophageal echocardiography did not reveal any evidence of patent foramen ovale or valvular vegetation. Moreover, a 24-h Holter electrocardiogram did not show atrial fibrillation or any other arrhythmia. Due to her underlying gynecological tumor, additional laboratory testing for tumor markers were performed the day after thrombectomy. These results revealed elevated CA125 (3536 U/mL; normal < 35.0 U/mL) and CA19-9 (892 U/mL; normal < 37.0 U/mL) levels. Levels of protein S, protein C, lupus anticoagulant, Factor V coagulation activity, anticardiolipin antibody, anti-cardiolipin-beta-2-glycoprotein complex antibody, and carcinoembryonic antigen were within normal range.
We were concerned that using heparin might cause heavy uterine bleeding and that could have led to repeated CI. Since she was scheduled for a hysterectomy in 2 months at another hospital, with her consent, hysterectomy and ovariectomy were performed earlier, 11 days after the initial bleeding . We discontinued heparin therapy after surgery. Histopathological assessment revealed no malignancy, and diagnoses of adenomyosis, uterine myoma, and ovarian endometriosis were established. On day 14 after the initial bleeding, whole-body contrast-enhanced CT revealed pulmonary thromboembolism, which was asymptomatic, and heparin was re-administered. On day 20 after the initial bleeding, because her pulmonary thromboembolism tended to dissolve, we switched the anticoagulant therapy from heparin to edoxaban 60 mg/day for 6 months. The patient’s D-dimer levels dropped immediately after surgery, and CA125 and CA19-9 levels returned to normal range (12.0 U/mL and 5.6 U/mL, respectively) 3 months after surgery . Since her symptoms had improved and her NIHSS score was 0, she was discharged with a modified Rankin Scale score of one, 42 days after she experienced CI. The patient had not experienced additional ischemic events 15 months postoperatively .