A newborn female of an uneventful pregnancy of a 40-year-old woman was delivered on 1 January 1999 via cesarean section (CS) at full term, because of previous CS. She is the sixth child of non-consanguineous Saudi Arabian parents who were originally from Gizan. During her gestational period, routine fetal ultrasonographic (US) scans at the 34th week reported mild ventriculomegaly without mention of any associated brain tumor.
At birth, her Apgar score was 8 and 10, and her weight was 3150 g. Her head circumference after birth was in the 90th percentile, and the anterior fontanel was 20 × 20 mm and soft. The initial neurological exam was normal, apart from a squint, and her parents were reassured.
At the age of 3 days, her mother brought her to a polyclinic because of poor feeding. She was reassured, and a change of milk formula was satisfactory for 1 week. Because of her recurrent vomiting and irritability, a computed tomography (CT) scan was performed, which reported a large posterior fossa tumor with obstructive hydrocephalus.
On admission at 20 days old to King Abdulaziz University Hospital in Jeddah, she presented with frequent vomiting, poor feeding, and increasing head circumference. The general physical exam revealed an irritable and emaciated baby in the second percentile of weight for her age. Head circumference was 45 cm with visibly dilated scalp veins and bulging anterior fontanel. Neurological exam demonstrated a conscious baby with spontaneous movement of her upper and lower extremities with mild spasticity. Cranial nerves exam was uneventful apart from Parinaud’s syndrome . Pupillary reflex was sluggish to light and vision was normal with no papilledema detected. Routine laboratory screening tests were within normal limits. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans revealed a heterogeneous 60 × 55 × 45 mm midline tumor filling most of the posterior fossa, causing anterior displacement of the brain stem and marked obstructive hydrocephalus . The tumor was iso- to hyperintense on T1-weighted images and hypointense on T2-weighted images with heterogeneous enhancement.
Through a midline suboccipital craniotomy, complete resection of the tumor was achieved. During surgery, an encapsulated solid vascular tumor occupying the fourth ventricle was encountered with diverse areas of soft and firm consistency. The baby remained stable hemodynamically throughout the surgery and received a total of 250 ccs packed RBC blood. During the operation, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was obtained for analysis, which was within normal limits for chemistry and cell counts. CSF cytology and tumor markers studies, human chorionic gonadotropin, and alpha-fetoprotein were negative. Histopathological examination of the specimen demonstrated a variety of tissues from all three germ layers, including immature as well as mature elements. The predominant tissue was neuroectodermal, in the form of neuroepithelial rosettes and tubules, resembling neuroblastoma. Mesodermally derived immature cartilage and primitive stroma were also seen, and endodermally derived respiratory and enteric epithelium was present in the form of cystic structures . The diagnosis was consistent with immature teratoma. During the postoperative period, the baby developed pneumonia that was resolved with intravenous antibiotics, and early postoperative MRI scans confirmed complete resection. She was discharged home on the 15th postoperative day in good condition. The infant received and well tolerated adjuvant carboplatin and etoposide (CARE) chemotherapy.
At the first year anniversary follow-up, she had a mild developmental delay with a slight improvement of Parinaud’s syndrome. Follow-up MRI scans at the fifth year of age revealed the stable size of the ventricles with no tumor recurrence . The patient was followed annually and had normal cognitive and neurological development; she is a university student and her recent CT scan at the age of 20 years revealed no recurrence .