A 51-year-old female patient had upper gastrointestinal bleeding with haematemesis and melena in the context of an altered general condition. The physical examination revealed weight loss (15 kg) and an abdominal mass of approximately 20 cm in size on the major axis, located in the epigastrium and left hypochondrium. The mass was not very mobile and was poorly limited. A blood test showed anaemia (8 g/dl). A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a voluminous mass of approximately 22 cm in size from the rear cavity of the epiploon with a predominant mix of aerobic and fluid components. The mass had a thickened and irregular wall and pushed back the stomach . This observation was suggestive of a gastric duplication with blocked communication. An oesophagogastroduodenoscopy did not reveal any lesion up to the 3rd duodenum apart from an aspect of extrinsic compression of the anterior side of the cardio-tuberosity junction. An exploratory laparotomy was decided upon, as the ultrasound endoscopy was not available. During this exploration, a large tumour of a suspicious nature was found at the expense of the posterior gastric wall extending from the spleen to the left hepatic lobe and left diaphragmatic cupola. There was no hepatic metastasis, suspicious adenopathy or peritoneal carcinosis. Nevertheless, the lesion seemed to be inextirpable. We therefore ended the procedure by performing, via a short gastrotomy, four biopsies of the lesion that communicated with the gastric lumen through an orifice admitting a finger. The postoperative outcomes were simple. The biopsy results were in favour of a stromal tumour, with positive CD117, CD34 and Dog1 antibodies . The Ki-67 index was positive at 4%.
A treatment with imatinib at the initial dosage of 800 mg twice daily was initiated. Poor tolerance to treatment (i.e., severe asthenia and aggravation of anaemia following repeated digestive bleeding) required a reduction in the dosage to 400 mg/day and transfusion. Under this treatment, the patient’s condition constantly improved, with a regular regression of the mass that was no longer palpable after 16 months of treatment. The total weight gain was then 8 kg. The CT scan showed a partial response with an estimated residual mass of 8 cm on its largest axis . A second laparotomy was performed after 16 months of imatinib treatment. An en bloc resection made of an upper polar gastrectomy with part of hepatic segment 3 and splenectomy was performed because of residual invasion of the spleen hilum and left hepatic lobe. Immediate oeso-antral anastomosis was performed at the same time. The outcomes of this operation were simple. The resection was histologically R0. Imatinib treatment was continued at a daily dose of 400 mg. After a 12-month follow-up, no recurrence was noted.
The authors received consent to both publish and participate from the patient. This case also received approval from the head of the Surgery Department of the Sylvanus Olympio University Hospital (Ref. N06/2019/DCS/CHUSO) to be reported and published.