A 28-year-old male presented to our emergency department with blurred vision and loss of consciousness three days after ingestion of 1.5 L of an unknown alcoholic beverage. He had a positive history of insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus and opium extract abuse. The patient’s companion declared that insulin shots had not been taken in the day prior to hospital admission. Physical examination revealed normal vital signs with a respiratory rate of 16 per minute. His first venous blood gas analysis (in the emergency department) showed severe metabolic acidosis with pH = 7.23, HCO3 = 7 mEq/L, BE = -19.1, pCO2 = 19 mmHg, and a methanol level of 10.2 mg/dL. Results of other lab tests are shown in Table .
He was intubated and femoral catheterization was performed. Three vials of bicarbonate were intravenously administered. He underwent hemodialysis for eight hours but remained unresponsive. Serum/urine ketone and blood sugar were later returned to be positive and 411 mg/dL, respectively, indicating the possible presence of DKA. After initiation of insulin infusion, serum bicarbonate level started to rise. During admission, he had developed brain edema . However, after appropriate treatment for DKA, the patient regained consciousness and was extubated. Since there were consolidations in his chest X-ray and lung computed tomography scan , antibiotics and sepsis workup were ordered. He was initially treated by meropenem and vancomycin (for aspiration pneumonia); however, after consulting with the attending infectious disease specialist, he was started on levofloxacin. He was also receiving intravenous potassium, pantoprazole, heparin with prophylactic dose, and nebulized N-acetyl cysteine. Due to melena, endo-colonoscopy was performed but was reported to be normal. The other complication our patient experienced was deep venous thrombosis at the site of femoral catheter which mandated anticoagulation therapy with heparin drip. Diabetic ketoacidosis re-occurred twice more during the hospitalization. With the legitimate dose of methadone prescribed by psychiatrics, DKA completely resolved, and he was discharged home completely symptom-free after four weeks. Serial venous blood gas analysis, blood sugar and selected lab tests of the patient during hospital admission are shown in Figs. and and Table .