We report a 44-year-old Caucasian woman who initially presented in 2003 with a multitude of progressive lichenoid 2–4 mm papules starting two years ago, particularly marked on the forehead right above both eyebrows, on the dorsal aspects of the forearms, shoulders, legs as well as on the gluteal region, accompanied by severe pruritus . Clinically, the papules were judged as discrete, circumscribed, erythematous to skin-coloured, firm skin eruptions associated with an induration and stiffening of the affected lesions. Furthermore, the patient complained about a progressive thickening of the glabella. Even though we cannot ensure continuous clinical deterioration, at the time of the initiation of therapy, there was no hint for a beginning stabilisation or even improvement of symptoms. Otherwise, she felt healthy and well. The general examination was without pathological findings. Neither a topical nor a systemic therapy was yet applied.
Skin biopsies were taken from the left forearm/wrist, both legs and the left shoulder. Routine histological examination including haematoxylin-eosin, PAS labelling and Alcian blue staining revealed marked mucinous deposition within the upper and mid dermis beside an increased appearance of fibroblasts, collagen bundles and a discrete inflammatory infiltration.
Additionally, immunohistochemical investigations were performed in order to enumerate CD4+ (T helper cells), CD68+ (macrophages), anti-mastcell-tryptase+ (mastcells), decorin+ (collagen fibril stability protein), MIB-1+ (Ki-67+ proliferating cells), CD20+ (B lymphocytes), and FGF-R+ (fibroblast growth factor receptor bearing cells) cells taking consecutive sections . A punch skin biopsy measuring 3 mm in diameter was taken from affected skin of the right forearm. 5 μm paraffin-embedded sections were cut, mounted on slides and routinely preserved. Prior to the single immunolabelling, different pretreatments were performed for antigen retrieval . The alkaline phosphatase anti-alkaline phosphatase (APAAP) technique using the labelled streptavidin-biotin (LSAB) method was used to enumerate immunopositive cells at an individual dilution taking consecutive sections. The alkaline phosphatase fast red detection kit utilised a biotinylated secondary antibody that binds to the primary antibody. This step was followed by the addition of an streptavidin enzyme conjugate binding to the biotin present on the secondary antibody. Afterwards the specific antibody-secondary-antibody-streptavidin-enzyme-complex was detected using a precipitating enzyme reaction product. Each step was incubated for a precise time and temperature. The alkaline phosphatase was used as enzyme; the chromogene fast red could be visualised. Cells were evaluated semiquantitatively (absent (-), rare (o), moderate (+), frequent (++)) directly below the dermoepidermal junction. Immunopositive cells were evaluated 'blind' separately in two view fields in a row (0.25 mm × 0.25 mm each) directly below the dermoepidermal junction resulting in a length of 0.25 mm and 0.50 mm in depth. In order to avoid a sampling error, a number of sections were randomly reevaluated by a second observer. In case of a significant difference, the sections had to be recounted by both observers. In brief, immunolabelling revealed occasional perivascular CD4+ and CD20+ lymphocytes located in the papillary dermis and a high number of anti-mastcell-tryptase+ cells within the subepithelial perivascular infiltrate revealing a continuing decrease with increasing depth . Simultaneously, an increased dermal expression of MIB-1+ cells , morphologically predominantly fibroblasts, within the upper and mid dermis and sporadic FGF-R+ cells in an unspecific distribution could be detected. CD68 immunohistochemistry and intradermal decorin levels did not alter remarkably as compared to healthy controls (data not shown). Exact results of all immunohistochemical stainings are detailed in Table .
Complete laboratory measurements unveiled the following pathological results: leucocytes 10870 μL-1, lymphocytes 13.2%, IgG 2000 mg/dl. There was no increase in B cell count. Immunoelectrophoresis disclosed albumin 51.4%, alpha-2 globuline 10.5%, gamma globuline 22.9%. Cranial x-ray, x-ray of the thorax, ultrasound of the abdominal organs, electrocardiography and urinary investigations were unremarkable. Blood smear cytological evaluation revealed beginning qualitative but still no quantitative changes as defined by leukocytic aberrations pointing towards a leftward shift. Serum immunofixation demonstrated an IgG-kappa paraproteinaemia. No elevation of the IgG-lambda paraprotein was assessed. Bone marrow biopsies displaying reactive lymphoid infiltration including minimal extension of plasma cells with monoclonal immunoglobuline production provided evidence for monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) without distinct morphological characteristics of a plasmocytic plasmocytoma or plasmoblasts.
Initially, 20 MHz ultrasound scanning producing cross section images of the skin was established in order to measure both structure and thickness of the skin at the dorsal aspects of the left wrist and the right forearm. The total thickness of the skin was measured from the entrance echo to the border between the dermis and the subcutaneous tissue. A cutaneous diameter of 2291 μm at the left wrist (lesional skin) and of 1106 μm at the right forearm (non-lesional skin) could be assessed.
In our unit, an experimental treatment modality using oral MTX 12.5 mg once per week followed by a subsequent folic acid application on the following day for a 6-months-period was subsequently initiated. MTX was well tolerated by our patient. After the first three months, the continuous progress of skin lesions during the last two years could be stopped and our patient experienced subjectively an improvement and objectively a stable clinical outcome without new lesions. Subjective impression of amelioration could not be confirmed by means of ultrasound measurement. Within the following two months, no further improvement could be evaluated, whereas no further progression such as formation of new lesions or increase of stiffness could be observed. Due to the unsatisfying clinical results and declining acceptance by our patient, MTX treatment was stopped and a subsequent therapeutic attempt with medium-dose UVA1 cold-light phototherapy was initiated. Irradiation consisting of 50 J/cm2 single-dose UVA1 (CL 300000 liquid, Photomed, Hamburg, Germany) was performed four times a week for three weeks followed by two times a week for further two weeks resulting in a cumulative dose of 800 J/cm2 after five weeks. Meanwhile, the skin status again remained stable, whereas no improvement could be observed. Therefore, our patient broke up phototherapy. To date, skin condition has slightly worsened without any current treatment modality.