The proband girl was born at 38 weeks of gestation to a 23 years old mother after an uneventful pregnancy. According to birth measurements, she suffered from Intra uterine growth restriction (IUGR) with disproportionate congenital microcephaly . The parents are first-degree cousins. They have a second healthy child boy and did not experience any abortion or child death. Investigation of the family tree identified the spontaneous abortion of a first-degree cousin and a girl, 6th degree proband’s relative, presented hypotonia, mental retardation and facial dysmorphism. At 42 months, the proband presented a mild dysmorphic face with short forehead, high nasal bridge and flat nasal root, down slant pulpebral fissure, epicanthal folds, mild strabismus, long eye lashes, retrognathia and large ears relative to her face . Her anthropometric measurements showed growth retardation . She was hyperactive with a history of drooling and several attacks of unprovoked seizures that are now under control without antiepileptic drug. Her neurological examination showed a mild generalized hypertonia with mild contracture in knees but her balance, motor, sensory and reflexes were all in the normal ranges. The proband, has a history of motor delay and spasticity in lower limbs, which was improved with physical therapy. On the contrary her speech delay showed no improvement upon therapy. The proband social and cognition axes of development were almost normal. The auditory brainstem response (ABR) was also normal. However, the brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed severe microcephaly and small frontal lobes with no evidence of gross structural abnormality.
The proband’s karyotype at a resolution of about 350 bands was normal. NimblegenHuman CGH 3 × 720 K Whole-Genome Tiling v3.1 Array analysis of her genomic DNA showed a 241 Kb interstitial homozygous deletion at 11p14.2 . The complete genotype of the proband is therefore arr 11p14.2 (26,954,789-27,196,089) × 0. We used QPCR as previously described to confirm this rearrangement in the proband and to show that both parents are heterozygous for the deletion . This region encompasses Fibin (Fin Bud Initiation Factor Homolog) and BBOX1 (butyrobetaine-gamma 2-oxoglutarate dioxygenase 1) , a TGF-beta dependent gene that encodes a secreted protein essential for pectoral fin bud initiation in zebrafish [,] and an essential component of de novo carnitine biosynthesis [,], respectively. A similar almost fully overlapping heterozygous 225 kb deletion was suggested to be the cause of Primrose syndrome (OMIM#259050) at the heterozygote state . The absence of ossified ear cartilage and muscle wasting specific to this pathology in the proband and both her parents, who are homo- and heterozygote for this rearrangement, respectively, goes against the implication of this deletion in this syndrome. Corroboratingly, some patients described in DECIPHER inherited similar deletions from their unaffected parents .
The proband’s metabolic investigations were performed in dry blood spot using tandem mass spectrometry (MVZ wagnerstibbe für Laboratoriumsmedizin). The indices of common blood metabolites, electrolytes, liver function tests, creatine phosphokinase, lipid profile, blood gas and amino acid profiles were all in the normal range in particular that of acyl-carnitines and isovaleryl carnitine . A detailed analysis of the different acylcarnitine levels at 42 and 60 months of age showed that all evaluated acylcarnitines were in reference ranges, whereas free carnitine (FC) (25 and 19 μmol/L) was close to the normal lower limit (20–70 μmol/L) . The proband’s acylcarnitine (15.5 μmol/L in proband, normal range 4–28 μmol/L) to free carnitine (AC/FC) ratio was normal however (age-specific range 0.1-0.8) .