Our patient was a 72-year-old man who had been diagnosed as a rectal cancer 10 years prior to admission, and was treated surgically by low anterior resection at that time. His occupational and residence history showed no apparent exposure to asbestos. Four months before admission, the patient noticed a mass in his upper abdomen; two months before admission, he experienced abdominal pain.
On admission, a fist-sized tumor in the epigastric region, as well as abdominal tenderness, was noted. Laboratory findings showed a hemoglobin level of 8.6 g/dL and a C-reactive protein level of 5.5 mg/dL, which were indicative of anemia and inflammation, respectively. Tumor marker levels were all within the reference values: carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), 0.9 ng/mL (<5.0 ng/mL); cancer antigen 19-9, 2.6 U/mL (<37.0 U/mL); α-fetoprotein, 1.5 ng/mL (<10.0 ng/mL); sialyl Tn antigen, 17.6 U/mL (<45.0 U/mL); and cancer antigen 72-4, 2.1 U/mL (<6.9 U/mL). Computed tomography (CT) scans showed no abnormal findings in the mediastinum or lung fields, as well as no pleural hypertrophy or nodules. A tumor mass surrounding the transverse colon was found in the epigastric region; its internal content was homogenous, and only its margins were contrast-enhanced . The lumen of the transverse colon was preserved. There was no pleural effusion or ascites, and no nodular lesions in the chest or abdomen were observed. Similar to the CT findings, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a tumor in the epigastric region in which only the margins were contrast-enhanced . Colonoscopy revealed an ulcerated lesion in the transverse colon with a 5-cm major axis and without a rand wall, which occupied two-thirds of the diameter of the intestinal lumen. The central portion of the lesion formed a deep ulceration and the ulcer base was dark brown, which was believed to be due to the adherence of iron from the patient’s medication . A biopsy showed only a hyperplastic mucosa, necrotic tissue, and extensive infiltration of inflammatory cells; there was no apparent neoplastic lesion. Fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (PET) tests showed a strong abnormal uptake of the contrast material by the tumor in the epigastric region, which was detected by CT and MRI. No abnormal uptake was found in any other location.
A gastrointestinal stromal tumor was suspected, and therefore, a laparotomy was performed. The surgical findings showed a tumor in the transverse colon as well as extensive infiltration of the ileum. An extended right hemicolectomy and partial ileal resection of the infiltrated regions were performed. No ascites or disseminated tumors were found in the abdominal cavity. The resected specimen showed a tumor (dimensions: 10 × 9 × 5 cm) that formed an ulcer on the mucosa of the transverse colon. Macroscopic examination showed that the tumor, which had initially developed in the transverse colon, had infiltrated the ileum . Histopathologically, hematoxylin-eosin staining showed that the tumor was composed of spindle cells with a mitoses as well as epithelioid cells showing fasciculated growth . Immunohistochemical staining showed that the calretinin (+), AE1/AE3 (cytokeratin) (+), vimentin (++), HBME-1 (+), α-SMA (++), desmin (-), S100 (-), c-kit (-), CD34 (-), and Ki-67 antibody labeling index was high . Comprehensively, the diagnosis was localized biphasic malignant peritoneal mesothelioma that had initially developed in the visceral fascia of the transverse colon. Similar histological aspects were found in 6 of the 16 dissected lymph nodes that were diagnosed as metastasis. The patient did not receive postoperative chemotherapy, and the follow-up was conducted in an outpatient setting. Recurrence of the peritoneal metastasis was found 7 months after the surgery; the recurrent tumor increased in size and the patient died 18 months after the surgery.