An 85-year-old, 68 kg woman was admitted to our clinic with a long history of coronary heart disease, hypertension, carotid atherosclerosis , and persistent thrombocytosis. Additionally, the patient had suffered from a minor form of COVID-19 infection 3 months prior, presenting mostly upper respiratory tract symptoms—cough, anosmia, and changes in taste, for which she received symptomatic therapy in ambulatory settings .
At clinical presentation, the patient reported severe postprandial pain in the lower abdomen, left flank, and left hypochondrium. The pain had appeared a week earlier and progressively worsened, especially after meals. She also described vomiting and sitophobia, but without changes in intestinal transit or any other symptoms. On admission, her temperature was 37 °C, blood pressure = 110/70 mmHg, heart rate = 78 beats per minute, respiratory rate = 30 breaths per minute, and the oxygen saturation was 98% in ambient air. She had pale skin and mucosae, without peripheral edema, no palpable pulse in either pedal artery, but present in tibialis posterior arteries bilaterally. Widespread tenderness of the abdomen without peritoneal irritation signs was discovered upon palpation. The remainder of the examination was normal.
The blood tests showed normal levels of myocardial enzymes, no signs of hepatic or renal involvement, normal levels of serum ions. However, the blood count revealed marked thrombocytosis (709,000/mm3), mild leukocytosis (10,750/mm3), and normal red blood cell count, with a hemoglobin value of 14.9 g/dL, consistent with the patient’s previous tests. Abdominal CT showed a circumferential parietal thrombosis involving the superior mesenteric artery, originating at the aortic emergence and extending over a length of approximately 12 mm, maintaining a filiform, patent distal lumen with normal filling, both of the artery and the bowel loops .
Based on the clinical signs, blood results and imagistic findings, the positive diagnosis was an exacerbation of chronic mesenteric ischemia. For the motivation of the diagnosis, we considered the following criteria: the presence of postprandial pain, systemic atherosclerosis, the absence of intestinal infarction/necrosis, the lack of metabolic acidosis, and the thrombotic origin of the ischemic event revealed on the abdominal CT [,].
Abdominal angiography was performed ( left). Selective catheterization of the superior mesenteric artery demonstrated a 12 mm long thrombus, located immediately beyond the aortic emergence, thus reducing the arterial lumen down to 10% of its usual size.
The bone marrow biopsy performed due to a suspicion of ET revealed megakaryocytic hyperplasia. Genetic testing for JAK-2 mutation revealed the presence of the mutation, supporting the diagnosis of ET [,].
An interdisciplinary consult with general and vascular surgery concluded that, due to her age and comorbidities, a surgical strategy would impose too much of a risk. She consented to a percutaneous therapeutic procedure.
Endovascular procedure was performed under local anesthesia. Catheterization for percutaneous transluminal balloon angioplasty (PTA) and stent placement was performed via the brachial route. A 0.014-inch guidewire (Terumo, Somerset, NJ, USA) was used to cross the lesion transluminally. A short5F PIER (Cordis, Miami, FL, USA) catheter was used to reach the aortic lumen. A short 6 mm balloon-expandable Cobalt-Chromium stent (Express, Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA) was placed retrogradely in the superior mesenteric artery origin. There was no dissection and no residual stenosis ( right).
Afterwards, she received dual anti platelet therapy with acetylsalicylic acid 75 mg/day (S.C. Terapia S.A., Iasi, Romania) and clopidogrel 75 mg/day (Sanofi Winthrop Industrie, Amilly, France), along with her previously prescribed medication: enalapril 5 mg/day (S.C. Magistra C&C SRL, Constanta, Romania), indapamide 2.5 mg/day (Labormed Pharma S. A., Bucharest, Romania), and simvastatin 40 mg/day (S.C. Terapia S.A, Iasi, Romania). Once the diagnosis of ET was established, the patient also received hydroxyurea 15 mg/kg/day (Bristol Myers Squibb KFT, Budapest, Hungary). The patient’s condition improved after the angioplasty; after discharge, the clinical course continued to be favorable. One month after the procedure, no residual stenosis was detected, and the patency of the stent was confirmed.