A 77-year-old man, who was 172 cm tall and weighed 70 kg, was scheduled for radical mastectomy and axillary clearance for breast cancer. He had a history of myocardial infarction one year previously, for which he had undergone insertion of multiple bare metal coronary artery stents. He had developed post-infarction dilated cardiomyopathy with a severe reduction in ejection fraction (30%), a marked increase in the left ventricular diastolic diameter (6.8 cm), and global left ventricular hypokinesia with apical akinesia. He also had moderate mitral and minimal tricuspid valve insufficiency. His preoperative chest radiograph revealed cardiomegaly. His past medical history also included hypertension, diagnosed forty years ago. He was also a current, light smoker (less than 10 cigarettes per day). At pre-anesthetic evaluation, he was on dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and clopidogrel and on valsartan for hypertension. After specialist consultation, we decided to continue preoperative medications.
We planned a regional anesthesia technique using a combination of ESP and SBP block to avoid the use of general anesthesia. This technique was explained to the patient, and a written informed consent was obtained for the procedure.
We used a high-frequency linear ultrasound transducer (M-Turbo, FUJIFILM SonoSite Europe, The Netherlands) and 22 G × 50 mm needles (SonoPlex STIM, Pajunk, Germany) for the procedure.
The ESP block was performed as described by Forero et al. with 20 ml of 0.5% ropivacaine. The patient was placed in the supine position with the ipsilateral arm abducted to perform the SBP block. The LTN was identified at the C7 level within the middle scalene muscle; 3 ml of 0.5% ropivacaine was injected to perform the block . The TDN was identified in the infraclavicular region near the thoracodorsal artery and blocked with 3 ml of 0.5% ropivacaine . The LPN and the MPN were blocked by injection of 10 ml of 0.5% ropivacaine between the pectoralis major and pectoralis minor muscles . A total dose of 36 ml of 0.5% ropivacaine was used to perform the blocks.
An adequate level of anesthesia was ensured on assessment after 30 min by testing for pain sensation to pinprick , followed by the commencement of the surgical procedure. During surgery, a score of 3–4 was achieved on the Observer’s Assessment of Alertness/Sedation scale with a bolus dose of propofol 40 mg followed by an infusion of 2 mg/kg/h. No intraoperative opioids were required, and the patient remained comfortable throughout the entire duration of surgery that lasted for about 100 min. Administration of 1 g acetaminophen every 8 h was performed for postoperative pain relief; no additional analgesics were required intraoperatively and for two postoperative days before discharge. Postoperative pain was assessed every 6 hours using the numerical rating scale (NRS). The patient reported a pain score of less than 3 on the NRS at each pain assessment. He was discharged on the second postoperative day without complications.