A 74-year-old Caucasian man presented with significant exertional dyspnoea and peripheral oedema; progressive over a 12-month period. Of note, he had undergone allogeneic stem cell transplantation following high-dose chemotherapy (fludarabine/cyclophosphamide and methotrexate) 30 months previously for acute myeloid leukaemia. He had recovered well from this aside from an episode of skin GvHD which responded well to oral prednisolone and ciclosporin. He was known to have mild coronary artery disease (diagnosed by invasive coronary angiography), hypertension, and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. His medication list was as follows Apixaban 5 mg twice daily, Atorvastatin 20 mg nocte, Omeprazole 20 mg daily, Ramipril 10 mg daily, Acyclovir 400 mg twice daily, Mycophenolate 500 mg twice daily, and Penicillin V 250 mg twice daily.
Clinical examination revealed a pulse of 110 b.p.m. (regular), blood pressure 98/60 mmHg, and JVP +8 cm. His oxygen saturations were 92% on room air with bilateral pleural effusions suggestive of pulmonary oedema and peripheral oedema to mid-thigh. Pericardial knock was heard, pulsus paradoxus, and Kussmaul’s sign were absent. Baseline electrocardiogram demonstrated sinus tachycardia only. Chest radiography confirmed pulmonary oedema and pleural effusions. His c-reactive protein, N-terminal pro b-type natriuretic peptide, and troponin-T levels were elevated [69 mg/L (reference range < 5 mg/L), 2800 ng/L (reference range < 400 ng/L), and 26 ng/dL (reference range < 14 ng/dL), respectively] but the remainder of his blood panel was unremarkable.
Transthoracic echocardiography showed normal left ventricular dimensions with preserved systolic function (left ventricular ejection fraction 57%) with no hypertrophy or regional wall motion abnormalities. The right ventricular (RV) dimensions were within normal limits with normal function. Moderate bi-atrial dilatation and pericardial thickening were noted. The inferior vena cava measured 20 mm and collapsed <50% with inspiration. The mitral inflow Doppler profile showed E:A ratio of 1.4:1. Respiratory variability was noted in both trans-mitral (>30%) and trans-tricuspid (>40%) filling pressures on Doppler echocardiography, with preserved septal tissue Doppler E’ velocities suggestive of constrictive physiology . Diagnostic pericardiocentesis drained 350 mL of blood-stained fluid, with negative cytology, immunohistochemistry, and microbiology. Computed tomography scanning of the patient’s chest, abdomen, and pelvis revealed no evidence of recurrent malignancy or tuberculosis.
Cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging confirmed a diagnosis of effusive CP, with significant pericardial thickening, bi-atrial enlargement, and ventricular interdependence on real-time free breathing imaging. Tissue characterization found no evidence of myocardial oedema, focal fibrosis, or prior infarction.
The aetiology of the CP was unclear, and management focused on intravenous diuretics alongside empirical high-dose steroids. Unfortunately, he remained New York Heart Association (NYHA) Class 3–4 with diuretic resistant heart failure, requiring multiple prolonged hospital admissions.
Partial pericardectomy (with removal of the anterior pericardium adherent to the RV free and anterior wall, constrained by a boundary of the phrenic nerves) and pericardial biopsy was undertaken following multidisciplinary discussion involving cardiology, cardiothoracic surgery, and haematology, for both diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. Given the pre-operative clinical state of the patient (NYHA Class 3–4) and the presence of very thick localized adhesions a partial, not radical, approach was undertaken, with the surgical team concerned about iatrogenic damage from attempting to remove these islands of adherent pericardium, with unacceptable risk should cardiopulmonary bypass be required. Following stripping of the thickened pericardium, the anterior cardiac surface was seen to move freely intra-operatively . Histological analysis of stripped pericardial tissue displayed features of graft-vs.-host disease (GvHD). Consequently, ruxolitinib (JAK1/JAK2 tyrosine kinase inhibitor) was commenced as a GvHD salvage therapy alongside high-dose oral steroids.
Post-operatively the patient recovered and was discharged from hospital, with sustained clinical improvement over subsequent months. He had no further hospital admissions and his diuretic requirements reduced. At latest review, 12-month post-pericardectomy, his functional status was NYHA Class 1–2 and repeat cardiac imaging exhibited a reduction in pericardial thickness of the residual pericardium, with improved Doppler parameters and no evidence of ventricular inter-dependence by CMR imaging .