A 67-year-old man presented with a 5-month history of incapacitating low back pain (LBP), anorexia, and a 5-kg weight loss. Eleven months earlier, he had undergone a 6-week course of intravesical BCG instillation for superficial transitional cell CIS of the bladder. Physical examination revealed tenderness to palpation of the upper lumbar spine, but neurological examination was unremarkable. A complete blood workup was normal, including normal white blood cell count and normal erythrocyte sedimentation rate. Blood cultures and a tuberculin skin test were also negative. Computed Tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbosacral spine revealed L1-L2 spondylodiscitis with a small, noncompressive anterior epidural collection and bilateral psoas muscle abscesses . Percutaneous CT-guided drainage of the psoas abscesses was performed and aspirate cultures revealed M. bovis. The patient was treated conservatively using a thoracolumbar corset and triple antituberculous therapy (isoniazid, rifampin, and ethambutol).
Three months later, the patient exhibited worsening of his LBP with new-onset pain and mild weakness (4/5) in the right L2 distribution. Repeat CT and MRI revealed progression of the spondylodiscitis with marked expansion of the anterior epidural abscess and compression of the cauda equina. Given the latter findings, surgical decompression, debridement, and stabilization were indicated. Through an anterior thoracoabdominal approach, L1 and L2 corpectomies with extensive debridement were performed, followed by T12-L3 instrumented fusion using a cadaveric femoral strut allograft . Following this first stage, a minimally invasive posterior T11-L4 instrumentation using percutaneously placed pedicle screws was performed to supplement the ventral construct .
Postoperatively, the patient had an uneventful recovery with a complete resolution of his LBP and motor deficit. Antituberculous therapy was continued for a total of 9 months. After 20 months of follow-up, he remains asymptomatic with no evidence of infection or tumor recurrence. Radiographic imaging demonstrated satisfactory alignment [Figures and ].