A 64-year-old man was referred to our hospital after computed tomography (CT) revealed a pancreatic mass.
There was no associated symptoms.
The patient had a nephrectomy performed for a “benign” tumor 19 years ago at another hospital, without any relevant paper information. The patient had no other relevant personal or family history.
There was no associated personal and family history.
Upon examination, the patient’s temperature was 36.5 °C, heart rate was 87 bpm, respiratory rate was 16 breaths/min, blood pressure was 145/88 mmHg, and oxygen saturation in room air was 99%. The abdomen was soft with no tenderness or palpable masses. An old surgical scar was observed in the left flank region.
Blood glucose levels and liver function test results were normal. Other blood investigation results were as follows: Serum hepatitis B surface antigen, 1794.61 IU/mL (< 0.05 IU/mL); hepatitis B virus deoxyribonucleic acid, 2.23 (< 1.0E + 03); serum alpha-fetoprotein, 3.12 ng/mL (< 20 ng/mL); carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), 1.45 ng/mL (< 5 ng/mL); carbohydrate antigen (CA) 12–5, 18.79 U/mL (< 35 U/mL); CA 19–9, 16.87 (< 39 U/mL); and squamous cell carcinoma antigen, 0.84 ng/mL (< 1.5 ng/mL).
Conventional ultrasonography revealed a well-defined hypoechoic mass with increased blood flow in the pancreas head. Contrast-enhanced ultrasound (CEUS) showed rapid inhomogeneous enhancement of the mass 17 s after injection of contrast; there was no significant washout in the venous phase. A small area of necrosis was observed at the center of the tumor. The CEUS findings were consistent with a pNET. Contrast-enhanced CT showed a lobulated low-density mass, with the diameter of 6.1 cm × 5.6 cm × 4.2 cm, extending outward from the pancreatic head, with obvious heterogeneous enhancement in the early arterial phase. There was decreased enhancement in the venous phase with the “fast in fast out” mode, but the intensity was still higher than that of the surrounding pancreatic parenchyma. Patchy, non-enhancing areas were observed at the center of the mass. The size, shape, and enhancement of the remainder of the pancreas were normal. No signs of lymph node metastases were observed. On magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the lesion was hypointense and moderately hyperintense on T1- and T2-weighted images, respectively . The chemical-shift MRI sequence showed a drop in the signal on out-of-phase images. In contrast, heterogeneous enhancement was observed in the arterial phase, with a thin hyperintense rim; there was washout in the portal and venous phases. MR cholangiogram showed dilatation of the bile duct and main pancreatic duct, suggesting an obstruction. Based on the imaging findings, the provisional diagnosis was a pNET.