A 31-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital with acute right lower abdominal pain that had lasted for 2 days prior to admission. Her medical history revealed several bouts of right lower abdominal pain that resolved with conservative treatment. She had no history of traveling abroad or a sexually transmitted infection such as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, hepatitis B virus (HBV), or syphilis. On admission, her body temperature was 37.5 °C. Abdominal examination revealed diffuse tenderness in the right lower abdomen with positive guarding and rebound tenderness at the McBurney point. Laboratory tests revealed a C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 15.06 mg/dL and white blood cell (WBC) count of 8620 μL−1. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed a dilated appendix with maximum diameter of 2 cm and thickened cecal and ascending colon walls , which was consistent with acute appendicitis. According to the patient's request, she was treated with antibiotics (intravenous cefmetazole) for 2 days without improvement. Therefore, an appendectomy was performed. Her appendix showed acute inflammation, especially from the cecum to the root of the appendix, without necrosis, perforation, or formation of localized abscess. Histopathology revealed phlegmonous appendicitis.
The clinical course after admission is described in . After the appendectomy, her body temperature remained >38 °C, and her CRP and WBC were elevated more than before the operation. Abdominal CT on the third postoperative day showed thickened cecal and ascending colon walls. We considered pseudomembranous enterocolitis and changed the treatment from intravenous cefmetazole to oral vancomycin. However, the test for Clostridium difficile was negative, and her symptoms and laboratory data did not improve. Therefore, we also considered an amebic infection; on the sixth postoperative day, we examined a fecal culture that was immediately maintained at 37 °C, tested for serum amebic antibody, requested the pathologists to reexamine the pathology regarding amebic infection from her appendix, and added oral metronidazole to her treatment. Following the oral metronidazole treatment, her clinical condition significantly improved. The pathologic examination of the appendix with periodic acid–Schiff (PAS) stain revealed multiple trophozoites of Entamoeba histolytica , and her serum amebic antibody was positive. On the 12th day after the procedure, the patient was discharged home; in addition, 12 days after the oral metronidazole treatment, we treated the cyst form of the parasite with paromomycin. She had no further recurrence for 6 months.