A 57-year-old woman visited the emergency room with left foot drop and mild pain, which had started suddenly 3 days prior. The pain severity was 3/10 on the visual analog scale (VAS) score. The patient had a medical history of diabetes mellitus for a year and hypertension. She had received an operation of osteochondral autograft transfer on her left knee 10 years ago. On physical examination, she presented with a tingling sensation and numbness in her left lateral lower leg and foot dorsum, and was positive for Tinel’s sign. The motor strength of ankle dorsiflexion and big toe extension were grade I, and the motor strength of hip flexion and hip abduction were grade IV. Upon a simple radiological study of the left knee, severe osteoarthritis was revealed. Findings were compatible with Kellgren-Lawrence grade III. There were no other remarkable findings. Common peroneal neuropathy was suspected; thus, ankle foot orthosis was applied and she was referred to the orthopedic department.
Seven days after symptom onset, she visited orthopedic department. Under the same diagnosis, 10 mg of prednisolone was prescribed for 3 days and electromyography on her lower leg was planned.
Seventeen days after symptom onset, a motor nerve conduction study and needle electromyography (EMG) were performed. The motor nerve conduction study showed no response of the left peroneal nerve contrary to the normal findings in both the tibial and right peroneal nerves. A sensory nerve conduction study of the left superficial and deep peroneal nerve also showed no response .
In the needle EMG results, abnormal spontaneous activities (positive sharp waves, fibrillation potentials) were recorded in the left tibialis anterior, peroneus longus, extensor halluces longus, and extensor digitorum brevis muscle, which are innervated by the common peroneal nerve. Motor unit action potential analysis and recruitment showed no activity in these muscles. A needle EMG of the other muscles did not reveal any abnormalities .
Considering the initial nerve conduction study and needle EMG findings, left common peroneal neuropathy around the knee level with severe partial axonotmesis or severe conduction block was highly suspected. For further evaluation, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) study of her left knee was planned.
Meanwhile, the patient’s pain was getting worse; therefore, 150 mg of pregabalin, 1,300 mg of acetaminophen, and 150 mg of tramadol were prescribed. One month after symptom onset, she was referred to our pain clinic. Physical examination findings were the same as her first visit at the emergency room; however, her pain got worse as the VAS score was 8/10 compared to 3/10 on her first visit.
Upon ultrasound examination of her left knee, about 2.0 × 1.2 cm sized popliteal cyst was found to extend to the fibular head, compressing the common peroneal nerve . Thus, ultrasound-guided aspiration and common peroneal nerve block were performed . The aspirated fluid was yellow, thick, and mucinous with a volume of 5 ml. Nerve block was performed with 0.1875% ropivacaine and 20 mg triamcinolone. Immediately after nerve block, pain and paresthesia were relieved. We prescribed 50 mg of pregabalin, 1,300 mg of acetaminophen, 150 mg of tramadol, and 1,000 mg of naproxen for 3 weeks.
Six weeks after symptom onset, MRI of her left knee was performed . Axial proton density-weighted MRI with fat suppression of the knee showed that the cystic lesion was compressing the common peroneal nerve at the level of the fibular head. In addition, there was an increased signal intensity in the proximal anterior compartment of lower leg, which indicated denervation injury . The menisci showed a degenerative change without tear, and bone and cartilage imaging showed findings compatible with severe osteoarthritis.
Seven weeks after symptom onset, pain severity was 0/10 on VAS score, but limping gait was still maintained. Therefore, a second common peroneal nerve block were performed with 0.1875% ropivacaine and triamcinolone 20 mg at her second visit to our pain clinic . The motor strength of ankle dorsiflexion and big toe extension were grade II, even though the surgical removal of the perineural cyst was determined at the orthopedic department.
Ten weeks after symptom onset, surgical excision of the cyst was performed and pathologic findings revealed that cyst was a Baker’s cyst . Four months after surgery, she had no pain but the sensorimotor deficit remained.
Informed consent to publication are obtained from the patient.