An 80 year old female came to the emergency department of our hospital complaining of abdominal pain of recent onset. She related a history of frequent episodes of non-bloody diarrhea of approximately one month's duration, unresponsive to loperamide. Her past medical history included surgical correction of rectal prolapse six months previously, implantation of a pacemaker, anticoagulation, osteoporosis, and hypothyroidism treated with levothyroxine.
Her temperature was normal. Physical examination revealed lower abdominal tenderness but was otherwise unremarkable. The white blood cell count was 8.1 ×109/L (normal: 4.5-10.8 ×109/L). The patient was admitted to hospital.
Due to chronic renal failure unenhanced abdominal CT scanning was performed . This showed a 15 cm length of colon at the splenic flexure with significant parietal thickening and fat stranding, as well as pneumatosis and free air in the surrounding mesocolon. Ischemic colitis was diagnosed based on location in a watershed area and signs of necrosis and perforation.
The following day the white blood cell count was 20.4 ×109/L. In light of this and the CT scan findings, an exploratory laparotomy was performed which revealed a small amount of ascites. A 16 cm segment of thickened bowel from the splenic flexure was resected.
The postoperative course was uneventful. The patient was discharged on the eighth post-operative day. However, the next day she was readmitted to hospital with abdominal pain accompanied by at least ten episodes of non-bloody diarrhea occurring that day. An abdominal CT scan with rectal contrast showed no evidence of anastomotic leak or other abnormality. Stool culture and testing for Clostridium difficile toxin were negative. The patient improved with conservative management. Given the diagnosis of collagenous colitis (see pathologic findings below), treatment with oral budesonide was started and she was discharged on the eleventh day of her hospital stay. One month later she reported feeling well and having one to two stools of normal consistency per day.
Macroscopic examination showed normal appearing mucosa but a markedly edematous and thickened wall measuring up to 1.5 cm.
Microscopic examination showed the characteristic features of severe collagenous colitis throughout the segment of colon with areas of ulceration and abscess formation. The latter were transmural in at least two sites, compatible with perforation. Of note, subepithelial histiocytes, often multinucleated, were a prominent feature in the collagen band, but true multinucleated giant cells characteristic of the giant cell form of collagenous colitis were not found. There was no evidence of acute ischemic colitis or inflammatory bowel disease.
Review of the prior rectal prolapse resection specimen confirmed the microscopic findings characteristic of prolapse. Histologic features of collagenous colitis were absent.