A 60-year-old Sri Lankan man was admitted in April 2017 with a 2-day history of fever with arthralgia, myalgia, headache, and generalized malaise. He complained of numbness and pain of the bilateral upper limbs and lower limbs, with weakness of both lower limbs. He was unable to walk as usual or get up from a squatting position. He could pass urine without difficulty and had no difficulty in breathing and coughing. He denied recent diarrheal, respiratory illness or recent vaccinations. He was previously apparently well with no significant comorbidities.
On examination, he was conscious, rational, and had normal vital parameters. Cardiovascular, respiratory and abdominal examinations were normal. A limb examination revealed hypotonia and reduced power in the bilateral lower limbs. His upper limbs were normal. His lower limb tendon reflexes were absent with reinforcement and his upper limb reflexes were diminished. All his sensory modalities were intact. Although he had a good cough reflex, his neck muscle power was reduced. A cranial nerve examination was normal. On admission, his spontaneous tidal volume (STV) was 400 mL. A provisional diagnosis of Guillan-Barré syndrome was made.
The complete blood count on admission showed a white cell count of 4.2 × 106/microL, Platelets of 166 × 103/microL and a hematocrit of 40. Hus nonstructural protein 1 (NS1) antigen result was positive on admission. With the compatible history, positive dengue antigen, leukopenia and thrombocytopenia, a diagnosis of dengue fever was made. Serology results for HIV, hepatitis B and a throat swab for influenza were negative.
Nerve conduction studies revealed grossly delayed nerve conduction in common peroneal and posterior tibia nerves. F waves were delayed. Ulnar nerve conduction was delayed with absent F waves. It was compatible with a severe demyelinating polyneuropathy. A cerebrospinal fluid study done later on day 11 of his illness showed albumincytological dissociation (protein 70 g/dL, cell count - lymphocytes 5/cumm and no polymorphs).
Our patient was started on intravenous immunoglobulins (IvIG) 0.4 g/kg/day (30 g in this 75 kg weighing man) on admission. On the second day of hospital stay, our patient deteriorated neurologically. He was having poor respiratory effort with low neck muscle power, and his spontaneous tidal volume dropped to 150 mL. He was electively paralyzed and intubated. He was ventilated for 3 days and intravenous immunoglobulins were administered for a total of 5 days. He made a remarkable recovery and was extubated on day 4 of IvIG. He was able to walk without support on discharge.
The dengue illness of our patient followed an uncomplicated course without clinical or ultrasonic evidence of hemoconcentration. Lowest thrombocytopenia noted was 32 × 103/microL on the fourth day of his illness. Transaminases were marginally elevated (AST > ALT). Both dengue virus-specific immunoglobulin M (IgM) and immunoglobulin G (IgG) were positive on the sixth day of his illness. On discharge, our patient was fully recovered neurologically.