An 82-year-old female patient presenting with intermittent pain in the left flank was accepted by The Fourth Hospital Affiliated to China Medical University (LiaoNing, China) on April 19, 2017.On physical examination, the patient had no fever with a pulse rate of 88 beats/min and a blood pressure of 130/80 mmHg. There was mild left upper quadrant tenderness to palpation. She had no significant past medical or surgical history of note. She had a history of hypertension for 10 years. Laboratory examinations showed the following: white blood cell count, 4.70 × 109/l (normal range, 4.0–10.0 × 109/l); red blood cell count, 4.06 × 1012/l (normal range, 3.5–5.0 × 1012/l); haemoglobin level, 130 g/l (normal range, 110–150 g/l); red blood cells in urine, 1.6/HPF; and white blood cell in urine, 4.1/HPF. Cytological examination of the urine revealed no urothelial carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, or small cell carcinoma components. A computerised tomography (CT) urography demonstrated that a 9 × 7 mm irregular mass (31HU) was located in the lower ureter , which led to the dilatation of the proximal ureter and renal pelvis. During the nephrographic phase, the mass (82HU) had a significant contrast enhancement . Chest and abdomen computed tomography showed no evidence of distant visceral metastases. These led to suspicion of lower ureteral tumour.
Trans-urethral resection of the tumour was carried out on April 27, 2017; due to the age and life quality of the patient, the ureter was retained. The tumour with a size of 1.0 cm in the lower part of the left lower ureter was removed by a 2 μm holmium laser and sent to the pathology department. Simultaneously, we used laser to cut the suspicious mucosa around the tumour and then indwelled double-J stent to prevent ureteral obstruction. Surgical samples were formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded, and cut into 4 μm thick sections for the histological examination with hematoxylin-eosin stain and immunohistochemical procedures against epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), cytokeratin (CK), vimentin, desmin, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), cytokeratin high molecular weight (CKH), cytokeratins 20, S100, P63, GATA3, and Ki-67 . The histopathological findings suggested that the tumour had a biphasic appearance with an epithelial component represented by areas of urothelial high grade carcinomas and a sarcomatoid component . Immunohistochemical analysis indicated positivity of the tumour cells for vimentin, CK, EMA, CEA, CKH, GATA3, and P63 and negativity for Desmin, S-100, and CK20. High proliferation index (40%) was documented against Ki-67 staining , indicating the malignant nature of the lesion. Based on the histological and immunohistochemical findings, sarcomatoid urothelial carcinoma was diagnosed. Due to patient and families rejected the adjuvant therapy, no postoperative radiotherapy or chemotherapy was performed. In July of this year, another ureterscope was carried to reexamine the situation where the tumour grew. It turned out to be good and there was no sign of any recurrence of the tumour.