A 29-year-old Sri Lankan woman presented at a period of gestation of 12 weeks in her third pregnancy, 5 years after insertion of a copper T-380A IUD. During pregnancy, the locator strings could not be identified and the device was not visualized by transabdominal or transvaginal ultrasound. There were no clinical features suggestive of perforation or intra-abdominal bleeding. As she was asymptomatic, further investigations and device retrieval were deferred. She was then lost to follow up until 38 weeks, when she was admitted to a peripheral hospital and underwent a vaginal delivery with no complications.
Following delivery, she was investigated to locate the missing IUD. X-rays showed the device in the pelvic cavity . As she had repeatedly defaulted follow up by health care services, it was unlikely that she would comply with plans for evaluation and device retrieval at a later date. Early intervention was therefore planned in the same unit. She underwent a laparotomy on day two postpartum, during which a mass involving her sigmoid colon was found in her pelvis. The IUD was palpable within the mass. The extent of bowel involvement was difficult to assess, and access was difficult due to the large puerperal uterus. Retrieval was therefore abandoned and she was transferred to a high-volume surgical unit.
A repeat laparotomy was planned with mechanical bowel preparation and consent for a stoma, in anticipation of a difficult dissection. Under prophylactic antibiotic cover, her suprapubic transverse incision was reopened and her pelvis explored. The IUD was identified with the two arms forming a fistula between proximal and distal parts of her sigmoid colon. The protruding stem was embedded in a mass of fibrous tissue extending from her left fallopian tube to her sigmoid colon. The device was removed and the fistula tract and fibrous tissue containing the stem were excised. The openings of the fistula in the proximal and distal sigmoid were about 1cm in diameter. These were primarily closed with serosubmucosal sutures . Postoperative recovery was uneventful.