A 54-year-old Japanese woman visited our hospital due to palpitations and wide QRS tachycardia with persistent tiredness for several months. She underwent repair of TOF when she was 2-years old. After the repair, no follow-up check was performed. During the period, she gave birth to three children. She underwent atrial flutter ablation (cavo-tricuspid isthmus block line) when she was 50-years old and 51-years old.
On admission, she had wide QRS tachycardia of 180 beats/minute, but it spontaneously converted to sinus rhythm. This paroxysmal wide QRS tachyarrhythmia of a few minutes’ duration was easily observed several times.
An electrocardiogram showed prolonged QRS duration (199 msec) with a complete right bundle branch block and an echocardiograph demonstrated that her right ventricle was highly enlarged and had poor contraction, and severe pulmonary valve regurgitation with one leaflet flail . Four-dimensional flow MRI demonstrated that regurgitant volumes (RVols) and regurgitant fractions (RFs) of PR were calculated as 63.12 ml and 54.0%, respectively. RV end-diastolic/end-systolic volume index (RVEDVI)/(ESVI) was 169.54/99.76 mL/m2, and the cardiac index (CI) was 1.78 L/minute per m2. Flow energy loss (FEL) calculated from four-dimensional flow MRI was 2.93 mW, which is estimated to be three times higher than normal controls (Additional file : Movie S2). An electrophysiological study showed an intact anterior internodal pathway and a slow pathway just through the outside of the right atriotomy line scar, which is supposed to cause a re-entry circuit .
We decided to perform a PVR and the right maze procedure because the energy loss of the right side of her heart system was high and, additionally, arrhythmic therapy was needed, even if the extremely dilated RV size did not get restored. Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was instituted with the ascending aorta and bicaval cannulation. Anterior and posterior pulmonary valve leaflets were prolapsed and the left leaflet was highly degenerated. The pulmonary annulus was intact with sufficient size; thus, a bioprosthetic valve was implanted in the native pulmonary annulus with a supra-annular position. After all the leaflets were resected, a Mosaic Ultra® 27 mm (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) was placed on the supra-annular position. Concomitantly, the right maze procedure was performed. The right atrium was plicated with the removal of the scar, adding the incision to the lateral side of the atrium, and cryoablation on the posterior and anterior walls of the atrium from the incision line to the tricuspid isthmus and to the inferior vena cava.
Her postoperative course was uneventful and she discharged on day 21. A four-dimensional flow MRI done 3 months later showed that RVEDVI/ESVI had significantly reduced to 85.24/55.41 mL/m2 and her CI had increased from 1.78 to 2.58 L/minute per m2. Energy loss had greatly improved from 2.93 to 1.48 mW .