A 41-year-old white woman presented in December 2014 to our cardiology department with new onset of heart failure New York Heart Association (NYHA) class IV. She reported that she had gained 8 kg weight in the last 4 weeks.
She had a history of a surgically removed uncomplicated ovarian cyst 17 years ago. In 2011, autoimmune Hashimoto thyroiditis was diagnosed and substitution therapy with levothyroxine was started. In November 2014, she was hospitalized in another hospital because of generalized weakness, weight loss of 19 kg, and abdominal pain. Adrenal insufficiency was suspected and confirmed by a positive Synacthen test . In view of her autoimmune thyroid disease, the diagnosis of PGA II was suspected. Therapy with levothyroxine 50 μg/day was continued and steroid replacement therapy with Hydrocortone (hydrocortisone) 20 mg/day and fludrocortisone 0.3 mg/day was initiated on 21 November 2014. She was discharged 2 weeks later in a stable clinical condition. Nine days before her actual admission she collapsed because of dizziness and had a cerebral concussion and open fracture of her nasal bone. The cause for the collapse was not further investigated, and neither blood tests, nor cardiac, nor neurological investigations were carried out. As an out-patient she received paracetamol against pain, local therapy with vitamins A and E, and antibiotic therapy with amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium for 7 days. Her family history disclosed that one of her three children, who is now 7-years old, was diagnosed with trisomy 21 and hypothyroidism.
On admission, a physical examination showed orthopnea, blood pressure 110/70 mmHg, tachycardia of 102 beats per minute (bpm), tachypnea of 30 breaths/minute, bilateral basal crepitations, and leg edema. Her oxygen saturation was 90 % at rest, without oxygen. An ECG revealed a sinus tachycardia, low voltage, negative T-waves in V5 and V6 and a c corrected QT interval (QTc) of 590 ms . Her serum troponin T levels were only slightly elevated. The results of blood and urine tests are listed in Table . Echocardiography showed septal, apical, and anterior wall akinesia and a severely reduced left ventricular systolic function with a left ventricular ejection fraction (EF) of 30 %. CMRI confirmed her highly reduced systolic function with a left ventricular EF of 28 % and showed a relative enhancement, indicating hyperemia and capillary leakage . Neither ischemic areas, nor myocardial scars, nor fibrotic changes were detected. Sellar and renal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) investigations were normal.
Therapy with bisoprolol and ramipril, and furosemide administered intravenously was initiated. Her fludrocortisone dose was reduced to 0.05 mg/day. Under that therapy, her clinical condition improved, her BNP levels regressed , echocardiography showed an improvement of systolic function, and ECG abnormalities regressed . Because of the improvement in her cardiac function, lack of cardiovascular risk factors, and lack of signs for ischemia on MRI, no coronary angiography was carried out. She was discharged as heart failure NYHA class I after 2 weeks with a pharmacotherapy comprising Hydrocortone (hydrocortisone) 20 mg/day, fludrocortisone 0.05 mg/day, levothyroxine 50 μg/day, pantoprazole 40 mg/day, bisoprolol 5 mg/day, and ramipril 10 mg/day. Follow-up investigations 6 months later showed normalization of her ECG and systolic function, documented by echocardiography and cMRI .