A 27-year-old woman presented to our dizzy clinic in February 2021 with a 19-month history of recurrent episodes of dizziness (lasting 2–3 min) accompanied by nausea and dysphagia (located to the right side of the throat by the patient) and odynophagia following swallowing solid foods. Frequently, these episodes were followed by cold sweats, pallor, palpitations, and progressive right-sided tinnitus (with the tinnitus being known for more than 12 years). At the time of presentation, TLOC for approximately 2 to 3 min was noticed at least four times per week (see for the timeline of events). These symptoms occurred independently of her head and body position, and she could not avoid her episodes of TLOC with typical prevention maneuvers for vasovagal syncope such as squatting and leg crossing. Cervical pain, especially during horizontal head rotations or while lying on the right side, was denied. Due to these food-intake-related episodes, the patient lost 10 kg within 12 months. The patient's history was otherwise uneventful except for episodic migraine headaches without aura and a vestibular migraine (with episodes occurring about every other month and lasting for 1 day), and she did not take any medication on a regular basis. The patient's mother suffered from episodic headaches also, and an aunt had been diagnosed with a stroke.
Before presenting to our dizzy clinic, the patient had already received an extensive diagnostic work-up including a cardiologic assessment with no signs of structural heart disease or cardiac arrhythmia (with normal results on transthoracic echocardiography, stress echocardiography, long-term electrocardiography, and heart MRI). A gastroscopy showed normal results. On detailed neurologic and neuro-otologic examination at the time of presentation to our clinic, the patient showed no Horner syndrome, postural hypotension, or paroxysmal cough. Gait and balance testing was within normal range, and no signs of peripheral-vestibular loss-of-function were found on head-impulse testing. Hearing was normal. No symptoms of neurofibromatosis 1 could be detected.
With the episodes being triggered by swallowing solid foods, a fiberoptic endoscopic evaluation of swallowing (FEES) was performed. On FEES, a slight bulging of the right lateral pharyngeal wall with decreased sensitivity to touch was noticed. Pharyngeal squeeze maneuvers revealed a diminished contraction of the right lateral pharyngeal wall, which was considered pathological in comparison to the left side. Pharyngeal squeeze maneuvers also triggered cold sweats and dizziness without progression to syncope. No further functional deficits were noted on FEES, especially no recurrent laryngeal nerve paresis.
Extensive neurologic evaluation including electroencephalography (EEG) and hemodynamic functional testing (Schellong test, 72 h-continuous electrocardiography, and 24 h blood pressure measurement), as well as quantitative vestibular testing (video head-impulse-testing (vHIT), cervical vestibular-evoked myogenic potentials (VEMPs), ocular VEMPs, and caloric irrigation), demonstrated normal results. On magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain a homogenous, contrast-enhancing lesion in the retrostyloidal space suspicious of a vagal schwannoma (dimensions = 16 x 15 x 12 mm) was detected (–). On MRI of the cervical spine, no degenerative or post-infectious changes could be depicted. Subsequently, a 68-Ga-DOTA-peptite PET/CT scan was performed to better characterize the metabolic properties of this lesion. Testing showed no expression of SSTR2; hence, a paraganglioma or a glomus vagale tumor was considered unlikely.
Based on these findings, the case was presented to neuro-oncologists, neuro-radiologists, neurosurgeons, and otorhinolaryngologists at the interdisciplinary Schwannoma Board of the University Hospital of Bern, Switzerland. After evaluation, the board proposed a single radiosurgical procedure (stereotactic CyberKnife radiotherapy, 1x13Gy) accompanied by cortisone treatment (dexamethasone 4 mg per day, halving the dose every 3 days) for 10 days in order to cope with any radiation-induced edema. The patient agreed to this treatment, which was performed in March 2022 and was tolerated without any side effects. On 6 weeks of follow-up after treatment, the patient reported no reduction of the triggered episodes of (near) TLOC, dizzy spells, and exacerbated right-sided tinnitus. Weight was stable (60.7 kg). At the same time, however, longer-lasting episodes of vertigo and light-headedness were noticed, accompanied by fear of syncope, exhaustion, and transient left-sided hemisyndrome, which were interpreted as secondary functional symptoms/panic attacks due to complete restitution without treatment. Diagnostic procedures revealed a normal MRI scan of the neurocranium, a normal CT-angiogram, and EEG as well as normal cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) puncture lab and vasculitis screening lab results.
On further follow-up, the patient reported a cessation of episodes with (near) TLOC and dysphagia by October 2022, with residual infrequent episodes of mild nausea triggered by swallowing about twice per week. In contrast, migraine headaches associated with dizziness remained frequent (up to five episodes per week). On repeated brain MRIs obtained in September 2022, the vagal schwannoma was unchanged in size and morphology (–). On the last follow-up in January 2023, the patient confirmed a regression of her migraine headaches accompanied by dizziness by approximately 50% of episodes and a continuing cessation of episodes with (near) TLOC.
Written informed consent was obtained by the patient for publication. Being a description of a single, clinical case, no ethics approval was required.