A 64-year-old Caucasian female was transferred to a tertiary care hospital with a fever, hypotension, and a two-week history of lightheadedness and dizziness with near-syncopal episodes and mild visual disturbances. She reported a weight loss of 40 pounds over the past 2 years due to progressive dysphagia, and upper endoscopy at the previous hospital revealed esophageal candidiasis. Her previous medical history included COPD, asthma, recurring right lower extremity DVT, achalasia, atrial fibrillation (on warfarin), fibromyalgia, hypertension, hypothyroidism, cholecystectomy, and a distant history of Hodgkin’s lymphoma (for which she received chemotherapy). BMI was 30.62 kg/m2. She denied chest pain and shortness of breath. Upon arrival at the hospital, she was found to be in atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular response and complained of palpitations. Physical exam was notable for expiratory wheezes and a 2/6 systolic ejection murmur at the right sternal border. She spontaneously converted to sinus rhythm after receiving intravenous metoprolol, and her EKG showed T-wave inversion in the inferior leads. Her labs showed a white blood cell count of 8.0 × 103/mm3, an INR of 5.7, a hematocrit of 25.6%, a troponin I level of 0.05 ng/mL, and a BNP of 6696 pg/mL. Stool guaiacs were positive. A chest x-ray and CT of the abdomen and pelvis were negative for acute disease. A 2D echocardiogram revealed severe aortic stenosis with a peak gradient of 91 mmHg, a mean gradient of 61 mmHg, and normal systolic left ventricular function (see Figs. and ). She was given two units of packed red blood cells, four units of fresh frozen plasma, and fluconazole.
Four days after initial presentation, the patient underwent right and left heart catheterization for evaluation of her coronary arteries and aortic valve. She was found to have severe aortic stenosis (mean gradient of 56 mmHg, valve area of 0.64 cm2), mild pulmonary hypertension (28 mmHg), and normal left systolic function, with no evidence of significant coronary artery disease. The aortic root size was noted to be normal. Valve surgery was recommended.
The patient underwent minimally invasive aortic valve replacement with a bovine pericardial valve, cryoablation of both atria, and clipping of the left atrial appendage. The aortic valve was found to have a bicuspid, thickened appearance with calcifications, multiple small vegetations, and a root abscess beneath the right coronary cusp. With a new suspicion of infective endocarditis, the patient was placed on broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotics with vancomycin and piperacillin/tazobactam. Two intra-operative peripheral blood cultures were taken, and an infectious disease consult was requested.
One day post-surgery, the level of C-reactive protein was measured at 8.4 mg/L, and the sedimentation rate was 46 mm/hr. Three days post-surgery, a tissue culture from the aortic valve vegetations identified Enterococcus hirae through MALDI-TOF. The tissue sample was sensitive to ampicillin, amoxicillin, and vancomycin, and it demonstrated synergy with gentamicin and streptomycin. Antibiotic treatment was then switched to intravenous ampicillin and ceftriaxone; the patient declined aminoglycoside treatment due to concerns of nephrotoxicity. Both blood cultures were negative for bacterial growth. The patient denied any exposure to psittacine birds, poultry, and suckling animals, as well as recent travel.
The patient had an uncomplicated postoperative course. She was discharged with the goal of 6 weeks of treatment with intravenous ampicillin and ceftriaxone.
Two months after her discharge, two peripheral blood cultures were negative for bacterial growth. Ten months after her discharge, the patient presented for multifocal pneumonia, and blood cultures were found to be negative then as well. Fifteen months after her initial presentation, the patient had a follow-up appointment with Cardiology. Mild mitral and mild tricuspid regurgitation were noted, and a 1/6 systolic murmur was appreciated at the right upper sternal border. A comprehensive 2D transthoracic Doppler echocardiogram at the time showed a well seated aortic bioprosthetic valve with normal-sized aortic root and without evidence of dehiscence, paravalvular leak, or aortic stenosis.