We report on a 62-year-old woman with genetically confirmed PROMM with a severely reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF 25%).
In line with aforementioned typical symptoms of PROMM, the patient showed a severe first-degree atrioventricular block (380 ms) , cataracts, and pre-diabetes. A one-vessel coronary artery disease was diagnosed with a history of myocardial infarction. The patient’s pedigree revealed that her father, uncle, and grandfather had also suffered from cardiomyopathies with fatal outcome before the age of 64 .
After ventricular fibrillation (VF) with successful cardiopulmonary resuscitation in 2008, the patient received an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD). Meanwhile multiple episodes of symptomatic sustained and non-sustained ventricular tachyarrhythmias (VTs) were documented. Due to palpitations and dyspnoea [New York Heart Association (NYHA) Class III)] after invasive rule-out of progressed coronary artery disease, the patient underwent two endocardial VA ablation attempts for inside the left ventricle (LV) in another centre, as a left-sided ischaemia-related arrhythmia substrate was suspected due to previous myocardial infarction caused by occlusion of the left anterior descending artery (LAD). Adherent to the guidelines, the patient was treated with a maximum dose of a beta-blocker (95 mg metoprolol twice daily) and amiodarone (200 mg).
As VA recurrence accompanied by palpitations and dyspnoea (NYHA Class III) was observed, the patient was referred to our centre for repeat ablation and evaluation for an urgent heart transplantation (HTX). In the meantime, she developed acute cardiac decompensation requiring inpatient recompensation with i.v. diuretics and levosimendan therapy. Catheter ablation was performed under general anaesthesia. Two diagnostic catheters were introduced via the femoral veins and positioned in the coronary sinus (6 Fr, Webster®, Biosense Webster, Inc., Diamond Bar, CA, USA) and the right ventricle (RV) (5 Fr, Webster®, Biosense Webster, Inc., Diamond Bar, CA, USA). For an antegrade approach, venous access was achieved via the right femoral vein. A single transseptal puncture was performed under fluoroscopic guidance using a modified Brockenbrough technique and an 8.5-Fr transseptal sheath (Carto VIZIGOTM Bi-Directional Guiding Sheath). As the LV summit area as well as anterior aspects of the LV may sometimes be reached more easily using the retrograde approach, an additional retrograde access to the LV was achieved via the right femoral artery with insertion of an 8.5-Fr sheath (SL1®, St. Jude Medical, Inc., St. Paul, MN, USA). Endocardial mapping was performed using a 3D-mapping system (CARTO3®, Biosense Webster, Inc., Diamond Bar, CA, USA) and a multipolar mapping catheter (PentaRay®, Biosense Webster, Inc., Diamond Bar, CA, USA). Ultra-high density electro-anatomical reconstruction of the RV and LV was conducted aiming for >1000 mapping points. A low-voltage area suggestive for myocardial scar was defined as bipolar voltage of ≤1.5 mV. Interestingly, voltage mapping found the pre-described ischaemia-induced arrhythmia substrate in the anterior segments and apex of the LV, but it also revealed a second low-voltage area along with the basal and inferior aspects of the RV . Programmed ventricular stimulation induced a sustained VA with right bundle branch block and a tachycardia cycle length (CL) of 380 ms suggestive for a LV arrhythmia substrate . Activation mapping revealed the earliest activation of the myocardium during VA at the anterior segments of the LV, in line with the abovementioned bipolar low-voltage area . Catheter ablation (40 W; irrigation: 30 mL/min) at this specific certain anatomical area resulted in deceleration and specific termination of the VA. Afterwards, extensive endocardial substrate modification was performed in the LV aiming for the elimination of all late and fractionated potentials in the zones of bipolar low voltage and at the border between normal and scarred tissue. Repeat ventricular stimulation induced another VA with a left bundle branch block and a tachycardia CL of 440 ms . Of note, tachycardia CL was in the range of the previously documented VA episodes stored in the ICD . Activation mapping revealed the earliest activation during sustained VA at a circumscribed low-voltage area at the basal and inferior RV . Catheter ablation (40 W; irrigation: 30 mL/min) at the inferior RV resulted in specific termination of the second VA. At the end of the ablation procedure, no VA could be induced with programmed stimulation. As data on the efficacy of VA ablations in PROMM are scarce and alternative therapy options were exhausted, the patient was evaluated for HTX. In case of recurrent VAs after previous VT ablation, we actually consider and recommend an epicardial approach, especially with respect to dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) or right ventricular involvement. Hitherto, no further VAs were documented during follow-up. LVEF was unchanged, palpitations improved, but dyspnoea persisted.