A 17 year old male presented to the emergency with a history of high grade fever since two weeks. Examination revealed short stature, tapering jaw , pallor and thumb polydactyly . There was no visceromegaly or lymphadenopathy. Previous complete blood counts were not available. Family history was insignificant. Complete blood count showed haemoglobin 3.4 gm/dl, MCV 100 fl and MCH 36 pg, white blood cell count 55.9 × 10 E9/L and platelet 8 × 10E9/L. Peripheral blood smear revealed 26% blast cells . Bone marrow was hypercellular exhibiting infiltration with 21% blast cells comprising of myeloblasts and monoblasts with presence of auer rods . Bone trephine was hypercellular showing diffuse infiltration with sheets of blast cells. The overall findings were consistent with acute myelomonocytic leukemia (AML M-4, according to F.A.B classification). The blasts cells expressed CD 33, CD13, HLA-DR, CD 117, CD34 antigens and cytoplasmic myeloperoxidase on immunophenotyping. Bone marrow cytogenetics revealed 46, XY, t (8:21) (q22; q22) [11]/ 46, XY, add (2) (q37),t (8; 21) [4]/46 XY [5] . Mutation analysis for NPM 1 and FLT3 ITD was negative while FLT3 D835 was positive. Based on his physical findings, peripheral blood was sent for analysis of chromosomal breakage . There were 1.98 average number of breaks/cell in patient’s cells while control sample had 0.05 average number of breaks/cell. Tri-radial and complex figures were also noted. These features were consistent with Fanconi anemia and the patient was presumed to be transformed into AML at presentation.
Considering that the patient was high risk AML, option of subsequent allogeneic bone marrow transplant was discussed at consolidation therapy. Complete human leukocyte antigen (HLA) typing of the patient was performed and peripheral blood cytogenetics of his siblings was advised. He received induction chemotherapy with daunorubicin and cytarabine (3 + 7). During the hospital course, he developed febrile neutropenia for which he was empirically treated with antibiotics. Blood and urine cultures did not reveal growth of organisms. The neutropenia resolved on Day 21 and the patient became afebrile. Day 14 bone marrow revealed clearance of blast cells while minimal residual disease showed 0.03% blast cells. He was discharged and was advised follow up in outpatient clinic. However the patient was lost to follow up.