A 64-year-old Japanese woman was brought to our emergency department after ingesting an unknown dose of glyphosate surfactant herbicide in order to attempt suicide. The woman had no history of psychiatric illness or neurological disease, however, she had a history of hypertension and hyperlipidemia, both of which were being medically controlled.
Initially, she did not present with headache, dizziness, numbness, or any other neurological symptoms. She was also able to acknowledge the date and her hospitalization, and was able to describe her attempted suicide. The patient also described being depressed after losing her job three months prior to the event, and that she was not taking any antidepressants.
Several hours after admission she became agitated and confused, apprehensively questioning where she was and why she was at a hospital. Following the manifestation of these symptoms, she was admitted to our psychiatric department.
The patient was found to be disoriented with regards to time and place, did not understand why she was in the hospital, and denied having attempted suicide. Although we initially thought this might have been due to depression or psychiatric illness, it became apparent that she was not able to remember events that had occurred after hospitalization. The patient was conscious of her memory impairment and disorientation, and became agitated about her condition to the point of delirium. As a result, she needed to be confined to a protection room for several days.
While she was clearly in a state of delirium, a physical examination revealed her to be in a good general condition, with stable vital signs. We observed no focal neuropathological signs except for her memory deficit. Blood tests (including tests for complete blood count, electrolytes, urea, creatinine, and thyroid hormone) and serological test for syphilis yielded normal results. The results of her urine analysis and toxicological screens were also normal. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the brain showed only an old infarction in the bilateral basal ganglia, and we were unable to immediately perform a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan due to her agitated state.A brain MRI scan without contrast was performed on day nine of her hospitalization and revealed a small high-intensity lesion in the dorsal part of the left hippocampal body on the diffusion-weighted image with a corresponding focus of low signal on the apparent diffusion coefficient map. Fluid-attenuated inversion recovery and T2-weighted sequences also revealed a high-intensity signal in a similar area . An electroencephalogram exhibited regular alpha activity, and the results of her cerebrospinal fluid analysis were within normal limits.
We diagnosed the patient with a left hippocampal infarction and administered a course of 75mg of clopidogrel once daily to be taken orally. Within three weeks since hospitalization, her disorientation to place and state of agitated delirium slightly improved. However, she still could not retain any memory of new events, and her orientation to time was still impaired. We performed the Wechsler adult intelligence scale-third (WAIS-III) and the Wechsler memory scale (WMS-R) for neuropsychological assessment. The WAIS-III revealed an IQ of 70, while the WMS-R yielded the following scores: Verbal memory 52, General memory 64, Delayed memory 65 . These results suggest that she had both retrograde and anterograde amnesia.
A follow-up WMS-R performed two months later revealed a partial improvement in some domains , and no abnormalities were found on her follow-up MRI scan. Therefore, she was discharged from the hospital on day 77. Despite a half year of rehabilitation at another hospital, the patient continues to exhibit memory impairments, requiring a notepad to supplement lapses in her ability to recall.