A 67-year-old male was admitted to hospital in January 2021 with a new onset mass in the right neck. Magnetic resonance imaging indicated a thickening and enhancement of the nasopharyngeal wall, as well as multiple cervical lymphadenopathies. A nasopharyngoscopy revealed a neoplasm on the top left wall of the nasopharynx. Pathological findings of the mass confirmed non-keratinizing squamous cell carcinoma. Multiple bone metastases were detected by radionuclide bone scans. As a result, he was diagnosed with nasopharyngeal carcinoma (cT4N3M1).
He then participated in a clinical trial for metastatic nasopharyngeal carcinoma at initial diagnosis investigating the efficacy and safety of a PD-1 inhibitor (toripalimab) combined with gemcitabine and cisplatin (toripalimab 240 mg on day 1 + gemcitabine 1 g/m2 on days 1 and 8 + cisplatin 50 mg on days 1–3). There were no adverse reactions in the first three courses of treatment. However, he complained of precordial discomfort on the sixth day of the fourth course, in the absence of any history or heart disease. Blood results showed increased high-sensitivity cardiac troponin (hs-cTn) up to 0.553 (normal 0.013–0.025) ng/ml, creatine kinase-MB (CK-MB) up to 176 (normal 0–2.88) ng/ml, serum myoglobin up to 405 (normal 28–72) ng/ml, pro-brain natriuretic peptide (proBNP) up to 205 (normal 0–14.8) pmol/L, and interleukin-6 (IL-6) up to 17.41 (normal 0–5.4) pg/ml. While the value of IL-10 and interferon (IFN)–γ were, respectively, 17.2 and 26 pg/ml, slightly higher than the normal range.
He was then transferred to ICU. QT prolongation, horizontal ST segment depression (0.5–1 mm) of V5 and V6 leads, and T wave inversion in I, AVL, II, III, AVF, V5, and V6 leads were observed following a dynamic electrocardiogram. A bedside echocardiogram suggested the left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) decreased to 40%. A coronary computed tomography angiography showed that the proximal occlusion in left anterior descending, right coronary artery, and left circumflex branch was 70, 90, and 90%, respectively, with collateral formation and distal development, indicating the diagnosis of chronic and already compensatory coronary heart disease. Therefore, the new onset of chest symptoms and laboratory abnormalities were inferred as immune-related myocarditis and the patient was excluded from the clinical trial. He was quite depressed about it.
We immediately continued immunosuppressive therapy with methylprednisolone 4 mg/kg per day intravenously, as well as anti-platelet therapy with aspirin and anti-atherosclerosis therapy with atorvastatin. However, there was no improvement with his clinical performance; indeed, we noted an aggravation in the value of the myocardial zymogram. Consequently, intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG, 0.4g/kg per day for 5 days) and a higher dosage of methylprednisolone (500 mg for 3 days, followed by a step-by-step dose reduction) were administered on the second day in the ICU, combined with trimetazidine and coenzyme Q10 to nourish cardiac muscle. There was a subsequent decline in the value of the myocardial zymogram as his symptoms improved.
However, this was short lived; the value of hs-cTn elevated on the sixth day since admission to ICU. Considering the aggravated laboratory parameters, he was treated with tofacitinib (5 mg twice daily for a week) for intensive immunosuppression. The level of hs-cTn, CK-MB, IL-6, IL-10, and IFN-γ gradually decreased to nearly normal a month after admission. Variation in lab tests and treatment strategies are demonstrated in . Regular cardiac assessment by electrocardiogram and echocardiogram showed few changes over time. The patient felt much better recovering without a major adverse cardiac event (MACE), and his confidence to fight the tumor was restored. Unfortunately, the enlarging neck mass indicated tumor progression and he was transferred to the oncology department for further anti-tumor therapy.