A 64-year-old man was referred to our hospital for further examination of a tumor in the right lobe of the liver, which was found on computed tomography (CT) by his previous physician. He had a history of stroke and diabetes mellitus but was generally in good condition, and his liver function was rated as Child–Pugh A and Liver damage A. Abdominal CT showed a tumor on the right side of the liver with TT extending to the IVC . The patient was diagnosed with HCC and scheduled for elective surgery. While awaiting surgery, he visited our hospital with complaints of respiratory distress. CT scan showed a pulmonary embolism due to TT dispersion, and the TT extension into the right atrium . The TT was rapidly growing, putting the patient at a high risk of sudden death. Since the TT extended into the RA, we concluded that it would be difficult to remove it using conventional right lobectomy. After consultation with a cardiovascular surgeon, we decided to perform a right atrial incision under artificial cardiopulmonary support to remove as much of the TT as possible, followed by right lobectomy to prevent TT dispersion during operation. After opening the abdomen and confirming that there was no disseminated lesion, the cardiovascular surgeon performed a median sternotomy and cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was established with cannulation of the ascending aorta, superior vena cava, and inferior vena cava. The RA was incised after taping the IVC and the TT extending from the IVC in the RA was removed as much as possible . Subsequently, the IVC was clamped to prevent TT dispersion, and resection of the right liver lobe was performed using the Pringle maneuver . After liver resection, the right hepatic vein was incised at the confluence of the inferior vena cava under total hepatic occlusion, and the TT from the right hepatic vein to the IVC and specimen were removed. The inferior vena cava (IVC) defect was sutured directly. After weaning from the CPB, vitamin K was administered to antagonize heparin, and FFP was administered to obtain hemostasis. The operation time was 12 h 47 min, CPB time was 7 h 41 min, and blood loss was 17,505 ml.
On the second postoperative day, the total bilirubin level increased to 4.5 mg/dl, but then plateaued and subsequently normalized. Postoperative complications included SSI corresponding to Clavien Dindo-II. Prophylactic antibiotic administration caused drug eruption, generalized skin rashes, and fever, which improved gradually. The patient was discharged from the hospital on postoperative day 74 because of the time required for rehabilitation due to the decline in ADL caused by these complications.
Eight months after surgery, the patient was diagnosed with hepatic and adrenal recurrence, and bevacizumab and immune checkpoint inhibitors were initiated.
He is still alive 1 year and 10 months after the surgery.