On March 1, 2019, a 22-year-old girl came to our outpatient clinic asking for serologic testing for SS.
The patient denied having dry eyes, dry mouth, parotid enlargement, or other clinical manifestations.
The patient was referred to oral surgery department for evaluation of a left painless floor-of-mouth lesion 3 years ago. The lesion had been present for 1 mo and the patient showed no difficulty eating, drinking, or speaking. Before ranula presentation, there was no obvious trauma or inducement. A pink, fluctuant, dome-shaped bulge in the floor of the mouth on the left side of the patient's lingual frenulum was found in an oral examination . Palpation revealed that the bulge was confined to the soft tissue. Based on these manifestations, the diagnosis of a unilateral (left) simple ranula was made. Her oral surgeon at the time did not consider anything more than a ranula, and did not perform any further tests. The patient underwent a surgery to remove the entire unilateral sublingual gland with the ranula while the lingual nerve was preserved. The pathology showed a sublingual gland (left) with chronic inflammation, lymphocytic infiltration, and focal mucus extravasation . There was no ranula on her right sublingual gland so far.
In 2017, 10 mo after the ranula surgery, the patient developed acute left submaxillary parotid lymphadenectasis without inducement. Ultrasonic (US) examination revealed patchy hypoechoic areas in the left parotid. Two years after the first parotid lymphadenectasis, she developed acute right parotid gland swelling without inducement as before. US examination revealed scattered, foveolate hypoechoic areas, and lymphadenectasis in bilateral parotids. Treatment with antibiotic and glucocorticoid were given. 1 mo later, US reexamination still revealed diffuse lesion in bilateral parotids and submandibular glands, which strongly suggested SS.
There was no family history of autoimmune disorders.
No abnormality was found on physical examination.
Serologic tests showed an antinuclear antibody (ANA) titer of 1:320, with antibody positivity for the extractable nuclear SS–related antigen A (SSA) as well as an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 33 mm/h (reference range 0-20 mm/h for females), rheumatoid factor (RF) of 441 IU/mL (reference range 0-20 IU/mL), and IgG of 20.10 g/L (reference range 8.6-17.4 g/L). The unstimulated whole saliva flow rate was 1.7 mL/min (reference range > 2 mL/min). Ophthalmologically, the Schirmer test results were 30 mm on both eyes in 5 min (reference range > 10 mm). The patient’s characteristics and laboratory data are shown in Table .