A 48-year-old African American female with a past medical history of hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy (HOCM), obesity, hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, and diabetes mellitus. She underwent uncomplicated thoracotomy with septal myectomy 2 years prior to this presentation, in which 11.0 g of excised myocardium was removed leading to a significant improvement in her LVOT obstruction with no residual valvular dysfunction. The postoperative course was uneventful. She presented with acute stroke and her symptoms included slurred speech, right facial droop sparing the forehead, and right-sided hemiparesis/hemianaesthesia. Previously, the patient had stable follow-up with postoperative echocardiograms showing a normal left ventricular ejection fraction of 70%, with a regional wall motion abnormality characterized by akinesia of the basal anteroseptal, mid anteroseptal, basal and mid inferior wall, and basal and mid inferior septum. The last echocardiogram was performed 3 months prior to this presentation.
The patient had stable vital signs. National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) was 8, and her exam revealed expressive aphasia with flaccid right upper and lower extremities. Lab work were within normal limits. The rest of her physical exam was unremarkable. Electrocardiogram did not show any acute ischaemic changes, bundle branch blocks, or dysrhythmias. Computed tomography (CT) and CT angiography of the head and neck revealed an acute occlusion of the left sylvian branch of the middle cerebral artery, with an acute infarction of the left insula and the left frontal corona radiata.
She was not a candidate for thrombolytic therapy and was subsequently started on dual-antiplatelet therapy with aspirin 81 mg daily and clopidogrel 75 mg daily. She was admitted to the neurological intensive care unit for further workup. Echocardiogram demonstrated an ejection fraction of 55% with a focally abnormal left ventricular function and akinesis of the basal, mid anterior, and inferior septum consistent with her prior echocardiograms. However, there was a protruding density not previously reported in the basal-mid interventricular septum, measuring 2.2 × 1.4 cm . It had multiple associated sessile, mobile projections with poor perfusion pattern on definity contrast enhanced imaging, visualized at the site of the remote myomectomy . Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging was attempted to further characterize the lesion; however, it was unsuccessful due to the patient body habitus. Electrocardiogram-gated contrast cardiac CT was then performed and revealed an ovoid hypodensity arising from the septal wall of the left ventricle, with no contrast enhancement and low Hounsfield units . Given the septal akinesis, coronary angiography was performed to rule out ischaemia and showed normal coronary arteries with no evidence of obstruction.
Based on the lesion’s atypical location in the LVOT, its origin at the former myectomy site, and poor perfusion on definity contrast study, the final diagnosis was acute cardioembolic stroke secondary to a left ventricular thrombus. Notably, the patient had no previous history of thromboembolic events and work-up for a possible underlying hypercoagulopathy state was negative. It was therefore deemed appropriate to commence anticoagulation with heparin and there was subsequently no evidence of bleeding. She was successfully transitioned to oral dabigatran 150 mg twice a day and discharged in a stable condition. Her neurologic deficits improved and echocardiography 3 weeks later demonstrated resolution of the thrombus .