We present the case of a 75-year-old woman who underwent a laparoscopic monolateral suspension for vaginal vault prolapse. The patient was a Caucasian woman in good general health with two previous spontaneous deliveries and a vaginal hysterectomy for uterine prolapse in 2001.
She was admitted to our hospital with a diagnosis of a recurrence of stage 4 of vaginal vault prolapse following the Pelvic Organ Prolapse Quantification (POP-Q) System, without stress urinary incontinence. The main symptoms she reported were a sense of weight and vaginal pressure. Considering the anamnesis, pelvic examination, clinical symptoms, and recurrence of pelvic organ prolapse, the surgical procedure chosen was a laparoscopic sacral colpopexy. The patient received adequate information on the surgical technique via laparoscopic access and, in case needed, via laparotomic or vaginal access.
A consent form was provided and signed. During surgery, the parietal peritoneum was opened at the level of the sacral promontory with subsequent incision of the presacral fascia and identification of the longitudinal ligament. After the visualization of the right ureter and homolateral hypogastric inferior right nerve , we performed a recto-vaginal dissection toward the perineal and anorectal junction together with dissection of the vesicovaginal space until the endopelvic fascia.
In our surgical practice, a 30 × 30 cm polypropylene mesh (Restorelle XL- Coloplast A/S, 3050 Denmark) with a single arm is used. Before its insertion in the abdominal cavity, the mesh is tailored only in the portion that will be anchored to the vaginal and rectal space, while the other end is left intact in its length and subsequently tailored after its attachment to the sacral promontory.
After the mesh was anchored on the vesical-vaginal space with 12 interrupted sutures (Ethibond 3–0 needle), multiple attempts to fix the mesh to the sacral promontory were tried firstly with an Ethibond 0 needle and then with non-absorbable helicoidal clips (5 mm CapSure–Permanent fixation System. Davol Inc. Subsidiary of C.R. Bard, Inc. 100 Crossings Boulevard Warwick, RI 02886 USA) but any attempt to penetrate the site was unsuccessful . Considering that the mesh was already fixed to the anterior and posterior vaginal compartment, we intraoperatively decided to convert the procedure into a modified laparoscopic lateral suspension (LLS) with a monolateral right mesh, on the basis of the original technique described by Dubuisson et al., where a V-shaped mesh is used . We carried out a retroperitoneal tunnel using laparoscopic forceps through the right lateral access under transperitoneal visualization, putting in tension and fixing the mesh to the Camper fascia with two interrupted sutures, using an Ethibond 2–0 needle.
At the end of the procedure, the vaginal vault was well suspended . This strategy was possible because the sacral portion of the mesh was not shaped before its fixation to the sacral promontory and was long enough to allow its anchorage to the right lateral Camper fascia.
During the post-operative recovery, we performed a 3D reconstruction CT scan to evaluate the sacrum which detected an exuberant osteophytic bridge at the level of the anterior right margin of L5 and S1 that protruded for 17 mm .
The patient was discharged after 3 postoperative days with no post-surgical complication. At the follow-up visit, scheduled at 6 months after surgery, the vaginal vault was well suspended, with no signs of genital prolapse. The patient reported clinical well-being, without pelvic pressure or sensation of a vaginal bulge.