A 53-year-old gentle man presented with alleged history of fall from a twenty-foot tree and sustained closed injury over his left foot. Following the injury, he developed pain and swelling over his left foot and he was not able to weight bear weight on the injured limb. The patient underwent native splinting for 1 month. On removing the splint after 1 month, there was persistent pain and swelling over the left foot. The patient presented to us 6 weeks following the initial injury.
There was a diffuse swelling and tenderness over the left mid foot region and the foot was grossly deformed. The patient was able to perform the ankle movements but the subtalar and mid foot joint movements were painful and restricted. The neurovascular status of the lower limb was intact.
Radiographs taken at the time of presentation showed a neglected homogenous lateral type of Lisfranc injury (, and ). On careful examination of the radiographs, multiple chip fractures were present in the region of base of second metatarsal indicative of fleck sign . CT of the foot was not taken at the time of presentation. Multiple radiographic views including 30° oblique were taken to ensure that other fractures are not missed.
The patient was taken up for surgery after obtaining informed consent. In supine position and keeping the knee in flexion and ankle in neutral position a longitudinal skin incision of size 5 cm was made in the 1st dorsal we space between the first and second metacarpal, the incision extends from the web space to the mid tarsal region. The dorsalis pedis artery and deep peroneal nerve were identified and tagged. Reducing the first metacarpal was very difficult even after releasing all the adhesions and fibrous tissue. To reduce the base of the first metatarsal, osteotomy at the base of first metatarsal and distal aspect of medial cuneiform (to shorten and achieve reduction) was done. The first metatarsal and medial cuneiform was aligned and fixed with a 5 holed 2.7 mm plate to achieve a 1st tarsometatarsal joint arthrodesis. Through the same incision, the second metatarsal was reduced by removing base of 2nd metatarsal and distal end of intermediate cuneiform and fused with a 4 mm cannulated cancellous screws. A second longitudinal skin incision of size 7 cm was made over the fourth metatarsal extending till the mid tarsal region. Through this incision, the third metatarsal base was excised and fused with the lateral cuneiform with a 4 mm cannulated cancellous screw. On reducing the fifth metatarsal, the fourth metatarsal spontaneously reduced. By percutaneous stab incision made, laterally, the fifth metatarsal was fixed to the cuboid bone by a 4 mm cannulated cancellous screw. On fixing the fifth metatarsal, the fourth metatarsal was also reduced and found to be stable. Wounds were closed and below knee slab was applied.
The patient was allowed non-weight-bearing mobilization with walker support on the first post-operative day. Partial weight-bearing was allowed after 6 weeks and full weight-bearing was allowed only after 3 months. Serial radiographs were taken at 2 weeks, 6 weeks, and at 6th month post-operative period, as shown in Figs. , , and , respectively. The wounds had completely healed ( and ). Satisfactory reduction and fusion of all the tarsometatarsal joints were noted on radiographs. At 6 months follow-up, the patient was completely pain free and was able to walk without support (, and ). He had also returned to his work. The implant will be removed after 2 years.