A 32-year-old German man, employed as a railroad maintenance worker, presented to our department with chronic instability of his right shoulder. He reported that he suffered numerous anterior shoulder dislocations, which were reduced spontaneously every time. The initial work-related trauma occurred six years prior to the current presentation when he had lost consciousness due to exsiccosis and fell onto the railway line. His physical examination in our emergency room at that time showed a swollen right shoulder with pain-induced restriction in range of motion. His X-rays showed no signs of a luxation or fracture, so that we diagnosed a sprain of the acromioclavicular joint (Rockwood classification I). Since he lost consciousness he was not able to tell whether his shoulder might have been dislocated. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan taken six months later showed a subdeltoid bursitis without evidence of a rotator cuff tear or osseous pathology. Upon his visit six months after the injury his right shoulder an Anterior Apprehension Test revealed an anterior shoulder instability, while the range of motion, the rotator cuff, sensibility and circulation seemed intact on clinical examination. A conservative treatment with physiotherapy was initiated. Six years later he presented to our department again complaining of chronic anterior shoulder instability with spontaneous reduction without a second trauma. His Apprehension and Relocation tests were positive for the mentioned anterior shoulder instability while a posterior instability could be excluded. A further MRI scan displayed a Hill-Sachs lesion of the humeral head and a lesion of the anterior labrum with a possible osseous involvement. After completing standard X-rays as well as a computed tomography (CT) scan that revealed a glenoid rim defect in addition to the above-mentioned defects, we advised surgery and he was scheduled for an open Latarjet procedure .
The examination under anesthesia confirmed the anterior shoulder instability. The operation was performed in the beach chair position. After sterile cleaning and draping we used the deltopectoral approach. After preparation and sectioning of the clavipectoral fascia we displayed the coracoid bone. At that stage we noticed that the conjoined tendons were not attached to the coracoid process. The tendon of the pectoralis minor, the short head of the biceps brachii and the coracobrachialis muscle were proximally ossified about 2cm lateral of the coracoid process. We concluded that he suffered an avulsion fracture of the coracoid process. The coracoid process was then transferred in an open Latarjet procedure, with re-fixation of the avulsion fracture with attached conjoined tendons to the glenoid rim. We used two 4mm screws (length 26mm and 32mm) for re-fixation of the coracoid process and the bone fragment .
His immediate postoperative CT scan showed an optimal position of the coracoid process as well as the osseous piece attached to the conjoined tendons . After the procedure, his shoulder was immobilized in an arm sling for two weeks. Passive physiotherapy (90° anteversion, 90° abduction, 30° outer rotation) was recommended for six weeks. After completing this course of physiotherapy he was allowed to move his shoulder actively in every direction. Contact sports were allowed approximately four months after verification of proper bone remodeling.
On his follow-up visit three months after the intervention he presented with a satisfying range of motion and without pain (140° anteversion, 120° abduction, 40° external rotation). All instability tests were negative. A repeated CT scan showed a timely ossification of the fixed bony piece . Therefore, full weight bearing was allowed and he was motivated to return to his job.