The patient was a five-year-old girl who collapsed suddenly during activities at nursery school. She was healthy until that day. She had passed a regular health check one month before the event. Regional emergency workers transferred her to our hospital located 30 min away from the event and categorized as a secondary healthcare hospital without extracorporeal cardiopulmonary resuscitation (ECPR) capability. Her condition deteriorated, and she developed cardiac arrest in the ambulance. Regional emergency workers commenced Basic Life Support (BLS) while transferring her to the emergency room. Resuscitation with Advanced Life Support including intubation and repeated epinephrine was given to her after arrival at the emergency department (ED). Unfortunately, after resuscitation for a total of 81 min inclusive of four minutes pre-hospital BLS, she remained unresponsive; the resuscitation was unsuccessful. Venous blood gases on arrival to the ED showed pCO2 65.8 mmHg, and pO2 29.7 mmHg. pH, bicarbonate, and base excess were immeasurable possibly due to out of range of indication. Blood tests showed the following abnormal values: prothrombin time 20.2 s; APTT 88.7 s; D-dimer 106.3 μg/ml; FDP 249.8 μg/ml; potassium 7.3 mEq/L; creatinine 0.71 mg/dL; AST 65 U/l; LDH 821 U/l; and ammonia 477 μg/ml. Postmortem CT showed a large right abdominal mass extending through the IVC into the entry portion of the right atrium .
A judicial autopsy conducted at the local police department showed: the weight of the Wilms tumor that originated in the right kidney was 885 g, while the left kidney weighed 100 g, and no further histological examination was performed ; tumor extended into the right renal vein, IVC, and entry portion of the right atrium ; and greyish or dark red small multiple emboli filled the right and left peripheral pulmonary arteries . Taken together, the main cause of her sudden cardiac arrest was attributed to multiple pulmonary tumor embolisms secondary to stage IV Wilms tumor.