A 60-year-old male was referred to our center with cecal inflammation found during a screening colonoscopy. He did not complain of any abdominal discomfort, such as pain, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. He had no past medical history except surgery for an inguinal hernia. He was afebrile with stable vital signs. On a physical examination, there was no tenderness in the abdomen.
Colonoscopy performed at the local clinic revealed a hyperemic inflammatory lesion in the cecum around the appendiceal orifice. Because the lesion felt very hard during the colonoscopic biopsy, it was likely associated with a long period of inflammation. An abdominal CT performed after the colonoscopy in the clinic revealed a 5 × 2.5 × 4 cm mass-like lesion in the cecum around the ileocolic (IC) valve and appendiceal orifice; it had heterogenous enhancement and an ovoid calcification (8 mm) at its center, which was suspected to be an appendicolith . The lesion was accompanied by appendicitis, which was identified based on appendiceal dilation (9 mm) and haziness of the periappendiceal fat. The main lesion seemed to be an inflammatory mass rather than a malignancy because it appeared to be an extraluminal or extramucosal lesion. Ultrasonography revealed a diffuse area of wall thickening (4.9 × 2 × 2.5 cm) in the cecum around the appendiceal orifice that was suspicious for an inflammatory mass or benign mass. The 8-mm calcification identified on the previous CT was probably in the mass-like wall thickening rather than in the appendix. The appendiceal lesion seemed to be a mucocele rather than acute appendicitis because there was no periappendiceal inflammation, a thin wall, and no direct tenderness. Colonoscopic biopsy of the cecum showed mild chronic nonspecific colitis with mucosal lymphoid follicles.
The patient underwent laparoscopic partial cecectomy. In the surgical field, there was a large mass in the appendiceal orifice . There did not appear to be an intussusception involving the appendix or other intestine including the ileum. The cecum was partially resected, with care taken to preserve the IC valve. After the resection, it was thought that the ileocolic valve had enough remaining lumen to allow the passage of bowel contents. Final histopathological analysis of the surgical specimen revealed an appendiceal intussusception without any mucosal lesion of the appendix . Three days postoperatively, the patient had abdominal distension without gas passage. An X-ray revealed a small bowel obstruction pattern. An L-tube was inserted, and the patient remained NPO. Despite conservative management, the symptoms were ongoing, and an abdominal CT was performed 6 days after surgery. This CT showed abrupt narrowing of the terminal ileum with a small bowel obstruction and stenosis of the IC valve. Emergency laparoscopic exploration was performed. In the surgical field, small bowel dilatation was present just proximal to the IC valve and raised concerns for IC valve stenosis. Therefore, a laparoscopic ileocecectomy was performed. The patient was discharged 11 days after the second surgery without a significant postoperative complication. We carried out the follow-ups regularly with CT, and he remained asymptomatic for 2 years postoperatively.