The patient was a 51-year-old male with progressive idiopathic PD. He was diagnosed with PD at age 41 and his symptoms began with left- greater than right-sided tremor that progressed to grade 2/4. He developed bradykinesia, rigidity, dyskinesias, and balance problems. He experienced speech difficulties which responded to medication and reported a 9-month history of noisy breathing that worsened after the discontinuation of his PD medications. He also reported reflux and mild dysphagia. Medications included amantadine, carbidopa/levodopa, rasagiline, and ropinirole.
With the goal of improving his limb symptoms, the patient underwent implantation of subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation (STN-DBS) electrodes (Medtronic, model 3389) during separate awake procedures using microelectrode recording, microstimulation, and macrostimulation. The first electrode was placed in the right-STN, and the second in the left-STN 1 month later . Ten days later, a dual-chamber subclavicular pulse generator was implanted under general endotracheal anesthesia.
After an uneventful placement of the right-STN electrode and prior to the placement of the left-STN electrode, the patient was referred to a pulmonologist for evaluation of possible obstructive airway disease. Pulmonary function testing revealed mild air trapping, mildly reduced diffusion capacity, and increased airway resistance. Inhaled bronchodilators did not improve these symptoms. Therefore, upper airway obstruction was suspected, and he was referred to Otolaryngology.
Upper airway evaluation via transnasal laryngoscopy revealed bilateral VF immobility with VFs at the paramedian position . Computed tomography (CT) scan of the neck revealed no evidence of mass or lymphadenopathy. Given the breathing risk with severe bilateral VF immobility, a tracheostomy was placed under general anesthesia on the same day as the subclavicular pulse generator. Three weeks later, the patient returned to the clinic for initial programming of his STN-DBS system.
Following initiation of bilateral STN-DBS, the patient was evaluated at several intervals during a period of 11 months [; ]. Outcome measures included VF abduction and airway opening, Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS-III) motor scores, and anti-PD medication dose. Standardized scales were used for conversion of anti-PD medication into a levodopa equivalent dose (LED). Bilateral high frequency STN-DBS was set at 150 Hz. Stimulation settings: Right-STN lead contacts: C(+)9(−)10(−). Left-STN lead contact: C(+)0(−). Pulse width: 60 uS.
At baseline, the anti-PD medication dose totaled 1660 mg LED and the UPDRS-III score was 57. Transnasal laryngoscopy revealed bilateral VF immobility with a maximum airway opening of 4 mm. Improvement in the UPDRS-III score was sustained at each measurement timepoint, with a 70–82% reduction in anti-PD medication with high frequency STN-DBS. While the left VF remained immobile at the paramedian position, the right VF abduction modestly increased with maximum airway opening of 6 mm with STN-DBS . However, airway opening remained 70–75% smaller than that of healthy individuals and was insufficient to permit decannulation of the tracheostomy.
On day 225 with DBS, the UPDRS-III score was 32, with an 82% reduction in medication. Right VF movement had improved to 3 mm, and maximal airway opening had increased to 6 mm. Speech was relatively clear with only mild dysphonia, no coughing, and no stridor with the tracheostomy capped (UPDRS Speech score: 2). On day 225, we also tested the patient after turning the stimulation off for 2 hours. Without DBS, the UPDRS-III score was 74, markedly worse than baseline of 57 and suggesting rapid disease progression. In addition, right VF movement returned to baseline, with maximal airway opening decreasing from 6 mm to 4 mm. We also observed an overall reduction in the tone of the VFs and increased laryngeal tremor. Without DBS, speech also became more effortful, less precise, and less intelligible (UPDRS Speech score: 4).
On day 328, with high frequency DBS, the UPDRS-III score was 32, with a 70% reduction in medication. Right VF movement was 2.5 mm, and maximum airway opening was 5 mm. On day 328, we also tested this patient after turning the stimulation frequency to 60 Hz for 2 hours. With low frequency DBS, the UPDRS-III score was 65, markedly worse than that with high frequency DBS. VF movement and maximum airway opening were unchanged with low frequency DBS. We also observed a weaker voice with less intelligible speech (UPDRS Speech score: 3). However, it should be noted that this patient was nearing the time for his next dose of anti-PD medication.