A 59-year-old man presented with complaints of fatigue, respiratory distress, orthopnea and failure to thrive. He had a history of multiple rib fractures (2nd-10th on the right side and 2nd-11th on the left side) due to excessive body massage 1 year previously, leading to bilateral flail chest. He also had diarrhea (2–3 times per day), weight loss of approximately 15 kg over 2 years and onychodystrophy involving the finger and toe nails. He had undergone left hemicolectomy 1 year prior for multiple gastrointestinal polyps at another hospital and was diagnosed with CCS based on histopathological examination. He had no family history of polyposis. Since that time, he has been treated with nutritional supplementation, antibiotics (levofloxacin and cefepime) and corticosteroids (hydroprednisone) for 6 months.
On clinical examination, the patient was malnourished, emaciated and had loss of finger and toe nails. He could not lay down to sleep. He had a partial arterial oxygen pressure of 58 mmHg and an oxygen saturation (SpO2) of 88% with nasal oxygen. He had paradoxical chest movements on both sides due to flail chest and pseudarthrosis.
On colonoscopy, we found more than 100 colonic polyps diffusely distributed, starting at 17 cm from the cecum up to the anus with inflamed mucosa and few erosions in the size range of 0.8–1.5 cm . Histopathological evaluation of the colonic biopsy revealed multiple adenomatous polyps, mild atypical hyperplasia and inflammatory granuloma . On immunohistochemical analysis, IgG staining was present but staining for IgG4 was negative. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest showed multiple fractures of the 2nd-10th ribs on the right side and the 2nd-11th ribs on the left side . Laboratory investigations showed a serum albumin concentration of 31 g/L (normal range, 40–60 g/L), serum calcium concentration of 2.04 mmol/L (normal range 2.25–2.75 mmol/L), serum phosphorous concentration of 14 mmol/L, serum ferritin concentration of 225 ng/ml, highly sensitive C-reactive protein (hsCRP) concentration of 5.48 mg/L, and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 7 mn/h. The T-spot/TB test yielded 176 + 28FC /10S6MC. Evaluation of tumor markers showed a carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level of 5.17 ng/ml with the absence of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), CA19–9, and CA242. The kidney androgen-regulated protein (KAP) level was 7.55 mg/dL, and the results of the human lipoarabinomannan assay (for tuberculosis) were normal. The serum immunoelectrophoresis test was negative, the immunoglobulin 4 (IgG4) concentration was 5940 ng/mL, Ig alexin was normal. Analysis of antinuclear antibodies (ANAs) revealed the patient was PCNA(+) and anti-ENA(−). Analysis of bone metabolism showed a β-CTX (β-Crosslaps for bone resorption) concentration of 0.621 ng/mL, a T-25-OH-vitaminD concentration of 7.4 ng/mL, and a parathyroid hormone (PTH) concentration of 94.2 pg/mL. The patient had severe osteoporosis and osteomalacia.
We continued his nutritional supplementation and antibiotics but stopped his steroid treatment due to the rib fractures. He underwent open reduction and internal fixation twice (anterior and posterior separately) using a titanium alloy fixator and a nickel-titanium memory alloy embracing fixator for chest wall reconstruction . The surgeries were done in two sessions because the first operation took a long time and the patient could not tolerate the prolonged anesthesia. The fixations were done using two bilateral curved incisions one on either side. We mainly retracted the muscles during the fixation and muscle cutting was performed only at few places. Postoperatively, he developed respiratory muscle weakness and respiratory failure due to which he required prolonged ventilator support. Tracheostomy and bronchial lavage were performed to provide ventilator-assisted breathing after operation. He recovered gradually and remained on the invasive ventilator for 3 months (2 months in hospital and 1 month at home). His hospital stay was 2 months. Subsequently, he received nutritional support at home and household noninvasive ventilator support for 6 months. At last follow-up (6 months after discharge), the patient’s body weight had increased by 20 kg and the patient showed improvement in his symptoms .