A 20-year-old female patient presented with neurocognitive behavioral difficulty, voracious appetite, and chronic encephalopathy. Despite maximal medical treatment, the patient had persistently elevated serum ammonia levels, with pre-operative levels of 135 and 98 mcmol/L, along with clinical signs and symptoms of encephalopathy. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a hypoplastic intrahepatic portal venous system. The superior mesenteric vein and splenic vein joined to form a short extrahepatic portal vein, with dominant flow into two parallel shunts into the suprahepatic inferior vena cava (IVC) . The patient was previously evaluated for candidacy for a liver transplant at a local children’s hospital but was denied eligibility. Thus, the patient and her family agreed to an endovascular procedure to increase blood flow into the intrahepatic portal venous system and decrease blood flow through the portosystemic shunts.
The embolization of the patient’s two extrahepatic portosystemic shunts was performed via a right internal jugular approach. The IVC was selected with an 0.035″ Amplatz wire (Boston Scientific, Marlborough, Massachusetts) with the aid of a 5F JB1 catheter (Angiodynamics, Latham, New York). The catheter was then removed, and a 10F RAABE Flexor sheath (Cook Medical, Bloomington, Indiana) was advanced into the IVC. An inferior vena cavagram was performed, demonstrating wide patency. Next, a JB1 catheter and a .035 angled glidewire (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) were used to select the right hepatic vein. Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) was performed demonstrating a patent right hepatic vein. The left hepatic vein was then selected, demonstrating a massively dilated vein. Next the portal vein was selected and venography was performed, confirming dominant flow into shunts and a small caliber portal vein. The splenic vein, inferior mesenteric vein, and superior mesenteric vein were all evaluated and were patent with flow into the two portosystemic shunts rather than the diminutive portal vein . Next, an occlusion balloon (Edwards LifeSciences, Irvine, California) was inflated in the larger shunt to measure pressures prior to plug deployment. The IVC pressure measured 16 mmHg, while the portal venous pressure with occlusion of the shunt measured 18 mmHg prior to intervention. A 16 mm AVPII Amplatzer plug (Abbot, Chicago, Illinois) was deployed in the larger portosystemic shunt. After selection of the second shunt, an occlusion balloon was again inflated, and the portal venous pressure was found to be 18 mmHg. Next a 12 mm Amplatzer plug was deployed. Following embolization, flow into the hypoplastic portal vein improved with near complete occlusion of flow into the portosystemic shunts . The final portal venous gradient was 2 mmHg.
Enoxaparin was administered at a dose of 40 mg daily for 90 days as prophylaxis against portal venous thrombosis. At 3 month follow up, the ammonia level was 133mcmol/L. Although still elevated, the patient’s family and educators both subjectively noted mild improvements in her behavioral symptoms and described her as being more affectionate and less confrontational. A follow up CT at 3 months demonstrated complete occlusion of the two portosystemic shunts, and a portal vein diminutive in caliber. The portal vein measured 7 mm in diameter on both pre and post-procedure CT scans. The total volume of the liver was found to be 843 cm3 on pre-procedure CT & 1191 cm3 on post-procedure CT . The patient had no complications at 3 and 6 months of follow up. At 6 months follow up the patient’s family continued to endorse modest improvement in the patient’s behavioral symptoms. A 1 year follow up abdominal ultrasound showed a normal sized liver measuring 13.1 cm. The main and intrahepatic portal veins were diminutive, though all appeared patent with antegrade flow with a peak velocity of 29 cm/sec in the portal vein. 1 year follow up ammonia level was 97 mcmol/L.