A 25-year-old man with high-risk pre-T-ALL in complete hematological remission for 4 months and no ophthalmic history presented to our hospital with 2 weeks of bilateral ocular pain with decreased vision and 1 week of right-sided ocular redness with periocular and temporoparietal headache. He reported no dizziness, dysphagia, fever, focal weakness, hearing loss, or paresthesia and had no history of radiation to the head. Inquiry about family history revealed blindness in his maternal grandmother. The patient had completed first-line hyper-CVAD chemotherapy, courses 1A (i.e., cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, and dexamethasone) to 4B (i.e., methotrexate and cytarabine) in August 2014. He had also completed a 10-course regimen of prophylactic intrathecal chemotherapy in November 2014, which is the standard of care for pre-T-ALL. A post-treatment bone marrow biopsy was negative for residual disease.
On physical examination, the patient had hand-motion vision in both eyes. Tonometric right- and left-eye pressures were 38 and 16 mm Hg, respectively. Pupils were sluggishly reactive without afferent pupillary defects. Upward gaze limitation with convergence/retraction-type nystagmus was present. Other gaze fields were normal. The eyelids, lashes, and lacrimal glands were normal on slit-lamp examination. The right-eye conjunctiva was diffusely injected, while that of the left eye was white and quiet. Corneas were clear. The right-eye anterior chamber had a grade 2 flare, while that of the left eye was deep and quiet. Irises were normal and lenses were clear. On dilated fundus examination, the right- and left-eye vitreous were hazy and clear, respectively. Bilateral diffuse intraretinal hemorrhages with whitening and complete bilateral retinal detachments without identifiable tears were seen . Retinal folds and areas of bullous detachment were noted. Nerves were difficult to visualize. B-scan ultrasonography confirmed these findings and revealed significant retinal thickening at the posterior poles .
The patient was admitted and started on intravenous acyclovir to cover for possible acute retinal necrosis versus progressive outer retinal necrosis. As the initial complete blood count was normal, there was less concern for cytomegalovirus retinitis. The patient was started on dorzolamide/timolol for his increased right intraocular pressure. Given his upward gaze palsy, he underwent magnetic resonance imaging to assess for possible central nervous system involvement, which showed only soft-tissue masses consistent with subretinal exudative fluid . Lumbar puncture was normal. Right-eye vitreal biopsy polymerase chain reaction was negative for herpes simplex, varicella zoster, cytomegalovirus, and toxoplasmosis, and cytology was negative for malignancy.
Because the patient was not improving on antivirals, retinal biopsy was performed. As on dilated fundus examination, no tears were identified, and a diagnosis of bilateral exudative retinal detachment was confirmed. The patient underwent left-eye retinal detachment repair with biopsy. Pathologic analysis of the retinal biopsy, including molecular, cytogenetic, and flow cytometric testing, revealed infiltration with pre-T-ALL . This finding was confirmed on left-eye vitreal and subretinal fluid cytology. The patient was referred to his hematologist for further treatment with radiation therapy to both eyes, systemic chemotherapy, and bone-marrow transplant. The patient's exudative detachment and optic nerve symptoms improved. The right-eye intraocular pressure corrected, and the left-eye retina remained flat. Nonetheless, his visual acuity remained poor in both eyes, with light perception vision.