A 47-year-old Caucasian woman presented in our institution 18 months after undergoing primary left TKA (Insall-Burstein II, Posterior-Substitute, Zimmer, Warsaw, IN). She had a post-operative history of recurrent instability and multiple episodes of knee dislocation. Her medical history was significant for severe psychiatric disorders, including bipolar disease and depression, and morbid obesity (body mass index (BMI) = 61 kg/m2). Her knee stability was tested under fluoroscopic guidance. The LCL appeared to be non-functional, as the knee fully opened to varus stress in both flexion and extension. Non-operative management with a knee immobilizer was prescribed.
Our patient returned two weeks later with another episode of knee dislocation. Closed reduction was achieved. A biceps femoris advancement was performed to treat the instability of the knee to varus stress. Stability was achieved for only seven months, as our patient began to feel lateral pulling with a resultant instability and, subsequently, further dislocations. Surgery was performed to reconstruct the ligament using an Achilles tendon allograft. The reconstruction, however, failed within 10 months.
A revision TKA using a more constrained implant (varus-valgus constrained implants) was then performed. Intra-operatively, all of the primary TKA components were well-fixed and in good position. However, the polyethylene tibial insert (Posterior Stabilized polyethylene insert, Zimmer, Warsaw, IN) demonstrated severe wear of the post. The previous ligamentous advancement and allograft reconstruction had completely avulsed from the tibia distally. No soft tissue existed to provide appropriate lateral support. A varus-valgus constrained polyethylene insert with a thickness of 17 mm (LCCK, Zimmer, Warsaw, IN) was used. Intra-operatively, the revised implant provided good stability throughout flexion and extension.
Following revision surgery, the knee of our patient remained stable for six years without any clinical symptoms of instability. She then began noticing lateral knee pain and feelings of instability, but without frank dislocation. The pain worsened, and she fell twice after the onset of instability. On physical examination, she had lateral laxity with significant varus thrust. Five degrees of varus deformity existed as measured from the mechanical axis on a weight-bearing radiograph . Active and passive motion ranged from full extension to 110° flexion (further flexion was limited by impingement of the posterior soft tissues over her thigh and calf). Radiographic examination on our patient showed well-aligned prosthetic components with no evidence of implant loosening. The knee opened widely on the lateral as compared to the medial side . The knee society clinical rating and function scores were 22 and five points, respectively.
All treatment options were discussed with our patient. She refused to undergo arthrodesis or any kind of hinged knee prosthesis, and instead requested a more conservative procedure. Due to her previous experience, which had performed well for approximately six years with only varus-valgus constrained polyethylene, we decided to perform a combination procedure of revision to a new polyethylene insert and an allograft reconstruction of the LCL with Achilles tendon and a calcaneal bone block. At surgery, the post of the LCCK polyethylene insert was grossly deformed along the medial side and severely worn through the polyethylene down to the central metal post . Post-operatively, our patient had persistent drainage. The post-operative culture grew Staphylococcus aureus. Our patient was taken back to surgery for irrigation and debridement with polyethylene exchange. Unfortunately, she failed to respond to the treatment, thus a two-stage revision surgery was performed. After six weeks of an antibiotic cement spacer combined with systemic antibiotics, the infection was cleared, shown by normal erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP) and negative culture from aspiration. At the second stage surgery, the frozen section revealed no evidence of acute inflammation, and her knee was revised to rotating-hinge prosthesis.
Post-operatively, full range of motion and full weight bearing were allowed. The wound healed well without any complication. Our patient has no evidence of infection 18 months after surgery. The knee is stable with active flexion to 100° and a 25° extension lag. The knee society clinical rating and function scores are 65 and 60 points, respectively. Radiographs showed well-aligned prosthetic components without evidence of implant failure.