A 55-year-old male presented in the outpatient clinic with a large and foul-smelling tumor growing out of his left eye since a year ago. The mass was initially a small black nodule on the temporal side of the limbus. Other than complete blindness of the left eye, there were no symptoms related to central nervous, cardiorespiratory, or gastrointestinal system. History ocular trauma, excessive sun exposure, and family with malignancy was denied. Physical examination revealed a baseball-sized irregular mass with dark brown to greyish discoloration protruding out of the left eye socket. The fungating tumor surface was partially covered with necrotic tissue, slough, and blood clot. Computed tomography (CT) scan with contrast demonstrated a mixed density mass with antero-posterior diameter of 7.7 cm and latero-lateral diameter of 7.8 cm, phthisic left globe, extra cavitary stretching of optic nerve, ophthalmic vein, and extraocular muscles . There was no evidence of distant metastasis from head neck CT-scan, and pulmonary plain radiography.
The patient was reported to display an increasingly abnormal behavior within the last two years with reports of disorganized speech, self-talk, and difficulty in communication. The patient mostly lived alone or by the care of his siblings after his spouse and children left him. There was no history of medical treatment for the tumor or mental illness. The dominant symptoms at the time of admission and during hospital stay were auditory hallucinations, suspicious behavior, and delusion of persecution. The psychiatric assessment confirmed the diagnosis of paranoid schizophrenia (International Classification of Mental and Behavioral Disorders [ICD]-10 Code F20.0). He was prescribed Olanzapine 10 mg daily, Amitriptyline 100 mg daily, Trihexyphenidyl 1 mg daily, and Diazepam 15 mg daily along with routine psychotherapy throughout the hospital stay.
The patient underwent left exenteration and wide excision that include the eye globe, eyelids, retrobulbar soft tissues, and periosteum with tumor-free margin confirmed by intraoperative frozen sections . The left orbital defect was reconstructed using forehead flap and split-thickness skin graft (STSG) harvested from the left lateral thigh to cover the forehead wound (A). The surgery was performed board-certified specialists: one ophthalmologist, one oncologic surgeon, and two plastic surgeons. Pathologic analysis confirmed the diagnosis of invasive conjunctival melanoma (ICD-Oncology code 8720/3) with evidence of tumor invasion to the retrobulbar vasculature and fat tissue. Frozen sections revealed clear resection margins thus, no nonexcisional adjuvant therapy was applied. To facilitate postoperative drainage, a single 16 French tube was inserted at the posterolateral side of the left orbit.
However, 2 days later it was forcefully pulled out by the patient caused by his paranoid nature. Bilateral arm restraints were applied and additional intravenous Diazepam 10 mg was administered as necessary. Serohemorrhagic fluid was observed to be oozing from the previous drain tract saturating the gauze, requiring daily change. Bulging of the distal flap covering the orbit was noted one-week post-operation necessitating seroma drainage. The drainage was performed twice at day 10 and day 15 before the patient was finally discharged 16 days post-operation under stable psychiatric condition. Post-operation at day 21 showed vital forehead flap and STSG with satisfactory cosmetic results (B). Regrettably, this is the latest information we had regarding his postoperative condition since the patient only managed to came once for postoperative control 7 days after discharge (21 days post-operation).