A 42-year-old woman presented with notable decreased vision and distortion in the right eye forty-two days after severe thoracoabdominal injury in a motorcycle accident. Visual acuity was 20/50 in the right eye and 20/63 in the left eye without improvement using a pinhole occluder. Anterior segment examinations were unremarkable. Fundus examination revealed dilated retinal veins, superficial hemorrhages, and multiple white retinal patches at the posterior pole in both eyes . The white retinal patches involved the macula of the right eye. FFA showed hyperpermeable vasculature and extensive fluorescence leakage in the middle and late stages . OCT revealed highly reflective exudates in the neuroepithelium and macular edema in the right eye . The patient had a history of strabismus surgery 16 years ago, and visual acuity had remained 20/63 in the left eye since then. A detailed history revealed that after the trauma, she underwent liver and bile duct surgery. Postoperatively, the abdominal incision was infected. Hemoculture revealed Staphylococcus aureus positivity, and intravenous antibiotics were started immediately. At the time of her first visit to the eye clinic, she was undergoing intravenous antibiotic therapy. Upon first glance at her fundal appearances with multiple white retinal patches and retinal hemorrhage, we considered it to be bilateral Purtscher’s retinopathy. No specific treatment was given to her.
Ten days later, the four separated retinal lesions in the right eye joined together with star-shaped hard exudates and radial folds in the macula . Visual acuity of the right eye decreased to 20/200. In the left eye, the color of the white retinal patches seemed lighter, and two cotton-wool spots near the optic disc disappeared . OCT revealed that retinal edema was reduced in both eyes with obvious highly reflective exudates in the macula of the right eye. The decreased vision of the right eye and the change of the fundal appearances ten days later challenged our initial diagnosis of Purtscher’s retinopathy.
The patient was not followed up with until 2 years later. The BCVA of the right eye was 20/100. From her fundus photo , we found cicatrization of the oval white patches in both eyes. Especially in the right eye, macular scarring caused obvious radial folds that might have severely impaired visual function. OCT showed fibrous tissue proliferation in the inner limiting membrane layer of the right eye . In the left eye, obvious subretinal fibrous tissue proliferation was found .