A 60-year-old male presented to the hospital following a syncopal event that was preceded by an ICD shock shortly after exposure to marijuana.
The patient has a past history significant for a large anterior myocardial infarction and severe three-vessel coronary artery disease (CAD). The patient was not deemed a bypass candidate and has received a single chamber ICD (Medtronic EnTrust D154VRC) for prevention of sudden cardiac death (SCD) in context of a left ventricular ejection fraction of 20%.
The patient presented to hospital on this occasion following a left eye orbital rupture sustained during a fall due to the syncopal event shortly after smoking 4 "bongs" of marijuana. The patient experienced an ICD discharge prior to the loss of consciousness. There were no other associated symptoms. At no time did the patient have clinical signs or symptoms of angina or cardiac failure. The patient gives a history of experiencing an ICD discharge while smoking the same amount of marijuana 6 months prior. With both occasions, the patient had used 4 bongs rather than his usual 2 to 3 bongs of smoking. He did not seek medical attention at that time. Other than these two episodes of ICD discharge following more than his usual marijuana exposure, he denied any other syncope or ICD discharge.
There was no family history of SCD. The patient was receiving at home enteric coated aspirin 81 mg daily, carvedilol 25 mg twice daily, ramipril 10 mg once daily, atorvastatin 20 mg once daily, spironolactone 25 mg once daily, furosemide 40 mg once daily, diazepam 10 mg once daily, rabeprazole 10 mg as needed for heartburn, all without any changes in the two months prior to this episode. He denied any other recreational drug, or alcohol use. Home oxygen was used at night during sleep. The patient reports use of marijuana daily using a water pipe. He typically uses 7 or 8 "bongs" throughout the day, usually 2 to 3 "bongs" at one time. On the occasions that he inhaled a fourth "bong" consecutively, his defibrillator discharged.
Investigations revealed no biochemical or electrocardiographic evidence of ischemia. Following repair of the globe rupture, the ICD was interrogated and revealed one event in the VF zone (rate > 188 bpm) which was adequately detected and treated with one appropriate shock. The device delivered anti-tachycardia pacing during charging and a 35 J shock that was successful to restore normal sinus rhythm. During the interrogation, the device was reprogrammed to decrease the VT/VF detection from 12/16 to 6/8. The device was found to be otherwise functioning normally. The patient made an uneventful recovery and was discharged home after 2 days of intravenous amiodarone therapy and was discharged with a prescription for oral amiodarone and strong advice of quit smoking.