A 69-year-old man of Indonesian descent was admitted to another hospital with fever and dyspnea. His medical history included tuberculosis in his youth, which was left untreated, ulcerative colitis and a myocardial infarction. His current medication was a beta-blocker, acetylsalicylic acid and azathioprine.
On admission his body temperature was 39.5°C (103°F), and physical and laboratory examination revealed no other abnormalities except for crackles on both sides of the lungs. A chest X-ray showed bilateral nodular changes, which were confirmed by subsequent computed tomography (CT) of the chest. However, a bronchoscopy showed no abnormalities. Cytological examination of sputum was normal. Cultures of blood, sputum, and urine were negative. Auramine, Ziehl-Neelsen stain, and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for mycobacterium were also negative. The initial screening for tuberculosis was negative and culture results for tuberculosis were not yet available. While waiting for results, anti-microbial treatment was started based upon the suspicion of a community-acquired pneumonia.
The patient was treated with amoxicillin-clavulanic acid in combination with ciprofloxacin. A hypersensitivity pneumonitis caused by azathioprine exposure was also considered and therefore azathioprine was discontinued and prednisone 60 mg a day was started.
However, nine days after admission the patient was somewhat disorientated to time and place and complained of headache. Neurological examination revealed no further abnormalities. A lumbar puncture revealed no evidence of meningitis .
Nevertheless antibiotics were changed to treat bacterial and viral meningitis. Thereafter, fever and disorientation diminished, but five days later he lost consciousness and developed hemiparalysis. Encephalitis in an immunocompromised host was considered to be the best suitable diagnosis at that time. The patient was referred to our hospital. At that time the initial cultures of bronchial fluid for Mycobacterium tuberculosis became positive. Chest radiograph now showed bilateral infiltration of the upper lobes in addition to the previously seen bilateral nodules. Analysis of his cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) corresponded with (myco)bacterial infection . The "opening pressure" of this lumbar puncture was 23 cmH2O, corresponding with a moderately raised intra-cranial pressure. The PCR for M. tuberculosis was positive in the CSF and subsequent cultures became positive for M. tuberculosis as well. We concluded that our patient had disseminated mycobacterial infection, presenting with pneumonia and meningitis. His treatment was changed to isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamid, pyridoxine, moxifloxacin, acyclovir and dexamethasone. He required mechanical ventilation and was transferred to the ICU. An electroencephalogram was performed, which was consistent with diffuse encephalopathy. A subsequent CT scan of the brain showed defects in caudate nucleus, the left occipital lobe and diffusely small lesions of the grey matter, consistent with tuberculomas (see Figure ).
Later, during his stay in our ICU, he developed periods with hypertension (blood pressure 320/250 mmHg), sinus tachycardia (150 beats/minute), excessive transpiration, decreased oxygen saturation (80%) with tachypnea (50/min), pink foamy sputum, and high fever (40°C). This constellation of symptoms was accompanied by dystonia in the first three days. These episodes lasted approximately 30 minutes and improved after administration of morphine, benzodiazepines or clonidine. A drug reaction was considered, but stopping rifampicin did not ameliorate symptoms. PAID due to mycobacterial infection was considered. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an abnormal signal in the region of the hippocampus, thalamus and the anterior parts of the lentiform nucleus and caudate nucleus. This was consistent with tuberculous infection . His autonomic instability was treated with beta-blocker and clonidine. A month after admission these periods ceased, which coincided with our patient's improvement. His neurological status improved somewhat (Glasgow Coma Score of E4M5V4) and our patient was discharged to his primary hospital. However, he remained neurologically severely impaired and after three months he died of pneumonia.