An 18-year-old female patient referred to us with complaints of dyspnea (NYHA score of 2–3). An apical rumble and a harsh second heart sound were heard in physical examination. Echocardiographic examination revealed a large mid-trabecular VSD with bidirectional shunt and the widest diameter measuring 22 mm on 2D echocardiography (ECHO) . The defect was located 9 mm proximal to the moderator band. Left and right heart cavities were enlarged; left ventricle, left atrium and right ventricle end-diastolic diameters were respectively 68 mm (Z score: +8.23), 44 mm (Z score: +6.22) and 41 mm (Z score: +10.3). Pulmonary artery diastolic pressure, which we were able to measure due to pulmonary insufficiency, was 58 mmHg. Before and after the vasoreactivity test with inhaled iloprost performed during cardiac catheterization, average aortic pressure was 65 → 86 mmHg, average pulmonary artery pressure: 58 → 73 mmHg, Qp/Qs: 1.6 → 3.2, PVR: 4.6 → 4.3 Wood/U/m2 and PVR/SVR: 0.5 → 0.2 .
On left-ventricular angiocardiogram, the largest end-diastolic defect diameter was 21 mm. The closure procedure was performed with transthoracic echocardiographic guidance, using a 24 mm Cera septal occluder (CSO, Lifetech Scientific Co., ltd, Shenzhen, China) and a 14 F sheath dilator to make a 4.5-5 mm opening . Measured immediately after the procedure and during cardiac catheterization one month later, average aortic pressure was 75 → 75 mmHg, average pulmonary artery pressure: 66 → 30 mmHg, Qp/Qs 1.5 → 1.4, PVR: 4.4 → 2.9 Wood/U/m2 and PVR/SVR: 0.4 → 0.2 .
Transthoracic echocardiographic examination performed 24 hours after the procedure showed a max 35–40 mmHg gradient between the left and right ventricles through the fenestration. At the follow-up examination one month later, the gradient level was the same and there was a 50 drop in pulmonary artery diastolic pressure compared to the pre-procedure value.The patient had a normal sinus rhythm prior to the procedure. After the procedure, we observed sporadic early ventricular systoles and a nodal rhythm disorder that started after approximately 12 hours and spontaneously reverted to normal 9 days later. The patient was put on dexamethasone for the nodal rhythm. Propranolol was started after Holter ECG showed intermittent non-sustained ventricular tachycardia (VT) attacks. When the initially intermittent nodal rhythm became permanent, the patient was switched to sotalol. The last ECG and Holter ECG showed a normal sinus rhythm with sporadic early ventricular systoles and no VT attacks . Holter ECG performed 1 month later showed no early ventricular systoles.
The patient was closely monitored for hemolysis due to the fenestration of the device, but none was observed.
The patient’s dyspnea (NYHA score 2–3 upon admission) started to recede on the 4-5th day after the procedure and was graded as 1–2 in the follow-up examination 1 month later.