A 33-year-old Thai man with a heavy smoking habit presented with a 3-week history of ptosis in his left eye without any other complaints. His visual acuity was 20/20 bilaterally. His intraocular pressure and ocular motility were unremarkable. Ophthalmic examination was significant for mild ptosis of the left eyelid with anisocoria (smaller pupil in the left eye) as shown in . The difference in the pupillary diameter between the right and left sides was greater in dark than in bright conditions. In bright light, the right and left pupils were 3 and 2 mm, respectively . Under dim light, however, the right pupil dilated to 4 mm, whereas the left pupil was almost unchanged (2.5 mm), as shown in . This finding was the result of iris dilator impairment in the left eye. Both pupils reacted to light briskly without an afferent pupillary defect. Anhidrosis was noted on the medial side of the left forehead. A Horner syndrome confirmatory test (the 10% cocaine test) was positive; the difference in pupillary diameter increased to 2.5 mm (6.0 mm on the right and 3.5 mm on the left) after the instillation of 10% cocaine bilaterally . This was accompanied by right upper eyelid retraction . At his first visit, physical examination (including a neurologic examination) was unremarkable. Thus, a provisional diagnosis of left-sided painless isolated Horner syndrome was made. Comprehensive radiological investigations including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and magnetic resonance angiography of his neck and brain combined with computed tomography of the chest were scheduled. Two weeks after his first visit, he developed a left-sided headache along with ipsilateral Horner syndrome. Neurologic examination revealed hypoesthesia in the left cranial nerve V1–3 territories. Emergent computerized tomography angiography (CTA) of the neck, including the skull base, revealed long segmental luminal narrowing of the petrous part of the left internal carotid artery (ICA), and left ICA dissection was suspected . Further MRI and magnetic resonance angiography demonstrated an enhancing infiltrative lesion epicenter at the central skull base, specifically the left sphenoid bone. The lesion encased the left ICA with extensions to the left Meckel cave, left sphenoid wing, and lateral wall of the nasopharynx . Rhinoscopy with incisional biopsy was performed, and pathologic examination revealed undifferentiated, non-keratinizing, and squamous cell NPC. According to the eighth edition of the American Joint Committee on Cancer staging manual, his NPC staging was T4N2M0. Tumor was locally advanced with intracranial extension; regional lymph nodes were bilaterally metastasized above the cricoid cartilage level; and investigations revealed no distant metastasis.