A 45 days old infant with female appearing genitalia was admitted because of recurrent vomiting, poor feeding and cholestasis. It was a product of consanguineous parents with birth weight of 3300 grams. Problems started from third day of life with recurrent vomiting and poor intake which led to poor weight gain.
Intermittent clay colored stool was reported by parents, with changing to completely acholic type a few days before admission. No similar presentation or family history of other features of liver or edocrine disease was reported. On Physical examination length measured 50 cm (<5th percentile), weight 3000 g (<5th percentile), and head circumference 36.5 cm (5–10th percentile). She had a weak pulse, with a heart rate of about 130 beats per minute. Blood pressure was 50/40 mmHg at admission. She had pallor and decreased subcutaneous fat and ill appearance with severe dehydration. Patient's sclerae and skin were obviously jaundiced. External genitalia seemed normal female type. The patient was admitted to PICU and blood drawn for necessary laboratory tests. Initial resuscitation including; rehydration therapy and correction of blood glucose and electrolyte abnormalities started. Broad spectrum antibiotic also was administered due to patient's ill appearance.
Sepsis workups including blood culture and urine culture were performed, which later results showed both negative. Cosidering cholestasis presentation, other investigation including tyrosine level, laboratory assessment for metabolic disorders including serum and urine amino acid chromatography, urinary organic acid profile and NH3 and lactate levels were evaluated with all in normal range but serum alpha1 antitrypsin concentration was mildly increased. The markers for hepatitis and TORCH infections were also negative.
The laboratory tests were as follows: serum sodium 102 meq/lit and serum k+ level 9 meq/lit. Total and direct bilirubin was 13.9 mg/dl and 5.4 mg/dl retrospectively. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 7. Thyroid function test was normal and serum glucose level by either glucose oxidas or orthotoloidas method were lower than normal but with no significant difference. Other laboratory findings are shown in . Buccal smear was negative for bar body. Abdominal sonography showed both adrenals hypertrophic but otherwise normal. Pelvic sonography revealed the testicles in the inguinal canal, moreover, a uterus was not detected in pelvis. Ophthalmic fundoscopy in view of corioretinitis, cataract was not conclusive; chromosome study showed 46XY pattern.
Severe electrolytes abnormalities guided us to possible diagnosis of CAH, and further evaluation including findings in proved this diagnosis. Fludrocortisones and hydrocortisone replacement therapy was instituted and resulted in dramatic improvement. Electrolyte abnormalities and blood sugar was corrected during first week of treatment (Na=130 and K=4.5 Meq/lit). One week later, the total and direct bilirubin declined to 5 and 2.5 mg/dl respectively. After one month, bilirubin levels and all of the liver function tests returned to normal, jaundice disappeared and acholic stools changed to normal pattern. In the following 6 months no history of acholic stool or hypoglycemic attacks were noticed.
On her most recent visit at the age of 15 months, the patient had no obvious problem. Her height was 75 cm (25th percentile), weight 9.5 kg (10–25th percentile) and head circumference 46 cm (25th percentile); her neurodevelopment was appropriate for age.