A 62-year-old woman (body mass: 61.2 kg; height: 1.57 m; body mass index (BMI): 24.8 kg.m−2) was hospitalized in an intensive care unit for ARDS of infectious origin.
Her medical history included autoimmune hypothyroidism, arterial hypertension, and anosmia. She reported no history of smoking. She was retired and practiced regular physical activity: walking, hiking, and using a home stepper. She was only treated by levothyroxine.
The patient was first seen as an outpatient with influenza-like symptoms and was treated with probabilistic antibiotic therapy (amoxicillin then ceftriaxone) for 7 days. The evolution was unfavorable and she was admitted to the pulmonary critical care unit on 5 April 2016 with signs of acute respiratory distress. The chest X-ray on admission showed bilateral alveolar-interstitial syndrome with bilateral lower lobe consolidations , prompting spiramycin addition to her antibiotic treatment. Following a rapid deterioration in lung function under high-flow oxygen therapy, the patient was intubated (D+1) and transferred to the intensive care unit. The worsening clinical picture prompted antiviral treatment with oseltamivir (75 mg twice daily) in addition to ceftriaxone (2 g) and spiramycin (1.5 million units daily). Repeated samples were taken for bacteriological (i.e., protected brush sampling of mucus plugs, cytobacteriological examination of urine, blood culture, polymerase chain reaction, and antigenuria) and virological (e.g., polymerase chain reaction for influenza) investigations. The patient was treated with norepinephrine up to 0.5 microgramme.kg−1.min−1 for 24 hours because of hemodynamic instability.
Moderate ARDS (partial pressure arterial oxygen/fraction of inspired oxygen ratio = 123 mmHg with positive end-expiratory pressure ≥ 5 cm H2O) with bilateral pneumonitis was diagnosed.
The patient was placed on mechanical ventilation at 6 mL.kg−1 predicted body weight, along with sedation using midazolam and sufentanil and curarization with cisatracurium for 48 hours. The favorable response led to a gradual decrease in sedation and ventilatory weaning at D+10. However, following respiratory distress secondary to laryngeal edema, the patient was reintubated, and systemic corticosteroid therapy (1 mg.kg−1) was initiated. In the absence of bacteriological evidence and given the favorable clinical course, antibiotic therapy was reduced to ceftriaxone alone for 10 days. The definitive extubation (D+13) proceeded without complication. The patient (body mass: 62.0 kg, i.e., BMI: 25.2 kg.m−2) was discharged from the intensive care unit (D+14) after weaning from oxygen. This delay is according to the literature, which recommends between 2 and 3 weeks . She then received respiratory physical therapy in the after-care and rehabilitation department.
The rehabilitation program comprised physical exercises . The endurance exercises were performed on a cycle ergometer, treadmill, or stepper. Initially, endurance exercises were executed in sequences of 10 minutes or less, with the goal of reaching 30 minutes per session. The intensity of endurance exercises was prescribed on the effort perception (score of 11-13 on the ratings of perceived exertion scale) . In addition, muscle strengthening exercises for the upper and lower limbs were proposed, lasting 10-15 minutes per session and using weights, dumbbells, or elastic bands. Each exercise comprised a series of 6-12 repeated movements. A 1-minute recovery period was observed between exercises. Warm-up and stretching exercises were performed, respectively, before and after each session . Moreover, the patient was encouraged to increase the time spent in daily living activities.
One month after this episode, she experienced dyspnea on exertion with whitish sputum and a 2-kg weight gain despite daily physical activity (30 minutes/day on a stepper). At D+39, a new chest X-ray showed the clear regression of alveolar condensation with some persistent sequelae at both pulmonary bases .
Three months later, the patient (body mass: 63.0 kg, i.e., BMI: 25.6 kg.m−2) was seen in consultation in the pulmonary department. She had continued daily physical activity with satisfactory tolerance (30 minutes/day of treadmill walking and 15 minutes/day cycling at moderate intensity). Pulmonary function testing (PFT) revealed impaired alveolar-capillary transfer with a carbon monoxide diffusing capacity reduced to 3.93 mmol/(min∗kPa) (60% of the theoretical value). The pulmonary volumes and expiratory flow rates were normal (forced expiratory volume second = 1.84 L, vital capacity = 2.2 L, total lung capacity = 4.49 L; i.e., 102%, 98%, and 109% of the respective theoretical values), with no sign of obstruction (Tiffeneau ratio: 87.1%). Respiratory muscle strength was normal (based on maximal inspiratory and expiratory pressures and the sniff test). The patient covered a satisfactory distance of 542 m (i.e., 109% of the theoretical value) in the 6-minute walk test, with significant desaturation (i.e., 8% drop in saturation, with 88% saturation at the end of the test). The cardiopulmonary exercise test indicated normal aerobic fitness with a peak oxygen flow (VO2peak) of 20.4 mL.min−1.kg−1. The exercise intolerance appeared to be ventilatory in nature with low ventilatory reserve (RV = 6.3%), high respiratory quotient (RQ = 1.32), inappropriate hyperventilation (69 L.min−1) with high respiratory equivalents, significant desaturation on exertion, and a high alveolar-arterial gradient (8.1 kPa), consistent with ARDS sequelae. The exercise limitation also appeared to be of metabolic origin, related to overweight. She was advised to continue regular physical activity (at the first ventilatory threshold) at home, where she had a treadmill and an ergocycle.
At the 6-month evaluation, the patient displayed only mild exertional dyspnea, stage 1 of the modified Medical Research Council (mMRC) classification, but her physical activity was limited by pain from a sternal fracture caused by a road accident (August 2016). The chest CT scan confirmed residual bilateral basal consolidations.
At one year, the patient no longer experienced dyspnea. The chest CT scan showed the persistence of a bilateral interstitial syndrome associated with bronchial dilatation and pleural-based consolidations . PFT had remained stable (carbon monoxide diffusing capacity: 63%) and no other abnormality could be detected.