Arthroscopic isolated partial meniscectomy was performed in a 53-year-old female with MRI confirmed degenerative tear in the posterior horn of the medial meniscus. She manifested pain at medial side of the left knee joint, but cannot be alleviated after two weeks medication of oral NASIDS. The operation was done smoothly under subarachnoid anesthesia without using a tourniquet, and cost only 20 min. Degenerative tear in the posterior 1/3 medial meniscus but no obvious chondral lesion were found intraoperatively. The patient was slim, with the BMI of 23.7, and had no malignancy, VTEs and vascular diseases history but ipsilateral leg varicose veins, no use of anticoagulant and hormone. Also no one in her family had history regarding VTE events. As a routine procedure of thromboprophylaxis, the patient was encouraged to perform ankle pump and continuous passive motion (CPM) exercises after surgery but no use of elastic stockings, and 3200 IU low molecular weight heparin calcium(LMWHC) was injected subcutaneously at the morning of following day. Then she was allowed walking and discharged, flexion and extension of knee joint without weight bearing and straight leg-raising exercises were encouraged but long distance walking was discouraged at home.
Three weeks after surgery, she found swell at the knee joint and it extend to calf and ankle sequentially, but had not attached importance to it. On the 33th postoperative day, dyspnea, palpitation, and nausea were felt abruptly after stand up, and these symptoms had not alleviated after a rest. Soon she presented with severe dyspnea, tachycardia, and hypotension at ambulance and was transfer to emergency department. Pitting edema in the calf was found. An arterial blood gases analysis showed decreased PO2 (72 mmHg, normal 80–100 mmHg) and PCO2 (31 mmHg, normal 35–45 mmHg). Coagulation function showed elevated D-dimmer (2494 ng/ml, normal 0–243 ng/ml) and FDP (28.88μg/ml, normal 0–5 μg/ml).Electrocardiography revealed sinus tachycardia and a right ventricular strain pattern, and chest CTA showed obstruction in both pulmonary arteries . So she was diagnosed pulmonary embolism(PE) and was admitted into ICU, Urokinase (0.2 million units ivgtt in10 minutes, followed by 1.2 million units ivgtt for 10 h) thrombolysis was administered, enoxaparin(60 mg ih q12h) and warfarin(3.125 mg po qn) were prescribed subsequently for anticoagulation. One week later, her condition was stable and transfer to normal ward, the edema at calf also alleviated obviously. The intravenous ultrasound confirmed thrombosis of popliteal vein and small saphenous vein . The reexamined chest CTA revealed pulmonary arteries obstruction had dissolved. After two weeks anticoagulation of warfarin(3.125 mg po qn), the thrombosis of popliteal vein vanished and the patient discharged. Warfarin was prescribed, and regular follow up was conducted to monitor the coagulation function and residual small saphenous vein thrombosis in outpatient department.