A 76-year-old man with pathologic myopia who had received an anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) injection for myopic CNV in the right eye a year earlier was studied. His ocular history also included prior cataract surgery in both eyes and an inner lamellar macular hole in the left eye. He was not taking any medications and had no other medical diseases.
He returned to our clinic with a complaint of distorted vision in the left eye which he first noted one week prior to our examination. His visual acuity was 20/40 in the right eye and 20/20 in the left eye, and the intraocular pressure was 17 mmHg in the right eye and 15 mmHg in the left eye. The refractive error (spherical equivalent) was − 0.38 diopters (D) in the right eye and − 0.50 D in the left eye. The axial length was 30.9 mm in the right eye and 31.0 mm in the left eye. Slit-lamp examination was unremarkable. No inflammatory cells were detected in the anterior chamber or posterior vitreous. Dilated ophthalmoscopic examinations of the right eye showed multiple patchy chorioretinal atrophies and myopic CNV at the scar phase on a background of severe diffuse chorioretinal atrophy . The left eye showed 3 sites of retinal and subretinal hemorrhages and many whitish lesions on a background of severe diffuse chorioretinal atrophy . The hemorrhages were seen in the superior-nasal area of the central fovea and were relatively large and botryoidal-shaped . The ones in the parafoveal region were linear and small , and those in the inferotemporal side of the optic disc were round . The swept-source OCT (SS-OCT) images of the left eye showed disruption of the inner segment/outer segment junction with hyperreflective anterior projections into the outer retina that corresponded to the area of the botryoidal-shaped hemorrhages . These SS-OCT images also showed subretinal infiltrations adjacent to the linear retinal hemorrhages and a disruption of the adjacent ellipsoid zone . The quality of the OCTA images was poor due to unstable fixation, excessively long axial length, and severe myopic chorioretinal atrophy. The fluorescein angiographic (FA) images showed that the retinal and subretinal hemorrhages were hypofluorescent due to blockage . The FA images also showed early hyperfluorescence and late leakages corresponding to the area of the botryoidal-shaped hemorrhages and also adjacent to the linear retinal hemorrhages . These sites were suspected to be the area where the Type 2 CNV developed.
We planned anti-VEGF drug injection to treat the developing CNV but the patient noticed a sudden reduction of his visual acuity in the left eye 3 weeks later. We re-examined the patient and found that a MHRD had developed in the left fundus with subretinal hemorrhages . The SS-OCT images showed a MH with a diameter of 80 μm, and a hyperreflective line which was suspected to be the residual posterior vitreous membrane . We planned a vitrectomy 5 days later, however the preoperative SS-OCT images showed a closed MHRD and the myopic CNV had regressed . Four months after the spontaneous closure of the MHRD, the CNV recurred . The dye leakage observed adjacent to the linear retinal hemorrhages in Fig. d had completely disappeared. Anti-VEGF drug injection was performed to treat the recurred CNV. The visual acuity in the left eye improved to 20/25 from 20/200.