A 13-year old Anuac (Ethiopia, Region of Gambela) male adolescent was referred to our pulmonary clinic for recurrent hemoptysis and repeated respiratory infections. He started to expectorate bright bloody sputum, sometimes as much as 30–50 ml per day, intermittently starting from 4 years of age with gradually increasing hemoptysis especially in the last 3 weeks before presentation. He received treatment with multiple courses of unspecified oral antibiotics for up to 5–10 days for recurrent episodes of cough and fever with shortness of breath since infancy; and he gradually developed worsening exercise intolerance with dyspnea on exertion, palpitation and non-radiating left side dull aching chest pain especially in the last 5 years.
These symptoms occur 4–5 times in a year for which he was prescribed oral antibiotics which improved symptoms for few months. He was treated for pulmonary tuberculosis with Rifampicin, Isoniazid, Pyrazinamide and Ethambutol combination for 2 months followed by Rifampicin and Isoniazid of 4 months at the age of 6 years with clinical suspicion and left hemithorax opacities on chest x-ray but negative microbiologic studies from gastric aspirate and lymph node cytology. Otherwise, he had optimal developmental history and he was a grade 7 student with average school performance. Apart from those mentioned above, his past medical, social, environmental, and family history were unremarkable.
On examination, he was healthy looking with BP of 100/65 mmHg, PR of 100, axillary temperature of 36.4 degree Celsius and oxygen saturation of 94% in room air. He weighed 36 kg, height of 160 cm (BMI; between –2 and –3 SD; other indices above –2 SD). Chest examination revealed decreased air entry on left hemithorax with relative dullness. Head and neck, lymphoglandular, cardiac, abdomen, genitourinary, musculoskeletal and neurologic exams were all normal at presentation.
Complete blood count (WBC = 7800, N = 56%, L = 42%, Hemoglobin of 13.5 mg/dl, Platelets = 322,000/ul) and acute phase reactants (ESR = 5, CRP was negative) were normal and screening for tuberculosis was negative. Chest radiograph showed smaller left lung with hilum not well visualized and diffuse reticulation; and a normal right hemithorax. A contrast enhanced chest Computed Tomography (CT) showed diffuse ill-defined mass in the mediastinum and left hilum bounding the left pulmonary artery and left bronchus and its branches (not shown here); and diffuse left lung inter-lobular septal thickening, and right lung was normal. The left pulmonary artery was smaller than the right and the left pulmonary veins were not visualized on Contrast enhanced coronal and reconstructed planes .
Flexible bronchoscopy demonstrated edematous mucosa of the left bronchial divisions with increased vascularity and multiple bronchial varices starting from the main bronchus and extends distally to all left lobar bronchi . Echocardiography reported decreased size of the left atrium but no other structural heart defected or pulmonary hypertension. Ventilation and perfusion scan and cardiac catheterization were not available in our setting. After the child was evaluated by a team of pediatricians and pediatric surgeons, pneumonectomy was decided because of severe and recurrent symptoms. Endovascular stent implantation was not done because of delayed diagnosis, limited experience in our setting with additional problem of device availability.
Left posterolateral thoracotomy revealed heavy and fleshy appearance of the affected left lung. The pulmonary artery was judged normal but the left pulmonary viens were rudimentary. There were no enlarged hilar lymph nodes but the left lung was adhered to the left lateral chest wall and diaphragm. Left pneumonectomy was done after releasing the adhesion with minimal intraoperative bleeding. He received 2 doses of (prophylactic) ceftriaxone at 50 mg/kg IV 30 min before and 12 h after surgery based on the hospital protocol. He has also received combination of analgesics after thoracotomy including diclofenac 1 mg/kg IM PRN and morphine orally as needed. The post-operative course was smooth, chest drain removed on day 4 and patient discharged stable on sixth post-operative day. The child recovered uneventfully from the surgery and remains asymptomatic after 6 months of follow up post-pneumonectomy. On the follow up, he reported normal activity with no limitation, has restarted school and has no scoliosis, chest pain or cough. A control CXR showed complete opacification of the left hemithorax with no mediastinal shift and normal right lung with hyperinflation.