An 84-year-old female with a past medical history of chronic leukopenia, chronic headaches, vertigo, hypertension, and osteoarthritis presented to the ED as a stroke alert from her outpatient otolaryngology appointment for progressive hearing loss and bilateral ear pain. Upon arrival, the patient revealed a four-day history of left-sided facial droop and a four-week history of headaches, describing the pain as originating from both ears radiating to her jaw. The patient also noted bilateral tinnitus over the prior 2–3 weeks with decreased hearing and ear swelling. She denied any significant change in the chronic periodic vertigo, which she had suffered for years. She also denied any peripheral numbness, tingling, or weakness.
Physical examination found a well-appearing elderly female in no acute distress. Vital signs were concerning for hypertension (184/89 millimeters of mercury) but were otherwise within normal limits. The patient had an obvious left-sided facial droop, with paralysis of the left-sided facial muscles involving the forehead and palpebral fissures. She was unable to raise her left eyebrow but was able to close her eyes bilaterally. Pupils were equal and reactive to light with intact extraocular motions. The remainder of the neurologic examination was reassuring with normal mental status, no strength or sensory deficits in bilateral upper and lower extremities, normal finger-to-nose test, no visual field deficits, and an ability to ambulate with a steady gait. There was significant swelling and tenderness of the external auditory canals and mastoids bilaterally. The tympanic membranes were non-visualized bilaterally due to significant canal edema. All other physical exam findings were unremarkable.
The patient’s notable mastoid process tenderness, acute hearing loss, and inflammation of her auricles raised concern for an erosive or infectious process leading to her Bell’s palsy. Her facial paralysis involved the ipsilateral forehead, making stroke a less likely cause of her presentation. She had no other signs or symptoms on exam concerning for an acute embolic or hemorrhagic stroke including weakness or numbness in her limbs, ataxia, gait instability, or visual deficits. Due to the high suspicion for mastoiditis or other underlying infectious etiologies, a computed tomography (CT) brain and temporal bone was performed and revealed erosion of the mastoid segments of the greater facial nerve canals on the left side. The CT also demonstrated opacification of the mastoid air cells bilaterally with erosion of the bilateral proximal styloid processes . New erosive and destructive changes were also seen in the right occipital condyle and right posterior clivus suspicious for an infectious or neoplastic process.
Given these imaging findings, the patient was empirically treated with intravenous (IV) vancomycin and clindamycin for presumed erosive mastoiditis. Subsequent head and neck magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated widespread skull base osteomyelitis (SBO). There was noted to be involvement of the stylomastoid foramen bilaterally, extending along the left greater than right facial nerves, likely an extension of the infectious process. There was also likely sigmoid sinus thrombosis on the right extending into the jugular vein .
Otolaryngology was consulted and placed bilateral ear wicks in the ED for topical ofloxacin administration. The next day, the patient underwent a bilateral myringotomy tube placement, adenoidectomy, and complete bilateral mastoidectomy. She was continued on IV antibiotics with transition to cefepime, vancomycin, and metronidazole for broader coverage while middle ear cultures taken in the operating room were pending. On post-operative day one, the patient had significant pain relief and improvement in her facial nerve function. Cultures from the mucoid discharge of the left middle ear grew Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and her antibiotic regimen was changed to oral ciprofloxacin based on culture sensitivities.
During her hospitalization a CT venogram also confirmed a right venous sinus thrombus, and the patient was placed on enoxaparin 80 milligrams four times daily for the next three months. She was discharged with a six-week course of oral ciprofloxacin and outpatient follow-ups with otolaryngology, neurology, infectious disease, and her primary care physician. The patient was seen in clinic three months later and was doing well with resolved facial nerve palsy, resolved headaches, and significantly improved hearing.