A 25-year-old man had had worsening vision of left eye since 7 months ago. There was no history of headache, vomiting, polydipsia, polyuria or sexual dysfunction. The case was obese and well-nourished and appeared to be apathic. The visual acuity of right eye was 0.8, while the left eye could only count fingers within 30 cm. There were signs of bitemporal visual field defect, delayed light reflex of the left pupil and slight abduct limitation in left eye. Computed tomography scan showed a roundish homogenous and mildly high density mass in the sellar and suprasellar regions, with clear margin, intra-tumor calcification, but no periphery edema . The magnetic resonance imaging showed the roundish intrasellar and suprasellar mass of measured 3.9 cm × 3.6 cm × 3.0 cm located slight to the left, which invaded the anterior skull base, cavernous sinus and upper clivus. There were signals of slight hypointense on T1-weighted images , slight hyperintense on T2-weighted images , moderate nonhomogeneous enhancement and the dural tail sign , All signals were with clear margin and without periphery edema . Endocrine tests of the hypothalamic–pituitary axis were normal.
A left transpterional craniotomy exposed the tumor, which was mainly located in suprasellar region and was partially extended into the intrasellar, anterior skull base, cavernous sinus and upper clivus . The tumor had soft texture, clear boundary, crimson and hypervascularity. The bilateral optic nerves were compressed severely . The tumor was then separated along its pseudocapsular margin, and was resected in the interspace I, II, III, respectively . The tumor in the intrasellar and cavernous sinus was partially removed. The bilateral optic nerves were decompressed well after tumor resection . The pituitary stalk, bilateral internal carotid arteries, oculomotor nerves and posterior communicating artery were also protected.
The resected specimen was grey and soft. Histopathologic examination (HE) staining showed that tumor cells were oval and well-differentiated with schistic distribution. Cytoplasm was sparse with mild acidophilia. Nuclei were oval, without obvious heteromorphosis and mitotic figures. Neuropil structure was observed in some region of the tumor tissues, without necrosis . Immunohistochemical staining showed that the neuronal markers such as Synaptophysin, NeuN and Alpha-internexin were highly positive . Other markers including the glial marker (GFAP), epithelial marker (CK) and anterior pituitary hormones markers (such as GH, PRL, TSH, FSH, LH and ACTH) were negative. The p53 albumen had no mutation. The Ki67 index was around 3 % . Pathologic diagnosis was the extraventricular neurocytoma (WHO II).
The patient’s visual acuity improved on the second postoperative day. The patient developed a mild diabetes insipidus but recovered after hypophysin therapy. Cranial MRI showed subtotal tumor removal, with a little tumor remained in intrasellar region . One week later, the patient developed an epileptic seizure and was treated by oxcarbazepine. The patient was discharged from hospital after 14 days after the surgery.
Three-month postoperative follow-up showed patient’s left visual acuity increased to 0.12 with improvement on vision defect. The anterior pituitary hormone tests were normal. Cranial MRI results were similar as the one taken on the second postoperative day.