A four-month-old male infant born in October 2001, who was the only child of consanguineous parents, was admitted to the intensive care unit of our hospital with diagnoses of septic shock, bilateral suppurative otitis media, thrush and diaper area candidiasis.
Three days prior to admission, he had developed fever that partially responded to acetaminophen. The physical examination revealed tachycardia, weak peripheral perfusion, significant weight loss, hepatosplenomegaly, abundant mucous discharge from both tympanic ducts, erythematosquamous cutaneous lesions on the thoracic wall, thrush and diaper area dermatitis.
His blood pressure recovered soon after admission, through rapid infusion of intravenous fluids and transfusion of red blood cells. Intravenous cefotaxime and cloxacillin were started.
The laboratory tests at the time of admission revealed leukocytosis with neutrophil predominance (> 40 x 103/mm3) that persisted during this hospitalization in spite of the antibiotic treatment. The chest radiography showed mild, bilateral, symmetrical interstitial infiltrates. Urine and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cytochemistry were normal. Blood, urine and CSF cultures were sterile. Otic discharge culturing showed the presence of Haemophilus influenzae type B and coagulase-negative Staphylococcus. The antibiotic treatment was maintained for 14 days, with a good clinical response.
The patient’s past medical history consisted of uncomplicated fekal development with full-term eutocic delivery and weight of 3,400 grams. He had respiratory depression and sepsis of unknown origin at birth and was treated empirically with broad-spectrum antibiotics. His umbilical cord detached late, at 21 days of age, and since day 23, he had presented recurrent episodes of bilateral non-purulent otitis media that were resistant to regular antibiotic treatment.
He had been readmitted at the age of two months because of bronchopneumonia and mucoid suppurative otitis media. During that hospital stay, he was treated for cellulitis that originated at venipuncture sites and affected his entire arm. He was treated with intravenous penicillin and cloxacillin with a good outcome.
On the basis of the recurrent infections and physical findings, a diagnosis of primary immunodeficiency was suggested. An ELISA test for human immunodeficiency virus and tests for complement components and quantitative immunoglobulin isotypes A, G, M and E were done. In addition, determinations of CD4, CD8 and the CD4/CD8 ratio were all normal. Flow cytometry analysis for CD18 and CD11 were requested, and also bone images. Finally, a bone marrow biopsy was done to rule out histiocytosis.
The diagnosis of leukocyte adhesion deficiency (LAD) type 1 was suspected because of the persistent leukocytosis and the history of a delay in umbilical cord detachment. Because of this suspicion, the patient was started on prophylactic oral therapy with amoxicillin/clavulanate and nystatin, and was discharged. A flow cytometry analysis, kindly provided by Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center/Children’s Hospital Immunology Laboratory, detected that the CD11 and CD18 levels were low, thus confirming the diagnosis of LAD type 1 . Bone marrow or stem cell transplant was not available, and the patient died at the age of four years at another city hospital because of severe sepsis.