A healthy 5-year-old boy presented with right facial paresis (incomplete closure of the right eye and deviation of the buccal rim) that appeared approximately 10 days prior to admission. Concurrently, the mother reported a “change in mood”. The symptoms were accentuated when the child cried, and no fever was reported in previous weeks. Additionally, the mother did not report any tick bites.
No neurological disorders or neuropsychiatric disturbances were previously reported in his medical history nor in his family.
Upon physical examination, the child was in good general conditions, showing incomplete right eye closure, buccal rim deviated to the left (right labial angle paretic) , no nystagmus. No additional clinically relevant findings were observed during the physical examination. Specifically, the tympanic membranes presented no acute inflammation.
A diagnosis of facial palsy with a Grade IV from the House-Brackmann grading system (obvious facial weakness, incomplete eye closure, no forehead movement, asymmetrical mouth movement, and synkinesis) was made.
Laboratory data showed normal blood count, negative indices of inflammation (CRP 0.5 mg/L, ESR 2), and normal coagulation. The only significant finding was an exceeding D-dimer of 4263 μg/L, (normal values < 500). The D-dimer values were still increasing the next day (15,353 μg/L).
The brain MRI (Magnetic Resonance Imaging), performed due to the alteration in the behavior, did not show any cerebral lesions or ischemic events. The study of the supra-aortic trunks with echo color Doppler showed no signs of steno-obstructive lesions in the common carotids, internal carotids and external carotids, with well-modulated flow in all carotid trunks; the optic fundus was normal.
Lymphoproliferative disease was excluded by means of light microscope examination of peripheral blood, normal lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and normal abdominal ultrasound. In light of the possible post-infectious etiology of facial paralysis, the main serology tests were performed (EBV as previous infection, Parvovirus negative, HSV 1/2 IgG positive, HSV 2 IgG negative, Mycoplasma, Enterovirus, Borrelia, Bartonella negative).
Serology for SARS-CoV-2 revealed previous infection (IgG positive, IgM and IgA weakly positive) although the nasopharyngeal polymerase chain reaction was negative.
Given the positive of serology for SARS-CoV-2, although in absence of high indices of inflammation and lack of diagnostic criteria for multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C), an echocardiogram and electrocardiogram were performed and resulted as normal.
The diagnosis of post-infectious COVID-19-related facial paralysis was made and steroid therapy with prednisone (1 mg/day for 7 days followed by tapering) and eye lubricants was immediately started. At 1 month follow-up, the child was healthy and was no longer showing any sign of palsy.