A 53-year-old Caucasian sightseer man, with past medical history significant for non-specific hypertensive motility disorders of the esophagus with incomplete or spontaneously resolved episodes of esophageal obstruction (the last one three months ago, with a global annual frequence of 3–4 episodes, as referred), was eating his grilled sirloin steak with trouffle dinner at a restaurant in Spoleto, italian city extremely renowned for “The Festival of Two Worlds”, when he felt swallowing difficulty with stoppage of food passage. He is accompanied to the emergency department of district general hospital by his friends given the persistence of symptoms 15 min after the ingestion of boneless meat. The patient had no history of other specific diseases in the past and no abnormal family or medication history of note. He denied prior weight loss, halitosis, ingestions of caustic substances, excessive alcohol consumption, hematemesis and melena. Physical examination, including firstly an airway evaluation and ventilatory status assessment, resulted unremarkable. On the basis of the known esophageal past medical history as well as the absence of bones in the bolus, the patient was submitted to a new conservative treatment, the “Nitro-Push Blind Technique”: after suitable preparation and monitoring of blood pressure, two sprays (600 mcg) of nitroglycerine (Natispray®, Teofarma srl, Valle Salimbene, PV, Italy) were administered under the tongue. Five minutes later, a 28 Fr naso-gastric tube (Argyle™ Lavacuator Tube, Covidien, Mansfield, MA, USA) was carefully and blindly inserted into esophageal lumen until resistance to progression and, during the air insufflation at this level through the tube’s service channel, gentle pressure was applied to the food bolus by means of catheter’s tip to facilitate disimpaction. Sudden symptoms relief and copious belch indicated the resolution of obstruction obviating the need for endoscopic approach. Patient was carefully discharged after 30 min from admission without complications, with a written plan of home care advising the patient to go to urgent care in case of any symptoms as well as the recommendation to contact a gastroenterologist to define the diagnosis. At this aiming, after 4 days, the patient underwent esophageal HRM, performed with a 4 mm outer diameter 24-channel water-perfused system (Gastro Explorer HR®, EB Neuro Spa, Firenze, Italy). Esophageal pressure topography data was analyzed using Mano.Net® (EB Neuro Spa, Firenze, Italy) analysis software. The acquired HRM datasets were reviewed according to the current Chicago classification and the hypercontractile pattern with regular lower esophageal relaxation, normal wave front velocity but hypertensive, repetitive contractions (>300 mmHg), and a distal contractile integral >10,000 mmHg · s · cm were consistent with the diagnosis of Jackhammer esophagus.