A 61-year old male patient was admitted to our hospital in May 2007 with a solid mass in the right-inferior gum for almost a year and progressive enlargement in latest two weeks. He had no respiratory or gastrointestinal complaints, and he denied any weight loss. In this spray painter, chronic aplastic anemia was diagnosed when he was 21 years old, after a previous three-year exposure to high concentration of benzene. Consequently, he was treated with glucocorticoid for four years. After that this patient lived together with his brother in Hangzhou, and he only did some houseworks. He had never smoked nor been exposed to smoking environment. 40 years later, three synchronous primary neoplasms including a basaloid squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus, primary hepatocellular carcinoma and well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma of the gum were diagnosed in this patient.
In late October 2006, he developed progressive dysphagia and a barium swallow and computed tomography (CT) of esophagus showed an esophageal neoplasm. Esophagogastroscopy and histopathological analysis of the biopsy specimen revealed a basaloid squamous cell carcinoma . The patient underwent a radical operation of esophageal carcinoma. CT of abdomen showed a cycloid hypodense lesion with a clear margin in the left liver. He was suggested follower-up for the lesion in the liver. The repeated CT of abdomen two month later showed a little enlargement of the lesion. The patient had no family history of malignancy. He had also no history of hepatitis.
On physical examination, a painless rigid mass (2 × 1.5 cm) was found on right-inferior gum near the first molar. Chest X-ray and electrocardiogram were unremarkable. The bone marrow puncture and biopsy was performed and showed the marrow failure. Hepatic ultrasonography revealed two low echoic masses at level S2-3 (maximum diameter 3.9 cm), and the entire liver parenchyma had heterogeneous echogenicity. Histopathological analysis of the biopsy specimen revealed primary hepatocellular carcinoma . A gum biopsy from the mass was performed, and showed well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma . So the patient underwent a radical operation for the mass on June 23, 2007. Neither adjuvant chemical therapy nor radiation therapy was given during the period of hospitalization. The patient was discharged on July 16, 2007. Five months later, he died of massive hemorrhage of gastrointestinal tract induced by thrombocytopenia.