A 37-year-old man was admitted with a 4-day history of fever, headache and myalgia. He complained of epigastralgia, nausea, and diarrhoea. His past medical history consisted only of active smoking. He had no background of splenic disorders and alcohol excess and was not immunocompromised. He reported no cardiac symptoms. Three days before the beginning of symptoms, his right hand had been bitten by his dog. On admission, his temperature was 38.2°C, his heart rate 130 b.p.m., and his blood pressure 118/72 mmHg. Pulse oxygen saturation was 100% on room air. The clinical examination was unremarkable, apart from a bite wound on his right hand. There was no rash, no sign of cellulitis, or soft tissue necrosis. Laboratory tests showed an intense inflammatory status: C-reactive protein, 417 mg/L, normal range 0–5 mg/L; white blood cell count, 9.45 G/L, normal range 3.77–9.05 G/L (neutrophils 91%, lymphocytes 3.5%); procalcitonin, 8.42 μg/L, normal range 0–0.5 μg/L; thrombocytopaenia (platelets, 29 G/L, normal range 177–379 G/L); and acute kidney injury (creatinine, 189 μmol/L, normal range 45–84 μmol/L, ×3 vs. baseline) and abnormal liver enzymes (aspartate transaminase [AST] × 2 upper reference limit, alanine transaminase [ALT] × 3 upper reference limit). Markers of myocardial injury included elevated high sensitivity-troponin T (peak 1129 ng/L on Day 2, upper reference limit 50 ng/L) and N-terminal brain natriuretic peptide (1127 pg/mL, upper reference limit 500 pg/mL). Twelve-lead electrocardiogram showed a mild diffuse ST-segment elevation with micro-Q waves in inferior and lateral leads (, panel A). Transthoracic echocardiography revealed mild global left ventricular (LV) hypokinesia with a decrease in LV ejection fraction (42%) and preserved right ventricular function. There was no pericardial effusion. Blood cultures were drawn, and the patient was treated with parenteral cefotaxime (3 g per day).
After 45 and 47 h, the two aerobic blood cultures grew slender, fusiform, Gram-negative rods. Capnocytophaga canimorsus was identified by Maldi-time of flight mass spectrometry.
Cefotaxime was changed to amoxicillin (3 g/day for 7 days) with a favourable clinical course and subsequent recovery of biological markers.
Because of ECG alterations and troponin elevation, coronary computed tomography angiography was performed and showed normal coronary arteries. Cardiovascular magnetic resonance was performed on Day 5 and showed a non-dilated LV (87 mL/m²) with normal global systolic function (LV ejection fraction 56%). T2-weighted short-tau inversion-recovery sequence showed focal areas of subepicardial oedema in the LV inferolateral wall (, panel B). Cine-cardiovascular magnetic resonance acquired 1 min after the injection of 0.1 mm gadolinium chelates demonstrated early hyper-enhancement in the LV inferolateral wall, indicating hyperaemia (, panel C). Late gadolinium-enhancement imaging in the subepicardium of inferolateral and anterolateral walls confirmed the diagnosis of acute myocarditis (, panel D). T2- and extracellular volume (ECV) LV maps revealed increased T2 time (oedema) and ECV (interstitial space) in the inferolateral and anterolateral walls as compared to the septal wall (, panels E and F). Although it is the gold standard for the diagnosis of acute myocarditis, endomyocardial biopsy was not performed because there was no haemodynamic deterioration, no heart failure, or arrhythmias, and because the Gram-negative rod bacteria was covered with specific antibiotic regimen. The patient was discharged on Day 7. He remains well at 1 year without further symptoms at the last clinical visit.