An 87-year-old woman who presented with appetite loss and leg edema was admitted for evaluation. Blood examination revealed an inflammatory response (C-reactive protein level was 7.85 mg/dL), kidney dysfunction (blood urea nitrogen was 37.4 mg/dL, and the serum creatinine level was 2.25 mg/dL), and hypoalbuminemia. Urinary examination revealed severe proteinuria (7.05 g/gCr) and hematuria. In addition, the patient was positive for myeloperoxidase-ANCA (147 U/mL). The main laboratory data are presented in .
According to these results, she was diagnosed with AAV and glucocorticoid therapy was started (an oral dose of prednisolone 40 mg/day). The patient was considered to be at a high risk of deep vein thrombosis; therefore, heparin calcium therapy was also administered. Although the systemic inflammation improved after glucocorticoid therapy, the leg edema and hypoalbuminemia did not improve. Her body weight steadily increased, and leg edema worsened 14 days after hospitalization; she received hemodialysis therapy. Although the baseline platelet count was 400,000 to 500,000/μL, 8 days after the start of heparin calcium therapy, her platelet count gradually decreased. In addition, blood examination performed 26 days after hospitalization revealed that the platelet count was 81,000/μL, the fibrinogen level was low at 138 mg/dL, and the FDP-D-dimer level was high at 18.2 μg/mL . According to the 4Ts scoring, reduction of 50% or more of the platelet count and a platelet decrease between 5 and 10 days after using heparin are consistent. Additionally, because the FDP-D-dimer was high, she might have had thrombosis. Other causes of thrombocytopenia were not detected. Therefore, it was highly possible that she developed HIT. In addition, the patient was strongly positive for the anti-PF4-heparin complex antibody (the titer of the anti-platelet factor 4-heparin complex antibody evaluated by the latex turbidity assay was more than 5.0 U/mL). The titer measurement result was extremely high because the cutoff point of the anti-platelet factor 4-heparin complex antibody evaluated by the latex turbidity assay is 1.0 U/mL. These results were the basis of the HIT diagnosis. We performed Doppler echography for her legs to evaluate deep vein thrombosis 28 days after hospitalization. However, deep vein thrombosis was not detected. Because we expected her renal function to recover at that time, enhanced computed tomography to evaluate systemic thrombosis was not performed. Heparin was discontinued 29 days after hospitalization, and argatroban therapy was administered, following which warfarin therapy was administered. After starting argatroban therapy, her platelets count gradually increased . Fortunately, no symptoms due to arterial or venous thrombosis presented in her clinical course. Fifty-two days after her hospitalization, the platelet count improved to 200,000/μL. Because her AAV activity was well controlled and the titer of MPO-ANCA was reduced, the dose of prednisolone was decreased. However, because kidney function was not recovered, she was administered maintenance hemodialysis therapy.