A 6-year-old boy with testicular relapsed B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) with marrow involvement presented with fever, body aches, headaches, and chills. He was in his usual state of health until noon that day, when he started to feel ill. He felt warm to the touch with an oral temperature of 38.9 C (102 F). He had no other symptoms and no known sick contacts. His only home medication was trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX), which he took on Saturdays and Sundays for Pneumocystis jirovecii prophylaxis. His last chemotherapy treatment was one week prior and consisted of intravenous (IV) etoposide and IV cyclophosphamide.
Nine months prior to the patient’s presentation, in August 2022, he was noted to have an enlarged, firm right testicle during routine follow-up. A testicular biopsy, bone marrow biopsy, and lumbar puncture confirmed testicular relapsed B-ALL with marrow involvement. Following this diagnosis, the patient began chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and immunotherapy with blinatumomab. He had been intermittently neutropenic between October and December 2022.
In February 2023, he began an eight-week cycle of chemotherapy, known as continuation 2, which consisted of oral mercaptopurine, oral methotrexate, oral thioguanine, IV vincristine, IV etoposide, IV cyclophosphamide, and intrathecal methotrexate. He had just completed this phase of treatment and was due to start maintenance therapy with oral dexamethasone, oral methotrexate, oral mercaptopurine, IV vincristine, and intrathecal methotrexate when he became ill. Thus, the start of maintenance therapy was deferred to the following week, when the patient was more clinically stable.
At initial presentation (day 0), the patient was tachycardic, non-toxic, and well-hydrated. He had a tunneled central venous catheter (CVC) with no surrounding erythema. Labs were significant for white blood cell count 2,800/μL, absolute neutrophil count 2,100/mm3 (increased from 600/mm3 the week prior and 300/mm3 one month prior), hemoglobin 9.1 g/dL, and platelets 60,000/μL. He received ceftriaxone and a normal saline bolus. Respiratory pathogen panel was negative. He was admitted to the pediatric hematology-oncology service for observation.
On day 1, the patient became septic with tachycardia, hypotension, and fever to 39.5 C (103.1 F), requiring three normal saline boluses of 20 mL/kg each. C-reactive protein level was 148 mg/L. Antibiotics were broadened to vancomycin and cefepime, given his ill appearance and immunocompromised state. He was ultimately transferred to the pediatric intensive care unit after developing altered mental status. A repeat chest X-ray showed new diffuse patchy airspace opacities and focal right lower lung confluent opacities, in the setting of a new oxygen requirement. The patient’s mental status rapidly improved and was thought to be behavioral in nature. He was transferred back to the floor on day 2.
On day 2, CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis was obtained due to abdominal pain and demonstrated bilateral lower lobe consolidation and ground glass opacities concerning for pneumonia, small bilateral pleural effusions, and splenomegaly . His fever persisted, and he was noted to have severe neutropenia, with an absolute neutrophil count of 500/μL. Blood cultures collected from each lumen of the patient’s tunneled double-lumen CVC on day 0 began to grow gram-positive rods after 36 h. On day 3, the organisms were identified as Nocardia nova complex. He had multiple subsequent central and peripheral blood cultures on days 1 and 3, only one of which, a CVC culture collected on day 3, also grew N. nova. An isolate was sent to Mayo Clinic Laboratories (Rochester, MN) for antimicrobial susceptibilities. Following identification of N. nova, vancomycin and cefepime were discontinued, and the patient was started on imipenem-cilastatin, TMP-SMX, and linezolid. Over the next day, fever and oxygen requirement resolved. The CVC was removed on day 4 after being in place for 256 days. Due to the episode of altered mental status, CT head, lumbar puncture, and brain MRI were performed, with unremarkable results. On day 6, CT chest revealed mild central bronchial wall thickening and numerous peripheral nodular and ground glass opacities without evidence of abscess . Because he had already improved without antifungal therapy, these findings were attributed to nocardiosis; dedicated evaluation for invasive fungal infection was not pursued. On day 7, following blood culture clearance, a peripherally inserted central catheter was placed for continuation of antibiotics and chemotherapy.
The patient began maintenance chemotherapy on day 8, consisting of intrathecal methotrexate, IV vincristine, oral prednisone, and oral mercaptopurine. He was discharged on day 11 with imipenem-cilastatin, TMP-SMX, and linezolid, pending antimicrobial susceptibilities. Susceptibility testing was reported on day 12, showing susceptibility to ceftriaxone, imipenem, clarithromycin, amikacin, TMP-SMX, and linezolid . Imipenem-cilastatin was discontinued at that time. The patient was unable to tolerate large doses of TMP-SMX suspension and unable to swallow pills, so linezolid was continued and azithromycin was added. Six weeks after discharge, linezolid and azithromycin were discontinued in favor of TMP-SMX monotherapy at a dose of 800-160 mg twice daily (10.3 mg of trimethoprim per kilogram per day). Since TMP-SMX and methotrexate are both anti-folate drugs, and due to the patient’s recent pancytopenia, the dose of oral methotrexate was reduced by 42%. Follow-up chest X-ray 19 days after discharge showed interval improvement in bilateral patchy perihilar opacities. At his outpatient visits, he was well-appearing and hemodynamically stable, apart from an episode of COVID-19 infection in August 2023, treated with remdesivir. He is set to remain on TMP-SMX for a prolonged course, with periodic chest CT to evaluate response.