A forty-year-old Filipino female homemaker presented in her home country in April 2017 with a progressively enlarging vulva mass over three months, which she noticed after undergoing depilation waxing in this area. She was a lifetime non-smoker, was nulliparous and had no known history of endometriosis, sexually transmitted disease or prenatal exposure to diethylstilbestrol. She had not undergone previous Papanicolaou smear or pelvic surgery. She had no past medical history nor family history of note. During the course of her disease, she developed significant morbidity with limited mobility, groin pain and lower limb swelling. From the perspective of a young woman, the physical, social and psychosexual implications of her illness were frustrating and distressing.
Physical examination in the Philippines showed a 12 centimeter (cm) cream-colored, firm polypoid mass over the right anterior labia majora, attached from a base measuring 4 cm in diameter. Matted bilateral inguinal lymph nodes were palpated, measuring 10 cm by 9 cm, and 4 cm by 3 cm in the left and right inguinal fossae, respectively. On further examination, the urethra, left labia majora, vagina, uterus, adnexa and digital rectal examination were noted to be normal. Computed tomography (CT) scans of the thorax, abdomen and pelvis confirmed enlarged lymph nodes in bilateral inguinofemoral regions, but no distant visceral or nodal metastases. The patient underwent wide local excision of the vulvar mass with bilateral inguinal lymph node dissection in the Philippines. However, residual nodal disease in the left femoral station was deemed surgically inoperable due to its proximity to the femoral vessels, precluding safe dissection. Histological examination showed metastatic clear cell adenocarcinoma. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was positive for cytokeratin, CAM 5.2 and HNF1-ß, and negative for napsin-A, P40, desmin, SMA, S-100 and Melan-A, with 4 of 23 harvested lymph nodes positive for macrometastases, International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics Stage IVA. Post-operative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the pelvis showed a residual enhancing heterogeneous left inguinofemoral nodal mass measuring 5 cm on short axis. The patient received adjuvant chemotherapy with intravenous carboplatin and paclitaxel 3-weekly, followed by radical adjuvant pelvic external beam radiotherapy concurrent with weekly cisplatin, which was completed in October 2017. Post-therapy MRI documented regression in the size of this node to a short axis of 3.2 cm with no new sites of disease. The patient was subsequently placed on 3 monthly surveillance.
Three months later, she re-presented with clinical enlargement of the left inguinofemoral lymph node, and local progression was again confirmed on MRI. This was deemed surgically unresectable. Between January 2018 to September 2018, the patient received second-line carboplatin plus docetaxel for 5 cycles, third-line gemcitabine plus ifosfamide for 4 cycles and fourth-line weekly paclitaxel for 2 cycles. Chemotherapy was discontinued due to grade 3 fatigue and clinical disease progression with worsening pain over the left groin . The patient was referred to our center for a second opinion.
Examination at our center revealed a now 25 cm fungating left inguinal nodal mass with adjacent 6 cm left upper thigh satellite nodule, with lymphedema distal to the large left groin mass . This was associated with pain on movement requiring regular opioid analgesia. The patient was unable to ambulate independently due to pain and left lower limb swelling and was largely chair-bound. Eastern cooperative organization group (ECOG) performance status was 2. An 18-F fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography CT scan (PET-CT) demonstrated a fungating mass at the left groin with invasion of the adductor compartment . There was also bilateral pelvic and retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy with suspicion of left lower limb lymphatic obstruction, and soft tissue deposits seen in the left gluteal region and anterior abdominal wall were consistent with metastases. Wedge biopsy of this mass at our center confirmed adenocarcinoma, clear cell subtype . IHC performed demonstrated tumor expression of HNF1-β, cytokeratin, CAM 5.2, but negativity for p16, p40, napsin-A, desmin, SMA, S-100 and Melan-A. Diffuse overexpression of p53 on IHC was consistent with a p53-mutant pattern. Expression of MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 and PMS2 was preserved. PD-L1 (Dako 22C3pharmDx) CPS was 45 . The patient was enrolled on a prospective study of somatic tumor sequencing (Integrated Molecular Analysis of Cancer in Gynecologic Oncology, IMAC-GO, NCT02078544) after obtaining written informed consent. Next-generation tumor sequencing (FoundationOneCDx®) showed a tumor mutational burden of 5 mutations/mega base and microsatellite-stable (MSS) status. Pathological variants were noted in CDKN2A/B loss, TERT promoter124C>T, TP53 G154S, MET amplification .
In view of a high PD-L1 CPS of 45, the patient received off-label treatment with pembrolizumab 200 mg 3-weekly from October 2018. Disease response assessment was performed by FDG PET-CT every 3 cycles, using Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) version 1.1. Adverse events were graded using Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 5.0. The patient was adherent to treatment from October 2018 to September 2019.
Complete clinical response ( and ) and RECISTv1.1 PR on PET-CT scan ( and ) was seen after 3 cycles of pembrolizumab. This partial response was sustained for 8 months duration. CA125 reduced from 298 to a nadir of 5.2 . Importantly, there was rapid resolution of her left limb pain, allowing her to discontinue all analgesia, as well as marked improvement to the associated lymphedema. Her ECOG performance status improved to 1 and she resumed independent ambulation. From our patient’s perspective, she experienced a remarkable reduction in morbidity and regained her independence. Repeat biopsy of a residual sinus in the left groin showed only suppurative necrotic material. The patient experienced grade 1 fatigue and grade 1 diarrhea related to pembrolizumab that were managed supportively. However, after the fourth cycle of pembrolizumab, she developed a new grade 3 neutropenia which was concerning for immune-related neutropenia. This prompted a Hematology consult, bone marrow biopsy and examination. Unexpectedly, bone marrow examination showed a normocellular marrow with dysplastic features, confirming a diagnosis of myelodysplastic syndrome with excess blasts subtype. Chromosomal analysis on her bone marrow biopsy showed clonal translocation., No clear cell carcinoma infiltration of the bone marrow was found. The diagnosis made was secondary myelodysplastic syndrome with excess blasts (MDS-EB), which was thought to be related to her previous exposure to multiple lines of cytotoxic chemotherapy. As her VCCC tumor was responding to treatment at this point, she was continued on pembrolizumab, but granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) was avoided in view of the diagnosis of MDS-EB.
After receiving 8 months of pembrolizumab, radiological disease progression was detected on serial PET-CT. As the patient remained clinically well and asymptomatic, pembrolizumab was continued in view of continued clinical benefit. Unfortunately, after a duration of 11 months of pembrolizumab therapy, her neutropenia continued to worsen . This coincided with VCCC disease progression, presenting with recurrence of left groin pain and radiological findings of increased metabolic activity in the left inguinal ulcerative lesion with more prominent surrounding subcutaneous tissue and increased left thigh girth likely due to lymphatic obstruction. Alongside this, her CA125 level gradually rose . In September 2019, the patient returned to her home country to continue treatment, and defaulted follow-up at our center. Her disease continued to progress in her home country, coinciding with the transformation of MDS to acute myeloid leukemia (AML) in December 2019. She subsequently demised of AML in January 2020. Her overall survival (OS) from time of initiation of pembrolizumab till death was 16 months.