A 67-year-old Caucasian man was referred to the Oncology Service, Wills Eye Hospital, for an evaluation of a peripheral iris elevation at the 9:00 o'clock position in the left eye (OS). He had a history of choroidal melanoma OS, confirmed using FNAB and treated with iodine-125 plaque brachytherapy 20 years before referral. In the FNAB, a 25-guage needle bent to an 85° angle was inserted via a 1.5-mm partial-thickness scleral incision approximately 3.5 mm posterior to the limbus OS along the 10:00 o'clock meridian. Under indirect ophthalmoscopy, the needle was advanced through the vitreous cavity into the choroidal mass, and aspiration was performed. After aspiration, mild vitreous hemorrhage was noted, and hemostasis was achieved by applying direct pressure on the globe. A nylon suture was used to close the scleral incision site. Cytological examination of the aspirate showed mixed spindle and epithelioid melanoma cells.
On examination at our center, 20 years later, visual acuity was 20/20 in the right eye (OD) and 20/25 OS. Intraocular pressure was 9 mmHg OD and 11 mmHg OS. The right eye was unremarkable.
The OS had a superonasal dilated episcleral blood vessel that perforated the sclera 3 mm from the limbus [Figure 1(A)]. A flat, darkly pigmented episcleral mass, measuring 0.2 mm in the basal diameter was noted at the 10:00 o'clock meridian at the site of entry of the episcleral vessel [Figure 1(A)]. The iris was elevated nasally along the 9:00 o'clock meridian. Gonioscopy revealed confluent seeding in the inferior angle and multiple tiny seeds over the temporal and superior trabecular meshwork. Funduscopy of the left eye revealed a flat retina with regressed choroidal melanoma measuring 8.0 6.0mm in basal dimensions and 1.9mm in thickness. The tumor was surrounded by an area of retinal pigment epithelium atrophy, and nasal retinal vessels had occlusion [Figure 1(B)].
Transillumination of the ciliary body revealed a superonasal dark shadow in the pars plana [Figure 1(C)]. Ultrasound biomicroscopy demonstrated a ciliary body mass of 3.1mm thickness at the site of the shadow, causing forward bulging of the peripheral iris [Figure 1(D)]. Based on these findings, a clinical diagnosis of ciliary body melanoma with anterior chamber invasion, angle seeding, and early extraocular extension was made.
The patient was treated with a round 18mm custom-designed I radioactive plaque covering the entire anterior segment and delivering a dose of 7,000 cGy to the tumor apex at a depth of 4.0 mm. FNAB of the ciliary body tumor for cytogenetic evaluation at the time of plaque placement showed a loss of 1p, disomy 3, gain of 6p, and disomy 8. At the one-year follow-up, choroidal melanoma had remained regressed at 1.9mm thickness, and ciliary body melanoma had regressed to 2.2mm thickness. The small extrascleral component remained stable with no evidence of orbital recurrence on clinical examination or orbital imaging. Systemic evaluation showed no evidence of systemic metastasis.