A 28-year-old man was referred to our hospital with a 2-week history of uveitis in his right eye. The best corrective visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/25 and ocular pressure was within normal range. Ophthalmoscopic examination of the right eye revealed fine keratoprecipitates and moderate cell infiltration into the anterior chamber and vitreous. No obvious retinal lesion was observed. However, fundus fluorescein angiography (FA) showed hyperfluorescence in the optic disc and a petaloid pattern of fluorescence pooling in the macula indicating cystoid ME. Despite initiation of topical corticosteroids, optic disc swelling, extensive preretinal and intraretinal hemorrhages developed a few weeks later. Vascular tortuosity associated with CRVO was observed in the right eye, and BCVA decreased to 2/200 due to ME and hemorrhage . No systemic symptoms associated with Behçet’s disease and no laboratory tests or chest CT scans suggesting sarcoidosis were found. Although there was no family history suggestive of TB and systemic source of TB infection was not identified on physical examination, TB-associated uveitis was diagnosed based on a positive TST and IGRA in addition to the ocular findings. Anti-TB therapy with rifampin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol, together with monthly IVR and systemic corticosteroids (0.5 mg/kg), was initiated. After two IVR sessions, fundus findings associated with CRVO improved markedly, and ME was resolved except for persistent serous retinal detachment . BCVA recovered to 20/25. However, before the fourth IVR session, severe retinal hemorrhage on the nasal side and VH were found in the right eye, with exacerbation of ME . Although FA was required to evaluate non-perfusion area and the activity of ocular inflammation, it could not be performed since pruritus and nausea were observed at the first FA. In spite of continuation of IVR, VH progressed to obscure fundus observation, and BCVA decreased to hand motion. Therefore, vitrectomy and panretinal photocoagulation were performed. After surgery, iridocyclitis was observed, but it was controlled by topical corticosteroid, and anti-TB therapy was continued for 6 months and was suspended. Since a second vitrectomy with cataract surgery was given for recurrence of VH at 5 months after the first surgery, ocular inflammation in the right eye was resolved. However, BCVA remains at 20/200 due to disruption of retinal outer layers in the macula besides retinal ischemic region presented by hyperreflective image in retinal inner layers .