A 55-year-old woman presented with bilateral knee pain for several years secondary to advanced tri-compartmental osteoarthritis, marginally worse on the right side.
The patient enjoyed an active social life, had no known allergies, and exercised regularly. Following a discussion of the surgical options, it was decided that the genesis II total knee replacement (TKR) with Oxinium (Smith and Nephew, Memphis, TN) would be most appropriate for her activity levels.
We performed the right TKR first, using a midline skin incision and a medial parapatellar arthrotomy. Intramedullary alignment jigs and a measured resection technique were used to prepare the bone and achieve balance in flexion and extension. The bone was cleaned with pulsatile lavage and the components cemented in place, with the tourniquet used only during cementation. The knee was closed in layers and the patient was given three post-operative doses of intravenous cefuroxime.
Following an uncomplicated post-operative period at 10 weeks after surgery, the proximal extent of the incision became erythematous, discharging a serous fluid. This was treated expectantly with local dressings, however, the erythematous area became larger and began to spread distally .
Inflammatory markers were within normal limits (C-reactive protein 1.1 mg/L and erythrocyte sedimentation rate 18 mm/h) and clinically the patient demonstrated an excellent range of pain-free knee movement. A consultation with the dermatology unit suggested that this may be allergic dermatitis and recommended a trial of topical corticosteroids. Dermovate (clobetasol propionate 0.05% w/w) was applied to the affected area and within 48 h there was a marked improvement in the appearance of her skin .
Six months later, the patient underwent a left genesis II TKR with oxidized zirconium implants using a similar technique as previously described. Twelve weeks after surgery, the proximal aspect of the incision became inflamed with local blistering. On this occasion, dermovate cream was used as first-line treatment, leading to resolution within 24 h.
At the annual clinic visit, we observed hyperpigmented spots on the skin surrounding both knees and on her feet and hands .
The patient has remained asymptomatic, with excellent knee function and radiographs show no signs of loosening . Skin patch testing with a commercially available kit for the metals used in the knee replacement was negative and at 18 months from her first TKR, the patient remains satisfied with the clinical outcome. We continue to follow her up with annual clinical and radiological assessments.