A 71-year-old man with a history of atrial fibrillation, acute appendicitis, and early esophageal cancer treated with endoscopic submucosal dissection underwent distal pancreatectomy with splenectomy for treatment of pancreatic body cancer . Pathological examination showed well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma (pT3, pN0, pM0). The Union for International Cancer Control (UICC) stage was established as IIa . After surgery, the patient received adjuvant chemotherapy of S-1 for 6 months. Multi-detector row computed tomography (MDCT) showed a 30-mm nodule at the lesser curvature of the stomach 17 months after pancreatectomy during postoperative surveillance . Positron emission tomography (PET)/CT showed fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in the nodule; maximum standardized uptake value uptake (SUVmax) was 3.5 . Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed mucosal irregularity in the posterior wall of the lesser curvature of the gastric body and submucosal tumor in the anterior wall of the stomach antrum . Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) showed the hypoechoic submucosal tumor, which was diagnosed as adenocarcinoma by fine-needle aspiration (FNA) cytology.
Based on these findings, we diagnosed lymph node metastasis of PDAC invading the gastric wall, and the patient was treated with gemcitabine and S-1 combination (GS) therapy for 6 months. Considering the patient’s age and prior pancreatic resection, we selected GS therapy due to its relatively high response rate and manageable complication rate found in a previous phase III study for unresectable pancreatic cancer (GEST study) . Because the tumor size did not change over 6 months and CA 19-9 decreased from 54 to 28 U/mL, we decided to perform total gastrectomy and prophylactic cholecystectomy for tumor resection.
Macroscopically, two nodules were located in the stomach, with one in the wall of the lesser curvature and the other in the antrum anterior wall . Pathological examination showed that these were well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinomas in the subserosa and muscularis propria of the stomach. The tumor was not exposed to the mucosa and serosa, and there was no lymph node involvement .
Surprisingly, there was a tumor in the neck of gallbladder; pathological examination revealed this was a well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma in the subserosa .
As the pathological findings of these tumors were similar to the lesion initially resected by distal pancreatectomy, we diagnosed metachronous gastric and gallbladder metastases from PDAC.
The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 16. Because of prior S-1 adjuvant therapy after pancreatectomy and GS therapy before gastrectomy/cholecystectomy, we elected to defer further chemotherapy. A liver metastasis was discovered 7 months after the second operation. He was then treated with GS therapy followed by gemcitabine and albumin-bound paclitaxel combination therapy and modified FOLFIRINOX therapy. At 41 months after the second surgery, the patient remained alive.