A 32-year-old male was admitted for persistent fever (37.3°C) and upper abdominal pain 5 days after mRNA-1273 vaccination (first dose). Vital signs evaluation showed a blood pressure of 88/60 mmHg, heart rate of 133 beats/min, tachypnoea (37 breaths/min), and oxygen saturation of 99% on room air. He had a prior medical history of COVID-19 infection 9 months earlier.
On arrival at the hospital, laboratory blood tests showed elevated levels of inflammatory markers like white blood cells at 9400/μL (normal range, 3300–8600/µL) and C-reactive protein at 1.35 mg/dL (normal range, <0.14 mg/dL) and cardiac biomarkers like creatine kinase at 465 U/L (normal range, 41 to 153 U/L) and troponin T at 3444 ng/L (normal range, <14 ng/L). Chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly without obvious pulmonary congestion or pleural effusion . Electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia with ST-segment elevation in leads II, aVF, and V1 to V3 . Echocardiography showed diffuse hypokinesis of the left ventricle and a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 20% (see , ). Emergency coronary angiography which was performed to exclude acute coronary syndrome showed normal coronary arteries, and endomyocardial biopsy was performed.
Several hours later, in the intensive care unit, the patient acutely developed respiratory failure and cardiogenic shock with ventricular tachycardia. Hence, he was intubated and given mechanical cardiac support with venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA-ECMO) and intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP). He received intravenous infusions of dopamine 5 μg/kg/min and dobutamine 3 μg/kg/min, and intravenous furosemide 40 mg/day and steroid pulses of 1000 mg/day for 3 days. Echocardiography on day 4 showed improved left ventricular function (LVEF 32%), and he was weaned from VA-ECMO and IABP on day 5. The patient was extubated on day 8 and discharged from the intensive care unit on day 12. Echocardiography on day 15 showed recovery of left ventricular function (LVEF 65%) (see , ). Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging on day 16 showed recovery of LVEF to 49% without focal myocardial oedema and no significant late gadolinium enhancement lesions in the myocardium . The patient recovered completely and was discharged on Day 22.
Endomyocardial biopsy results were as follows: There was a high degree of inflammatory cell infiltration with a predominance of CD3-positive T lymphocytes mixed with histiocytes and eosinophils in the myocardial interstitium, together with partial myocyte damage. There was also mild fibrosis in the interstitium. There were no epithelioid cell granulomas or giant cells, consistent with the findings of lymphocytic myocarditis . A real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test did not detect any viral genomes in the tissue specimens.