A 75-year-old white female patient treated by us for about 15 years for HCV-associated cirrhosis in Child-Pugh’s functional class A5. The ultrasound examination showed two focal lesions, one of 2.1 cm in diameter on the IV hepatic segment (S4) and the other of 4.0 cm in diameter on the VI hepatic segment (S6), both of which hypoechogenic and related to an HCC. An abdominal CT with contrast medium confirmed the presence of the two lesions, with a typical HCC contrastographic result, showing a marked enhancement in the arterial phase and wash-out in the portal phase, which was delayed and presented a persistently dense peripheral margin . No increase in serum levels of alpha pheto-protein, which was 35 ng/ml, was observed during follow-up.
The functional class of the cirrhosis, together with the site and size of the lesions, suggested the use of a simultaneous, combined approach with RFA of the S4 lesion and resection of the S6 lesion.
After partial mobilisation of the right hepatic lobe, intraoperative ultrasound was performed in order to exclude the presence of any further lesions, followed by RFA of the S4 lesion with a Model 1500 generator (RITA Medical System, Mountain View, CA), using an ultrasound-guided needle-electrode provided with expandable hooks which were gradually opened during the 21 minutes of the procedure .
As a precaution, an elastic ligature was then applied to the hepatic peduncle and subsequently, without clamping, segmentectomy was performed for the removal of the S6 lesion . The resection required the use of a TissueLink FB 3.0 Floating Ball radiofrequency handpiece (RITA Medical System, Mountain View, CA) and terminated with the selective ligature of the segmentary peduncle , identified by means of ultrasound. Blood loss from the resected surface was less than 50 cc. Finally, a subhepatic drainage tube was put into position.
The post-operative period was normal, without any particular changes in the RBC or HGB count; the preoperative values of these were, respectively, of 5.150 million/ml and 13.8 gm/dl, with an Ht of 42.6, while the immediate postoperative values were RCB 4,900 million/ml, HGB 13.4 gm/dl and Ht of 40.9. There was only a slight increase in post-operative transaminases, which reached 459 for GOT and 158 for GPT on post-operative day 1, returning to normal on day 5. We also observed an increase in total bilirubinemia, which on day 1 went from 0.89 to 2.19, with a clear prevalence in the indirect quota; these values returned to normal on day 4.
The drainage was removed on day 2, when the patient resumed oral feeding; she was sent home on day 6.
The biopsy of the resected lesion confirmed the diagnosis of encapsulated HCC with a mainly pseudoglandular growth pattern, Edmondson’s grade II; the resection margins proved to be healthy.
The patient has been followed up every six months and now, at 36 months after surgery, still shows no sign of disease relapse.