A 36-year-old gravida 3 para 0 at 29 weeks’ gestation presented with acute abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting for one day without any inciting factors. She denied any associated symptoms such as fever, chills, diarrhea, or constipation. She denied consumption of raw or undercooked food or recent travel history. Her past medical history was only significant for primary SjS diagnosed four years ago, she presented with the xerostomia and dry eyes for months and then test for antinuclear antibody (ANA) and anti-Ro52 and Ro60 antibody were positive, positive Schirmer’s test and unstimulated salivary flow rate, and salivary gland biopsy showed focal lymphocytic sialadenitis with a focus score of ≥ 1 per 4 mm2, she was treated with daily hydroxyquinoline 200 mg since then and the disease was maintained stable until this admission. She has had two uncomplicated spontaneous miscarriage, so in the early stages of this pregnancy, prednisone 10 mg daily was use for the recurrent spontaneous miscarriage. She denied a history of surgery in the past.
On presentation, vital signs were as follow: temperature 98.2 F, blood pressure 115/67mmHg, heart rate 80 beats/min, respiratory rate 18 breaths/min, oxygen saturation 98% on room air. On exam, the abdomen was soft, non-tender, and without rigidity or rebound tenderness. Laboratory studies showed leukocytosis and neutrophilic predominance with white blood cells (WBC) count and the percentage of neutrophils fluctuating between 9.14 ~ 12.84 × 109/L and 80.2 ~ 86.9%, respectively, low potassium of 2.8mmol/L, elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) at 40 mm/h (normal range (NR) 0–20) and elevated fibrinogen of 6.05 g/L (NR 2–4), hemoglobin was 105 g/L and the platelet count was 260 × 109/L, serum albumin was 33 g/L. Other laboratory profile including liver and kidney function, thyroid function, serum electrolytes, and urinalysis were basically normal. C-reactive protein (CRP) was 0.61 mg/L (normal range (NR) 0–8) and serum complements, procalcitonin and serum ferritin were normal. Autoimmune studies were notable for an elevated antinuclear antibody (ANA) with a titer at 1:160, positive anti-Ro52 antibody of 49 (normal range < 25), and anti-Ro60 of 71 (normal range < 25). Other immunological antibodies were all negative including anti-(double stranded)-DNA antibodies, anti-β2- glycoprotein I antibody (IgG and IgM), anti-Sm antibody, anti-nRNP antibody, anti-SSB/La antibody, anti-Jo-1 antibody, anti-scl-70 antibody, anti-ribosomal P-protein antibody, anti-histone antibody, anti-nucleosome antibody, anticentromere B antibody, anti-PM-Scl antibody, anti-proliferating cell nuclear antigen antibody, and anti-mitochondria-M2 antibody. Standardized lupus ratio was 1.18 TR (NR 0.89–1.2). Immunoglobulin was detected with IgG of 11.9 g/L (NR 8.6–17.4), IgM of 1.17 g/L (NR 0.5–2.8) and IgA of 3.94 (NR 1.0-4.2) Stool examination, fecal occult blood test as well as urinalysis were normal. Complete abdominal ultrasound demonstrated no intraabdominal process or peritoneal effusion.
The patient was admitted for inpatient management for an initial diagnosis of acute gastroenteritis. She received supportive measures including intravenous fluid and electrolyte repletion, and symptomatic control with bowel rest and metoclopramide. After four days of treatment, the patient developed worsening nausea, vomiting, cramping abdominal pain, and inability to pass flatus and stool, which led to the concern for intestinal obstruction. A Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen was subsequently performed which revealed dilated small bowel with the widest diameter of 45 mm suggestive of small bowel obstruction, however, no anatomical lesions leading to obstruction were identified on CT imaging . She was treated with conservative management including nothing by mouth, intravenous fluids, and parenteral nutrition. A nasogastric tube was inserted for decompression of the gastrointestinal tract. Despite the above measures, her symptoms persisted and due to progressive deterioration, a multidisciplinary discussion including obstetricians, rheumatologists, and surgeons was held. Considering medical history, clinical presentations, laboratory, and imaging findings, we suspected acute intestinal pseudo-obstruction secondary to underlying SjS. The patient was treated with immunosuppressive therapy including intravenous methylprednisolone 80 mg daily and intravenous immunoglobin (IVIG) 20 g daily. On day two of immunosuppressive therapy, the patient began to show signs of improvement and was able to pass flatus and stool. However, she continued to experience progressive abdominal pain along with nausea and vomiting. Given concern for bowel perforation or volvulus, another CT of the abdomen was performed which revealed stable dilated small bowels with the widest diameter of 53 mm, with no signs of mechanical obstruction, bowel necrosis, or perforation .
After a multidisciplinary discussion, immunosuppressive therapy was deemed effective, and we believed the aggravated symptoms were likely attributable to increased bowel movement. We decided to continue immunosuppressive therapy and the patient completed a 5-day course of IVIG and a 7-day course of pulse dose steroids, followed by an oral prednisone taper. After treatment, her symptoms subsided and was able to advance diet.
Unfortunately, the patient developed signs of acute liver injury with rising aminotransferases after the resolution of IPO. ALT increased from 118 to 763 U/L, and AST increased from 69 to 496 U/L consistent with a hepatocellular injury pattern . Other biomarkers, including bilirubin, total bile acid, albumin, and coagulation studies were within a relatively normal range. Blood pressure, hemoglobin and platelet remained stable and there were no signs of hemolysis. The acute hepatitis panel and autoimmune liver disease antibody spectrum were negative, including antimitochondrial antibody (AMA). A meticulous evaluation was negative for other etiologies of acute liver injury such as autoimmune hepatitis, viral hepatitis, HELLP syndrome (Hemolysis, Elevated Liver enzymes and Low platelets Syndrome), AFLP (Acute Fatty Liver of Pregnancy), and ICP (Intrahepatic Cholestasis of Pregnancy), and we attributed it to Sjogren’s syndrome or progressed gestation. After consideration of both risks and benefits, the patient proceeded with an urgent caesarean section at 33 weeks’ gestation which resulted in an uneventful delivery of a neonate weighed 1850 g. Apgar’s score was both 10 at 1 and 5 min. On post-partum day 4, AST recovered to the normal range and ALT rapidly downtrended to 225 U/L and then recovered to normal on post-partum day 7 , and the patient was eventually discharged home on post-partum day 7. The schematic diagram of the progression of the patient’s disease was showed in Fig. . On 6-month and 12-month follow-up, her was regularly checked by Rheumatologist, her overall condition was satisfactory without any systemic manifestations and hadn’t suffered from any gastrointestinal symptoms since the pregnancy termination.