A 62-year-old Caucasian male with a past medical history of hypertension and diabetes, presented with bilateral eye protrusion since 1 week. He had been experiencing double vision and throbbing frontal headaches for the past 2 weeks. Physical examination was remarkable only for bilateral exophthalmos , without any palpable lymphadenopathy. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the orbit revealed 3.8 × 3.0 × 1.5 cm enhancing orbital mass involving the lateral and superolateral aspect of the peripheral right orbit as well as an irregular 1.1 × 1.1 × 2.4 cm mass along the inferior aspect of left orbit . Also noted were abnormal signal enhancements within the lesser sphenoid wing and the anterior body of the mandible on the right. Given this constellation of findings, there was suspicion for lymphoma or other metastatic disease.
Biopsy of right eye mass was done that revealed extensive soft tissue involvement by two separate lymphomatous populations [ and ], comprising small and large neoplastic lymphocytes. The large cells were positive for CD20 B cells with co-expression of CD10 BCL6 and MUM-1. By corresponding flow cytometry, they were found to be kappa chain restricted. These features were consistent with high grade large B cell lymphoma. The small lymphoma cells were CD20+ B cells with co-expression of BCL2 and aberrant CD43 and partial CD5. Flow cytometry revealed lambda restriction. These morphological and phenotypic features were consistent with MALT lymphoma. B cell immunoglobulin gene rearrangement by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was done to detect clonality. Peaks migrating at 318, 255, and 274 bases were present on B-cell immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH). In addition, there were peaks present migrating at 195 and 273 bases on B-cell immunoglobulin kappa light chain (IgK). The intensities of these peaks were consistent with clonal neoplasm. Gene rearrangement studies were also done on the different aberrant lymphocyte population with diagnosis of MALT lymphoma. Those areas also shared common peaks at 318 and 255 bases in IgH as well as 273 bases in IgK light chain.
Metastatic work-up with computed tomography (CT) scans and positron emission tomography (PET) scan was negative. He was started on Rituximab and cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone (CHOP). By the time of his 1-month follow-up, the orbital swelling had disappeared . His lymphoma is currently under remission. Repeat PET is negative for any metastatic disease, and only residual disease is present in the orbit.