A 53-year-old Caucasian woman reported to our clinic in September 2014 with a first and acute episode of transient confusion and sensory aphasia and a two days history of headache. She was on medication for arterial hypertension and hypothyroidism. Since May 2013 she received dimethyl fumarate (Fumaderm®) for the treatment of psoriasis. The patient only received topical treatment prior to dimethyl fumarate. Her clinical examination on admission was unremarkable. Cerebral magnet resonance imaging (MRI) showed several subcortical T2 hyperintense and partially contrast-enhancing lesions in the right frontal and left parietal lobes, which were increased in size on follow-up MRI two weeks later .
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) protein was slightly elevated (54 mg/l), cell count and IgG-Index were normal and she had identical oligoclonal bands in serum and CSF. She did not have antibodies against (Human immunodeficiency virus) HIV 1 and 2 and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for JC-virus desoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) (University Tübingen (sensitivity of JC-virus DNA: > 1000 copies) and University Düsseldorf (sensitivity of JC-virus DNA: > 4 copies/assay ), Germany) of CSF was negative. Histological analysis of a biopsy of the right frontal lesion showed infiltration of lymphocytes, perivascular CD45-positive cells, CD68-positive microglia, reactive astrocytosis and focal demyelination . Some cells had intranuclear inclusions and stained positive with an antibody against JC virus. PCR of brain tissue for JCV DNA was positive and confirmed the diagnosis of PML.
Treatment with dimethyl fumarate was stopped and she was put on 250 mg Mefloquin per week and 45 mg Mirtazapin per day. The patients peripheral lymphocyte counts during treatment with dimethyl fumarate were retrospectively evaluated and ranged between 450 and 700 cells/μl while her leucocyte counts were higher than 3000/μl during the whole treatment period. The initial symptoms were considered to be epileptic and treatment with 1000 mg/day Levetiracetam was initiated. Upon follow-up three months later, the patient reported of persistent difficulties with concentration and word retrieval. Aphasia could not be detected in simple conversation and bed side tests. Neurological examination as well as repeated cerebral MRI showed no evidence for disease progression or immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome. Upon 7-month follow-up the patient reported a stable course of disease with unchanged minor difficulties with concentration and word retrieval, which were very mild and could not be detected in conversation or neurological examination. The MRI showed an increase of the T2 hyperintense lesion in the right frontal lobe, while gadolinium enhancement and the other lesions remained unaltered. The patient tolerated the treatment well and reported no adverse events.