An 81-year-old Japanese woman was referred to our hospital for endoscopic treatment under the diagnosis of early stage gastric cancer (biopsy tub1–2) based on esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) screening. She had no history of illness, and biochemical parameters and tumor markers were within normal limits.
Helicobacter pylori antibodies were negative, and EGD showed atrophic changes associated with previous H. pylori infection.
An irregular depressed lesion measuring 25 mm in diameter was found on the posterior wall of the lower body . Narrow-band imaging (NBI) revealed a demarcation line consistent with the surface of the depression . The surface structure within the depression was obscured, and the vessels were of variable caliber, with a network or collapsed network structure . Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with a well-differentiated intramucosal adenocarcinoma [tubular adenocarcinoma (tub1–2)], and endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) was performed . The resected specimen had the following histological parameters: 28 × 28 mm, type 0–IIc, MiNEN (tub2 60% > endocrine cell carcinoma 40%), pT1b(submucosa (SM) 900 μm), pUL(−), Ly(+), v(−), pHM0, pVM0 . Histologically, the tumor was composed of two components [tub2 adenocarcinoma and neuroendocrine cell carcinoma (NEC)], and it showed submucosal and lymphatic invasion. As shown in Fig. c, histopathological examination revealed tub2 adenocarcinoma in the anal-side depression. In the oral-side depression, tumor cells lacked glandular structures and had nested trabecular or acinar-like structures. Immunohistochemistry was positive for synaptophysin and CD56, and chromogranin partially, confirming the diagnosis of NEC. The final diagnosis was early gastric MiNEN as the adenocarcinoma and NEC components independently accounted for > 30% of the entire lesions. We determined that additional surgical resection was necessary due to submucosal and lymphatic invasion and laparoscopic pyloric gastrectomy was performed. The resected specimen showed no histological remnant of cancer and no metastasis in all the dissected lymph nodes. No postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy was administered, but annual computed tomography (CT) and EGD follow-up have been performed for 3 years without any recurrence or metastasis.