A 46-year-old male presented to our emergency department with sudden substernal chest pain. He had a history of uncontrolled hypertension for 5 years. About 2 months earlier, he was admitted to the hospital for chest tightness and dyspnea after mild activity. The coronary angiography showed no significant stenosis or occlusion. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed an aneurysmal dilatation of aortic sinus of 5.7 cm in diameter and ascending aorta of 4.2 cm in diameter, trileaflet aortic valve with aortic insufficiency causing moderate AR. The left ventricle (LV) was dilated to 6.9 cm in diameter. He declined surgical intervention in favor of medical therapy to improve his symptoms, and then he was discharged.
On this admission, the patient suffered from chest pain for about 1 h. The blood pressure was 143/42 mmHg, and there was no difference between two arms. He was conscious and neurological examination showed no abnormalities. Electrocardiography showed ST segment depression in leads I, aVL and V4–6, and preoperative hsTnT level was elevated to 45.60 ng/L (under 14 ng/L is normal). Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) revealed a Stanford type A aortic dissection with circumferential dissection of ascending aorta, and the proximal intimal flap prolapsed into the left ventricle outflow tract (LVOT) . The coronary arteries arising from the true aortic lumen were not involved in the dissection. The dissection extended distally to brachiocephalic trunk, bilateral common carotid artery, and left subclavian artery, and ended at right common iliac artery. TTE indicated aortic dissection with a proximal intimal flap moving in and out of the LVOT in synchronicity with the cardiac cycle causing severe AR. He was therefore scheduled for urgent surgical treatment. Intraoperative TEE further confirmed a balloon-like intimal flap prolapsing into LVOT during diastole, which interfered with aortic valve cusp mobility, causing severe AR . However, regurgitant flow was concentrated in a balloon-like intimal flap, concealing the degree of preexisting aortic insufficiency. The LV was dilated to 7.0 cm in diameter with mild left ventricular wall hypertrophy, and mild left ventricular lateral wall motion abnormalities. The ascending aorta was severely involved by dissection and therefore, cardiopulmonary bypass was instituted by cannulation of right atrium and right axillary artery combined with right femoral artery. Surgical inspection confirmed that the intima of the ascending aorta had been torn away through almost all of its circumference and the dissection extended proximally to below the level of coronary arteries. However, the coronary arteries and aortic valve annulus were not involved with dissection. The aortic valve commissures were intact, and the aortic valve leaflets were degenerated with mild thickening and without prolapse and deformity. Bentall procedure (aortic valve replacement with ascending aorta graft implantation) and Sun’s procedure (total arch replacement using tetrafurcate graft with stented elephant trunk implantation) were performed. During hypothermic circulatory arrest, nasoparyngeal temperature was 25 °C and antegrade cerebral perfusion by combining right axillary artery with left common carotid artery was selected for cerebral protection. The total cardiopulmonary bypass time was 244 min, aortic cross-clamping time was 138 min and circulatory arrest time was 17 min. The surgery was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the 7th postoperative day after a smooth recovery. Histopathological analysis revealed myxoid degeneration of aortic valve and ascending aortic wall.