A 36-year-old Sudanese female patient presented to Gezira Center of Nephrology and Urology, Sudan, complaining of burning micturition and back pain. A pregnancy test at the time of presentation was negative. A history of similar symptoms with increasing frequency over the preceding 2 years was reported.
The patient had a normal developmental history since birth, with no past history of chronic medical conditions and no family history of renal problems, malformations, or malignancy.
The patient had been diagnosed with multiple urinary tract infections many times without any radiological investigation. Antibiotics were the main treatment on each occasion. The patient had one child 3 years earlier by normal vaginal delivery at home. During her pregnancy, she complained of two similar episodes and again was diagnosed with urinary tract infection and treated accordingly. She passed her pregnancy period without proper antenatal care and follow-up. She is a housewife of low socioeconomic status and lives in her own house, no history of smoking or alcohol consumption. She had been treated for recurrent urinary tract infections at local clinic with limited resources and without proper investigations.
Physical examination at this presentation was normal apart from mild lower abdominal tenderness, but generally the abdomen was soft, and no distention or scar was noted. Clinical observations were unremarkable . Her urinalysis showed pus cells of 10–12/high-power field. Renal function blood test results revealed normal urea and serum creatinine levels . Urine culture report confirmed positive growth of Escherichia coli sensitive only to ciprofloxacin and norfloxacin, and resistant to amoxicillin, erythromycin, tetracycline, and nitrofurantoin.
Ultrasound of the abdomen and pelvis was performed and revealed ectopic kidneys at the hemi-pelvis, fused in their upper poles. Normal size and texture of the kidneys was noted, with normal corticomedullary differentiation. No stones or obstructive changes were found .
As a part of the radiological workup, computed tomography (CT) urography was performed. This revealed a right kidney ectopically placed in the pelvis, measuring 9.6 cm in bipolar length, medially and inferiorly faced. The left kidney was also ectopically placed in the pelvis, measuring 9.3 cm in bipolar length. It was mal-rotated as the pelvis faced upward and laterally, both kidneys were partially fused at the upper poles . The report concluded that bilateral ectopic partially fused kidneys in their upper pole were present with the left kidney mal-rotated.
Appropriate antibiotics (ciprofloxacin 400 mg) were given intravenously according to the culture and sensitivity. Outpatient follow-up with repeat ultrasound scan every 3 month was scheduled. At 1-year follow-up, the patient had no further symptoms. Her follow-up course is shown in Table .