A 53-year-old man presented with a 1-wk history of epigastric pain. He also had complaints of bloody vomitus and melena.
Three weeks prior to this hospital admission, abdominal discomfort and nausea had developed. He had visited the local hospital and received conservative treatment. However, the symptoms were not relieved after medication. A week ago, epigastric pain had developed, and he had vomited reddish blood on the day before admission. For further evaluation, the patient was transferred to this hospital.
He had no history of surgery and past medical history.
The patient had a history of severe alcohol abuse and a 20 pack-year history of smoking. Otherwise, there were no special circumstances in family history.
The physical examination revealed no palpable abdominal mass or signs of peritoneal irritation. His blood pressure was 153/120 mmHg, and pulse rate was 115/min. He appeared chronically ill.
The laboratory testing showed a normal white blood cell count, blood glucose, creatinine, coagulation profile, and serum electrolytes except low hemoglobin was present with a level of 10.5 g/dL (normal range: 13.5-17.5 g/dL).
The patient’s upper GI endoscopy revealed diffuse erythema and edema of the gastric wall. Furthermore, a huge ulcer was detected in the posterior wall of the lower body , which was suspicious for Borrmann type II gastric cancer; therefore, patient underwent biopsy and additional studies for evaluation. Moreover, the contrast-enhanced abdominal CT showed a huge ulcer within the same lesion with diffuse wall thickening . The margin of the pancreas was unclear, and multiple enlarged lymph nodes were observed in the left gastric and gastroepiploic chain .
Because these findings strongly suggested gastric cancer at advanced stage, F-18 FDG PET/CT was performed for further evaluation. In the maximum intensity projection image, there was uneven FDG uptake on the stomach, but no other distant metastasis was seen . Trans-axial F-18 FDG PET/CT image showed diffusely intense FDG uptake at the ulcer lesion . In addition, several enlarged hypermetabolic lymph nodes were noted at the left gastric chain . The clinical impression was gastric cancer with regional lymph node metastases.
However, there were no malignant cells and only severe inflammation was seen in the first biopsy result. The patient underwent secondary endoscopic biopsy for a pathologic confirmation. However, no cancer cells were found, and multiple fungal hyphae were noted in the periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)-stained image. The results indicated mucormycosis based on the characteristics of the hyphae, which showed a 90-degree angle branching with no visible septa .