A 67-year-old female patient with no previous history of chronic disease was found lying on the ground unresponsive, 3 h after being ‘last seen well’ by her family members. She got directly transported to the nearest comprehensive stroke centre with onsite endovascular treatment capability. The on-call neurologist documented global aphasia, left conjugate gaze deviation, right facial palsy, and right hemiplegia [National Institute of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) of 21]. Native computed tomography (CT) scan ruled out haemorrhage and showed no early ischaemic changes in the left hemisphere . Artificial intelligence-based image analysis (Brainomix, Oxford, UK) measured an Alberta Stroke Program Early CT Score of 10/10, signifying no early ischaemic damage of the brain tissue. Computed tomography angiography analysis revealed the occlusion of the left middle cerebral artery (MCA) main segment . As the exact onset of symptoms was unknown, the neurologist decided to withhold IV thrombolysis and send the patient directly to mechanical thrombectomy.
The ER staff spotted a large ST elevation on the monitor of the patient waiting for transfer to the angiography suite. While the patient could not signal chest pain, being completely mute due to aphasia, a 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) confirmed the extensive anterior ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) pattern .
The neurointerventional service that day was provided by an accredited interventional cardiologist with completed neurointerventional fellowship training, thus a consensual decision was taken by the cardiology and neurology teams to request the execution of the necessary endovascular interventions within a single procedure.
The patient was transferred to the catheterization laboratory with anaesthesia backup. The right femoral artery was cannulated with an oversized, 9-Fr sheath to allow continuous invasive blood pressure monitoring. As a first step, a coronarography was performed to rule out a suspected Takotsubo syndrome caused by a potential stroke-induced spasm. While no sign of coronary spasm was seen, a sub-occlusive thrombotic lesion was documented at the origin of the left anterior descending (LAD) artery . Taken the slow but persistent coronary flow, the patient’s stable haemodynamic condition, and the haemorrhagic risk associated with a stroke intervention under dual antiplatelet therapy into account, coronary stenting was temporarily withheld, and 500 mg of IV aspirin was administered only .
To save time, the fastest cerebral recanalization technique, aspiration thrombectomy was performed in the left MCA using a dedicated 6-Fr aspiration catheter (Sofia Plus, Microvention Terumo Inc., Aliso Viejo, CA, USA). Complete flow restoration was achieved with a single pass, and the patient’s right hemiplegia promptly improved.
As no sign of complication was detected on control angiography , the operator decided to continue with the coronary revascularization after the administration of 7500 IU Na-heparin. Two 14″ guidewires were advanced into the LAD and circumflex (CX) coronaries, pre-dilatation of the lesion was performed, and an everolimus-eluting stent (Resolute Integrity, Medtronic Inc., Dublin, Ireland) was implanted in the left main (LM)-LAD continuum. The LM portion of the stent was post-dilated by a non-compliant balloon at 20 ATM . Although the origin of the CX was covered with struts, the flow was patent, and no further post-dilatation was performed to avoid the need for bifurcation stenting. The puncture site was closed by a closure device. As soon as the post-operative control CT ruled out any complication , the patient was loaded with 600 mg of clopidogrel. Control ECG in the cardiac care unit showed complete ST resolution .
Neurological examination on the following day revealed only mild clumsiness of the right hand with a very mild word-finding difficulty (NIHSS 2 points). Laboratory analysis documented a peak high-sensitivity troponin T level of 595 pg/mL. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging performed on the 12th day following the interventions showed preserved ejection fraction (EF 55%) with only mild septal hypokinesia. Surprisingly, no late enhancement and no cardiac source of emboli were documented . Prolonged rhythm monitoring using 72-h Holter ECG did not detect atrial fibrillation. Patient was scheduled for haematology examination as the next step of her work up. She remained independent upon her discharge to rehabilitation (modified Rankin Scale: 1).