A 49-year-old man from a North African origin and with a Moroccan nationality presented with a 2-year history of progressive stiffness and painful spasms of his both legs, with recent worsening of his condition over the last few weeks resulting in a considerable difficulty of standing up and walking. There was no past history of diabetes, or other auto-immune diseases. The family history was unremarkable. On admission, the lower limbs were rigid with a flexum of the hips and knees, movements were severely limited and painful, and strength could not be assessed because of rigidity and spasms. A slightly increased tone was noted in his upper limbs, with normal muscular strength and without any movement limitation. No paraspinal or axial contractions were palpated. Sensory examination was normal except for reduced vibration sense in both lower extremities. Deep tendon reflexes were normal in upper limbs. Patellar and Achilles jerks could be elicited markedly. Plantar response was flexor bilaterally. Functionally the patient was unable to walk because of the rigidity in his both legs. He had an intact intellect and there were no other neurologic abnormalities.
Results of routine laboratory tests including full blood count (FBC), serum electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, glucose and liver enzymes were normal. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) values were normal. Chest X-rays and abdominal ultrasonography revealed no abnormalities. Magnetic resonance imaging of the whole neuraxis and EEG were also normal. Cerebrospinal fluid examination was unremarkable, there were no atypical cells found on cytopathological analysis. Electromyography of the lower limbs revealed no abnormalities. Serologic testing for HIV, syphilis, viral hepatitis B and C was negative. Anti-mitochondrial antibodies and anti-cytoplasm antibodies were found in the serum, while antinuclear antibodies (ANA) and anti- DNA screening and auto-antibodies to glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) were within normal limits. Anti-amphiphysin antibodies test wasn't carried out. With the high suspicion that the clinical case could be a SLS, oral diazepam was administered in high doses (25 mg/day) after which we observed a dramatic remission of the clinical state with marked reduction of the hypertonus and the patient could walk with little aid. The administration of 30 mg of baclofen daily provided relief of symptoms.