To emphasize this statement, we report the case of a 3.6-year-old boy with Emberger syndrome. This syndrome is associated with an increased risk of myelodysplastic syndrome, familial acute myeloid leukemia and immune deficiency. Therapeutic management is limited to prophylactic antimicrobial treatment and pre-emptive allogenic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (allogenic HSCT).
In June 2020, the patient received an allogenic haploidentical HSCT. After transplantation, he received ciclosporine, mycophenolic acid and post-transplant cyclophosphamide as immunosuppressive therapy. In addition, prednisone was introduced at day-21 post transplantation to treat grade 3 acute graft-versus host disease and 5 days later ruxolitinib was introduced because of progression. Posaconazole was also started at day-26 and cotrimoxazole as a prophylaxis of pneumocystosis at day-48. Thirty-four days after transplantation, a CMV reactivation was diagnosed with a positive CMV viral load at 3.52 log copies/mL. Intravenous ganciclovir was introduced (5 mg/kg q12h; 70 mg q12h) to prevent morbidity and mortality of the infection in this clinical setting. At the same period, pancytopenia has been observed and might have been worsened by several of the drugs received by the patient including ganciclovir. The patient was then administered G-CSF injections every 3 days. After 3 weeks of ganciclovir treatment, the viral load did not decrease . Low drug exposure and UL97 or UL54 virological resistance were suspected. Trough ganciclovir concentrations were sub-therapeutic (< 0.5 µg/mL) and the resistance mutation analysis was negative meaning that treatment failure was likely due to drug underexposure. The patient had a rapid renal clearance (creatinine clearance (CrCl): 220.5 mL/min using Schwartz formula ) so it was decided to conduct an AUC-driven ganciclovir dosage adaptation. The dosage was thus increased to 10 mg/kg q12h (140 mg q12h). Exposure was assessed by collecting five plasma concentrations between drug intakes and AUC0–12 h was estimated using a non-compartmental approach based on five sampling times: pre-dose, and then 1, 2, 4 and 6 h post-dose). As displayed in Fig. , whereas trough concentrations remained below the usual therapeutic threshold (e.g. < 0.5 µg/mL) [–] peak concentrations was high and AUC0–12 h was close to 50 µg h/mL, which was within the therapeutic range (40–60 µg h/mL) suggested by some authors to treat CMV infection [, ]. Eventually, viral load decreased quickly after 6 days at this dosage and became undetectable after 52 days. Two months later, viral load has remained undetectable. No significant change in the haematological parameters was noted after ganciclovir dosage modification.