A 35-year-old man has been experiencing shortness of breath for nearly 20 years. During the past 6 months, his symptoms worsened with the stiffening of his four limbs.
Physical examination revealed the following vital signs: blood pressure, 130/88 mmHg; heart rate, 100 beats per min; respiratory rate, 22 breaths per min; and oxygen desaturation rate, 60% on room air. Upon examination, the jugular vein and abdomen were distended. His heart sounds were regular, and bi-phasic murmur along the left sternal border was best heard at the 2nd and 3rd intercostal space, with mid-diastolic murmur at the 2nd aortic valve area. Pulmonary examination revealed bilateral rales, and decreased breath sounds in the left lung. Upon examination of the extremities, pitting oedema and digital clubbing were observed.
Electrocardiogram revealed right axis deviation and prominent elevated R wave in leads V1 through V2 (, ). Laboratory test results showed serum N-terminal brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP, normal range 0–150 pg/mL) level of 8768 pg/mL and hyperhaemoglobinemia (haemoglobin of 214 g/L, normal range 130–175 g/L). Markers for connective tissue diseases (antibodies), systemic vasculitis, and thrombophilia were negative. Echocardiography revealed enlarged right atrium (61 mm) and right ventricle (36 mm × 54 mm), flattening of the interventricular septum towards the left ventricle, and severe tricuspid regurgitation with pressure gradient of 90 mmHg. The tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion decreased to 13 mm, with preservation of left ventricular ejection fraction. Unexpectedly, occlusion of the LPA was observed with only a protruded root. A PDA with 20 mm in diameter was visible, and a mosaic bidirectional flow across this PDA was noted ( and and , ). Chest radiography showed right ventricular hypertrophy and bulging main pulmonary artery . Chest computed tomography confirmed marked enlargement of the main pulmonary artery (74 mm) and large PDA . The LPA root was visible. However, the distal branches were faintly filled , subsequently, the left lung was dysplastic and collapsed . The right pulmonary artery and its branches were dilated and relatively hyperaemic with disproportionate perfusion. No segmental or subsegmental mismatched perfusion was noted on dual-energy lung perfusion imaging. Based on these findings, a diagnosis of right heart failure was made. This failure was secondary to PDA with right-to-left shunting and complicated by LPA occlusion and pulmonary hypoplasia-induced hypoxaemia.
The patient’s history was carefully reviewed to confirm the presence of congenital PDA with unilateral agenesis of the LPA. After birth, the presence of a harsh heart murmur without cyanosis raised a suspicion of congenital heart disease. Thereafter, PDA was confirmed. Subsequently, PDA ligation surgery was performed at the age of 4. According to his parents, surgery was uneventful except for the development of hoarseness, which has since persisted. He lost to regular follow-up. Three years later, echocardiography revealed the persistence of PDA with left-to-right shunt. However, since no symptoms were noticed, his parents refused a second surgery. At the age of 17, he experienced shortness of breath on exertion. At the age of 31, the patient presented with more severe symptoms including haemoptysis and exercise intolerance. Right heart catheterization revealed a pulmonary artery pressure of 140/87(m104) mmHg and pulmonary vascular resistance of 46.5 Wood Unit QP/QS 0.22 (, ). Computed tomography angiogram of the pulmonary artery demonstrated dilated pulmonary trunk with obscure LPA and PDA. He refused to undergo heart and lung transplantation. Additionally, he opted for receiving traditional Chinese medicine rather than undergoing palliative treatment.
Combined pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) targeted therapies were initiated with an endothelin-receptor antagonist (macitentan 10 mg q.d.), guanylate cyclase activator (riociguat 1 mg t.i.d.), and prostacyclin analogues (treprostinil intravenous/subcutaneous titration) according to the most recent European Society of Cardiology guidelines. Additionally, supplemental oxygenation and diuretic agents were administered. The patient’s vital signs were stable and pitting oedema was reduced. Plasma NT-proBNP decreased to 2500 pg/mL and the patient was discharged uneventfully. He remained stable until the latest follow-up at 3 months from the initiation of therapy.