A 3625 g infant was born to a 45-year-old female (Gravida 10, Para 9). The patient was diagnosed prenatally in another facility with CDH. The mother came to the hospital after the onset of labor and the rupture of membranes. Baby was born via cesarean section. The infant was observed to be in respiratory distress, flaccid, cyanosed, hypotensive and he had delayed crying. On physical examination, the chest was inspected to be bulging and the abdomen was scaphoid. Chest auscultation reveled a decrease air entry bilaterally with the left side being more affected than the right side where the heart sounds were more prominent. Apgar scores were three in 1 min, seven in 5 min, and seven in 10 min. Patient was shifted to neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) and was kept on mechanical ventilation.
Chest x-ray was obtained that displayed left CDH with bowel loops on the left side of the chest . Echocardiography showed tricuspid regurgitation (TR), patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), and pulmonary hypertension.
On the eighth day, CDH repair was done via a subcostal incision. The hernia’s sac was eviscerated and excised. Dissection of the posterior and anterior leaf was done followed by closure with simple interrupted sutures. Examination of the whole small bowel revealed no ischemia therefore no resection was done. Testing the closure was declared to be successful after the lungs were inflated and no bubbles were observed. Drain was inserted in the thoracic cavity with suction and the patient was transferred to the NICU. Postoperative period was uneventful as the patient was extubated on the ninth postoperative day.
After the patient was discharged, he had multiple emergency department visits and admissions due to multiple events of respiratory tract infections and respiratory distress. Recurrence was detected at 242 days of age during follow-up and an elective repair for the hernia was scheduled . Unfortunately, before the scheduled elective repair of the hernia, the patient presented with intestinal obstruction due to strangulation of the CDH that required an emergency operation thirteen weeks after the detection of the recurrence. Through transabdominal subcostal incision, the hernia’s defect was visualized and widened in order to reduce the bowel the chest cavity. Large mesenteric defect measuring 20 cm was seen. In addition, patchy gangrenous segments of the bowel were observed requiring massive resection of the middle segment located between 90 cm from the duodenal-jejunal flexure and 25 cm from the ileocecal valve measuring about 90 cm of gangrenous bowel. Approximately 10 cm of the gangrenous small bowel was left for a second look operation. The hernia’s defect was closed and mesh placed.
Following the operation, the patient had a cardiac arrest for five minutes and received cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR). The former event resulted in hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy (HIE) that was confirmed via electroencephalography (EEG) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Four days later, the patient underwent a second look operation where 6 cm additional gangrenous bowel segment was resected. Two stomas were created and they were closed eight days after.
The patient developed several complications following the CDH repair operation. First, he developed disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). Second, disseminated candida tropicalis and septic shock with multiple organ dysfunction. Third, due to the extensive bowel resection, the patient developed short bowel syndrome (SBS) requiring a prolonged total parenteral nutrition (TPN). Nine weeks after the bowel resection, he was switched to oral feeding but he couldn’t tolerate it as he developed vomiting and had to be fed via TPN once again that was gradually weaned off to NGT feeding. Fourth, he developed gastroesophageal reflex disease (GERD) grade II and had poor sucking due to HIE that formed an obstacle to oral feeds. Regardless, the patient was discharged a month later after 103 days of hospitalization on oral feeds .