A 27-year-old nulligravida woman was presented to our hospital with a four-month history of lower abdominal pain, frequent urination, and dyspareunia. She had regular menstrual cycle without any menstrual-related complaints. In addition, there were no constitutional symptoms or bowel complaints. Her medical and surgical history was non-eventful and there was no family history of cancer. The general examination did not detect any abnormality. Her body mass index was 21.7. Liver and spleen were not palpable abdominally, but there was a firm non-tender pelvic–abdominal mass about the size of 16 weeks pregnancy with restricted mobility. There was no evidence of ascites. A vaginal examination revealed that a mass was felt anteriorly and through all fornices. Posterior lip of the portion – vaginalis of the cervix was felt as a rim and taken up posteriorly. The mass with the size of about 16 weeks pregnancy with restricted mobility was felt by the bimanual examination. The uterus could not be felt separately. The cervix was not visualized on speculum examination since a bulging mass was observed in the upper portion of vagina.
Her lab profile values were within the normal limits of hemoglobin: 13.3 g/dL. Ultrasonography revealed a huge pelvic mass that measured 11 12 cm (probably of uterine origin). MRI revealed a huge anterior cervical myoma measuring 10.5 9.2 12 cm (anteropsterior, transverse, and height, respectively) with the uterine body visualized above and the fundus reaching 5 cm cranially to the sacral promontory . Neither hydronephrosis nor hydroureter was detected by the IVP; however, the left ureter was mildly and laterally displaced.
The patient was counseled for surgery with a high possibility of a hysterectomy. Due to financial constraints, she did not receive preoperative gonadotropin-releasing hormone analog (GnRHa). After an informed consent, prophylactic ureteric catheterization was performed. Exploratory laparotomy revealed a huge anterior cervical myoma that measured about 10.5 9 12 cm filling the pelvis with normal corpus uteri on its top and deviated backward to the right. Both fallopian tubes and ovaries were grossly normal. Bilateral uterine artery ligation (BUAL) at its origin from the internal iliac artery (IIA) was not possible. Myometrial injection of diluted vasopressin was not performed due to non-availability of the drug in our country.
The peritoneal flap over the tumor was incised at its upper limit and, then, reflected downward. The footsteps of Victor Bonney, the pioneer of myomectomy, were meticulously followed to shell out the myoma (6). First, the capsule of the tumor was incised at its upper portion for about 5 cm. Then, the index finger of the left hand was inserted through the incision to ascertain the plane of cleavage between the tumor and its capsule. Subsequently, the incision was enlarged across the capsule and the tumor was gradually enucleated down to its base by using the fingers of the right hand through the proper plane of cleavage. Due to the non-availability of the myoma screw, enucleation was assisted by inserting a traction silk stitch (number 1) and pulling on it with the left hand . The base of the capsule was coagulated before the complete enucleation of myoma . Subsequently, the edges of the capsule were pulled up by forceps with a simultaneous suction to clarify the tumor bed in depth . The cavity was swiftly obliterated by applying the continuous concentric layers of "spiraling stitch" (7) with 0 polyglactin 910 inserted in a bottom-up manner . Ureteric catheters were felt before the suture placement at the base of the defect to avoid the ureteric damage during suturing. The first layer placed at the base of the defect was tied. Continuous traction and maintaining constant tension on the suture after each layer was ensured during the whole procedure. Finally, we performed the trimming of redundant wound edges and closure by a "baseball stitch" with 2-0 polyglactin 910 . A drain was placed within the cul-de-sac. There was an estimated blood loss of approximately 150 mL. The operative time was 80 min. The weight of the excised myoma was 473 gr. The postoperative course was uneventful. After two days, the drain, ureteric and Foley's catheters were removed and the patient was discharged. Cervical leiomyoma was confirmed histopathologically.
The patient was regularly followed up monthly for about six months. Outcomes included the resumption of regular menses and symptom relief. The patient reported regular menses and a relief of pelvic pressure symptoms. A six-month follow-up MRI revealed an intact cervical canal in the midline position with no evidence of residual fibroids . Figure 4 presents the relevant data from this episode of care organized as a timeline.
This case report was approved by the local research ethics committee of our institution (MFM-IRB: Mansoura Faculty of Medicine Institutional Research Board, Code No: R/572/07/2019) and prior written informed consent was obtained from the patient.