A 50-year-old previously well Sri Lankan male patient presented to the Oro-Maxillo-Facial (OMF) surgical unit and then referred to the general medical unit with the complaint of sudden onset swelling of lips, tongue and face for 24 hours. It was painless but progressive over the day. There was no peri-orbital swelling or peripheral edema. He had not experienced dyspnea, wheezing, abdominal pain or body itching. There were no identifiable precipitating factors attributing to angioedema. He denied any history of atopy or allergy. It was the first episode of this nature that he had experienced in his life and there were no previous documented cases of angioedema in his family. He was not on any short or long term medication. On detailed history, patient had experienced loss of appetite and loss of weight (8 kg) over the past 3 months but denied fever, night sweats, chronic cough, joint swelling, oral ulcers and rashes.
On examination, his weight was 49 kg, swelling of the tongue, lips and perioral region were noted. There was mild pallor without icterus but no lymphadenopathy, hepato-splenomegaly or abdominal masses. There were no dental caries, oral ulcers, joint swelling, rashes or bone tenderness. He had a regular pulse with blood pressure of 120/80 mmHg. Respiratory, neurological and loco-motor system examination were unremarkable.
Subsequent investigations revealed hemoglobin of 10.3 g/dL, white cell count of 5.52×103/μL (neutrophils – 38.6%, lymphocytes – 45%, monocytes-14%, eosinophils-1.3% and basophils-0.7%) and a platelet count of 207×103/μL. Blood picture showed normochromic normocytic red cells with marked rouleaux formation, total white cell count was normal with lymphocytic predominance and normal platelets. No atypical cells were seen. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 130 mm in 1st hour. Serum lactate dehydrogenase level was 960 IU/L (normal: 100–300 IU/L), C-reactive protein, liver profile and renal profile were normal. Mantoux test was negative. Serology for anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA), retroviral studies, Venereal disease research laboratory (VDRL) test, hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis C antibodies, Epstein-Barr virus and cytomegalovirus antibodies were negative.
C1 esterase inhibitor protein level was 23.71 mg/dl (15-35 mg/dL; measured by radio immunediffusion technique) and the functional percentage of C1 esterase inhibitor was 15% (normal >67%, equivocal 41-67%, abnormal <41%) at the time of angioedema. The serum compliment levels were as follows; C3 level – 110 mg/dL (75-165 mg/dL), C4 – 2 mg/dl (14-54 mg/dL) and C1q – 26% (75 -125%).
Bone marrow showed marked hyper cellularity with diffuse infiltration of homogenously mature lymphoid cells (70%). Blasts cells were 1% of marrow nucleated cells. Erythropoiesis, granulopoiesis and megakaryopoiesis were markedly suppressed. Features were compatible with bone marrow infiltration by low grade non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). Immunohistochemistry of the bone marrow revealed CD20 positivity with negative results for CD10, CD3, CD138, CD23 and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT) markers, indicating compatibility with B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Soluble interleukin 2 receptor levels were not carried out due to unavailability of the laboratory facilities.
Electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm and chest roentgenogram was normal. Ultrasound scan of the abdomen showed mild splenomegaly (15 cm). Contrast enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest, abdomen and pelvis showed right pretracheal and subcarinal lymphadenopathy with mild splenomegaly compatible with the diagnosis of lymphoma .
Patient was diagnosed to have B cell NHL with an episode of acquired angioedema on presentation. He did not have any life threatening episodes of angioedema but was managed initially with steroids and danazole, to which he responded slowly but completely and started on chemotherapy for the management of NHL. He is on oncology clinic follow-up and he did not develop any further episodes of angioedema thereafter up to 6 months follow-up after starting chemotherapy. Subsequent measurements of complement levels including C4 and C1q were within normal limits.