A 39-year-old female patient was referred to our institution for further investigation of a pancreatic cyst detected by abdominal ultrasonography during her health checkup. Contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography revealed a left intraperitoneal multilocular tumor measuring 14 cm . Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a smooth mass with homogeneous contents in the pancreatic tail . Endoscopic ultrasonography demonstrated a cystic lesion in the pancreatic tail, which was primarily anechoic, with some peripheral stone-like structures and a hyperechoic fluid–fluid level. Communication with the pancreatic duct was unclear. The patient was diagnosed with a benign pancreatic tumor and was followed up every six months.
After 3 years, the tumor showed remarkable progression. Follow-up magnetic resonance imaging revealed a multilocular cystic mass measuring 18 cm . A 10-cm cystic mass with solid components was hyperintense on diffusion-weighted imaging . The serum carcinoembryonic antigen level was < 18.0 ng/ml, and serum carbohydrate antigen 19–9 was 28 U/ml. Based on these findings, LDP was performed for possible malignancy.
The first 12-mm trocar was inserted at the umbilicus using open method. After pneumoperitoneum, other four trocars were inserted . Laparoscopic examination revealed a voluminous, subcapsular, elastic, and multilocular cyst under the transverse colon . The capsule appeared solid enough to withstand retraction of the endoscopic forceps without rupturing. The tumor was considered to originate from the pancreas. It was difficult to dissect the dorsal side of the tumor in the caudal to the cranial direction because of the tumor size. After the splenic artery and vein were divided, the pancreas was transected at the left side of the superior mesenteric vein using a linear stapler with a polyglycolic acid sheet . Furthermore, an additional port in the left upper quadrant facilitated tumor elevation and dissection of the dorsal layer of the giant tumor from the retroperitoneum, proximal to the distal region. The tumor compressed the left renal vein because of its size. Following the detachment of the tumor from the superior mesenteric artery, left renal vein, left adrenal gland, left kidney, and transverse colon, LDP was completed . The operative time and total intraoperative blood and ascites loss were 371 min and 600 ml, respectively.
Macroscopic examination revealed an 18-cm multiloculated pancreatic tail cyst with granular sebaceous material inside its lumen . Histopathological analysis revealed that the lumen of the cyst at the pancreatic tail was covered with various tissues, including mucinous, ciliated, and stratified squamous epithelium ; cartilage ; salivary gland-like organization; muscle; and bulbil. The presence of tissue components in the three germ cell layers led to the diagnosis of mature cystic teratoma of the pancreas.
The postoperative course was uneventful, except for a pancreatic leak, which was well controlled by antibiotics, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 13. The patient was followed up six months later without signs of recurrence.