A 50-year-old male patient with acute right lower quadrant pain was admitted to our hospital for emergency laparoscopic appendectomy under general anesthesia. He suffered from right ureter stone 2 years ago. Except that, the patient was in good health. The patient suffered from acute right lower quadrant stabbing pain from 11 am. The physical examination was remarkable for tenderness on the right lower quadrant area. The patient's preoperative chest X-ray finding, laboratory finding, and electrocardiogram were all within normal range. His preoperative blood pressure (BP) was 125/79 mm Hg, and pulse rate (PR) was 80 beats/min. General anesthesia was induced with 350 mg of thiopental, 80 mg of succinylcholine, and 50 μg of fentanyl. Tracheal intubation was done without difficulty on a single try. And then anesthesia was maintained with 6vol % of desflurane. The patient was monitored with noninvasive blood pressure (NIBP), ECG (lead II), pulse oximetry, and capnography. During the operation, BP, PR, and SpO2 were maintained at 110 to 150/65 to 90 mm Hg, 80 to 110 beats/min, and 99% to 100%, respectively. And there was no problem during appendectomy. When the anesthesia was over, NIBP was 120/70 and PR was 100 beats/min. On arrival in the postanesthesia care unit (PACU), the patient complained of severe dyspnea and chest pain, which was persisted and worsened. At that time, NIBP was 100/60, PR was 100 beats/min, but SpO2 was 85% to 94%. Respiratory rate was 30 breaths/min. Thus naloxone 0.2 mg was administered. In 25 minutes after arrival in the PACU, the patient was in asystole. And then he underwent cardiopulmonary resuscitation according to ACLS protocol using 1 mg of epinephrine, one 200J DC shock for V-fib. After that, his NIBP was 80/40 mm Hg, PR was 140 beats/min, and SpO2 was 84%. His ECG finding was A-fib. After 20 minutes, the patient developed asystole rhythm again and CPR was restarted. He remained severely hypotensive despite vasopressors, and died after 5 hours CPR. Because the patient's vital signs abruptly worsened, we could not perform additional evaluation such as chest X-ray, transthoracic echocardiography, thoracic computed tomography (CT) scan, etc. Then, a forensic autopsy was performed postmortem and thoracic and abdominal aortic dissection along the root of ascending aorta was present and massive hematoma within right and left thorax was present. And there was acute inflammation of appendix. Other findings were essentially normal. The patient had no family history of vascular disease or clinical features of connective tissue disease. He has no marfanoid habitus. This is the second case in the literature of acute aortic dissection occurring after laparoscopic appendectomy. This case was approved by Ethics Review Committee and the Institutional Review Board (OC18ZESI0062). Informed written consent was obtained from the patient's elder brother for publication of this case report and accompanying images.