A 31-year-old woman was admitted to our surgical emergency service with a one-day history of intermittent abdominal pain associated with fever, nausea and vomiting. Her history was unremarkable. On physical examination, she was found to have right lower quadrant abdominal tenderness with guarding. The white blood cell count was 12800/mm3, and C-reactive protein was elevated. An ultrasound examination on the abdomen showed free fluid in right ileocecal region. Acute appendicitis was suspected and the patient underwent an urgent surgical procedure. Upon laparotomy, free brownish fluid in the peritoneum and a hyperemic appendix were detected. Inspection of the uterus and ovary revealed a solid, oval left-sided ovarian tumor located behind the uterus. The tumor was distinctly separated from the uterus. There was no adhesion or infiltration of the surrounding structures. The right salpinx, ovary and uterus were normal by inspection and were left intact. Left sided salpingo-oophorectomy and appendectomy was performed.
The tumor was firm, had a smooth and shiny surface and measured 11 × 10 × 6 cm. The cut surface of the tumor was white-gray in color and displayed a whorled pattern. On the pole beneath the salpinx there was a cyst measuring 3 cm in greatest diameter filled with brownish material that was included in the tumor . In the vicinity of the cyst, there were signs of hemorrhage and a thin, brownish, coarse layer of fibrin covered the tumor surface in this area. Grossly, there was no recognizable normal ovarian tissue. The left salpinx was unremarkable. The serosal surface of the appendix, which measured 4.5 × 1 cm, was opacified.
Microscopically, the tumor was composed of whorled interlacing fascicles of typical smooth muscle cells with bland nuclei. Focally, there was dense fibrosis and hyalinization but significant nuclear atypia, pleomorphism and necrosis were absent. Mitotic activity was sparse (up to 1/10 high power field). The lumen of the cyst was covered with cuboidal epithelial cells without signs of atypia, surrounded by endometrial-type stroma . There were siderophages and extravasated red blood cells in the vicinity of the cyst. Above the cyst, there were fibrin, red blood cells and polymorphonuclears on tumor surface. Multiple sections showed no additional stromal or glandular elements in the tumor. The serosal surface of the appendix and surrounding fat tissue were infiltrated with polymorphonuclears, but there were no signs of appendicitis.
Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for vimentin, desmin and α-smooth muscle actin but not for CD34, S100 protein, epithelial membrane antigen, α-inhibin, calretinin and CD117. Epithelial lining of the cyst was positive for epithelial membrane antigen and the surrounding stroma was positive for CD10 (all antibodies from DAKO; Copenhagen, Denmark).
The diagnosis of primary ovarian leiomyoma associated with endometriotic cyst and periappendicitis was established.
The patient had no complication during the postoperative course and was discharged 7 days after surgery. No further therapy was indicated, and patient is well, 6 months after the diagnosis was made.