A 20-year-old healthy Thai man with myopic astigmatism attended our clinic for refractive surgery. He denied any past ophthalmic procedures. Best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/32 in the right eye (OD) with −7.25–3.75 × 15° and 20/40-1 in the left eye (OS) with −10.75–6.0 × 170°. Corneal tomography and corneal thickness were obtained with a rotating Scheimpflug camera system for anterior segment analysis (OCULUS Optikgeräte, Pentacam, GmbH Wetzlar, Germany). The result showed that the thickness of the thinnest point of the right and left cornea was 521 and 511 μm, respectively, and no ectatic changes were detected. Instead of undergoing laser vision correction, we recommended implantation of toric Implantable Collamer Lens (toric ICL; STAAR Surgical, Nidau, Switzerland) in both eyes owing to thin corneas. Two separate operations of ICL implantation were scheduled, starting with the right eye. Preoperatively, the slit-lamp examination was completely normal. His pupils were reactive to light, and the diameters of pupils were equal. His scotopic diameters of the right and left pupils measured with a corneal topography (Carl Zeiss, ATLASTM 9000 Corneal Topographer, Jena, Germany) using PathFinder II Corneal Analysis Software were 7.0 and 6.4 mm, respectively. The anterior chamber depth (ACD) measured with scanning slit corneal topography (Bausch & Lomb, Orbscan II, Rochester, NY, USA) was 3.32 mm in the right eye and 3.2 mm in the left eye. The white-to-white (WTW) distance measured with a caliper was 11.5 mm in both eyes. The preoperative intraocular pressures of the right and the left eyes were 17 and 16 mmHg, respectively. The patient did not require preoperative preventive iridotomies because of the presence of a hole at the center of the optic part of the fourth generation of ICL. The preoperative endothelial cell counts of the right and left eyes were 2728 and 2824 cells/mm2, respectively. The 12.6-mm ICLs were selected for both eyes. Before surgery, tropicamide 1% ophthalmic solution (Novartis, Mydriacyl 1%, UK) was applied until full pupillary dilatation was achieved. A viscoelastic agent (Alcon Laboratories, Inc., Provisc, Fort Worth, Texas, USA) was injected into the anterior chamber through a paracentesis port. The ICL was implanted in the right eye through a 2.75 mm temporal clear corneal incision. The viscoelastic agent was removed by manual irrigation with balance salt solution.
One hour after uncomplicated surgery, the patient complained of mild ocular pain. The IOP of the right eye measured with an applanation tonometer elevated to 48 mmHg. The cornea was clear, and the vault of ICL was 1.5 times of central corneal thickness (CCT). A 250 mg acetazolamide tablet was given orally, and the IOP decreased to 30 mmHg within 1 hour. The patient was then prescribed 250 mg acetazolamide tablets every 6 hours before he was discharged. On the first postoperative day, IOP decreased to 15 mmHg. Visual acuity was 20/30-2 and improved to 20/25-2 with pinhole correction. Refraction showed +2.5−1.75 × 60°. Although the IOP was normal and the cornea was clear, we saw retention of viscoelastic agent in the anterior chamber, and the right pupil was 6 mm in diameter and slightly reactive to light. Although the ICL was in place with a vault 1.75 times of CCT, we decided to remove the viscoelastic agent by irrigation with balance salt solution. On the next day, the visual acuity was 20/25-1 and improved to 20/20-1 with pinhole correction. Refraction showed +1.37−2.25 × 31°, and the IOP was 13 mmHg. The right pupil still dilated 6 mm in diameter. Five days after ICL implantation, the patient complained of glare especially at night despite satisfactory visual acuity. Despite normalized IOP, the right pupil remained 6 mm under slit-lamp examination and was slightly reactive to light. Pilocarpine 2% eye drops (Alcon Laboratories, Inc., USA) were applied to the right eye every 15 minutes four times, and the pupil constricted to 3 mm. The patient had applied pilocarpine 2% eye drops in the morning for 2 consecutive days and complained of less glare. Therefore, we advised him to continue pilocarpine 2% eye drops once a day in the morning. The visual acuity was 20/25+2, the autorefraction was −1.00−2.50 × 45°, and IOP was 16 mmHg. The pupil was 4 mm in diameter and reactive to light . The ICL was in a good position with the 1.5-time CCT vault. We performed the ICL implantation in the left eye 2 weeks later. The surgery was successful without postoperative increased intraocular pressure, and his left pupil did not dilate after surgery.
Two months after surgery, the patient stopped pilocarpine 2% eye drops owing to conjunctival injection. He visited our clinic 3 months after surgery and claimed that the night glare improved, although more glare was detected in the right eye compared with the left eye. However, no glare was experienced during the day. In general, he was satisfied with the results of surgery. On examination, his right eye was 20/20-2, while his left eye was 20/20. The intraocular pressure was 13 mmHg in both eyes. The right pupil was 3.5 mm in diameter under slit-lamp examination and was reactive to light. The left pupil was 2.5 mm in diameter . The higher-order aberrations in root mean square (RMS) of his right and left eyes measured by corneal topography (Carl Zeiss, ATLASTM 9000 Corneal Topographer, Jena, Germany) using PathFinder II Corneal Analysis Software were 0.37 and 0.43 µm, respectively. No area of iris atrophy was detected in the right eye.