A 45-year-old female presented to our hospital with rapidly progressive double vision. She had a history of a right CCA (15 mm in diameter) that was diagnosed at our hospital 5 years earlier when she presented with transient right third nerve palsy. She had been treated with strict blood pressure control in our outpatient clinic without recurrence of symptoms. Annual magnetic resonance (MR) imaging had not shown any morphological change in the aneurysm. Seventeen days before the present admission, she experienced onset of acute intractable headache accompanied by a “swishing sound” in the right side of her head, which worsened gradually and which was not responsive to analgesics. Three days prior to admission, her headache subsided abruptly, and she developed double vision and worsening visual acuity of her left eye. On admission, she was distressed. Neurological examination revealed left third nerve palsy, left ocular bruit, left chemosis, slight left exophthalmos, and subjective reduction in visual acuity in the left eye. Ophthalmologic examination showed reduced visual acuity in the left eye (20/67) when compared with the right eye (20/50). Computed tomography and MR imaging revealed a remarkable enlargement of the left superior orbital vein (SOV), and cerebral angiography confirmed direct CCF caused by CCA rupture. The fistula tracked toward the contralateral (left) cavernous sinus and drained into the left SOV [Figure –]. Given the acutely worsening neuro-ophthalmologic symptoms as well as the robust direct CCF with the resultant engorged left SOV, urgent treatment was indicated to prevent devastating permanent neuro-ophthalmologic deficits. Endovascular treatment was not available on an urgent basis at our hospital. Given her young age and her stable systemic condition, we elected to proceed with open surgical trapping of the aneurysm in conjunction with high-flow bypass using a RA graft after obtaining informed consent.
Standard neuroanesthesia with somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEP) of the left extremities was induced. With right cervical carotid bifurcation exposure, a curvilinear fronto-temporal skin incision was made, and the superficial temporal artery (STA) was meticulously prepared under a microscope. The RA graft was harvested concurrently by another surgeon. A fronto-temporal craniotomy was performed, and a subzygomatic tunnel was made for the RA graft. The Sylvian fissure was fully split under microscope, and the M1, M2, and M3 portions of the middle cerebral artery (MCA) and the supraclinoidal internal carotid artery (ICA) were exposed. First, an “insurance” STA-M4 bypass was made distal to the M2 portion for RA graft anastomosis. Then, the harvested RA graft was gently pulled through the subzygomatic tunnel. The distal end of the RA graft was anastomosed to the M2 (inferior trunk) of the MCA, and the proximal end was anastomosed to the external carotid artery (ECA). The patency of the anastomosis was confirmed with microvascular Doppler assessment, and the right cervical ICA was then clamped. At this stage, due to bleeding from the cavernous sinus, we incompletely trapped the aneurysm to control the bleed by clipping the ICA just distal to the origin of the ophthalmic artery, leaving only retrograde flow from the ophthalmic artery into the cavernous aneurysm. Then, extradural anterior clinoidectomy was performed. We exposed the ICA proximal to the ophthalmic artery as well as the distal dural ring, and some bleeding from the cavernous sinus was controlled with packing with Gelfoam. The C3 portion of the ICA was finally clipped . Microvascular Doppler exploration through the lateral wall of the cavernous sinus did not detect any flow signal. We also confirmed anterograde flow into the ophthalmic artery via retrograde ICA flow provided by the RA graft. Significant SSEP change was not observed at all throughout the operation.
Immediately after the operation, auscultation over the left eye confirmed disappearance of the ocular bruit. Furthermore, chemosis and exophthalmos resolved. Postoperative angiography confirmed patency of the high-flow bypass and complete occlusion of the CCF. MR imaging revealed no significant cerebral infarction in the revascularized distal right ICA area and showed marked shrinkage of the formerly engorged left SOV [Figure –]. An examination by an experienced ophthalmologist confirmed total resolution of the deficits. The patient returned to her daily life without any permanent neurological sequelae.