A previously healthy 69 year old male was evaluated in Outpatient Allergy Clinic. He reported a history of sudden onset of lip and tongue swelling, throat tightness, shortness of breath, cough and wheeze within five minutes of sucking on a peppermint candy. He took two tablets of diphenhydramine 25 mg and his symptoms progressed to difficulty with talking and swallowing. He was urgently transported to Emergency Department where he was administered epinephrine intramuscularly, parenteral antihistamines and steroids. His vitals remained stable throughout the episode and he denied any urticarial lesions or gastrointestinal symptoms. His symptoms resolved within 3–4 hours. On history, he reported frequent consumption of foods with peppermint flavour such as chocolates, candies, ice cream, as well as peppermint tooth paste, which he had tolerated well. However, a few weeks prior to this episode, he had developed isolated tongue and lip swelling with the use of Colgate peppermint toothpaste and had avoided it since, although he did not consider the peppermint flavour to be the culprit. During summer months of the preceding three years, he had cultivated peppermint plants in his backyard and admitted to having experienced nasal congestion, cough and a slight wheeze when gardening. His past medical history was remarkable for gout, dyslipidemia and gastroesophageal reflux. He had no prior history of atopy. His medications were simvastatin, omeprazole and aspirin. Skin prick testing was performed to common inhalants and was positive to dust mites, but negative to other common inhalants, including eight types of moulds. Skin testing was negative to commercially available food allergens of egg white, cow’s milk, fish, shellfish, peanut, tree nuts, wheat, soy and sesame. Skin prick testing to a saline slurry of peppermint candy demonstrated a wheal and flare with largest diameters of 10 mm and 35 mm (W10/F25), respectively (Figure a). Prick-to-prick test with fresh peppermint leaf provided by the patient revealed a skin test response of W25/F50 (Figure b). Both peppermint tests were negative when applied on five healthy volunteers. Patient and healthy volunteers displayed appropriate histamine (W3F25) and negative control (W0F0) skin responses. Our patient was advised to avoid any traces of peppermint and menthol and carry an epinephrine autoinjector. He removed the peppermint plants from his backyard and returned to gardening the following summer without experiencing any symptoms. Later on, he had an accidental exposure to lip balm with traces of peppermint flavour causing solitary lip swelling that responded to oral diphenhydramine.