This case involved a 62-year-old woman with tuberculomas in the diaphragm and posterior mediastinum. She had no relevant medical history and had never smoked. She presented with mild dyspnea. Chest X-ray examination showed small nodules in the bilateral lung fields. Blood test results were normal, including the tumor markers carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19–9. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest showed a cystic lesion measuring 30 mm in the left diaphragm , focal thickening of the posterior mediastinal pleura with calcification in the region of the left 11th thoracic vertebra , and multiple small nodules in the bilateral lungs . Positron emission tomography–CT revealed increased uptake of fluorodeoxyglucose in the cystic lesion in the left diaphragm [maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) = 6.9] and posterior mediastinum (SUVmax = 2.1). Surgical resection of the masses in the left diaphragm and posterior mediastinum was considered because of concern regarding malignancy. However, a sputum culture showed Mycobacterium tuberculosis; therefore, the patient was treated with anti-tuberculosis therapy (ATT) before surgery. A sputum culture was negative 6 months later. Although treatment for tuberculosis seemed successful, the diaphragmatic mass slightly increased in size and the posterior mediastinal thickness became considerably enlarged. We thus considered that these lesions could be malignant, and the patient was admitted to our hospital for surgery. We did not perform a percutaneous CT-guided needle biopsy of diaphragmatic mass for the diagnosis, because we concerned that a percutaneous biopsy might cause a dissemination of the tuberculosis or the tumor.
After the patient and her family had provided informed consent for surgery, we performed the operation. Because we considered the possibility of the tuberculoma in the diaphragm, we performed the surgery in the negative pressure operating room. We placed an 11.5-mm port on the anterior axillary line of the sixth intercostal space, but we found a dense inflammatory adhesion between the lung and chest wall. Therefore, the chest cavity was opened through the eighth intercostal space. We detected the mass in the diaphragm and posterior mediastinum. A dense adhesion was also present between the mass in the diaphragm and left lower lobe, and we performed wedge resection of the left lower lobe, because it was adhered to the mass. We then divided the diaphragm, leaving a healthy muscle margin around the lesion, and reconstructed the diaphragm with simple suturing . There was no adhesion between the left diaphragm and the abdominal organs. We also resected the posterior mediastinal lesion with wedge resection of the left lower lobe. The diaphragmatic lesion was filled with purulent liquid.
Polymerase chain reaction of the purulent liquid in the left diaphragm was positive for tuberculosis, and the lesion was, therefore, diagnosed as a tuberculoma. Acid-fast bacteria culture was negative. The patient had an uncomplicated postoperative course and began treatment with anti-tuberculosis drugs comprising isoniazid (300 mg/day), rifampicin (450 mg/day), ethambutol (750 mg/day), and pyrazinamide (1200 mg/day) on postoperative day 7. She was discharged on postoperative day 10 with no complications. At the 6-month follow-up, she was asymptomatic with no evidence of recurrence on CT.
Macroscopic examination of the lesion in the left diaphragm showed a 68-mm yellow mass surrounded by a thick wall . Microscopic examination of both specimens showed epithelioid cell granulomas composed of histiocytes and multinucleated giant cells with caseous necrosis , although no acid-fast bacilli were detected by Ziehl–Neelsen staining. The tuberculoma was surrounded by diaphragmatic muscle tissue . In addition, there were histiocytes and multinucleated giant cells in the diaphragmatic muscular layer . Therefore, the patient was pathologically diagnosed with tuberculous abscesses in the diaphragm and posterior mediastinum, and additional ATT was administered.