A 25 year-old woman with a past medical history significant for anorexia nervosa, for which she had multiple psychiatric admissions, depression and Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder on fluoxetine and methylphenidate who presented with weakness for 1 day. She was in her usual state of health until the night prior to presentation, when she began to feel weak after having dinner. The next morning she had difficulty getting out of bed, felt dehydrated and was lethargic. The patient reports that her “normal” weight is between 90 and 100 pounds. Recently, she moved out of her parents’ home, withdrew socially, resumed binging, and started to feel depressed. Since then, her eating habits have been characterized by cycles of binging and starving, during which she will consume an entire box of pasta or 20 apples, feel sick, and then starve until feeling hungry again. She denies fever, nausea and vomiting, diarrhea, urinary symptoms, and recent increase in exercise volume or frequency. She also denies current suicidal and homicidal ideation.
In the emergency room, vital signs were significant for rectal temperature 93 F, heart rate 56BPM, blood pressure 80/55, and respiratory rate 14. Physical exam was remarkable for lethargy, emaciation and pitting lower extremity edema. Electrocardiogram showed sinus bradycardia, with a prolonged corrected QT interval of 0.54 and U waves, attributed initially to magnesium deficiency. She was given 2 grams of magnesium intravenously in the emergency department. Laboratory studies were notable for BUN 37 and Cr 0.6, glucose 31, Ca 7.9, Mg 1.9, phos 3.5, AST 1,386, ALT 1,208, alkaline phosphatase 378 and prolonged prothrombin time. She received 10% dextrose in water solution and was admitted to Medicine for further management of EKG abnormalities and elevated liver transaminases.
On the medical ward, patient was hypophosphatemic, hypokalemic, hypocalcemic, and hypomagnesemic, requiring IV fluids and frequent electrolytes repletion. She was closely monitored with multiple daily blood draws. Working closely with the Nutrition and Endocrine services, Her diet was slowly advanced with increase in calorie allowance. Throughout her nutritional rehabilitation, she had a vigorous appetite and had no problems eating or voiding.
Ultrasound of the right upper quadrant revealed a normal size liver, with no structural lesions, and a gallbladder polyp, with no evidence of cholestasis or cholelithiasis. Blood acetaminophen and alcohol levels and urinary toxicology were unremarkable. Work up for infectious, autoimmune, and genetic causes of hepatitis was unremarkable. During this time, the patient’s AST and ALT peaked in the high 4,000 s and slowly trended downward. She refused a liver biopsy. Ultimately, the patient’s liver failure was attributed to chronic malnutrition and possible liver hypoperfusion in the setting of poor oral intake.The patient remained in sinus rhythm on telemetry, with heart rate ranging from 40 and 100 beats per minute and persistent QTc prolongation. Trans-thoracic echocardiogram revealed a hypokinetic left ventricle, left ventricular wall atrophy, and an ejection fraction of 10-15%. Following carddiology recommendations, the patient’s phosphorus, magnesium, and potassium were aggressively maintained at >3.5, >2.0, and >4.0, respectively, to reduce the risk of torsades de pointes. The corrected QT interval eventually downtrended toward the normal range.
The psychiatrist continued to meet and support the patient throughout her stay in the hospital and was present on rounds to discuss the patient’s discharge disposition and plans for follow up. Her hospital course was otherwise notable for steadily decreasing blood counts. During her hospitalization, she was found to be pancytopenic with an absolute neutrophil count as low as 700 and platelet count of 21,000. She was placed briefly on reverse contact isolation for infection prophylaxis until her white count and ANC increased.
The patient improved dramatically over the first few days and by day 4 of hospitalization, she was able to ambulate without assistance and use the bathroom independently she was discharged by day 10.