A 15-year-old girl presented to her primary care provider with episodes of altered behavior. She reported a 30-minute period of fatigue, confusion, poor concentration, irritability, and “staring off” which was noted by parents while the patient was getting ready for school. The patient herself did not recall the event. Her parents had witnessed several similar events lasting up to 30 min, at least once per week, in the morning, for the past 5 months. Their daughter’s symptoms would resolve after eating breakfast. They had not sought medical care previously, assuming her behavior was related to early morning drowsiness. When the frequency of these episodes increased to several times per week, they presented to their primary care physician. Following her primary care visit, the patient was scheduled for an outpatient EEG after BMP, thyroid studies, and UDS which were normal. The patient became unresponsive during the EEG study and was referred to the local hospital with the following laboratory data when she was symptomatic: point-of-care glucose 36 mg/dL (65–110), insulin 36.8 uIU/mL (2.6–24.9), C-peptide 4.6 ng/mL (1.1–4.4), and betahydroxybutyrate 0.6 mg/dL (0.2–2.8). Her mental status immediately improved with intravenous dextrose. In search of an insulin-producing mass, she underwent abdominal CT with contrast which was negative per the local radiologist’s report. Her EEG was interpreted as abnormal prompting the initiation of valproic acid therapy for potential seizure activity. She was discharged home from the emergency room with a glucometer and planned neurology follow-up. An outpatient endoscopic ultrasound was pursued as another attempt to localize any potential insulin producing mass, and this too was unremarkable. She was subsequently referred for subspecialty consultation with a pediatric endocrinologist. Prior to her scheduled endocrinology appointment, she was admitted to a tertiary care pediatric center due to near daily episodes of hypoglycemia associated with altered mental status. The patient became hypoglycemic overnight while fasting in less than 6 h . A critical sample was obtained and confirmed hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia . Testing for sulfonylurea ingestion was performed and the result was negative. An MRI of the abdomen revealed a 0.9 × 1.1 × 1.3 cm pancreatic mass . Valproic acid was stopped and her hypoglycemia medically managed successfully with diazoxide 150 mg orally 3 times per day (8 mg/kg/day) and two tablespoons of cornstarch at bedtime. She ultimately underwent laparoscopic distal pancreatectomy with pathologic examination of the mass confirming a benign insulinoma . She had mild hyperglycemia post-operatively which resolved within 48 h without insulin therapy and was discharged home on post-operative day three. Gene sequencing by using DNA from a peripheral blood sample for multiple endocrine neoplasia was negative.. The patient remained euglycemic, asymptomatic, and lost 15 kg in the 10 months following tumor resection which dropped her BMI from the 87th to 45th percentile. A follow up EEG was performed and was completely normal. She is now considered cured. The time from onset of symptoms to correct diagnosis, tumor localization, and surgical management was approximately 8 months.