The patient was female, 71 years old, 145 cm in height and 45 kg in weight. She was admitted to the hospital because of “post-traumatic left lower limb pain accompanied by limited activity for 2 h”. After admission, she was diagnosed as “fracture of left femoral neck” and planned to undergo elective surgery. The patient denied history of heart disease and infectious diseases, and no history of diabetes, hypertension and operation and esthesia. Blood pressure (BP) was 124/69 mm Hg, heart rate (HR) was 72 times/min, pulse oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 96%, cardiopulmonary auscultation was not special, and no difficulty in endotracheal intubation was predicted. Chest X-ray showed a few chronic inflammatory lesions in both lungs; An electrocardiogram examination was normal. Blood biochemical determination of globulin value and ratio, creatinine, urea nitrogen were normal range. Blood routine results showed that hemoglobin was 131 g/L, hematocrit was 83%, platelet was 68 × 109/L, no thrombosis was found in deep veins of both lower limbs, American Standards Association grade ii. The left femoral neck fracture was treated by open reduction and internal fixation with endotracheal intubation combined with general anesthesia.
BP 140/80 mm Hg, HR 78 times/min and SpO2 96% were measured after admission to the operating room. Electrocardiogram, noninvasive blood pressure, HR and SpO2 were monitored continuously. Left iliac fascial nerve block was performed with 0.2% ropivacaine 30 mL under ultrasound guidance. After 3 minutes of oxygen and nitrogen removal, sufentanil 15 µg, etomidate 10 mg, propofol 50 mg, and Rocuronium 40 mg were intravenously injected for general anesthesia induction. After the muscle relaxation was improved, id 6.5 mm reinforced tracheal catheter with steel wire was inserted through the mouth with visual laryngoscope, and the sound of both lungs was clear and symmetrical. After that, the tracheal catheter was fixed and anesthesia ventilator was used for intermittent positive pressure ventilation [Tidal Volume (VT) 320 mL, F 12 times/min]. Continuous low-flow inhalation of 1% to 2% sevoflurane and continuous micropump propofol (10–20 mL/h) during the operation maintained general anesthesia. During the operation, hemodynamics was stable and the operation was smooth. The operation lasted for 90 minutes and was completed at 19:45 on the same day. 5 minutes later, the patient’s spontaneous respiration recovered, VT was about 250 mL, neostemine 1 mg + atropine 0.5 mg antagonistic residual muscle relaxation was given, VT increased to 350 mL, the patient could raise her head, extend her tongue and clench her fist as instructed, SpO2 97%, BP and HR normal after 5 minutes of spontaneous air breathing. After the tracheal and oral secretions were fully sucked out, extubation was prepared at 19:50 (140 minutes after induction and 25 minutes after operation). After the air in the balloon was drained, it was found that it was difficult to remove the tracheal tube.
Considering that the tension of vocal cords had recovered after the patient woke up or laryngeal spasm might be the cause, oxygen was given immediately and propofol 30 mg was given intravenously until the patient fell asleep and tried again, but still failed. The other two anesthesiologists failed in each attempt. At this time, it was suspected that the fine gas injection tube of the endotracheal tube cuff was blocked or indicated the failure of the one-way valve of the cuff, and the gas in the endotracheal tube cuff could not be completely pumped out. Therefore 5 mL normal saline was injected into the cuff. It was found that there was no resistance and 5 mL normal saline was successfully pumped out, thus eliminating the reason why the cuff could not be deflated.
In order to avoid vocal cord damage caused by forcible extubation, urgent request superior doctor. After the superior doctor arrived to understand the treatment process, the patient had clear breath sounds in both lungs through auscultation, and the tracheal tube was checked to be unobstructed with sputum suction tube. After another intravenous injection of 30 mg propofol and 30 mg succinylcholine, video laryngoscopy was used to examine the acoustic doorway after the patient fell asleep, and it was found that the vocal cord edema was obvious and close to the tracheal tube, and there was almost no space between the tube and the vocal cord . Therefore, it was decided to take the tube temporarily to Intensive Care Unit (ICU) for observation at 20:20.
ICU gave patients proper rehydration, improved tissue perfusion, assisted ventilation, anti-inflammatory, reduced edema, neurotrophic, prevention, and treatment of infection, maintenance of circulation and stability of internal environment. At 8:00 the next day, after the infusion of sedative drugs was gradually reduced, the patient became conscious and resumed breathing on his own. After communication with the patient, another attempt to remove the tracheal tube failed. Ultrasound was used to scan the patient’s airway, and it was found that there was obvious soft tissue edema on both sides of the glottis, and the tracheal tube jacket was located at the position of the fifth tracheal cartilage, and no other abnormal structures were found. The computerized tomography (CT) results showed soft tissue swelling of oropharynx and larynx. Consider laryngeal, glottic and subglottic edema, and continue to use anti-inflammatory drugs to eliminate edema .
The next day, the patient was awake. Under supervision, 5 mL 2% lidocaine was sprayed around the glottis of the larynx with a laryngeal anesthesia tube, and 3 mL 2% lidocaine was sprayed into the trachea through a tracheal tube. Pure oxygen was continued to be inhaled, and the glottis was observed again with a video laryngoscope 10 minutes later. At this time, a gap between the tracheal tube and glottic cleft was found, and the tracheal tube with steel wire was gently rotated under direct vision. It was found that the wrinkled and raised capsule was stuck under the right vocal cord. The catheter was continued to rotate counterclockwise so that the wrinkled and raised capsule was located above the glottic cleft. Finally, the tracheal catheter was successfully pulled out with a little resistance. Before extubation, the patient woke up perfectly and her vital signs were stable. SpO2 97% when she breathed air autonomously. After catheter extraction, the patient’s voice was slightly hoarse, and there was no inspiratory wheezing. Auscultation revealed clear breath sounds in both lungs without dry and wet rale.
Three days after extubation, the neck CT showed that the soft tissue swelling near the glottis disappeared obviously . The patient was discharged successfully 1 week after surgery without respiratory tract infection or complications related to endotracheal intubation.