The patient was a 25-year-old Afghan male. He had experienced penetrating sharp injury with nail to his left heel 20 days before admission. Eight days after injury, lockjaw and muscle spasms developed, particularly in left lower extremity. Vaccination history of the patient was negative. He was awake and experienced trismus (mouth was opened only one centimeter) and marked opisthotonos. The generalized attacks with 3 - 4 minutes intervals for a few seconds dominated in his left leg. Two doses of human anti-tetanus immunoglobulin (Hyper-Tet 250 U) was injected into his buttock and a 0.5 mg of tetanus-diphtheria toxoid was injected in the deltoid muscle. He was admitted to ICU for more care and received midazolam and morphine infusion.
Patient had feeding via Nasogastric (NG) tube. The patient had severe spasms and was at risk of rhabdomyolysis. Therefore, for renal protection, hydration was done by half saline 4 L/day and bicarbonate infusion to keep urine pH > 5. Metronidazole was prescribed, 500 mg/qid/iv. The patient had a temperature of 38°C for three days after ICU admission then received tazocine 3.375 g/qid, empirically. Ciprofloxacin 500 mg iv (twice per day) was started for a positive urine culture (Escherichia coli > 100,000). Despite the above mentioned medications, the patient was still experiencing severe generalized spasm and pain and needed more sedation and analgesics; therefore he remained intubated and spasms were reduced by high doses of sedatives, analgesics and muscle relaxants. The pancronium 4 mg as loading dose, then 2 mg/hour was used for patient relaxation. On the tenth day, the patient underwent percutaneous dilatational tracheostomy (PDT). On the fifteenth day, with partial improvement of patient’s spasms, the muscle relaxant was discontinued. But spastic attacks, with dominancy in left leg, continued and high doses of sedative agents were prescribed; consequently, ventilation and oxygenation status of the patient were disrupted and he could not extubated. Prescription of baclofen had no significant effect. Therefore, considering the spastic attacks and pain focused on the left leg, chief complaint of the patient and to facilitate extubation, ultrasound-guided sciatic nerve block (esaote, MyLab® 30 cv) was suggested. A curved 5 MHz probe on upper part of the medial thigh, a 20G, 120-mm-long, 30° short beveled Teflon-coated (Vygon, Locoplex® Ecouen, France) Electro-Stimulating XIU Three Needle was inserted into the target, sciatic nerve, using in-plane approach, while the electrical nerve stimulator was set on 1.7 mA, 2 Hz, 0.1 ms, and an electrical surface electrode was attached on his calf. After obtaining foot aversion on 0.5 mA, 2 Hz, 0.1 ms current, 40 mL of Marcaine 0.17% (MYLAN) + lidocaine 0.7% (Iran Hormone co., Iran) was injected after frequent negative aspirations. Drug distribution was observed around the target. Patient’s pain score decreased to less than 2 in the Universal pain assessment tool measure (in which pain severity is recorded on a 0 to10 numeric scale where 0 indicates no pain at all and 10 indicates the worst pain imaginable) . The patient’s pain was relieved and he was extubated on the 18th day after ICU admission. Routine ICU monitoring was performed during ICU admission. The patient had tachycardia but blood pressure was almost stable. Routine laboratory data and liver function test was normal and Creatine Phosphokinase (CPK) raised up to 4500 IU/L. The patient left the ICU with the good general condition.