A man in his late 70s noticed shortness of breath on exertion 5 months prior. He presented to a previous physician, and computed tomography (CT) revealed moderate emphysema, a nodule in the right lower lobe of the lung, and a mass in the upper lateral part of the right breast. PET showed accumulation of 18F-FDG in a nodule in the right lower lobe of the lung and a mass in the right breast with a maximum standardized uptake value of 4.23 and 3.11, respectively . The nodule in the right lower lobe was diagnosed as T1bN0M0, Stage IA2 lung cancer. Owing to the presence of respiratory dysfunction and other diseases (bipolar affective disorder), the policy was to follow up without treatment.
The patient had visited our hospital 1 month prior for a detailed examination of the right breast mass. Breast ultrasonography showed a well-demarcated tumor lesion, a slightly heterogeneous internal echo, and no enhancement of the posterior echo. Color Doppler showed some internal blood flow . T1-weighted gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 2.2 cm smooth-edged mass with an early contrast-enhanced margin in the upper lateral region of the right breast. In the late contrast-enhanced phase, the entire mass was stained and the contrast agent was pooled. T2-weighted images showed a high intensity throughout the mass . These findings suggested vascular tumors, necrosis within the tumor, or vascular malformations as differential diagnoses, in addition to breast cancer. We performed a vacuum-assisted breast biopsy under ultrasound guidance. Histopathological examination of the biopsy specimen showed irregularly dilated and anastomosed reticulated vessels and hobnail-like endothelial cells. In contrast, there was a partial area in which poorly dilated vessels were compactly arranged in alveolar nests. A characteristic reticular pattern and hobnail-like endothelial cells were observed, suggesting an RH. The rate of MIB-1 proliferation was 40% in parts of the alveolar area but < 1% overall. One month after the biopsy, a right partial mastectomy was performed. No standards have been established for the preferred resection margin during surgery with suspected RH. Therefore, the extent of resection of this breast tumor was determined according to surgery for invasive ductal carcinoma of the breast. The resulting histopathology showed no tumor exposure at the resection margin. The final pathological diagnosis of the tumor was RH.
A gross examination of the resected specimen revealed multiple reddish tumor nodules measuring 2 cm in size in the subcutaneous adipose tissue . Histologically, there was a proliferation of reticular or slit-like abnormal blood vessels, with a strong tendency toward fusion and irregular luminal dilatation with congestion. The tumor endothelial cells had small, oval to slightly flattened nuclei with heavily stained chromatin, and characteristic claw-like projections into the lumen were occasionally observed . Detached individual endothelial cells were observed in the vascular lumen. Solid growth, lacking an obscure vascular lumen, was also observed. The mitotic figure was obscure. Abnormal vessels were set in a fibrous stroma. A continuous intravascular spread of tumor cells was observed. No neoplastic lesions were observed in the mammary glands.
Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for ERG, CD34, factor VIII-related antigen, and CD31, and negative for podoplanin (D2-40) and α-smooth muscle actin, indicating pure vascular endothelial differentiation . The MIB-1 proliferation rate was ≤ 1%. Pathological diagnosis of RH was made based on characteristic retiform vasculature and claw-like or hobnail tumor cells occupying the entire tumor nodule.
Three months after surgery, the patient was free of local recurrence and distant metastasis.