An 18-year-old boy with 1-week history of auditory hallucinations, sense of insecurity, delusions of reference and feelings of being followed and controlled by others unknown, insomnia was admitted to Psychiatry department in December, 2013. He often heard many boys and girls commenting on him and criticising him sometimes. He suspected people were always discussing him and doing harm to him. These symptoms mentioned above made him sometimes just stare blankly, feel nervous, restless, tired, irritable, afraid of going outside. Insomnia subsequently developed. He was previously healthy and had no remarkable family history. He was enrolled in a high school. He did not smoke, drink alcohol or use illicit drugs. After admission to the hospital, physical examination was normal. On mental state examination, the patient was oriented and cooperative. Positive and Negative Symptoms Scale (PANSS) scored 95 which indicated he was in acute psychosis. His full scale of Weschler Adult Intelligence was 98 which indicated his intelligence was normal. His electrocardiogram, brain magnetic resonance imaging were normal. The laboratory investigations showed hypokalemia (3.17 mmol/L), hypomagnesemia (0.48 mmol/L).
According to his symptoms and investigations, the patient was diagnosed with schizophrenia-like psychosis and was treated with paliperidone at the dose of 6 mg/day and magnesium and potassium supplementations. Two weeks later, anxiety ameliorated, quality of sleep improved, hallucination and delusion resolved. The PANSS scores decreased to 41.His serum potassium increased to 3.23 mmol/L, magnesium level was still at 0.48 mmol/L. His electrolyte disturbances were thought to be caused by acute psychosis and were expected to recover soon, the patient was discharged with oral potassium and magnesium supplementations.
During the regular following up, the patient felt a little fatigue as before while his psychosis maintained complete remission. Two weeks later after discharge, laboratory studies showed worsened hypokalemia (2.99 mmol/L) and hypomagnesemia (0.49 mmol/L) despite potassium and magnesium supplementations. He had no history of diuretic, laxative and licorice intake, no episode of anorexia, vomiting and diarrhea. Considering that his psychosis and other common conditions failed to explain his electrolyte disturbances, we consulted a nephrologist who suspected this patient might had GS, further examinations were subsequently ordered. The results of hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, metabolic alkalosis, hypocalciuria were consistent with GS .
In order to verify this diagnosis, gene analysis was performed. Genomic DNA was isolated and purified from peripheral blood of the subject and used for polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification of individual exons of the SLC12A3 gene. Twenty-six pairs of oligonucleotide primers were generated to amplify all 26 exons and flanking intronic regions. PCRs were performed in a 50 μL volume containing 1 μL genomic DNA, 2 μL primers, 1 μL deoxyribonucleotide triphosphate(dNTP), and 5 μL 10 × 9 Taq buffer, 5 μL MgCl2, 2.5 U Taq enzyme, and 35.5 μL ddH2O. PCR was performed using standard conditions with an initial denaturation step at 95 °C for 3 min, subsequently followed by 35 cycles with denaturation at 94 °C for 30 s, annealing at 55–60 °C for 35 s and elongation at 72 °C for 40–50 s. Sanger direct sequencing was performed on an ABI 3730XL automated DNA sequencer (Applied Biosystems Division, Life Technologies, CA, USA) by Sangon Biotech Shanghai Co., (Shanghai, China). GenBank Accession Number NC_000016, was used as reference sequences. The numbering of a nucleotide starts at the first adenine of the translation initiation codon. This patient carried out c. 2687 G > A homozygous mutation of exon 23 in the SLC12A3 gene which led to p.Arg896Gln which was already known as pathogenic mutation in the previous report (Kurschat et al. ) .
Eventually, the diagnosis of GS was established. Thus, additional spironolactone (40 mg/day) combined with increased doses of oral potassium chloride sustained-release tablets (3.0 g/day) and potassium magnesium aspartate (0.3 g/day) were administered. During next half a year, fatigue resolved, paliperidone gradually tapered and eventually discontinued while psychosis maintained complete remission. His serum potassium was near normal (3.2–3.5 mmol/L), hypomagnesemia significantly improved (0.57–0.67 mmol/L).