A 4.5-month-old female infant was brought to the emergency room after experiencing several episodes of nystagmus. Parents reported horizontal fast eye movements lasting for 30 s and the baby seemed to be unresponsive meanwhile; a single episode was associated with profound vomiting. There were no other problems, no signs or history of recent infection or head trauma, and between the episodes, the infant behaved normally. Parents were initially not aware of any provoking factors, including the changes of head position.
Differential diagnosis for paroxysmal abnormal eye movement in infants was established. Occulogenic etiologies are the most common but less likely, given the paroxysmal nature of the symptoms. Epileptic nystagmus may be a plausible cause, even despite the negative EEG findings during the presumed interictal period. Intoxications either from substances like alcohol, certain medications, or drugs can induce nystagmus. This can be due to the direct cerebellar toxicity or, as in the case of alcohol , by altering the specific gravity inside the semicircular canals. Inborn errors of metabolism and leukodystrophies can present with nystagmus, often alongside other symptoms. Any structural abnormalities in the central nervous system, especially within the brainstem, must be thoroughly excluded. Neuroinfections are a potentially treatable cause of nystagmus, warranting the consideration of a spinal tap. Several peripheral vestibular etiologies , such as BPPV, vestibular neuronitis, labyrinthitis, perilymphatic fistula, and superior semicircular canal dehiscence, should be considered. Abnormalities in eye movements, including nystagmus, can arise from whiplash-associated disorders due to impaired cervico-oculomotor systems . Thus, a detailed history regarding potential previous injuries is crucial. Functional nystagmus is recognized but improbable in this case due to the patient’s age.
Physical examination as well as the acute blood test (ions, CRP, liver and kidney function) were, in presenting case, normal, and transcranial ultrasound showed enlargement of the subarachnoid space. Because of the broad differential diagnosis of nystagmus in infancy, the baby was acutely admitted to the hospital for further evaluation and observation.
The patient’s family history was unremarkable. She was delivered by spontaneous prolonged labor at the gestational age of 33 weeks and 3 days, terminated by C-section. The Apgar scale was 5-7-8, nCPAP was used during the first day, and common neonatal jaundice occurred. ATB therapy had been administrated for the first 48 h for possible sepsis, finally diagnosed as fetal inflammatory response syndrome. However, the child was well thriving since the discharge from the maternity ward.
Detailed blood tests revealed mild thrombocytosis and neutropenia, which together with a slight increase of the Fahraeus-Westergren test (34/57) was suspected of the possible parainfectious finding. Both neurological and otorhinolaryngological examinations were normal. BAEP showed slightly prolonged latencies of wave III and V bilaterally. There were no epileptiform discharges on EEG. The magnetic resonance of the brain showed enlargement of SA spaces bilaterally (BESS - benign enlargement of subarachnoid space). Screening tests for metabolic disease as well as TORCH were negative.
Meanwhile, during the stay at the hospital, the mother started to report a clear connection between the positioning of the baby and the episodes of nystagmus. The diagnostic roll test was performed, and the subsequent horizontal nystagmus lasting no more than 30 s was disclosed. The diagnosis of transient positional geotropic nystagmus, likely due to right lateral semicircular canal canalolithiasis, was set up. This diagnostic conclusion is congruent with the characteristics of BPPV. We performed the Lempert roll maneuver (“barbecue roll”) with prompt effect. In case of remission, the parents were instructed to repeat the maneuver at home, which happened once and was quickly resolved this way.
Due to the absence of electrophysiological documentation during the fit, we developed a pipeline to semiautomatically acquire video-oculography from the available video recording . This was done in MATLAB R2021b using the Kanade-Lucas-Tomasi feature-tracking algorithm, which enables motion tracking of the selected points of interest. In this particular case, it was the patient’s pupil and medial palpebral commissures. The Euclidean distance of the pupil to the adjacent one is calculated. In order to correct for the zooming, it is further normalized by the Euclidean distance of the medial commissures. In the online supplementary video 1 (for all online suppl. material, see ), passive rotation to the right side is immediately followed by horizontal bidirectional nystagmus with frequency 2.5 Hz, which decreases to 1.5 Hz after 4 s and in 3 more seconds ceases completely. Amplitude remains stable during the fit. Nystagmus is absent following the left turning. Dynamics of the eye movements are documented in . Sharp change immediately after the head turn attributes to the vestibulo-ocular reflex and rapid change in the feature proportions, which makes a precise assessment of the movement amplitude practically impossible. The CARE Checklist has been completed by the authors for this case report, attached as the online supplementary material.