A 35-year-old Ethiopian male patient presented with swelling in his lower abdomen that had been present for 2 years. The swelling started off small but gradually increased in size over time. Along with the swelling, he experienced frequent urination, but without any pain or discomfort during urination, urgency, intermittent urination, or blood in the urine. A total of 2 months prior to his presentation, the swelling became painful. The patient had no history of previous abdominal trauma or surgery, and had never been treated for tuberculosis. He denied any loss of appetite, fever, weight loss, or night sweats. He had no known allergies and no history of constipation, blood in the stool, or black, tarry stools. There was no swelling in any other part of his body.
On abdominal examination, there was a 20 × 13 cm non-tender abdominopelvic mass that moved laterally but not vertically . It was firm in consistency and had no attachment to the overlying skin or underlying tissue. Otherwise, there was no organomegaly or sign of fluid collection. The per-rectal examination was unremarkable.
Blood examinations were all normal. On imaging, abdominal ultrasound (US) showed a 20 × 13 × 16 cm predominantly cystic huge intra-abdominal mass with soft tissue around the left superolateral aspect, and there was moderate hydronephrosis on the right side, likely due to the mass effect. Subsequent pre- and post-contrast abdominal CT scans showed a 16 × 12 × 10 cm well-defined lobulated predominantly cystic peritoneal lesion with a thick enhancing wall and septa and a large heterogeneous enhancing soft tissue mural component measuring 8 × 6 cm . The mass extended inferiorly into the pelvis, causing the urinary bladder to be pushed anteriorly toward the left side. The mass also exerted pressure on the descending and ascending colon, as well as the major abdominal blood vessels, pushing them posteriorly. The small bowel loops were displaced laterally, suggesting that the mass originated from the peritoneum. The other abdominal organs appeared normal, and there were no signs of ascites or enlarged lymph nodes. The mass also compressed the right proximal ureter, resulting in moderate dilation of the pelvi-caliceal system. However, no renal stone was observed.
The patient underwent surgery to remove a large cystic mass in the abdominopelvic area. During the operation, it was discovered that the mass was a 20 × 10 × 10 cm globular cystic mass attached to the back and top of the urinary bladder . The mass was slightly adhered to the abdominal wall and omentum, but there was a clear separation between the mass and the mesentery. No other organs or bowels showed any abnormalities. The entire cystic mass was removed along with a partial removal of the bladder . The bladder was repaired in two layers, and the abdomen was closed. The surgery was performed by a senior general surgeon and general surgery residents. After the surgery, the patient received ceftriaxone and tramadol intravenously for pain management. Wound care was provided daily. A urinary catheter was kept in place for 7 days and then removed. The patient recovered well and was discharged without any complications. Histopathologic analysis of the removed mass showed a fibrovascular wall, amorphous secretory materials, lymphoplasmacytic inflammatory cell infiltrates, macrophages containing hemosiderin due to bleeding within the cyst, fibrosis, and smooth muscle bundles. No signs of malignancy or abnormal epithelial cells were found .