A 39-year-old woman was referred to the glaucoma clinic for management of elevated intraocular pressure and vision loss in the right eye after ICL implantation (V4c Visian ICL, Staar Inc., Monrovia, CA) in 2017. Her preoperative examinations showed high myopia in the right eye and no abnormalities in the left eye. Before ICL implantation, ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) revealed a deep anterior chamber, open angles and correct IOL position in the right eye. No glaucomatous optic disc change was observed in her right eye. After ICL implantation, her IOP fluctuated between 40 and 55 mmHg. She had a history of phacoemulsification and posterior chamber phakic IOL implantation due to complicated cataracts secondary to uveitis in 2006. Regular ophthalmological re-examinations were conducted after IOL implantation, and temporarily elevated IOP of 29 mmHg was observed in 2016. Her IOP returned to normal after treatment with anti-glaucoma medication (the specific medication is unknown), followed by irregular medication. She had no history of trauma or systemic disease. A family history of glaucoma or high myopia was denied.
On admission examination in the glaucoma clinic, the patient was found to have an IOP of 43 mmHg while using 3 types of anti-glaucoma medications, and her best-corrected visual acuity was 20/20 in the right eye. Slit-lamp examination showed that both the ICL and IOL were well centred, and a few pigmented keratic precipitates were present on the corneal endothelium with pigment deposition on the surface of the ICL, although the aqueous fluid was clear . Gonioscopy revealed that the whole angle was open and that there was pigmentation on the trabecular meshwork . UBM examination showed contact and rubbing between the ICL and posterior surface of the iris . The cup to disc ratio was 0.8. The Humphrey visual field test (24–2 SITA-standard) indicated typical advanced visual field defects (mean defect = − 24.13 dB P<0.5%) that were consistent with GON on optical coherence tomography. No evidence of pigment dispersion or GON was observed in the left eye.
The patient was diagnosed with refractory glaucoma, and her IOP was controlled to 25–35 mmHg by oral methazolamide and an intravenous drip of mannitol. Then, she received diode laser TSCP, which was performed with 20 spots (2000 mW) at 2 s each, sparing the temporal quadrant to avoid vascular damage. Postoperative medications included anti-inflammatory, anti-infection and 3 types of anti-glaucoma drugs. Her IOP was 18 mmHg the day after surgery, and a physical examination showed no obvious abnormality in the right eye, but the BCVA had decreased to 20/40. One week later, the anterior chamber became shallow, and the ICL was incarcerated in the pupil. UBM showed uneven depth of the anterior chamber, and the ICL had moved forward . The patient’s postoperative IOP increased to 30 mmHg over 1 month while using the maximum dose of anti-glaucoma medication, and 1/2 of the angle was closed on UBM and gonioscopy. An Ahmed glaucoma valve (AGV) model FP7 (New World Medical, Rancho Cucamonga, CA) was implanted 2 months after TSCP without moving the IOLs . Her IOP was well controlled without anti-glaucoma medication, her visual acuity remained 20/40, and no progression of glaucoma occurred in the next 10 months.