A 31-year-old male presented to the emergency department with a 24-h history of unremitting nausea, biliary emesis, abdominal distension, and absolute constipation. Notably, the patient's last regular bowel movement had been three days prior to the current presentation, with the patient erroneously attributing his altered bowel habits to his recent onset of anorexia of unknown origin. The patient reported no red flag symptoms, affirmatively denying recent fevers, previously altered bowel habits, infectious urinary symptoms, or weight loss. The patient's prior medical and surgical histories were unimpressive, and he reported no other comorbidities. Pertinently, the patient had had an episode similar to the current one four years ago; at the time, his condition was managed conservatively and resulted in a prompt resolution of his symptoms within 24 hours of his presentation to the hospital. The patient remained asymptomatic thereafter with no consequent episodes till the current presentation.
Upon clinical examination, the patient appeared profusely unwell, with excruciating, 7/10, vague, non-localized abdominal pain that caused significant distress to the patient. Abdominal examination revealed a soft, distended abdomen that was non-tender with no evidence of rigidity, peritonitis, or guarding. Pertinently, bowel sounds were audible and were noted to be tinkling in nature, raising the initial suspicions for an obstructive etiology underlying the patient's clinical presentation. The murphy's sign, along with the psoas, obturator, and rovsing's signs, were all negative and unimpressive, effectively ruling out acute cholecystitis and acute appendicitis as plausible etiologies. The patient's past surgical history was also unimpressive, further precluding post-operative adhesions as the likely etiology. Upon clinical examination, there was no evidence of hernial protrusions, and the genital orifices were unremarkable. Furthermore, clinical examination of the abdomen did not reveal any rigidity or guarding, and no signs of peritonitis were appreciated. The patient's C-reactive protein was raised to 15; however, his remaining labs were unremarkable for any pertinent derangements. In order to better delineate the etiology underlying the patient's presentation, an abdominal x-ray was obtained and revealed multiple air-fluid levels in the small bowel .
Based on the patient's x-ray findings, an obstructive pathology was deemed plausible. However, given that the patient demonstrated an unremarkable surgical history and did not show signs of a possible gastrointestinal malignancy, adhesions, and tumor as causes of acute intestinal obstruction were effectively ruled out. Further radiological investigation through the means of a computed tomography (CT) scan divulged a transition point in the terminal ileum, with mesenteric band cut-off, strongly alluding to the presence of a diverticulum in the specified region .
The CT imaging of the abdomen further revealed the presence of the classical meckel's loops, thereby confirming the presence of meckel's diverticulum .
Considering the impression obtained from the patient's radiological work-up, a multidisciplinary team meeting (MDT) was conducted. The presence of meckel's diverticulum due to an acute small bowel obstruction was deemed exceedingly plausible. Consequently, the patient was managed using conservative measures for the next 24 hours; however, the patient refused a nasogastric tube, which would have been pivotal in relieving the obstruction. During this time, the patient had an episode of nominal bowel motion once but did not pass any flatus. Conservative treatment was thus continued, and the patient was prepared for a laparoscopic diverticulectomy.
During the operation, meckel's diverticulum in close proximity to the ileocecal valve was confirmed. Per-operative evaluation divulged meckel's diverticulitis with the tip attached to the ileal mesentery through the means of a band .
Given this intraoperative finding, tip and band release was performed .
Additionally, given the presence of meckel's diverticulitis and the fact that the patient had been symptomatic four years prior to the current episode, meckel's diverticulectomy was performed .
The surgery was conducted unremarkably, with no intra- or perioperative complications encountered during the process. Postoperatively, the patient remained well and symptom-free except for a minor wound infectious from the hypogastric port used for specimen delivery during the surgery. Daily wound dressings were advised without the need for antibiotics.
The subsequent histopathology report confirmed the presence of diffusely inflamed ectopic gastric mucosa in close proximity to the ileocecal valve, reinforcing meckel's diverticulum as the culprit etiology underlying the patient's episode.
The present paper was reported in line with the SCARE guidelines .