A 90-year-old woman presented to the Emergency Department for syncope. Her past medical history included a moderate chronic kidney disease and the implantation of a dual-chamber PM for symptomatic sinus node dysfunction eight years prior to her presentation. Of note, PM implantation was complicated by an early displacement of the ventricular lead, necessitating a reintervention on the first day following the procedure. At her admission, the patient was confused and hypotensive with a blood pressure of 89/56 mmHg and a heart rate of 35 beats per minute. Physical examination revealed no signs of heart failure or heart murmurs. Laboratory results showed a potassium level of 5,6 mmol/L (normal ranges 3,5–5,0 mmol/L), a glomerular filtration rate of 38 ml/min and a C-reactive protein of 7,6 mg/L (normal ranges < 5 mg/L). The electrocardiogram revealed a complete AV block due to intermittent loss of capture of the ventricular lead . Echocardiography showed a preserved right and left ventricular systolic function, without significant heart valve disease. The interrogation of the PM revealed an elevation of the ventricular stimulation threshold (3,5 V at a pulse width of 0,5 ms), compared with 0,7 V at a pulse width of 0,5 ms three months ago, along with a ventricular sensing at 8 mV and a stable impedance of 480 ohms. Corresponding parameters for the atrial lead included a stimulation threshold of 0,6 Volts at a pulse width of 0,5 ms, a sensing of 0,4 mV and an impedance of 420 ohms. Battery's longevity was estimated at three years. Chest x-ray did not show any macroscopic lead fracture or displacement. Based on the above, the diagnosis of a syncope due to complete AV block in the setting of ventricular lead dysfunction was made.
As the risk of CIEDs-related infection was high, with a calculated PADIT score at 7, representing a subsequent rate of hospitalization for device infection of 2.82% at one year, the patient was implanted with a leadless PM capable of maintaining AV synchrony in VDD mode (MICRA™ AV model MC1AVR1, Medtronic, MN, USA). The device was implanted at the level of the lower interventricular septum, as shown in , since the mid-septum was difficult to access. During the implantation procedure, while performing the leadless stimulation threshold testing, no atrial retrograde conduction was observed. The transvenous PM was programmed to an AAI-R mode. With these settings, the transvenous PM was responsible for rate-responsive atrial stimulation, while the leadless PM allowed for atrial triggered ventricular stimulation . At day one after implantation, a chest x-ray showed no signs of displacement and the leadless PM interrogation revealed satisfying parameters: stimulation threshold of 0,25 volts at a pulse width of 0,24 ms and an impedance 870 ohms. The patient was discharged one day after implantation. During follow-up, the electrocardiogram and device interrogation revealed stable stimulation parameters with an AV synchrony rate of 88% at one month and 85% at six months . An AAI-R mode setting was maintained for the transvenous PM. The patient had no perioperative or short-terms complications.