An 80-year-old female with no past surgical history was brought into the Emergency Department (ED) of a public teaching hospital with concern for altered mental status. She had a past medical history of atrial fibrillation (for which she was taking apixaban), two prior cerebrovascular accidents, hypertension, insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, and Stage 3 chronic kidney disease with a baseline serum creatinine of 1.3–1.5 mg/dL.
Upon evaluation, the patient had a Glasgow Coma Score of 8 (E(2)V(2)M(4)) and was unable to provide any history. Initial vitals showed a temperature of 97.8 °F, heart rate of 73 beats/min, blood pressure of 118/65, respiratory rate of 18 breaths/min, and oxygen saturation of 97% on room air. On examination, her abdomen was distended and diffusely tender to palpation. Laboratory results showed an elevated serum creatinine of 5.0 mg/dL consistent with acute kidney injury (AKI). Serum electrolytes, white blood cell count, serum lactate, and coagulation tests were within normal limits. The patient underwent a CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis without contrast, which showed a large dilated loop of proximal jejunum with evidence of mesenteric twist concerning for a closed loop SBO .
Given the patient’s age and medical comorbidities, her estimated American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement Program intraoperative mortality risk was 19%, and the risk of serious complications was 35% . However, due to the acute decline in mental status, AKI, and concerning abdominal exam, emergent surgical intervention was recommended to the next of kin. After obtaining consent, we proceeded with an exploratory laparotomy.
After intravenous fluid resuscitation and perioperative antibiotics, the patient underwent general anesthesia and intubation. Upon entering the abdomen, we noted several decompressed loops of small bowel, as well as a dilated loop of jejunum densely adherent to the mesentery of the SMA and transverse colon. We also noted twisting of the mesentery and numerous adhesions of the small bowel to the mesentery, retroperitoneum, and surrounding structures. During our lysis of adhesions, we noted a large mesenteric defect through which a loop of jejunum had become trapped, causing the closed loop SBO. Moreover, the cecum was visualized in the right upper quadrant instead of its usual anatomical location in the right lower quadrant of the abdomen (A). It became apparent that the adhesions were in fact Ladd bands (A), and that our patient had an intestinal malrotation. After completely lysing the Ladd bands, we then proceeded with a Ladd procedure for malrotation. We first detorsed the mesentery through counterclockwise rotation. The segment of jejunum involved in the internal hernia appeared viable, so no bowel resection was performed. We then mobilized and rotated the cecum and the ascending and transverse colon towards the left, also performing an appendectomy. After straightening out and relocating the duodenum to the right hemiabdomen, the final position of abdominal contents was consistent with that seen after a completed Ladd procedure (B).
The patient’s postoperative course was accompanied by resolution of AKI but complicated by delirium and prolonged ileus. Initial high-volume bilious output from her nasogastric tube prompted a CT scan that showed no evidence of SBO, and confirmed the new position of the cecum on the left . The patient was discharged following clinical improvement and ability to tolerate a diet. She was seen in clinic two weeks later and reported feeling well, with no obstructive symptoms.