A 75-year-old Caucasian female with a history of hypertension and well-controlled type 2 diabetes mellitus was admitted after open reduction and internal fixation of an ankle fracture. She was treated with subcutaneous unfractionated heparin (5000 IU three times a day) for deep vein thrombosis (DVT) prophylaxis from day 1. On day 4, a DVT and pulmonary embolism (PE) workup was completed after she developed acute shortness of breath and tachycardia with hypoxemia. DVT and subocclusive saddle-shaped PE were both noted , and she was started on a continuous heparin infusion. The following day she developed sudden onset of left-sided weakness and rightward gaze deviation concerning acute ischemic stroke. CT angiogram of the head and neck and subsequent MRI brain revealed a stroke caused by right-sided common carotid artery occlusion with thrombus extending into the external and internal carotid arteries. A tandem occlusion of inferior branch of the right middle cerebral artery was also noted on cerebral angiography . The patient underwent successful mechanical thrombectomy of the right carotid artery bifurcation thrombus. After the endovascular procedure, thrombocytopenia (153,000/µL to 94,000/µL) was noted. Clinical suspicion was raised for HIT and PF4-H AB, and SRA tests were sent. Heparin infusion was stopped, and she was started on continuous bivalirudin infusion. Transthoracic echocardiogram with bubble study revealed a patent foramen ovale (PFO) with right to left shunting, and the etiology of stroke was presumed a paradoxical embolism. On hospital day 7, PF4-H AB (optical density (OD) < 0.103) and SRA tests resulted negative with uptrending platelet count (105,000/µL) . Bivalirudin was subsequently stopped, and the patient was restarted on therapeutic continuous heparin infusion due to reduced suspicion of HIT as a result of the negative serological tests. From day 8, platelets started to downtrend to 36,000/µL. Clinical re-emergence of HIT was suspected, and heparin infusion was held. Repeat PF4-H AB antibody and SRA tests were sent and resulted positive. The patient was treated with bivalirudin and bridged successfully to warfarin with recovery of platelet count (205,000/µL). She suffered no further thromboembolic events and was eventually discharged to an inpatient rehabilitation facility.