A 14-year-old female presented with an intraoperative ASSH complicating a posterior spinal instrumented fusion.
The patient was not known to have any coagulopathies, and no obvious vascular lesions were documented. The surgical procedure did not directly involve the dura mater, and no evident intraoperative dural tears were found.
Concerning the haemostatic agent administered (as described in the literature)[-], the patient was not known to have had any coagulopathies or anticoagulant treatments, and all preoperative blood testing was normal.
Four months before admission for spinal surgery, the patient successfully underwent the neurosurgical decompression of a Chiari malformation with associated syringomyelia; this consisted of a sub-occipital craniotomy, a C1 laminectomy and duraplasty. At the 3-mo follow-up, the neurosurgeon noted no contraindications to future correction surgery for scoliosis. The paediatric orthopaedic team planned a posterior spinal instrumented fusion from T3 to L4 associated with multilevel, Ponte-type (posterior elements) osteotomies around the apex of the kyphosis.
The patient’s known comorbidities secondary to multiple congenital malformations included ventricular (ORPHA-1480) and atrial (ostium secundum type, ORPHA-99103) septal defects, tricuspid atresia (ORPHA-1209), a congenital partial pulmonary venous return anomaly (ORPHA-99124), a persistent left superior vena cava connecting through the coronary sinus to the left-sided atrium (ORPHA 99-109), a right aortic arch (ORPHA-99081), major aortopulmonary collateral arteries (MAPCAs), moderate-to-severe dilatation of the ascending aorta, severe dilatation of the left ventricle and moderate mitral insufficiency.
At the time of surgery, the triradiate cartilage was closed and the patient’s Risser sign was grade 1. The curves of the scoliosis consisted of a right proximal thoracic curve of 36°, a main left thoracic curve of 72° (the major curve) and a right thoracolumbar-lumbar curve of 58°. There was a T2-T12 hyperkyphosis of 68° in the sagittal plane .