A 15-year-old senior high school female student (height: 168 cm, weight: 61 kg) was admitted first to Chengdu Women and Children’s Central Hospital with no menarche (Chengdu, China). The patient was born following a full-term normal delivery and had a birth weight of 3.25 kg. Her parents were nonconsanguineous to each other. The patient was her parents’ sole child, and her mother denied taking any sex hormone drugs or exposure to radioactive substances during her pregnancy. The parents also denied any family history. The patient exhibited a female appearance and voice, with little subcutaneous fat, no beard or Adam’s apple, bilateral breast B3, no tenderness, and several armpit hairs. Gynecological examination showed that the patient presented with normal female external genitalia but exhibited clitoral hypertrophy, urethral and vaginal openings located properly in the perineum area, no palpable or obvious mass in the bilateral groin and labia, and Tanner stage III pubic hair.
Transabdominal ultrasonography showed a naive uterus with a size of 4 cm × 1.6 cm and an endometrial thickness of 0.3 cm. The size of the left ovary was 1.9 × 1.0 cm, and that of the right ovary was 2.2 × 0.9 cm. Hysteroscopic examination of the right gonad revealed that it was olive shaped with a size of 3 × 2 × 1.5 cm. A pelvic MRI plain scan showed that the sizes of the uterine body and cervix were approximately 14.5 mm × 33 mm and 10 mm × 21 mm, respectively, and the visible endometrial thickness was 3 mm. The vagina was discontinuous, the middle and upper vagina were similar to a cord, the lumen was not observed, and the lower vagina was clear. Near the right lateral wall, there was an ovoid soft tissue signal with small dots of T2WI hyperintensity, approximately 21 mm × 13 mm in size.
Serum sex hormonal analysis revealed that the adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) level was 28.40 pg/ml, the estradiol (E2) level was 42.86 pg/ml, the prolactin level was 12.41 ng/ml, the follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) level was 40.11 mIU/mL, the luteinizing hormone (LH) level was 20.45 mIU/mL, the progesterone level was 0.9 ng/ml, the 17-α-hydroxyprogesterone level was 3.99 mmol/L, the testosterone level was 86.18 ng/dl, and the anti-Mullerian hormone (AMH) level was 0.79 ng/mL. The hormonal results indicated that the patient had hypergonadotropic hypogonadism.
The karyotype of peripheral blood was 46,XY. A novel missense mutation of c.281 T > G (p.L94R) in the SRY gene was detected by next-generation sequencing. The de novo mutation was confirmed by Sanger sequencing and pedigree analysis . No pathogenicity variation of other gonadal-related genes was found. The L94 residue is highly conserved and located in the HMG box region, probably involved in DNA-binding specificity and stability . Based on these results, the patient was initially diagnosed with 46,XY DSD with an SRY mutation.
The results of the first gonadal histopathology showed that there was a primitive ovarian cortex and several primitive follicular structures located in both gonads, and somewhere to the right of the ovary, Leydig cells were present. Both gonads presented as GB, with extensive calcification on the left; at the same time, invasive seminoma in its early stage was observed on the right. GB is made up of sex cord and primordial germ cells, which are marked by FOXL2 and SOX9 for the former and OCT4 for the latter. Furthermore, we could see groups of primordial germ cells crowded together, implying that clonal expansion probably occurred, and outside of the GB, the number of germ cells increased dramatically, which suggested the formation of invasive seminoma . The upper, middle and lower poles of the left gonad had ovarioid stroma with no germ cells and extensive calcification, which suggested the existence of the “burn out” type of GB (data not shown). The clinical diagnosis was left gonadal dysplasia and right gonadal dysplasia with GB. Right gonadectomy was performed immediately after obtaining the consent of the patient’s parents. The serum testosterone level decreased to 2.73 ng/dL, which was consistent with the pathological findings, and the alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) level was < 0.5 ng/mL and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level was 6.0 ng/mL after gonadectomy.
One year later, a left gonadal malignancy was observed by the findings of a mass in the left adnexal region by pelvic MRI and a serum AFP level exceeding 1000 ng/ml; the testosterone level increased to 15.9 ng/dL. Then, total hysterectomy and adnexal and left gonadal resection were performed by laparoscopy under general anesthesia after obtaining the consent of the patient’s parents. The AFP level decreased to 9.5 ng/mL after the operation. The histopathology results showed mixed germ cell tumors made up of 80% yolk sac tumors and 20% invasive seminoma in the excised left mass. The yolk sac tumor component displayed the specific structure of the S-D body and strongly positive staining for AFP and OCT4. In addition, positive staining of OCT4 and D2–40 was observed in the neoplastic cells of the invasive seminoma component. Furthermore, undifferentiated gonadal tissue (UGT) was also observed in the remaining left gonad .
The patient underwent 4 cycles of the BEP chemotherapy regimen (bleomycin 15 U/m2, etoposide 100 mg/m2 and cis-platinum 20 mg/m2) after the operation. After chemotherapy, the patient presented with grade III myelosuppression. Six months after discharge, the patient dictated on a telephone follow-up that her tumor had recurred and she was undergoing further treatment at another hospital.