The observation took place in March 2020. The animal concerned was a female ring-tailed lemur (Lemur catta), 4 years old, with a body weight of 4.2 kg, with signs of anorexia, weakness, epistaxis and uncoordinated gait. These clinical signs appeared four days before the animal was brought to the clinic. During a clinical examination two adult female Ixodes ricinus ticks were removed from the animal’s body. The ticks were identified on the basis of morphology using taxonomic keys . The lemur came from a zoo in eastern Poland. The animal lived in a group of 6 lemurs. Two months before she had received fenbendazole (50 mg/kg p.o. for 3 days) as deworming treatment, but no ectoparasite prophylaxis had been applied. The animal was clinically examined and blood samples were collected for biochemical, haematological and molecular tests for tick-borne diseases (babesiosis/theileriosis/anaplasmosis/ehrlichiosis). The ticks found on the animal’s body were also tested for the above diseases using molecular methods.
DNA extractions from the blood samples and ticks for molecular tests were performed using a commercial DNA Genomic kit (A&A Biotechnology Gdańsk, Poland) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Subsequent PCR tests were performed according to the methods described by Skotarczak et al. , Altay et al. and Adaszek and Winiarczyk . The final identification of tick-borne pathogens was performed by sequencing PCR products.
The haematological and biochemical test results did not reveal any abnormalities, except for thrombocytopaenia (PLT = 61 × 109/l; range 165–685 × 109/l) . The microscopic examination of the stained blood smear (Giemsa method) revealed morulae in the cytoplasm of circulating neutrophils suggestive of acute granulocytic anaplasmosis . The PCR test revealed Anaplasma DNA in the lemur’s blood and in I. ricinus ticks collected from the lemur’s body . The analysis of PCR product sequencing identified the Rickettsia species as A. phagocytuphilum GU183908 (100 % homology). Based on the microscopic blood smears and the molecular test results, the disease was caused by Anaplasma phagocytophilum infection. The treatment started with doxycycline (2.5 mg/kg p.o., b.i.d.) administered for three weeks. 24 h after the initiation of the treatment the lemur’s condition improved significantly: her appetite increased and normal gait was restored. Three days later the epistaxis had subsided. Two weeks following the initiation of the antibiotic treatment a sample of the animal’s blood was collected for a quick test to detect the presence of A. phagocytophilum antibodies (VetExpert, CaniV-4 Poland). The test result was positive. A control PCR test carried out after the next three weeks (according to the same procedure as previous) did not reveal genetic material of A. phagocytophilum in the animal’s blood. Also, no DNA of bacteria was found in the blood of the other five lemurs from the same institution. Six months after the beginning of therapy the antibodies for A. phagocytophilum were still be present in the animal’s blood.