A 64-year-old man presented to our outpatient clinic with complaints of general fatigue and high fever (>38°C) at night that persisted for 3 days. He had previously undergone 25-mm mechanical aortic valve implantation (St. Jude Medical Regent; St. Jude Medical, Inc., St. Paul, MN) 12 years prior because of severe aortic regurgitation. Upon examination, no focus of infection could be identified, and he was admitted to our heart centre to exclude the possibility of PVE. After three sets of blood culture were obtained, intravenous ceftriaxone (2 g/day) was empirically initiated. Initial transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed no dysfunction of the mechanical aortic prosthesis, and whole-body CT revealed no embolic events. The patient recovered to a low-grade fever (37–38°C) 48 h after the initial antibiotics therapy and showed improved C-reactive protein level (from 13 to 6.3 mg/dL) in the first 5 days. Subsequently, transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) performed on the 5th day of hospitalization revealed a 6–11 mm mobile echogenic mass attached to the prosthetic valve and a thickened area within the posterior annular region with a low echogenic appearance at the level of the non-coronary sinus of Valsalva . At this point, the patient met two minor diagnostic criteria (predisposing heart condition of prior prosthetic valve implantation and high fever) in the modified Duke diagnostic criteria for infective endocarditis because the TOE findings were considered inconclusive. Subsequently, combined 18F-FDG PET/CT and CT coronary angiography revealed intense hyper-metabolism above the aortic valve prosthesis with greater intensity at the posterior end and absence of obstructive coronary artery, thereby confirming the diagnosis of aortic PVE complicated with perivalvular abscess . Following a comprehensive discussion with the endocarditis team, including an infectious disease specialist, a microbiologist (pathologist) and cardiovascular surgeons, we decided to switch from intravenous ceftriaxone to appropriate antibiotic therapy [intravenous ampicillin (8 g/day) and gentamicin (180 mg/day)] for blood culture-negative patients with PVE based on the current ESC guideline and withheld specific serological tests or polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays for unusual but potential microorganisms as long as the patient’s clinical course was not out of track and the antibiotics therapy appeared clinically effective. Following 1 week of intensive antibiotic treatment, we finally decided to perform surgery mainly because the PVE was complicated with perivalvular abscess, as evidenced by 18F-FDG PET/CT with all negative blood culture tests. On the 14th day of hospitalization, prosthetic valve was surgically replaced with a 25-mm bioprosthesis (25A Trifecta™; St. Jude Medical, Inc., St. Paul, MN, USA) with extensive debridement of the infected and necrotic tissues surrounding the aortic annulus . Surgically excised tissue was subjected to microbiological and pathological analysis; however, no evidence of bacterial organisms was found and blood culture tests were negative. Post-operative TTE revealed a normally functioning aortic valve, and he was discharged on the 51st day. Based on the international guideline, antibiotic therapy was continued for 6 weeks until hospital discharge, although gentamicin was discontinued in the first 3 weeks because of nephrotoxicity. Furthermore, intravenous antibiotic treatment was followed by 6-month outpatient oral antibiotic therapy with amoxicillin (750 mg/day) without any recurrences.