The patient is a 41 year old middle-eastern female who underwent abdominoplasty, liposuction (arms and back), and buttock augmentation by fat grafting in the private setting. Her inpatient stay was uneventful and was discharged home 2 days postoperatively. She returned for follow-up on day 4 postoperatively, with concerns regarding a red, hot, and tender swelling in the left gluteal region. She was then admitted to the hospital for 2 days where intravenous ceftriaxone was started. She underwent surgical debridement of necrotic subcutaneous tissue the next day. She continued to attend her outpatient clinic appointments for a few days but was readmitted with similar complaints. Intravenous ceftriaxone was administered and she underwent further debridement of necrotic tissues. Postoperatively, intramuscular chymotrypsin and daily dressings were commenced. Clinically, her condition continued to deteriorate and she became febrile with peripheral temperature readings of 38 °C and started to develop gangrenous wounds. On day 6 postadmission, the patient was then transferred to the operating theater where further necrotic tissue was debrided. On day 17 postcosmetic surgery, she was transferred to the plastic surgery department with a specialist public hospital.
The patient was previously healthy with unremarkable past medical, surgical, and family histories. Her concomitant medications were related to her initial surgery and included analgesics, antibiotics, and omeprazole. She has no known drug allergies. She denies alcohol intake, smoking, and recreational drug use. She only traveled to Austria, Germany, and Netherlands 3 months prior to undergoing cosmetic surgery. She denies other risk factors such as being exposed to any environmental sources of infection such reconstruction/demolition sites, animal/insect bites, or any form of penetrating injury.
On admission, the patient's vital signs and systemic examination were unremarkable. The gluteal regions were severely affected, there was a 20 cm by 15 cm wound at the left buttock with extensive necrotic skin and subcutaneous tissue. The right buttock was indurated and swollen and other operative sites were unremarkable. Laboratory investigations showed hemoglobin levels of 8.1 (g/dL), white cell count of 46. 69 (109/L), and procalcitonin levels of 1. 46 (ng/mL), other tests were unremarkable .
The patient's management involved regular analgesics, empirical intravenous Meropenem, and surgical debridement of her wounds. Despite this, she continued to be febrile with temperatures of >39 °C and her inflammatory markers (including procalcitonin levels) continued to rise. Upon dressing the following day, new areas of necrosis have developed. She continued to undergo regular extensive surgical debridement, almost twice weekly, to the extent that portions of the sacrum and head of femur became exposed. Vacuum-assisted closure therapy (V.A.C ATS®/GranuFoam Silver®, KCI San Antonio, TX) was applied and adjusted to 100 mm Hg continuous mode following debridement. Regular tissue samples were sent to histopathological and microbiological analysis. At 2 weeks postadmission, preliminary microbiological results showed filamentous fungus, prompting the initiation of intravenous voriconazole empirically at 450 mg (6 mg/kg) twice daily for 24 hours followed by 300 mg (4 mg/kg) every 12 hours thereafter. This was continued for 2 weeks and was changed accordingly upon receiving the full mycology report stating the presence of A elegans. This was also confirmed by histopathology samples. Liposomal amphotericin B (AmB) was then started accordingly at a dose of 375 mg (5 mg/kg) per day for a further 3 weeks .
After commencing the appropriate antifungal therapy and several debridement procedures, the patient's general condition, vital signs, investigations, and wounds have gradually improved. She underwent a total of 10 surgical interventions. Her final wounds had healthy granulation tissue with no signs of infection and were deemed suitable for surgical reconstruction .