A 26-year-old afro-descendent woman, with the complaint of asymptomatic swelling in the left hemimandible, which was previously detected in the imaging examination. Without relevant data from her medical history, the patient informed our team that had been submitted to surgical resection for removal of an FD lesion on the opposite side (right hemimandible).
During extraoral examination, slight facial asymmetry was observed on the left side, with local swelling in the submandibular region, without the presence of lymph node enlargement in the region. Moreover, on intra-oral examination, an increase in buccal and lingual bone plate volume was detected, extending from tooth 33 to tooth 37 on the ipsilateral side, without tooth mobility and pain after manual palpation and percussion.
On orthopantomography (OP) and Cone beam computed tomography (CT) analysis with sagittal and axial slices, a single, extensive, and multilocular mandibular lesion with the appearance of “frosted glass” was observed, closer to the left mandibular basal-edge, which basically promoted the thinning of the lingual plate. After the 3D imaging reconstruction, a destructive lesion with irregular edges and no encapsulated membrane was visualized, without root resorption of teeth .
Based on clinical data and imaging features collected, the initial diagnosis of fibro-osseous lesion was established; however, differential diagnosis was considered such as ameloblastoma, keratocystic odontogenic tumor, and central lesion of giant cells.
Excisional biopsy that consisted of exposing the lesion by performing a Newmann modified incision for final diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. Thus, complete removal by curettage and peripheral osteotomy of the surrounding bone were performed . After diagnostic confirmation of FD, immediate local reconstruction was performed with placement of xenograft (Bio-OSS, Geistlich, Sao Paulo, Brazil) covered with collagenous membrane (Bio-Gide, Geistlich, Sao Paulo, Brazil) , followed by primary wound closure . In histopathological analysis, the presence of trabecular bone tissue without visible osteoblastic rimming was observed, amid fibrous stroma with monotonous spindle cells without atypical mitosis (–B) that confirmed the diagnosis of FD.
After three and six months of follow-up, complete intraoral healing (–B) and absence of facial asymmetry on the left side were observed, and teeth associated with the initial lesion were submitted to root canal treatment in order to avoid further local recurrences Moreover, axial (–B) and sagittal (–D) CT sections showed a mixed area corresponding to intra-osseous healing process and new bone, confirmed by the 3D imaging reconstruction of both hemimandibles (, F).