A 37-year old male from Pakistan arrived in Italy in July 2013 to attend a professional course. After few days, he developed high grade fever (40 °C) associated with chills, headache and one episode of vomiting. He was visited by a primary physician who prescribed him cefixime 400 mg/day and acetaminophen. After 4 days, due to the persistence of fever and the onset of productive cough and asthenia, cefixime was changed to levofloxacin (500 mg/day). However, the fever did not resolve, and therefore the patient was taken to the nearest emergency department (ED). At presentation, he was febrile (39.5 °C), tachycardic (121 beats per min) and hypotensive (90/50 mm Hg); there were no meningeal signs and the Glasgow Coma Score was normal (15). Oxygen saturation while breathing ambient air was 99 %, the respiratory examination and a chest radiograph were both normal. Laboratory investigations were as follows: haemoglobin, 15.9 g/dL; red blood cell count, 5.54 × 109/L; total white cell count, 6.3 × 109/L (with 85 % neutrophils, 11 % lymphocytes and 4 % monocytes); platelet count, 14 × 109/L. With the exception of d-dimer concentration (9376 ng/dL), the other coagulation parameters were within the normal range. Hyponatremia (127 mmol/L) was present as well as raised values of C reactive protein (126 mg/L), total bilirubin (3.3 mg/dL), and lactate dehydrogenase (371 U/L). Serum concentrations of glucose, liver enzymes, urea and creatinine were within normal ranges. An ultrasound scan of the abdomen showed no hepatosplenomegaly and a normal biliary tract. Legionella and pneumococcus urine antigens were negative. A thin blood film showed “malaria parasites” that were not identified at the species level by the laboratory technician. Due to lack of anti-malarial drugs and the expertise for the diagnosis and therapy of malaria, the ED physician contacted the Luigi Sacco hospital in Milan for assistance. Ten hours after presentation at the first ED, the patient was finally admitted to the intensive care unit of Luigi Sacco hospital with a provisional diagnosis of “severe malaria”, based on the results of the laboratory tests (severe thrombocytopaenia and raised bilirubin levels) and the presence of hypotension. On physical examination, when admitted to the ICU, the patient was conscious, fully oriented to time and place with high fever (40 °C) and had severe headache. The pulmonary, cardiovascular and abdominal examinations were reportedly unremarkable. Neither signs of bleeding nor skin petechiae were detected. No previous history of malaria episodes was elicited and no underlying chronic diseases were present. The patient was treated with a loading dose of intravenous quinine (1200 mg). At treatment inception the platelet count was 5 × 109/L, without haemorrhagic manifestations. Examination of the peripheral blood smear by the haematologist did not reveal platelet clumping and a blood sample obtained with sodium citrate confirmed the finding of low platelet counts thus excluding a diagnosis of pseudothrombocytopaenia. In the absence of bleeding the haematologist judged as unnecessary the use of platelet transfusions. Thick and thin blood smear examinations were diagnostic for P. vivax infection with schizonts, gametocytes and ring forms being detected and a very low parasitaemia (0.1 %). Plasmodium vivax monoinfection was subsequently confirmed by DNA polymerase chain reaction performed on a stored blood sample obtained on admission. Blood and urine cultures were obtained but gave negative results. Serology for HIV, CMV, dengue virus, leptospirosis, syphilis, Brucella and typhoid fever were negative.
Platelet counts showed a rapid increase soon after the infusion of quinine (i.e., 13 × 109/L, 16 × 109/L, 20 × 109/L, 32 × 109/L, respectively, after 4, 10, 18 and 24 h). The following morning an infectious diseases consultation was requested which suggested an interruption of intravenous quinine (after two doses administered). In consideration of the stable clinical condition and the diagnosis of P. vivax malaria the patient was transferred to the Infectious Diseases ward where oral chloroquine was started to complete the treatment. Parasite clearance was observed within 48 h after hospital admission as well as improvement or complete disappearance of all accompanying signs and symptoms (fever, headache, nausea, asthenia, myalgia). After completing a 3-day course of chloroquine treatment, and documentation of normal glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase activity levels, the patient was started on oral primaquine (15 mg of base in a 26.3 mg tablet per day for 14 days) and discharged the fifth day of hospitalization in good clinical conditions and with platelet counts within the normal range (223 × 109/L).