A 20 year-old Caucasian male patient was transferred from the medical floor to our intensive care unit (ICU) with septic shock. The patient had a history of relapsed acute myeloid leukemia with myelodysplasia-related features, and his most recent chemotherapy was administered about 10 weeks prior to ICU admission. The patient had no underlying co-morbidities and no known drug allergies.
Upon admission to the ICU, the patient was febrile (temperature 39°C), had tachycardia (heart rate 125 beats per minute), and tachypnea (respiratory rate 22 breaths per minute). He was also hypotensive (blood pressure 80/35 mmHg, mean arterial pressure 50) for which he was started on norepinephrine, titrated to a dose of 20 µg/min for a mean arterial pressure (MAP) target of 65 and above. The laboratory results were significant for neutropenia (absolute neutrophil count 216), thrombocytopenia (platelets 85 × 103/µl), and hypokalemia (potassium 2.8 mmol/L).
The source of infection was presumed to be a recto-cecal abscess that he developed as a complication following an appendectomy that was performed 7 weeks earlier. The patient was admitted to the hospital with febrile neutropenia secondary to the recto-ceccal abscess about 6 weeks prior to his transfer to the ICU. Given the patient’s thrombocytopenia, surgical intervention for source control was postponed until platelet recovery and he was maintained on broad spectrum antibiotics, meropenem and vancomycin, as well as micafungin. Upon admission to the hospital, amikacin was also started, but discontinued 5 days later once the culture results showed no growth. On day 12 of hospital admission, he developed right arm cellulitis associated with an abscess. The cultures taken from the blood and arm abscess were positive for extended spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) and carbapenem-resistant enterobacteriaceae (CRE) Escherichia coli. The patient was started on colistin, with a loading dose of 9 million units infused over 90 minutes, followed by a maintenance dose of 3 million units infused over 60 minutes every 8 hours. Since the patient was still febrile and neutropenic, he was kept on meropenem and vancomycin, and micafungin was switched to amphotericin B.
During his ICU stay, the patient continued on colistin and meropenem, tigecycline was added, and amphotericin B was switched to micafungin. By the second day of ICU admission, the patient’s blood pressure improved and norepinephrine was discontinued, but he remained febrile. However, on that day, and during the administration of the morning dose of colistin (day 28), the patient developed a severe reaction that consisted of hypotension (Blood pressure was 85/40 mmHg, MAP was 55) requiring the re-initiation of norepinephrine, shortness of breath, hypoxia (oxygen saturation level 91%), tachycardia (heart rate 147 beat per minute), tachypnea (respiratory rate 30 breath per minute), with a flushed face. Colistin was immediately held, and adrenaline, chlorpheniramine and hydrocortisone were given. Laboratory tests showed a new onset of leukocytosis (WBC: 19.3 × 103/µl, increased from 1.9 × 103/µl) and acute kidney injury (serum creatinine: 1.2 mg/dL, increased from 0.7 mg/dL). Given that the patient had been admitted with septic shock and had been on colistin for a prolonged duration with no complications, the clinical judgment at that time was that the symptoms were related to the patient’s critical illness rather than colistin. The plan was to continue colistin treatment and closely observe the patient during administration. The following day, leukocytosis was resolved, the patient’s renal function was back to its baseline, and norepinephrine was discontinued. Over the next 3 days, the patient received colistin without any complications.
However, on day 5 of ICU admission and day 31 of colistin treatment, the patient developed another similar, but more severe reaction during the administration of colistin. The patient became hypotensive and required re-initiation of norepinephrine, had shortness of breath, hypoxia (oxygen saturation level was 90%) and a flushed face. In addition, the patient was noted to have generalized erythema in his upper limbs. Supportive therapy was administered, which consisted of adrenaline, hydrocortisone, and chlorpheniramine. Laboratory results were significant for leukocytosis (WBC: 17.3 × 103/µl), acute kidney injury (serum creatinine: 1.4 mg/dL) and an increase in total bilirubin level (total bilirubin: 2.79 mg/dL, increased from 0.88 mg/dL). Based on the clinical assessment of both the critical care and infectious disease teams, the reaction was considered as an anaphylactic reaction to colistin and therefore it was discontinued. The patient was maintained on meropenem, tigacycline, and amikacin. According to the Naranjo scale, which is a scale used to assess the causality of adverse drug reactions, this adverse event was rated as probable with a score of 7.
Two days later, norepinephrine was discontinued and all abnormal laboratory results resolved. After 2 more days, the patient’s condition stabilized and he was transferred to the floor on piperacillin/tazobactam, tigecycline, and amikacin. However, the following day, he developed ventricular fibrillation and died during cardiopulmonary resuscitation.