We present the case of a 71-year-old man with rectal adenocarcinoma admitted for fever and dyspnoea in March of 2022. The patient did not have any allergies; he was a former smoker and had hypertension, dyslipidaemia, benign prostatic hyperplasia and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. In 2019 he was diagnosed of rectal adenocarcinoma and he received treatment with capecitabine, radiotherapy and underwent a surgery (abdominoperineal resection). In September of 2020 he presented a pulmonary metastasis therefore he started FOLFOX (oxaliplatin in combination with 5-fluorouracil and leucovorin) and Bevacizumab for 9 cycles and afterwards capecitabine and Bevacizumab for 3 more cycles. Due to pulmonary progression, he started the second line with FOLFORI (folinic acid, fluorouracil and irinotecan) and Cetuximab for 4 cycles until February of 2022.
In March of 2022 he had already been admitted twice for fever and dyspnoea, with a radiological image compatible with pneumonia. In the first admission he received treatment with amoxicillin-clavulanic acid and azithromycin and in the second hospitalization he was treated with piperacillin-tazobactam and levofloxacin as health care associated pneumonia. Cultures were negative, so he completed empirical treatment showing progressive clinical and analytical improvement. On both occasions, he was discharged afebrile, hemodynamically stable and without oxygen therapy needed.
In the current episode, the 3rd admission in March of 2022, he is readmitted due to the reappearance of the symptoms a few days after being discharged. He presented elevated analytic acute phase reactants and radiographic worsening with multilobar involvement . Empirical treatment was started with piperacillin-tazobactam 4 g/6 h and levofloxacin 500 mg/24 h. Also, a thoracic CT scan and a bronchoscopy were performed. The thoracic CT scan showed pulmonary lesions with necrosis and cavitation in both lungs, the metastasis had not changed in comparison with the previous scan. The bronchoscopy showed purulent secretions from both lungs, specially the right one. Nocardia cyriacigeorgica (> 100.000 CFU/ml) was successfully identified by MALDI-TOF in the samples of bronchial aspirate. Antibiotic treatment was changed to cotrimoxazole 800/120 mg/12 h, and brain infection was ruled out with a CT scan.
Two weeks later the patient presented haemorrhagic skin ulcers in the lower limbs, over an erythematous plaque . The ulcers measured 5 mm of diameter and secreted a brown material. Both, a skin biopsy and a culture were performed. Scedosporium apiospermum was identified by calcofluor and lactophenol blue, as well as through MALDI-TOF technique in the samples from the skin biopsy. There were not any predisposing factors known as the patient had not had any trauma nor drowing incidents. The biopsy showed abcessified areas and fungal structures with 90º ramification with positivity for Hematoxylin-eosin, Grocott and Periodic acid-Schiff staining . Voriconazole 300 mg/12 h was started after the results and was administered during 6 weeks at hospital admission with slow improvement. Deep infection was ruled out by lower limbs CT scan. As a local complication, the patient presented a deep bruise that needed debridement. The initial 4 weeks the patient received intravenous voriconazole and afterwards switched to oral treatment for the long term.