A 78-year old male patient with RA treated with tofacitinib (10 mg p.o. daily), methotrexate (20 mg p.o. weekly) and low dose corticosteroids (prednisolone 5 mg p.o. daily), was admitted to hospital with a 2-week history of arthralgia, nausea and confusion (Additional file ). RA was diagnosed 6 months ago, as the patient fulfilled the 2010 ACR/EULAR classification criteria with bilateral symmetric swollen and tender joints (wrists, hands and feet; over 10 affected joints in total) and arthralgia for 3 years (negative anti-CCP antibody and negative rheumatoid factor IgM). No signs of erosions were found on X-ray (hands and feet). Therapy was initiated with prednisone (20 mg/day) and MTX 15 mg/week s.c. with increasing doses over time. Tofacitinib was initiated 2 months prior hospital admission due to lack of efficacy of MTX monotherapy (MTX was switched to p.o. at that time, as the patient disliked injections).
At time of admission the patient reported shortness of breath on exertion but not at rest.
Physical examination showed following vital signs: temperature (auricular): 36.5 °C blood pressure: 178/95 mmHg, heart rate: 75 bpm, oxygen saturation: 88–90% at rest and on exercise 80% on room air. Wrists and ankles were swollen and tender bilaterally symmetric. There were normal findings on auscultation of heart and lungs without any other signs of venous congestion.
Laboratory findings on admission revealed hypercalcemia (albumin-corrected 3.12 mmol/l (normal range 2.0–2.6 mmol/l) and elevated 1,25- dihydroxyvitamin D levels (162 ng/l, normal range 22–111 ng/l). PTH was appropriately low at < 0.5 pmol/l (normal range < 1.3 pmol/l). Further laboratory findings are described in Table .
Further investigation of hypercalcemia included a whole body CT scan, which showed bilateral interstitial pneumonic infiltrates without pleural effusions . The patient was referred from normal ward care to the ICU due to acute respiratory failure requiring non-invasive ventilation/ high-flow oxygen therapy. PCR from bronchoalveloar lavage (BAL) was positive for P. jirovecii and Rhinovirus A/B/C and a diagnosis of PJP was made with colonization of Rhinovirus. Adequate therapy with TMP/SMX i.v. (15 mg/kg/d) and prednisolone p.o. (1 mg/kg/d) was initiated. Treatment with TMP/SMX was stopped after 10 days because of severe hyponatremia (drop from 136 mmol/l to 119 mmol/l; normal range 136–144 mmol/l) and acutely worsening confusion, which was attributed most likely to acute hyponatremia or as a direct adverse drug reaction to TMP/SMX. As second line therapy we initiated clindamycin and primaquine. Confusion improved but thrombocytopenia developed (drop from 441 G/l to 83 G/l) 4 days later, which was felt to be due to primaquine and led to the discontinuation of clindamycin and primaquine.
Both the patient’s clinical condition and hypercalcemia were improved after 17 days of antibiotic therapy. PJP- prophylaxis with monthly inhaled pentamidin (300 mg) was initiated.