A 53-year-old woman was admitted to donate one of her kidneys to her husband. Contrast-enhanced CT revealed irregular lumen in the right renal artery ; however, she had normal blood pressure and a blood test indicated normal renin activity and aldosterone level. Renal arteriography visualized a 15-mm long string-of-beads pattern at the proximal right renal artery , while the rest of the distal right renal artery and the whole left renal artery appeared intact. Based on these findings, she was diagnosed with moderate renal artery FMD. A renogram with technetium-99m mercaptoacetyltriglycine revealed that the ERPFs of the right and left kidneys were 48.4 and 64.1 mL/min, respectively. Considering the laterality of FMD as well as the difference of ERPF, her right kidney was judged to be suitable as a graft kidney.
Laparoscopic right donor nephrectomy by the retroperitoneal approach and kidney transplantation to the recipient were performed. Following the removal of the donor kidney, we resected 20 mm of the right renal artery, including 15 mm of the diseased portion documented by preoperative imaging examinations, considering the finding of intraoperative palpation. The renal artery was then reconstructed using a graft of the internal iliac artery and its brunch harvested from the recipient on extracorporeal surgery. As shown in Figure , end-to-end anastomosis between the donor renal artery and arterial graft was performed at two proximal sites using the interrupted suture. Then, the graft kidney was transplanted in the right iliac fossa by vascular anastomoses with arterial graft to the internal iliac artery in an end-to-end fashion and the renal vein to the external iliac vein in an end-to-side fashion. In this case, the warm ischemia time and cold ischemia time were 3 and 147 min, respectively. Affected artery was pathologically diagnosed with medial-type FMD, characterized by fibroplasia in the arterial medium and proliferation of smooth muscle tissue cells .
After transplantation, the subsequent courses in both the donor and recipient were surgically unremarkable, and the renal graft functioned favorably with a serum creatinine level of 1.6 mg/dL, resulting in the withdrawal of hemodialysis. The renal graft function was stable with a serum creatinine level of <2 mg/dL for 3 years after transplantation in the recipient, and blood pressure in both the donor and recipient was normal without medication.