A 66-year-old Caucasian male patient, suffering from right heart failure due to pericardial effusion, was transferred to our centre. The patient’s symptoms started 4 months earlier with shortness of breath and substantial weight loss. In the 2 weeks prior to hospitalization, the patient suffered from episodes of tachycardia, mild fever, and dizziness. The patient had an ongoing history of diabetes mellitus. In particular, there was no previous asbestos exposure. A pericardiocentesis performed at a distant hospital delivered 500 mL of serous exudate, but was incidentally inconspicuous with no malignant cells in cytology. Breathlessness remained unchanged even after successful drainage. The patient was transferred to our centre with the provisional diagnosis of pericarditis of unknown origin.
Transthoracic echocardiography (ECHO) showed dilatation of both atria and impaired left ventricular (LV) function (LV ejection fraction 42%). Predominantly the right ventricular was compressed apically by an 18 mm × 32 mm tumourous formation surrounded by a localized pericardial effusion . Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT) scan showed a contrast-enriched neoplasm, originating from the pericardium . Positron emission tomography (PET)–CT scan revealed a highly increased glucose metabolism in the neoplasia . Therefore, a primary pericardial malignoma was diagnosed. There was no evidence for infiltration of the myocardium or metastasis to adjacent organs or lymph nodes. Based on cardiac imaging we hypothesized a constrictive effect of the tumour on the myocardium. This was supported by haemodynamic findings showing an increase and equalization of diastolic pressures in the left and right ventricle as well as a typical square root sign in the pressure curves. Cardiac output was markedly decreased at 1.8 L/min .
After consultation with oncologists, the heart team decided to first resect the tumour due to impaired haemodynamics and then initiate adjuvant chemotherapy.
With the onset of anaesthesia, high doses of vasopressors and inotropes were required to stabilize cardiac output and blood pressure. Full sternotomy was performed to ensure sufficient access to the tumour. Rapid histological examination revealed a spindle-shaped, partly tubular malignant tumour . After resection of the pericardial neoplasia, tumourous penetration into the myocardium became obvious. This was not to be expected based on previous imaging. Complete resection of the myocardial involvement by PPM was not possible due to massive infiltration. Therefore, an effective decompression of the ventricle could not be achieved. In the absence of treatment options, implantation of an Extracorporeal membrane oxygenatio (ECMO) for haemodynamic stabilization was rejected. Consequently, the patient died on the first postoperative day from multiorgan failure due to haemodynamic instability caused by persistent tumour compression.