A 64-year-old Asian man who was previously healthy and had no comorbidity presented for his annual physical examination. He was not taking any medications except for his daily multivitamins. He also indicated on many occasions that he would not take any prescription medications unless it was for treating a life-threatening condition.
His history and physical examination were unremarkable. His family history only included diabetes mellitus type 2 on his maternal side. He ate a balanced diet, exercised regularly, and actively got involved his community. He did not smoke and only drank a glass of red wine once a week. His blood pressure was normotensive, his body mass index (BMI) was normal, and all preventive measures he underwent were up-to-date. A routine blood work was done on that visit to identify the patient's comprehensive blood count (CBC), comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP), lipid panel, thyroid function test, and prostate-specific antigen (PSA).
The patient was phoned and informed of his blood work results three days later. His blood work was unremarkable except for the lipid panel which showed a total cholesterol level of 260, a low-density lipoprotein (LDL) level of 202, a high-density lipoprotein (HDL) level of 40, and a triglyceride level of 179. Based on his calculated 10-year total coronary heart disease risk, he was recommended to continue his regular exercises and make further dietary changes to induce more omega-3 and to cut down on total fat intake. He was also advised to return to the clinic after three months to repeat the lipid panel test.
The patient returned to the clinic three months later for his follow-up evaluation for hyperlipidemia. His vital signs and the results of his physical examination were unchanged from his previous presentation. However, he stated that in addition to dietary changes, he had also begun taking an over-the-counter dietary supplement of 600 mg of red yeast rice(brand name: Schiff) twice daily with meals for about 12 weeks after he learned that his cholesterol levels were high. He used it because he thought it was more "natural". A repeated lipid panel test surprisingly showed a reduction in his total cholesterol level (198), LDL level (155), and triglyceride level (146). Meanwhile, his HDL level was unchanged.
This patient returned to the clinic one more time three months later for his reevaluation for hyperlipidemia. Again, his vital signs and the results of his physical examination were unremarkable. While continuing on a regular exercise regimen of moderate intensity, a healthier diet, and the red yeast rice supplement, his lipid panel remained stable and satisfactory. His total cholesterol was found to be 190, LDL level was 152, triglyceride level was 142, and high- HDL level was 45.