A 57-year-old female patient with a history of NF1 and PH initially diagnosed 3 years ago, already on conventional treatment with supplemental oxygen and anticoagulation, as well as disease-specific double oral combination therapy (ambrisentan 10 mg od and tadalafil 40 mg od) was admitted to the hospital because of worsening dyspnea on mild exertion and a presyncopal episode.
Her past medical history was notable for surgically repaired pyloric stenosis and 2 abortions during the third trimester of gestation due to intrauterine fetal death, followed by a successful pregnancy. The patient had already undergone an extensive workup which excluded known causes of PH. Lung ventilation/perfusion scan was not suggestive for chronic thromboembolic disease and high-resolution CT of the lungs was negative for interstitial lung disease. Blood tests excluded other causes of pulmonary hypertension.
Considering the patient’s clinical deterioration, the decision was made to proceed immediately with atrial septostomy, due to inherent difficulties in the reimbursement of prostanoids in our hospital at that time. The patient had an uneventful procedure with graded balloon dilation of the interatrial septum with gradually increasing inflated balloons diameter of 6, 8 and 10 mm. A moderate decrease in right atrial pressure , a mild increase in cardiac index and, as expected, a decrease in SaO2 was noted due to the right-to-left shunting through the atrial septum. The patient remained clinically and hemodynamically stable and was discharged a few days later.
After an initial modest improvement in symptoms, six-minute walk test (6MWT) and NT-proBNP at 2 months, access to prostanoids was eventually gained and the patient was started on subcutaneous treprostinil with gradual increase in the administered dose up to 100 ng/kg/min in a time period of 7 months.
The patient during a follow-up period of 2 years demonstrated gradual improvement and at present remains in World Health Organization class 2 with significant hemodynamic improvement . A recent transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated the positive remodeling of the right ventricle and the persistence of the atrial septostomy . The shunt flow was small and at rest was from the left atrium to the right atrium but after 2 min of isometric exercise (hand grip and feet in cycling position) the shunt became right-to-left .