A 27-year-old pregnant patient presented with a 4-month period of neck and shoulder pain, with paresthesia radiating to the upper extremities bilaterally. Postcontrast MRI of the cervical spine revealed an enhancing intradural extramedullary lesion in the cervical spine. The lesion spanned adjacent from vertebral bodies of C1-C3 causing severe compression with kinking at the level of the C1-C2 foramen .
At 31 weeks of gestation, the patient’s condition worsened with muscle spasms of the left upper and lower extremities and generalized headache. The obstetrician decided to deliver the baby by an emergency cesarean section which proceeded without complication. The placenta was inspected grossly for abnormalities and disposed of.
The patient developed worsening of pain hours following cesarean section, with new-onset quadriparesis. Emergent posterior decompressive laminectomy for resection of the mass was performed. A posterior midline approach was used to expose the occiput to C5. Next, the vertebral artery was mobilized off the sulcus of C1 to facilitate a wide right-sided laminectomy at that level. A C2-C4 laminectomy was performed taking care to remove the medial aspect of facet joints to facilitate exposure. Taking into consideration the tumor borders, hemorrhage, and emergent nature of the case, we felt that a C2-C4 laminectomy was necessary for safe resection of the tumor. The dura of the cervical spine was opened to the right of the midline to access the mass. The dentate ligaments were cut distal to their attachment to the cord. Gentle countertraction was applied to improve the visualization of the ventrally located mass. The mass was removed in a piecemeal fashion under the microscope . Preoperative and postoperative imaging changes are found in .
Examination following surgery revealed intact sensation without improvement of muscle strength. She could communicate and respond to commands through blinking. By the following morning, the patient was breathing spontaneously on the ventilator and tolerated continuous positive airway pressure mode. She slowly began improving and regained strength with a return to baseline by postoperative day 4. The patient was discharged 1 week later with her child and was ambulating independently. Her only deficit was numbness in the posterior occiput consistent with occipital neuralgia.
This lesion met the definition of primary melanoma of the CNS as set forth by the WHO guidelines. Histopathological evaluation of the lesion revealed a malignant melanoma with S-100, HMB45, Mart-1, and vimentin positivity and BRAF negativity . Complete surveillance by dermatology revealed only a single unrelated melanocytic lesion identified as a compound nevus with minimal atypia by biopsy. Speculum examination and examination of the vulva showed no primary lesion. MRI of the brain showed no evidence of intracranial metastasis and PET scan revealed no abnormal uptake. CT and plain films of the thorax and abdomen showed no evidence of other primary lesions. The ophthalmological examination revealed no retinal lesions. Because of the possibility of transplacental metastasis to the baby, pediatric oncology followed the child who did not have any evidence of disease. Due to the infeasibility of obtaining tumor-free margins of ventral cervical dura, we elected to perform fractionated radiotherapy to the tumor bed at 3750 cGy delivered in 15 fractions.
The patient was recurrence free on MRI at 6 months follow-up. At 9-month postoperatively, she complained of severe neck pain without any radicular pain or weakness. The X-ray revealed postlaminectomy kyphosis . Instrumentation had not been performed at the index operation due to concerns of metal artifact interfering with the detection of a recurrent tumor on follow-up imaging. The patient was admitted and placed under Holter cervical traction. Lateral cervical spine radiographs revealed the corrected deformity. She then underwent a C2-C6 posterior cervical fusion with C2 pars screws and lateral mass instrumentation from C3-C6 . Radiology revealed satisfactory cervical alignment with a slight reversal of normal cervical lordosis 2 weeks following fusion . At 6 months following fusion and instrumentation, she reported nearly complete resolution of pain with only minor shoulder stiffness and pain.