A 25-year-old woman presented to the OPD with complaints of swelling and progressive pain over the right foot for the past 4 years. The swelling was initially small in size and gradually progressed to attain the present size and was associated with pain for the past 6 months on exertion like cycling. No history of previous trauma to the same site. There was no fever, chills, recent weight loss, or loss of appetite.
On examination, she had a gross swelling over the fourth metatarsal area with an overlying healed scar with minimal tenderness. There were no sinuses or discharge. The patient had pain while weight bearing on the right foot. The distal neurovascular status was intact.
The patient was initially treated at another hospital where biopsy of the swelling was done and histopathological examination revealed atypical osteoid proliferation. The working diagnosis was low-grade osteosarcoma/osteoid osteoma/osteoblastoma.
The initial baseline investigations were within normal limits. The radiograph of the right foot revealed a well-defined eccentric lesion with a homogeneous matrix over the distal two-thirds of the fourth metatarsal bone expanding into the intermetatarsal region .
The CT revealed a well-defined, exophytic, lobulated, and dense sclerotic lesion with an osteoid matrix of size 4.6 × 3.2 × 3.6 cm (AP × TR × CC) arising from the medial aspect of the distal shaft of the right fourth metatarsal bone (,,). The lesion extends circumferentially around the shaft causing mild thinning of the shaft of third metatarsal.
The MRI revealed an expansile altered signal intensity lesion involving the fourth metatarsal bone appearing hypointense on both T1 and T2 weighted images with low-signal intensity internal areas with no associated soft-tissue component (, , ).
Based on clinical presentation and radiographic findings, the diagnosis of a locally aggressive bone-forming tumor was considered. The patient was planned for surgical intervention after obtaining the required consent.
Under general anesthesia, the tourniquet was inflated over the thigh to 220 mm Hg pressure. Through the dorsal approach, skin and soft tissue over the fourth metatarsal area was dissected. The tumor was carefully removed with a cuff of normal tissue at both ends. Intraoperative samples were sent for bone tissue culture and histopathological examination . Non-vascularized fibular graft was harvested from the ipsilateral side to bridge the defect caused by tumor excision. The fibular graft was fixed with K-wire to the proximal phalanx and to the base of the fourth metatarsal. A below-knee cast was applied for 6-weeks. After 6 weeks, the patient underwent K-wire exit and was started on partial weight-bearing mobilization with the help of walker support.
The bacterial growth in the tissue samples provided for culture was negative. The diagnosis of osteoblastoma was supported by a histopathological examination of the excised tumor, which revealed a osteo-proliferative lesion with osteoblastic rimming and osteoid deposition .
The patient was under follow-up for a total of 2 years, during which time she had no symptoms. On follow-up radiographs , there were no signs of recurrence and the fibular graft had united to the metatarsal base.