A four month-old boy was admitted to the Pediatric Intensive Care unit at our hospital due to cough, dyspnea, shortness of breath and cyanosis. On admission, the child was afebrile and exhibited tachydyspnea. He had normal blood pressure and heart rate of 144 bpm, but the SpO2 was low (86%).
The child had recently experienced respiratory problems that were resolved with inhalation therapy. There was no family history of genetic diseases. After normal results were obtained for laboratory tests, a thoracic X-ray showed a massive shadowing of the left hemithorax. Based on this finding and results of other diagnostic approaches a diagnosis of type II PPB was made (ICD-11, 8973/3). Despite the predisposition for PPBs tumors among families, in this patient genetic no family-related disease were reported. Using DNA isolated from blood samples collected in the presence of ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), we performed next generation sequencing (NGS) using a Miseq instrument (Illumina). The sensitivity of this test is reported as 99.99%. We compiled a molecular genetic test report that included sequence analysis of all coding exons and exon-intron boundaries of the DICER1 gene and found no evidence of mutation. Although the results of genetic testing were normal, a normal test result alone cannot eliminate a diagnosis of PPB, so additional testing was carried out.
There were no breath sounds in the right pulmonary area on auscultation. A chest x-ray revealed massive shadowing of the right lung .
Ultrasonography of the lung detected a 7.15 x 5.79 cm mass attached to the pleura that contained cystic lesions .
Evaluation of contrast CT indicated the presence of a mass on the right bronchus . Surgery was planned.
The surgery involved a radical resection of a 7.0 x 5.0 cm mass that included cystic lesions. Histopathological analysis of the mass confirmed that it contained stromal and epithelial components that had a high risk of proliferation. Immunohistochemistry for tumor markers characteristic of type II PPB tumors was performed with staining for: 1) Cyclin D1; 2) Cytokeratin 7 and 20; 3) P63; 4) P53; 5) TTF1; 6) WT1-; 7) Ki67; and 8) Napsin A. Tumor biomarkers are substances that are detected in blood of patients with malignant tumors. The detection of biomarkers is useful in all stages of cancer care, including early detection, diagnostic, evaluation of chemotherapy efficiency and the prediction of metastasis dissemination13.
Scintigraphy revealed a suspicious lesion in the right corner of the scapula , but no metastatic lesions were observed in the head. This finding was verified by MRI.
Histopathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of type II PPB. The patient was scheduled to start chemotherapy in a specialized pediatric oncology center for treatment with the IVADo chemotherapy protocol comprising: ifosfamide and vincristine 0.025 mg/kg/day delivered as a bolus; 1.25 mg/kg/day doxorubicin given by iv over 15 minutes on 2 days; and cyclophosphamide at 40 mg/kg/day. These dosages are reduced by 50% relative to typical regimens since the patient was an infant. Genetic analysis of germ line DICER1 mutations by NGS was negative.
A second CT scan performed 2 months after initiating chemotherapy treatment revealed a new, growing mass . Shortly after the CT scan, the patient’s condition deteriorated with leukopenia and respiratory distress followed by sepsis and cardiopulmonary arrest.