A 76-year-old male with a 3-week history of unstable walking, slow speech and dizziness was admitted to our stroke unit. An MRI-scan showed no signs of acute ischemia. Further investigations were not performed and he was discharged. The neurological symptoms progressed further over the next 2 weeks and the patient was re-admitted. On examination, he was unable to walk due to truncal ataxia and he had a severe dysarthria. He was alert, without weakness, pyramidal signs, cranial nerve affection or sensory deficits e.g., the neurological signs were purely cerebellar. He denied B-symptoms (fever, night sweats, or unintended weight loss). A repeated MRI-scan was still without structural abnormalities. Routine hematological and biochemical investigations were within normal limits. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination showed mild pleocytosis, elevation of protein level at 1.12 g/L (range: 0.15–0.50 g/L), normal IgG-index but an oligoclonal band was present. There were no neoplastic cells and flowcytometry was normal. Screening for antibodies to paraneoplastic neurological syndromes was performed by indirect immunofluorescence test (Euroimmun, Lübeck, Germany) and confirmed by using EUROLINE profiles neuronal antigens, 12 recombinant antigens (amphiphysin, CV2, PNMA2 (Ma2/ta), Ri, Yo, Hu, recoverin, SOX1, Titin, Zic4, GAD65 and anti-Tr/DNER (Euroimmun, Lübeck, Germany). The tests showed a strong reaction to anti-Tr/DNER antibodies in both serum and CSF. Immunoreaction against other paraneoplastic antibodies and the mGluR1 and mGluR5 receptor were negative.
18F-FDG positron emission tomography/contrast enhanced computed tomography (FDG-PET/CT) scan revealed a round structure with moderate FDG uptake in the left submandibular gland suggesting a Warthin tumor (lymphomatous papillary cystadenoma). He underwent extirpation of the process which appeared to be a lymph node in close vicinity to the submandibular gland. The node had a thickened lymph nodular capsule and a nodular growth pattern with scattered CD30 and CD15 positive Reed–Sternberg cells. His past medical history revealed that he had been diagnosed with HL previously (Ann Arbor stage III B) but he has been in complete remission for 12 years. Thereafter a diagnosis of relapsed HL was made (Ann Arbor stage I A). As soon as the result of the CSF findings was available, he was treated with intravenous (i.v.) immunoglobulin (IVIG) 0.4 g/kg/day for 5 days followed by 3 additional 5 days i.v. immunoglobulin sequences separated by 4 weeks. The hematological treatment consisted of four 21-day series of i.v. gemcitabine and i.v. liposomal doxorubicin on days 1 and 8 and radiation therapy. The neurological deterioration stopped. Over the following 6–8 weeks he improved. At the last follow-up, 16 months after onset, he could walk assisted by a cane, the dysarthria had improved and he was able to communicate normal. An FDG-PET/CT scan after 12 months showed no sign of HL.