A 51-year-old woman, without any previous comorbidities, illnesses, allergies or addictions, presented with a history of persistent, left-sided, non-radiating, non-pleuritic, chest pain, and insidious onset, gradually progressive dyspnoea of 1-year duration. She had two episodes of syncope, 8 months before. She did not give any history of constitutional symptoms including fever or loss of weight.
Upon initial evaluation in another hospital, she was diagnosed with complete heart block which required a permanent pacemaker insertion. She was also found to have pericardial effusion which was treated with an empiric course of anti-tuberculosis therapy (ATT). Despite taking ATT for 8 months, she did not have resolution of the pericardial effusion and was referred to our hospital for further evaluation.
On examination, she was found to be afebrile, with a blood pressure of 100/70 mmHg in both upper limbs without any evidence of pulsus paradoxus. Her heart rate was 78 beats/min, respiratory rate was 18 breaths/min, and arterial oxygen saturation on room air was 98%.
Examination of the cardiovascular system showed muffled heart sounds and an absence of murmurs, rubs, or gallops. Examination of other systems was normal.
A provisional diagnosis of chronic symptomatic pericardial effusion was made, and she was evaluated further. Chest X-ray film showed cardiomegaly and the presence of a pacemaker in situ . Echocardiogram showed large pericardial effusion with a maximum extent of 27 mm posteriorly. It also showed evidence of global left ventricular systolic dysfunction with an ejection fraction of 41.3%, tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion of 19 mm, and E/A ratio of 1.9. There was global hypokinesia, mild mitral regurgitation, and myocardial ‘sparkling’ was noted in the septum . Details of laboratory investigations are shown below .
Computed tomography scan of the thorax and abdomen did not give any significant findings other than cardiomegaly and pericardial effusion. Autoimmune workup and serum angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) levels were normal.
In view of the presence of chronic pericardial effusion, the differentials that were considered included infections (tuberculosis, post-viral), connective tissue disorders (systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, scleroderma), infiltrative disorders (amyloidosis, sarcoidosis, histiocytic disorders), malignancy (lymphoma or secondary pericardial effusion from lung, oesophageal, or breast malignancy), and IgG4-related disease.
Relevant investigations for all but one of the differentials considered were negative. Serum protein electrophoresis showed an M band. The bone marrow biopsy showed pale eosinophilic deposits in the vessel wall and Congo red stain revealed reddish-orange deposits which showed green birefringence under polarizing microscope thus confirming the presence of amyloid . Serum free light chain (sFLC) ratio was elevated. A cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan could not be done as the patient’s pacemaker was not MRI compatible. Technetium pyrophosphate (Tc-PYP) scintigraphy showed moderate uptake of tracer equal to bone activity (Grade 2) in the region of the heart consistent with cardiac amyloidosis . The patient did not give consent for a pericardial or myocardial biopsy. A final diagnosis of systemic amyloidosis with cardiac involvement causing systolic dysfunction, chronic pericardial effusion, and complete heart block was made.
She had good clinical improvement with medical management. Though further evaluation and specific treatment for systemic amyloidosis were planned, she wished to continue further treatment in a hospital near her hometown, and hence was referred there. Details of further follow-up were not available.