A 43-year-old Caucasian male was referred with worsening floaters in both eyes and excessive tearing in the right eye. A diagnosis of heterozygous ATTRD18E amyloidosis mutation in exon 2 had been made nearly 2 decades earlier. The patient had already experienced multiple complications of his condition, including stroke, heart failure, left ventricular thrombus, interstitial lung disease and spontaneous spinal hematoma. He was on treatment with patisiran, acetylsalicylic acid and warfarin, after prior treatment with revusiran and inotersen. His father had died at age 49 from cardiac arrest secondary to amyloidosis. The patient’s floaters and photopsias had been present for 10 years, but he had never had a formal ophthalmologic evaluation.
On examination, best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of both eyes was 20/20 with normal pupils, normal intraocular pressure and no relative afferent pupillary defect. Automated visual field testing was normal in the right eye and showed a nasal defect crossing the vertical midline in the left eye. Both conjunctivae had a nodular, gelatinous appearance, consistent with conjunctival lymphangiectasia . There was no evidence of amyloid deposition on the iris or lens. Dilated fundus examination revealed normal optic discs, a large sheet-like vitreous opacity in the left eye inferior to the optic disc, multiple small retinal microaneurysms, mild arterial tortuosity and focal deposits along the arterial walls, presumed to be amyloid . Intravenous fluorescein angiogram (IVFA) showed delayed temporal arterial filling, inferotemporal telangiectasia and phlebitis in the left eye , with late vascular leakage in the temporal retina in both eyes . The location of the most prominent retinal phlebitis was felt to correspond to the visual field defect in the left eye.
At follow up after 2 years, BCVA remained 20/20 in both eyes with stable visual fields, despite subjective worsening of vision. There was no change in the appearance of the optic discs. The previously observed vitreous opacities and conjunctival lymphangiectasia remained unchanged. Dilated fundus examination showed sheathing of the inferior aspect of the left optic nerve as well as areas of nonperfusion in the temporal and superior aspects of the macula. There were more hemorrhages seen temporally in the left eye. Repeat IVFA showed increased staining of the vessels as well as late leakage in both eyes, which had not previously been observed in the right eye .