A 17-year-old boy with no significant past medical issues was brought to our emergency room after a collision involving a motorcycle and a transport truck, a cervical collar correctly applied and oxygenation ensured with an oxygen mask.
Upon admission to the emergency room the patient was unconscious (Glasgow Coma Scale <8), the hemodynamic condition was stable, his pupils were bilaterally isochoric, isocyclic, and reactive to light. Orotracheal intubation was performed with a video laryngoscope and the cuff pressure was measured using a cuff manometer and was set to approximately 20–25 cmHO. Adequate and timely interventions allowed the SpO2 never to fall below 90 %, while the mean arterial pressure was maintained over 65 mmHg.
A first total-body contrast enhanced computed tomography (CECT) was performed and a thin layer of left hemispheric subdural hematoma was found, along with intraventricular hemorrhage, bilateral fracture trasversing the pars interarticularis of C2 with an associated subluxayion of C2 on cervical vertebrae 3 (C3) (Hangman type fracture, ), right common carotid artery dissection, and right liver lobe laceration without active bleeding.
Subsequently the sedated patient was transferred to the operating room and a cerebral intraparenchymal catheter was positioned to assess the intracranial pressure (ICP), and a value of 12 cmH20 was shown.
A carotid artery and vertebral angiography was performed, which documented a right common carotid artery injury with intima invagination , and an endovascular treatment with a metallic stent in the right common carotid artery was performed. Afterwards, the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU).
The next day, an increase in ICP refractory to standard medical treatment was observed. A total body CT scan showed severe general cerebral oedema, while the liver laceration was reported as stable. Therefore, the patient underwent bilateral decompressive craniectomy to facilitate the control of ICP and improve cerebral perfusion pressure.
In the following days, further evaluations regarding the C2-C3 spinal fracture-dislocation were carried out, including a cervical spine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which documented the anterolisthesis of C2 over C3, without signs of spinal cord suffering , and conservative treatments were advised by neurosurgeons.
Somatosensory evoked potentials (SEPs) were performed, and described as normal in terms of amplitude and latency.
On the fifth day upon arrival the patient developed severe pneumonia due to methicillin-susceptible staphylococcus aureus (MSSA), successfully treated with cefazolin for 7 days.
On the 11th day upon arrival, after a neurological assessment, showing a left GCS 6 (E1-V1-M4) and absence of motor response on the right side, a brain CT scan was performed: reduced cerebral oedema and no ischaemic areas were found.
On the 13th day, with a persistent GCS < 8, a tracheostomy was performed.
In the following weeks, a gradual and slow cognitive and motor recovery was observed.
On the 42nd day upon arrival, the patient was awake, conscious, with normal limb movements, and in spontaneous breathing through the tracheostomy tube. However, during the neurological evaluation we acknowledged an inability to protrude the tongue, in lateral tongue movements, and in swallowing. Furthermore, a fiber optic laryngoscopy highlighted complete vocal cords paralysis with stagnation of saliva in the piriform recess.
Subsequently the patient was discharged to an acute care rehabilitation and after a month of physical therapy an initial recovery of tongue motility and vocalization occurred.