An 11-year-old girl noticed a small subcutaneous nodule in her iliac region. As the nodule was asymptomatic, she did not consult a doctor for 1 year. After the nodule began to gradually increase in size, she visited a nearby hospital where T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 4.3- × 4.1-cm tumor in the subcutaneous iliac region . A T2-weighted image showed the tumor with high intensity in the inner cystic region . A non-specialized surgeon undertook an unplanned marginal resection, after which MRI showed no evidence of tumor residue . An approximately 4-cm scar from surgery was observed in her iliac region . As the resected specimen displayed sarcoma-like features on histological examination, she was referred to our hospital. She displayed no symptoms, and her blood test results were normal (Hb = 12.7 g/dl, CRP = 0.019 mg/dl). In our hospital, the histological specimen was investigated again using hematoxylin–eosin (H–E) and immunohistochemical staining. H–E staining showed proliferation of spindle-shaped cells with enlarged nuclei, with stroma composed of fibrous tissue . Furthermore, we noted the presence of pseudoangiomatous spaces filled with blood and surrounded by tumor cells , in addition to lymph nodes surrounding the tumor . Immunohistochemical findings revealed positive staining for CD68, CD99, CD56 (focally), and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) . Staining for CD34 was positive only in the blood vessels, whilst staining for Bcl-2 was only focally positive within the lymph nodes . Staining for S-100 was negative (data not shown). On the basis of the aforementioned histological features, we diagnosed AFH. Based on this diagnosis, we undertook an additional extended resection. Skin and one layer of the underlying iliac muscle was resected . Because the tumor involved the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve, we had no choice but to excise the nerve clumping with the tumor. We performed closure of the membrane of the iliac muscle . There was no evidence of tumor on macroscopic examination of the resected specimen , which was confirmed by histological examination (data not shown). It has been 3 years since treatment, and the patient has remained disease-free. However, perceptual disorders of the femoral front have remained.