The patient was a 30-year-old male presenting with chronic right sided low back pain beginning three months ago. He reported that he “threw out his back” while getting out of his truck, which led him to being unable to move the next day and required transportation by ambulance to a hospital for treatment. Upon arrival he reported receiving an oral steroid prescription and then being discharged home to rest for a few days. Over the next few weeks, he reported taking things easy and refraining from all of his previous exercise and activity. After two to three weeks, he reported that he began playing golf and resumed his prior resistance training program with full return to all normal activities within the next month. His complaints consisted of a tight achy pain in the right lower back with prolonged sitting, sleeping (slept on his side and/or back) and with playing golf. He stated that it was typically worse the day following exercise or activity. The patient reported that he can gain relief from the pain with stretching his lower back and taking a hot shower. He reported playing a full 18-hole round of golf two times per month and is at the driving range every other day. When he is at the range, he reported that he would hit both a large and small bucket each time (approximately 150 balls) with twenty of those consisting of chips and pitches. His current workout routine consisted of rotating through chest, back, arm, and leg workouts 2-3 times each week. Overall his past medical history is unremarkable, and he is not currently taking any medications to manage his pain. His goal with physical therapy was to play golf and resistance train without LBP. The patient was informed that the data concerning his case would be submitted for publication. The U.S. Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPPA) was discussed and an informed consent was obtained to allow for the use of his medical information.
The results from the review of systems can be seen in . Significant findings were found in the neuromuscular system for balance, as well as several deficits within the musculoskeletal system. The details of the deficits found in the musculoskeletal system can be found within .
With the patient’s complaints of mainly right sided lower back pain beginning approximately three months prior, there were multiple diagnoses to consider for this patient. The working hypotheses were a facet joint dysfunction, lumbar intervertebral disc protrusion, and SI joint dysfunction. The hospital visit and his intake forms did not yield any positive red flag findings. The subject was referred to skilled physical therapy to address his LBP with a goal of returning to playing golf. Based on his history, there were concerns about his core stability and endurance as well as general mobility since he is very active and hitting a large number of range balls weekly.