A 34-year-old Albanian man was admitted to a regional hospital presenting with dry cough, fever, progressive dyspnea, night sweats, and a thick-walled cavitary lesion of the left lung, associated with bilateral pulmonary infiltrates on radiologic examination . He had been well in other aspects until 15 days previous, except that he had lost 10kg in the last six months. While in the emergency department, he tested positive for HIV-1 infection and was referred to our hospital.
He had emigrated from Albania to Greece 10 years previously and worked as a farmer. He resided with his wife and two children, all of whom were well. There was no history of previous chest pain or cardiac disease, cough, sputum production, sweats, chills, use of tobacco or more than moderate amounts of alcohol, intravenous drug use, receipt of transfusions, rash, visual problems, headache, arthralgia, or myalgia. There was no history of recent travel, past tuberculous infection, or close contact with anyone with tuberculosis.
On admission, he was ill-looking and in considerable discomfort. His temperature was 38.35°C, his heart rate was 110 beats per minute, his respiratory rate was 30 breaths per minute, and his blood pressure 110/75mmHg. A physical examination revealed diffuse crackles in both lungs, while no friction rub was detected. There were also lesions consistent with Kaposi’s sarcoma on the oral mucous membrane and on his lower extremities. Multiple mobile lymph nodes of 1-cm diameter were palpated in both axillas, whilst no additional lymph nodes were felt. A specimen of arterial blood, drawn while he was breathing room air, disclosed that the partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2) was 77mmHg, the partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PaCO2) was 33mmHg, and the pH was 7.46. His hematocrit level was 33.0%, his hemoglobin level was 11g/dL (mean corpuscular volume was 85), his white cell count was 6.13×109/L with 71.70% neutrophils, 16.50% lymphocytes, and 8.30% monocytes, and his platelet count was 150×109/L. His erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 50mm per hour and his C-reactive protein level was 7.00mg/dL (normal limit <0.5mg/dL). The results of his other laboratory tests were normal except for low albumin. His CD4+ cell count was 4 cells/mm3 and his HIV-1 RNA was 71,045 copies/mL.
A microscopic examination of the stained sputum showed AFB and a cytologic examination revealed no malignant tumor cells. A culture of sputum specimens yielded normal respiratory tract flora. Specimens were subsequently inoculated onto Löwenstein-Jensen (L-J) medium. The initial viral serology tests performed on day two (including cytomegalovirus [CMV], coxsackie, Epstein-Barr virus, hepatitis A, B, and C viruses, herpes simplex virus [HSV] 1 and 2, and varicella zoster virus) were negative except from CMV immunoglobulin G (IgG). Based on these initial microbiological results, a possible diagnosis of MTB infection was presumed, and anti-TB treatment was initiated (isoniazid 5mg/kg/d, rifampicin 600mg/d, pyrazinamide 30mg/kg/d, and ethambutol 20mg/kg/d), in combination with empirical antimicrobial treatment for common bacterial pathogens (ceftriaxone 2gr/d and moxifloxacin 400mg/d) and prophylaxis with co-trimoxazole (1 tablet at 960mg, three times per week) and azithromycin (2 tablets totaling 1200mg/week). Five days later a marked increase of liver function was noted and the rifampicin was discontinued. He developed CMV antigenemia (pp65 positive) and therapy with ganciclovir (5mg/kg twice daily) was started. Subsequently, he developed neutropenia and his ganciclovir dosage was adjusted. Because of his low CD4 count, combined antiretroviral therapy (emtricitabine 600mg/d, tenofovir 200mg/d, and efavirenz 245mg/d) was introduced within two weeks from his admission. A repeated radiograph and thoracic computed tomography scan disclosed deterioration of pulmonary infiltrates, while he continued to be febrile. Real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) (MTB COBAS® TaqMan® 48 Analyzer, Roche Diagnostics, Basel, Switzerland) performed directly in the clinical specimens was negative for the presence of MTB DNA.
His respiratory status further deteriorated, but at this time aerobic vials from routine blood cultures (FA BacT/ALERT® and FN BacT/ALERT®, bioMérieux, Marcy l’Etoile, France) collected during his hospitalization showed as positive for microbial growth. Gram stain from the positive blood culture vials revealed the presence of Gram-variable pleomorphic, coccoid, and bacillary bacteria . After 24 hours of incubation onto MacConkey and blood agar plates, white, small colonies had grown. After prolonged incubation (over 48 hours), the colonies became smooth, glistening, and mucoid, had begun coalescing, and were teardrop-shaped, and after three to four days of incubation their color turned to salmon-pink . The isolated microorganism was catalase-positive and oxidase-negative. Phenotypic identification as Rhodococcus equi was initially performed by BBL GP cards (bionumber 1445000540, Becton Dickinson Diagnostics, Franklin Lakes, New Jersey, United States), whereas, by Vitek2 Advanced Expert System™ it was identified as Kocuria varians (bionumber 010010302000000, identification with 91% probability, bioMerieux). His urease test was positive, whereas, synergistic hemolysis was observed, with one hemolysin-producing Staphylococcus aureus strain. Susceptibility testing was performed by the disk diffusion method and Etest . The isolate was susceptible to gentamicin, rifampicin, kanamycin, tetracycline, ciprofloxacin, vancomycin (minimum inhibitory concentration, MIC: 0.75μg/mL), teicoplanin (MIC: 0.5μg/mL), linezolid (MIC: 0.125μg/mL), imipenem (MIC: 0.19μg/mL), tigecycline (MIC: 0.094μg/mL), and daptomycin (MIC: 0.19μg/mL), and was resistant to ampicillin, cefoxitin, clindamycin, sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim.
Identification to species level was confirmed performing PCR followed by sequencing of 23S rDNA gene and comparison with existing universal microbial genes’ sequencing data (BLAST database). Homology of 98% was detected with the R. equi genome, verifying the initial phenotypic identification. After diagnosis of R. equi bacteraemia, antibiotic treatment was adjusted and ertapenem combined with ciprofloxacin was administered intravenously. Three days later he became afebrile, with gradual improvement over the next fifteen days. Ten days after the identification of bacteraemia, growth was observed on the L-J medium inoculated with sputa. The Z-N stain was positive for AFB, but their coccoid morphology was not consistent with mycobacteria . A subculture on conventional solid media confirmed the presence of R. equi. Unfortunately, our patient died one month later due to CMV pneumonia.