27 year old Nepali male presented to the emergency department with five days history of high grade fever, multiple joint pain and swelling preceded by four weeks history of progressive painful nodular skin lesion over the face, scalp, both ears, all four limbs and upper chest. Fever was not associated with headache, productive cough, abdominal pain, dysuria and diarrhea. Small joints of hands, bilateral elbows, knees and feet were painful. There was no history of preceding diarrhea, upper respiratory tract infection or urinary tract infection.
There were no previous similar complaints in the past.On examination patient was febrile with temperature of 38 centigrade, blood pressure of 114/74, pulse 95 per minute. His general appearance revealed multiple painful nodular skin lesions over face, both ears, upper and lower limbs. (See Figure ). There were widespread hypo and hyper-pigmented skin lesions. Sensation over the skin lesion was intact.
Musculoskeletal examination revealed tender and swollen bilateral MCPS, PIPs, wrists, elbows, bilateral knees and bilateral 3rd and 4th MTPs. Patient also had evidence of enthesitis around both knees at site of quadriceps tendon insertion and tenosynovitis of wrist extensors bilaterally. Lung and cardiovascular examination was essentially normal. Neurological examination showed thickened ulnar nerves bilaterally with no evidence of ulnar neuropathy.
Cranial nerves were intact. Muscle power in all groups of muscles was normal. There was no sensory impairment at any level.
Laboratory investigations revealed WBC count of 36800 (normal 4–10). (93% neutrophils), Hemoglobin (Hb) of 8.7 g/dl (MCV of 74.6, MCH of 22.3), Platelet counts of 656 K; blood urea nitrogen 13.6 mmol/L (normal 2.5 -6.7) and creatinine 163umol/L normal (50.4-98.1). Inflammatory markers were raised (CRP of 335 mg/l and ESR of 87 mm/1 hr). Urine chemical examination showed 2+ protein and 3+ erythrocytes.
Urine Microscopy revealed WBC count of 103 and Red blood cell of 486 with positive granular cast.
Urinary protein creatinine ratio was 117 mg/mmol (normal range of 0–45).
Blood and urine culture didn’t grow any organism.
Further investigation revealed negative ANA, RF, anti ccp and normal complements. X rays of hands and feet were normal.Punch skin biopsy (see Figure histopathology of skin nodule) was taken from the nodule present over right upper arm. Skin biopsy revealed non-necrotizing granuloma with numerous foamy macrophages in dermis and subcutaneous fat. Small number of acid-fast bacilli was seen in some of the macrophages and biopsy result was reported as borderline tuberculoid. Leprosy was diagnosed on basis of typical skin lesion and skin biopsy finding.
Treatment of our case included intravenous hydration and anti-leprosy medication (rifampicin 600 mg monthly and dapsone 100 mg daily). Skin lesions and arthritis initially got worse after starting treatment, which improved with addition of high dose steroid, (Prednisolone 60 mg daily). Polyarthritis resolved five days after starting treatment with multidrug anti-leprosy medication and high dose steroid. Patient renal function returned to normal. Patient didn’t undergo renal biopsy after improvement in his renal function. Patient was discharged in good general condition.
Patient had regular follow up in the out patient clinic with infectious disease doctor. Steroid was tapered slowly and patient was improving clinically. Four months after initiation of treatment, patient suddenly developed similar acute presentation. Patient was receiving monthly rifampicin 600 mg and daily dapsone of 100 mg. Patient landed in emergency department with sudden onset of high grade fever, new skin painful nodular lesions, symmetrical polyarthritis involving small joints of hands, bilateral elbow joint, bilateral knees, ankles and bilateral metatarsophalangeal joints.
Laboratory investigations revealed leukocytosis, high inflammatory markers, and raised liver enzymes.
This episode was considered to be secondary to type 2-lepra reaction and treated accordingly. Patient responded well to 20 mg of daily prednisolone. Patient is regularly followed up in infectious disease outpatient clinic and is receiving combined antileprosy medication for paucibacillary leprosy.