A 71-year-old female was admitted to our hospital with a complaint of worsening pain in waist, which radiated to her left leg with feeble strength for 2 months. The visual analogue scale (VAS) score for pain was 5 points for the waist and 8 for the left leg. She had orally taken Eperisone Hydrochloride tablets, Aescuven Forte, and Mecobalamin, however, with no relief.
She had PD for 11 years and maintained on Madopar, Adamantane and Sinemet, which was unluckily valid last year. Hence, 1 year ago, she underwent deep brain electrode implantation (DBEI) for PD. Five years ago, she underwent a PVP for compressive fracture of T11 after a fall. Since then, she has been taking calcium and vitamin D supplements, but not regularly.
Upon admission, a physical examination showed that she was unresponsive to questions, had intermittent tremors, truncal rigidity, and bradykinesia. The patient also had radiating pain and numbness on anterolateral and medial sides of the left leg and the lateral side of the left dorsal foot. She tested positive for the straight-leg-raising test (40 degrees) and negative for the femoral nerve stretch test. Her muscle strength of the left L5 myotome was slightly decreased (grade IV-). She scored a total of 224 points on the Short- Form-36-questionnaire (SF-36) and 10 points on the Japanese orthopedic association (JOA) score.
Digital radiographic (DR) images revealed grade I degenerative spondylolisthesis without any obvious instability at L4 level .
A CT scan indicated LDHs at L3–4 and L4–5, with the L4–5 herniation being much severer, particularly on the left side . Her diagnosis was determined to result from LDH (L3–4, L4–5) and degenerative spondylolisthesis (L4–5, grade I).
Stated thus, we concluded that the L4–5 lesion was the primary lesion causing her pain, while that in L3–4 was secondary. PTED surgery was performed at the L4–5 level under local anesthesia , while L3–4 remained untouched. In case this operation failed, the operation of L3–4 level would be performed. PTED procedures mainly consisted of an ectomy of the herniated disc and the removal of hypertrophic ligamentum flavum and facet joint osteophytes.
The day after PTED, the patient reported decreased pain in the lower back (VAS: 3) and limbs (VAS: 2) and improving strength. Three days later, her pain recurred (lower back pain VAS: 4; limb radiating pain VAS: 3), and a CT re-examination detected vestiges of the removed ventral bone of the responsible superior articularis and reduced disc, with a widened lateral recess and growing vertebral canal. The CT also showed an endplate injury of L5 upper end plate . She was discharged 1 week later with improved symptoms.
Two weeks postoperatively, during telephone follow-up, she complained of recurrent back pain (VAS: 4) without any worsening of the radiating pain (VAS: 3), though seen as NPF during early recovery stage. Consequently, NSAIDs and neurotrophic drugs were administered, and she was told to limit her activities for half a month; this intervention worked and her VAS decreased to 3. Subsequently, the dose of NSAIDs was reduced.
However, 8 weeks postoperatively, the pain in her lower back recurred gradually and progressively, without relapse of her radiating leg pain, while neither accident nor obvious trauma could be recalled as a probable cause. Over the course of a week, her back-pain VAS reached 8 and NSAIDs and neurotrophic drugs no longer had any effect. She could hardly turn over in bed or stand or walk by herself, therefore prompting another hospital visit. This time, a physical examination revealed pain on percussion at L1–3 (++) and longitudinal percussion pain (++). DR images were obtained. To our surprise, the height of L2 vertebral body was decreased, apparently indicating OVF, was confirmed afterwards by CT . Since she could not recall any injury history, it was deemed a latent osteoporotic fracture.
PVP of L2 was performed under local anesthesia. The next day, she could walk in the ward with the help of a waist brace support. The VAS of her back pain decreased to 1. Repeat DR and CT examinations confirmed height restoration of L2 without cement leakage . Bone mineral density (BMD) exam of her waist by dual energy X-ray absorptiometry was T < − 2.5 SD in the lumbar region; therefore, intensive anti-osteoporosis treatment, including drugs and rehabilitation, were advised.
Ten days following L2-PVP, the patient felt recurrent back pain after a severe cough, with a sudden increase in her VAS score to 7. Bed rest and pain-killers offered no relief. A CT re-scan revealed an ambiguous fracture line at the anteroinferior region of L1 which we had not noticed in the previous CT. Because of her history of electrode implantation, an MRI scan was deemed unsuitable for her. Bone scintigraphy confirmed a fresh fracture of L1 .
PVP of L1 was performed and back pain disappeared immediately again, bringing down the VAS score to approximately 1 . The back pain vanished without recurrence, with the SF-36 score adding up to 353 and JOA 25 points at 14 weeks postoperative following the PTED of L4–5. In addition, she scored 374 points on the SF-36 score and 26 points on the JOA at 36 weeks postoperatively. She could then walk freely and quickly.