An 86-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital with symptoms of dysphagia. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed an elevated lesion 33–36 cm from an incisor tooth accompanied by ulcers at the center of lesion, which was located in the lower thoracic esophagus . Another submucosal tumor located at the anal site of the lower thoracic esophagus was considered intramural metastasis. Esophagography showed the main tumor lesion on the left antero-lateral wall of the lower esophagus and a submucosal tumor on the other side causing constriction of the esophagus. The main lesion had good extension on its basal part, indicating that the depth of invasion was the submucosal level . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed the protruded tumor lesion to be 3 cm in size, with no findings of lymph node or distant metastasis . Positron emission tomography-CT (PET-CT) showed an increased uptake of fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) in the lower thoracic esophagus and no findings of lymph metastasis . A blood test showed that tumor markers, such as carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and squamous cell carcinoma associated antigen (SCC), were not elevated. A pathological examination of an endoscopic biopsy revealed moderately to poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma. Based on these preoperative analyses, the patient was diagnosed with cT2N0M0, cStageII esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.
Because the patient was elderly and had a poor performance status (PS 2), she did not undergo preoperative therapy, postoperative therapy, or lymph node dissection of the superior to mid-mediastinum regions. We instead performed thoracoscopy- and laparoscopy-assisted subtotal esophagectomy and reconstruction with the gastric tube. Under thoracoscopy and laparoscopy, we performed subtotal esophagectomy and lymphadenectomy, and reconstruction was performed through the retrosternal route. The total operation time was 377 min, and intraoperative blood loss was 105 ml. Oral diet was started 11 days after the operation, and the patient was transferred to another hospital for rehabilitation on day 25 in a good general condition.
Three tumors were found in the resected specimen; the biggest tumor was 58 × 52 mm in size, and none were stained with Lugol or showed deposition of melanocytes . A pathological examination showed that the tumors were located at the mucosa and submucosa of the esophageal wall and were composed of atypical epithelioid cells in a sheeted pattern with necrosis and spindle-shaped cells in a haphazard pattern; however, no melanocytes were observed. Immunohistochemically, atypical epithelioid cells were positive focally for S-100 and HMB45 and partially for Melan-A , and spindle-shaped cells were positive focally for these markers. However, all of them were negative for almost all of the epithelial markers. We thus decided on a diagnosis of amelanotic type PMME. Although lymph node metastasis at the paracardial lymph nodes (No. 2) was detected, a CT scan performed at 12 months after surgery showed no findings of recurrence.