A 37-year old Caucasian man presented to the emergency department with a 6-week history of a painless, left inguinal lump. There were no systemic symptoms. He had no significant past medical history, was a non-smoker, did not drink alcohol, and was not on any regular medication. He worked as a self-employed joiner. Family history included leukemia in a paternal uncle, pharyngeal cancer in a paternal aunt, and Ewing’s sarcoma in a maternal aunt.
On examination, there was a well-circumscribed, irreducible, and nontender lump above the pubic tubercle. An ultrasound was performed and it reported appearances suspicious of an abnormal lymph node. A biopsy was performed and pathology was in keeping with a Trojani grade 3 intranodal leiomyosarcoma; therefore, it was considered a nodal metastasis. This tumor demonstrated positivity to desmin, muscle specific actin (MSA), smooth muscle myosin (SMM), and caldesmon, but was negative for S100, CD34, and CD31. There was necrosis, with mitotic figures identified with 25 mitoses per 10 high power fields including numerous atypical forms . The surgeon also commented that the lymph node was unusually deep, with close relation to the spermatic cord.
Computed tomography (CT) chest, abdomen, and pelvis showed no other sites of disease. However, positron emission tomography (PET) revealed a fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-avid mass within the left knee , as well as nodal activity in left groin and left external iliac region. On the basis of the PET scan findings, the knee mass was assumed to be the primary site for the leiomyosarcoma, with metastases to the left groin node. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the left knee was also performed, but was unreported at the time of commencing neoadjuvant chemotherapy. The patient proceeded to receive neoadjuvant chemotherapy, with four cycles of doxorubicin and ifosfamide chemotherapy for treatment of metastatic leiomyosarcoma. Prophylactic GCSF subcutaneous injections is the standard given, following each cycle to combat neutropenia, a common hematological toxicity .
The patients’ knee symptoms deteriorated while receiving treatment for the leiomyosarcoma. A cyclical relationship between the knee pain and administration of GCSF following chemotherapy was noted, and at it’s worst, he was unable to bear weight and a large, tender effusion developed.
MRI knee was carried out several weeks into his chemotherapy, which noted a well-defined soft tissue lesion demonstrating features in suggestive of diffuse TGCT . The patient continued with chemotherapy under the clinical presumption that this was primary leiomyosarcoma with inguinal nodal metastasis, and an interval MRI in 3 months was planned to assess response to chemotherapy.
Repeat MRI knee at the end of neoadjuvant chemotherapy demonstrated similar features suspicious of TGCT, and this was subsequently confirmed following biopsy of the synovium .
Following the completion of chemotherapy, the patient underwent surgery (wide local excision of the left groin lesion, left orchidectomy, resection of spermatic cord, and groin flap reconstruction). No residual tumor was seen on pathology. At the time of writing this case report, the patient is 42 months into his follow-up with no signs of recurrence. The patient continues to complain of left knee pain and locking, however, to a much lesser degree and it does not interfere with his activities of daily living.