A 46-year-old white woman was admitted for the presence of small multiple splenic lesions which were incidentally found by a routine abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan. At the scan she was found to have an incisional hernia at the midline incision of the previous colectomy. She was asymptomatic with unremarkable laboratory findings. On physical examination, no palpable mass in her abdomen was found. Upper and lower endoscopy and abdominal ultrasonography (US) did not show primary malignancies, while the CT scan revealed a dysmorphic and inhomogeneous spleen with nodular millimeter hypodense areas which were found to be almost isodense to the remaining splenic parenchyma in basic and later contrastographic scans (Additional file ).
She had a 20-year history of FAP of a classic phenotype with profuse colorectal polyposis. She had successively undergone a restorative proctocolectomy (1995), exeresis of cranial osteomas (2003), hysteroannessectomy for a benign ovarian cyst and uterine myomatosis (2007), and has been regularly followed up. She also presented congenital hypertrophy of retinal pigment epithelium (CHRPE) and dental abnormalities. On mutational analysis, a mutation of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene in fragment C of exon 15, deletion of an A nucleotide (c.2638delA) was found which created a premature stop codon 105 nucleotides downstream and caused a truncated protein (p.Ile880SerfsX36).
A few days following the scan, she underwent a laparotomy with splenectomy and incisional hernia repair.
Her postoperative course was uneventful and she was discharged on the seventh postsurgical day.
Histological examination of the specimen revealed SHs.
The resected spleen measured 10×8×2cm and, on the cut section, showed multiple well-circumscribed bulging nodules ranging in size from 0.5cm to 1cm. These were red-tan, quite homogeneous and compressing the surrounding splenic parenchyma. On microscopic examination, the lesions were composed of disorganized cords and sinuses of red pulp with slit-like vascular spaces lined by plump endothelial cells containing erythrocytes and, occasionally, an amorphous material largely composed of trapped platelets. White pulp follicles were absent and only a scant trabecular structure was observed. No cytological atypia was observed. Although grossly well demarcated, the nodules were not capsulated, but surrounded by a rim of compressed red pulp separating them from the normal spleen without associated fibrosis. The residual spleen was histologically unremarkable.
On immunohistochemical examination, the endothelial cells lining the vascular channel were positive for CD8, CD31, CD34 and vimentin. The definitive diagnosis was multiple hamartomas of the spleen.
After the operation at a six-month follow-up, she was in good general health.
Subsequent to further analysis, we have confirmed the presence of the heterozygous mutation c2638delA in exon 15 of the APC gene, also on the DNA extracted from a paraffin-embedded specimen of the SHs .