An active 96-year-old Caucasian woman with pseudoexfoliative glaucoma (PEXG) was referred to our tertiary ophthalmology center with uncontrolled IOP despite maximum medical topical therapy, namely: prostaglandin analog, carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, beta-blocker, and alpha-adrenergic agonist topical eye drops. She presented late due to difficulties traveling to attend medical appointments but reported good treatment compliance. She denied any family history of glaucoma. Upon examination, Goldmann tonometry confirmed an IOP of 28 mm Hg in her right eye and 24 mm Hg in her left eye. Her best-corrected visual acuity was “counting fingers” in the right eye and 0.2 LogMAR in the left eye. Anterior segment biomicroscopic examination of the left eye demonstrated pseudophakia with pseudoexfoliative material on an atrophic pupillary sphincter and a clear cornea. Gonioscopy confirmed an open iridocorneal angle and a heavily pigmented trabecular meshwork. Fundus examination revealed a cup-to-disc ratio of 0.9 in both eyes and was otherwise unremarkable. Despite the poor visual acuity, a visual field examination was attempted, resulting in a mean deviation (MD) of −27.6 and −9.6 dB in the right and the left eye, respectively, with double arcuate defects.
Based on the above clinical findings, surgical treatment was discussed, and agreed with the patient to attempt to preserve functional vision in the left eye. Considering the amplitude of IOP reduction sought, MIGS options were excluded. Yet, in presence of a monophthalmic patient with extensive visual field defects, it was also decided to avoid glaucoma drainage devices or trabeculectomies to minimize the risk of hypotony and potential wipe-out syndrome. While DS appeared to be the best-suited option, it was feared that her difficulties attending appointments may prevent adequate postoperative follow-up, including laser goniopuncture. Therefore, it was decided to perform XEN-DS to benefit from both DS’ scleral lake and XEN's standardized outflow control.
Following topical and subconjunctival anesthesia with xylocaine, blunt Westcott scissors and non-toothed Bishop-Harmon forceps were used to open the conjunctiva at the limbus. Conjunctiva and Tenon's capsule were dissected, and a 5.5 × 5.0 mm superficial scleral flap was created 2 mm more posteriorly than in conventional DS (A), so that the dissection of the deep flap would terminate 2 mm away from the scleral spur. Corneal tissue, therefore, remained untouched. Once the deep scleral flap was excised (B), a scleral section was removed and soaked in mitomycin C (MMC) 0.4 mg/mL for 5 minutes. Mitomycin C-soaked sponges were applied to the deep scleral bed for 2 minutes, and the MMC-soaked scleral section was positioned perpendicular to the limbus and secured to the deep scleral bed with 10-0 Dermalon sutures. The XEN gel stent was then implanted ab externo into the anterior wall of the DS so that 1 mm lies within the anterior chamber and 3 mm rest on the deep scleral bed next to the space maintainer (C). The superficial flap was repositioned and secured with two 10-0 Dermalon sutures to its distal corners. The conjunctiva and Tenon's layer were closed at the limbus with two 8-0 Safil resorbable suture (D). No perioperative complications were observed.
Postoperatively, all anti-glaucoma medications were withdrawn and combined topical corticosteroid and antibiotic therapy (Spersadex comp, Théa PHARMA SA) was prescribed for 4 weeks. Postoperative unmedicated IOP was 5 mm Hg at day-1, and gradually increased to 8 mm Hg through to 6 months .
The XEN gel stent remained stable within the anterior chamber and the filtration bleb remained healthy and diffuse through to 6 months . Ultrasound biomicroscopy revealed a patent intrascleral lake .
No postoperative complications were observed, and no needling revision or subsequent surgical intervention was required. Interestingly, while the best-corrected visual acuity remained unchanged, visual field MD showed a marked improvement from −9.6 to −1.5 dB after 6 months .