A 65-year-old man was admitted to the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University in October 2018, with weakness in the right limbs for 3 days and altered consciousness for 1 day . Three days earlier, he developed sudden weakness and numbness in the right limbs, accompanied by slurred speech and deviation of the mouth to the left. At that time, he had no disturbance of consciousness, jaundice, headache, or dizziness. Computed tomography (CT) at the local hospital showed a circular low-density area in the left thalamus and midbrain. Acute cerebral infarction was suggested, and the patient was started on antiplatelet drugs. However, his condition worsened over the next 2 days and he developed fever (maximum body temperature, 38.7 °C) and altered consciousness. Skull magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a lesion occupying the intracranial space , and the patient was transferred to our hospital for further management.
The patient had been diagnosed with membranous kidney disease 5 months earlier and had received cyclophosphamide (cumulative dose, 1.8 g) with prednisone (48 mg once daily for 4 months, followed by 32 mg once daily for 1 month). A month earlier, he had been hospitalised in a local hospital for treatment of a lung infection. In addition, he complained of swelling and pain in his left upper back and neck 5 days prior, and B-mode ultrasonography at a local hospital revealed multiple abscesses in the left rhomboid muscle.
The patient had cough and expectoration. The phlegm was white mucilaginous sputum. On auscultation, laboured breathing in both the lungs, with no dry or wet rales, was observed. Upon admission to our hospital, his blood examination findings were as follows: white blood cell count, 1.37 × 1010/L (with 86.4% neutrophils); serum creatinine, 45 μmol/L; urea, 5.77 mmol/L; hypersensitive C-reactive protein, 115.60 mg/L; procalcitonin, 0.25 ng/mL; serum albumin, 30.4 g/L; total bilirubin, 23.9 μmol/L; indirect bilirubin, 17.0 μmol/L; serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase, 99 U/L; serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase, 142 U/L; and lactic dehydrogenase, 371 U/L. The cerebrospinal fluid appeared normal.
Soft fluctuant swellings, 5 cm in diameter with an unclear boundary, were present on his right back, left shoulder, and back. The overlying and surrounding skin were red. We found multiple abscesses in the muscle layer on B-mode ultrasonography. The clinical and ultrasonographic findings were suggestive of multiple abscesses. Under local anaesthesia, a needle was inserted into the abscess cavity on the back, and greyish-white purulent fluid was aspirated. Microbiological examination of the fluid revealed a small number of gram-positive acid-fast bacterial cells. Samples were incubated at 35 °C on Columbia Blood Agar for 3 days. N. cyriacigeorgica was identified using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionisation time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS; Microflex, Bruker, Billerica, MA). The clinical and microbiological findings were suggestive of disseminated nocardiosis .
Treatment was started with trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole, along with linezolid, methylprednisolone, and meropenem . Four days after the start of treatment, the blood examination results were as follows: white blood cell count, 1.10 × 1010/L (83.3% neutrophils); serum albumin, 32.8 g/L; serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase, 119 U/L; serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase, 43 U/L; and hypersensitive C-reactive protein, 8.22 mg/L.
Vacuum-sealed drainage and chronic ulcer repair were also performed for the abscess on the back. Two weeks after admission, the patient had recovered full consciousness. He was discharged from the hospital on 13 November 2018 after confirming that the C-reactive protein level had returned to normal. He was advised to continue trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole (3 tablets [1.44 g] 3 times daily) for a total of 12 months. At the 6-month follow-up after discharge, imaging examinations showed absorption of the brain abscess and improvement of lung inflammation . The patient is currently living independently.