A 65-year-old female presented with vague symptoms of peri-umbilical and epigastric abdominal pain, poor appetite, unintentional weight loss of 10 pounds, and night sweats.
Computed topography (CT) scan performed during the work-up of the patient revealed two liver lesions.
The patient had a history of neuroendocrine tumors in the rectum. Specifically, in a screening colonoscopy performed in 2012, a 1 cm polypoid lesion was seen in the rectum. This was removed endoscopically, with saline injection and hot snare cautery. Review of the histological slides revealed a low-grade, well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumor (“carcinoid”) with no evidence of lymphatic or vascular invasion. Resection margins were not able to be assessed on this excision pathologically. On subsequent colonoscopy in 2017, a more extensive endoscopic mucosal resection was performed in the region of the previously identified carcinoid, with final margins negative on pathologic examination. No recurrence in the region of the rectum or additional neuroendocrine tumors in her colon were seen on subsequent colonoscopies, and no liver lesions were seen on CT imaging.
The patient additionally had a previous medical history of hypothyroidism (treated with levothyroxine) and hypertension (treated with clonidine, amlodipine, and hydrochlorothiazide-triamterene).
Mild diffuse tenderness was found on abdominal examination. No masses or hepatomegaly were detected. The rest of the examination was unremarkable.
Serum chromogranin and alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) were both elevated, at 450 ng/mL (normal range: < 93 ng/mL) and 2198 ng/mL (normal range: 10-20 ng/mL), respectively. The percentage of AFP binding to Lens culinaris agglutinin (AFP-L3%) was also elevated (86.6%). The patient was found to be positive for hepatitis C virus (HCV) by polymerase chain reaction. HCV genotype was determined to be 1a. Laboratory examinations at the time were additionally notable for mildly increased aspartate aminotransferase (72 U/L; normal range: 0-35 U/L) and alanine transaminase (86 U/L; normal range: 19-25 U/L).
Standard dynamic CT imaging of the abdomen and pelvis with intravenous contrast revealed a total of two hepatic masses: A 2.2 cm × 2.1 cm peripherally enhancing mass in the left lobe (segment 4) with central hypodensity, and a 1.4 cm × 1 cm lesion in the right lobe (segment 7) that was low density . Additionally, prominent portacaval lymph nodes were noted.
To characterize the lesions further, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with gadolinium-based contrast was subsequently performed, with multiple pulse sequences, including T1 and T2 weighted and in phase/opposed phase gradient-echo images. Diffusion imaging was also performed. These images showed a 2.7 cm × 2.5 cm × 2.3 cm T2 hyperintense lesion in the left lobe (segment 4) with peripheral rim-like enhancement on the arterial phase and persistent enhancement on the venous phase . The lesion in the right lobe (segment 7) was 1.5 cm × 1.5 cm × 1.1 cm and similarly T2 hyperintense but was too small to evaluate its enhancement characteristics adequately.
Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) showed FDG avidity in the left lobe lesion (standard uptake value of 6.6) but no avidity in the right lobe lesion. No extrahepatic FDG avidity in the nodal basins or pelvis was seen.
Gallium-68 dotatate PET scan was also performed and showed no tracer uptake in the rectum, liver, or portal lymph nodes.
The left lobe segment 4 lesion of the liver was biopsied under CT guidance, with final pathology findings being consistent with a high-grade neuroendocrine tumor (due to morphology and synaptophysin expression detected by immunohistochemistry). A Ki-67 immunohistochemical investigation revealed 30% of the cells to be positive. Concurrent biopsy of uninvolved hepatic parenchyma revealed absence of cirrhosis or significant fibrosis. A repeat MRI scan performed showed an interval increase in the size of the segment 4 lesion, which measured 4.1 cm × 3.6 cm × 2.3 cm. Chest CT showed no evidence of metastatic disease.
A combination of clinical, imaging, and pathologic findings raised the possibility of metastatic neuroendocrine tumor to the liver at the time, with the main differential diagnosis considered being a primary hepatic tumor (most likely HCC). Given that there was no indication of extra-abdominal spread on imaging studies and the absence of cirrhosis in the hepatic parenchyma, the decision to proceed with segmental resection of the two hepatic lesions with portacaval lymph node sampling was made, as this was felt to be beneficial for either differential diagnoses considered. Furthermore, plans were made to treat the patient’s HCV infection following the surgical intervention.
A staging laparoscopy was performed and revealed no evidence of metastatic disease outside of the liver and confirmed the absence of cirrhosis. Open exploration with intraoperative ultrasound revealed only the two known liver lesions. Anatomic resection of segment 4 and nonanatomic resection of the lesion in segment 7 were performed, as well as a portal lymphadenectomy.
Pathologic examination of the left lobe segment 4 resection specimen revealed a segment of red-brown liver parenchyma measuring 10.2 cm × 5.1 cm × 4.1 cm. On serial sectioning, a tan-white to tan-green mass measuring 4.7 cm × 4.0 cm × 2.3 cm was identified. The surgical resection margin was negative. Microscopic evaluation of this tumor revealed a poorly differentiated malignant tumor with variegated and intermixed histology. Based on morphology, foci resembling HCC, CC, and neuroendocrine tumor were identified . Immunohistochemical analysis showed the malignant cells to be focally positive for AFP, cytokeratin (CK)-19, CK-7, CK-18, CK-20, p53, polyclonal carcinoembryonic antigen, Hep-Par-1, arginase 1, CDX-2, as well as focally positive for synaptophysin and neuron-specific enolase . Ki-67 proliferation index was high, estimated at approximately 60%. The tumor cells were negative for chromogranin, prostatic acid phosphatase, and cancer antigen 19-9 (CA19-9).
Pathologic examination of the right lobe segment 7 resection specimen revealed a 1.5 cm × 1.5 cm × 1.0 cm segment of hepatic parenchyma, which was serially sectioned to reveal a 1.0 cm × 0.5 cm × 0.5 cm white nodule. The surgical resection margin was negative. Histologic examination of the nodule revealed malignant cells forming glands on a sclerotic background . Immunohistochemical analysis revealed the malignant cells to be positive for CK-18, CK-19, CK-7, carcinoembryonic antigen, synaptophysin (strong diffuse), chromogranin (scattered and weak), and CDX-2 (scattered and weak). Ki-67 proliferation index was approximately 20%. The cells were negative for AFP, CD56, Hep-Par-1, and arginase 1.
Intra-operative consultation on a portacaval lymph node was initially reported as negative. Final pathologic examination of the resected portal lymph nodes revealed a microscopic focus of metastatic HCC in one of the lymph nodes.