A 62-year-old man was introduced to our hospital after bilateral renal tumors were identified in a health screening. Contrast-enhanced CT revealed a left renal tumor 42 mm in diameter, showing well-defined margins, irregular contrast in the arterial phase and early drainage in the renal parenchymal phase . MRI revealed a solid, low-intensity mass on T1-weighted imaging, an irregular high-intensity mass on T2-weighted imaging, and strong signals on DWI . These findings led to an expectation of typical ccRCC in the left kidney. The right renal tumor was 26 mm in diameter and showed no contrast enhancement on CT . The mass was isointense on T1-weighted imaging and hypointense on T2-weighted imaging. DWI revealed strong signals . These findings suggested RCC with a non-clear cell-type histology in the right kidney. The patient was diagnosed clinically with cT1b ccRCC in the left kidney and cT1a non-ccRCC in the right kidney, with no apparent metastases (N0M0 stage). Robot-assisted partial nephrectomies were performed, first for the left renal tumor, then for the right renal tumor 3 months later.
Macroscopic examination of the left renal tumor revealed a lobulated, heterogeneously yellow appearance with bleeding and necrosis. Macroscopic examination of the right renal tumor revealed a well-defined, circular, solid mass lacking a pseudo-capsule. The cut face was white and grayish-white in color with internal hemorrhage and necrosis . Both tumors were examined histopathologically. Microscopic findings for the left renal tumor using HE staining included an alveolar growth pattern of cells with clear cytoplasm, abundant vascular plexuses, and sparse stroma. Immunohistochemical examination of the left renal tumor with anti-CA9 and anti-CD10 antibodies yielded strongly and moderately positive results, respectively, but results for CK7 were negative. These results identified the left renal tumor as ccRCC . Microscopic findings for the right renal tumor using HE staining showed cuboid cells consisting of tubular and papillary growth patterns with stromal mucin, and spindle cells were occasionally absorbed. Immunohistochemical examination of the right renal tumor with anti-CK7 and anti-AMACR antibodies yielded strongly positive results, while CD10 was weakly and focally positive. Mucus stained with Alcian blue was identified within the tumor stroma. These findings led to a diagnosis of MTSCC in the right kidney . The patient has shown no signs of recurrence as of 12 months postoperatively.