A 62-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with a 10-month history of motor aphasia. He had a past history of bifrontal oligodendroglioma and underwent right frontal lobectomy in another hospital, followed by bifrontal radiation therapy 30 years before the admission. Additionally, he had a lacuna infarction in the left frontal lobe six years before the admission. On admission, he had mild motor aphasia, with 90% Karnofsky Index of Performance Status (KPS). Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging revealed a heterogeneously enhanced mass lesion, 2.8 cm in maximum diameter, in the left frontal lobe. After careful informed consent and discussion of alternatives, the patient selected partial removal using navigation-guided endoscopic technique to prevent the deterioration of his higher functions, rather than the conventional microsurgical removal.
For navigation-guided endoscopic biopsy, the patient's head was fixed with a Mayfield frame under general anesthesia. Two transparent sheaths with diameters of 6.8 mm (Neuroport®, mini size; Olympus Corp., Tokyo) with Nelaton tubes (Fr 18) as alternative inner tubes were inserted into the front of the target lesion via an infinity-shaped burr hole, under control of the navigation system (StealthStation®, Medtronic, Inc., Minneapolis, MN) . The front of the lesion was observed with a rigid endoscope (EndoArm®; Olympus Corp. Tokyo, Japan) through the left port, and the lesion was removed partially, using one or two surgical tools, through the bilateral ports .
Partial removal, with 40% removal rate, using the technique described earlier for navigation-guided endoscopic surgery, with photodynamic diagnosis (PDD) and intraoperative pathological diagnosis (IPD), was performed. During the surgery, convenient hemostasis using bipolar coagulation and aspiration, without any interference from the surgical instruments, was easy to perform. MR imaging revealed partial resection of the mass lesion after the surgery . The patient had no advanced complications, and was discharged from our hospital one week after the surgery. The histological diagnosis was anaplastic astrocytoma.