A 14-year-old white Arab boy presented with left hip pain of 1-month duration associated with gait imbalance and limping. The patient exhibited a healthy appearance with an appropriate weight (69 kg) for his height (169 cm). His chest and abdominal examination were unremarkable on palpation and auscultation. No lymph node enlargement was identified on neck, axillary, or groin assessment. No back skin lesions or spinal deformities were identified. He demonstrated no neurological deficits with normal cranial nerve assessment. He was able to heel and toe walk with motor power 5/5 in bilateral upper and lower extremities and grossly intact sensation. Peripheral reflexes were all within normal limits. His extremities exhibited normal vascular examination, regular capillary refill, and 3+ pulses in the radial, ulnar, dorsalis pedis, and posterior tibial arteries assessment. The left hip range of motion was unremarkable except for limited internal rotation and pain on adduction and flexion. External rotation of the hip was normal. There was focal tenderness on deep palpation of the medial and anterior aspect of the hip with no palpable lesions. Radiographs of the hip at a peripheral hospital showed two osseous masses around the left femoral neck.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the hip confirmed the two masses as interarticular chondromas with different stages of maturity and no soft tissue extension or malignant degeneration. One lesion on the anterolateral aspect of the left hip joint measuring 4.6 × 3 × 2.5 cm showed signal intensity suggestive of cartilage component and possible partial mineralization . The second lesion was along the inferomedial aspect of the left hip joint measuring 5.8 × 4 × 4.5 cm showing a cartilaginous rim with mature internal ossification . A nonenhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of the pelvis and hip joints was further done for evaluation of the matrix component and to rule out communication with the femur . The CT scan showed more calcification in the inferomedial lesion and no direct bone bridging or communication with the diaphysis of either lesion. Surgical intervention was recommended to relieve the pain and improve the range of motion.
The patient was scheduled for resection on 29 January 2020. On admission, the patient demonstrated normal vital signs (blood pressure 120/60 mmHg, pulse 86 beats per minute, temperature 36.6 °C, respiratory rate 20 breaths per minute, oxygen saturation 100%). On physical examination, the patient exhibited an antalgic gait with limited hip movement. He had clear lung sound and no murmurs on auscultation of the chest. Abdominal examination was normal on palpation and auscultation. His vascular exam was normal with 3+ pulses and normal capillary refill. Hip examination revealed focal tenderness on palpation of the anterior aspect of the hip with limited range of motion on flexion, adduction, and internal rotation. On neurological examination, all cranial nerves were intact, motor power was 5/5 in all extremities, and his sensation was grossly intact to pinprick test. He also demonstrated normal 2+ peripheral reflexes along with downgoing toes on Babinski test bilaterally. Laboratory studies were unremarkable (complete blood count 15.6 mil /cu.mm, white blood count 8400 /cu.mm, platelet count 228,000 /cu.mm, creatinine 0.9 mg/dL, prothrombin time 12.8 sec, activated partial thromboplastin clotting time 32.8 sec, and normal urine analysis). The surgery was performed under general anesthesia, and a dual incision utilizing both a medial and an anterior approach was deemed necessary for access to both intra-articular lesions. The medial mass was addressed first. A longitudinal incision was made over the palpable tendon of the adductor longus muscle. The interval between the gracilis and adductor longus was identified and developed, followed by the interval between the adductor brevis and adductor magnus muscle. Care was taken to identify the posterior division of the obturator nerve, and the hip capsule was opened proximally uncovering the lesion. The lesion was then dissected free from the surrounding tissues and its stalk separated from the femoral neck using an osteotome with no need for hip dislocation . The second lesion was accessed using an anterior Smith-Petersen approach to the hip. The interval between the sartorius and tensor fascia lata (TFL) was identified and developed while avoiding injury to the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve. The interval between the rectus femoris and gluteus medius muscles was then identified, and the anterior hip capsule was exposed and opened. The anterolateral lesion was found to be free floating and was extracted from the joint. The two lesions were later confirmed to be osteochondromas based on pathology .
During his hospital stay, the patient was given cefuroxime 1.5 g intravenously as preoperative antibiotic prophylaxis and was kept on 750 mg every 8 hours for 24 hours postsurgery. He was kept on 1 L intravenous normal saline and was given intravenous paracetamol 1 g every 6 hours and intravenous push morphine 2 mg every 4 hours as needed for pain. He also required two doses of intravenous ondansetron 4 mg for nausea postsurgery. Postoperatively, the patient was allowed full-weight-bearing ambulation directly with hip range-of-motion exercise as no femoral compromise or internal fixation was necessary at the time of surgery. At 2 weeks postoperatively, he presented back to the clinic with an intact range of motion of the hip and good wound healing. Strengthening exercises were initiated. At 6 months follow-up, images revealed no occurrence, and he was able to return to his baseline physical activity .