An 8-year-old girl presented to the emergency department with swelling and erythema of the anterior midline neck over a previous tracheostomy scar . The child had been treated with oral antibiotics during the previous 7 days to address mild tenderness and erythema, without swelling, of the anterior neck. Roughly 12 hours prior to the emergency room evaluation, the child's neck acutely ballooned outward over a 3-centimeter diameter without known provocation. The child did not experience dyspnea nor dysphagia at any point.
A brief review of the child's medical and surgical history revealed underlying Stickler syndrome with Pierre Robin sequence. She had undergone a tracheostomy at 2 months of age to bypass an upper airway obstruction. At 2 years of age, the child underwent bronchoscopy and was soon after decannulated. The tracheostomy stoma did not heal spontaneously over 8 months. Therefore, she underwent surgical closure via fistulectomy with four-layered closure a few months before her 3rd birthday. The child did well after surgery. She was seen thereafter only for wellness visits until her emergency room presentation more than 5 years after decannulation at the age of 8 years old.
While in the emergency department, the child underwent a computed tomography (CT) scan of her neck, which confirmed the presence of a TCS . The patient was admitted for one evening of observation. After an uneventful night, she was discharged home without needle decompression.
Roughly 2 weeks later, the child returned to the operating room for definitive repair of the TCS, which was accomplished via a modified fistulectomy with four-layered closure and a penrose drain. The small tracheal defect was identified without concomitant bronchoscopy by filling the surgical field with normal saline followed by application of positive pressure ventilation. Once the location of the defect was known, the perichondrium around the tracheal defect was closed with a figure-of-eight absorbable suture, and the overlying soft tissue was closed sequentially in layers. The patient was discharged home the following morning without complication. At subsequent outpatient visits, the neck had healed well.