A 51-year-old Sri Lankan woman presented with epigastric pain for two months. Initial examination showed that she had tenderness in the epigastrium. There was associated loss of appetite as well. Her past medical, surgical and familial histories were unremarkable. Routine laboratory data on admission did not show any abnormal findings. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was normal up to 2nd part of the duodenum and revealed a normal mucosa of the stomach . Abdominal CT scan showed a mass lesion (12×8×11 cm) of the left lobe of the liver with enhancement during arterial phase and washout during venous phase. The impression of the radiologist was a hepatocellular carcinoma, most probably of fibrolamellar type due to star sign within the lesion . The operative plan was laparoscopy and left hemi hepatectomy. Laparoscopic exploration was performed for under general anaesthesia. On the laparoscopic examination, the appearance of the liver was completely normal. There was a large solid mass arising from the lesser curvature of the stomach. There were no regional lymph node enlargement. There were no peritoneal deposits and also pelvic organs were appeared normal on laparoscopy. Then patient underwent open surgery which involved ligation of the left gastric artery and separation of the tumour from the lesser curvature with a small cuff of the stomach. The weight of the surgical specimen was 0.92 kg. Later histology of the surgical specimen was suggestive of a GIST). The patient had an uneventful postoperative course and was discharged after seven days on orals. The histopathological examination of the surgical specimen revealed a tumour which composed of interlacing fasicles of spindle cells with wavy nuclei which are fairly monomorphic. There was no evidence of tumour necrosis. The mitotic activity of the tumour was 2 per 50 high power fields. It showed diffuse CD117 positivity in membrane and cytoplasm. The overlying gastric mucosa was histologically unremarkable and resection margins were free of tumour. The overall features were suggestive of GIST. She was not given postoperative chemotherapy. The patient was asymptomatic for past 2 years and currently been followed up as an outpatient in the clinic.
Gastrointestinal stromal tumours are believed to be originated from the interstitial cells of Cajal, a pace-maker cell that controls gastrointestinal peristalsis. The clinical manifestations of GISTs depend on the location and size of the tumours. Patients may present with pain, dysphagia, weight loss, gastrointestinal bleeding, bowel obstruction, or a palpable abdominal mass . Surgical resection is the most effective treatment option for GIST. The 5 year survival rate after surgery amounts to 28–65% [-]. Tumour resection is the treatment of choice for GISTs. According to Lupescu et al. CT abdomen is sufficient to diagnose the location, extension, size, contours, structure of the tumours, hepatic metastasis of GIST . Thus, it is important to be able to diagnose GISTs from pre-operative CT. According to Rosch et al. the sensitivity and specificity of endoscopy are 87% and 29%, respectively for distinguishing intramural lesion from extramural compression . According to the best of authors knowledge there were no published case reports describes GIST of stomach mimicked hepatic tumour. But there are reports on extra gastro intestinal GIST involving lesser omentum [-]. Baskiran et al. described a large pedunculated GIST of posterior gastric wall mimicked a pancreatic tumour. Our patient’s upper gastro intestinal endoscopy showed a normal gastric mucosa. Therefore we didn’t plan for a upper GI endosonography for this patient. Here, our preoperative diagnosis was not GIST of stomach. Radiologically the wall of the stomach was not thickened and there was no intramural tumour in the gastric wall. Park et al. has described a left hepatic cyst may rarely mimic a submucosal tumour arising from the gastric cardia and fundus . Our patient had a GIST of a stomach mimicking left hepatic tumour. In the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of a patient with gastric extra mucosal GIST that was misdiagnosed as a hepatocellular carcinoma of left lobe of liver and diagnosed by laparoscopy and treated by surgery.