We report a case of a 35 year old female who had mitral valve (MV) commissurotomy and ring annuloplasty (32 mm Carperntier) on July 28, 1987 for rheumatic valvular disease. Fifteen months after this surgery, she presented with an embolic event to posterior cerebellar artery. Her blood cultures were positive for Candida tropicalis. Echocardiography showed moderate mitral stenosis with 0.5 × 0.4 cm density on the anterior portion of the ring behind the mitral valve consistent with fungal vegetation. She did not improve clinically after treatment with amphotericin B and required a 31 mm Medtronic Hall mechanical prosthesis on 10/17/88 which was followed by chronic outpatient suppressive treatment with fluconazole.
In August 1989, she presented to the hospital with pancytopenia, splenomegaly and renal failure. A large fungal vegetation was noted on the MV annulus and blood cultures were positive for a different species of candida (C. parapsilosis) leading to her third mitral valve procedure (second replacement) on 8/14/1989. She was discharged home and enjoyed a period of seven years with good functionality while being on 200 mg per day of fluconazole suppressive therapy.
In December 1996, she presented with three weeks of fever, marked splenomegaly and hemorrhagic infarct of the left optic disc. Her blood cultures grew C. parapsilosis prompting the initiation of amphotericin B and fluconazole therapy and surgical consultation at University of Virginia (UVa) for the third episode of CPE. The fourth mitral valve procedure (third replacement) was performed on 1/22/1997 at UVa followed by increased dose of fluconazole (400 mg per day).
In November 1998, she presented with continued fever, heart failure and overt pulmonary edema secondary to C. tropicalis prosthetic MV endocarditis with positive blood cultures. TEE showed dilated and hypokinetic right ventricle, severe tricuspid and mitral valve regurgitation with an LV ejection fraction of 35 %, and severely elevated pulmonary artery pressure (80–90 mmHg). The fifth, and last, mitral valve procedure [fourth replacement (St Jude Valve)] was performed on 11/23/1998 at UVa due to worsening heart failure and pulmonary edema. Due to recurrent CPE, she was also considered for heart transplant but repeat MVR along with ongoing antifungal treatment was thought to be better. She was discharged on liposomal amphotericin B three times a week to correspond with her visits for erythropoietin infusion secondary to pancytopenia before resuming fluconazole. She was closely followed on oral fluconazole at 800 mg daily from January 1999 until 2006. She consistently denied using any intravenous drug or medication noncompliance. During this 7 year period, she enjoyed an active lifestyle including camping and fishing.
Worsening pancytopenia and splenomegaly developed in the second half of 2006 secondary to recurrent C. parapsilosis MV vegetation with positive blood cultures which led to biventricular heart failure, multiorgan failure, pancytopenia and acute kidney injury requiring hemodialysis. The candida species was still sensitive to fluconazole, voriconazole, itraconazole, amphotericin B and 5-flucytosine. The patient was felt not to be a candidate for redo surgery and subsequently died in November 2006.