A 40 years-old man was admitted to another hospital after a motocross accident. He had lung and liver contusion, right shoulder dislocation, multiple fractures of the right ribs and pneumo-hemothorax, and his blood pressure was 70/50 mmHg. A CT scan showed isthmus rupture with dissection of the thoracic aorta . He was then transferred to our hospital, where he was immediately taken to operatory room to perform an endovascular correction of the lesion: an endoprosthesis (Gore TAG® 28-150, W.L. Gore and Associates, Flagstaff, Ariz) was placed from the distal tract of the aortic arch to the middle part of the descending aorta, with preservation of antegrade left subclavian artery flow. Intraoperative angiograms showed correct apposition of the graft to the vessel wall, without any signs of endoleaks. The patient was then admitted to the Intensive Care Unit for close monitoring and establishment of respiratory and hemodynamic stability. He didn't undergo any further surgical procedures for the treatment of other non-vascular lesions.
Two days later a second CT scan was performed to control the correct placement of the graft, since the patient's hemodynamic condition was still unstable. The images showed right lung emphysema, enlargement of mediastinum, pericardial effusion, bilateral pleural effusions with pulmonary atelectasy due to compression of the parenchyma and an increase of the haematoma surrounding the aortic arch and subclavian artery; there weren't any signs of endoleak nor further bleeding .
On the following week signs of aortic pseudocoarctation syndrome occurred, with no popliteal and tibial pulses; femoral pulses were decreased but still palpable. A new CT scan was then performed in 7th post-operative day: no signs of graft rupture were evident but there was a partial collapse of the endoprosthesis at the descending tract, with distal slow restoration of the blood flow throughout the right lumen ; the patient still had pulmonary atelectasis due to hemotorax and ribs fractures.
Considering patient's clinical conditions, the graft collapse wasn't treated at that time, waiting for hemodynamic stability. Since then, the patient's general conditions progressively improved enough to allow reintervention, but the patient refused any new treatment, so he was discharged.
Four months after the procedure the patient came back to our Division. He complained for gluteal and sural claudication with pain-free walking interval of less than 40 meters and erectile disfunction; a chest and abdominal radiography showed a subocclusion of the graft. A ultrasound duplex examination of abdominal aorta and lower limb arteries showed revascularization flows throughout splancnic vessels and both common, internal and external iliac arteries. We thus decided to perform an angiography which demonstrated the increased collapse of the aortic graft, confirming the sub-occlusion of the central tract of its lumen, with a delayed flow in the abdominal aorta .
A second graft (Bolton Relay™ 28-155, Bolton Medical, Barcelona, Spain) was then placed inside the previous one, with a bare-stent which landed proximally to the left subclavian artery . As there were some difficulties in ascending the guidewire across the collapsed graft, it was ballon-dilated before introducing the new endograft. No post-dilatation was necessary. A single inner lumen was restored to allow a continuous and valid blood flow to the descending aorta. The patient was discharged four days later in good clinical conditions. Peripheral pulses were all presents and palpable.
At the 18th month follow-up a CT scan showed regular diameter of the graft, normal renal perfusion, no signs of any endoleaks; the left subclavian artery remained patent at follow-up . The patient returned to his previous daily activities; he didn't complain of claudication anymore and its erectile function had returned to normal.