A 45-year-old man was admitted to the Neurology Department at the local hospital in January 2017 due to verbal communication disturbances, nausea, vomiting, headaches, disequilibrium and a walking problem. Computer tomography (CT) of the head revealed small bilateral calcifications in the ventricles as well as reduced density of white matter. A lumbar puncture (LP) was performed. Analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) yielded the following findings: protein 33 mg/dL, glucose 66 mg/dL, pleocytosis 70/μL – neutrophils (70%). Neuroinfection was considered, and empirical antibiotic therapy with ceftazidime was given to the patient, who was then transferred to the Department of Infectious Diseases. In the absence of the desired effect, the antibiotic was changed to ceftriaxone, and acyclovir and steroids (a daily dose of 12 mg dexamethasone for 10 days) were added. After taking these drugs, the patient reported a slight improvement and headache reduction, which were probably due to the action of the steroids. No antibody tests were carried out to determine the cause of infectious disease. The patient was discharged home. One week later, epileptic seizures appeared, and the patient was admitted to the Department of Infectious Diseases in another hospital. A head CT scan was performed, yielding results comparable to those of the previous scan. Another LP was also performed, with the following CSF findings: protein 302 mg/dL, glucose 30 mg/dL, pleocytosis 160/μL - neutrophils 80%, and negative cerebrospinal fluid culture. Blood culture, urine culture and respiratory tract culture were also negative. The liver enzyme levels were elevated, and slight hyponatraemia (up to 130 mmol/l) was observed, but the C-reactive protein (CRP) level was normal. Brain MRI revealed slight enhancement of the lining of the leptomeninx, mainly the ventricular ependyma, after administration of gadolinium contrast. According to the CSF findings, tuberculosis infection was the most likely cause of the symptoms, but the Bactec and QuantiFERON tests were negative. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), Lyme disease, hepatitis B (HBV), and hepatitis C (HCV) infections were also excluded. A test for CMV antibodies was performed using serum and CSF samples. All of the test results were negative. The patient’s condition deteriorated; he could not walk or communicate verbally any longer, and he could only make minimal active movements with his limbs. A re-examination of CSF yielded the following findings: protein 496 mg/dL, glucose 88 mg/dL, pleocytosis 35/μL – neutrophils 80%. In May 2017, the patient was admitted to the Neurology Department in our hospital. He was conscious but unable to communicate verbally, and he had stiffness of the neck for 4 fingers, tremor of the upper limbs, and a high degree of paresis of the lower limbs. Brain MRI revealed cerebral oedema, enlarged ventricles containing blood, and strong enhancement of the ventricular lining with gadolinium contrast . We noticed the presence of hydrocephalus, which was probably a consequence of disease progression. Generalized seizures intensified, and the patient’s EEG was abnormal, with mainly slow waves but without status epilepticus. A number of tests for pathogenic microorganisms were carried out repeatedly. HBV, HCV, HIV, Francisella tularensis, Leptospira, CMV, EBV, Borrelia and Toxoplasma infections were excluded. The tests for tuberculosis (Bactec and QuantiFERON) were repeated, and their results were negative as well. An LP was performed again (xanthochromia, protein 705 mg/dL, glucose 6 mg/dL, pleocytosis 90/μL – neutrophils 90%). Atypical cells characterized by a polymorphic nucleus and heterochromatin cytoplasm were found. Elevated levels of lactate dehydrogenase were found in the serum and the CSF. Because of the presence of atypical cells in the CSF, meningeal biopsy was performed, and the specimen was sent for histopathological examination. Unfortunately, the specimen did not show any abnormalities. That was probably due to a lack of noticeable changes at the biopsy site: the specimen was taken from the frontal vault, but most of the melanomatotic changes were present in the base of brain. Nevertheless, the neoplastic process was highly probable; therefore, we tried to identify the source of the tumour. The diagnostics were extended to include abdominal and chest computer tomography scans, and ophthalmoscopy of the fundus oculi as well as abdominal, thyroid and testicular ultrasound examinations. Colonoscopy was planned, but the patient’s general condition was serious. The patient was examined by specialists in cardiology, internal medicine, pulmonology, ophthalmology, infectious diseases, anaesthesiology and neurosurgery. Non-infective diseases, such as sarcoidosis or vasculitis, were taken into account. The patient’s skin was evaluated several times, but there was no suspected area requiring further analysis. Drugs were used only for symptomatic treatment. The patient’s condition worsened, and epileptic seizures were observed several times a day. Moreover, he had a fever (38–39 degrees Celsius) and heart arrhythmia. The patient died 4 weeks after admission to our hospital. The patient survived 7 months after the onset of symptoms. After his death, an autopsy was performed. There was a small amount of fuscous or brown contents under the arachnoid part of the base of the brain and the cerebellum. The ventricular system was slightly enlarged and filled with a cloudy, red-brown liquid. In the lumens of the posterior ventricles, there were soft, flabby, loosely attached beige masses measuring 3–4 cm. The lining of the ventricles was beige or honey-coloured, sometimes spreading and dull. There was a slight degree of cerebral oedema. The histopathological examination of the meninges showed infiltrations of histiocyte-like cells [CD68(−), S-100(+), Vim(+), PanCK(−), LCA(−)] containing deposits of a brown pigment in the cytoplasm, with local polymorphic features and enlarged cell nuclei . The infiltrations were observed beneath the arachnoid membrane of the brain and the cerebellum and lined the ventricles. There were small points of necrotic tissue in the subependymal regions, along with congestion and cerebral oedema. There was neoplasm of the CNS, probably melanoma. This finding was supported by another histopathological examination of the meninges in a centre with a higher degree of reference and allowed us to recognize the meningeal melanomatosis. Based on the clinical examination, the results of additional tests and the autopsy, we could diagnose the patient with primary meningeal melanomatosis presenting as melanocytic meningitis. The above clinical case shows that despite extensive diagnosis and a number of tests, the diagnosis was extremely difficult to establish.