A 65-year-old Persian man was admitted with severe low back pain. The current symptoms started 1 month before the admission. He experienced muscle weakness (3/5 muscle strength on the Medical Research Council scale) with progressive urinary retention and constipation. Therefore, he developed cauda equina syndrome. The patient did not experience any unintentional weight loss, night sweats, or fever. All routine laboratory tests including complete blood count with differential (CBC w/diff), thyroid function tests (TFTs), liver function tests (LFTs), blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, alkaline phosphatase, and ferritin levels, and tumor survey were normal.
Diagnostic radiographic imaging was performed according to symptoms and physical examination signs. Computed tomography (CT) scans of the lumbar vertebrae demonstrated a lesion in the L3 vertebra with destruction of the L3 vertebral body and the left pedicle . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbosacral spine revealed a lesion of the L3 vertebral body with hyposignal on T1-weighted and hypersignal on T2-weighted image, with significant compression of the spinal cord. Short tau inversion recovery (STIR) sequences also showed bone marrow changes . No hemorrhage was seen. A whole-body bone scan [single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT)] was performed to evaluate various bone-related pathology, and increased absorption was seen only in the L3 vertebra. The diagnosis before surgery was a primary spinal tumor.
Rapid deterioration of the neurological condition of our patient led to the decision to perform surgery without biopsy. In April 2020, 3 days after the first visit, under general anesthesia, the patient underwent an L3 corpectomy with expandable cage placement, followed by an L2–L4 lateral screw placement with rod fixation . The vertebral body sample obtained from the surgery was submitted for pathology examination. Three days after the first surgery, facetectomy, laminectomy, and total spondylectomy were performed with pedicle screw from L1–L5. A titanium mesh was placed over the laminectomy site to protect the spinal cord and fusion with autograft bone from the patient's iliac crest .
Excisional biopsy revealed high-grade lymphoma . Histopathology and diagnosis confirmed diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), which consisted of large lymphoid cells that had vesiculated nuclei with prominent nucleoli and frequent mitotic activity. Small mature lymphoid cells with mature nuclei were also found. Immunohistochemical staining was cluster of differentiation 3 (CD3)-positive for non-neoplastic cells, and CD3-negative, CD15-negative, and CD20-positive for neoplastic cells. Antigen Ki67 was positive in about 70% of tumor cells. Bone marrow biopsy was negative. A staging examination including CT of the thorax, abdomen, and pelvis presented no additional suspicious sites.
Post-operation, the patient showed no new neurological deficit. The treatment was continued with a total of six cycles of R-CHOP chemotherapy (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, hydroxydaunorubicin [doxorubicin], vincristine [Oncovin] and prednisolone) and then local radiotherapy by a clinical oncologist and radiation oncologist, respectively. The patient received a total of 40 Gy over 22 sessions. The intensity of back pain was assessed by visual analog scale (VAS), before and after the surgery. Eight months after surgery (last visit), an improvement was seen in back pain intensity (VAS) and neurological status. Anteroposterior and lateral lumbar spine radiographs are shown in Fig. C and D at the last follow-up. Based on clinical status, radiological imaging, and laboratory tests, no extraspinal disease was observed. We reviewed a PubMed database for the following search terms: primary lymphoma, spine, and vertebrae from 2010 to 2020. We selected English, full-text publications which exactly corresponded to our subject of interest. Only primary lymphoma of the lumbar vertebrae without involving other bones was considered. In addition, primary lymphoma of the sacrum was not included in this study. We excluded studies that did not mention the type of lymphoma [–].