The patient, a regular and heavy consumer of alcohol, was a 29-year-old male lumberjack with no known medical illness. He had been having fever and cough for 2 weeks. He was brought to the hospital in a confused state after being reported missing from work for a few days.
The patient presented with septic shock, which was consistent with the definition of Sepsis-3. He was in a very confused state and was talking irrelevantly. His Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) registered E4V2M5. His temperature was 38.0°C, blood pressure was 85/42 mmHg, and his pulse rate was 135 b.p.m. He also had neck stiffness, bilateral upper and lower limbs power registered at least three, while his tone and reflexes were normal. He had normal heart sounds with no murmur and bilateral lung crepitations. The patient was given fluid resuscitation and required a vasopresssor for blood pressure support. He was also put on a mechanical ventilator before being admitted into the intensive care unit (ICU).
Initial blood investigations showed anaemia and thrombocytopenia with normal total white cells and renal function. Ultrasonography examination showed the presence of splenic microabscesses and chest radiograph showed bilateral lung fields consolidation. Computed tomography (CT) of the brain was normal and lumbar puncture examination of the cerebrospinal fluid on admission showed no signs of inflammation or infection.
The patient’s blood culture taken on admission grew B. pseudomallei. This was confirmed by a real-time polymerase chain reaction assay targeting the type III secretion system (TTS1). This B. pseudomallei isolate appeared to be gentamicin-susceptible by the Kirby–Bauer disk diffusion susceptibility test . He remained bacteraemic with positive blood cultures on Day 6 and 12 of admission yielding B. pseudomallei with the same antibiogram pattern. Subsequent blood cultures on Day 24, 26 and 27 of admission had no growth.
The patient was administered IV noradrenaline upon admission. The highest dose used was 0.27 mcg/kg/min on Day 4 of admission, and he was subsequently weaned off after a week. Upon admission, he was empirically given IV ceftazidime and IV C-penicillin. On Day 4 of admission, antibiotics were escalated to IV imipenem in view of the patient’s persistent high-grade temperature and leukopenia. He required ventilatory support on a high setting for 2 weeks. During the second week of intensive phase therapy with IV antibiotics, he was started on oral trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (co-trimoxazole). His condition was complicated with ventilator-associated pneumonia. Culture of endotracheal secretions grew a multidrug resistant Acinetobacter baumanii, which was treated successfully with high dose IV ampicilin-sulbactamfor 14 days. He also developed sepsis-induced supraventricular tachycardia which resolved spontaneously.
In the third week of admission, there was a new onset of left-sided hemiparesis (muscle power 1/5) and pansystolic murmur with thrills at the apex of the heart. A repeat CT of the brain showed a right corona radiata infarct with a high parietal petechia haemorrhage . An echocardiogram showed a thickened mitral valve with an oscillating mass at the posterior mitral valve leaflet suggestive of vegetation with a moderate eccentric mitral regurgitation.
The intensive phase therapy for melioidosis was extended to 6 weeks using IV ceftazidime, and we added IV gentamicin at the dose of 60 mg, 8-hourly for 14 days. He was also given concurrent oral co-trimoxazole, which was subsequently continued as monotherapy in the eradication phase therapy for melioidosis.
He was discharged after 12 weeks of admission with minimal residual left sided weakness (Modified Rankin Score of 2). The patient was able to perform all activities of daily living independently with intact cognitive function. He was subsequently transferred to a cardiac referral centre for definitive management. He remained well during follow-up in the cardiac centre at nine months from initial presentation. Echocardiogram showed that the vegetation on mitral valve had resolved with residual moderate mitral regurgitation and left ventricular ejection fraction of 66.5%. He remained in Modified Rankin Score of 2.