A 55-year-old healthy Japanese woman presented to our hospital with a two-month history of malaise and myalgia, and she had had a fever for one month. The patient had no significant medical history and no relevant history regarding pets, travel, dental treatment, or drug abuse. Her occupational history was that she worked at an import grocery store. During her physical examination, we noted her body temperature of 37.6°C, a grade 2 systolic murmur at the apex, and a painful 1 mm black induration on her right forefinger. Trans-thoracic echocardiography showed a 1 cm mobile mass on the mitral valve with moderate mitral regurgitation. Her laboratory tests showed a white blood cell count of 8200/μL, a C-reactive protein level of 6.6 mg/dL, and a hemoglobin level of 9.9 g/dL. Gram-positive cocci forming pairs or short chains were shown by Gram staining of three sets of blood cultures drawn at the time of admission.
IE was diagnosed on the basis of the Duke criteria for the diagnosis of infective endocarditis (two major and two minor criteria) and antibiotic treatment with benzylpenicillin 3 million units every four hours and gentamicin 60 mg every eight hours was started, as Streptococcus sp. was suspected as the causative pathogen. Subsequently, the rapid ID32 Strep (bioMérieux, Marcy-l'Etoile, France) profile (code 34323501010) revealed L. garvieae. We also performed molecular species identification by 16S ribosomal RNA gene (16S rRNA) sequencing, and the almost full-length 16S rDNA matched L. garvieae (99.9%). The results of an anti-microbial susceptibility test using Etest strips (AB Biodisk, Dalvagen, Solna, Sweden) showed the following values: erythromycin 0.25 mg/L, clindamycin ≥ 256 mg/L, vancomycin 0.38 mg/L, linezolid 2.0 mg/L, penicillin 0.5 mg/L, ceftriaxone 0.38 mg/L, gentamicin 1.5 mg/L, and streptomycin 64 mg/L. Considering these results, we changed the anti-microbial treatment to intravenous ceftriaxone 2 g every 12 hours and gentamicin 80 mg every eight hours intraveneously.
Meanwhile, her body temperature rose to 39°C with left lower back pain on her sixth day in the hospital. Left-sided renal infarction was diagnosed on the basis of contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) . On the 12th hospital day, cerebral infarction occurred, followed by a sudden onset of right-sided hemiparesis and slurred speech (National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score 12). Diffusion-weighted MRI showed a cerebral infarction of the middle cerebral artery area . Furthermore, cerebral mycotic aneurysms were detected by three-dimensional CT angiography on the 24th hospital day . The patient also developed aspiration pneumonia after the cerebral infarction complication.
Anti-microbial treatment was completed in nine weeks, including the treatment for pneumonia. Several repeat blood cultures thereafter were all negative. The vegetation on the mitral valve was no longer detected by trans-esophageal echocardiography performed just before she was discharged from the hospital. We found by CT that her left-sided renal infarction had improved, and the consequences of her cerebral infarction had also improved with only right-sided muscular weakness (NIHSS score 2). She was discharged from the hospital, and she is now well while being monitored in the out-patient clinic.