A 72-year-old Japanese woman was admitted to her family doctor with epigastric discomfort and weight loss (10 kg/year). Imaging studies suggested pancreatic head cancer; thus, the patient was referred to our department. Her weight at the time of initial consultation to our department was 48.9 kg (body mass index was 22.1 kg/m2). She had a medical history of hypertension and no family history of cancer. Laboratory data indicated a decreased hemoglobin concentration of 10.9 g/dL. The other laboratory data, including tumor marker concentrations (carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) concentration of 2.8 ng/mL and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) concentration of 15.6 U/mL), were within normal limits.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) revealed a hypovascular tumor in the uncinate process of the pancreas with tumor contact to the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) of more than 180° (approximately 190°) and with portal vein (PV) involvement, although there was no evidence of distant or lymph nodal metastasis . Moreover, CECT revealed an arterial anomaly: the right gastroepiploic artery (RGEA), left branch of the middle colic artery (MCA), first jejunal artery (FJA), and inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery (IPDA) formed a common trunk that branched from the right and slightly ventral side of the SMA . A diagnosis of adenocarcinoma was made by endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration. Thus, she was diagnosed with unresectable LA PDAC according to the Japan Pancreas Society classification and immediately underwent four cycles of chemotherapy [gemcitabine plus nanoparticle albumin-bound paclitaxel (GnP)]. However, the lesion did not shrink and tumor contact with the SMA (approximately 190°) was not improved after chemotherapy. Because the probability of achieving curative resection was judged to be low, the patient received a radical dose [55.2 Gy (relative biological effectiveness (RBE) weighted absorbed dose) in 12 fractions] of CIRT with concurrent gemcitabine, and GnP therapy was continued.
She complained of vomiting about 2 months after CIRT. Although CECT showed no tumor growth and tumor contact with the SMA (approximately 190°) was not improved after CIRT, a duodenal obstruction accompanied by wall thickening at the third portion of the duodenum was observed . Endoscopy revealed a duodenal obstruction . She could not eat solid food and a trans-nasal feeding tube was inserted. The tip of feeding tube was placed at upper duodenum. 18-fluoro-2-deoxy-glucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography (FDG-PET/CT) revealed slight FDG accumulation in the pancreatic lesion without findings of distant or lymph nodal metastasis . The cause of the duodenal obstruction was thought to be an adverse effect of CIRT. Because a therapeutic intervention was needed to enable enteral nutrition, we proposed several treatment options, such as course observation with tube feeding, bypass surgery, or resection with the expectation of the anti-tumor effect of chemotherapy and CIRT, and she chose resection. Figure shows the progress of the preoperative treatment and changes in tumor markers.
Subtotal-stomach-preserving pancreatoduodenectomy with PV resection was performed . Because nerve plexus dissection around the SMA was considered to be necessary to achieve R0 resection, a mesenteric approach was selected. Tissues around the pancreatic head region were slightly edematous and fibrotic because of CIRT; however, these were not too hard. After incising the transverse mesocolon, the SMA and superior mesenteric vein were identified, and the right branch of the MCA was taped (Additional file : Video S1). The ventral side of the SMA was exposed and the left side of the nerve plexus around the SMA was incised. Then, the left branch of the MCA was taped (Additional file : Video S2). Part of the nerve plexus around the SMA was assessed by means of a frozen tissue section to confirm the absence of tumor cells (Additional file : Video S3). Then, the SMA was taped (Additional file : Video S4). After ligating and cutting the root of the left branch of the MCA, the common trunk of the RGEA, left branch of the MCA, FJA, and IPDA, that branched from the right and slightly ventral side of the SMA, was taped (Additional file : Video S5). The cranial side of the SMA was taped and the left side of the SMA and the tumor were detached (Additional file : Video S6). After ligating and cutting the common trunk of the RGEA, the left branch of the MCA, FJA, and IPDA, dorsal side of the SMA and the tumor were detached (Additional file : Video S7). After exposing the first jejunal vein, the inferior pancreaticoduodenal vein was ligated and cut (Additional file : Video S8). Combined PV resection was performed, and the specimen was removed (Additional file : Video S9 and Additional file : Video S10). The surgical duration was 453 min and blood loss was 275 g.
Microscopically, viable tumor cells were observed in the replaced fibrotic tissues, and portal vein invasion and extrapancreatic nerve plexus invasion was observed; however, lymph nodal metastasis was not observed and R0 resection was achieved . Viable tumor cells with ductal formation were accompanied by vacuolar degeneration, and adipose degeneration was observed. The effect grade was categorized as Evans grade IIA . The duodenal wall showed acute inflammation and fibrosis without the presence of malignant cells.
Postoperatively, the patient recovered uneventfully except for controllable diarrhea and she was discharged on postoperative day 27. Postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy with tegafur/gimeracil/oteracil (S1) was administrated for 17 months. At the time of this report, 5 years have passed since the initial consultation and the patient has experienced no recurrence. Although examination for pancreatic function was not performed, her exocrine pancreatic disfunction was controllable with oral medication, and she did not develop diabetes during follow-up.