We report the case of a 41-year-old Lao woman who lived in Vientiane Capital, Laos. She was diagnosed with sarcoidosis two years prior to presentation, although details of the diagnostic work-up were unavailable. She had no other notable past medical history apart from early menopause aged 39 years old.
One month before her admission with appendicitis, she was admitted to our hospital with cough and dyspnoea. A thoracic computerised tomography (CT) scan demonstrated a mild-to-moderate left-sided pleural effusion alongside widespread peribronchovascular honeycombing and hilar-mediastinal lymphadenopathy; this was diagnosed as stage IV sarcoidosis. Investigations for tuberculosis were not performed. She remained in hospital for 2 weeks, and on discharge was prescribed prednisolone 40 mg daily to control a sarcoid flare.
She re-presented 2 weeks later with a five-day history of worsening abdominal pain in the right upper and lower quadrants, and diarrhoea. On admission she was afebrile, with unremarkable vital signs (blood pressure 110/80 mmHg, heart rate 74 bpm, peripheral oxygen saturations 98% on room air, and respiratory rate 20/min). An abdominal ultrasound scan demonstrated hepatomegaly; the appendix was not described. She was diagnosed clinically with appendicitis and taken for surgery the same day. Intra-operative findings included peritonitis, copious amounts of pus and a caecal mass (10 x 10 cm). She underwent a hemicolectomy with primary ileo-colic anastomosis. The caecal mass was excised and sent for histopathological examination, and showed suppurative appendicitis.
Post-operatively, she was treated with ceftriaxone (2 g intravenously, every 24 hours), gentamicin (5 mg/kg intravenously, once daily) and metronidazole (500 mg intravenously, every 8 hours), and she initially improved. However, a florid, disseminated pustular rash developed the following day, initially across her left chest, before spreading to her upper thighs and lower abdomen . The rash consisted of numerous small, well-demarcated erythematous lesions of varying sizes, many with pustules (
, inset). On direct questioning, the patient’s family revealed, surprisingly, that a milder version of this rash had first appeared on the patient’s arms and legs two months earlier, although it is unclear if it truly had the same appearance and aetiology. Of note, a biopsy of one of these lesions was taken prior to this admission, in connection with her admission for presumed sarcoidosis. The skin biopsy demonstrated a nodular infiltrate in the dermis, composed of a histiocytic aggregation and neutrophilic micro-abscesses admixed with plasma cells, and multinucleated giant cells. No sarcoid granulomas or bacteria were seen. The histopathology report commented that the observed mixed cell granulomas can be associated with chronic granulomatous infections; notably, these findings are consistent with listeriosis.
On the fourth post-operative day, the patient deteriorated with septic shock and respiratory failure, with a blood pressure of 80/50 mmHg, respiratory rate of 38/minute and peripheral oxygen saturations of 85% on room air. She was transferred to the Intensive Care Unit for inotropic and vasopressor support with noradrenaline, and was intubated 3 days later due to further respiratory deterioration. Of note, prior to intubation, the patient did not exhibit any signs of meningitis. The antibiotics were escalated empirically to meropenem (1 g intravenously, every 8 hours) and a blood culture was sent, along with a bacterial swab of the pustular rash.
The blood culture flagged positive after 18 hours, with Gram-positive rods seen on Gram stain, subsequently identified as
Listeria monocytogenes by MALDI-ToF. At the same time,
L. monocytogenes also grew from the pus swab, confirming a diagnosis of disseminated listeriosis. Initially, meropenem was continued to provide ongoing broad-spectrum coverage given the recent intra-abdominal pathology. Two days after
L. monocytogenes was isolated, the antibiotic was switched to high-dose intravenous ampicillin (2 g, 6 times daily), which was continued for the remainder of the admission. The isolates from both blood and pus were sensitive to penicillin, meropenem, co-trimoxazole and erythromycin, as determined by disk diffusion testing .
The appearance of the rash improved, with some resolution of the pustules, but unfortunately, the patient’s clinical condition was unchanged, with on-going cardiorespiratory failure. Given the lack of clinical improvement, the severity of the infection, and the poor prognosis of invasive listeriosis, after one week of intensive care treatment, the decision was taken by the patient’s family to stop active treatment. It was arranged for her to be taken home for end-of-life care.