The patient with IMO was a 4-month-old male infant, who was admitted to hospital due to a cranial suture closure at the 1st month of his birth. In a prenatal examination at week 24, an abnormal skull shape was found in this child. The child was prematurely born through cesarean section at around 36 weeks’ gestation. He weighed 2490 g at birth and had an abnormal skull development within 35 cm of head circumference. A high-precision whole exome sequencing was ordered for the patient and his biological parents at day 18. The genetic results showed that both parents were normal heterozygous. However, two heterozygous mutation sites of gene TCIRG1 were found in the child. The mutations were c.504-1G > C and c.1371delC (p.G458Afs*70). The c.504-1G > C implied Guanine at the 503 site of intron was mutated to be Cytosine. The c.1371delC (p.G458Afs*70) indicated a deletion of Cytosine at the 1371 site of exon, which caused Glycine to Alanine mutation at position 458, as well as the gene translation termination at position 70 . These two mutations were inherited from his parents . The head MRI examination was performed at day 50. The results showed that his skull was still irregular in shape .
Clinical characteristics of blood diagnostics and biochemical detection index were shown in Table -.
The result of head radiograph of the patient revealed an irregular skull shape, the closed cranial suture, and the skull bone dense sclerosis, all of which were characteristic patterns of IMO . The result of his chest radiograph showed an increased lung texture on both sides of his lung due to the pneumonia, and a general increased density of rib bone . Generally, the femur in a 4-month-old child was composed of 36% cortical and 64% trabecular bone , whereas the femur of this IMO patient contained at least 50% cortical bone. The radiograph of his left leg showed a complete fracture of femoral shaft . Additionally, the bone marrow cavity was narrowed considerably. The result of his femoral radiograph also revealed an abnormal thickening of cortical bone and over mineralization of the trabecular bone, which was presented by a hyper bone density in bone marrow cavity and cortical bone .
This child was 60 cm in height, and 4 kg in weight. His skull was abnormally enlarged. He was fully conscious and had a normal reaction to his surroundings, such as the stimulation of light and sound. His anterior and posterior fontanels were closed, yet the cranial nerve examination was normal.
The cranioplasty on his left skull was performed smoothly at day 109. Three weeks later, he returned hospital for review and to perform the second cranioplasty on his right skull. However, we found a cerebrospinal fluid leakage in his brain. Therefore, we performed the ventriculoperitoneal shunt surgery on the left side of his head to treat the leakage. Unfortunately, this child had developed a severe pneumonia during his recovery period. And a fracture of his left femoral shaft was happened at month 4. After the treatment of his fracture, the child was discharged.