This case report is based on a 37-year-old male living with his wife in Guangdong, China. He denied any history of immunodeficiency disease and relevant medication and intravenous drug addiction .
Initially, the patient developed a fever with a peak temperature of 40 °C after drinking Chinese herbal wine (the specific ingredients were unknown), accompanied with chills, shivers, rash, and pruritus. After a week, abdominal colic gradually appeared, with watery diarrhea 20–30 times a day. The patient visited several hospitals. The highest white blood cell count was 51.70 × 109/L (reference value 4.00–10.00 × 109/L) and the neutrophil ratio was 87.0% (reference value 46–75%). The chest CT showed no abnormalities and the abdominal CT showed diffuse bowel wall edema. With a variety of broad-spectrum antibiotics and supportive treatment in the local hospital for 40 days, his general condition did not improve, and he was transferred to the emergency department of our hospital afterward.
During the treatment in the emergency department of our hospital, the patient had a fever of 39 °C, with hypotension of 89/54 mmHg, malnutrition, skin flushing, scattered flaky rash and exfoliation, tenderness and rebound pain in the lower abdomen. Laboratory tests showed a white blood cell count of 3.84 × 109/L, neutrophil ratio of 75.8%, red blood cell count of 3.16 × 1012/L (reference value 4.00–5.50 × 1012/L), hemoglobin of 66 g/L (reference value 130–175 g/L), platelet count of 41 × 109/L (reference value 100–300 × 109/L), C-reactive protein of 24 mg/L (reference value 0–10 mg/L), procalcitonin of 11 ng/ml (reference value 0.00–0.05 ng/ml). The abdominal CT showed an extensive bowel wall edema in the jejunum, ileum, and colon. The colonoscopy showed a diffuse congestion, edema, erosion, and spontaneous blood in the colonic mucosa, and the colonic band structure disappeared . After admission, multiple blood culture results were negative. The vancomycin and tigecycline were given empirically accompanied by nutritional support treatment. On day 7 after admission, the patient's stool culture test result turned out to be K. ohmeri (28 °C, Sabouraud medium), so caspofungin was added to the treatment (for 7 days). He was transferred to the Gastroenterology Department for further treatment on day 9 after admission.
After the patient was transferred to the Department of Gastroenterology, he still had a fever of 37.3–39.0 °C. The rash, extirpative dermatitis, diarrhea, and abdominal pain were not significantly improved. The WBC count was 16.53 × 109/L, neutrophil ratio of 80.2%, C-reactive protein was 22.9 mg/L, procalcitonin was 0.24 ng/ mL, and blood IgE was 351.30 IU/ mL (reference value was 0.00–120.00 IU/ mL). On day 13 after admission, the PET-CT showed hepatomegaly, splenomegaly. The metabolism was active (SUVmax of the liver was 5.1, SUVmax of the spleen was 5.3); the metabolism of axial bone and proximal long bones of the outer limbs were increased (SUVmax 10.0); cavity lesions in the left lung , and metabolism was active (SUVmax was 5.3); the bowel wall of the jejunum, ileum, colon, and rectum had an extensive edema, and the metabolism was slightly increased (SUVmax is 5.0). After a multidisciplinary consultation, considering the poor control of the patient’s fever and leukocytosis, the anti-infective regimen was switched to meropenem combined with linezolid. Considering the erythroderma as well as allergic enteritis may be caused by the Chinese herbal medicine wine, the intravenous methylprednisolone (0.8 mg/Kg/day) was started, supplemented with high-dose intravenous gamma globulin (0.4 mg/Kg/day, for 5 days).The montmorillonite powder was given to relieve diarrhea, drotaverine hydrochloride to relieve pain, and other treatment to correct water and electrolyte disorders and supply nutrition. After the above comprehensive treatment, the peak temperature of the patient was lower than before, fluctuating between 36.5 and 38.0 °C. The abdominal pain was slightly relieved and watery stools decreased to about 10 times a day. A re-examination of abdominal CT revealed that the bowel wall edema was significantly reduced compared to before, and the follow-up re-examination of colonoscopy also confirmed the CT results .
On day 23 (10 days of meropenem combined with linezolid treatment), the patient's body temperature suddenly increased to 39.5 °C with chills. Re-examination of the chest CT showed that the cavitary lung lesions were slightly larger than before , so bronchoalveolar lavage was recommended for further detection of pulmonary pathogens. The blood culture showed yeast-like fungal growth (28 °C, CHROMagar Candida media) , and the MALDI TOF–MS (VITEK MS, bioMérieux, France) showed K. ohmeri. As a result, caspofungin was added to the treatment again. After 24 h’ treatment of caspofungin, the patient defervesced and the blood culture did not change into negative until 9 days after the treatment. On day 27 (after 2 weeks of combined treatment of meropenem and linezolid) The anti-infective therapy was changed to intravenous moxifloxacin. Bronchoscopy was performed and the galactomannan test of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) was 1.1 (reference value 0.0–0.9). To further clarify the nature of the lung disease, the patient was transferred to the Devision of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine. On day 37 after admission, a cough and sputum appeared gradually. The re-examination of chest CT revealed increased consolidation in the cavitary lung lesions . Bronchoscopy was conducted again and the galactomannan test of BALF was 2.7, which was higher than before, and the sputum and BALF culture showed the growth of aspergillus fumigatus, so the clinical diagnosis was invasive pulmonary aspergillosis. Based on the use of caspofungin for the treatment of K. ohmeri, intravenous voriconazole was administrated for anti-aspergillus treatment. On day 47 after admission (10 days after treatment of voriconazole), the re-examination of chest CT revealed that the cavitary lung lesions were smaller than before . The general condition of the patient improved, with no fever, subsided red rash on the head and face, relieved cough and abdominal pain, reduced stool frequency which was about 3–5 times, and no more watery stools but yellow paste-like stools. According to the above, the intravenous voriconazole was changed to oral administration, the caspofungin was stopped (24 days in total), the methylprednisolone was tapered to 12 mg/d, and the patient was discharged on day 51 after admission.
After discharge, the patient continued oral voriconazole, and the dose of methylprednisolone was reduced to 4 mg/d. One month and a few days later (on day 84 after admission), the patient returned to the hospital for re-examination. Compared with the previous chest CT, the fungal balls in the cavitary lung lesions were larger than before. Therefore, based on treatment of voriconazole (already used for 46 days), intravenous amphotericin B was added for anti-aspergillus therapy, the dose of which is gradually increased to the maximum tolerated dose of 45 mg (0.9 mg/Kg). We also injected 5 mg of amphotericin B into the lung cavity twice under bronchoscope. Voriconazole was discontinued (52 days in total) when amphotericin B was used for 6 days, and methylprednisolone was discontinued at the same time. Six weeks after the use of amphotericin B (total dose 2 g) (on day 127 after admission), the re-examination of chest CT showed that the lung cavities still existed, and exudates around the lesion was slightly reduced . Considering the poor efficacy of antifungal treatment, the patient was transferred to the Department of Thoracic Surgery of our hospital 2 weeks later (on day 141 after admission) for video-assisted thoracoscopic wedge resection of the left lower lobe and left upper lingual lobe. Pathological findings of the surgically resected specimen further confirmed the diagnosis of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis . Re-examination of chest CT 10 days after operation (on day 151 after admission) showed that the upper lingual and dorsal left lower lobe lesions of the left upper lobe were resected, with some exudates and consolidation in the operation area. Amphotericin B was continued for 2 weeks after the operation until the total dose was 3 g. The patient has been followed up for 3 years and has no symptoms such as fever, abdominal pain, and diarrhea, and no new infections have been found on chest CT .