A 32-year-old man and his two siblings from Kermanshah, Iran, who were suspected to have LS, were referred to us. The parents were consanguineous and the suspected siblings exhibited childhood-onset short stature.
All available family members provided written informed consent. This project was conducted ethically in accordance with the World Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki.
The 32-year-old proband exhibited a delay in skeletal maturity of about 13 years. He was 146 cm tall [height,—3.3 Standard Deviation Score (SDS)] with a small chin, double chin, and a mildly prominent forehead . He had a history of developing kidney stones and had undergone surgery for approximately four episodes of kidney stones at the age of 7, 10, 14, and 20.
The patient’s mother was 145 cm (-1.7 SDS) and had high blood pressure and kidney stones. The father was 155 cm tall (-2.1 SDS) and also had hypothyroidism, kidney stones that were operated when he was 65, and had a history of stroke. The patient had another affected brother and sister, whose heights were 136 (-4.6 SDS) and 138.5 (-2.6 SDS) cm, respectively (Supplementary Fig. ). They also exhibited delayed bone age, small chin, double chin, and a mildly prominent forehead. The affected sister also suffered from kidney stones, and her neonatal head circumference, height, and weight were below the normal range. Three other brothers were healthy, and their heights were in the normal range.
All affected individuals were born at term, and their pregnancies and deliveries were normal. The parents stated that hypoglycemia was never noted in the affected individuals, although it was not documented. The developmental milestones of all affected individuals were normal, and no special abnormalities were reported during their childhood. The affected siblings claimed that they received hormonal therapy in childhood, although there are no records available.
The proband experienced delayed puberty at the age of 17 years. His semen analysis report at the age of 31 showed normal sperm count, motility, progressive motility, sperm morphology, semen liquefaction time and semen PH . He had no fertility problems.
A High Pure PCR template preparation kit (Roche; Product No, 11,814,770,001) was used to extract genomic DNA from the patient and all available family members for WES.
The WES was performed on 1 μg of genomic DNA sample from the proband according to the latest reference genome assembly GRCh38/hg38 using Agilent's SureSelect Human All Exon V6 kit. To obtain an average coverage depth of approximately 100 × , the generated library was sequenced on a HiSeq 4000 Illumina platform. Heterozygous variants were excluded considering the homozygous inheritance mode in the pedigree. Consequently, variants with allele frequencies more than 1% were excluded according to dbSNP132 (. nlm.nih.gov/projects/SNP), the 1000 Genomes Project , the Exome Sequencing Project (ESP) ( ngton.edu/ EVS), the Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC), GnomAD , and the local database, Iranome . Intragenic variants, untranslated regions (UTRs), and synonymous variants were also excluded. Pathogenic variants reported in the Human Gene Mutation (HGMD) and ClinVar were given a higher priority.
To predict the pathogenic consequences of the detected variants, SIFT , PolyPhen-2 , and MutationTaster databases were used. The WES analysis identified a homozygote variant (c.610 T > A) in the GHR gene (NM_000163.5) on chromosome 5.
To check the evolutionary conservation for the region of the variant, ConSurf and UCSC database were applied . Multiple alignments of the amino acid sequence with various species had revealed that the Trp at position 204 in human GHR is evolutionarily conserved across species, including Primates, Euarchontoglires, Laurasiatheria, Afrotheria, Mammals, Birds, Sarcopterygii, and Fish.
To validate the candidate variant, Sanger sequencing was performed first on the proband and subsequently on all available family members to confirm co-segregation of the selected variant with LS (Supplementary Fig. ).
The web-based server Primer3Plus was used to design primers. The in-silico PCR tool in the UCSC genome browser and dbSNP database were utilized to check the specificity of primers and lack of SNPs in the genomic region, respectively. PCR products were sequenced by an ABI 3130 system using ABI PRISM BigDye Terminator v. 3.1 sequencing kit (Applied Biosystems, USA), and the sequencing data were analyzed using CodonCode Aligner v. 8.0.2 (CodonCode Corp, USA). Primers and PCR conditions are available upon request.
Sanger Sequencing results confirmed the co-segregation of the variant with the disease, as both parents showed a heterozygote pattern of the variant. The three affected siblings were homozygous mutant, while the 3 healthy siblings were heterozygote for the c.610 T > A variant.
According to the recommendations of the ACMG for the classification of sequence variants , this variant is classified as likely pathogenic due to the following evidence: 1. The variant is located in the ECD, which is a mutational hot spot of the GHR and also in the FN3 domain,a vital and well-established functional domain (PM1), 2. The variant was absent in control population databases, including the 1000 Genomes Project, Exome Aggregation Consortium, and Exome Sequencing Project (PM2), 3. Missense variants are a common mechanism of the LS syndrome, and the GHR gene has a low rate of benign missense variation (PP2), 4. Various lines of computational data including 10 pathogenic predictions from BayesDel_addAF, DEOGEN2, EIGEN, FATHMM-MKL, M-CAP, MVP, MutationAssessor, MutationTaster, REVEL, and SIFT suggest a damaging effect on the gene, as the variant is located in a highly conserved region, FN3 domain, which is considered a supporting evidence for pathogenicity (PP3), 5. The patient’s phenotypes are highly similar to LS cases (PP4).
Using IBS illustrator , a schematic pattern of GHR protein, its domains, and the reported variants related to LS has been shown in Fig. .