A 66-year-old female developed a descending aortic dissection and was treated conservatively with medical therapy because there were no complications such as splanchnic ischemia, renal insufficiency, lower extremity ischemia, or focal neurologic deficits. One month later she was admitted via our emergency department (ED) because of recurrent severe back pain. Aortic computed tomography (CT) showed a type B aortic dissection with intramural hematoma and false lumen expansion . She underwent TEVAR. Left carotid-subclavian artery bypass was performed by exploration from left low neck for left subclavian artery coverage . After surgery, she resumed oral intake and increased left pleural drainage of a milky fluid was noted on postoperative day 2. Aortic CT on postoperative day 4 revealed no endoleak or thrombosis. Persistent pleural drainage of a milky appearing fluid of more than 1000 mL per day continued. The pleural fluid triglyceride concentration was 227 mg/dL. Left chylothorax resulting from disruption of the thoracic duct during the left carotid-subclavian artery bypass was suspected. Conservative medical treatment of nothing per oral (NPO) and administration of total parenteral nutrition (TPN) failed to reduce the amount of drainage. Therefore, surgical ligation of the thoracic duct was planned at postoperative day 30. After induction of general anesthesia, the right lung was deflated, and 3 trocar sleeves were inserted at lateral ninth, anterior lateral seventh, and anterior lateral fifth intercostal spaces. The pulmonary ligament was transected, and the lung was retracted. The parietal pleura was incised along the distal part of azygos vein toward diaphragm. The thoracic duct should be found between aorta and azygos vein. Careful dissection exposed the thoracic duct as near as possible to diaphragm, which was then ligated . Her recovery was uneventful, and the left Jackson-Pratt drain was removed on postoperative day 5. At the 3-month follow-up, chylothorax was not recurrent .