The patient was an Iranian 40-year-old woman who had a history of 11 years of relapsing–remitting MS and an expanded disability status scale (EDSS) of 2, and was able to walk independently. She had not experienced a relapse during the past 6 months. She complained of spasticity and functional impairment in her right lower extremity despite receiving physiotherapy, exercise therapy, and medication to alleviate spasticity. She had no history of comorbidities such as cardiovascular disease, diabetes, psychological problems, or familial diseases, and no contraindications for DN . Her latest MRI report showed multiple plaques in cervical spinal cord and brain. The study was approved by the research ethics committee of Tehran University of Medical Sciences. The patient has given written and informed consent for the publication of this report and any accompanying images.
Right leg plantar flexor spasticity was assessed by the Persian version of modified modified Ashworth scale (MMAS), a valid and reliable scale that rates the intensity of spasticity on a scale of 0–4 [, ]. With patient in a supine position and the legs extended, the physiotherapist passively moved the ankle from maximal plantarflexion to maximal dorsiflexion during 1 second counting one thousand and one and scored the resistance to passive stretch. (The patient has spasticity bilaterally in lower limbs, but right-side spasticity is more than the left).
Passive and active ROM of ankle dorsiflexion was measured using an ankle biplane goniometer (A Bissell Health Care, model 7524, USA) in the supine position, with the knee extended. Maximum passive ROM (PROM) was assessed by physiotherapist while passively moving the ankle to maximum dorsiflexion. Active ROM (AROM) was measured while the patient actively performed the dorsi flexion .
Cortical excitability was assessed using motor-evoked potential (MEP), short interval intracortical inhibition (SICI), and intracortical facilitation (ICF). MEP represents the global excitability of the cortex, spinal, and corticospinal pathways . SICI and ICF are well-known paired-pulse TMS that are used for investigating intracortical circuits in the motor cortex . The resting motor threshold (RMT), expressed as a percentage of maximal stimulus output (%MSO), was measured using MagPro (MAG venture TMS, Denmark). The stimulation target location was fine-tuned for the patient to stimulate the right plantar muscle hotspot by an 8-shaped coil (coil head dimensions: 170 × 113 × 17.34 mm) defined as the optimal location for MEP in the contralateral spastic plantar flexor at the lowest stimulation intensity. MEP was recorded from soleus muscle electromyography (EMG) recordings (Seniam.org). The active and reference electrodes (20 mm apart) were placed on the main soleus muscle bulk near the motor point of the soleus muscle, located between the medial condyle of the femur and the medial malleolus. The electrodes were positioned at the ankle (around the medial malleolus . The RMT was defined as the minimum TMS intensity required to produce detectable MEP amplitudes above 50 mv from background EMG in at least five out of ten trials. SICI refers to the phenomenon in which a subthreshold conditioning stimulus (CS) suppresses MEPs evoked by a subsequent suprathreshold test stimulus (TS) with a 3-ms inter-stimulus interval (ISI). ICF is a phenomenon of increased cortical excitability induced by conditioning stimuli and was assessed by test stimuli in a conditioning test paradigm. It was generated when a subthreshold CS occurs and stimulates MEPs evoked by a suprathreshold TS with an ISI of 13 ms (msec).
We used a 0.3 mm × 50 mm (Korea) disposable stainless steel needle. A fast-in-fast-out technique was followed, and heads of gastrocnemius and soleus muscles were needled each for 1 minute (total 3 minutes). One DN session per week for 3 weeks was performed, and follow-up was carried out 2 weeks later . For the gastrocnemius and soleus muscle, a line from the popliteal crease to the heel was drawn. This line was divided into three equal parts, and for the medial head of gastrocnemius about 2 cm medial from the middle of the proximal segment and about 2 cm lateral for the medial and lateral heads of gastrocnemius were needled . For the soleus muscle, the middle segment of the line was also divided into three parts, and the needle was inserted about 2–3 cm lateral in the lower third part of the middle segment .