This 27-year-old woman was in good health until 2 months before the discovery of her disease. On May 2014, she felt down spontaneously while walking. After this incident, she noticed certain difficulties in controlling her legs. Two days later, a progressive strength loss was developed on both legs, leaving her in a wheelchair 1 week later. Sphincters were intact at this time.
She consulted a general physician, who prescribed corticoid medication, obtaining some relief of her symptoms but never a complete recovery. After 6 weeks, she developed a complete and symmetrical spinal cord syndrome, referring an important weakness and numbness of the fingers on both hands and extending to the rest of her body. At this point, she developed urinary incontinence and severe constipation.
During the general examination, the patient was alert and cooperative. No fever present and we did not discover any important information on the pulmonary nor cardiovascular condition, no lymph nodes were palpated, the skin showed normal characteristics. The neurological exam demonstrated complete motor loss of both legs, with a partial sensory level of hypesthesia and hypalgesia at C6–C7. Reflexes were all hyperactive, with a positive bilateral Hoffman reflex and bilateral extensor plantar response. Laboratory data were entirely normal. A moderate increase on the erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 25 mm/h (normal: 15 mm/h) was detected. The cerebrospinal fluid analysis was within limits, with negative cultures. Magnetic resonance images (MRIs) of the cervical spine , demonstrated a well-defined oval intramedullary lesion expanding the spinal cord at the C7-Th1 level, with a clear hypointense signal on T2-weighted images, and showed homogeneous enhancement after gadolinium application, suggesting an intramedullary solid, and well-defined tumor.
The patient was taken into surgery, where we performed a C6–Th1 laminoplasty. The lesion was identified using transoperative ultrasonogram. After opening the dura, we observed a severely expanded spinal cord, but with a normal superficial appearance. A midline myelotomy disclosed a well-defined brownish soft mass that was progressively dissected from the spinal cord parenchyma and achieving an in bloc resection with the aid of bipolar forceps and microscissors.
The patient had an uncomplicated postoperative evolution. The histology of the lesion , characterized an important proliferation of large histiocytes with foamy cytoplasm, pale irregular nucleus and small vesicular nuclei, some of them with the appearance of engulfed intact lymphocites. Plasma cells, lymphocytes, and eosinophils were within the stroma of the lesion. The immunohistochemistry confirmation reported mature lymphocytes that were positive to CD45/CD68 antibodies and positive CD20 and CD3 in mature B lymphocytes that were within larger histiocytes (emperipolesis); positive CD60 in histiocytes; positive CD30 in immuneblasts; positive CD15 in leucocytes and negative to the latent membrane protein-1 antibody. After defining the lesion, she underwent a complete evaluation including computerized tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis, as well as a bone scan designed to locate extranodal sites of disease, however, none was identified. No order for adjunctive radiation or chemotherapy was considered at the time. By the 3rd week after surgery, she referred to increase in superficial and deep sensitive perception, when she began to identify pressure, light pain and was able to pinpoint stimulation in both legs. The patient was discharged to a spinal cord rehabilitation unit, and over the next 6 months, she was able to move some proximal muscles in the lower extremities, and she re-educated her sphincters.