An 18-year-old male presented with a 1-month history of progressive weakness in the lower extremities and progressive precordial oppression. He had a three-year history of occasional precordial oppression. Neurological examination revealed mild symmetric paraparesis with grade 4+/5 strength on manual muscle testing and bilateral severe hypesthesia below the T4 level. The deep tendon reflex in the lower extremities was markedly increased, and Babinski's sign was observed bilaterally. He had difficulty with tandem gait. His peak urinary flow rate was moderately decreased. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging of the thoracic spine revealed an intradural extramedullary cystic tumor at the T1-T2 level that was severely compressing the spinal cord from the ventral side . The contents of the cyst showed signal intensity nearly identical to that of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) on T1- and T2-weighted MR images . The tumor showed no enhancement on gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted MR images. There were no other abnormal findings including vertebral body anomalies, spina bifida, or a mediastinal mass.
Tumor removal was performed through a C7-T2 laminoplastic laminotomy. The spinal cord was bulging, but the cyst wall was not identified through the pia mater. After the spinal cord was longitudinally split along the posterior median sulcus, the cyst wall, which had a thin, translucent, membranous appearance, was identified at the ventral side of the flattened spinal cord through the split posterior median sulcus . The cyst was aspirated with a 24-gauge elastic needle . The contents of the cyst consisted of a serous, clear, and colorless fluid similar to the CSF. The cyst wall was tightly attached to the spinal cord, and was peeled off as much as possible. The intraoperative pathological diagnosis with frozen sections was an arachnoid cyst [Figure and , see below for details]. Therefore, further resection of the tumor was not performed to avoid damage to the spinal cord. The ventral part of the cyst wall was opened to allow the CSF to flow freely. There were no somatosensory or motor-evoked potential changes in the lower extremities during the operation. Postoperative MR imaging demonstrated marked shrinkage of the cyst . The patient experienced no postoperative complications, and all symptoms including precordial oppression, decreased peak urinary flow rate, sensory abnormalities, and mild paraparesis disappeared. However, 10 months after surgery, the patient noted precordial oppression again, and MR imaging revealed that the cyst had refilled .
Eleven months after the first operation, fenestration of the cyst wall and insertion of a cyst-subarachnoid shunt were performed using the same approach as the first operation . Because the cyst wall was found to have adhered tightly to the spinal cord during the first operation, we chose continuous drainage of the cyst fluid into the subarachnoid space using a cyst-subarachnoid shunt in the second operation rather than resection of the cyst wall to prevent spinal cord damage. The contents of the cyst were again similar to that of the CSF , and contained 18 mg/dl protein, <1 mg/dl glucose, 153 mmol/l sodium, 3.0 mmol/l potassium, and 135 mmol/l chlorine. One end of the shunt tube was inserted into the cyst through the split posterior median sulcus, and the other end was placed in the dorsal subarachnoid space of the spinal cord . After the operation, precordial oppression disappeared. He was discharged with no neurological deficits.