A 50-year-old female patient with a previous history of hypothyroidism and no past surgical history was transferred from Ear, Nose and Throat (ENT) outpatient clinic for further evaluation of a 7 mm solitary pulmonary nodule in the right upper lobe [Fig. ]. This was incidentally discovered in a computer tomography (CT) scan of the neck done for evaluation of upper respiratory tract symptoms. A CT of the chest was done to assess the rest of the lung parenchyma. In addition to the previously mentioned peripherally located nodule, the (CT) showed a 2 X 2 cm well-defined oval shaped enhancing soft tissue anterior mediastinal tumor with (Hounsfield units of 55). All radiological findings were suggestive of thymoma [Fig. ]. As the pulmonary nodule has an intermediate risk for malignancy an integrated positron emission tomography with computer tomography (PET/CT) was performed. Nor the nodule neither the mediastinal lesion showed any hypermetabolic activity [Fig. ] so watchful waiting was elected for the management of the nodule. Due to the age of the patient and the CT radiological manifestations including the size of the mediastinal lesion, absence of intralesional fat, loss of triangular thymic shape, a soft tissue Hounsfield units as well as the oval shape of the lesion, the likelihood of epithelial thymic tumor namely thymoma has increased . These clinical and radiological characteristics in addition to the patient’s wish encouraged us for the option of surgical resection rather than watchful waiting policy. Based on the high index of suspicion of non-invasive thymoma a right sided video-assissted thoracoscopic thymectomy. The patient was placed in left lateral decubitus position. A roll was placed under the patient’s side, elevating the body by approximately 30 to 45 degrees. Three thoracoscopic ports were used with insufflation of pleural space with CO2 (flow of 4–6 l/m, pressure of 3–5 mmHg) was performed. After assessment of the whole chest cavity, complete thymectomy including the above-mentioned tumor as well as the adjacent mediastinal fat was performed. The specimen was retrieved and a 24-Fr chest drain was inserted. A digital palpation through the thoracoscopic incisions could not detect the nodule so resection was not performed.
The post-operative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged home after chest tube removal on the first postoperative day.
The histological examination revealed grossly a completely excised thymus that contained a unilocular cyst filled with white creamy material. Histologically the cyst was lined with ciliated columnar epithelium resembling respiratory epithelium that supported the diagnosis of intrathymic bronchogenic cyst [Fig. ].