A 50-year-old Japanese woman presented to us complaining of a sudden headache. Her medical history revealed she suffered from AD, and was allergic to pollen, house dust, acetaminophen, and gabapentin. A computed tomography (CT) scan of her head was performed when the patient first presented, showing no significant results. Digital subtraction angiography revealed a right internal carotid artery–anterior choroidal artery aneurysm . Since impending rupture of the cerebral aneurysm was suspected, she underwent cerebral aneurysm clipping (Sugita Clip Titanium, MIZUHO Co., Tokyo, Japan) the following day, which was performed via right frontotemporal craniotomy. Titanium implants (Saney Plate system, Saney Seiko Inc., Saitama, Japan) and a pterion plate (Titanium skull mesh, Muranaka Medical Instruments Co., Osaka, Japan) were used in the cranioplasty. The postoperative course was uneventful, and she was discharged on postoperative day (POD) 13. On POD 25, she presented with swelling of the right eyelid and fever, at which point she was treated with oral cefazolin. However, she did not respond well to the treatment and was admitted to the hospital on postoperative day 33 because of continuous fever. On physical examination, eyelid swelling associated with tenderness was observed. She had a low-grade fever of 37.0 °C and eczema of the face. Meningeal signs were negative. Pale red papules, which are characteristic of AD, were observed on the face and fissures of both ear lobes. A blood test revealed that her white blood cell count (WBC) and C-reactive protein (CRP) levels were 7300/mm3 and 7.0 mg/dL, respectively. Based on these findings, the patient was hospitalized for SSIs.
Neuroradiological findings were as follows: a head CT scan revealed isodense pooling in the right frontal epidural space. On magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), a corresponding high-intensity lesion was seen on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) and on T2-weighted imaging . Epidural empyema due to SSI was suspected; therefore, she underwent emergent removal of the infected bone flap the day after admission. During surgery, pus was found in the epidural space, requiring irrigation with a high volume of saline . After surgery, she was treated with intravenous meropenem at a dosage of 6 g/day. The culture revealed methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA); thus, the antibiotic regimen was changed to cefazolin at a dosage of 6 g/day. Swelling of the eyelid and fever improved immediately after surgery, and both CRP and WBC levels decreased to within the normal limits; therefore, she was discharged 15 days after bone flap removal. Five months after the first bone flap removal, the patient underwent a second cranioplasty. In this procedure, artificial bone (ARTBONE, AHEAD Laboratories, CA, USA) was fixed using titanium plates (Saney Plate system, Saney Seiko Inc., Saitama, Japan). The patient was discharged 10 days after the operation without any signs of infection. Twenty-five days after the cranioplasty, the patient presented again with fever associated with headache and swelling of the right eyelid. The implant was removed because recurrent SSI was suspected. The operative findings were similar to those observed when the bone flap was removed. The muscle and subcutaneous tissue were swollen, and it was difficult to turn the skin flap. The dural surface was covered with a dark-red hematoma and yellow granulation tissue. These areas were irrigated as extensively as possible. The pus culture revealed MSSA. Intravenous cefazolin was initiated as antibacterial treatment. At this point, the AD was not cured. We also considered metal hypersensitivity as a differential diagnosis, and subsequently, she underwent a metal patch test. The test showed negative results for the metal samples, including titanium. She was also treated with oral levocetirizine dihydrochloride, (tranilast) at a dosage of 100 mg/day (two capsules per day), and a topical heparinoid. The dermatitis and pruritus have resolved. Fourteen months after the second implant removal, the patient underwent cranioplasty. The artificial bone (ARTBONE) was placed with an absorbable plastic plate (CRANIOFIX absorbable, B-BRAUN, Hessen, Germany). She has not developed another recurrent infection over 28 months following the last cranioplasty.