A 30-year-old Italian man was referred in June 2010 to our unit for multiple facial fractures resulting from a motorcycle accident.
A physical examination demonstrated a diffuse edema in the middle and lower facial thirds, bilateral periorbital edema and diffuse escoriation to his cheeks. On intraoral examination severe preternatural mobility of the upper and lower jaws was noticed, with malocclusion, anterior open bite and mucosal lacerations. Our patient also complained of bilateral numbness to the nasolabial region and cheek.A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed fractures to the nasal bones, associated 1, 2 and 3 Le Fort fractures, right paramedian lower jaw, bilateral zygomatic fractures, orbital floor, sphenoidal sinus wall and pterygoid processes .
Our patient underwent surgery under general anesthesia. An oral, bilateral transconjunctival and transcutaneous approach was performed for the reduction and fixation of the major facial fractures. The surgical treatment did not require any intermaxillary fixation.
Our patient was submitted to clinical and radiological postoperative follow-up. One month later, in July, our patient complained of the onset of a gradual limitation in mouth opening. His maximal incisal opening (MIO) was 10mm with an almost complete absence of any protrusive, right and left lateral mandibular movements .Based on our patient’s symptoms, a CT scan was ordered a few days later, which showed a significant calcification of the left lateral pterygoid muscle. An irregular ossified mass extending from the left pterygoid process to the mandibular condyle was noticed . The working diagnosis was MOT of the left lateral pterygoid muscle.
We suggested a surgical removal of the foci of ossification, but our patient refused due to the absence of any pain or any significant limitation in the activities of his daily life. Therefore, he was immediately advised to undergo physiotherapy (FKT), in accordance with our unit’s guidelines.
A set of exercises consisting of forced active and passive mouth opening was presented to our patient. The training was aimed to correct his jaw’s movable model to reach a satisfactory range of movements.
Our patient was instructed to open his mouth in a straight line, in front of a mirror. He then had to practice protrusion and left and right lateralization movements. Our patient accomplished each movement by applying gentle pressure with his fingers. The exercises had to be performed four times a day in batches of about 20 repetitions for every vector of motion.
He returned 30 days later, with a MIO of 25mm and a minimal improvement of mandibular movements .
In July 2011, 12 months after starting physiotherapy, our patient had improved the range of motion of the mandible, reaching a MIO of 30mm without any significant restoration of other mandibular movements . Furthermore, another CT scan revealed the persistence of calcifications of the left lateral pterygoid muscle explaining the incomplete resolution of the clinical picture.