A 37 year-old male who underwent successful laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy four years ago and who has consequently lost 74 kg was presented to our clinic with other family members willing to provide their sick father with a right lobe for the liver transplantation. Before the SG was done four years ago his weight was at 157 kg and his Body Mass Index (BMI) at 49 kg/m2. At that time Ultrasound examination showed severe fatty liver changes with diffuse increased hepatic parenchymal echogenicity and also intraoperative inspection of the liver was consistent with that observation. Unfortunately, liver biopsy was not taken. We did not quantify steatosis with other imaging modalities, such as MRI or CT, since the liver donation was not an issue at that time.
At the time of surgery, he weighed 83 kg and his BMI was at 27 kg/m2. His lowest weight after SG was at 80 kg.
Full donor work up including liver biopsy was completed. The liver biopsy showed steatosis in less than 5%, no inflammation, no hepatocyte ballooning and no fibrosis.
He was chosen as an appropriate donor with a total liver volume of 1800 cm3 and a future remnant liver volume of 900 cm3. The graft-to-recipient weight ratio (GRWR) was at 0.9%.
Donor work up was completed including extended lab analysis, anesthesia, and cardiac, assessment, psychiatric team and ethical committee evaluation for organ transplantation and was approved for liver donation.
The Liver Transplant Board confirmed the indication for liver transplant and approved the living donor liver transplantation (LDLT). After completing the evaluation, LDLT was performed.
His father suffered from end-stage liver disease secondary to NASH cirrhosis, accompanied by type 2 diabetes mellitus. Evaluations revealed a Child-Pugh stage B, a model for end-stage liver disease (MELD) calculated score of 17 and a body weight at 100 kg.
During the right lobe hepatectomy, only minimal adhesions were found. The liver appeared grossly normal with a sharp left lateral lobe. The left liver lobe was supplied by a branch of the left gastric artery and a smaller branch of the main hepatic artery. The donor common hepatic artery, after the bifurcation of the left HA branch, was recovered with a segment of the gastroduodenal artery . We chose to perform a right lobe donation, the most commonly performed procedure in our center, since it provides a sufficient liver remnant volume. Additionally, in this particular case the left lobe had two small arteries in comparison with the right lobe that only had a single big right hepatic artery. Also, there were no veins from the right lobe merging into the middle hepatic vein.
On the recipient side, left and right hepatic arteries were divided and a large anastomosis with branch-patch reconstruction was established. The right hepatic vein and the right portal vein appeared without any abnormalities . The donor operation time was 3 h and 20 min. The donor didn’t receive any blood products and was admitted to our intensive care unit for one day.
The donor had an uneventful recovery. On the first postoperative day, patient ambulation and clear fluid oral intake took place and he was discharged after seven days with normal liver function .
Currently, eight months after the right lobe donation procedure, his liver function appears to be normal and his body weight remains stable in comparison to his weight prior to surgery (BMI = 27 kg/m2).
Graft reperfusion in the recipient was normal and liver biopsy was not required.
Similarly, the recipient had an uneventful postoperative course. Ambulation and reintroduction of oral feeding were started on postoperative day two and he was discharged with normal liver function three weeks after LDLT. His diabetes disappeared after three months.