A 30-year-old woman, presented to the hospital at 10 weeks of gestation, with nausea, vomiting, few episodes of watery non-bloody diarrhea, and dark colored urine for the past 5 days. She had multiple abortions in the past and was having her 11th pregnancy, all with the same partner. Her past medical history is significant for hereditary pancreatitis (R117 H gene mutation) requiring multiple surgeries, five miscarriages (all in the first trimester), and self-resolving thrombocytopenia during the last trimester of her previous viable pregnancies. She tested negative for antiphospholipid syndrome (negative anticardiolipin antibodies, anti-beta2-glycoprotein I antibodies, and lupus anticoagulant). She denied any bleeding or bruising symptoms including hematuria, epistaxis, or vaginal bleeding.
She presented with a blood pressure of 156/99 mmHg, heart rate of 80 beats/min, respiratory rate of 16 breaths/min, oral temperature of 98.4°F, and peripheral oxygen saturation of 97% on ambient air. Physical examination was unremarkable, except for petechiae on the lower and upper extremities. Initial laboratory investigations revealed a hemoglobin level of 7.8 mg/dL, platelet count of 15,000/mm3, presence of schistocytes on peripheral smear, serum creatinine of 2.44 mg/dL, elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) at 1847 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 58 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 17 U/L, alkaline phosphatase 45 U/L, total bilirubin 1.7 mg/dL, direct bilirubin of 0.4 mg/dL, albumin 3.2 mg/dL, and haptoglobin <8 mg/dL.
Urinalysis showed 3+ proteinuria and 3+ blood with spot urine protein-to-creatinine ratio of 5600 mg/g. Her coagulation studies were normal with INR 0.95, PT 10.4 s, PTT 25.5 s and fibrinogen level of 311 mg/dL .
All viral serologies for hepatitis B and C, HIV and Parvovirus B-19 were all negative. With that presentation a diagnosis of thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA) was made. ADAMTS-13 activity and inhibitor assay was sent to the Blood Center of Wisconsin to rule out TTP and daily plasmapheresis was started since day 1 of her hospitalization along with oral prednisone at 1 mg/kg/day. No STEC testing was performed as the patient had normal bowel movements. Despite daily plasmapheresis, the patient required multiple transfusions to maintain her hemoglobin levels above 8 and remained hypertensive requiring 2 antihypertensive medications. Her renal function continued to worsen requiring hemodialysis on the 4th day of initiating daily plasmapheresis. On hospitalization day-4, ADAMTS13 activity was reported to be normal at 129%. Diagnosis of aHUS was strongly considered at that time and the decision was made to discontinue plasmapheresis and to start the patient on eculizumab at a dose of 900 mg intravenously weekly. Complement gene mutation tests were ordered as part of aHUS work-up (which was sent to Genomic and Pathology Services of Washington University Medical School in St. Louis). Due to the patient’s clinical instability, rifampin was initiated prophylactically with meningococcal vaccination given after initiating treatment with eculizumab. On Day-15 of hospitalization (after two doses of weekly eculizumab) laboratory values started to improve. Her platelet count increased to 124,000/mm3 , hemoglobin levels remained above 8.5 mg/dL without any transfusion , and LDH trended down to 520 U/L . Her AKI was resolving with good urine output (BUN of 18 mg/dL and creatinine 2.44 mg/dL). Hemodialysis was then stopped and the dialysis catheter was removed. She clinically improved and remained hemodynamically stable. Patient was discharged home 18 days after admission.
Genetic analysis result came back few weeks after her discharge, revealing that she had no pathogenic sequence variants identified. Genes sequenced were C3, CD46, CFB, CFH, CFI, DGKE, and THBD. Patient was given induction dose of 900 mg intravenous (IV) eculizumab every week for 4 doses, followed by 1200 mg IV biweekly for the rest of her pregnancy as an outpatient. No maternal or fetal complications were reported during the entire pregnancy and on the 36th gestational week, she delivered a healthy baby through cesarean section with no peri-operative complications. Around the time of her delivery, her Hb was 10.9 mg/dL, BUN was 9 mg/dL, creatinine of 0.52 mg/dL, and LDH of 163 U/L. She was discharged home 3 days postpartum. She continues to receive two weekly eculizumab infusions after her delivery, has had no TMA recurrence for more than 20 months on eculizumab therapy and with healthy baby.