A 66-year-old male developed general epileptic convulsion and was admitted to our department one hour after onset. His history included epilepsy and hypertension. On admission, blood pressure was 126/84 mmHg and pulse was 82 beats/min with sinus rhythm. Neurological findings included deterioration of consciousness, right conjugate deviation, total aphasia and right hemiparesis with a manual muscle test score of 1/5. The National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale score was 20 points.
Brain computed tomography (CT) showed expansive and symmetric high-density lesions involving the bilateral basal ganglia, thalami and cerebellar dentate nuclei . Diffusion-weighted brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed multiple hyperintense spots in the bilateral cerebral subcortical area , which were indicative of acute infarctions. Magnetic resonance angiography did not show any intra- or extracranial arterial occlusion, stenosis or other vascular abnormality . MRI using susceptibility-weighted imaging (SWI) showed hypointense lesions coinciding with high-density lesions in CT imaging and multiple hypointense spots in the cerebral parenchyma . Hypointense lesions that coincided with the high-density lesions on CT were detected on both minimal intensity projection and phase images on SWI. Moreover, multiple hypointense spots were found in the bilateral cerebral subcortical white matter, which suggested multiple calcifications in the subcortical area.
After admission, we started administration of an anti-epileptic drug and convulsion was stopped. Thereafter, the patient gradually became alert and fully recovered from the neurological deficits within 24 h after admission. One day after admission, electroencephalography showed no apparent epileptic discharge or other abnormal findings. Blood pressure was stable all day at 110 to 130 mmHg (systolic) and 60 to 80 mmHg (diastolic).
Examinations were performed to investigate the cause of intracranial calcification. The serum levels of sodium, potassium, chloride, calcium, albumin, phosphorus, intact PTH, thyroid profile, lipid profile and uric acid were all within normal limits, except for low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (133 mg/dL). Complete cell count, C-reactive protein and erythrocyte sedimentation rate were also normal. Autoimmune tests including antinuclear antibody, anti-single and -double-stranded DNA IgG antibody, rheumatoid factor, cytoplasmic and myeloperoxidase antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, and anticardiolipin antibody were all negative or within normal limits. To exclude infection, we examined hepatitis B and C antibodies and human immunodeficiency virus − 1 and − 2 antibodies, and performed a venereal disease test, and all were negative. Laboratory tests and whole body CT showed no evidence of secondary calcification diseases, such as parathyroid disorder, pseudohypoparathyroidism, thyroid disease, other endocrine disease, metabolic disease, collagen diseases, vasculitis, infections (syphilis, hepatitis and HIV) or cysticercosis. Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with IBGC.
Concurrently, we performed examinations to investigate the cause of cerebral infarction. Transthoracic echocardiography showed no particular findings. Transesophageal echocardiography revealed a patent foramen ovale; however, there was no evidence of deep vein thrombosis in the lower limbs on contrast CT and ultrasound sonography including Doppler. A 24-h Holter electrocardiogram and monitoring of a continuous 3-lead cable bedside electrocardiogram for 7 days did not show atrial fibrillation or other arrhythmia. Digital subtraction angiography showed no atherosclerotic changes in the proximal arteries.
Quantitative resting cerebral blood flow (CBF) and cerebrovascular reactivity (CVR) were measured by single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) in one session using the dual-table autoradiographic method and dual administration of N-isopropyl-p-[I-123] iodoamphetamine (123I-IMP), as described in detail elsewhere . For SPECT with drug challenge, acetazolamide (17 mg/kg) was administered intravenously. Tomographic images were reconstructed and CBF quantification was performed using the QSPECT image reconstruction package . After image reconstruction, images were processed using NEURO FLEXER. This program automatically measures CBF values at rest and after acetazolamide challenge, and can also calculate CVR, as follows: CVR = 100 × (Diamox CBF- resting CBF) / resting CBF . Surprisingly, resting CBF was decreased slightly, and moreover, CVR was severely impaired heterogeneously at basal ganglia or thalami, which were well-calcified areas, and at all other cortical and subcortical areas of the bilateral cerebral hemispheres, in the absence of steno-occlusive changes in the proximal arteries .
Thorough blood examinations were also conducted to investigate the possibility of coagulation disorders, such as antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, collagen disease, Protein S and C deficiency, antithrombin III deficiency and tumor markers, but the results were unremarkable. Finally, even though we could not determine the exact cause of cerebral infarction, we concluded that the lack of vascular reactivity might have played a role in causing multiple cerebral infarctions after convulsive seizure in this patient. To prevent secondary attack, the patient was treated with an antiplatelet drug, cilostazol (200 mg/day), and was finally discharged from hospital with no neurological deficits.