A 72-year-old woman underwent surgical excision for a pT1 melanoma on her right shoulder in 2008. In June 2020, she had a cutaneous relapse on the right chest wall along the middle axillary line. The histological exam confirmed a metastasis of an amelanotic malignant melanoma BRAF-V600 E mutated. After radical resection of the lesion and negative staging obtained with CT scan, assuming a pathological stage IV disease with no absolute contraindications, the woman underwent monthly adjuvant nivolumab (480 mg) from September 2020 to August 2021 without any evidence of relapse at the end of the planned period of treatment. The tolerance was good except for mild cutaneous adverse effects not requiring discontinuation of treatment.
In August 2021, the woman experienced episodes of angina and underwent coronary angioplasty. In October 2021, she became symptomatic for severe anemia but endoscopic exams did not reveal any pathological gastrointestinal conditions. A PET/CT scan identified a 2 cm nodule in the right lung and a mild spot on a jejunal loop which was further investigated through an enteral videocapsule that detected an ulcerated and bleeding lesion in the small intestine.
At the end of November 2021, the patient underwent exploratory laparotomy with small bowel resection achieving excellent palliation of anemia. The histological exam confirmed a transmural localization of amelanotic melanoma with pathological mesenteric lymph nodes. Molecular biology assessment showed a BRAF-V600 E mutation and PDL1 (clone SP 263) 0% MEL score 0. The patient then began dabrafenib + trametinib in January 2022 after performing a baseline CT scan that detected a rapidly progressive disease in the right lung and the appearance of peritoneal carcinomatosis. A CT scan after 3 months showed a clear progression of abdominal carcinomatosis (as shown in ), consistent with the rapid worsening of clinical conditions.
In May 2022, despite the short interval from the end of adjuvant immunotherapy to the occurrence of distant relapse (2 months) and given the failure of BRAF/MEK inhibitor, we decided to start nivolumab 1 mg/kg + ipilimumab 3 mg/kg as the second-line treatment to pursue symptom palliation. The baseline performance status was very poor due to abdominal swelling, chronic constipation, and pain. After only 1 cycle, the patient experienced a progressive clinical benefit and the CT scan performed in July 2022 demonstrated a partial response >90% both at the pulmonary and abdominal levels, as shown in .
In August 2022, the woman started monthly nivolumab (480 mg) as maintenance therapy, which is still ongoing, with further objective response at each subsequent instrumental assessment. The patient is currently in excellent clinical condition and the last CT evaluation in March 2023 showed a complete pulmonary response, as well as further dimensional reduction of the peritoneal nodules, as shown in .