An 83-year-old Caucasian woman with rheumatoid arthritis and a large hiatus hernia was admitted with a one-day history of severe abdominal pain and vomiting. She was tachycardic, tachypnoeic, and pyrexial. Abdominal examination revealed tenderness and peritonism to her right iliac fossa. Her bowel sounds were diminished. Serology revealed a white blood cell count of 16.1g/dL, and plain abdominal radiographs revealed no obvious perforation or obstruction. A differential diagnosis of appendicitis and cecal carcinoma was considered, and the decision to operate was made. At laparotomy through a lower midline incision, palpation of the small bowel revealed that a large impacted gallstone in the mid-ileum was causing patchy mesenteric necrosis. There was free fluid in the right iliac fossa but no perforation. A 12cm length of ileum was resected, and a primary stapled anastomosis was performed. The gallbladder was found to be packed with stones. No fistula was identified, but the dissection was limited by dense fibrosis.
After initial signs of recovery, our patient developed worsening abdominal pain on the fourth post-operative day, and abdominal CT was undertaken . The scan revealed a low-grade small bowel obstruction due to a laminated ileal gallstone, a fistula between the gallbladder and duodenum, and a further stone in the gallbladder. After a trial of conservative management, a second laparotomy on day nine revealed a gallstone impaction in the distal small bowel and a contained leak in the original ileal anastomosis. The stone was removed through a transverse enterotomy, and the anastomosis was refashioned with sutures. The inflammatory mass in the right upper quadrant, with the residual gallbladder stone, was palpable but not disturbed. The post-operative recovery was complicated by a Clostridium difficile infection, but our patient returned home to independent living four weeks after the second procedure.
Twelve months later, she presented with a further episode of central abdominal pain associated with vomiting and distension. An ultrasound scan revealed a contracted gallbladder with a 10mm common bile duct, and intravenous antibiotics were commenced for a presumed cholecystitis. She failed to settle, and a CT scan revealed free intraperitoneal gas and fluid, a persistent cholecysto-duodenal fistula, and a further gallstone obstructing the small bowel. This gallstone corresponded in size and shape to that seen in the gallbladder 12 months earlier . At laparotomy, a limited small bowel resection was performed for perforation proximal to a gallstone obstruction. The stone was removed, and a hand-sewn anastomosis was performed. Her post-operative recovery was again complicated by a C. difficile infection in addition to a prolonged period of respiratory failure managed with a tracheostomy in critical care. She was discharged to her own home six weeks after surgery and made a good recovery. Two months after discharge, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography did not visualize any residual gallbladder stones.