A 17-year-old male patient was referred to the otorhinolaryngology outpatient clinic with symptoms suggestive of recurrent nasal obstruction over eight months. He also complained of 1 year of progressive left eye proptosis. There was no history of epistaxis, anosmia, or trauma to the face. On examination, a polypoid irregular mass filling the left posterior nasal cavity was observed. It was a whitish mass, and when palpated by the forceps, it had a semisolid consistency. There were no other remarkable findings on general examination. Computed tomography (CT), in , showed an expansile hyperdense lesion with a sclerosed peripheral mantle epicentered on the left sphenoid sinus and extending into the left nasal cavity. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)-T1-weighted image (T1WI), in , showed a well-defined hyperintense lesion filling the left ethmoid, sphenoid sinuses, and the left nasal cavity. The lesion displaces the lamina papyracea, medial, and inferior recti.
The optic nerve displayed a normal signal intensity. The patient was prepared for surgery. The patient was operated on in a supine position under general hypotensive anesthesia. We performed a left ethmoidosphenoidectomy under general anesthesia using an endoscope. The nasal cavity was decongested with 1:10,000 adrenaline-soaked cotton pledgets. The 30° endoscope was introduced in the left nasal cavity. The bulla ethmoidalis is encountered medially and penetrated using the powered debrider. The lamina papyracea was identified laterally, and we tried to preserve its mucosa. We continued dissection posteriorly until we identified the basal lamella and the posterior ethmoid cells. Complete dissection of the ethmoid cells was done under the guidance of a 45° endoscope. The lesion was excised in a piecemeal fashion. The mucosa in the sphenoid sinus was polypoidal and congested due to recurrent inflammation and obstruction. Routine postoperative endoscopic examination of the left sinonasal cavity was performed, and no evidence of cerebrospinal fluid leaks was present. Histopathological examination revealed the proliferation of stromal spindle fibroblasts presence with woven and lamellar bone deposits composed of scattered osteoblasts and osteocytes . There was no necrosis or features of malignancy. The diagnosis was compatible with OF. The patient was discharged uneventfully. Six months later, the symptoms completely disappeared. Rhinoscopic examination showed no residual lesion. A follow-up CT was done on an outpatient basis five months after surgery .