A 39-year old male presented with left sided pelvic pain for 1 year. He was evaluated elsewhere where MRI pelvis was suggestive of a soft tissue lesion in left pubic bone involving the body, superior and inferior rami, extending into ischiopubic rami, ischial tuberosity and sub-articular margin of anterior pillar of acetabulum with dimension 10 × 6.5 × 10.3 cm consistent with chondrosarcoma in view of chondroid pattern of matrix mineralization . His distant metastatic work up was negative. He underwent type II plus type III pelvic margin-free resection with histopathologic diagnosis of mesenchymal chondrosarcoma at a different hospital with pathological staging of pT2N0M0 (Stage IB) in April 2014. A follow up scan showed normal post-operative changes with no evidence of residual disease or distant metastases and was kept on observation by treating physician. In November 2014 after disease free intevral (DFI) of 7 months, he developed asymptomatic bilateral pulmonary metastases for which pulmonary metastatectomy was planned. After a course of 3 cycles of ifosfamide-adriamycin based chemotherapy, re-assessment in January 2015 revealed marked improvement in lung nodules but there was new evidence of gross local recurrence in form of left iliac bone and acetabular soft tissue lesion with irregular destruction of residual bone; the lesion was encasing the femoral head and infiltrating adjoining soft tissue. The patient underwent repeat pelvic resection in March 2015 but pulmonary metastatecomy was deferred in view of good response of pulmonary lesions to chemotherapy. In January 2016 after progression-free survival (PFS) of 11 months, the patient was found to have ill-defined soft tissue mass at left iliac bone and left hip along with another mass 7.5 × 6.5 cm dimension, at left hemipelvis suggestive of residual disease in left iliac lesion and progression of ischial lesion and multiple bilateral lung metastases. He underwent repeat local resection in February 2016 along with palliative radiotherapy to the involved site. However, the pulmonary metastatic nodules were not amenable to surgery. 4 cycles of palliative VAC chemotherapy (vincristine, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide-based therapy on Ewing’s Sarcoma like protocol) were given till June 2016 but his disease progressed symptomatically along with multiple sub-pleural and parenchymal pulmonary and bone metastases. He then received 3 months of oral metronomic therapy (thalidomide, celecoxib and cyclophosphamide) due to poor performance status. On improvement of his condition, he was given liposomal doxorubicin however post four cycles, imaging showed progression in the pulmonary and bone metastases .
Subsequent treatment with trabectedin monotherapy was started from January 2017 at dose 1.2 mg/m2 as 24-h continuous infusion with dexamethasone 20 mg intravenously, every 21 days. The patient tolerated the drug remarkably well without major toxicities and had improvement in clinical symptoms. The disease showed stable disease radiologically on interim assessments and he went on to receive 13 cycles of trabectedin. After a PFS of 12 months, he progressed with both local and distant disease showing pulmonary and vertebral metastatic disease . Pazopanib was given for 6 months but there was progression in form of appearance of new lung lesions in August 2018 followed by change of therapy to liposomal doxorubicin and ifosfamide. However, the patient progressed while on treatment and shifted to best supportive care from October 2018. He succumbed to his illness in May 2019.