A 51-year-old female presented with abdominal distension and fatigue that had worsened in the past 1 year and was diagnosed with a retroperitoneal tumor. There was no history of tumors, and no family history suspected of hereditary tumors. On physical examination, a palpable mass was noted from the right subcostal area to the epigastric region. Blood tests revealed impaired renal function due to inferior vena cava (IVC) obstruction caused by the tumor. Tumor markers were negative. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the trunk showed a hemorrhagic retroperitoneal tumor measuring 22 × 9 × 15 cm, which had increased in size from 20 × 9 × 9 cm over the past 2 months, compressing IVC and portal vein to the right abdominal side . Enlarged para-aortic lymph nodes were also noted . Whole-body 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/CT (FDG PET/CT) showed increased FDG uptake with SUVmax 8.8 in the retroperitoneal tumor but no distant metastases. Endocrinological assessments were unremarkable, ruling out pheochromocytoma based on normal levels of catecholamines and metanephrines in both blood and 24-h urine. 123I-meta-iodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) scintigraphy revealed no abnormal accumulation, excluding paraganglioma or sympathetic nerve tumors. Considering the possibility of gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) or other tumors responsive to drug treatment, a needle biopsy was performed preoperatively, revealing spindle-shaped sarcoma cells which raised dedifferentiated liposarcoma as a differential diagnosis and proceeded with resection of the retroperitoneal tumor. The tumor was extensively adherent to the left liver and IVC , and resected en bloc. Combined resection of the left liver and IVC was achieved without using extracorporeal circulation or IVC reconstruction, because the patient had double IVCs which prevented venous congestion of the kidneys and lower limbs. A small, disseminated tumor was also identified and retrieved. The blood loss was 17,490 mL. She developed a Grade B biliary leakage which required drainage and was discharged on the 35th day after surgery. The resected specimen was hemorrhaged and necrotic, with white lobulated nodules and edematous changes at the margins . There was no evidence of tumor invasion into liver and IVC. Microscopic examination revealed a spindle-shaped tumor cells proliferating in a fascicular and whorl pattern , and having round-to-oval nuclei with indistinct nucleoli . Necrosis (< 50%) and increased mitotic activity of 12 per 2mm2 suggested malignancy. Immunohistochemical staining demonstrated the tumor was positive for EMA , GLUT-1 , claudin-1 , and SSTR2A . The positivity for EMA, GLUT-1, and claudin-1 suggested differentiation toward perineurium , and malignant perineurioma was diagnosed. Of note, the tumor had no connection to the spinal leptomeninges. Negative staining for MDM2 and CDK4, CD34 and STAT6, and c-kit and DOG1 led to the exclusion of dedifferentiated liposarcoma, solitary fibrous tumor (SFT), and GIST, respectively [, ]. S100 protein was negative and H3K27e3 was retained. Cancer gene panel testing of the retroperitoneal tumor sample showed a base substitution in ARID1A (splice site 2251+2T>G), duplication of exons 5–31 in NOTCH2, frameshift mutation in MSH6 (D387fs*4), and deletion of exons 5–9 in NF2, none of which were treatable target in the present case. Twenty days postoperatively, a contrast-enhanced CT of the trunk revealed masses in the bilateral pelvic walls , which were diagnosed to be peritoneal dissemination. Whole-body FDG PET/CT at 50 days postoperatively showed a short-term enlargement and increased uptake of the pelvic masses . Due to the rapid enlargement of tumors in both pelvic walls, accompanied by increased abdominal distension and worsening bilateral lower leg edema, palliative radiotherapy was performed from 70 days postoperatively. However, the disease progression could not be controlled, and the patient died 6 months postoperatively.