A 25-year-old Asian Indian woman presented with complaints of swellings behind both her ankles and in front of both her knees for the last 2 years. These swellings had an insidious onset; they were painless, gradually progressive, and caused difficulty in walking for the last 1 year. She had history of bilateral cataract surgery 1 year earlier. There was no history of childhood diarrhea, seizures, cerebellar symptoms, psychiatric manifestations, mental retardation, or premature atherosclerosis. There was no family history of similar complaints.
On examination, she had firm, non-tender, fusiform swellings over bilateral tendo-Achilles (right 10×4.5 cm, left 8×3 cm) and bilateral infrapatellar tendons (right 2×1.5 cm, left 1.5×1.2 cm) as shown in Fig. . Her general examination was unremarkable except for bilateral pseudophakic eyes. On neurological examination, her higher mental functions were normal. Her pupils were normal sized and normally reactive. Her sensory system was unremarkable. Her muscle bulk, tone, power, coordination, and other motor system functions were normal. All her cranial nerves were normal. Her cardiac, abdominal and respiratory examinations were also unremarkable.
Her hemogram, renal function test, hepatic function test, serum electrolytes, and fasting lipid profile were within the normal limits. Her serum cholestanol level was 4.27 mg/dl (normal value 0.02 to 0.12 mg/dl). Serum and urinary bile alcohol could not be done because of unavailability. Electrocardiography, two-dimensional echocardiography, spirometry, and nerve conduction study were unremarkable. X-rays of both her legs revealed soft tissue thickening in bilateral ankles posteriorly and overlying right tibial tuberosity as shown in Fig. . Ultrasonography of bilateral tendo-Achilles revealed anteroposterior thickness of 7.5 mm and loss of normal tendon appearance with multiple hypoechoic foci within the tendon as shown in Fig. . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of her brain revealed T2 and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) hyperintense signals in the region of the dentate nucleus of both her cerebellar hemispheres with high choline and low N-acetylaspartate (NAA)/creatine peaks on magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) as shown in Fig. . She underwent excisional biopsy of her right infrapatellar which yielded a gray, brown, soft tissue measuring 2×2×1 cm on gross examination as shown in Fig. . Microscopic examination revealed foamy cells admixed with inflammatory cells and giant cells surrounding cholesterol clefts as shown in Fig. . On the basis of these findings the diagnosis of CTX was made and she was started on replacement with CDCA 250 mg three times a day, ursodeoxycholic acid 300 mg three times a day, and atorvastatin 10 mg at bedtime.