A 36-year-old Asian woman presented to the emergency department (ED) of our hospital complaining of progressive headaches for 10 d accompanied by left upper limb clumsiness.
The patient received her first dose of the AZD1222 without experiencing side effects, such as fever, headache, and myalgia, initially. However, on the 7th day after vaccination, she experienced a headache over the bilateral occipital regions accompanied by dizziness. On the 13th day after vaccination, the pain worsened and extended to the left side of the neck. On the 17th day after vaccination, she still had severe headaches and she noted left upper limb clumsiness, prompting consultation at our ED. During the whole course, there was no slurred speech, double vision, fever, or trauma history.
The patient had a history of iron deficiency anemia, possibly caused by menorrhagia, with a normal platelet count. She denied having chronic headaches or other systemic diseases.
The patient worked as a barber and was able to independently perform her activities of daily living. She did not take regular maintenance medications, such as oral contraceptives and iron supplements. She also denied tobacco smoking, alcohol drinking, and substance abuse. Her family history is unremarkable in her situation.
Neurological examination showed that she had agraphesthesia and poor proprioception over the left hand. Her Glasgow Coma Scale score was 15 with no obvious weakness over the upper and lower limbs. There were no other specific physical and neurological findings.
Before the patient visited our ED, on the 7th day after vaccination, thrombocytopenia (platelet count: 77 × 103/µL, reference range: 130 × 103/µL to 400 × 103/µL) and anemia (hemoglobin: 8.3 g/dL, reference range: 11.1-15.0 g/dL) were noted, where the D-dimer level was unknown at that time. On the 13th day after vaccination, while the pain worsened, a high D-dimer level (27500.8 ng/mL, reference range: < 500 ng/mL) was also noted.
On the 17th day after vaccination, while she visited our ED, a series of laboratory evaluations and autoimmune profile tests for the possible etiology of the CVT revealed normal findings in most tests, but weak positivity for anti--Sjögren’s-syndrome-related antigen A antibody (anti-SSA antibody: 12 U/mL, reference range: ≤ 7 U/mL) and antinuclear antibody (ANA: 1:80, reference range: negative). The fibrinogen level was 178.1 mg/dL (reference range: 200-400 mg/dL) and the international normalized ratio was 1.1 (reference range: 0.9-1.2). She still had low iron levels (14 µg/dL, reference range: 50-212 µg/dL) with normal transferrin levels. Anti-PF4 antibodies were also checked, which later showed positivity on ELISA (optical density: 3.4165, reference range: ≤ 0.4, Immucor GTI Diagnostics, Waukesha, WI, United States). The finding of the polymerase chain reaction test for SARS-CoV-2 from the nasal swab was negative.
The initial brain CT at the ED revealed focal edema over the right parietal lobe without hemorrhage and a hyperacute thrombus in her right cortical vein . Two hours later, brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an irregular contour of the right transverse sinus, which was unusual in female patients with this age, and hyperacute hemorrhage at the right parietal lobe .