A 34 year old male patient, a worker in the salt mines, presented to us complaining of diminished vision in both eyes since the past 10 years. He also complained of diminished night vision which was stationary and non-progressive. His vital parameters and general physical examination was noted to be within normal limits.
Ocular examination revealed a visual acuity of 6/36 (OD) and FCCF (OS). The pupillary reactions were sluggish in both eyes. The remainder of the anterior segment examination was noted to be normal. Fundus examination showed presence of widespread outer retinal atrophy with visible choroidal vessels and peripheral sub-retinal scarring. The left eye shows evidence of foveal atrophy. A small peripheral rim of normal retina, around 1 disc diameter in size, was noted on indirect ophthalmoscopy.
We initially considered a diagnosis of choroideremia, retinitis pigmentosa and scarred posterior uveitis. There was no family history of nyctalopia and an evaluation of his siblings revealed a normal retina. The blood-work on uveitis also came out to be negative.
We once again reviewed the past medical history and upon detailed inquisition the patient divulged a history of a suicide attempt 10 years ago. He stated that he had consumed the chemical used in the iodination of salt after which he noted the diminished vision in both eyes.
We carried out an OCT evaluation of the patient which showed evidence of outer retinal atrophy with associated sub-foveal scarring which was more pronounced in the left eye. A thinning of the choriocapillaris was evident in the OCT scans along with disruption in the continuity of the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) in the left eye at the fovea. An examination of the medical records revealed an old fundus fluorescein angiogram, from 10 years ago, which showed prominent areas of choroidal hyperfluoresence due to extensive window defects, indicative of RPE damage . An electro-retinogram of the patient noted a flat response in both eyes on scotopic stimulation.