A 25-year-old, right-hand dominant, White female with no significant past medical history presented to the emergency department with complaints of one week of right lower extremity numbness from her toes to her hip and three days of left lower extremity weakness. The patient’s weakness had been progressively getting worse to the point of using crutches because she was unable to pick up her left foot. She stated that she fell from standing height onto her left side, landing on a fully inflated air mattress while playing with her daughter three days before her numbness started, but reported no other traumatic injuries. She stated that the fall was minor and she didn’t think much of it. She stated that she went to a chiropractor two days after developing the right leg numbness without any significant improvement or worsening of her symptoms. The patient denied fevers, chill, facial weakness, numbness or paresthesias in upper extremities, difficulty swallowing, changes in speech, or visual symptoms.
On examination, the patient was alert and oriented to person, place, time, and situation. She was conversant, and her speech production and comprehension as well as cranial nerves were all normal. Visual fields were fully intact with no evidence of nystagmus or extraocular muscle weakness. Motor exam revealed complete, symmetrical strength, reflexes, and sensation in bilateral upper extremities. Lower extremity exam was significant for 3/5 strength in left hip flexion, 4/5 in left knee extension, 3/5 strength in left foot dorsiflexion, and 5/5 strength in left plantarflexion. The right leg showed full 5/5 strength in the previously mentioned muscle groups.
Following these exam findings, neurology was consulted with confirmation of the above findings as well as additional sensory deficits. Their exam showed right lower extremity with decreased pinprick and temperature sensation up to the thoracic (T) 11-T12 dermatomes. Left lower extremity had diminished proprioception and vibration with dysesthesia from the mid-shin down, but she was able to feel temperature and pinprick. The patient had sustained clonus at the left patella with 6–7 beats on the right patella. Ankle jerk was normal and symmetric. Babinski reflex was equivocal with significant withdrawal and negative Hoffman sign. Coordination was intact.
A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the patient’s brain, cervical, thoracic, and lumbar spine was completed to evaluate for the cause. Imaging showed multifocal areas of T2 hyperintensity throughout the spine with contrast enhancement, suspicious for a demyelinating or inflammatory disease without space-occupying lesions. The patient had large regions of active demyelination in the mid and lower cervical spine with nearly all levels involved. Although greatest areas of demyelination spanned from the fifth to seventh cervical vertebrae, these areas were asymptomatic . Magnetic resonance imaging of the head showed periventricular, juxtacortical, and infratentorial enhancing lesions, typical of multiple sclerosis .
Axial T2-weighted MRI images showed high signal intensity hemisecting the spinal cord at a level of the first lumbar vertebra, likely leading to her symptoms of BSS . Following the above findings, a diagnosis of Brown-Séquard syndrome was made and the patient was admitted for further workup as to the etiology of her neurologic deficits. Upon admission, the patient received further laboratory studies including workup for tuberculosis, John Cunningham virus, human immunodeficiency virus, extractable nuclear antigen antibody, antinuclear antibody, hepatitis C, neuromyelitis optica (NMO), hepatitis B, autoimmune encephalopathy, and kappa free light chains, all of which were within normal limits. The patient’s lumbar puncture revealed a lymphocytic pleocytosis.
As treatment, the patient received one gram of intravenous (IV) methylprednisolone for seven days with near complete recovery of strength by day three. She was discharged with mild residual numbness, but otherwise had a complete recovery. She was placed on outpatient IV ocrelizumab every six months as a disease-modifying agent.