The patient in this case was a 20-year-old male. He was admitted to our hospital with a 2-year history of pericardial cyst. He has no obvious discomfort and displayed no special positive signs. A chest X-ray examination showed bulging of the upper segment of the heart. Echocardiographic findings included a cystic dark area on the left ventricular lateral wall and anterolateral wall, consistent with a pericardial cyst and mild mitral regurgitation. Chest-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed that the left margin of the heart was saccular and the main pulmonary vein was tumor-like. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) of the pulmonary vein indicated a local tumor-like dilatation of the left atrium. No further obvious abnormalities were found in the other laboratory tests and inspection results. Based on the symptoms, signs, auxiliary examinations and medical history analysis, the patient was diagnosed as mild mitral regurgitation, however, because the texture and function of the valve leaflet were good, a secondary left atrial appendage tumor could be ruled out. In addition, the patient’s pericardium was continuous and complete, therefore, he was finally diagnosed as intrapericardial congenital LAAA.
The treatment was surgical resection. The surgical plan was resection of the atrial appendage aneurysm with beating-heart under general anesthesia and cardiopulmonary bypass. The surgical incision was a median sternotomy. The intubation methods adopted were vena cava intubation and aorta intubation. After opening the pericardium, the left atrial appendage showed tumor-like expansion, measuring about 7 × 7 cm . The expanded aneurysm was compressing the left upper pulmonary vein and the pulmonary artery trunk; its wall was thin, and the blood flow in it was slow. Upon exploring the atrial appendage aneurysm to its root, we found an obvious pedicle structure, so we chose to cut the aneurysm along the pedicle with a cutting stapler and gold nail . After confirming that the circumflex branch vessel was not affected and that no no obvious bleeding was present, we performed local reinforcement and suturing. The operation was smoothly completed, as confirmed by intraoperative transesophageal echocardiography. A bedside chest X-ray examination on the same day after the operation suggested the presence of many annular metal shadows in the middle of the chest, and the heart showed postoperative changes, but the rest of the X-ray findings were normal. The patient’s bedside transthoracic echocardiography prompts indicated no obvious abnormal echo mass was found in the left atrial appendage, and hhis heart rate was 132 beats/min. A routine pathological report of the excised left atrial appendage specimen showed fibrocystic wall-like tissue with a focal lining of flat epithelium was consistent with a benign cyst .
The patient recovered smoothly and the tracheal intubation was removed on the first day after the operation. He was transferred back to the general ward the next day and was successfully discharged from the hospital on the sixth day after the operation. Echocardiography before his discharge showed that mitral and tricuspid valves were slightly regurgitated. A coronary CTA showed no obvious abnormal changes in the coronary artery. The blood biochemical examinations showed no abnormality.
The patient returned to the outpatient clinic for re-examination one month after the operation. Echocardiography showed mild tricuspid regurgitation after resection of the LAAA. The re-examination results of the patient six months after the operation yielded results like those described above.