A 28 year old Caucasian woman was brought to our emergency department with a five hour history of progressive impairment in consciousness and slurred speech. Her past history was unremarkable, and she neither smoked nor drank alcohol. Her older brother said that she took no medications and she did not use illicit drugs as far as he knew. No history of head trauma was obtained. At the time of admission, her blood pressure was 140/70 mmHg with a pulse rate of 90 beats/minute, respiratory rate of 12 cycles/minute, and a temperature 37.1°C. Our patient was stuporous and there were no lateralizing signs or neck stiffness. Both planter reflexes were down. Our patient underwent a battery of investigations with the following results: hemoglobin 13.6 g/L; total white cell count 9100/mL3; platelets 270,000/mL3; mean corpuscular volume 84fL; mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration 33 g/dL; erythrocyte sedimentation rate 19 mm/hour; blood urea 35 mg/dL; serum creatinine 0.9 mg/dL; serum sodium 139 mEq/L; serum potassium 4.1 mEq/L; serum calcium 8.9 mg/dL; serum total bilirubin 0.8 mg/dL; aspartate transaminase 21 u/L; alanine transaminase 19 u/L; alkaline phosphatase 190 u/L; serum total protein 7.3 g/dL; serum albumin 4.4 g/dL; thyroid stimulating hormone 2.9 u/L; serum total triiodothyronine 1.3 nmol/L; serum total thyroxin 89 nmol/L; serum total cholesterol 177 mg/dL; serum triglyceride 100 mg/dL; low density lipoprotein cholesterol 128 mg/dL; very low density lipoprotein cholesterol 20 mg/dl; high density lipoprotein cholesterol 38 mg/dl; prothrombin time 12 seconds; activated partial thromboplastin time 31 seconds; a serum Venereal Disease Research Laboratory test was negative; and general urine examination and microscopy were unremarkable. Blood and urinary screening for cocaine, opioids and amphetamines was negative. A 12 lead electrocardiogram (ECG) was normal. A non contrast brain computed tomography (CT) scan showed bilateral hypodensities in her corpus striatum . In addition, there was a small hyper dense area at the anterior part of her right globus pallidus. The physician suspected encephalitis, and managed our patient accordingly. He ordered serology for toxoplasma and human immunodeficiency virus, and a lumber puncture was done: all of these tests turned out to be negative. At day four of admission, our patient became comatose, and our neurology department was consulted. The Glasgow coma scale was 3/15, no neck stiffness was detected, and both planter reflexes were up. On day five, a brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan with gadolinium revealed hemorrhagic infarctions involving both basal ganglia . Brain magnetic resonance angiography and magnetic resonance venography (MRV) were normal. Serum anti nuclear and rheumatoid factors as well as anti phospholipid antibodies were negative. Transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiographic examinations were normal, as was the carotid Doppler study.
Our patient was managed as ischemic stroke with secondary hemorrhagic transformation. Anti hypertensives and a statin were prescribed. Anti platelets and anticoagulation were not given. Gradually over a period of three weeks, our patient's consciousness improved to a degree of mild drowsiness. As for her language assessment, comprehension was intact but there was no speech output; she uttered few sounds, however, but no comprehensible words. She had generalized rigidity and hypokinesia. No abnormal movements were found and dystonic posturing was absent.