A 46-year-old Moroccan man with a history of cocaine and alcohol abuse, former smoker of 10 packs/year, detained in a penitentiary for 3 months, presented to an emergency department because of the finding by penitentiary doctors of severe anemia: hemoglobin (Hb) 43 g/L. He did not report previous concomitant comorbidities and he did not take any medication prior to hospital admission. It was difficult to collect a detailed family history because of a language barrier; he worked as a street vendor. He complained of progressive fatigue, arthromyalgia, upper finger paresthesia, mild abdominal pain, left ear tinnitus, and recurring headache for the previous 2 months. He denied fever, bleeding, and changes in bowel habits. At admission, severe normocytic anemia with Hb of 36 g/L, mean corpuscular volume (MCV) 87 fl, hematocrit (htc) 10.8%, and random distribution of red cell width (RDW) of 27% was confirmed, with neutropenia (0.59 × 109/L) and normal platelet count (15 × 109/L). On presentation he was oriented, afebrile (axillary temperature of 36 °C), and hemodynamically stable with blood pressure of 110/70 mmHg and a heart rate of 80 per minute. A physical examination showed pale skin, slight epigastralgia, and left tympanic membrane perforation; no lymphadenopathy, purpura, or hepatosplenomegaly were detected. A neurological examination was normal without any motor, sensory, or cranial nerves dysfunction except for slight upper finger paresthesia. Initial laboratory investigations revealed renal impairment with creatinine up to 176.8 μmol/L and azotemia 24.9 mmol/L, marked anisopoikilocytosis and multiple schistocytes (10%) on peripheral smear, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) increase (19.7 μkat/L), haptoglobin less than 1 mg/L, and normal bilirubinemia (17.1 μmol/L). Coagulation studies were normal except for slight elevation of D-dimer (2.63 nmol/L); markers of inflammation were negative; liver function was normal with aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 30 U/L and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 18 U/L. A direct Coombs test was negative, reticulocytes count was consistent with inappropriate bone marrow response (reticulocytes production index 0.061), and ferritin was within normal range.
Hydration with normal saline and blood transfusions with packed red blood cells were started. We observed an initial improvement of renal function but anemia did not improve enough despite transfusions with five bags of packed red blood cells, and it was associated to hemolysis (schistocytes, LDH further increase and haptoglobin consumed). In parallel we observed a progressive rapid decrease of platelet count down to 46 × 109/L and severe neutropenia was persistent without peripheral blasts. A diagnosis of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and hemolytic uremic syndrome was considered, but the rapid improvement of renal function with only hydration and the pancytopenia suggested a bone marrow deficiency associated to a hemolytic component of unclear origin. We decided to keep on with blood transfusion support and to strictly monitor our patient until the results of further investigations; meanwhile, we started intramuscular vitamin B12 1000 mcg daily because of extremely low, barely detectable, plasma levels (< 36.9 pmol/L). Serology for cytomegalovirus, Epstein–Barr virus, parvovirus B19, and Toxoplasma gondii were negative (past infection) as were serology for human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis virus. Bone marrow aspirate revealed normal cellularity with different cell types at various stages of maturation and without dysplastic alterations. An abdomen ultrasound showed normal kidneys and very slight splenomegaly (bipolar diameter 12.2 cm) without hepatomegaly and lymphadenopathy. See Additional file : Figure S1 for the timeline of the diagnostic and therapeutic flow of the present case report.
A week after beginning the vitamin B12 supplement we observed a dramatic hematological improvement with simultaneous decrease of hemolysis indexes; marked anisopoikilocytosis with teardrop cells (5%) persisted on peripheral smear without schistocytes . Anti-parietal cell antibodies were negative; upper endoscopy showed moderate gastric corpus atrophy, without presence of Helicobacter pylori. Recovery was complicated by pneumonia and urinary tract infections which were treated with intravenously administered amoxicillin/clavulanic acid.
We discharged our asymptomatic patient 2 weeks after admission with normal renal function, moderate normocytic anemia (85 g/L), and normal platelet and neutrophil count (484 × 109/L and 2.79 × 109/L, respectively).
At a follow-up of 6 months, he was alive but it was not possible to collect further medical information because we were informed that he was a fugitive.