A 48-year-old male was referred to our Endocrine clinic for obesity. He did not report any other symptoms. However, he reported that two years previously, he had been assessed in his home country for obesity, and routine workup indicated hormonal abnormalities. He had been diagnosed with a 3.5 × 3.5 cm pituitary macroadenoma on MRI. He received cabergoline 0.5 mg twice a week for 6 months to treat high prolactin levels. He subsequently discontinued this medication on his own and was lost to follow-up. His Epworth sleepiness score, to assess daytime sleepiness, was 6, which is normal. He was single and he never tried sexual intercourse or fathered a child. He was working as a laborer. He had no family history of pituitary diseases. On examination at our clinic, his blood pressure was 127/79 mmHg, his weight was 130 kg, and his BMI was 49.5 kg/m. No remarkable findings were noted on general examination. Blood workup revealed hyperprolactinemia, with a level of 7,237 mIU/L (normal range: 85–323), acromegaly with an IGF-1 level of 450 ug/L (normal range: 88–210), and a positive GH suppression test. Secondary hypothyroidism [TSH: 2.52 mIU/L (normal range: 0.3–4.2), FT4: 9.7 pmol/L (normal range: 11.6–21.9)] and secondary hypogonadism [FSH: 1.2 IU/L (normal range: 1.5–12.4), LH: 1.1 IU/L (normal range: 1.7–8.6), testosterone: 0.14 nmol/L (normal range: 10.4–30.86)] were also observed, along with a confirmed normal adrenal axis on the short synacthen test. In addition, HbA1C was 6%, which was in the prediabetes stage (normal: < 5.7%). The baseline workup is summarized in .
The patient underwent a pituitary MRI at our institution , which showed an irregular, mainly suprasellar T1 isointense, T2 dark, and homogenously enhancing pituitary macroadenoma (maximum axial diameter of about 29 mm). It encased parts of the left and right internal carotid arteries as well as ventral to the upper part of the basilar artery. The mass encroached on the left side of the optic chiasm and the prechiasmatic course of the left optic nerve. The pituitary stalk was displaced to the right side.
Perimetry assessment showed a constricted field mainly on the temporal side for the right eye and a constricted visual field for the left eye as well.
Due to the extensive nature of the macroadenoma, complete surgical excision was deemed unfeasible. The patient was reluctant to undergo a debulking procedure. As the cost of octreotide was prohibitive for the patient, treatment with cabergoline was initiated, with the dose gradually increased to 0.5 mg daily. Additionally, he received replacement therapy with testosterone undecanoate intramuscular injections and levothyroxine. Prolactin levels normalized ; however, IGF-1 did not improve . To address this, with the help of a charity, octreotide LAR was added at 20 mg every 4 weeks for 3 months, then escalated to 30 mg every 4 weeks for another 3 months, and further to 40 mg every 4 weeks for an additional 3 months; however, IGF-1 levels did not improve [IGF-1: 405 µg/L (normal: 79–214)]. Consequently, octreotide LAR was discontinued, and the patient was maintained on cabergoline monotherapy at the lowest effective dose to control hyperprolactinemia (0.5 mg/week). During this treatment course, regular examinations were conducted, including a pituitary MRI every 6–12 months, which showed no changes. Screening tests for acromegaly patients were unrevealing; echocardiography results were unremarkable, polysomnography found no obstructive sleep apnea, colonoscopy results were unremarkable, and no nodules were found on thyroid ultrasound. The patient was referred for radiotherapy and underwent two sessions but discontinued the treatment due to fear of side effects. He was referred to a dietitian to help with obesity management, where he lost 4 kg through dietary control. It is possible he could not reduce his weight more as he was a laborer, regularly eating commercially prepared meals.
Recently, pasireotide became available at our institution, and the patient was initiated on pasireotide LAR 40 mg every 4 weeks in addition to the ongoing cabergoline 0.5 mg per week. Before starting pasireotide, the patient’s IGF-1 level was 525 µg/L (normal range: 79–214). It decreased to 221 ug/L after 3 months and remained stable after another 3 months. Thereafter, we increased cabergoline dose from 0.5 mg/week to 3 mg/week. Three months later, he reported that he felt generally better and more active. IGF-1 level became normal (176 µg/L). Growth hormone levels also decreased to 0.48 ug/L after 3 months and remained below 1 ug/L thereafter. Pituitary MRI after 6 months of pasireotide treatment showed no changes . However, after 6 weeks on pasireotide, the patient developed type 2 diabetes. Currently, his diabetes is well-controlled on metformin 1 g twice daily and sitagliptin 100 mg per day. Other common side effects of pasireotide are diarrhea, abdominal pain, and headache. The patient reported these side effects only in the 3–4 days after each injection. However, they did not stop him from continuing the medication. His current medication regimen includes pasireotide LAR 40 mg every 4 weeks, cabergoline 3 mg per week, levothyroxine 200 mcg per day, testosterone undecanoate 1 g every 12 weeks, metformin 1 g twice daily, and sitagliptin 100 mg per day.