A 67-year-old female was hospitalized with severe low back pain with radiating pain in the left lower limb for 5 years. Symptoms worsened in the last 1 wk. She had exhausted conservative treatments and intended to proceed with surgery.
Five years before hospitalization, the patient began to experience aching pain in the waist, accompanied by pain and numbness in the left lower limb ranging from the posterior thigh and the posterolateral crus to the dorsolateral foot, especially obvious at the 4th and 5th toes. There was no weakness of lower limbs and no urination difficulty. The patient was not able to walk more than 100 m without rest. The uncomfortable symptoms often occurred after overwalking and catching a cold, but could be relieved via physical therapy and NSAIDs. One week before hospitalization, the above symptoms were significantly aggravated, accompanied by progressively extensive weakness of the left lower extremity and with conservative treatment giving unsatisfactory results. Lumbar computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated L4/5 intervertebral disc prolapse and lumbar X-ray imaging showed grade I L4 anterolisthesis from another hospital.
The patient was diagnosed with atrial septal defect five years before hospitalization and treated with repair surgery. She underwent operation because of lipoma located on the left trunk during the same year. She denied history of hypertension or diabetes. No history of trauma or malignant tumors were identified.
There was no special history or personal history. The patient was unaware of SCM before and denied family history of SCM.
Examination showed normal curvature of the lumbar spine without scoliosis deformity and no foot abnormality. There was a round skin sag of 1.5 cm in diameter located in the sacrococcygeal region with chromatosis but no hair. Slight tenderness and percussion pain in the paraspinal muscles were found. The left lower extremity had slight hypoalgesia and hypopselaphesia. Waist activities in different directions were somewhat limited because of pain, especially in extension. There was extensive weakness in the left lower limb, with hip flexors strength graded IV, knee flexion muscle strength graded III+, knee extension strength graded III and foot dorsiflexion strength graded III. The Lasegue sign was positive in the left lower limb. Bilateral tendon reflexes showed suspicious hyperactivity with lower limbs’ muscle tension slightly increased.
Her baseline severity of low back pain and left lower limb pain was 90 mm and 90 mm, respectively, on a 100-mm visual analog scale (VAS) when she was admitted into our hospital. We used the Oswestry Disability Index (ODI) to evaluate lumbar function and the score was 64.
The routine blood and blood biochemical parameters of the patient were within normal limits.
Anteroposterior and lateral X-ray imaging showed a grade I L4 spondylolisthesis and the flexion-extension X-ray imaging demonstrated instability at that level. Lumbar CT scan showed the L2-S1 intervertebral disc was swollen with the dura sac compressed to varying degrees, in addition to the L4 spondylolisthesis. Thoracic CT scan showed that the left part of the ligamentum flavum was thickened and ossified at the T11-12 Level with the posterior dura sac obviously compressed and that there were block vertebrae (T8/T9) and a butterfly vertebra (T9). Lumbar magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed L4 spondylolisthesis and the L4-5 intervertebral disc bulge compressing bilateral nerve roots, which was more serious on the left side. Additionally, SCM was observed; the spinal was split into two hemicords from the lower aspect of T12 to the upper aspect of L2, accompanied by a low-lying conus terminating at S1 with a thickened terminal filament deposited by fatty tissue .