We describe a 58 year old African American female with rheumatoid arthritis and type II diabetes who consulted for a 5 years old chronic, vesicular/blistering itchy rash involving her hands and feet. The patient also reported a distant, possible past clinical diagnosis of lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis (RA), which have not been confirmed by proper examination. The hand and foot rash initially presented in 2003. The patient was treated unsuccessfully by several physicians with terbinafine hydrochloride. In August, 2008, the patient re-presented to a second dermatology practice. At the time of the August presentation, the patient had also been evaluated by a podiatrist, and had been treated topically and orally with naftifine HCl 1% cream and clobetasol propionate Her concurrent medications on presentation to the dermatologist included Amavil©, sitagliptin and abatacept, and quinapril hydrochloride tablets for her hypertension.
The physical exam revealed the presence of several hyperpigmented macules and a few patches, in addition to tense microvesicles observed on the palms and soles. Laboratory analysis of the presentation included a normal potassium hydroxide (KOH) test normal, thiopurine methyltransferase (45.3 U/Ml) (normal range 40.0-65.0 U/Ml), normal glomerular filtration rate calculated for African American female 98 (normal range >60). The red blood cell distribution width, (RDW) was slightly elevated at 16.8 % (normal range11.5-14.0 %). The majority of her comprehensive metabolic panel including calcium, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, total protein, albumin, total bilirubin, sodium, potassium, carbon dioxide and chloride was also within normal limits. The alkaline phosphatase was within normal limits; however, the aspartate aminotransferase) (AST) (SGOT) was slightly elevated (153 MG/DL) (normal range 30-120 MG/DL), and the glucose as well (175 MG/DL) (normal range 70-100 MG/DL). The laboratory examination also revealed several extractable nuclear antigens such us SSA/Ro at 19.5 (normal range 0-16), and an elevated SSB/La at 71.9 (normal range 0-16). In addition, an elevated double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) was noted at 29.7 (normal range 0-25), as well as an elevated anti-nuclear antibody (ANA) at 1:160, and an elevated rheumatoid factor (RF) at 221.1 (normal range 0-14).The anti-extractable nuclear antigens Sm/RNP were normal.
Histologically: Review of the H&E slides demonstrated diffuse, intraepidermal vesicles, moderate epidermal spongiosis with the presence of epidermal Langerhans cell microabcesses. No subepidermal blisters were noted, and the dermis displayed a moderately florid superficial perivascular infiltrate of lymphocytes, histiocytes and occasional eosinophils. Evidence of a vascular allergic component was noted, i.e., focal perivascular leukocytoclastic debris without frank vasculitis was appreciated. The hematoxylin and eosin (H & E) diagnosis was consistent with spongiotic dermatitis with dyshidrotic eczema. However, given the previously described vascular findings, the diagnosis of a concomitant allergic drug component was suggested.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC): To study the possible immune response in situ we performed IHC by using a dual endogenous peroxidase blockage, according to the Dako (Denmark) insert, with the addition of Envision dual link. Furthermore, we applied 3, 3 diaminobenzidine and counterstained with hematoxylin. The samples were run in a Dako Autostainer Universal Staining System. We tested for mouse anti-human CD3, CD4, CD8, CD45, HLA DP, DR, DQ, myeloperoxidase (MPO), and rabbit anti-human IgM, and anti-human fibrinogen. Our tests showed positive staining with several antibodies by IHC of the sweat glands and its ductus as well as to some vessels in proximity where the main inflammatory process was found .
Multicolor direct immunofluorescence (MDIF): In brief, perilesional skin in Michel's medium (Newcomer Supply Parview Road, Middleton, WI, USA) was washed with PBS; 4 um thickness skin cryosections were incubated with FITC-conjugated antibodies. The following antibodies were utilized: a), rabbit anti-human IgG (γ chain), b), rabbit anti-human IgA (α chains) c) rabbit anti-human IgM (μ-chain), (all at 1:20 dilutions), rabbit anti-human C3 and d) rabbit anti-human fibrinogen, and e) rabbit anti-human albumin (both at 1:40 dilutions, and all from Dako, Carpinteria, California, USA). In addition, we also used goat anti-human IgE antiserum conjugated with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) (Vector Laboratories, Bridgeport New Jersey, USA). Unconjugated rabbit anti-human IgE antiserum was also utilized. The slides were then counterstained with 4’, 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (Dapi) (Pierce, Rockford, Illinois, USA). In addition, a mouse anti human collagen IV (H & L) at 2mg/ml from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, California, USA) was utilized, with Alexa Fluor® 555 from Invitrogen as its secondary. The DIF examination revealed the presence of anti-human IgE (+++) surrounding several papillary and deep dermal blood vessels, and overexpression of collagen IV within those vessel walls. In addition, focal, linear BMZ deposits of C3 (++), IgE (++), IgA (+), albumin (++) and fibrinogen (++) were observed, specifically noted along the BMZ in patchy areas near the prominent, previously described vascular deposits of IgE (i.e., in close proximity to selected superficial papillary blood vessels) .