Our patient was a 62-year-old Caucasian male with a long-standing history of acne rosacea who developed severe rhinophyma over several years which lead to nasal obstruction and major cosmetic deformity. He did not seek previous treatment as the skin changes were so gradual that it was not noticed until the rhinophyma reached significant size. Many patients in fact do not notice the skin changes until they see an old picture of themselves. In pre-op evaluation, his affected skin was noted to be porous, edematous, and had a rough texture.
The decision was made to take the patient to the operating room (OR) given the severity of the disease and the possibility of significant blood loss at the time of excision. The patient was placed in a supine position for induction of general endotracheal anesthesia. Preoperative Cefazolin was given IV for infection prophylaxis. In the OR, a loop cautery tip (Bovie ¾ short shaft thin wire disposable electrode, Bovie Medical Antioch, TN) was utilized to perform meticulous dissection layer by layer of the hypertrophic skin of the radix down to the tip, lateral nasal walls, and nasal alae. This was done with multiple passes using cutting current to create a smooth contour. Multiple cysts were encountered during removal of excess skin at the dorsal tip and nasal alae and they were drained simultaneously. Colorado cautery tip (Stryker, Kalamazoo, MI) was then used to level all irregularities of the skin from the excision and to control hemostasis. A field block with 0.5% Marcaine plain was placed for postoperative pain control. Estimated blood loss was 20 cc’s. The total procedure length was less than 90 min. Topical bacitracin ointment was applied generously to the treated area. The patient was admitted to the hospital for 23-h observation for adequate postoperative pain management, wound care education and to monitor blood loss of the raw de-epithelized areas .
The patient had his first follow-up appointment in the clinic two weeks after discharge from the hospital. He described substantial improvement in breathing and satisfaction with the cosmetic result. The patient reported that he used to feel embarrassed about the way his nose appeared that even when stopped at a traffic light, he would cover his nose with his hand to avoid the stares from nearby cars. Now he has a new sense of self-confidence and no longer feels the need to hide his nose.
There was some skin scabbing as expected, however by four weeks post-op, the patient’s skin was scab free with normal pigmentation. The patient was advised to avoid direct exposure to sunlight, and the importance of SPF 30 sunscreen use was emphasized to prevent skin hyperpigmentation .