A 30-year-old male patient (F.H.) with no previous medical history presented to the emergency room at 2:00 am after 3 days of persistent ongoing typical chest pain. He reported similar episodes of angina pectoris within the last two and half years, i.e. at 27 years of age, of same quality, lasting between 10-15 seconds, with the longest pain being intermittent over a 3-day period. However, for the last 6 month he has been pain free.
Physical exam was unremarkable except for elevated blood pressure of 170/90 mmHg in both arms. The electrocardiogram showed minimally diffuse ST segment depressions of 0.5mm in the lateral leads (I, aVL, V3-V6) . Blood tests revealed an elevated creatinine phosphokinase (CPK: 581U/I, normal range: <196U/I), and elevated high sensitivity troponin T (hsTNT: 0.954 ng/ml, normal range: <0.014 ng/ml), while myoglobin and CK-MB were in the normal range .
Accordingly, the patient was diagnosed with Non-ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction (NSTEMI), loaded with 500mg of acetyl salicylic acid, a bolus dose of heparin (5000 IU) and underwent a coronary angiography, which showed an occlusion of what seemed a markedly aneurysmatic circumflex artery with a diameter of up to 6.2mm just after the bifurcation of the posterolateral branch. . Due to the large thrombus burden, wiring of the circumflex ended up being a frustrating and cumbersome procedure even with balloon back-up . After successful placement of the wire in the distal circumflex, multiple attempts to manually aspirate and thereafter dilate the blood vessel with a compliant 4.0x20mm balloon failed to open the occluded artery (Fig. and Moving Image and Hence, the procedure was stopped and a loading dose of prasugrel of 60 mg was given along with a continuous intravenous infusion of the glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor eptifibatide.
The two operators on site re-evaluated the available options for further management. i) Conservative treatment with oral anti-coagulation, ii) Conservative treatment with dual antiplatelet therapy alone, iii) Continuous infusion of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor and a second trial to attempt opening the vessel percutaneously.
Twelve hours later, a second look angiography documented a persistent occlusion of the circumflex artery . Hence, a second attempt to open the occluded artery was undertaken. With the use of a Fielder FC wire (Terumo, Japan) and the help of a Finecross Microcatheter (Terumo, Japan) we were able to place the guidewire in a very distal portion of this hugely aneurysmatic and tortuous vessel. Injection through the microcatheter showed a completely thrombosed circumflex artery along its runoff . Manual aspiration and repeated balloon dilatations with NC Quantum Maverick and Maverick balloon (Boston Scientific, 300 Boston Scientific Way Marlborough) again failed to open the artery At this point, a bolus dose of intracoronary Abciximab (ReoproR; Janssen-Cilag Zug, Schweiz) was administered distally through the FinecrossR and a continuous intra-venous perfusion was planned.
Echocardiography done after the procedures during the index hospitalization revealed a normal left ventricular ejection fraction of 57% with hypo-kinesis of the infero- and anterolateral wall as well as a right ventricle of normal size and function (TAPSE=21mm) with no evidence of pulmonary hypertension Furthermore, a coronary CT scan with i.v. contrast performed on the third day of admission, 48 hours after continuous administration of the glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor Abciximab and of normalization of the ECG , continued to documented a persistently occluded circumflex artery with no hint to whether the artery ended as a distal coronary fistula. .
Subsequent to an interdisciplinary discussion regarding the treatment strategy in a thrombosed circumflex-arterial fistula, the asymptomatic patient was discharged 4 days after an uneventful hospitalization on 100 mg of acetylsalicylic acid and 10 mg of prasugrel for 12 months.
After discharge, the patient underwent an extensive hematological work-up, which showed no evidence of thrombophilia or of a hypercoagulable state . Additionally, cardiac MR showed a mildly depressed systolic LV function with inferior and inferolateral, basal akinesia. T2 weighted images confirmed myocardial edema (recent infarction) as well as late gadolinium enhancement exposed transmural scarring .