We describe the case of a 40-year-old Caucasian woman who had first been examined at the Department of Internal Medicine of our University Hospital three years ago for a Reynaud-like disorder. Her medical history was unremarkable except for an oligomenorrhea since she was 26 years of age. A physical examination revealed a fair condition. A chest X-ray showed a peripheral lesion, approximately 8 cm in diameter, of the third right rib with cortical expansion; this was confirmed by a contrast tomography scan. The lesion was associated with an area of bone rarefaction of the lamina of L2. The bone mass was suspected of being a neoplastic lesion. Subsequently,m99Tc bone scintigraphy revealed a hyper-metabolic focus in the rib and in the medial condylus of the right femur, while an magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan showed an aneurysmal cystic bone lesion. Costal biopsy showed numerous osteoclast-like giant plurinuclear cells, without necrosis, mitoses or histological signs of malignancy; a picture compatible with GCT of bone. Six months after diagnosis, the mass was surgically removed and local curettage was performed, with excision of the right major pectoralis and part of the II, III and IV right ribs. Histology showed a neoplasm with a solid structure made up of bland mononuclear stromal cells and an osteoclast-type giant cell-rich component, a picture compatible with GCT.
On gross examination, the surgical specimen consisted of a soft, well circumscribed endothoracic mass of 6 × 4.5 × 2.2 cm, with a tan and fleshy cut surface, which conglobated two ribs (11 cm and 5.5 cm in length). On microscopic examination, the tumor was seen to be composed of a large number of single multinucleated giant cells diffusely distributed on a background of spindle-shaped, oval or polygonal mononuclear cells; these latter cells were characterized by abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and oval nuclei without atypia. No aggregates of giant cells were observed. Necrosis and areas of hemorrhage were not observed. The mononuclear component displayed a low mitotic index (6/10 high-power field [HPF]) .
One month after surgery, during the first medical and laboratory follow-up examination, an increase in serum calcium (3.6 mmol/L) and alkaline phosphatase (ALP: 501 U/L) levels was found. Our patient's parathyroid function was found to be elevated (parathyroid hormone [PTH]: 712 ng/L). Our patient was referred for endocrine evaluation two months after surgery. Review of her medical records revealed hypercalcemia, which had been underestimated at the first examination. Her family history was negative for parathyroid and other endocrine diseases. PHPT was suspected. No cervical masses were palpable. Neck ultrasonography identified a round lesion located behind and below the right thyroid lobe and compatible with an enlarged parathyroid gland, whereas the thyroid was normal . A99 mTc-sestamibi scan revealed a hyper-functioning area in the upper right portion of the thyroid bed, which was suspected of being an underlying parathyroid adenoma . Cytological examination of a fine-needle aspiration biopsy of the nodular lesion was compatible with a parathyroid adenoma. Sequencing of the multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN)-1 gene proved normal. All biochemical data observed before parathyroidectomy are reported in Table and in the legend to Figure . A mini-invasive parathyroidectomy was scheduled. Histology confirmed the diagnosis of adenoma of the right inferior parathyroid gland. Post-operative laboratory tests showed normal levels of serum calcium (2.3 mmol/L) and PTH (80 ng/L). After a review of bone slices, the final diagnosis of the bone disease was a brown tumor secondary to probably long-standing underestimated PHPT. At present, one year later, our patient is free from symptoms and dual-emission X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) has shown that her bone density has improved .