A 52-year-old male, with a history of recurrent multiple TIAs, presented immediately after the onset of blurred vision and right-sided weakness, which we confirmed with the physical examination. This patient has no medical history of TIA risk factors. Based on the clinical history and examination, a left internal carotid artery (ICA) stenosis was suspected and the patient was admitted for immediate therapeutic cerebral catheter angiography.
The initial diagnostic cerebral angiogram revealed a left CCA stenosis of <30%, with normal posterior circulation vasculature. However, we could not examine the anterior circulation of the brain due to technical difficulties, which we will discuss later. As a result, the therapeutic catheterization was discontinued and medical treatment was warranted. A computed tomography angiography (CTA) of the head, neck, chest, and abdomen was recommended for a more thorough examination.
The native CT study of the brain after 45 days of catheterization showed signs of watershed infarction involving the right posterior frontal and parieto-occipital cortex. The CTA confirmed diffuse stenosis of nearly 30–50% in the left CCA and ICA, involving the entire vessel length, with diffuse circumferential mural thickening. However, a segment of mild narrowing (nearly 30%) was seen involving the right CCA measuring 30 mm in length, with a normal diameter of the right ICA. The circle of Willis was normal with a hypoplastic left A1 segment of the anterior cerebral artery with no vessel wall irregularities .
The diagnosis of RAA was made with CTA of the thoracic and abdominal aorta, which revealed Type 2 RAA, with ALSA, which had a bullous dilatation at its origin that suggests Kommerell’s diverticulum . The RAA was lying on the right side of the trachea and esophagus, with its branches being in the following order: the left CCA first, followed by the right CCA, the right SCA, and finally, the ALSA. The course of the ALSA was posterior to the trachea and esophagus. However, no definite evidence of tracheal or esophageal compression was noted in the CTA. There were no cardiac abnormalities. The ascending aorta was normal in diameter with no wall irregularities. However, the root was ectatic with a diameter of 32 mm at the annulus and 5 cm at the aortic sinus, suggesting an aortic root aneurysm. The descending aorta was mildly tortuous with a near midline position and positioned to the right mildly. However, atherosclerotic thickenings were seen involving the descending thoracic and abdominal aorta and iliac arteries.
Another two unexpected findings on CTA were a persistent left-sided superior vena cava (PLSVC) that ended in the coronary sinus, then to the right atrium. A single pelvic fused renal mass (Pancake kidney) was discovered at the lower end plate of the L4 to S3 vertebrae, with a single ureter terminating into the left vesicoureteral junction. Moreover, a single renal artery arises from the right common iliac artery and divides later into two major arteries.
Highlighting the endovascular difficulties is critical since the atypical anatomy will affect the entire procedure, from increased operation time to failing to complete the examination. This case formulates in a retrograde fashion as we did not recognize the difficulty until after the catheterization had already begun.
The cerebral angiography was performed using a 5-F (Vert; Merit) diagnostic catheter through a right trans-femoral route. Because the anatomical characteristics of a RAA limit catheter navigation, the first attempts to reach any of the main arteries of the Aortic Arch were unsuccessful. As a result, we replaced the (Vert; Merit) catheter with a (SIM1; Merit) catheter, which failed to reach them despite several maneuvers performed by the examiner. Finally, we shifted to the (SIM2; Merit) catheter, which yielded some results.
The (SIM2; Merit) catheter was placed into the aortic arch. First, we navigated the catheter at the left SCA origin; injection of the contrast material showed a small diameter left SCA and hypoplastic left VA. The origin of the left SCA was dilated, known as Kommerell’s diverticulum . At the same time, injection of the contrast material at the brachiocephalic trunk origin showed a large diameter right SCA with a dominant right VA. However, the brachiocephalic trunk was absent and the four major branches arose independently. At this time, we speculated that it was a type of congenital anomaly; otherwise, we did not yet know about it.
The carotids were the major challenge. We could not visualize their shadows by injecting contrast material near their origins or accessing them even with varying angles and maneuvers; all these efforts were unsuccessful in visualizing them. After several attempts of catheter navigation, the injection of the contrast material at the ascending aorta successfully visualized them only . Nevertheless, we could not access them, so we could not examine the brain’s anterior circulation.