A 48-year-old woman presented to the gastroenterologist at a local hospital with a 1-year history of dysphagia, which had been progressively worsening over the preceding two months. During endoscopy, a bulging tumor 70 mm in length with an intact overlying mucosa was observed in the esophagus 30 cm away from the incisor . Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) demonstrated a hypoechoic and homogeneous mass in the submucosal layer. Subsequently, a chest computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a homogeneous irregular mass arising from the posterior wall of the distal esophageal wall that was 69 × 36 mm in size and compressed the esophagus and trachea . Physical examinations, biochemical tests and cardiopulmonary function were normal. This patient had no medical or family history and was referred to our department for further treatment. Surgical evaluations were discussed preoperatively. Based on the current imaging data, a diagnosis of esophageal SMT was made, most likely leiomyoma. The patient was not recommended further preoperative endoscopic biopsy, which could probably result in mucosal adhesion to the tumor and a subsequently increased risk of mucosal injury during surgery. Taking into consideration the precarious location and large size of the tumor, a decision of robot-assisted resection surgery via the right transthoracic approach was made. The plan was to completely excise the tumor and maintain the integrity of the esophageal mucosa with a low threshold for conversion. Additionally, an esophagectomy with intrathoracic gastroesophagostomy was prepared if the tumor could not be removed.
The surgical procedure was performed using a da Vinci Surgical System (Model S; Intuitive Surgical, Inc., Sunnyvale, CA, USA). After induction of general anesthesia and placement of a double-lumen endotracheal tube, the patient was placed in the left lateral decubitus position. A 12-mm camera port was inserted at the 10th intercostal space (ICS) at the midaxillary line. Under direct vision, three additional trocars were inserted under thoracoscopic guidance as follows: an 8-mm port in the 7th ICS at the anterior axillary line for the first robotic arm, an 8-mm port in the 10th ICS at the posterior axillary line for the second robotic arm, and finally, a 12-mm auxiliary port in the 9th intercostal space immediately between the camera port and the first robotic port . We used CO2 insufflation with 8–10 mmHg pressure. After all the trocars were positioned, the robot was brought in from the head of the patient with the assistant surgeon on the patient’s left side. The hook or Maryland was manipulated by the first arm of the robot. The Cadiere forceps was manipulated by the second arm. The right lung was retracted laterally, exposing the esophagus. By incising the mediastinal pleura, a large bulge was clearly visualized in the distal esophagus in the confined posterior mediastinal space . A longitudinal myotomy was performed to expose the mass, in which a retraction suture was placed by 3–0 Vicryl (Ethicon US, LLC, Cincinnati, OH) and held by an assistant. The lesion was separated from the surrounding muscle and mucosa using a combination of sharp and blunt dissection under three-dimensional vision and wrist-like movement of the robotic instruments followed by enucleation . The split muscular layer and mediastinal pleura were loosely reapproximated with 2–0 Vicryl sutures . The integrity of the mucosa was confirmed by air insufflation of the esophagus and upper endoscopic inspection . The lesion was removed from the thorax in a specimen retrieval bag. Grossly, the 70 × 60 × 40 mm tumor was encapsulated . A 32-Fr chest tube was placed into one of the camera port sites under direct vision. The total operative time was 108 min, and the blood loss was less than 20 ml.
The patient was well postoperatively. On the third day, a postoperative gastrograffin swallow demonstrated no leaks or stricture. At this time, the patient started a liquid diet with good tolerance. She was discharged on the fifth day after operation. Histopathological examination revealed compact bundles of spindle cells . Immunohistochemical staining was positive for S-100 protein . The pathologic diagnosis of the tumor was a benign esophageal schwannoma. The patient remained asymptomatic and exhibited no evidence of recurrence at the 50-month follow-up postoperatively.