A 57-years-old female was admitted to the department of infectious diseases in our hospital with symptoms of cough and expectoration, aggravating with fever and dyspnea for more than 10 days. This patient was retired and she kept chickens at home; she had a history of thyroma and hypertension for an unknown period of time. She denied any history of prior lung disease or neurological illness.
She had complained of cough with white sputum after catching a cold 10 days before admission to the hospital, with no chest discomfort or dyspnea. Her symptoms became worse with the onset of a high fever (up to 39 degrees Celsius), accompanied by aches and pains all over the body and loss of appetite. She underwent treatment with cefotaxime sodium (2.0 g, q12H) for 3 days in a local clinic, however her symptoms continued to worsen and she was transferred to a general hospital. There she tested positive for influenza A virus infection on a rapid diagnostic test. The doctor suspected a severe influenza A virus infection and prescribed 150 mg of oseltamivir to be taken orally twice daily. She concomitantly received treatment of Tazocin (4.5 g q8H) and SoluMedrol (40 mg, Bid). This patient was confirmed to have the influenza A virus (subtype H3N2), according to virus culture tests and reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction analyses (RT-PCR) of the patient’s nasopharyngeal secretions, performed in the lab of the state’s center for disease control and prevention (CDC).
On her fourth day taking oseltamivir, the patient’s family noticed that she was suffering from hallucinations and interrupted delirium, and exhibiting unusual behaviors such as removing her own infusion pipe. She insisted that somebody was calling her to go to heaven, and that all of the doctors and nurses were malicious. She also presented with shakiness of both her upper extremities and her teeth from time to time. This lasted for seconds at a time and she was able to control the shakiness consciously, without foam at the mouth. She did not suffer from incontinence nor convulsions. She developed further symptoms including delusion and impaired calculation ability, however showed normal response intermittently, especially during the administration of benzodiazepine infusion (diazepam). The neuropsychiatric symptoms did not fluctuate nor deteriorate according to oseltamivir dosing times, and the patient continued to receive oral oseltamivir to fight the influenza A virus.
Four days after initiating treatment, the patient’s fever subsided and the respiratory symptoms alleviated. The oral oseltamivir was discontinued at that point. Her neuropsychiatric symptoms began to improve within a few days, and she was able to give correct answers to questions about her name, her families’ names, her age, and her location, as well as to perform simple calculations (additions and subtractions). She recovered completely within 10 days of the cessation of oseltamivir, and with continued administration of benzodiazepine for 5 days during treatment.