A woman in her fifties presented at the department of ophthalmology in Yamagata University Hospital with hyperemia, lacrimation, foreign body sensation, and exophthalmos in her right eye. She had been aware of the symptoms for four months, and exophthalmos had been developing for two months thereafter. On visiting an ophthalmology clinic at that time, her chief complaints were hyperemia, lacrimation, and foreign body sensation in the right eye. The presence of an orbital tumor was suspected. She denied any history of malignancy.
Initial examination showed that there was no bilateral difference in pupil diameter, and the light reflex was rapid. There was no relative afferent pupillary defect in either eye. Best corrected visual acuity (logMAR unit) was 2.5 (right eye) and 0 (left eye), and intraocular pressure was 22 mmHg (right eye) and 14 mmHg (left eye). Hertel exophthalmometry showed 22 mm (right eye) and 12 mm (left eye). Right exophthalmos was prominent, and an elastic soft mass was palpated from the lateral orbit to the temporal region.
Examination of the anterior segment in the right eye showed superficial punctate keratopathy with erosion below the cornea, and conjunctival injection. Mild cataracts were observed in both eyes. The fundus had no remarkable lesions. Goldmann perimetry showed mildly decreased sensitivity of the central visual field in the right eye. Eye movement of the right eye was limited in superduction.
MRI revealed a well circumscribed mass lesion measuring 6 × 7.5 × 7 cm behind the right eye. The tumor was contrast-enhancement with gadolinium. Coronal STIR images showed an invasion into extraocular muscles, an optic nerve compression and bone destruction due to a giant mass, and further displacement of the brain parenchyma . Multiparametric MRI showed that the orbital tumor was hypointense and hyperintense relative to fat on T1-weighted and T2-weighted images, respectively, as well as being contrast enhanced by gadolinium, thus showing the characteristics of a metastatic tumor. FDG - PET/CT revealed irregular accumulation of FDG in the left breast . There was no significant accumulation of FDG in other organs. The orbital tumor was considered to have metastasized from breast cancer because the breast cancer was diagnosed by PET-CT and MRI. Blood tests for tumor markers, including breast cancer, were negative. Her Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Performance score was 1.
The patients had been aware of a slow-growing lump in her left breast for several years, but had not sought medical advice. An ulcer measuring 2.0 × 1.8 cm being surrounded with erythematous lesion (2.9 × 2.3 cm) was found in the left breast and we performed an excisional biopsy from the ulcer lesion.
The pathology of the left breast ulcer is shown in . The tumor cells had small, round to spindle-shaped nuclei with a fine chromatin pattern, and formed tubular structures and solid nests. Because the solid nests had features suggestive of carcinoid, several relevant markers were investigated. Synaptophysin was positive, chromogranin A was negative , and neuron-specific enolase was slightly positive . These findings allowed us to establish a diagnosis of invasive ductal carcinoma with neuroendocrine differentiation. Immunohistochemistry showed negativity for cytokeratin (CK) 7 and CK20 , strong positivity for estrogen receptor , positivity for progesterone receptor, and negative for human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) . The Ki67 positivity rate was 26%, suggesting high proliferative activity . Ki67 positivity was particularly marked in the solid nest structures .
Because the metastatic orbital tumor compressed the cerebrum and was thus life-threatening, we immediately started broad-spectrum chemotherapy appropriate for the tumor. As there was severe damage to the corneal epithelium, a solution of purified sodium hyaluronate for ophthalmic instillation and ofloxacin ophthalmic ointment were administered. We performed three courses of nab-paclitaxel therapy (at a dose of 260 mg/m² by intravenous infusion at every three weeks). Because numbness and peripheral sensory neuropathy appeared as an adverse effect, we switched to combination therapy with Letrozole (an aromatase inhibitor: 2.5 mg/day per os) and Abemaciclib (a CDK4/6 inhibitor: 300 mg/day per os) for hormone receptor-positive, HER2-negative advanced breast cancer after three courses of nab-paclitaxel therapy, and this resulted in marked reduction of the orbital tumor .
Hertel exophthalmometry showed marked improvement in her right eye; 19 mm at 4 months after the start of chemotherapy, and 17 mm at 5 months after the start of chemotherapy. Marked improvements were presented in upward mobility of the right eye, and in the results of Goldmann perimetry. The corneal epithelial disorders in the right eye also showed obvious improvement. These positive effects of the chemotherapy resulted in improvement of right visual acuity . Two years after her initial visit, the patient’s general condition and quality of life are still good, and her breast cancer and orbital metastasis are still decreasing in size. She has been very satisfied with the treatment so far.