A 48-year-old Chinese male presented with a 1-year history of foamy urine and a 1-month history of lower limb edema.
The patient was hospitalized in our department on December 24, 2020. He experienced a 1-year history of foamy urine after an upper respiratory tract infection and a 1-month history of edema of lower limbs. The patient was treated with antibiotics due to a toothache, concurrently developing edema. Before admission, the patient had taken diuretics and urine protein-lowering drugs orally on an irregular basis, but it was not effective.
The patient had a 1-year history of hypertension, which was well-controlled with benidipine. Moreover, he had been diagnosed with chronic pulpitis 1 mo earlier.
His personal history and family history were unremarkable.
Physical symptoms were blood pressure of 146/96 mmHg, heart rate of 67 beats per min, temperature of 36.5°C, and respiratory rate of 14 breaths per min. Physical examination showed symmetrical moderate pitting edema in both lower limbs.
Laboratory examinations are shown in Table .
Ultrasound showed an enlarged kidney and clear demarcation between the cortex and medulla. Echocardiography, whole-body X-ray scanning and thoracoabdominal computed tomography scanning did not show obvious abnormalities.
The Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes 2021 Clinical Practice Guideline recommends that a renal biopsy is not required to diagnose MN in patients with nephrotic syndrome presenting with positive PLA2R antibodies. However, we unexpectedly found that the patient was positive for serum and urine IgG-lambda-M protein on immunofixation electrophoresis, and the serum free light-chain (FLC) ratio was still within the normal range, which did not exclude M protein-related disease. After assessing the risk of bleeding, renal biopsy was advised. The patient accepted and underwent a renal puncture biopsy on December 30, 2020. Light microscopy showed that biopsy tissue contained 14 glomeruli with a thickened glomerular basement membrane and mild glomerular mesangial area proliferation. Vacuolation and granular degeneration of the tubular epithelium, as well as focal fibrosis of the interstitium, were observed . Positivetive Congo red staining was seen in the glomerular mesangial area, interstitium, and some walls of small arteries . Immunofluorescence showed that the type of IgG deposition was predominantly IgG1 and IgG4, with positive FLC-kappa and negative FLC-lambda. Electron microscopy showed clumps of electron-dense deposits in the subepithelial area, basement membrane, and glomerular mesangial area and a haphazard arrangement of fibers (≤10 nm) in the glomerular mesangial area. Thus, the patient was initially diagnosed with MN accompanying acute tubulointerstitial nephropathy and AL renal amyloidosis.
After the diagnosis of AL amyloidosis is confirmed, primary and secondary amyloidosis require distinction, and a systemic examination should also be performed to identify amyloid involvement. Bone marrow biopsy showed abnormal monoclonal plasma cells occupying 0.4% of nucleated cells. FISH showed an IGH deletion signal in 7% of cells and a CCND1 amplification signal in 11% of cells at t(11,14) locus (threshold 6%). No significant abnormalities were seen in 13/del(13q). Systemic examination indicated that amyloidosis only involved the kidney.