A 54-year-old male presented with bilateral low back pain, tingling, numbness, and weakness in both the lower limbs, and incontinence of the bowel and bladder of 2-months duration . In the month prior to the presentation, he developed an anterior neck mass. Fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) suggested a PTC and the ultrasound of the neck showed an enlarged thyroid gland (the largest cyst in the left lobe, with calcification and increased vascularity), with multiple enlarged, necrotic cervical nodes, which was suggestive of cervical metastases.
On examination, he had a solitary left-sided thyroid nodule (2 × 2 cm). Motor strength in the lower extremities was 4-/5 on the left and 4/5 on the right (Medical Research Council scale). There was a 20% diminution of all sensation below L1 dermatome and 40% below L3. Perianal sensation was diminished. Plantar reflex was extensor on the left and flexor on the right side.
At the D11-12 level, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an expanded cord with an intramedullary lesion (13 × 11 × 8 mm); the T1 image was hypointense and the T2 study showed it was hyperintense with intense enhancement . The working radiological impression was that of a hemangioblastoma involving the conus medullary segment.
A midline vertical incision was made along the D10-L1 spinous process. D11, D12 laminectomy was performed revealing a tense bluish, intradural mass within the dura in the conus region . On longitudinal durotomy, the tumor was found to be brownish yellow, soft, easily aspirated, vascular, and friable. The tumor was removed en toto.
On postoperative day 3, the patient could walk with minimal support, and could resume his daily activities within a week. However, his bladder incontinence persisted, requiring a perurethral catheter in situ during discharge.
H and E (hematoxylin and eosin) staining showed neoplastic tissue composed of sheaths of cells with ovaloid nuclei and without a cytoplasmic border; some had a ground glass appearance and nuclear grooves. In addition, there were many unevenly distributed psammoma bodies between the cells. Immunohistochemically, tumour cells were strongly positive for cytokeratin (CK), CK7, thyroid transcription factor 1 and negative for Novel Aspartic Proteinase of the PepSIN Family type A (NAPSIN-A) and CK20. Pathology confirmed metastatic lesion from PTC.