A 70-year-old Japanese man was admitted to our hospital for the treatment of recurrent liver tumors. He had taken medications for hypertension, hyperuricemia, and depression since he was around 60 years old. At the age of 50 years, he was diagnosed as having liver cirrhosis due to chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection. In 2010, at the age of 60 years, he was diagnosed for the first time as having HCC in the right lobe of the liver, and was admitted to our hospital. The serum α-fetoprotein (AFP) level was 110 ng/dl (reference value < 10 ng/dl), and the des-γ-carboxy prothrombin (DCP) level was 8926 mAU/ml (reference value < 40 mAU/ml). Liver resection of segment 7/8 was performed; the pathological diagnosis of the resected tissue was well-differentiated HCC, and the surrounding tissue showed cirrhosis . After surgical resection, both the serum AFP and DCP levels decreased, to 10 ng/ml and 16 AU/ml, respectively, and entecavir was subsequently started. One year later, HCC recurrence was found in the lateral segment of the liver, and radiofrequency ablation (RFA) was performed. Neither the serum AFP level (7 ng/dl) nor the DCP level (25 mAU/ml) was increased at the time of this recurrence. In 2017, he underwent surgical resection of the right lung for lung cancer, and the histological diagnosis was adenocarcinoma originating from lung tissue. In June 2019, a tumor lesion with a diameter of 14 mm in the caudate lobe was found by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) contrasted with gadoxetate sodium , and he was again admitted to our hospital.
On admission, he had no symptoms. Laboratory tests showed a serum aspartate aminotransferase level of 29 U/l, alanine aminotransferase level of 24 U/l, alkaline phosphatase level of 149 U/l, lactate dehydrogenase level of 188 U/l, γ-glutamyl transpeptidase level of 42 U/l, serum hepatitis B surface antigen level of 69.81 IU/ml, serum AFP level of 6 ng/dl, DCP level of 37 mAU/ml, and HBV DNA level lower than 1.3 log IU/ml. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed that the tumor in the caudate lobe was enhanced at the arterial phase, and the contrast medium was washed out at the hepatocyte phase. In addition, another tumor with the same characteristics was found in segment 5. Abdominal angiography with CT arterioportography and CT hepatic arteriography (CTHA) was performed for the definitive diagnosis. Both tumors appeared as perfusion defects by CT arterioportography, and hypervascular lesions by early-phase CTHA, and lesions with rim enhancements on delayed-phase CTHA. The diagnoses of recurrent HCC for both tumors were made on the basis of these image study findings. Surgical resection of the caudate lobe was performed, and ultrasonography-guided RFA was subsequently performed for the segment 5 HCC.
The resected tumor was a simple nodular tumor that measured 21 × 21 mm. Histologically, it was diagnosed as HCC containing well-differentiated and moderately differentiated components. In addition, many giant cells with multiple nuclei, which were not present in the first resected sample, were found in the tumor tissues, and they were diagnosed as OGCs . Neither vascular nor bile duct invasion was detected. According to these findings, we believe radical resection was achieved. Ever since these therapeutic procedures were completed, the patient has been followed up at the out-patient clinic, and HCC has not recurred for more than a year and a half.