A 28-year-old female presented to the emergency department with d h/o RTA and had approximately a 12 cm lacerated wound over the anterolateral aspect of the right ankle . There is no other injury with stable vitals. The patient brought a piece of bone with her which was grossly contaminated . As per open injury protocol, we thoroughly irrigated the wound in the emergency department and administered tetanus toxoid and triple antibiotics (Inj. Cefoperazone + Inj. Amikacin + Inj. Metronidazole). X-ray of the patient showed the absence of talus . Hence, the diagnosis was made as “Total extrusion of talus without any fracture with a 12 cm open wound over anterolateral aspect of the ankle.” We planned an emergency surgery for thorough debridement and immediate reimplantation of the talus. In the operation theater, the patient was lying in a supine position under spinal anesthesia < thorough debridement of wound with 10 lit of normal saline was done, and all devitalized tissue debrided. Extruded talus soaked in betadine solution for 10 min and then reimplanted in its position. The ankle joint capsule and lateral collateral ligament were repaired , after which the ankle appeared stable, which was confirmed under C-arm. Further stability was given by a delta frame external fixator . Skin closure was done with low-tension sutures. Post-operative X-ray showed a well-reduced stable ankle with reimplanted talus . Postoperatively, the limb was kept in strict elevation on the Bohler Braun frame, and after two dressings, the patient was discharged on post-operative day 5. Sequential blood parameters assessed such as complete blood count, C-reactive protein which shows a downward trend and becomes normal within 2 weeks postoperative, and culture sensitivity done from wound swab which shows no bacterial growth. Suture removal was done after 20 days, and the patient was kept non-weight bearing for 12 weeks. The external fixator was removed after 12 weeks, and at that time, check X-ray did not show sclerosis or collapse of the talus . Partial weight bearing was started with ankle range of motion (ROM) exercises. The patient did plantar flexion up to 30° and dorsiflexion up to 10° . After 8 months, we planned a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the right ankle which shows some articular irregularity , but the patient started full weight bearing with a full ROM. We measured the functional outcome of the ankle with the American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society scoring system at the end of 12 months which comes to 73. During the past follow–up, the patient started her routine daily work painlessly and comfortably .