A six-year-old male was referred to the orthopaedic oncology clinic after initially presenting to a general surgeon regarding a mass on the left aspect of the manubrium. According to the patient’s parents, the mass was present since the child was two years old. It started as a pea-sized prominence and enlarged gradually. The patient denied any associated pain. There was no known history of trauma or injury. He denied any fevers, chills, sweats, or shortness of breath. At presentation, there was a three-centimeter palpable mass overlying the left side of the manubrium. This area was non-mobile and non-tender to palpation . He was neurovascularly intact in bilateral upper extremities. The patient was otherwise healthy and the remainder of physical exam including cardiopulmonary auscultation was unremarkable.
Plain radiographs demonstrated a mass that extended into the soft tissues anterior to the manubrium with partially ossified edges. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed a bony exostosis arising from the left anterior aspect of the manubrium with a cartilage cap and internal mineralization. No underlying marrow changes were noted . Based on the patient’s history, physical exam, and imaging studies the differential diagnosis included osteochondroma, surface chondroma, or periosteal chondrosarcoma. On serial monitoring radiographs and a repeat CT scan eight months after presentation, the lesion was found to be gradually enlarging. At that time, after a discussion with the patient’s family a decision was made to perform an open biopsy of the lesion through a direct anterior approach.
The patient underwent open biopsy of the sternal mass under general anesthesia. It was performed via a small longitudinal incision directly over the anterior soft tissue mass to allow subsequent biopsy tract excision if needed. The biopsy revealed a cartilaginous neoplasm with variably hypo-cellular to moderately cellular areas and zonal necrosis. There was a portion of patchy chondrocyte atypia, including nuclear enlargement and hyperchromasia. No mitoses were identified. Spindled histocytes within the lesion were found to be positive for CD68 and lesional cartilaginous cells positive for S100. These findings favored a diagnosis of a low-grade surface chondrosarcoma. Following the biopsy magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a lesion with heterogeneous internal enhancement without an associated vascular component. The mass was seen extending posteriorly with abutment of the left thymus and great vessels . Given the histology as well as the aggressive features on MRI there was concern for an intermediate grade lesion, therefore a complete resection was recommended. Pediatric general surgery was consulted given the location of the lesion to ensure the deep structures posterior to the sternum were not compromised during resection.
Imaging demonstrated the mass was adjacent to the great vessels and internal mammary artery therefore safe resection required dissection of soft tissues prior to osteotomy. Wide resection of the lesion was performed under general anesthesia. Pediatric general surgery performed a left thoracoscopic dissection and mobilized the posterior portion of the mass away from the internal mammary artery and thymus. Next, the patient underwent a wide resection of the sternal mass from an anterior approach performed by the orthopaedic oncology team using an oscillating saw under direct thoracoscopic visualization; this ensured adequate mass resection without injury to nearby structures. Fig. shows the chest wall after resection and Fig. shows the resected specimen. The location and size of the defect did not require reconstruction. A chest tube was placed by the pediatric surgery team and patient was admitted for monitoring. His postoperative course was uncomplicated. The chest tube was removed on post-operative day two and he was discharged home in stable condition on post-operative day three.
Final pathology demonstrated neoplastic cartilage surrounding pre-existing trabecular bone with associated osteonecrosis consistent with low grade chondrosarcoma with microscopically negative margins and closest being at 2 millimeters from the superficial skin . Given the complete excision, no adjuvant treatment was recommended. The patient was followed with quarterly physical exams and radiographs and as of 18 months postoperatively has no pain or recurrence noted on a most recent chest CT scan . Per National Comprehensive Cancer Network guidelines, the frequency of surveillance will decrease with time, but should be 10 years at minimum .