A 49 year-old male represented severe respiratory distress, odynophagia and dysphagia which were associated with biphasic stridor. The respiratory distress had begun one week ago. No history of smoking or alcohol was observed.
Emergent tracheostomy was done. Direct layngoscopy under GA showed a proliferative growth in the supraglottic region extending towards the right side in the aryepiglottic area. There was no damage on growth. Right TVC and right FVC and ant. commissure were tumoral. Left TVC was mobile .
The medial wall of right pyriform sinus was tumoral but the apex was normal. The other subunits of hypopharynx were normal. The biopsy of tumor was reported to be granulation tissue.
CT scan of the soft tissue of neck showed an irregular opacity in the sub-mucosal region of right supraglottis in central necrosis. The opacity projected into the airway and caused significant obstruction and invaded tumor thyroid cartilage .
In the past medical history of the patient, he has had papillary cell carcinoma of thyroid 37 years ago which underwent right hemithyro-idectomy and again 30 years ago he has had suffered left hemithyriodectomy and bilateral neck dissection and external RT. After the second surgery, because of aspiration and dysphonia, injection thyroplasty type 1 was done by Teflon on the right side.
Due to the positive history for Teflon injection, it was assumed that granulation tissue on biopsy is Teflon granulation. The signs and symptoms gradually became more severe and second biopsy was done.
The second biopsy suggested a malignant mesenchymal tumor. Histological examina- tion showed fascicles of eosinophilic spindle cells, and vesicular texture which is a cigar shaped nuclei with moderate atypia and 10 mitotic figures per high power field .
The immunohistochemistry of the specimen was positive for alpha smooth muscle actin, desmin ,vimentin and negative for S100 and pancytokeratin was consistent with the diagnosis of lieomyosarcoma of larynx.
The patient was then investigated to rule out the possibility of disseminations, which all were negative. Total laryngectomy was done postoperatively; the patient was treated by Adjuvant Radiochemotherapy and followed up.