A 52 year old man received a pre-emptive renal transplant from his wife for the treatment of end stage renal disease due to autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (HLA mismatch 1–1-1, CMV mismatch D+/R-, EBV IgG not detected). He received alemtuzumab at induction (30 mg subcutanously on day 0 and day 1) followed by maintenance immunosuppression with tacrolimus, mycophenylate mofetil (MMF) and prednisolone. As he was enrolled in a clinical trial, the use of alemtuzumab for induction was determined by the arm he was randomised to. He continued on tacrolimus before being randomised at 6 months to switch to sirolimus as part of the clinical trial . A year later he had to leave the study as he was undergoing incisional hernia repair so returned to tacrolimus-based immunosuppression.
Three years after transplantation renal function started to decline. Chronic antibody mediated rejection (CAMR) was found on transplant renal biopsy and new donor specific antibodies against HLA class II were detected. Tacrolimus and MMF doses were increased and he restarted on 5 mg prednisolone. The daily total tacrolimus dose was increased from 3 mg to 5 mg with levels rising from 5.4 μg/L to 7.0 μg/L and MMF daily dose was doubled from 1000 mg to 2000 mg. A month after this change he presented to primary care having passed frank blood in his stool and with a one week history of abdominal pain and faecal urgency. In response to these symptoms MMF was switched to mycophenolic acid, but the diarrhoea continued and he was admitted on two occasions due to worsening renal function.
Five months after biopsy confirmed CAMR, rituximab was started at a dose of 200 mg with a planned frequency of every 6–8 months and mycophenolic acid was withdrawn. Although rectal bleeding resolved the diarrhoea continued and he experienced 4 kg of weight loss over 2 months with an overall weight loss of around 14 kg over a year.
Investigations for the cause of his diarrhoea included CMV and EBV PCR and stool culture which were all negative at initial presentation. Faecal elastase was also normal and gastric parietal cell and enterocyte antibody testing was negative. Flexisigmoidoscopy showed non-bleeding haemorrhoids and colonoscopy was normal. Radionucleotide SeHCAT bile study to assess for bile acid malabsorption was also normal. Imaging studies including PET, CT thorax-abdomen-pelvis, CT enterography and MRI small bowel showed no evidence of malignancy or other bowel pathology.
EBV DNA was not detectable in serum by PCR at the onset of diarrhoea and EBV IgG remained negative. However, 6 weeks after the onset of diarrhoea EBV DNA was detected at titres of 1612 IU/ml and then fluctuated between not detected and 6770 IU/ml for the duration of his diarrhoea. EBV DNA was detected at low levels (< 1000 IU/ml) when tacrolimus dose was further reduced (levels in the region of 3.8 μg/L). Given symptomatic improvement EBV DNA PCR was not repeated on complete withdrawal of immunosuppression.
Creon was started under gastroenterology advice and loperamide was prescribed for symptomatic relief. Oesophagogastroduodenoscopy (OGD) was performed to investigate loss of appetite and further weight loss. Biopsies from the duodenum identified moderate lymphocytic duodenitis with mucosal damage as evidenced by shortening villi, in keeping with coeliac disease . However, diarrhoea was unresponsive to a gluten free diet and he was negative for antibodies to tissue transglutaminase and HLA DQ2 and DQ8.
Repeat OGD after 6 months of gluten free diet identified a clonal T-cell population. The intra-epithelial T-cells had normal immunohistochemistry, in that they expressed the antigens CD3 and CD8, but reproducible clonal T-cell receptor (TCR) beta and TCR gamma rearrangements were detected using a multiplex PCR assay . Immunoglobulin heavy chain gene rearrangements were polyclonal, excluding clonal B cell proliferation. There was no evidence of lymphoma either on biopsy or CT enterography and no FDG avid disease on PET.
After further reductions in tacrolimus repeat duodenal biopsies found a persistence of a clonal T cell population and mucosal damage with subtotal villous atrophy and a suggestion of crypt hyperplasia. Almost 3 years since the episode of CAMR and onset of diarrhoea all immunosuppression was withdrawn and peritoneal dialysis was commenced. The diarrhoea improved within days of stopping immunosuppression and the patient remains well on dialysis with no diarrhoea and he has successfully regained the weight he lost when unwell.