In the course of regular physical examination, a 4-year-old, male Japanese monkey (Macaca fuscata) was presented with slowly progressive gentle and depressed behavioral changes. Physical examination revealed no abnormality such as tetraparesis or ataxia. The author neither observed ocular and head injuries, and otitis media or interna, nor found any signs of infection or injuries of other tissues of the animal during this study.
The monkey was socially housed in three consecutive stainless steel cages (each cage: 80 × 100 × 180 cm) in an animal room controlled at 25 ± 1 °C and 50 ± 10% relative humidity with 10 to 15 exchanges of 100% fresh air/h and a 12-h light (6AM to 6PM), 12-h dark (6PM to 6AM) cycle. They were fed a commercial primate diet (PS, Oriental Yeast Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan), provided ad libitum and supplemented with a variety of fresh fruit, vegetables and other treats daily. Water was provided through an automatic watering system furnished to each cage.
The monkey was anesthetized with the medetomidine (30 μg/kg, Domitol, Meiji Seiyaku Co., Ltd., Tokyo)-midazolam (0.3 mg/kg, Midazolam Injection 0.5% [F], Fuji Pharmaceutical, Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan)-ketamine (2.5 mg/kg, Ketaral 50, Sankyo Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) combination. Complete physical examinations were also performed and blood was drawn for hematology and serum biochemistry. These investigations were done at the onset of a brain abscess (0 week: 0W) and 4, 6 and 11 weeks (4, 6 and 11W) after beginning of the treatment.
Blood samples were collected from the cephalic vein of the animal using no anticoagulant. At 30 min after collection of blood samples, serum was separated by centrifugation at 1,500 g for 10 min for biochemical examination. For hematological samples, blood was collected into tubes containing K2EDTA.
The following parameters were investigated using an automated cell counter (Microsemi LC-662 Horiba Co. Ltd, Kyoto, Japan): white blood cell count (WBC), red blood cell count (RBC), hemoglobin concentration (Hb), packed cell volume (PCV) ratio, mean corpuscular volume (MCV), mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH), mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC), and platelet count (PLT). Differential white blood cell counts were also determined on the first hematological examination (0W).
The following parameters were measured using a blood chemistry analyzer (Dry Chem NX 500 V: Fuji Film Co. Ltd, Tokyo, Japan): total protein (TP), albumin (Alb), globulin (Glob), albumin: globulin (A/G) ratio, total bilirubin (T-Bil), blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine (CRE), glucose (GLU), total cholesterol (T-CHO), triglycerides (TG), asparate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), amylase (AMS), creatine kinase (CK), electrolytes (Na, K, Cl, Ca), inorganic phosphorus (IP) and magnesium (Mg).) and C-reactive protein (CRP). CK isoenzymes were also analyzed by electrophoresis on the first examination (0W).
MRI was obtained before treatment (0W) and at follow-up evaluation 4, 6 and 11 weeks (4, 6 and 11W) after beginning of the treatment. MRI of the brain was performed under afore-mentioned general anesthesia with a 3.0 T Siemens Magnetom Open (Siemens AG Erlangen, Germany). T1-weighted sequences used a repetition time of 450 ms and an echo time of 15 ms; T2-weighted sequences used a repetition time of 4000 ms and an echo time of 100 ms. Slice thickness were 3.0 mm for T1-W and T2-W and MRI was made in transversal, sagittal and horizontal planes.
Although the animal was given a broad-spectrum antibiotic, Ceftriaxone sodium hydrate (60 mg/kg, i. v.; Rocephin for injection, TAIYO Pharma Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) for 3 days, he developed nausea and diarrhea. After the rest period of 10 days, the monkey was switched to administration of piperacillin sodium (50 mg/kg, i. v.; Pentcilin for injection, FUJIFILM Toyama Chemical Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) for 9 weeks. In addition, probiotics (3 g/head, p. o.; Bio-three for animals, Toa Biopharma Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) was daily added to the aforementioned regimen.
All procedures involving animals were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Yamaguchi University and followed the Guidelines of Animal Care and Experiments of Yamaguchi University (approval No. 409). The animal care and use program for Advanced Research Center for Laboratory Animal Science in Yamaguchi University has been accredited by AAALAC International since 2018.
Hematological findings during this treatment are shown in Table . There were no increased WBCs and decreased erythrocytic parameters indicating anemia. Although slightly declined PLTs were seen on the onset this disease (0W), PLTs gradually increased in the course of the treatment and the PLT values returned to their reference ranges. Other supplemental hematological data (0W) were within reference limits: reticulocytes (13%, reference values: 2–27%), band cells (2%, reference values: 0–17%), segmented cells (44%, reference values: 27–70%), eosinophils (3%, reference values: 0–10%), basophils (0%, reference values: 0–3%), lymphocytes (46%, reference values: 19–59%) and monocytes (5%, reference values: 0–12%).
Serum biochemical profiles of the monkey are shown in Table . TP and Alb concentrations trended to increase gradually during this study. T-BIL and BUN levels were moderately elevated during the course of the treatment as compared with the reference values. Throughout the observation, both GLU and T-CHO concentrations were moderately lower than the reference values, while AST, ALT, LDH, ALP and AMY activities progressively increased. Although initial CK activities were markedly elevated on the first physical examination, a series of chemotherapy could provide prominent relief from the influence of the brain abscess. Additionally, initial CK isoenzymes indicated as follows: muscle type (98.2%), muscle-brain hybrid (1.0%) and brain type (0.8%). CRP concentrations were consistently below the detection limit during the treatment. The levels of electrolytes remained unchanged within the reference range.
MRI findings are showed in Figs. , , , and where cerebral focus was well visualized by MRI. On the first physical examination (0W), the T1-weighted images revealed a well-defined spherical shaped lesion which was isointense on the transection, sagittal section and horizontal section. This lesion was confirmed in the right frontal lobe and the mass was delineated by a thick rim of isointense signal with respect to the brain tissue. On T2-weighted images, the abscess center was hyperintense and a ring of alternating intensity was observed around this mass. The MRI findings illustrated the capsule formation stage of a brain abscess without inflammatory response. The lesion chronologically decreased in size over the course of treatment. Until 11 weeks after treatment of the brain abscess, the size of the brain abscess continued to reduce, leaving an organized lesion trace. In particular, decreased signal intensity of T2-weighted images illustrated that the content in the lesion has not completely resolved over a period of treatment. The diameter of this brain abscess was reduced from 7.5 (0W) to 2.5 mm (11W). Unfortunately, blood culture could not be undertaken in 0 W to ascertain the infectious cause of the brain abscess.