A 22-year-old female college student was admitted to our hospital with complaints of primary amenorrhea, fatigue, and constantly growing taller after puberty. Before junior high school (15 years old), her height was similar to that of her peers, but she showed constant growth by 2–3 cm annually between age 15 and 18 years old and 1–2 cm every year thereafter. She has a medical history of hypokalemia and hypertension for over 10 years, which were not well treated. At 3 years old, she received surgery for left inguinal hernia. She was the first child of non-consanguineous parents. The patient has a younger sister who is 12 years old and underwent menarche at 11 years old with development of breasts and axillary hair.
On physical examination, the patient was quite tall, with a height of 171 cm, weight of 59.9 kg, and BMI of 20.5 kg/m2. Her blood pressure was elevated at 164/122 mmHg, and her heart beat was 111 beats/min. The skin color was dark yellow, there was no growth of breasts and no axillary hair, and the external genitalia was of female type but with no pubic hair.
The clinical, biochemical, and hormonal parameters of this case were obviously abnormal. Specifically, serum potassium was decreased to 2.8 mmol/L; however, 24-h urinary potassium was increased to 51.9 mmol/24 h. Serum cortisol measurements at 08:00, 16:00, and 00:00 were all decreased below the test threshold (<27.6 nmol/L) with a high plasma ACTH level of 133 ng/L. The sex hormones dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS) and estradiol were low; however, serum luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) levels were elevated to 45.71 and 86.86 IU/L, respectively. Serum aldosterone was 42.8 pg/ml, and plasma renin activity was 0.01 ng/ml/h. The glomerular filtration function was slightly decreased (eGFR 71 ml/min/L), but liver transaminase, cholesterol, blood glucose, HbA1c, and thyroid profiles were within the normal range. Clinic manifestations and general blood examination results are summarized in . Steroid hormones were further measured simultaneously by liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry using an ARCHITECT i2000sr (Abbott Diagnostics, Abbott Park, IL, USA) in a standardized manner. To give a clear understanding of the steroid metabolites, the steroid hormones are listed according to the steroid metabolism pathway in , and the reference range of each steroid hormone is summarized in . Briefly, serum cortisol, androstenedione, estradiol, and aldosterone were drastically decreased. Serum concentrations of 17-OH pregnenolone (0.81 ng/ml) and 17-OH progesterone (0.14 ng/ml) were low, but pregnenolone (6.51 ng/ml), progesterone (9 ng/ml), and corticosterone (54.2 ng/ml) were raised; 11-deoxycorticosterone was in the normal range (0.1 ng/ml).
Considering the possibility of disorders in sexual development, medical imaging examinations and karyotype analysis were carried out. Abdominal–pelvic CT scan and ultrasound revealed no visible internal genitalia, such as vagina, ovaries, uterus, or testicles but found bilateral adrenal hyperplasia; the bone age was delayed to 11 years old, and the bone mineral density values were computed using dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry images (DPX-NT, GE Healthcare); T-score of the lumbar spine (L1-L4) was −3.5, which implied osteoporosis, and T-score of the left femoral neck was −1.6, which implied osteopenia. The karyotype was 46,XY, indicative of male sex.
To gain a clear perception of this disease, informed consent was obtained from the patient. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes using a Blood DNA mini kit (Qiagen, Germany); DNA fragments in the target region were enriched using a customized capture kit (MyGenostics, Beijing, China) and sequenced using a high-throughput second-generation sequencing platform (DNBSEQ-T7, MGI, Shenzhen, China). Sanger sequencing was used to confirm the mutations. The analysis revealed a homozygous mutation on exon 1 of the CYP17A1 gene at nucleotide 287, which was changed from guanine G to adenine A (c.287G>A), resulting in the amino acid at codon 96 changing from arginine to glutamine (p.R96Q), which caused the complete 17-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase deficiency. For personal reasons, her parents and sibling were unwilling to be tested, so we did not investigate this mutation in her relatives.
Once the diagnosis was made, oral dexamethasone at 1 mg/day was prescribed to treat the hypertension and hypokalemia. After 1 month of dexamethasone treatment, the blood pressure had decreased to 120/90 mmHg and the potassium increased to 3.29 mmol/L; the skin color was whiter, and the patient felt more energetic. With regard to the choice of gender, we fully communicated with the patient and her parents, and the patient fully understood the condition and identified herself as being of female gender. Estrogen replacement was initiated 1 month later to promote epiphyseal healing and maintain the female appearance. With regard to the uncertain existence of an ectopic testis, in case of malignant change, we recommended that the testis need to be searched for and surgically removed, but the patient refused to undergo laparoscopic exploration. On follow-up examination at 4 months, the hypertension and hypokalemia were totally resolved (Blood pressure (BP), 125/83 mmHg; K+, 3.99 mmol/L), and plasma renin activity was apparently elevated (0.45 ng/ml/h) with a slight elevation of aldosterone (59.2 ng/dl). We further tested the level of serum anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH), alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), and beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (beta-HCG); the result for AMH was 3.4 ng/ml (reference range, 0.96–13.34 ng/ml), beta-HCG was 3.69 mIU/ml (reference range, <5 mIU/ml), and AFP was 1.8 ng/ml (reference range, 0–10 mg/ml). The timeline of the disease progression is shown in .