A 76-year-old Caucasian female with a past medical history of atrial fibrillation (not on anticoagulation), hypertension, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and obstructive sleep apnea presented to the ED complaining of intermittent, left-sided jaw and lower face pain onset that particular morning. She described her pain as “sharp and lightning-like,” causing her to wake up in the middle of the night. Patient reported similar symptoms three months prior after she had “dental work” completed; however, she denied any recent dental procedures. She also denied any other symptoms during initial presentation. Neurologic exam was normal, including cranial nerve testing, upper and lower extremity sensorimotor function, and cerebellar testing. The patient had mild tenderness over the left side of her mandible and the jaw opened and closed without palpable clicking or grinding. Vital signs revealed a temperature of 36.4° Celsius, heart rate of 105 beats per minute, respirations of 18 breaths per minute, blood pressure of 151/101 millimeters of mercury, and pulse oximetry of 96% on room air.
The differential diagnosis included acute myocardial infarction, trigeminal neuralgia, temporal arteritis, temporomandibular joint dysfunction, herpes zoster, subarachnoid hemorrhage, dentalgia, and other causes of acute jaw pain in an elderly female patient. CTA of the head and facial bones without intravenous (IV) contrast were grossly normal. Electrocardiogram revealed rate-controlled atrial fibrillation without acute ischemic changes. Chest radiograph was clear. Laboratory analysis revealed an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 34 millimeters per hour (mm/hr) (reference range 0–30 mm/hr); the remainder of the complete blood count, complete metabolic panel, thyroid stimulating hormone, troponin-I, urinalysis, and magnesium level were unremarkable.
The patient was restarted on apixaban after speaking with her cardiologist, given her history of atrial fibrillation. Neurology was consulted about the possibility of these symptoms being representative of trigeminal neuralgia and starting carbamazepine; however, neurology requested no medication changes and for the patient to follow up with her dentist prior to outpatient neurology follow-up to rule out dental causes. Patient was ultimately discharged home with outpatient neurology and dental follow-up.
The patient returned to the ED with complaints of similar pain two days later; however, this time her left lower face and jaw pain was present leaving the patient in moderate to severe distress. Given the repeat visit and failure of outpatient therapy, early neurology consultation was obtained regarding analgesic recommendations while the workup ensued. The consulting neurologist recommended methylprednisolone 250 milligrams (mg) IV and ketorolac for analgesia. The patient’s pain remained refractory and IV fentanyl was given; we considered other diagnoses including CAD. CTA of the head and neck was obtained, which revealed a CAD of the left internal carotid artery ( and ). The patient still did not exhibit any neurologic findings. Neurosurgeons whom we consulted at a tertiary-care hospital recommended continuing anticoagulation with close follow-up at their outpatient specialty clinic.
During hospitalization, the patient did not develop any neurologic deficits. Pain was controlled with IV hydromorphone and methylprednisolone 125 mg every 12 hours. She was ultimately discharged within 24 hours and continued on oral apixaban and steroids.