A 51-year-old man presented to the Emergency Department of our hospital complaining of worsening left upper limb weakness. During his presentation in Emergency Department he experienced a generalized tonic-clonic grand mal seizure.
Patient’s symptoms started a month ago with recurrent episodes of left upper limb weakness, which had been worsened the last 48 h.
The patient had a free previous medical history.
After seizure cessation, the patient’s temperature was 36.6 °C, heart rate was 93 bpm, respiratory rate was 16 breaths per minute, blood pressure was 180/90 mmHg and oxygen saturation in room air was 98%. The clinical neurological examination revealed left-sided facial numbness and left upper limb hypoesthesia, a Glasgow Coma scale of 15/15, without any other pathological signs. Our clinical considerations were first a space-occupying brain lesion and second a stroke.
Blood analysis revealed a mild leukocytosis 12 × 109/L, with predominant neutrophils (80%) with normal haematocrit and platelet count. Prothrombin and partial thromboplastin times were normal, and d-dimers were slightly increased at 0.80 μg/mL. Serum C-reactive protein was increased at 4.5 mg/dL (normal range < 0.8 mg/dL) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate at 30 mm/h. The blood biochemistries, as well as urine analysis were normal. Electrocardiogram, chest X-ray and arterial blood gas were also normal.
An initial imaging evaluation with brain computed tomography (CT) scan, revealed a 3.2 cm hypodense lesion at right upper parietal lobe. Following contrast media administration, the lesion showed peripheral enhancement. No midline shift was noted.
Brain lesion was further evaluated with a brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan. The latter revealed a 3.3 cm × 2.7 cm lesion at the right parietal lobe surrounded by mild vasogenic edema, which included the posterior central gyrus. The core of the lesion showed relatively homogenous restricted diffusion . Post Gadolinium T1W1 image, revealed a ring-shaped enhancement. Dural enhancement, due to involvement of the adjacent dura was also revealed . Due to the aforementioned imaging findings, differential diagnosis mainly included the presence of a brain abscess, while the possibility of a restricted diffusion metastatic lesion could not entirely be excluded.
The patient was further evaluated with blood cultures, urine and stool cultures and examination for ova and parasites which turned out negative. Transthoracic cardiac ultrasound was negative for cardiac vegetations or signs of infection. Considering the facts that blood cultures were negative, our patient had not prosthetic heart valves, congenital heart disease, previous endocarditis, heart murmur or stigmata of endocarditis, transthoracic cardiac ultrasound is sufficient to rule out endocarditis, when the patient presents an optimal echocardiographic window, as in the presented case. Dental examination, including panoramic dental X-ray, revealed poor oral hygiene with severe tooth decay and periodontal disease but without detection of dental abscess. Serology tests for human immunodeficiency virus, human T-lymphotropic virus-1 and virus-2, herpes simplex virus, Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus and toxoplasma, were negative. Wright, rapid plasma reagin tests and tuberculin skin test were also negative. Serum angiotensin-converting enzyme and protein electrophoresis were normal. Serum complement and levels of immunoglobulins were all normal, as follows: C3: 123 mg%, C4: 27 mg%, IgA: 136 mg/dL, IgG: 1200 mg/dL IgM: 120 mg/dL, IgE: 18 IU/mL, IgD: 15 IU/mL. Total lymphocyte count (1.8 × 109/L) and CD4+ percentage (45%), as well as their absolute count (810 cells/μL), were normal. A full panel of serum tumour markers CEA (1.5 ng/mL), CA 19.9 (12.4 U/mL), CA 125 (8 U/mL), PSA (0.208 ng/mL), α-FP (2.2 IU/mL), β-hCG (0.10 mIU/mL) and β-2-microglobulin (1.35 mg/L) were unrevealing. Abdominal and chest CT scans with intravenous contrast media administration did not reveal any infectious focus or neoplastic lesion. Upper and lower gastrointestinal tract endoscopies were also normal.
The etiological factor of patient’s brain abscess, and its susceptibility profile in antibiotics, was determined by using appropriate microbiological analysis. Specifically, pus and capsule tissue of the excised brain lesion were subjected to Gram stain, Acid-Fast Bacilli stain and cultures for aerobes, anaerobes, fungi and mycobacteria. The samples were initially enriched in Thioglycolate broth, incubated overnight and then inoculated onto blood agar plates, McConkey agar plates, Sabouraud agar plates, anaerobe growth media (N-S anaerobe selective supplement, G-N anaerobe selective supplement), and Löwenstein–Jensen medium. Cultures of both pus and capsule tissue grew B. subtilis. Identification of the bacillus was performed by Gram stain, catalase production, motility test and BBL™ Crystal™ Identification Systems for Gram Positive bacteria (BD Diagnostics, Le Pont de Claix, France). Gram stain revealed the presence of Gram-positive rods forming subterminal spors, with a positive motility test, catalase, o-nitrophenyl-β-d-galactopyranoside (ONPG), and citrate (Simmons’) tests. It was identified as B. subtilis, by BBL™ GP Crystal™ Identification Systems (bionumber 2450563773, BD Diagnostics). Antibiotic susceptibility testing was performed by the disk diffusion, and a gradient method (Etest, bioMerieux), according to EUCAST guidelines. Antibiogram demonstrated sensitivity of the microorganism to penicillin, vancomycin, ciprofloxacin, gentamicin and tetracyclines and resistance to clindamycin and rifampicin.