A 30-year-old female gravida 3, para 2 with an intrauterine pregnancy at approximately 24 weeks was transferred from an outside hospital and was activated as a trauma prior to arrival to our facility. The patient was the restrained driver of her vehicle, which had been traveling approximately 70 miles per hour. She was involved in a multivehicle accident, which occurred two hours prior to her presentation to our facility. The patient was not initially transported by emergency medical services but instead went by private auto to the outside facility. On presentation to that hospital the patient was noted to have abrasions with underlying ecchymoses across the gravid lower abdomen and the left side of the chest and neck consistent in patterning with where her seatbelt would have been positioned. She also complained of abdominal pain.
Vitals were taken and she was hypotensive with maternal blood pressures 90s/40s millimeters mercury (mm Hg), and tachycardic with heart rate in the 120+ beats per minute (bpm) range. Fetal heart tones were in the 80s bpm. Point-of-care ultrasound was positive for free fluid in the abdomen. Resuscitative efforts were started. As a Level I trauma center, our institution has an agreement with the non-trauma designated hospitals in our area. If they receive a trauma patient, they inform our trauma center that they will be transferring the patient and we automatically accept the patient to expedite the transfer process for what we call a continuation of trauma. For this particular patient a continuation of trauma was initiated. Prior to presentation to our facility, the ED, obstetrics, acute care surgery (ACS), and neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) teams gathered in the trauma bay as one cohesive unit to formulate several contingency plans based on the patient’s presentation (see ).
Upon initial presentation her vitals were blood pressure 127/97 mm Hg, heart rate 145 bpm, respiratory rate 28 breaths per minute, and she was saturating 100% on room air. Her Glasgow Coma Scale was 14 (eye = 3; verbal = 5; motor = six). She was noted to have abrasions and ecchymoses across her gravid lower abdomen, left chest and neck, which were consistent in patterning with an overlying seatbelt. Vaginal bleeding was also noted. The obstetrics team performed a point-of-care ultrasound with fetal heart rates in the 50s bpm, and the decision was made to proceed with emergent cesarean delivery. The ED senior resident intubated the patient and managed medications. Emergent cesarean section was performed via a low transverse incision by the obstetrics team.
Manual evaluation of the lower uterine segment revealed a large defect, and no fetus was palpable in the uterus. Further evaluation of the abdomen revealed the fetus was free floating in the right upper quadrant. The fetus was delivered and handed off to waiting NICU staff. A large, lower uterine segment defect was noted extending in the midline to the cervix. The hysterotomy was closed with adequate hemostasis, and the decision was made to proceed to the operating room for further evaluation. Upon initial assessment of the fetus, there was no pulse. The fetus was intubated and chest compressions were begun. Standard Neonatal Advanced Life Support protocol was initiated. Patient remained in asystole and time of death was called after 22 minutes of resuscitation.
The mother was transferred to the operating room, and the ACS team performed an exploratory laparotomy through the Pfannenstiel incision made in the trauma bay. Minor bleeding near the right uterine artery was found and controlled. No liver, spleen, stomach, small or large bowel injuries were appreciated. Patient received four units of packed red blood cells, three units of fresh frozen plasma, and one unit of platelets between the ED and operating room. Postoperatively, the patient underwent computed tomography (CT) of the head, cervical/lumbar/thoracic spine, chest, and abdomen, and CT angiography of the neck. No further injuries were discovered. The patient was extubated on postoperative day (POD) zero and was downgraded from the surgical intensive care unit on POD one.
On POD two she had persistent unexplained tachycardia. CT pulmonary angiography was obtained, which showed subsegmental pulmonary embolism. She was treated with a heparin drip and transitioned to enoxaparin and then rivaroxaban. She was discharged on POD six. She was readmitted three weeks after discharge for acute anemia in the setting of anticoagulation. The patient was transfused three units of red blood cells and discharged again two days later. At her eight-week postpartum visit she was doing well with no major issues.