A 69-year-old man developed a sudden epigastric pain. He was presented at this hospital as an emergency outpatient. Six years earlier, he underwent laryngoesophagopharyngectomy, bilateral lymph node dissection for hypopharyngeal cancer, and esophageal reconstruction with a free jejunum flap. On physical examination, the abdomen was flat and soft with tenderness in the epigastric region, but no sign of peritoneal irritation. Blood biochemistry findings revealed elevated values: creatinine, 1.16 mg/dl; lactate dehydrogenase, 364 U/l; and creatine phosphokinase, 622 U/l.
Abdominal contrast computed tomography (CT) revealed twisted mesentery with the small intestine around the point of torsion (whirl sign) and the superior mesenteric artery as the axis. Contrast enhancement was weakened in the same area of the small bowel . Given this information, we suspected small bowel volvulus and performed emergency surgery on the same day.
A 5-mm camera port was placed in the umbilicus and 5-mm ports in the lower and right lower abdomen. During laparoscopic examination, the upper jejunum adhered to the small bowel close to the terminal ileum with overlapping of the small bowel. The entire part from the upper jejunum to the terminal ileum was twisted clockwise with the superior mesenteric artery and vein as the axes and the adhesion site as the starting point. There were areas of poor color enhancement throughout the twisted section of the small bowel . We laparoscopically separated the adhesion between different sections of the intestinal tract and traced the bowel from the small bowel in the region of the ligament of Treitz toward the anus to confirm the absence of adhesions or torsion up to the terminal ileum. The color of the small bowel improved; hence, the surgery was completed without resecting any part of the intestine.
Postoperatively, the patient made good postoperative recovery, resumed oral intake on day 2, and was discharged on day 5 after surgery. No recurrence has been reported 1 year postoperatively.