A 67-year-old female was admitted to the hospital with the main complaint of painless gross hematuria for one week in April 2015. CT scan showed a left mid-ureteral lesion and underwent radical nephroureterectomy with a bladder cuff on the left side in April 2015. Postoperative pathology showed invasive UC with tumor grade T2N0M0, serous membrane, renal and bladder wall tissue invasion . The patient recovered well after surgery, and hematuria disappeared. Unfortunately, 6 months after the surgery, the patent’s left adrenal gland and abdominal aortic lymph node enlargement were observed in the follow-up CT scan examination . The patient first received chemotherapy with a combination of cisplatin and gemcitabine for a period of 6 weeks. Gemcitabine (1000 mg/m2) was given on days 1 and 8 of each cycle. Cisplatin (70 mg/m2) was given on day 1. Protocol-specified recommendations were for gemcitabine to be given as a 30-min intravenous infusion in 500 mL normal saline and cisplatin as a 4-h intravenous infusion in 1 L saline. However, she experienced nausea, anemia, diarrhea, and an apparent sign of mental depression during chemotherapy, and refused to continue the treatment. The CT scan from the follow-up visit in December 2015 showed no sign of shrinking with her swollen lymph nodes .
The patient presented severe weakness and fatigue in her visit in May 2016. Given the patient’s declination of chemotherapy-based palliative treatment, we decided to explore the options for potential targeted therapy and/or immunotherapy. Genetic testing of the patient surgical specimen paired with white blood cells was performed using the hybrid capture-based KnoTruthTM OncUro-600 panel (JIEN Biotechnologies, China) on the Illumina NextSeq500 next generation sequencing (NGS) platform. The NGS data was analyzed using OncoDecoderTM (Genomic Future, Inc. USA), and cancer-specific somatic mutations in FGFR3, TP53, and CREBBP were identified as shown in .
The tumor harbored a pathogenic somatic missense mutation of Ser249Cys in FGFR3, hotspot Arg282Pro mutation in TP53, and deletion of Arg413* in CREBBP. In addition, TMB was computed with a score of 13.6. IHC was performed for PD-L1 expression using the pathological specimen, and results show positive staining ( and ). At the time, ICIs (eg pembrolizumab/atezolizumab) were in Phase II clinical trials. Pazopanib is a multikinase inhibitor that exerted an exceptional response to UTUC patient with FGFR3 Ser249Cys mutation in a case report. Erdafitinib, the latest FDA-approved FGFR3 inhibitor for UC in 2019, was not even available for trial at the time. Based on these findings, the patient was given two options of treatment regimen with either pazopanib or ICIs. Concerning the potential side effects of pazopanib in renal function and the patient’s nephrectomy of the left kidney, the patient was initiated immunotherapy on pembrolizumab. The ethics committee of the Affiliated Zhongshan Hospital of Dalian University approved the study. The patient received pembrolizumab 100mg every 3 weeks for 6 cycles. The follow-up CT scans showed that the patient’s left adrenal gland and abdominal aortic lymph node mass disappeared after cycle 4 of the treatment ( and ). In contrast to the prior chemotherapy, the patient experienced only mild rash with an itch on pembrolizumab, and these symptoms improved significantly by taking mupirocin (for external use). No obvious abnormalities in renal function and liver biochemistry were observed. After 6 cycles of treatment, the drug was discontinued and pelvic CT was reviewed every 3 months, and the CR was maintained for 3 years and 7 months.
In January 2020, the patient experienced painless gross hematuria again in the follow-up visit. CT scans showed a mass lesion in the middle of the right ureter, and no other metastases in the pelvic cavity were observed ( and ). We performed a liquid biopsy with the patient blood circulating DNA using KnoTruthTM OncUro ctDNA-UMI NGS panel (JIEN Biotechnologies, China). The results show a score of 9.3 for blood plasma TMB (bTMB), and again Ser249Cys mutation in FGFR3. Owing to the patient’s sensitivity to pembrolizumab from early treatment and relatively high bTMB score in plasma ctDNA, we recommended a pembrolizumab retreatment regimen with 200mg every 3 weeks. However, the tumor did not show significant shrinking by the CT scan at the end of 3 cycles of treatment though the patient’s hematuria was alleviated. To seek the improvement of therapy, we recommended treatment plan with a combination of pembrolizumab and erdafitinib. The 3-month follow-up CT scan results showed that the thickness of the middle wall of the right ureter was strikingly reduced, and the expansion of the right renal pelvis and effusion completely disappeared ( and ). The patient remains progression-free at the end of 6 cycles of the combined treatment. Continuous clinical follow-up has been established for the patient.