A 53-year-old Japanese male presented with worsening dyspnoea. Marked oedema was observed in the extremities, and chest radiography revealed pulmonary congestion. Transthoracic echocardiography showed a LVEF of 15%, biventricular diffuse hypokinesis, and left ventricular dilation with functional mitral regurgitation. He was hospitalized with a diagnosis of heart failure with reduced LVEF (HFrEF).
Ten years prior to the admission, he underwent liver biopsy for one hepatic mass, which showed a granulomatous lesion with Langerhans-type multinucleated giant cells and necrosis. Although Mycobacterium tuberculosis was not detected, he had been taking drugs against suspected tuberculosis. Eight years before the admission, he was diagnosed with multiple myeloma and treated with lenalidomide and prednisolone. The multiple myeloma subsequently settled down, and lenalidomide and prednisolone had been discontinued 4 years before admission. He had been followed up without hospitalization.
On admission, he presented with orbital xanthomas and subcutaneous nodules on the neck, trunk, and back , which had been asymptomatic and uninvestigated since his childhood. Laboratory examination showed elevated levels of C-reactive protein, brain natriuretic peptide (BNP), high-sensitivity troponin I, and liver enzymes, and apolipoprotein A1 (Apo-A1) and HDL cholesterol were extremely low (see , ). Serum protein electrophoresis confirmed the presence of an IgGκ paraproteinemia. Urine immunoelectrophoresis indicated the presence of Bence Jones protein; however, bone marrow biopsy showed that plasma cells represented <10% of all nucleated cells, which did not meet the diagnostic criteria of multiple myeloma.
Computed tomography showed numerous plaques were accumulated from the aortic arch to the descending aorta . Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) showed prominent plaque formation, wall irregularities in bilateral common carotid arteries, and occlusion of left subclavian artery and left vertebral artery . Coronary angiography demonstrated significant stenosis in the left anterior descending artery (LAD, ), and the intravascular ultrasound confirmed diffuse hypoechoic plaques . Right ventricular endomyocardial biopsy showed no obvious abnormalities. Cardiac MRI showed an inducible perfusion defect in extensive anterolateral region under adenosine triphosphate stress ( and ). On the other hand, there was no evidence of myocardial oedema or late gadolinium enhancement . Cardiac dysfunction was at least partly attributed to reduced blood flow in the coronary artery, and percutaneous coronary intervention was indicated for the LAD lesions; however, we prioritized optimal medical therapy due to the incidence of contrast-induced nephropathy after coronary angiography.
Advanced atherosclerotic lesions for his age, wall thickening of the aorta, and persistently elevated C-reactive protein level were highly suggestive of vasculitis. 18F-Fluorodeoxyglucose PET/CT confirmed increased uptake in the aorta, bilateral common carotid arteries, and the skin area corresponding to the characteristic eruptions (–).
He underwent skin biopsy of the eruption in the neck, which showed necrotic lesions from the dermis to the subcutaneous tissue, surrounded by inflammatory cell infiltration including foamy histiocytes . Cholesterin deposits and an infiltrate of foreign body-type polygonal giant cells that phagocytosed these deposits were also observed, and these were consistent findings with liver biopsy specimen 10 years ago.
He was finally diagnosed with NXG based on a constellation of his clinical and histopathological features. Necrobiotic xanthogranuloma is a non-Langerhans cell histiocytosis and multisystem disorder. Although the pathogenesis remains unknown, impaired macrophage lipid homeostasis associated with a systemic inflammatory profile, which may result from the interaction of monoclonal immunoglobulin and lipoproteins, and extremely low levels of HDL are characteristic features. He began prednisolone treatment with at an initial dose of 0.5 mg/kg/day (30 mg/day) with reference to treatment for large-vessel vasculitis. After the treatment, skin yellow rashes became thinner ( and ), and C-reactive protein immediately decreased with markedly increased levels of Apo-A1 and HDL . In addition to prednisolone, carvedilol, and enalapril as a guideline-directed medical therapy (GDMT) for HFrEF at the time, aspirin and rosuvastatin for ischaemic heart disease were introduced. Brain natriuretic peptide level also decreased promptly and ST-T abnormalities of electrocardiogram on admission gradually improved (see , ). Left ventricular ejection fraction increased to 41% at 6-month follow-up.
Three years after the treatment, when prednisolone tapered to 5 mg/day, skin rashes relapsed with mild C-reactive protein elevation. Prednisolone dose was increased to 20 mg/day and tapered slowly to the maintenance dose of 8 mg/day. Thereafter, no relapse of skin rashes or C-reactive protein elevation was observed for 3 years. According to the updated GDMT, he is currently taking carvedilol 10 mg, sacubitril valsartan 100 mg, dapagliflozin 10 mg, and rosuvastatin 2.5 mg daily and receives 140 mg of evolocumab every 2 weeks as well. His HDL and Apo-A1 levels remain high despite the persistent paraproteinemia and M-proteinemia. Although LVEF has not recovered completely, his BNP level maintains low . The PET/CT obtained 5 years after treatment demonstrated decreased uptake in the aorta and cervical arteries, reflecting the resolution of vascular inflammation (–).