An 8-year-old incompletely immunized boy with a history of mild speech delay presented to the emergency department with 1 week of fever, headache, fatigue, unsteady gait, abdominal pain and vomiting. An outpatient evaluation 2 days prior included negative tests for strep, influenza, and SARS-COV-2. Immediate household family members were negative for SARS-COV-2. On arrival to the emergency department, the patient was ill appearing, lethargic, tachycardic, and febrile to 104.4F. Physical examination was notable for nuchal rigidity.
Initial labs showed a mild leukopenia (WBC 4.6 × 10^3/mcl), CSF pleocytosis (190 cells/mcL, 95% lymphocytes) and elevated CSF protein (132 mg/dL) . Inflammatory markers (CRP, ESR) were normal. With high suspicion for viral, rickettsial, or atypical bacterial meningoencephalitis, a broad infectious work up and empiric antimicrobial treatment were initiated.
The following day, he developed bilateral ankle clonus, hyperreflexia, and dysmetria. MRI brain was normal. Repeat lumbar puncture showed a continued CSF lymphocytic pleocytosis (145 cells/mcL) and worsened elevated protein (235 mg/dL). Mental status and neurologic examination continued to rapidly decline and by day 3 of admission he was less responsive with new findings of nystagmus, urinary incontinence, and dysconjugate gaze with right sided esotropia. EEG showed no signs of seizure or status epilepticus. Due to his worsening neurologic status despite broad-spectrum antimicrobial therapy, there was heightened concern for an autoimmune, paraneoplastic, or malignant etiology. Antimicrobial coverage was discontinued as infectious studies returned normal. The infectious work up was negative except for a positive mycoplasma IgG and IgM that was treated with a full course of levofloxacin . Hematology-oncology was consulted and ruled out malignancy. Serum and CSF flow cytometry as well as bone marrow biopsy were normal.
Repeated brain MRI on day 5 showed new findings of pronounced leptomeningeal hyperintensity and focal low diffusivity in the region of the dorsal left thalamus . Within a day, the patient was transferred to the pediatric intensive care unit due to autonomic instability, decreased responsiveness, and abnormal eye movements concerning for seizures. Antiepileptics were given and produced no improvement in mental status.
Rheumatology was consulted and considered a differential of autoimmune encephalitis, CNS vasculitis, acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM), CNS sarcoidosis, and CNS lupus. All rheumatologic labs returned normal, and the Mayo encephalopathy autoimmune panel was sent and not yet resulted . Testicular ultrasound, thyroid ultrasound, and ophthalmologic examination were normal. A third lumbar puncture showed worsening CSF pleocytosis (263 cells/mcL) and protein (245 mg/dL) . Rheumatology recommended pursuing brain biopsy if all oncologic and infectious testing remained negative.
Prior to performing a brain biopsy, the multidisciplinary team decided to treat empirically for an autoimmune CNS process with 2 doses of IVIG and a 5-day course of plasmapheresis. Steroids were considered but not initiated until all oncologic and infectious etiologies could be ruled out. The patient had no clinical neurologic improvement, and there was a slight improvement in CSF pleocytosis and protein . A repeat brain MRI showed progression of diffuse parenchymal swelling involving the cortex, deep gray nuclei, hypothalamus, brainstem, and cerebellum. The size of a focus of low diffusivity in the dorsal thalamus, with T2 prolongation, faint enhancement, and hyperperfusion evident on arterial spin labeling was increased. A new small foci of low diffusivity in the centrum semiovale and callosal splenium appeared . Importantly, cerebral CT angiography was normal, ruling out medium or large vessel vasculitis.
Up to this point, the patient had an extensive negative work up and no response to treatment. Brain biopsy was deemed necessary to rule out small vessel vasculitis and isolated CNS hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) before initiating empiric treatment with steroids. Brain tissue was obtained, and dexamethasone initiated. The following day, the preliminary pathology diagnosis was consistent with small vessel CNS vasculitis.
The histopathologic assessment showed vasculocentric transmural inflammation with damage to the vascular wall of arterioles, capillaries, and extent venules, without fibrinoid mural necrosis . The inflammatory infiltrate was composed mainly of lymphocytes as highlighted by immunohistochemical stains of CD3 and CD20 as markers of T and B lymphocytes . There were no granulomas. A Congo red stain was negative for amyloid. There was reactive gliosis of brain parenchyma, which was highlighted by GFAP stain. These findings were diagnostic of SV-cPACNS.
Dexamethasone was switched to high dose intravenous methylprednisolone for 5 days followed by a prolonged oral taper over 12 months with appropriate pneumocystis pneumonia and gastric prophylaxis, per the Brainworks treatment protocol for SV-cPACNS. One week after steroid initiation, the patient began following simple motor commands. Induction immunosuppressive therapy with cyclophosphamide was started on the same day. After another week, he was interactive, speaking in short sentences, and eating a soft diet. Prior to discharge, the Mayo CSF autoimmune encephalitis panel returned with CSF GFAP antibody positivity. Given the patient’s tissue diagnosis of small vessel vasculitis and dramatic improvement with immunosuppressive therapy, management was not changed. Three weeks after initiation of steroids and two weeks after initiation of cyclophosphamide, he was discharged home with outpatient therapy.
After completing 7 monthly doses of cyclophosphamide as an outpatient, the patient was transitioned to oral mycophenolate mofetil for maintenance immunosuppression. At his 6 month follow up, he continued to have intermittent slow speech and difficulty with cognitive processing. A follow up MRI 3 months later showed resolution of the acute appearing-appearing diffuse parenchymal abnormalities, with numerous new white matter lesions consistent with microvascular ischemic disease and cerebellar volume loss .