In June 2020, a 47-year-old woman with no comorbidities presented to her gynecologist with pelvic pain and vaginal bleeding. At the clinical examination, a vaginal mass was found, and a biopsy was performed, diagnosing HPV p40 positive and p16 negative vaginal SCC with lymphovascular invasion and without perineural invasion. The cancer grading was not specified (a–c). A pelvic MRI evidenced a locally advanced carcinoma with full-thickness posterior vaginal wall infiltration. No enlarged lymph nodes were detected, except for bilateral inguinal nodes with a suspected round shape but smaller than 7 mm and therefore difficult to determine. A rectal endoscopic ultrasound detected rectal wall infiltration, with a final staging of uT4 uN1, stage IVA according to the FIGO classification and the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) 2017. No distant metastases were identified at the CT scan.
After a multidisciplinary discussion and the placement of a protective colostomy, the patient started concurrent chemoradiotherapy, with cisplatin 40 mg/m2 weekly for 5 weeks and concomitant radiotherapy (45 Gy in 25 daily fractions of 1.8 Gy). At the end of the treatment, a pelvic MRI showed a large reduction in the tumor size and no rectal wall infiltration. Considering the good treatment response, the program was completed with brachytherapy (28 Gy in 4 daily fractions). In February 2021, an abdomen MRI detected a further dimensional reduction of the mass. In April 2021, the same imaging showed the dimensional stability of the primary tumor, with the appearance of suspiciously enlarged right inguinal lymph nodes, with maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of 9.6 at the 18F-FDG PET/CT. The biopsy of one of the right inguinal lymph nodes was positive for vaginal carcinoma recurrence. After a multidisciplinary meeting, nodal surgery and radiotherapy were excluded. The patient was thus a candidate for first-line chemotherapy with carboplatin (AUC 5) and paclitaxel (175 mg/m2) administered every 3 weeks for 6 cycles. After 3 cycles of chemotherapy, the 18F-FDG PET/CT showed a dimensional and metabolic progression (SUVmax 20.5) of the right inguinal nodes. After multidisciplinary discussion, a fourth cycle of chemotherapy was administered. In September 2021, a clinical and radiological progression was detected, with the 18F-FDG PET/CT displaying a further dimensional increase associated with a slight decrease in uptake (SUVmax 18.2). The MRI confirmed the increased size of the right inguinal lymph nodes (37 mm vs. 14 mm of maximum diameter at the start of the combination chemotherapy). Next-generation sequencing (NGS) did not detect any genetically targetable alterations, and the mismatch repair (MMR) protein complex resulted intact at immunohistochemistry. PD-L1 expression assessed by CPS was 10%.
In October 2021, the patient started second-line chemotherapy with gemcitabine 1,000 mg/m2 weekly for 2 weeks every 21 days. After 2 months, the patient complained of worsening inguinal pain that affected her walking capability, and the 18F-FDG PET/CT showed a dimensional increase of right inguinal lymph nodes (SUVmax 12.9) (a).
Considering the preliminary data of the phase II basket trial KEYNOTE-158, in January 2022, the patient started a third-line therapy with pembrolizumab 200 mg flat dose every 3 weeks. After only 2 months of treatment, her clinical conditions significantly improved: inguinal pain gradually disappeared, and she began to walk again without aids. In April 2022, the inguinal mass started to produce abundant blood serum fluid (a). Microbiological and cytological exudate analyses were negative. In April 2022, an 18F-FDG PET/CT highlighted an initial size reduction of the nodal recurrence, with a slight increase of the uptake (SUVmax 13.8), probably due to the inflammatory process (b). In July 2022, the 18F-FDG PET/CT showed further reduction both in size and in metabolic activity of the right inguinal mass (SUVmax 7.7) (c). The smaller diameter of the mass was clinically evident, with softer and clearer overlying skin (b). The patient performed a total of 16 cycles of pembrolizumab until November 2022. The 18F-FDG PET/CT performed in November 2022 showed a bilateral and diffuse lung uptake, and, soon after, the patient was hospitalized for acute respiratory failure with radiologic evidence of an interstitial lung disease, treated with high-dose steroid therapy and rapid symptom resolution. In January 2023, the high-resolution CT scan showed a partial reventilation of the lung consolidations. Considering the severe immune-related toxicity, immunotherapy was discontinued, and clinical and radiological follow-up was started. The last radiological follow-up was performed in March 2023: the right inguinal mass appeared as avascular and dimensionally stable at the ultrasound and showed a further metabolic reduction (SUVmax 3.7) at the 18F-FDG PET/CT.