A 5-month-old girl was admitted to the hospital with “episodic limb tremors for more than 1 month.”
Prior to the age of a month, the child experienced episodic limb shaking, loss of consciousness, cyanosis of the lips, fever, and vomiting without obvious triggers. These occurred during both waking and sleeping periods. When she was 5 months old, she was still unable to raise her head, turn over, or actively grasp objects with her hands. Neither of her lower limbs could support weight when placed under her armpits.
The child was previously healthy, and the parents denied a history of encephalitis, poisoning, or trauma.
The child was delivered by cesarean section at term (G2P2); there was no umbilical cord around the neck at birth and no asphyxia rescue (body weight 3550 g and height 50 cm). The parents of the child were previously healthy; the mother was healthy during pregnancy, but there was a history of special medication use and exposure to radioactive substances. The child had an older sister who was in good health and had no similar clinical manifestations. A family history of febrile seizures, epilepsy, and global developmental delay existed.
Weight: 7.6 kg, length: 65 cm and head circumference: 41 cm. Clear consciousness, an acceptable response, steady breathing, as well as no special facial features, yellow staining, rash, bleeding points on the skin and mucous membranes, coffee milk spots, and depigmentation spots were observed. The head was not deformed; the anterior fontanel was flat (about 1.0 cm × 1.0 cm); the bilateral pupils were large, equal circles (3.0 mm in diameter), and sensitive to light reflection. The pharynx was not hyperemeal, the neck was soft, and there were no obvious abnormalities in the cardiopulmonary and abdominal examinations. The vertical neck was unstable, the head could not be raised in the prone position, inability to complete elbow support, and both lower limbs could not support weight when supporting the armpits. Extremity muscle strength class V and normal muscle tone could be noted; bilateral knee tendon reflexes and Achilles tendon reflexes could be drawn symmetrically; the double Pap, Brinell, and Kirschner signs were negative.
Routine blood tests, urinalysis, blood ammonia, blood lactate, blood glucose, electrolytes, renal function, cardiac enzyme profile, hepatitis B and C antibodies, hepatitis A antibodies, blood tandem mass spectrometry, urinary organic acids, blood cytomegalovirus CMV-DNA, urinary cytomegalovirus DNA, and other physicochemical tests were normal.
Routine color ultrasound and chest radiography of the hepatobiliary, pancreatic, and spleen, conventional electrocardiography, cardiac ultrasound, and cranial magnetic resonance imaging showed no obvious abnormalities.
Electroencephalogram: atypical hypsarrhythmic pattern . Informed consent was obtained from the child’s parents; peripheral blood was collected from the child and parents for whole-exome sequencing. The child had a heterozygous mutation in the TBL1XR1 gene, c.86 G>A (p.Gly29Asp), a de novo variant, and both the father and mother were wild-type . This locus has been previously reported in the literature. The variant was considered pathogenic according to the ACMG guidelines.