A 48-year-old man underwent percutaneous cathether ablation for atrial fibrillation. Four years previously he had been diagnosed with a dilated cardiomyopathy after presenting with an episode of atrial fibrillation with an ejection fraction of 17%. He had no history of hypertension, diabetes or previous strokes. He was commenced on perindopril, metoprolol and warfarin. Initially, his atrial fibrillation was paroxysmal, however, over the last nine months he had noticed an increase in frequency of palpitations. Particularly in the last two months, he felt the atrial fibrillation was continuous and he was much less energetic and easily fatigued.
The patient had been anticoagulated with warfarin until 4 days prior to the procedure when the warfarin was withheld and anti-coagulation continued with subcutaneous low molecular weight heparin. A transoesophageal echocardiogram had been performed one week prior to the ablation procedure and showed no pre-formed atrial thrombus. The patient underwent segmental pulmonary vein isolation and linear ablation within the left atrium for substrate modification, as well as linear ablation of the cavo-tricuspid isthmus for ablation of the classic right atrial flutter circuit. An irrigated catheter tip was used. Intravenous heparin was commenced the morning of and during the procedure with a target activated clotting time of between 300 and 350 seconds.
On waking from the anaesthetic, the patient immediately complained of visual disturbance. On examination the patient had a visual acuity of 2/200 in both eyes and computerised static perimetry performed day 1 post ablation showed bilateral superior altitudinal field defects . Full neurological examination was undertaken and in addition to the visual deficit the patient also had subtle expressive dysphasia with word finding difficulty. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain on day 2 post ablation showed increased T2 FLAIR signal in both occipital lobes, extending into the inferomedial aspect of the left temporal lobe , no evidence of older infarcts were seen. A diagnosis of multifocal cerebral infarction post catheter ablation was made.
Day 3 post ablation, he developed an episode of atrial arrhythmia and was commenced on oral amiodarone. Warfarin was withheld until day 5 post ablation and then recommenced and maintained at therapeutic levels. Blood tests for biochemical abnormalities, coagulation studies and a clotting screen were within normal limits. A review one week later, showed an improvement in the visual acuity to 20/60 in the right eye and 20/80 in the left eye with a persistent bilateral superior altitudinal field defect.
One year later, visual acuity and visual field remained unchanged and the patient continued to have ongoing difficulties with word finding and reading. His atrial fibrillation, however, was now well controlled on medical therapy (warfarin, amidarone, perindopril and metoprolol).