A 62-year-old woman presented to the ophthalmology outpatient clinic with complaints of pain, blurred vision, photophobia, and redness in her left eye for a month. She had a history of pterygium surgical excision two months ago at another hospital in Mogadishu, Somalia. The patient had no history of ocular trauma and underlying systemic disorders such as diabetes mellitus. Patient was not informed whether topical MMC was used intraoperatively during her surgery. Patient was using fortified vancomycin ophthalmic suspension (50 mg/mL), fortified gentamicin ophthalmic suspension (14 mg/mL), atropine ophthalmic suspension, natamycin ophthalmic suspension (5%) and doxycyline capsule (100 mg). Despite these empirical treatment with ophthalmic suspensions and oral antibiotic, the patient was not responding to the treatment.
The visual acuity in the right eye was 20/20, while vision in the affected eye was restricted to perception of hand movement (HM). Slit-lamp examination showed severe conjunctival congestion, a central whitish corneal ulcer measuring about 6 × 6 mm with a central epithelial defect and unclear margin, and hypopyon . Pupil and lens were not visible due to the ulcer formation, and intraocular pressure was normal by digitally. We stopped the empirical treatment and performed corneal scraping under topical anesthesia for bacterial and fungal cultures a day later. The patient continued to use fortified vancomycin ophthalmic suspension, ceftazidime ophthalmic suspension (100 mg/mL) and voriconazole ophthalmic suspension (10 mg/mL) hourly during day, and cyclopentolate (1%) three times a day until the result of the microbiology report (7 days).
Gram stain of the scraping material did not reveal any specific organisms. Culture revealed gram-negative bacilli identified as Klebsiella pneumonia with conventional methods. The strain was found to be resistant to clindamycin, amikacin, vancomycin, quinupristin/dalfopristin, gentamicin, teicoplanin, ampicillin/sulbactam, fucidic acid, and cotrimaxasole, but sensitive to cefoxitin and ciprofloxacin. In vitro antibiotic susceptibility testing of the bacterial isolates was performed by Kirby- Bauer disc diffusion method and interpreted in accordance with Clinical Laboratory Standards Institute criteria .
In the first week follow-up examination, there was no relief in the patient’s complaints despite the empirical antimicrobial treatment and hypopyon level was increased . All previous topical ophthalmic suspensions were stopped and intracameral cefuroxime (1 mg/0.1 mL) injection was performed under topical anesthesia in the operating room environment. Besides that topical fortified cefuroxime (50 mg/mL) and moxifloxacin (0.5%) hourly, cyclopentolate (1%) 3 times a day and oral ciprofloxacin (500 mg) twice a day were initiated. The hypopyon level began to decrease in 3 days . Therefore, fortified cefuroxime and moxifloxacin ophthalmic suspension doses were reduced to every two hourly administration. After 7 days; the hypopyon disappeared and the stromal infiltrates were steadily regressing , oral ciprofloxacin was stopped and the patient was asked to continue topical antibiotic ophthalmic suspensions 4 times a day, and cyclopentolate twice a day for 3 weeks more. At 4th week; the conjunctival congestion and stromal infiltrates resolved. The patient felt comfortable and did not report any adverse and/or unanticipated events. Final visual acuity did not improve beyond finger counting at two meters due to residual central stromal opacification at 3rd month .