A 35-year-old Caucasian male patient who worked as an environmental engineer had a medical history of recurrent episodes of acute pharyngitis, essential hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, and occasional abdominal pain and bloating. He had no recent travel history. His family history included immunoglobulin (Ig) A deficiency in his 18-month-old son and a several-year history of nonspecific colitis in his father. Regular medications were nifedipine CR (30 mg/day) and rosuvastatin (5 mg/day).
The patient initially presented to his family physician with a symmetrical polyarthralgia involving his knees and hands, odynophagia, temporal headache, retro-ocular pain, and an intermittent fever (maximum of 38°C). He was initially managed with an antibiotic (azithromycin) and anti-inflammatory agents without resolution of symptoms. One week later, he developed oral mucosal lesions and a vesicular rash on his palms and soles . In April 2011, 3 weeks after the initial presentation, he was admitted to the emergency room at the Curry Cabral Hospital (Lisbon) with compressive retrosternal pain, without dyspnea or a productive cough. The odynophagia was persistent, with worsening of the headache and arthralgia.
The emergency staff noted nonexudative oropharyngitis and tender cervical lymphadenopathy with normal cardiorespiratory examination findings and absence of a pericardial friction rub. He had abdominal tenderness in the right lower quadrant without guarding. There were no vesicles on the palms of his hands or soles of his feet, but the skin had a scalded appearance. There was slight ST-segment depression on the inferior leads (II, III, and aVF) of the electrocardiogram (ECG) and mildly increased levels of troponin I and creatine kinase-MB fraction. The diagnosis of myopericarditis was considered. He started ibuprofen at 400 mg three times a day and was admitted for further workup.
As an inpatient, his condition slowly improved. His fever resolved and he was discharged with only slight fatigue during strenuous exercise. The skin vesicles disappeared and progressed to scaliness .
Laboratory examination showed positive serology for coxsackie A9 (IgM with a titer of 1:160) 1 week after the disappearance of the vesicular rash. It is assumed that a titer of >1:80 is predictive of a diagnosis of the infection in question. In addition, he was positive for IgA anti-transglutaminase 25 (<20 U/mL) and IgA anti-gliadin 77 (<25 U/mL) antibodies, with higher titers during follow-up after discharge (59 and 60 U/mL, respectively). He had normal immunoglobulin levels and was negative for antinuclear antibody (ANA), anti-DNA antibody (dsDNA), and p- and c-anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA). Serology for viral hepatitis and human immunodeficiency virus were negative. Endoscopy revealed a normal appearance of the gastric and duodenal mucosae, and biopsy showed slight mucosal architecture disruption.
An echocardiogram showed a normal left ventricle, slightly hypertrophic interventricular septum, normal systolic function (ejection fraction of 60%), and left atrium in the upper limit of the normal range. The ECG findings and cardiac biomarker levels returned to normal after 5 days.
To ameliorate the abdominal pain and bloating, a gluten-free diet was introduced, and this proved to be helpful with normalization of the anti-transglutaminase and anti-gliadin antibodies 6 months later.