A 12-year-old boy with no known chronic illness or history of medical conditions, from a rural region in the countryside of Bojnurd city, was brought to the emergency room (ER) with a decreased level of consciousness. Based on the history provided by the parents, the boy experienced unconsciousness for ~30 min before being taken to the ER. The parents did not mention any tonic movements, foaming at the mouth, or cyanosis occurring at home.
Upon arrival at the ER, the patient’s condition was characterized by tachypnea with a respiratory rate of 47 breaths per minute which was concurrent with probable signs of respiratory failure including belly breathing, noisy respiration along with intercostal and suprasternal retractions.
The patient’s vital signs were a blood pressure of 95/50 mmHg, oxygen saturation of 83%, and an axillary temperature of 38.3°C. Physical examination reveals crackles on lung auscultation, which are concurrent with a unilateral reduction of respiratory sounds at the lower zone of the lung. These findings are more pronounced in the right lung. Additionally, the examination of the mouth shows large tonsils. The patient did not respond to verbal stimulation and only demonstrated withdrawal in response to pain stimuli. Pupillary examination showed normal findings. In the physical examination, there were no signs of skin rash, insect bite, head trauma, or biting of the tongue. The arterial blood gas examination revealed respiratory acidosis (PH: 7.21, PCO2: 73, and HCO3: 28.7).
After attending Airway, Breathing, and Circulation in resuscitation primary surveys, which included protection of the airway, oxygenation, IV line access, and administration of isotonic IV fluids, the patient received intravenous hydrocortisone, a short-acting beta-agonist nebulizer, and intravenous phenytoin. As a result of this treatment, the patient’s consciousness was regained within 10–15 min.
After regaining consciousness, the patient reported that in the morning, he woke up from sleep and had several severe and spontaneous coughs, and he does not remember what happened afterward. He stated that he experienced a flu-like illness in the past several days and did not take any medication for this flu-like illness. The patient did not have symptoms of progressive dyspnoea, consumption of a new drug or food, previous history of seizure and epilepsy, or any other relevant symptoms that could lead to a diagnosis. There was also no significant familial medical history reported by the parents.
Laboratory examinations showed a leucocyte count of 20 300/mm3 (consisting of 47% neutrophil, 47% Lymphocyte, 3% Monocyte, and 3% Eosinophil, indicating leukocytosis and eosinophilia), Haemoglobin of 12.7 g/dl, Platelet count of 376 000/μl, and C-reactive protein level of 35 mg/l. All other laboratory examinations were within the normal range.
Based on the initial presentation and symptoms, the major diagnosis was a seizure, and it was assumed that the child was in the post-ictal phase. Symptoms like tachypnea and lung crackles were suspected to be related to aspiration during a seizure attack. Aspiration during a seizure can lead to respiratory complications, which may explain the tachypnea and lung crackles observed during the physical examination. Alternative differential diagnosis, ranked in order of priority encompassed asthma exacerbation, anaphylactic reaction, foreign body aspiration, central nervous system infections, and pneumonia.
To eliminate the aforementioned range of potential diagnoses, an anteroposterior chest X-ray was performed in the ER, revealing a distinct, well-defined round opacity located in the lower region of the right lung, leading to mediastinal displacement . The most plausible differential considerations for this particularly rounded opacity encompassed hydatid cystic disease, diaphragmatic eventration, and both benign and malignant lung neoplasms.
Upon the patient’s stabilization, a computed tomography scan was conducted, revealing a ruptured cyst exhibiting a water lily sign in the lower region of the right lung. This characteristic imaging appearance is indicative of a ruptured HC .
Following the confirmation of the diagnosis, the patient was promptly admitted to the paediatric intensive care unit in preparation for surgical intervention. Following the patient’s thoracotomy, the surgical team proceeded with cystectomy and capitonage. However, due to the significant extent of lung involvement, the decision was made to perform a lobectomy of the inferior right lobe. To allow for the expulsion of residual air and fluid, a chest tube was inserted post-surgery. Subsequent to the surgical intervention, the patient underwent a 3-month course of albendazole treatment, which proved efficacious in preventing recurrence. Follow-up assessments exhibited no indications or symptoms of disease relapse.