A 65-year-old man with essential hypertension for 18 years was admitted to the emergency department due to syncope and chest pain. He had lost consciousness an hour earlier after feeling chest pain while standing at a subway station in the morning. He lost consciousness for less than five minutes. For the past four years, he had experienced syncope after chest pain once a year, but spontaneously regained consciousness. He had a 50-year history of smoking and was taking regular medications that included cilnidipine, aspirin, atenolol and hydrochlorothiazide. Upon his hospital admission, he still complained of substernal squeezing chest pain with sweating. His vital signs were 69/42 mmHg and 48 beats per minute, and his initial electrocardiography (ECG) showed complete AV block; prominent ST depression in leads I, aVL and V2-V5; and slight ST-segment elevation in leads II, III and aVF . Under the impression of inferior STEMI, normal saline loading, intravenous heparin and inotropic agents were applied immediately in preparation for emergency coronary angiography. Three minutes after the initial ECG, reversed ECG was taken to check the presence of right ventricular infarct. It showed that the complete AV block and ST-segment changes, which are presented in Figure A, had disappeared . Due to the sustained hypotension despite improved ST changes, an emergent intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) was applied in the catheterization laboratory and the patient’s mean blood pressure was restored to over 60 mmHg. After the stabilization of the patient’s blood pressure, coronary angiography was performed. Contrary to the authors’ expectations, there was no significant intracoronary lesion in the RCA and the LCx . Instead, severe dynamic obstruction due to myocardial bridging was observed in the mid-segment of the LAD-wrapping apex , and Grade 3 mitral regurgitation (MR) was noticed in the left ventriculography .
The portable echocardiography that was performed immediately after the coronary angiography showed severe mitral regurgitation and systolic flow acceleration of the LVOT . However, the LVOT pressure gradients were not measured due to the MR doppler contamination. There was no regional wall motion abnormality or systolic anterior motion (SAM) of mitral leaflet.
On the first day of the patient’s hospital stay, intravenous furosemide was needed due to his newly-developed pulmonary edema. Because of the hypotension and dynamic LVOT obstruction, nitrate was not used. On the next day, the IABP was successfully removed without complication. In the follow-up echocardiography after the IABP weaning, the mitral regurgitation completely disappeared and the pressure gradient across the LVOT was restored to 8.95 mmHg during the resting state. The pressure gradient across the LVOT was increased to 38.9 mmHg during the Valsalva state . There was no left ventricular hypertrophy. The peak cardiac myoglobin and troponin-I at the time of the patient’s admission were 12.6 ng/ml and 0.118 ng/ml, respectively. On the seventh day after admission, dobutamine stress echocardiography was performed to determine the degree of the dynamic LVOT obstruction between the resting and stressful states; however, there was no significant increase in the pressure after the dobutamine infusion. Moreover, there was no structural abnormality in the aortic valve or the subaortic structure in the transesophageal echocardiography. On the basis of the evaluation, the patient was treated medically with diltiazem. The prescription of a β-blocker was avoided due to the fact that the possibility of vasospasm could not be completely excluded. In addition, the hydrochlorothiazide was stopped to avoid aggravating the condition of LVOT obstruction. Indeed, the patient remained complaint-free during the first six months of follow-up.