A 55 year old African American male was admitted to the hospital with a 4 week history of difficulty swallowing, hoarseness, fatigue, neck swelling, night sweats and a 20 lb weight loss. He had no muscle weakness. He had type II diabetes mellitus and hyperlipidemia. His medications included atorvastain 40 mg daily which he was taking for 2 years. There was no history of rhabdomyolysis, or autoimmune disease.
On exam, he was afebrile with normal oxygen saturation on room air. His voice was notably hoarse and he had difficulty clearing his secretions. His neck was swollen symmetrically, non-tender, and without lymphadenopathy. Cardiovascular, pulmonary and gastrointestinal examination was unremarkable. Strength was 5/5 throughout, and he was able to stand and walk independently. There were no vasculitic skin lesions.
Basic hematological and chemistry studies were obtained and were within normal limits. His creatine kinase (CK) was 45,233 U/L (normal <120 U/L), AST was 835 U/L (normal <66 U/L), ALT was 277 U/L (normal <69 U/L) and aldolase was 83 U/L (normal <8.1 U/L). Basic autoimmune studies including anti-dsDNA, anti-Smith, anti-La, anti-Scl-70, anti-centromere, anti-cardiolipin, and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic (ANCA) antibodies were all negative. Anti-Ro antibodies were positive. In addition, complement levels and immunoglobulin levels were normal. Infectious disease evaluations for all viral, fungal and bacterial etiologies were negative. Additional pertinent laboratory findings are displayed in Table . Video swallow study revealed significant oropharyngeal dysphagia.
Neck CT and MRI were suggestive of presumed infectious retropharyngeal exudate and phlegmon extending from the skull base to the upper thoracic region. There was diffuse inflammation of neck strap muscles . Otolaryngology and infectious diseases were both consulted to assess for retropharyngeal abscess in the setting of severe dysphagia and neck soft tissue swelling. Broad spectrum antibiotics were started, however, the patient’s clinical status worsened. On the fifth day of admission, the patient developed weakness of the shoulders and an MRI of the shoulders revealed marked swelling, edema and inflammation of the deltoids and neck muscles. A muscle biopsy was performed of the left deltoid muscle and pathology revealed an inflammatory myopathy notable for myriad necrotic fibers, sometimes involving entire fascicles, many replaced by macrophages. An inflammatory exudate was present in perivascular regions in perimysium especially where the necrotic fibers were present. Myositis specific antibodies including Jo-1, Mi-2, PL-7, PL-12, SRP, EJ and OJ were negative. Subsequently, anti-HMGCR antibody testing was extremely positive at >200 U (normal <20 U).
He rapidly developed respiratory weakness with negative inspiratory force and vital capacity of -55 cm H2O (expected >80 cm H20) and 3.72 L (expected >3.8 L) respectively. This was followed by rapid and severe weakness of proximal upper and lower extremity muscles with inability to abduct his arms and stand up from seated position without assistance. He required a feeding tube for nutrition.
Treatment was initiated with IV methylprednisolone 500 mg daily for 3 days, which was followed by 5 days of plasmapheresis, followed by intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) therapy with 1 g/kg daily for 2 days.
Follow-up CT scan of the neck after treatment revealed significant improvement in inflammation of strap muscles and retropharyngeal swelling . The patient improved and was discharged home on only prednisone with plans for outpatient rehabilitation. Within 4 days of discharge, he was readmitted for worsening lower extremity weakness, darkening urine, and ongoing difficulties with managing secretions. He received additional IVIG 500 mg/kg daily for 2 days followed by initiation of rituximab 375 mg/m2 per week for 4 weeks and cyclophosphamide 15 mg/kg on weeks 1 and 3 as induction therapy. An MRI of the thighs confirmed ongoing muscle edema. His CK and anti-HMGCR antibody levels began to stabilize, and then improve as did his clinic symptoms. Figure illustrates his CK and anti-HMGCR antibody levels in relation to his treatments. A repeat left thigh muscle biopsy showed a myriad of necrotic fibers, accompanied by a large number of regenerating fibers, all of which appeared to be in the same stage of regeneration confirming prior diagnosis of necrotizing myositis.
Subsequently, the patient was transferred to inpatient rehabilitation where he had progressive improvement in general fatigue, strength, and swallowing. He was discharged home requiring minimal assistance and after 3 months resumed all his usual activities. He was subsequently placed on methotrexate 15 mg weekly and a prednisone was tapered over the next 4 months without further complications.