A 78-year-old woman with a past medical history of hypertension, chronic kidney disease, and rheumatoid arthritis, who underwent a surgical aortic valve replacement with a Mitroflow n.21 bio-prosthesis valve 10 years prior, was referred to our hospital due to syncope.
She denied dizziness, chest pain, or palpitations. A Grade IV mid-systolic murmur was audible which was further diagnosed with severe bio-prosthetic valve stenosis.
Transoesophageal echocardiogram confirmed the severity of the stenosis with a peak velocity of 4.7 m/s (<3 m/s), a mean transvalve gradient of 42 mmHg (<20 mmHg) and an estimated valve area of 0.84cm2.
The angiography showed only a challenging take-off of the right coronary artery (RCA). Computed tomography revealed a derived annular area and perimeter measurements which advised implant of a 23-mm Evolut-R valve (CoreValve Evolut-R, Medtronic, Dublin, Ireland) .
Age and multiple comorbidities led the Heart Team to consider the patient at high risk for re-intervention therefore, a VIV procedure was scheduled.
A pre-emptive chimney stenting was deemed necessary because of very low coronary heights with the VTCs [(distance of the coronary ostium to the anticipated final position of the displaced bio-prosthetic leaflets after trans-femoral heart valve (THV)] distances of <4 mm and both the aortic root and the sino-tubular junction resulted small .
The haemodynamic gradient resulted in being 47 mmHg, thus the trans-femoral heart valve (THV) was deployed (, Video S).
After implantation, only a faint pinching of the left main (LM) ostium was observed without signs of coronary flow impairment (, Video S). The post-implant gradient of 21 mmHg was considered not satisfactory, thus a post-dilatation was performed using an 18 mm sized balloon, lowering it to 9 mmHg (, , Video S).
However, at the following coronary opacification, the LM pinching worsened and a risky dislodgment of the radiolucent leaflets of the degenerated valve appeared in front of the ostium, albeit no haemodynamic or electrocardiographic signs of coronary under-perfusion were evident (, , Video S).
Owed to the highly angiographic suspicion of impending CO, the stent was deployed and flared by multiple high-pressure post-dilatations (4.5 mm × 12 mm and 5.0 mm × 8 mm NC balloon up to 20 atm) (, , Video S).
The chimney stenting was performed also at the ostium of the RCA because of its posterior take off. Finally, both coronaries were patent with no more angiographic life-threatening images of impending CO .
The in-hospital clinical course was uneventful. She reported an NYHA Class I–II and no syncope or chest pain at a 3 months of follow-up.