A 52-year-old Asian man underwent transurethral resection (TUR) of stage I (T1N0M0) low-grade UC (transitional cell carcinoma [TCC]) in the anterior wall of the bladder at a nearby hospital. He was referred to our hospital 4 months after undergoing TUR. Cytoscopic examination performed at our division showed scar formation after TUR with negative biopsies, and he did not wish to undergo further treatment. Although we planned follow-up studies, he stopped visiting our hospital just after the cytoscopic examination. At the age of 64, 12 years after undergoing TUR, he visited our department with complaints of frequent urination and macroscopic hematuria without painful micturition. During his physical examination, a pelvic mass and superficial lymph nodes were not palpable, but computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a large mass (3.8cm×2.9cm) with infiltration into the muscle layer (T2b), which was located in the anterior wall of the urinary bladder. The mass intensity was the same as in the rest of the bladder wall on T1-weighted images and slightly greater than in the bladder wall on T2-weighted ones . Urinary cytology was positive and suggestive of UC (TCC). Cytoscopic examination revealed a large pedunculated polyp with a surrounding papillary appearance. The patient subsequently underwent a transurethral biopsy of the tumor. The pathological diagnosis was low-grade, non-invasive papillary UC (Ta), and there was no evidence of metastasis on CT or MRI. Although muscularis propria invasion was not observed in the transurethral biopsy specimens, the patient was diagnosed with stage II (T2bN0M0) UC on the basis of MRI findings of tumor infiltration into the muscle layer. Therefore, tumor tissue was removed by total cystectomy , and bilateral pelvic lymph node dissection of external iliac and obturator regions with ileal conduit urinary diversion was performed. In total, eight lymph nodes were dissected. No post-operative complications were observed.
The final diagnosis of low-grade UC (TCC) with rhabdomyosarcomatous differentiation (INFa, pTa [epithelial component]/pT2b [mesenchymal component], LVI0, RM0, u-rt0, u-lt0, ur0, N0, M0) was established on the basis of immunohistochemical studies and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) assay of the resected neoplastic tissue. The pedunculated polyp was made up mainly of a sarcomatous component with a spindle cell–like appearance, which was characterized by severe nuclear pleomorphism and mitotic activity , and scattered areas of necrosis. Some strap- and racket-shaped cells with eosinophilic elongated cytoplasm were present in a dispersed manner . Spindle-like cells were positive for vimentin , myogenin, and desmin, suggesting rhabdomyosarcomatous differentiation. In contrast, these cells were negative for cytokeratins recognized by AE1/AE3 , chromogranin, synaptophysin, α-smooth muscle actin, and anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) . Rearrangements and copy number gain of the ALK gene were not detected by FISH . Muscularis propria invasion (T2b) was observed in the sarcomatous lesion without lymph node metastasis. The epithelial component of the tumor, which was consistent with a papillary lesion surrounding the pedunculated polyp, was low-grade, non-invasive UC (TCC) without necrosis . The rate of positivity of urinary cytology in patients with low-grade UC (TCC) is about 25% at our institute. The status of X chromosome inactivation and loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in both the carcinomatous and sarcomatous components was not analyzed. No evidence of recurrence was detected by whole-body CT during a 2-year follow-up period without further treatment.