A 28-year-old female was admitted with fever (39.4 °C), headache, vomiting, and cough for 1 week. Medical history was notable for chronic hepatitis B. Chest CT was normal. Brain MRI showed hyperintensities on T2 FLAIR sequences in bilateral cortical and subcortical regions . No abnormal enhancement or hydrocephalus was seen. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed glucose 2.52 mmol/L, protein 1.76 g/L, and white blood cells 300 × 106/L (80% mononuclear cells). Acid fast stain, India Ink preparation, and bacterial culture were negative. She experienced one convulsion. Gancyclovir was administered for 3 days. Possible tuberculous meningitis was diagnosed and anti-tuberculosis therapy (ATT) was started with oral rifampicin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol. Isoniazid and dexamethasone were administered intrathecally every 2–6 days for 1 month. CSF was sampled six times during intrathecal treatments and showed persistent pleocytosis with white blood cells of 80 to 394 cells × 106/L (80–90% mononuclear cells). Ethambutol was withdrawn due to blurred vision and replaced with levofloxacin. Her fever and headaches improved but tremor developed in both hands.
Three months later, she developed back pain, leg weakness, memory loss, irritability, and confusion. These symptoms progressed and eventually she could not walk independently. Cervical MRI demonstrated patchy hyperintensities in the spinal cord extending from C2-C7 . Brain MRI demonstrated linear and radial gadolinium enhancement extending perpendicular to the lateral ventricles . CSF analysis showed glucose 2.32 mmol/L, protein 1.09 g/L, and white blood cells 52 × 106/L (90% mononuclear cells). Testing of CSF for Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) by nucleic acid amplification testing (Xpert MTB/RIF) and culture (MGIT) were both negative. ATT was adjusted to moxifloxacin, amikacin, isoniazid, rifampicin, and pyrazinamide. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) was administered (25 g/day × 5 days) with improvement of her symptoms. Methylprednisolone was given intravenously (1 g/day × 3 days, 500 mg/day × 3 days) without further improvement.
She was referred to our hospital 5 months later. She had weakness of the right leg, hyperactive deep tendon reflexes, bilateral Babinski signs, unsteady gait, limb incoordination, and hand tremor. ATT consisted of rifampicin, pyrazinamide, and moxifloxacin. CSF analysis showed glucose 2.7 mmol/L, protein 0.89 g/L, white blood cells 14 × 106/L (86% mononuclear cells), and positive oligoclonal bands. Blood tests for TSH, Free T4, T3, B12, ESR, CRP were normal. Serum tests for infection including HIV 1/2 antibody, HSV1 IgM, HSV2 IgM and IgG, CMV IgM, EBV DNA, HCV, cryptococcal antigen, and TPPA were negative. Tests for autoimmune disease (ANA, anti-DS DNA, anti-RNP, anti-SSA/SSB, anti-Scl-70, anti-Jo-1, anti-Sm, ANCA, anti-TPO) and neoplasm (CA 242, SCC Ag, AFP, CEA, CA19–9, CA125, CA72–4, CA15–3, Cyfra 21–1) were negative. The following serum autoimmune encephalitis antibodies were negative: Hu, Yo, Ri, Amphiphysin, Ma2/Ta, CV2/CRMP5, AQP4, NMDA, AMPA1, AMPA2, GABAB, CASPR2, LGI1, GAD65.
After reviewing of the brain MRI studies from the referring hospital, the linear perivascular radial gadolinium enhancement patterns made us suspect anti-GFAP astrocyopathy. Tissue-based and cell-based assays for GFAP antibodies were sequentially tested and antibodies were detected in blood and CSF. The GFAP antibody titers in serum and CSF were 1:32 and 1:100 respectively . Repeat brain MRI revealed persistent but subtle radial periventricular enhancement (image not shown). IVIG (25 g/day × 5 days) and prednisone (30 mg daily) were administered. Her leg weakness improved and she could ambulate without assistance at discharge. Prednisone was continued and tapered over 6 months. She has been followed for one and a half year without progression or relapses.