A 57-year-old male was diagnosed with lung cancer in September 2018 following discovery of 27 mm×25 mm solid nodule in the anterior basal segment of the left lower lung lobe . He underwent left lower lobectomy, and postoperative pathological examination revealed moderately differentiated invasive adenocarcinoma without accompanying lymph node metastasis, resulting in a pathological diagnosis of pT1cN0M0 IA3 stage according to the 8th edition of the UICC TNM Classification. Lung cancer recurrence was later discovered in August 2021 following discovery of a 37 mm×26 mm mass adjacent to the left upper lung hilar . The patient was treated with left upper lobectomy, and postoperative pathological analysis revealed a low-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma without lymph node metastasis, pathologically diagnosed as pT2aN0M0 IB stage. The same patient was later admitted to the hospital with recurrent fever, cough, and bronchorrhea of tan fluid and purulent sputum for more than 1 month. He had previously been treated with various anti-infective regimens, with no symptom improvement. Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed postoperative changes after left pneumonectomy with left pleural thickening and encapsulated fluid pneumothorax, a small slit of about 3 mm in diameter locally visible in the left bronchial stump communicating with the left residual cavity , and right middle and lower pneumonia . Fiberoptic bronchus examination revealed a small fistula, approximately 3 mm in diameter, visible in the left bronchial stump . According to these findings, the patient was diagnosed with a left BPF.
Following 2 weeks of closed drainage of the left thoracic cavity and anti-infective treatment with a combination of imipenem-cilastatin sodium, linezolid, and voriconazole, the patient’s fever subsided, his cough and sputum symptoms improved, and his white blood cell count returned to normal. He was subsequently able to undergo BPF closure via a right-sided thoracic approach with the assistance of ECMO and thoracoscopy. This method requires oxygenation support with the assistance of veno-venous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VV-ECMO) due to the fact that the patient had only right lung tissue remaining. Our strategy was ultrasound-guided percutaneous cannulation, i.e., insertion of an outflow cannula via the right femoral vein and an inflow cannula via the right jugular vein . A 4-cm incision was made in the fourth intercostal space between the right anterior axillary line and mid-axillary line to make an operation hole, and a 1-cm incision was made in the seventh intercostal space in the mid-axillary line to make an auxiliary hole to place the thoracoscope. Subsequently, the pleura of the right upper mediastinum was opened, and the arch of the singular vein was cut to facilitate exposure of the operative area. The left main bronchus was dissected from the rondel to a length of about 3 cm , and then, the left main bronchus was disconnected using a stapler with a suture to strengthen the severed end .
The operation was completed successfully, and ECMO was stopped immediately after the operation. The operative time was 136 min, intraoperative bleeding was approximately 105 mL, and VV-ECMO-assisted oxygenation support was provided for 115 min. In addition, antibiotic flushing and negative-pressure suction were applied after a closed drain was left in the left thoracic cavity, to control the pyothorax and promote closure of the residual cavity. The patient was able to get out of bed and move freely within 48 h after the operation, his right middle and lower pneumonia improved significantly compared with the previous period , the left thoracic residual cavity gradually narrowed, and the patient experienced no complications other than pain at the site of the surgical incision. The hospitalization time was 15 days. The patient was successfully discharged, and no BPF could be seen on repeat chest CT within 3 months of postoperative follow-up and the residual cavity was closed .