In December 2013, a 14-year-old boy presented to our hospital with a 4-year history of progressive pain in his left wrist; he had no history of preceding trauma. On examination, we observed localized swelling, tenderness, and limitations in the wrist movement. Neurological and vascular examination findings were normal. Anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the left forearm revealed extensive osteolytic lesions in the distal radius accompanied by internal pseudo-trabeculations and no periosteal reaction . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a large mass with a clear and smooth rim, invading the radial metaphysis and carpal articular surface . The patient was hospitalized, and tests revealed normal complete blood count, blood coagulation indicators, as well as liver and kidney function. To gather further details about the tumor, the patient underwent a C-arm-guided percutaneous core needle biopsy. A stab incision was made at the radial side of the forearm, and the tumor was sampled using a needle, with angulation and depth monitored via C-arm fluoroscopy. Based on histological examination, fibrous dysplasia was initially suspected; however, low-grade fibrosarcoma was not excluded.
To maximize wrist function recovery, we devised a two-stage procedure after extensive discussions with the patient’s parents and obtaining informed consent. Initially, we performed tumor resection via a radial approach. A longitudinal incision was made, facilitating dissection through the soft tissue. Identification and protection of the radial artery, radial vein, and superficial radial nerve were ensured. Subsequently, the lesion and surrounding normal tissues were meticulously exposed. The mass, measuring approximately 8 × 4 × 4 cm3, was found to originate from the medullary canal of the distal radius and expanded outward without apparent invasion of the surrounding soft tissues . After confirming that the surgical margins were tumor-free, approximately 13 cm of the affected radius was excised . We planned to perform a 13 cm-long free vascularized fibular proximal epiphyseal transfer, utilizing the peroneal artery as the vascular pedicle. A lateral incision was made in the ipsilateral lower leg, and dissection was performed carefully to isolate the vascular bundle while protecting the common peroneal nerve. The fibula was separated from the surrounding muscles and osteotomized using a wire saw, leaving the fibula graft attached to the limb solely by the vascular bundle . Before severing the peroneal artery, the adequacy of blood supply to the fibular graft solely pedicled on the peroneal artery was confirmed by observing bleeding from both the medullary canal and epiphysis. The peroneal vessel was anastomosed to the radial vessel in an end-to-end fashion. The fibular shaft was fixed to the radial shaft using a reconstruction plate, and the fibular head was fixed to the proximal carpal row and stabilized with two 2.0 mm Kirschner wires . However, considering the risk of vascular network damage in the epiphysis, ligament reconstruction was not performed. A long splint was applied for additional fixation after surgery, and blood flow in the transferred fibula was monitored using Doppler ultrasound. The complete specimen was sent to the pathology department for comprehensive histological examination, which confirmed a diagnosis of DF .
The bone union between the fibular graft and the proximal radius was achieved after 6 months, and the patient underwent internal fixator removal at another hospital. At the 12-month follow-up, the patient reported mild pronation in his left wrist but no pain. Radiography revealed radial volar subluxation of the wrist . Due to financial constraints and family circumstances, he did not receive further treatment.
In February 2019, the patient returned to our hospital because of severe wrist deformity and functional impairment. Physical examination revealed a local mass on the dorsal ulnar side of his left hand, with the wrist fixed in a position of palmar flexion and radial deviation and the range of motion at almost zero. Anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the left forearm showed extensive cystic destruction of the distal ulna and abnormal wrist joint alignment characterized by radial deviation, palmar subluxation, and joint space narrowing . Computed tomography (CT) demonstrated expansion and cortical breakthrough of the ulnar head accompanied by an extraosseous soft tissue mass . Three-dimensional CT revealed synostosis between the fibular graft and ulna . MRI showed an irregular mass with uneven and equal signals invading the distal half of the ulna . The patient was diagnosed with tumor recurrence and underwent surgery. A dorsal longitudinal incision was made; during the operation, a large irregular soft tissue mass on the ulna was observed, which came from the medullary cavity and eroded the dorsal cortex; the resection range included the mass and approximately 10 cm length of the affected ulna and the solid bone between the fibular graft and ulna was preserved to reduce fracture risk. Wrist deformity correction and fibula-scapholunate fusion were performed after tumor resection. The wrist was maintained in the neutral position, and a 2.7 mm dynamic compression plate was used for wrist fusion . The extensor tendons became loose after palmar flexion correction and were cut off, tightened, and subsequently repaired at different levels to prevent or decrease adhesion . Histological examination supported the diagnosis of DF recurrence in the ulna .
A splint was applied for protection for at least 6 weeks, and functional finger training was initiated as early as 72 h postoperatively. The surgical incision healed without complications. Radiotherapy, consisting of a total dose of 45 Gy delivered in 25 fractions over 4 weeks, was administered to the left forearm 6 weeks after surgery. Bone union was achieved after 6 months, and the patient underwent internal fixator removal to restore midcarpal joint movement. At the 2023 follow-up after the second tumor resection, radiographs showed a stable wrist and considerable hypertrophy of the fibula graft, which had been remodeled and resembled the radius . MRI revealed no signs of tumor recurrence . The patient experienced no pain in the wrist or elbow, and upper extremity function was deemed acceptable . He expressed satisfaction with the surgical outcomes and said he could work in a factory setting.