A 76-year-old white woman born and living in Portugal had a medical history of type 2 diabetes mellitus (without known microvascular or macrovascular complications) for more than 15 years, as well as hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and depression. She was treated with metformin (1500 mg per day), losartan/hydrochlorothiazide (100/25 mg per day), simvastatin (20 mg per day), aspirin (100 mg per day), and trazodone (150 mg per day).
She presented to the family physician for a routine visit. She had no active complaints, including history or symptoms of hypoglycemia. At the time of the evaluation, her physical examination was unremarkable, including her body mass index (24.3 kg/m2). A review of her laboratory data showed a FPG of 190 mg/dL and an HbA1c of 4.1%, which was measured by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). The remaining blood test results were clinically irrelevant, including complete blood count , lipid profile, liver and kidney functions, and iron metabolism. Inconsistent results were confirmed by analytical reassessment of HbA1c (4.5%, by HPLC) and FPG (236 mg/dL). Further review of her laboratory data over the past 4 years revealed that FPG had ranged from 130 to 250 mg/dL and HbA1c was consistently lower than 5%.
Given this discrepancy between HbA1c and plasma glucose, we hypothesized that she had an abnormal Hb, after excluding other potential factors such as anemia, hypertriglyceridemia, uremia, and chronic alcoholism . Therefore, Hb variants were studied after obtaining informed consent. Hb electrophoresis showed an abnormal peak (32.8%) with an earlier retention time than for A0, suggesting the presence of an Hb variant . The genetic sequencing of the beta-globulin gene revealed heterozygosity for the mutation c.422C>A (p.Ala141Asp) (p.Ala140Asp on the old nomenclature), corresponding to Hb Himeji.
Despite her denial of a relevant family history, namely of hematological diseases, we tracked her family (three sons, six grandchildren, and two greatgrandchildren) for the presence of this Hb variant, after obtaining informed consent. The study of Hb by HPLC was normal in all of them. Unfortunately, her two brothers were not available for study and her parents had died.