A 42-year-old middle-aged woman was admitted to the hospital with a 1-year-old bilateral adrenal mass and 1-month-old left upper abdominal pain. The patient denied previous symptoms of hypertension and weakness of limbs. Enhanced CT of the abdomen showed a right adrenal nodule and a large space-occupying lesion in the left adrenal region, with a high likelihood of pheochromocytoma , and blood tests showed that aldosterone and cortisol were in the normal range in the standing and lying positions, and catecholamines were normal. Intraoperatively, a huge tumor was found in the left adrenal region, measuring about 12*12*10 cm , with infiltrative growth with the left kidney, spleen, and pancreatic tail, and the lymph nodes around the superior mesenteric artery and renal artery were obviously enlarged. Considering that the tumor had metastasized to the left kidney, spleen and pancreas, the left adrenal gland, spleen, left kidney and pancreatic tail were surgically removed. Postoperative pathology: lymphocytes were found in the kidney and lymphocytes in the pancreas; lymphocytes were found in the spleen. It is considered to be a lymphohematopoietic system tumor, most likely a lymphoma . Immunohistochemistry: tumor cells CD20(+), CD19(+), BCL-2 about 90%, C-MYC about 70%(+), CD10(−), MUM-1(+), BCL-6(+), CK(−), CD3(−), CyclinD1(−), CD30(−), CR(−), Syn(−), S-100(−), Syn(−), S-100(−) and Ki67 about 90% (+). Bone marrow smear showed markedly active proliferation of granulocytes. Bone marrow flow cytometry: no obvious abnormal B-lymphocyte-associated immunophenotypes were detected. Testing for MYC, BCL-2 and BCL-6 genes in the left nephrectomy sample was positive for BCL-6. Subsequently, the patient received R-CHOP chemotherapy with the following regimen: rituximab injection 560 mg + cyclophosphamide 1100 mg + epirubicin 100 mg + vincristine 2 mg + dexamethasone 15 mg. Three weeks later, chemotherapy with zebutinib + R-CHOP regimen was administered. The disease improved significantly.