A 66-year-old woman, who had been healthy with no relevant previous medical history, complained of continuous fever starting two months before initial presentation. She realized weakness on her left extremities and was admitted to a city hospital for evaluation of fever and left hemiparesis. Then, she was transferred to our hospital for further evaluation three weeks later. On examination, her general condition was normal, except for an elevated body temperature (38.0° Celsius). No lymph-nodes were palpable. Additionally, she did not complain of Sicca symptoms, night sweats or weight loss. The patient was alert and had normal cognitive function. She had left hemiparesis (grade 4 as measured by the Manual Muscle Strength Testing) with bilateral brisk deep tendon reflexes and extensor plantar responses. Sensory extinction was noted in her left extremities.
The blood sample tests showed a slightly elevated C-reactive protein level (0.68 mg/dl) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (17 mm/h) as well as a high titer of antinuclear antibodies (x1280, speckled pattern). Anti-SS-A and anti-Ro52 antibodies were positive but anti-SS-B antibody was negative. Lip biopsy showed no inflammation. Immunoblotting revealed IgG-k monoclonal gammopathy; however, bone marrow histology showed 10 % proliferation of clonal plasma cells without light chain restriction, and Bence-Jones protein was not found. Tumor markers were negative and soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sIL-2R) was within the normal range. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) showed slight pleocytosis (11/μl; mature lymphocyte 94 %, no atypical cells). However, normal ranges of glucose and protein levels (73 mg/dl and 26 mg/dl, respectively) were observed. We also observed increments of both the IgG index (1.26) and interleukin 6 (29.4 pg/ml) but no increment of sIL-2R.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) exhibited hyperintense signals in the splenium of the corpus callosum and right-hemisphere dominant deep subcortical white matter without contrast enhancements . The brain lesions showed normal concentration patterns of choline, creatine and N-acetyl aspartate using MR spectroscopy. However, 123I-IMP single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) demonstrated blood flow increases in the basal ganglia, thalamus and brainstem , and 201Tl-scintigraphy revealed no abnormal accumulation in any part of the brain. 67Ga-scintigraphy found no evidence of systemic malignancy.
We tentatively diagnosed the patient as having NAIM associated with anti-SS-A and anti-Ro52 antibodies, as well as monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance. She was treated with intravenous methylprednisolone (mPSL) pulse therapy (1 g during the course of three days) and her fever transiently ceased. Three months after the onset of fever, she suddenly developed generalized tonic-clonic seizures (GTCS), which remained uncontrolled after the administration of antiepileptic medications. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) (0.4 g/kg in five days) had no beneficial effects. A second brain MRI showed extensive lesions that had developed in the bilateral frontotemporal lobes .
Brain specimens were sampled from the right frontal lobe using a brain biopsy. The histopathological examination showed atypical lymphoid cells with enlarged round nuclei diffusely infiltrating the cortical gray and subcortical white matters. These atypical cells were not cohesive, nor did they form a mass lesion. Perivascular tumor-cell cuffing was partly observed but not conspicuous. No necrosis was present, and mitotic figures were scant in number. Atypical cells were strongly labeled by antibodies for CD20, a B-cell marker. Additional immnunohistochemical studies revealed that tissue was positive for BCL-2, BCL-6 and MUM-1 but negative for CD5 and CD10 . A diagnosis of LC variant of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, non-germinal center B-cell pattern was made based on these histopathological and immunohistochemical features.
The patient had repeated GTCS, and accompanying severe aspiration pneumonia. She needed antibiotics and mechanical ventilator support. Considering the patient’s exhausted condition, we and her family chose to perform whole-brain radiation therapy (total 30 Gy) but not high-dose chemotherapy or rituximab therapy because the main adverse effect, bone marrow suppression, might be critical for her prognosis. Fever and seizures ceased for two months during and after the radiation therapy; however, she never regained consciousness. The follow-up MRIs revealed the progression of the lesions throughout the whole brain accompanying diffuse brain atrophy . She died one year after the initial onset of fever. No autopsy was permitted.