A 73-year-old woman had undergone a 27-gauge pars plana vitrectomy (PPV) for the epiretinal membrane in her right eye . The trocar was inserted into the vitreous cavity at a 30° angle to the scleral surface, positioned 3.5 mm posterior to the corneal limbus. The patient had diabetes mellitus, and preoperative optical coherence tomography angiography revealed a nonperfusion area, so the peripheral vitreous was shaved and retinal photocoagulation was performed on the peripheral retina. There were no scleral abnormalities such as thinning observed before or during the surgery. The surgical procedure lasted approximately 1 h. There were no complications, including unusual procedures or problems with the trocar site. The patient maintained a stable intraocular pressure (IOP) of 15 mm Hg 1 day after surgery and on postoperative day 4, and no abnormality was observed in either the conjunctiva or cornea. However, on day 14, the IOP decreased to 10 mm Hg, and bleb formation was observed in the conjunctiva. Fluorescein staining revealed no leakage from the conjunctival wound at the trocar puncture site .
On the 18th day following the PPV, the height of the bleb remained unchanged, but the corneal limbus in contact with the bleb appeared depressed, resembling saucer-like excavations. Fluorescein staining revealed no epithelial defects or fluorescein pooling, leading to a diagnosis of dellen . Owing to marked corneal thinning, conjunctival and scleral suturing was performed 20 days following the PPV. Intraoperative findings revealed a leakage from the scleral wound at the trocar puncture site when the conjunctival bleb was incised; therefore, scleral suturing was performed. In addition, an 8-0 vicryl compression suture was placed on the conjunctiva in the fornix to prevent bleb recurrence .
Nineteen hours after the conjunctival-scleral suturing, the scleral wound was closed, and fluorescein staining revealed no leakage . The IOP increased to 20 mm Hg, and the bleb and dellen disappeared . Since then, no recurrence of blebs or dellen was observed.