A 22-year-old Chinese female patient visited the clinic with a 10-year history of hypertension. The patient did not complain of chest pain or discomfort after exercise and had normal exercise tolerance. The patient had no other history of cardiovascular disease or cardiovascular risk factors. The patient’s blood pressure was 178/87 mmHg measured at the left upper extremity, 184/82 mmHg measured at the right upper extremity, 133/94 mmHg measured at the left lower extremity, and 146/97 mmHg measured at the right lower extremity, with a pressure gradient of more than 40 mmHg. Physical examination revealed that a systolic murmur appeared in the left infraclavicular area, and radio-femoral delay existed. Routine laboratory tests were negative, except for serum angiotensin-converting enzyme level of 13 U/L, which is lower than the normal range (18–55 U/L). Electrocardiogram showed an ST-segment depression in leads I, II, aVL, and V4–V6 and a T-wave inversion in leads I, II, aVL, and V3–V6. Posteroanterior chest X-ray showed an enlarged heart with a cardiothoracic ratio of 0.65 along with an S-shaped spinal curvature. Transthoracic echocardiogram revealed a large, fixed, moderate-intensity cardiac mass (76 mm × 42 mm × 62 mm) from a parasternal short-axis view, located at the apex and middle segment on the lateral and posterior walls of the left ventricle, without a clear boundary from healthy myocardial tissue . At the beginning of the descending aorta, a coarctation was observed with a diameter of 10 mm, and the minimal pressure gradient was 46 mmHg. The aortic valve was found to be tricuspid. Aortic computed tomography angiography (CTA) revealed a post-ductal-type CoA at the beginning segment of the descending aorta accompanied by multiple collateral vessels and a large soft tissue cardiac mass (77 mm × 51 mm) with a compressed left ventricular chamber . Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging revealed a local thickness (82 mm × 51 mm) of the left ventricular wall toward the heart cavity with low signals on T1-weighted imaging, uneven high signals on T2-weighted imaging, and abundant blood supply in the cardiac mass with gradual late gadolinium enhancement . Positron emission tomography–CT revealed a left ventricular soft tissue lump with an annular uneven enhancement of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose metabolic activity and significantly reduced uptake of 99mTc-methoxy-isobutyl-isonitrile. Coronary angiography revealed no vascular connections between the coronary artery and left ventricular mass with myocardial bridging at the middle segment of the left anterior descending artery without stenosis in the coronary arteries.
The patient underwent hybrid surgery with percutaneous catheter intervention with the implantation of an aorta stent and complete surgical removal of the left ventricular mass . The peak-to-peak gradient was lowered to <10 mmHg, and blood pressure returned to normal after aortic stent implantation. Pathological examination confirmed that the cardiac mass was cardiac fibroma . Post-operative transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated that the ventricular cavity remained normal without left ventricular ejection fraction reduction. At the 4-month follow-up, the patient’s left ventricular ejection fraction did not decrease and blood pressure was normal. All medications were stopped.