A 71-year-old man who was a heavy smoker visited the emergency clinic at his local hospital because of syncope, recurrent chest tightness, dyspnea, palpitations, and sweating for more than 20 days. Electrocardiography (ECG) showed sinus rhythm with a first-degree atrioventricular (AV) block. Chest radiography revealed a mediastinal mass. The results of brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and coronary angiography (CAG) were unremarkable. Cardiac computed tomography (CT) demonstrated multiple enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes and a low-enhanced solid lesion in the posterior–inferior wall of the left atrium, which was subsequently confirmed by transthoracic echocardiography (TTE).
The patient was then transferred to our hospital for further evaluation and treatment. Routine physical examination and laboratory examination on admission were unremarkable. Holter ECG record presented sinus rhythm with first-degree AV block and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. Cardiac CT scanning showed a small amount of pericardial effusion and pleural effusion on the left side. The solid echo mass on TTE was 50 mm × 67 mm × 19 mm in size and located in the left atrium at the AV junction without an obvious boundary to the adjacent cardiac tissues. The echo density of the mass was uneven. Left ventriculography and myocardial contrast echocardiography showed an abundance of contrast agent filling into left ventricular and the mass . PET-CT showed that the above mass was located in the posterolateral wall of the left atrium and left ventricle at the AV junction, measuring 61 mm × 26 mm with active uptake of fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) (SUVmax: 28.7), which was indicative of lymphoma. Multiple enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes with active uptake of FDG (SUVmax: 27.3) were seen in neck IV and station 2L, 3a, 4, and 5 of the mediastinum, indicating metastasis . A small lymph node with slightly active uptake of FDG (SUVmax: 2.8) was seen in the right hilum which was considered as reactive changes. The above imaging findings suggested that the mass was a PCL. Mediastinal lymph node biopsy was carried out with video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) through a 3-cm–long incision in the fifth intercostal space on the mid axillary line. A piece of tissue measuring 3.5 cm × 3.0 cm × 0.6 cm was removed using an electro-diathermia knife. Pathological examination of the specimen was completed by using conventional H&E staining and immuno-histochemistry staining. The histologic features showed that the normal structure of the lymph node had been destroyed and medium-to-large heterotypic lymphoid cells showed diffuse hyperplasia. These heterotypic cells were round/oval with red-stained cytoplasm and active mitosis . Immunohistochemistry showed positive results for CD20 (+++), CD79a (+++), CD19 (+++), mum-1 90% (+), CD10 80% (+), bcl-2 95% (+), bcl-6 95% (+), c-myc 25% (+), p53 40% (+), and Ki67 80% (+), and negative results for CD3 (−), CD5 (−), CD21 (−), CD23 (−), CD30 (−), ALK (−), CyclinD1 (−), and CD38 (−), and PD-L1 (22C3) expression of 35% the tumor cells. . In situ hybridization remained negative for Epstein–Barr virus (EBV)-encoded small RNAs (EBERs). The FISH results showed BCL6 (+), MYC (−), and BCL2/IGH (−), which ruled out double- and triple-hit high-grade B-cell lymphoma . The bone marrow aspirate and biopsy showed active bone marrow hyperplasia with normal trilineage hematopoiesis. A diagnosis of primary cardiac diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (GCB subtype, stage IV, NCCN-IPI 3) was established on the basis of the pathological evidence.
The patient was given a combined chemo-immunological therapy with R-CDOP (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, liposome doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone), which was decided upon after a multidisciplinary consultation by hematologists, oncologists, cardiologists, and cardiac surgeons. The patient received a single treatment course each month for 4 months. He was closely monitored during the chemo-immunotherapy, and an emergency plan was in place to deal with possible complications such as arrhythmia and cardiac rupture.
After 4 months of the treatment, the PCL and the enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes achieved complete remission as seen on the follow-up PET-CT after the treatment . No obvious side effect of the therapy was observed during the course of treatment. The clinical course of the patient is presented in . Further follow-up is required to ascertain the long-term outcome.