A 71-year old male presented in the outpatient department in August 2019 with the chief complaint of epigastric pain of 3 mo duration.
The epigastric pain was mild to moderate, localized, continuous, with no relation to meals. There was no relief with proton pump inhibitors. There was no history of jaundice, pruritus, clay-colored stools, anorexia, weight loss, dysphagia, gastrointestinal bleeding or vomiting.
The patient had undergone coronary angioplasty for coronary artery disease in 2010 and was on dual antiplatelet drugs.
He had no addictions, and his family history was non-contributory.
The patient was conscious and oriented. His pulse rate was 80 bpm and regular, and blood pressure was 110/70 mmHg. There was no pallor, icterus, or lymphadenopathy. Abdominal examination and other systemic examinations did not reveal any abnormalities.
His blood investigations were as follows: Hb 13.9 g/ dL, white blood cell count 4600/µL, platelet count 166000/µL, prothrombin time 16.5 s, serum bilirubin 0.42 mg/ dL, ALT 18 U/L, AST 17 U/L, ALP 83 U/L (< 129 U/L), gamma glutamyl transferase - 33 U/L (< 71 U/L), and serum creatinine 1.22 mg/dL (< 1.4 mg/dL).
At the local medical center, he had undergone ultrasonography of the abdomen that revealed dilatation of the CBD (15 mm) and pancreatic duct (PD) (5 mm). He was referred to our center for further management. Abdominal magnetic resonance imaging and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) showed dilated CBD (15 mm) and PD (6 mm) with abrupt cut-off at the level of the ampulla. No other abnormalities were noted . Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) revealed a subepithelial, hypoechoic mass lesion at the ampulla 7 mm in size, causing upstream dilation of the CBD and PD. The lesion was free from duodenal muscularis propria. There was no regional lymphadenopathy.
The age and comorbidity of the patient, the limitations and diagnostic accuracy of endoscopy, biopsies and imaging for ampullary lesions, and suspicion of malignancy made us acquire the histological diagnosis of ampullary lesion before a highly morbid surgical intervention. EUS-guided biopsy was not possible due to technical difficulties of the tiny mobile lesion. Hence, ESP was considered a diagnostic and therapeutic intervention for the subepithelial ampullary lesion. ESP aids in achieving en bloc resection of the ampulla for histopathological diagnosis and staging. Thus, en bloc ESP was performed with a balloon-catheter-assisted technique as described by Aiura et al. ESP was carried out with a therapeutic duodenoscope (TJF Q 180V, Olympus Medical Systems Corp., Tokyo, Japan) with a 4.2 mm diameter accessory channel. Selective CBD cannulation was achieved with a 0.035” guidewire using a sphincterotome. The linked stone extraction balloon catheter (Fusion Quattro Extraction Balloon, Wilson Cook Medical Inc., Winston-Salem NC, USA) and a 5 Fr snare were inserted over the guidewire through the accessory channel side by side. The balloon catheter alone was advanced into the bile duct, and then the balloon was expanded with distilled water mixed with contrast. The balloon was pulled back gently towards the duodenal lumen, at which point the snare was opened so that it grasped the base of the papilla next to the inflated balloon. Pulling the balloon catheter toward the duodenal lumen made it easier to snare the papillary lesion entirely by lifting the papilla from the duodenal wall and towards the lumen. En bloc papillectomy was performed with a monopolar electrosurgical current (ERBE Vio3, Endocut Q mode). A 5 Fr X 7 cm single pigtail pancreatic plastic stent was placed prophylactically, and a 10 Fr X 10 cm biliary plastic stent was placed after biliary sphincterotomy .