A 30-year-old woman (gravida 2 para 1) was admitted to our emergency department with fever and regular uterine contractions at 23-week gestation. Initial physical examination showed mild fever (37.4°C), obesity (body mass index, 29.6 kg/m2),[ abdominal tenderness, and negative rebound tenderness. Her pulse was 102/min. Her first pregnancy concluded a live birth. She had no significant medical history, denied smoking, and denied a family history of venous thromboembolism (VTE). According to the Caprini risk assessment tool,[ her total VTE risk score was 2 points (pregnant and obesity), which is indicative of low risk. Laboratory examination showed the following results: leukocytosis (17.08*109/L) with neutrophilia (15.15*109/L) and elevated C-reactive protein level (111.7 mg/L).
Spontaneous abortion happened on the night of admission. Dilatation and curettage procedure was performed because of retained placenta, followed by antibiotics therapy (cefazolin sodium,1 g bid iv), because of the cause of abortion does not exclude intrauterine infection. After the miscarriage, the patient reported severe fever (temperature 39.5°C) and chill. Laboratory tests revealed leukocytosis (18.36*109/L) with elevated neutrophilia (16.05*109/L) and C-reactive protein level (115.8 mg/L) . Based on laboratory results, the patient was diagnosed with a bacterial infection. Since infection increases the risk of VTE (postpartum = 1, miscarriage = 1 and obesity = 1), the patient was placed on low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) (Nadroparin,4100AXaIU Qd iH) for anticoagulation therapy as prophylactic dose 2 days after abortion. The patient complained of abdominal pain after 3 days of persistent fever; a physical examination indicated right lower quadrant abdominal tenderness with positive rebound and guarding. A mass of 8 cm in diameter could be palpable in right lower quadrant abdomen. Pelvic ultrasound (US) revealed an inflammatory mass on the right side. . The initial diagnosis includes appendicitis, adnexal abscess, and septic pelvic thrombophlebitis. Abdominal CT revealed right OVT . Due to refractory fever, the patient was initiated on antibiotic treatment with meropenem (1 g Q8h) and vancomycin (0.5 g Q6h). As CT confirmed the existence of right ovarian vein thrombosis, the dose of anticoagulant was changed from prophylactic dose (Nadroparin, 4100AXaIU Qd iH) to therapeutic dose (Fondaparinux sodium, 2.5 mg Qd iH). Anticoagulation therapy with LMWH (Fondaparinux sodium, 2.5 mg qd) continued until discharged. The patient abdominal pain symptoms lasted for 4 days, while the fever symptoms disappeared after 15 days, with normal laboratory test results. And the patient was discharged on postpartum day 22. LMWH was switched to oral anticoagulation (apixaban 2.5 mg bid). 1.5 months after discharge, no abnormality was found in pelvic ultrasound. The patient refused to continue anticoagulation therapy. To date (1 year after her delivery), no adverse event has been reported during follow-up. No readmission took place (see the timeline for more details) . Pathology of abortion tissues revealed chorioamnionitis. Doppler US excluded deep vein thrombosis of the lower limbs. All the interventions were tolerated well. No heparin-induced thrombocytopenia and abnormal hemorrhage occurred.