A 42-year-old female, teacher by profession, presented with chief complaints of high-grade fever and easy fatigability for eight days. No history of cough, headache, abdominal pain, decreased urination, active bleeding, or any recent drug intake. She had no co-morbidities; regular menstrual cycle, and consumed a vegetarian diet. At the time of presentation, she was conscious and oriented to time, place, and person. Vitals were stable. Pallor was present, and petechiae was visible in both the lower limbs. Lymph nodes were non-palpable. Per abdominal examination revealed no hepatosplenomegaly. Nervous system, cardiovascular, and respiratory system examination did not reveal any significant abnormality.
During the hospital stay, initial laboratory reports revealed bicytopenia with the total leucocyte count 9.9 × 103/μL, haemoglobin 4.4 g/dL, mean corpuscular volume of 96.6 fL/um3, and platelets of 8 × 103/μL. The peripheral smear showed reduced red cell mass, moderate anisocytosis, anisochromia, presence of macrocytes, normocytes, and polychromatic cells with schistocytes and nucleated red blood cells as shown in below. Renal function test and serum electrolytes were within normal limits. The reticulocyte proliferation index was 2.7. Her liver function test revealed total bilirubin of 3.74 mg/dL, indirect bilirubin of 2.06 mg/dL, aspartate transaminase was 168 U/L and alanine transaminase 88 U/L suggestive of haemolysis. Prothrombin time (11.1 sec) with international normalized ratio of 1.3, and partial thromboplastin time (21.6 sec) and were within normal limits. Direct Coombs’ test was negative. Since the patient was strict vegetarian, vitamin B12 levels were quantified to be 144 pg/mL (reference range 211–911pg/mL). Serum lactate dehydrogenase was 1442.34 U/L (Reference range <250U/L). Bone marrow aspiration revealed hypercellular marrow with megaloblastoid picture. The patient was promptly started on intravenous methyl-cobalamin therapy and oral folic acid.
However, on the fourth day of hospital stay, the patient developed three episodes of generalised tonic-clonic seizures and became disoriented. Non-contrast computed tomography of the brain ruled out intracranial bleeding. There was rising LDH, without improvement in the platelet count or the haemoglobin level. In view of the neurological involvement along with thrombocytopenia, fever, and microangiopathic haemolytic picture of the blood smear, and lack of response to vitamin B12 therapy, a possibility of TTP was considered. PLASMIC score was 8 suggesting a high probability of TTP. Anti-nuclear antibody was negative, and complement levels were normal.
On the fourth day, plasmapheresis was initiated. Simultaneously, pulse methylprednisolone was also initiated, and after 3 days the patient was shifted to high dose oral steroids (1mg/kg). The patient received a total of 5 cycles of plasmapheresis. The general condition of the patient improved but continued to fluctuate, and the platelet count and haemoglobin level increased to 78 × 10 u/L and 8g/dL, respectively. ADAMTS-13 activity later came out to be 7% (Reference range- >10%), and anti-intrinsic factor antibody was negative. Patient was given 2 doses of Rituximab 14 days apart to prevent relapse. Patient responded well to therapy and clinical and haematological parameters improved within 7 days. Neurological features improved by day 10 and there were no more seizures. Doses of steroids was tapered gradually after completion of 6 weeks.