A 4.5-year-old boy presented to the Emergency Department of our hospi-tal complaining of abdominal pain. During his presentation in the Emergency Department, he experienced an exploratory laparotomy, appendectomy, and peritoneal drainage.
Ten days after exploratory laparotomy, appendectomy, and peritoneal drainage, he was conscious and still reported abdominal pain. He was transferred to the West China Medical Center for further diagnosis and treatment.
The patient was admitted to a community clinic due to fever and abdominal pain for 10 d. The child developed fever accompanied by abdominal pain around the umbilicus 10 d before the visit. His body temperature fluctuated between 38 °C and 39 °C. There were no signs of rash, chapped lips, glossitis, limb swelling, or desquamation. After routine anti-infective treatment, the body temperature returned to normal on day 6 after the onset of the disease. However, the child continued to experience abdominal pain, so he was transferred to a higher-level hospital. He was diagnosed with acute simple appendicitis and treated with anti-infective therapy for 3 d. However, the abdominal pain worsened. He subsequently underwent an exploratory laparotomy, appendectomy, and peritoneal drainage. No abnormal electrocardiogram (ECG) was found before operation. Three days after surgery, he presented with a sudden cardiac arrest and underwent cardiopulmonary resuscitation, ventilator-assisted ventilation, and anti-infective treatment with meropenem combined with metronidazole. Seven days later, the child was conscious and still reported abdominal pain. He was transferred to the West China Medical Center for further diagnosis and treatment.
No personal or family history available.
Physical examination at admission showed that blood pressure was 110/80 mmHg, respiration was 24 per min, and pulse was 80 beats per min. The heart margin extended to the lower left, the heart rhythm was normal, P2 > A2, and II/VI systolic murmur was detected in the mitral valve area. The lung sounds were clear bilaterally, the liver was not palpable, and no edema was noted in the lower extremities.
The auxiliary examination included the following: An abdominal ultrasound (a small amount of ascites and no signs of biliary tract infection or obstruction); routine blood testing [white blood cell (WBC), 11 × 109/L; N, 36%; hemoglobin (Hb), 97 g/L; and platelets (PLT), 485 × 109/L]; inflammation- related parameters [C-reactive protein (CRP), 8 mg/L; erythrocyte sedimentation rate, 25 mm/h; and procalcitonin, 0.07 ng/mL]; myocardial damage (N-terminal brain-type natriuretic peptide, 577 pg/mL; troponin I, 0.61 µg/L; and myoglobin 8.2 µg/L).
Imaging examinations included the following: Disseminated intravascular coagulation screening (D-dimer, 3.27 mg/L; fibrin and fibrinogen degradation product, 12.6 ug/L; fibrinogen (Fg), 126 mg/dL; prothrombin time (PT), 13.1 s; and activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), 32.1 s); ECG (sinus tachycardia; non-biased axis; T-wave changes; and abnormal Q-wave; ); dynamic ECG [sinus tachycardia with sinus arrhythmia; abnormal Q-wave (V2 and V3 in QS type, V4 in QRS type, and V5 in QR type); and T-wave changes (V2-V4 T wave inversion)]; chest X-ray (heart shadow enlargement mainly in the left; ); echocardiography (tumor-like dilation complicated with a large quantity of mural thrombosis in the left anterior descending branch with a maximal diameter of 17.2 mm; slightly strong echo of 15 mm × 6 mm in size detected on the vascular wall; initial dilation in the right coronary artery with a maximal diameter of 7.5 mm; intermittent abnormal motion of the left ventricular wall; decreased left ventricular systolic function; ejection fraction (EF), 39.5%; fractional shortening (FS), 19.0%; left ventricular interval end-systolic diameter, 3.53 cm; and left ventricular internal end-diastolic diameter, 4.36 cm; ).