The patient was a 45-year-old man who was a non-local and employed as a long-term shepherd herding sheep. On 10 December, his shoulder started to hurt, and he took some analgesic medication. One day later, the pain became unbearable, and he decided to go to a hospital, for which he spent > 7 h along a 170 - km rugged mountain road. In the county hospital, he presented with high fever, slight cyanosis, swelling of the axillary lymph nodes, and > 5 existing hand wounds measuring 2–8 mm in length on his right side, but he had no respiratory symptoms. He was suspected of having plague. A total of.3 g levofloxacin was administrated intravenously. On 12 December, the diagnosis of bubonic plague was confirmed after laboratory examination, including Y. pestis culturing, PCR, and the Fraction 1 (F1) antigen of s detection. At 0.720 h on 12 December, he showed symptoms of septic shock, such as mental confusion and worsened purpura, and progressed to septicemic plague. Because the patient was allergic to streptomycin, streptomycin was administrated at.25, 75, and 2 g intramuscularly . At 1100 h on 12 December, the patient went into shock, and clinical rescue failed.
Gram staining of blood and lymphatic fluid samples showed bacilli with bipolar staining and blunt ends. The strains isolated from both samples were lysed by a Y. pestis-specific bacteriophage. The genes caf1 and pla were positive in both samples but negative in the throat swab. Consistently, the titer of the F1 antigen in both samples was 1:128 but negative in the throat swab . According to different region (DFR) analysis, the isolate was Genomovar 8, the main type of the local Y. pestis strain .
A total of 10 close contacts were identified: a couple that employed the patient, four herdsmen, and four medical staff . All the contacts received pre-exposure chemoprophylaxis, isolation management, and health monitoring according to the plague control guidelines of China (, ). The anti-F1 antibody of all the contacts was negative (titer, ≤ 1:4) (, ) on 12 December. On 17 December, the titer of herdsman C was 1:128, as he showed no other clinical manifestations, he was diagnosed with an asymptomatic plague infection. The titer of his three dogs were 1:32, 1:128, and 1:128, respectively.
According to epidemiology investigation and laboratory evidence, it was indicated that herdsman C was exposed to plague at the same time as the patient. According to herdsman A's statement, the patient often skinned and ate hare, which was later proven by the remains of hare fur and skin found at the patient's home, but all samples were negative for Y. pestis. Before 17 December, herdsman C denied coming into contact with a marmot but later cooperated with the investigation of his dogs for fear of legal punishment. After his and his dogs' antibody titers turned positive, he admitted that the patient and himself had been exposed to a hibernating marmot. They lived on adjacent pastures and had excavated, skinned, and consumed a hibernating marmot. The marmot's viscera had been fed to herdsman C's dogs at his home.
The patient was most likely infected through contact with contaminated fluid or tissue via his wounds, but the possibility of flea-borne transmission cannot be ruled out. Gastrointestinal infection is less likely, as the cooking was thorough. Lastly, the patient showed no signs of pneumonic plague. Thorough inspections were conducted around the two men's houses, but no marmot leftover was found. Several Ochotona curzoniae (commonly known as pika) but not plague hosts were caught alive around the patient's house, but all tested negative for Y. pestis.