We report the case of Y.B (initials of infant used to retain anonymity), a 7-month-old male infant that was referred from a secondary health facility in Sokoto, Nigeria, to Usmanu Danfodiyo University Teaching Hospital (UDUTH), Sokoto in November 2019. He was brought by his parents to the Emergency Paediatric Unit of UDUTH on account of a 5-day history of fever and vomiting, and a 3-day history of progressively enlarging left-side abdominal mass which was noticed incidentally and said to be tender to touch. There was no preceding history of trauma and there were no masses on other body parts. There was associated excessive crying, crying on micturition, refusal to feed and weight loss. He was admitted at the referring hospital at the onset of illness where he had anti-malaria (artesunate), and antibiotic (cefuroxime) treatment, as well as a blood transfusion with no significant improvement, necessitating referral to UDUTH Sokoto 72 h later. Operating within a resource-constrained health system, UDUTH is the highest tertiary level healthcare facility within the state. Both of his parents have no formal education and are ‘petty traders’ with a combined average earning of 40 000.00 Nigerian naira ($132.00 United States dollars [USD]) per month.
Physical examination revealed an ill-looking child in respiratory distress, irritable, febrile (axillary temperature = 38.8 °C), moderately dehydrated, pale, anicteric acyanosed with no significant peripheral lymphadenopathy. His weight and length were 5.5 kg and 64 cm, while oxygen saturation (SPO2) was 89% in room air. He had a tender, firm and ballotable abdominal mass extending from the left lumbar region to the left iliac region, measuring 8 cm × 10 cm. The right kidney, liver and spleen were not palpable. He had normal male external genitalia and was not circumcised. His pulse rate was 140 beats/min, blood pressure 60/40 millimetres of mercury and respiratory rate was 65 cycles/min. Chest auscultation revealed vesicular breath sounds with widespread coarse crepitations and normal heart sounds. The neurologic examination was also normal. A clinical diagnosis of sepsis with focus on the chest and urinary tract with malaria was made. Other considerations were nephroblastoma and neuroblastoma.