A 66-year-old man with a history of diabetes mellitus, benign prostatic hypertrophy, and hypertension had recently undergone percutaneous coronary intervention and was transferred to a hospital owing to a high fever and temporary loss of consciousness. The patient had been diagnosed with diabetes mellitus 8 months prior to the hospital admission with markedly elevated blood glucose and hemoglobin A1c levels (12.4 %). After the initiation of intensive insulin therapy, the patient’s serum glucose level was well controlled. The patient had undergone transurethral resection of the prostate 9 years earlier for treatment of urinary retention secondary to benign prostatic hypertrophy. However, urinary retention persisted, and the patient’s symptoms had been managed by an indwelling urinary catheter at home for 6 months. Ten days prior to the onset of fever, he had begun intermittent urethral self-catheterization.
The patient’s vital signs on admission were relatively stable. Although focal neurological symptoms were absent, magnetic resonance imaging of the head showed multiple acute emboli in the left parietal and posterior lobes. Blood and urine culture detected antimicrobial-susceptible P. aeruginosa, and treatment of ceftazidime (4 g per day) was initiated. Because of his sustained fever, blood cultures were redrawn on day 7, and they were positive for ceftazidime-resistant P. aeruginosa. Antibiotic therapy was changed to levofloxacin (500 mg per day) and continued for 2 weeks. During the hospitalization, transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) was performed twice (on day 1 and day 4), but no remarkable findings were observed. The patient’s symptoms resolved with antibiotic treatment, and he was discharged.
Three days after discharge, the high fever remerged, and the patient was readmitted. Physical examination did not show any abnormalities, but laboratory results showed elevated levels of white blood cells (9300/μL) and serum protein (12.5 mg/dL). Blood culture again detected P. aeruginosa, and magnetic resonance imaging of the head showed newly formed, multiple emboli accompanying micro-hemorrhages at the cerebral cortex and cerebellum bilaterally. IE was suspected, but TTE performed on the day of readmission did not reveal any structural abnormalities. Three days later, however, transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) revealed a movable, hypoechoic lesion at the aortic valve, along with new-onset severe aortic regurgitation . A patent foramen ovale (PFO) was also discovered . The patient was transferred to our hospital for emergency surgical treatment.
On arrival, a pan-diastolic murmur was auscultated, but there was no apparent peripheral embolic finding. Full body computed tomography did not reveal any other infectious foci. P. aeruginosa was repeatedly identified in blood cultures, and the antimicrobial susceptibility testing of the pathogen revealed the following minimum inhibitory concentrations: piperacillin, ≥128 μg/mL; ceftazidime, ≥32 μg/mL; cefepime, 16 μg/mL; aztreonam, ≥32 μg/mL; imipenem/cilastatin, 1 μg/mL; meropenem, ≤0.5 μg/mL; gentamicin, 4 μg/mL; tobramycin, ≤1 μg/mL; amikacin, 8 μg/mL; ciprofloxacin, ≤0.25 μg/mL; and levofloxacin, ≤0.5 μg/mL. An emergency operation for aortic valve replacement and PFO closure was performed, and a combination therapy of high-dose meropenem (6 g divided into 3 doses per day) and a single daily dose of tobramycin (300 mg per day, approximately 3.5 mg/kg/day) was initiated perioperatively. The post-operative clinical course was uneventful, and the patient completed a 6-week course of the combination antibiotic therapy. The dose of tobramycin was adjusted to target trough levels of 1 to 2 μg/mL, and the patient did not develop renal dysfunction during the treatment. The patient recovered well without recurrence after 1 year.