On December 6, 2019, a 78-year-old male patient was admitted to The Department of Stomatology, The Affiliated Hospital of Guangdong Medical University due to the infection and erosion of the gum, suppuration of the tongue and the discovery of maggot-like worms.
Two weeks ago, family members of the patient noticed the infection and erosion of the gum and suppuration of the tongue. The maggot-like worms were observed the past 3 d.
The patient’s general health was poor. In September 2019, he was admitted to The People’s Hospital of Maoming (a local hospital near his house) due to cerebral infarction, for which he was treated with left middle cerebral artery balloon dilation, artery antithrombotic, thrombus aspiration and stent implantation. Right side catheterization of the internal jugular vein was also applied. Nonetheless, as a result of the cerebral infarction, he still suffered from right hemiplegia, mobility and mental decline. He had difficulty swallowing and was fed via a feeding tube.
The histories of diabetes, hypertension and other chronic diseases were denied. The histories of hepatitis, tuberculosis and other infectious diseases, trauma, blood transfusion and allergy were denied too. The vaccination history was unknown.
Physical examination revealed right hemiplegia, mental decline and inability to communicate. Body temperature was 38.5 °C; pulse was 137 times/min, breath was 20 times/min, and blood pressure was 128/72 mmHg.
The oral and maxillofacial regions were symmetrical. The feeding tube was in place. Swallowing was difficult. The patient mostly relied on mouth breathing. He had poor oral and dental hygiene, halitosis, a swollen tongue with a smooth back and atrophic tongue papillae. The duct openings of the bilateral submandibular glands were red and swollen. Fixed bridge repair of the right maxillary and bilateral mandibular teeth was observed. The crown edges were not fitted. The degree of teeth mobility was I-II. The palatal gum of the right maxillary teeth was erosive and ulcerated and about the size of a “soybean”. Pus overflowed when squeezed, and on the buccal gum, a white maggot about 1.0 cm long was seen.
There was a fistula about 0.5 cm ×0.5 cm in size in the front of the right tongue. Pus overflowed with maggots wriggling in the fistula.
The patient had more than 20 maggots in his oral cavity in total. All of them were milky white and cylindrical with sharp front and blunt back. Peristalsis was obvious as well as folds in the body .
Leukocyte count was 3.45 × 109/L. Neutrophil ratio was increased at 89.25%, Lymphocyte ratio and monocyte ratio were decreased at 9.28% and 1.35%, respectively. The rest of the routine laboratory examinations were normal.
Computed tomography scan showed many artifacts in the oral cavity and the adjacent structures were not clear. Irregular destruction in the left region of the maxilla bones was revealed, considering the possibility of inflammatory lesions. Osteoporosis of the maxilla and mandible bones was also observed. The soft tissue around the upper alveolar was swollen with a little gas accumulated. The mucosa of the bilateral ethmoid sinus and maxillary sinus was slightly thickened.