A 65-year-old man was referred on April 2010 to our surgical department with histologically documented metastatic thyroid carcinoma on biopsy samples taken from a pathological fracture of his left femur. He had already undergone orthopedic stabilization of the fracture followed by adjuvant radiotherapy. Staging work-up with Computed Tomography (CT) documented a tumor in the right lobe of the thyroid, multiple cervical supraclavicular and axillary lymph-nodes, multiple bone metastases and liver metastasis . Aspiration biopsy cytology of the neck and axillary lymph nodes showed malignant thyroid follicular epithelium-derived cells. Levels of serum thyroglobulin and anti-thyroglobulin antibodies were 102815,0 ng/mL and 727,4 IU/ml, respectively.
We treated the primary thyroid tumour with a near-total thyroidectomy including central plus right neck dissection and the addition of right axillary lymph node dissection.
On gross pathological examination, the thyroidectomy specimen weighted 74 g; the right lobe was enlarged, measuring 7.5 × 3.5 × 3 cm. The cutting surface showed a solid nodule, 3.8 × 2.5 cm in size at the apex of the right lobe. Microscopic examination of the thyroid tumor showed a follicular neoplasm with two growth patterns: micro- and macrofollicular areas alternating with predominantly cribriform and solid/insular areas. A thick, fibrous capsule was still evident around the nodule although it was completely invaded by the tumor; extensive vascular invasion, within and beyond the tumor capsule, was also observed.
Histologically, the cuboid neoplastic cells had eosinophilic cytoplasm; a striking feature was represented by their frequent cytoplasmic vacuolization, with formation of "signet ring cells" having prominent cytoplasmic vacuoles with eccentric nuclei. Colloid-like material was found in micro-macrofollicular areas; focal mucoid secretion within glandular lumens and inside the "signet ring" cells too was highlighted by mucicarmine and Alcian-blue staining; 7/22 cervical lymph nodes, 5/23 axillary lymph nodes showed massive infiltration/total substitution by a follicular cell derived carcinoma with three peculiar cell types: 1) cylindrical, eosinophilic cells with apical snouts, arranged in follicle-like structures; 2) oxyphilic cells with abundant granular cytoplasm and strong nuclear pleomorphism; 3) cuboid cells with vesicular, round nuclei with deeply eosinophilic nucleoli, nuclear pseudoinclusions and a focal papillary growth pattern were also evident. Immunohistochemistry was performed using a peroxidase-antiperoxidase complex method. Neoplastic cells, both in the primary thyroid tumour and in the lymph node metastases, showed intense and diffuse staining for thyreoglobulin (TG) and thyroid transcription factor (TTF-1), while carcino-embryonic antigen (CEA) and CD15 stainings were negative. In areas with solid growth, p53, bcl2 and E-cadherin were intensively expressed, and a Ki 67 staining ratio of > 10% was found. A diagnosis of poorly differentiated follicular carcinoma with "signet ring cells" and Hürthle- cell features was made .
The disease stage according to the AJCC criteria was IVc. The patient received 260 mCi of 131I in May 2010 and 260 mCi of 131 I in October 2010. Radioiodine whole body scan performed after completion of treatment still detected multiple metastatic lesions . One year later, the patient is alive with persistent, stable disease and, on a background treatment with levotiroxine 150 mcg per day; TSH approaches 0.5 uIU/mL and thyroglobulin has lowered to 44.000 ng/ml.