A 53-year-old woman was admitted to the hospital with a complaint of limb joint pain for 11 mo.
The patient presented with pain in her shoulder, elbow, wrist, and metacarpophalangeal joints with swelling, tenderness and numbness for 1 mo before pain began in her bilateral knee, ankle, toe and finger joints for approximately 10 mo.
The patient had no history of fractures and bone injury.
Her parents were not consanguineous. Her father and mother died of bone cancer and esophageal cancer, respectively. She has a daughter, a brother and two sisters who are asymptomatic. The pedigree of her family is shown in Figure .
On admission, her blood pressure was 120/70 mmHg, pulse rate 98/min, and respiratory rate 20/min. Her height and body weight were 155 cm and 63 kg, respectively. Physical examinations showed slight swelling of her wrists, hands, knees and ankles, accompanied by tenderness, limited retral swing of the upper limbs and slightly restricted movement of the lower limbs.
The patient had mild anemia; decreased levels of serum bone alkaline phosphatase (BALP), 25-dihydroxy vitamin D3, urinary calcium and phosphorus; and an elevated level of serum phosphorus. The levels of serum calcium, urinary fluoride, lactate dehydrogenase, creatine kinase, C-telopeptide of type I collagen, N-terminal mid-fragment of osteocalcin, and parathyroid hormone (PTH) were within the normal reference ranges. Her spectrum of antinuclear antibodies, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide, anti-streptolysin O and rheumatoid factor were negative.
The biochemical measurements of her daughter, brother and sister were normal except that her daughter had mild anemia (partial data not shown). All laboratory findings are summarized in Table .
The bone mineral density (BMD) was measured by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (iDXA, GE Lunar, United States). The results showed that the hips and lumbar spines of the patient and her daughter significantly increased. The T scores of the patient were higher than those of Chinese female youth, and the Z scores of her daughter were also higher than those of the age-matched Chinese women . The results of the BMD tests for her brother and sister revealed low bone mass (osteopenia) compared with the Chinese sex-matched adolescents (data not shown).
X-ray images of the limbs, including the wrist and ankle joints of the patient, showed increased bone density in the pelvis, femurs, humerus, knees and shoulder joints; mild degeneration in the hips, knees, ankles, shoulders, elbows and wrist joints; and slight soft tissue swelling around the wrist joints . The chest computerized tomography (CT) scan of the patient showed that bone mineral density increased in the bilateral humeral head, sternum, scapula, ribs and multiple thoracic vertebrae . Whole-body bone single-photon emission computed tomography of the patient revealed extremely high uptake in the long bone, ribs, and spine with no renal or bladder radioactivity visualization. The features from imaging showed a “bone super scan” . The results of the ultrasound examination of the patient showed synovitis in both the first metatarsophalangeal joints and the wrist joint, tenosynovitis of the fourth compartment of the left wrist, and joint effusion on the right ankle (data not shown).
X-ray images of the limbs of the patient’s daughter showed that the density of the bone tip and flat bone increased, and the marrow cavity became narrow . The CT scan of the lumbar spine of the patient’s daughter showed that bone mineral density increased at the upper and lower edges from the twelfth thoracic vertebra to the first sacral vertebra and slightly decreased in their center .
A bone biopsy of the patient on the right posterior iliac crest showed cortical bone sclerosis, some thickened bone trabeculae, and active proliferation of bone marrow hematopoietic cells . Immunohistochemical staining of the bone marrow biopsy showed a few CD20 (+) or CD3 (+) lymphocytes and scattered CD138 (+), IGN (+) or IG λ (+) plasma cells (data not shown).
Whole exome sequencing (whole-exome library construction by xGen Exome Research Panel v2.0 (IDT, Iowa, United States), high-throughput sequencing by a DNBSEQ-T7 sequencer (MGI, Beijing, CHN), and not less than 99% of target sequence were sequenced) identified two heterozygous mutations, including c.857G>A (p. Arg286Gln, rs760956030) in exon 10 of the CLCN7 gene (NCBI reference sequence: NM_001287) and c.714-20G>A (-, rs200087340) in intron 7 of the TCIRG1 gene (NCBI reference sequence: NM_006019.4). Her daughter carried the same heterozygous mutation in the CLCN7 and TCIRG1 genes by genetic analysis .
The R286 position was highly conserved among various species in the CLCN7 gene . Moreover, Polymorphism Phenotyping v2 prediction results of p. R286Q in the CLCN7 gene was probably damaging, with a score of 1.000 , and Mutation Taster predicted it to be a disease-causing variant. Mutation Taster predicted c.714-20 (IVS7) G>A in the TCIRG1 gene as no change in potential splicing sites.