We report the case of a 63-year-old Caucasian female patient who was incidentally diagnosed with an oxyphilic variant of a minimally invasive FTC (syn. Hurthle cell carcinoma; HCTC) after undergoing left hemithyroidectomy with subtotal resection of the contralateral side for a nodular goiter in January of 2007. In line with current guidelines, thyroidectomy of the right side was completed and lymphadenectomy of the central cervical lymphatic compartment was performed in February 2007. The initial tumor formula was pT2, pN0 (0/6), cM0 with an oxyphilic phenotype. Subsequently, the patient received radioactive iodine (RAI) therapy (March 2007: 4.8 GBq; July 2007: 7.4 GBq). Unstimulated serum thyroglobulin (TG) concentration before the second course of RAI therapy was 2.2 µg/L (shown in Fig. ). The follow-up period of 4 years did not reveal clinical symptoms or other signs of tumor relapse. In June 2011, we observed an increase in TG concentration of 13.0 µg/L . Positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET-CT) detected a mediastinal mass with increased tracer uptake, which was further confirmed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealing enlarged thoracic lymph nodes. Accordingly, RAI therapy was repeated in August 2011 (7.0 GBq). Shortly afterwards, stimulated TG concentrations increased again to 43.9 µg/L . Further PET-CT showed focal tracer uptake between esophagus and thoracic aorta, which was interpreted as lymphatic metastases. Hence, regional lymphadenectomy and pericardiectomy were performed in January 2012 via lateral thoracotomy. Of the eight lymph nodes removed, none was positive for the known HCTC, and the TG concentration persistently increased. In August 2012, unstimulated TG was 170.0 µg/L . Eventually, we decided to perform a cardiac MRI, revealing a pediculated mass located within the right atrial septum (shown in Fig. ). In November 2012, a postoperatively confirmed HCTC metastasis was surgically removed from the right atrial septum via pericardial patch plastic. Only 6 months after the procedure, the unstimulated TG concentration was still increased at 48.3 µg/L . PET-MRI showed a further metastasis located within the pancreatic body . Thus, we performed a distal pancreatectomy in June 2013. Afterwards, another uneventful follow-up period of 3 years occurred. In August 2017, PET-MRI was performed because of a newly increasing unstimulated serum TG concentration, revealing metastases within the right lung and right deltoid muscle .
In October 2017, the pulmonary metastases were removed via an open surgical wedge resection. Because of its small size, the muscular metastasis was initially left untreated.
In 2018, follow-up was unremarkable except for the known metastasis of the deltoid muscle, which remained stable in size. Unstimulated TG concentrations were elevated but stable. A year later, in May 2019, another PET-CT was carried out because of an increasing unstimulated TG concentration (112.0 µg/L) . The scan revealed a new metastasis of the right upper pulmonary lobe apart from the metastasis within the deltoid muscle. In addition, we detected a rapidly progressive metastasis located in the upper pole of the right kidney . RAI therapy (7.4 GBq) was performed. The pulmonary metastasis showed a good response, and the renal metastasis could not be visualized on postinterventional scintigraphy, but still observable on CT and PET-CT. After an interdisciplinary discussion, surgical removal of the upper pole of the right kidney and the no longer iodine-avid lesion of the deltoid muscle was performed in January 2020. In both locations, the pathological findings confirmed metastases of the known HCTC.
Now, almost 1 year after the last surgery, the patient is in good general condition and her quality of life is excellent. Unfortunately, unstimulated TG increased over the last few months . A PET-CT scan revealed two new small pulmonary metastases in the right upper and left lower lobe . Together we decided on a “wait-and-see” strategy. Follow-up imaging is planned in 3 months.