An 11-month-old Caucasian boy was referred to this department for investigation of a raised urea and creatinine. He was born at 37 weeks’ gestation to unrelated parents. He had difficulties with bottle-feeding in the first 2 weeks of life and at the time of weaning he was noted to choke on solids. He was also found to have bilateral profound sensorineural hearing loss on routine screening, which led to him receiving cochlear implants at 18 months. At 8 weeks, he was not fixing and following and was noted to be hypotonic. At 10 months, he became unwell with fever, lethargy and rash. His urea was 44 mmol/L but reduced to 14 mmol/L after rehydration therapy.
At the time of his referral he had global developmental delay, truncal hypotonia, delayed visual maturation and bilateral sensorineural hearing loss. He was not on any regular medication. Results of initial blood and urine tests together with serial plasma lactate levels from presentation are shown in Fig. and Table respectively.
A renal ultrasound scan showed right and left renal lengths were 6.2 cm (30th centile) and both kidneys were echogenic. The presence of renal impairment and echogenic kidneys on ultrasound prompted renal biopsy, which showed significant tubulointerstitial damage with immature glomeruli . Electron microscopy of renal tissue revealed abnormal mitochondria affecting the tubular cells . Assessment of oxidative enzyme histochemistry in a muscle biopsy revealed a mosaic pattern of cytochrome c oxidase (COX) activity , which was confirmed by direct measurement of respiratory chain enzyme activities; complexes I and IV were both severely decreased with complex III activity decreased to a lesser extent, and evidence of complex II activity being spared . Taken together, these data are consistent with a generalised disorder of mitochondrial function.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the proband was reported to show abnormal signal in the cerebral white matter particularly in the temporal and subcortical white matter in the frontal lobes and abnormal signal in the periventricular white matter around the trigone and frontal horns. A cystic area was also seen in the temporal lobe. The features were in keeping with a metabolic condition or megalencephalic leukoencephalopathy with subcortical cysts.
Abnormal findings from kidney and muscle biopsy prompted genetic testing for mitochondrial disease. Diagnostic mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) studies, including assessment of mtDNA copy number, mtDNA rearrangements and sequencing of the entire mitochondrial genome were all normal (data not shown). Due to a strong clinical suspicion of mitochondrial disease, nuclear genetic studies were undertaken, prioritising the analysis of the RMND1 gene because of the clinical presentation. Direct Sanger sequencing of the RMND1 coding exons in blood genomic DNA (primer sequences and conditions available on request from the authors) identified two heterozygous RMND1 (GenBank Accession number NM_017909.2) variants predicted to be deleterious—a rare c.713A>G, p.Asn238Ser missense change (21/120626 alleles on ExAC and 5/12982 alleles on ESP6500) affecting a highly conserved residue and a novel c.565C>T, p.Gln189* truncating mutation. Analysis of parental blood DNA samples confirmed the mother carried the c.713A>G, p.Asn238Ser variation and the father carried the c.565C>T, p.Gln189* variation, thus demonstrating recessive inheritance . The p.Asn238Ser mutation has recently been shown by others to be a pathogenic RMND1 variant . During this period of investigation the patient was commenced on Coenzyme Q10 supplementation. Despite starting this supplement our proband remained globally delayed in terms of his development.
This child demonstrated stable chronic kidney disease (CKD) for 9 years since presentation. Plasma creatinine started to increase at the age of 10 years, indicating a decline in renal function . At this time he was hospitalized for a gastroenteritic illness and cardiovascular examination revealed peripheral oedema and a gallop rhythm on auscultation. His echocardiogram confirmed a diagnosis of a dilated cardiomyopathy (ejection fraction of 35 %) for which he was given diuretics. His renal function failed to improve and he has commenced peritoneal dialysis.