Our patient is a 42-year-old male who initially presented to our clinic with a 5-year history of intermittent right knee pain.His medical history was significant for gout, managed with allopurinol, and he had previously undergone a nephrectomy to treat chronic renal disease. He denied any prior trauma to his knee but has worked in an oil field for his entire adult life. He reported a 2-month history of acute worsening of his pain as well as catching and locking symptoms that preceded his initial orthopedic assessment. He presented to our emergency room before orthopedic assessment due to sudden onset of right knee pain; blood tests revealed a uric acid level of 7.4 (normal) and a knee aspiration by the emergency room physician showed the presence of negative birefringent crystals. Pre-operative clinical examination of his right knee examination was significant for an effusion with medial greater than lateral joint line tenderness to palpation. His active and passive range of motion was 20—°, limited by pain. He had pain medially with McMurray testing and was ligamentously stable. He had no palpable gouty tophi within the knee and there was no evidence to suggest gouty tophi present anywhere else on his body. Weight-bearing knee radiographs showed mild tricompartmental degenerative changes with osteophyte formation. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the right knee displayed tears along the posterior horn of both menisci and mild thinning of the articular cartilage of the medial and lateral femoral condyles and mild osteophytoses. Given the patient’s presentation and new onset of mechanical symptoms, a diagnosis of symptomatic meniscal tearing in the setting of chronic degenerative osteoarthritis was made. The possibility of a gout flare was also discussed but thought unlikely due to the combination of his new mechanical symptoms with a negative prior history of knee involvement. After counseling of management options was completed, a trial of conservative care was initiated. He was given a combined injection of a hyaluronic acid viscosupplementation and corticosteroid to treat his pain and inflammation and a guided course of physical therapy was started. Topical anti-inflammatory medication was also prescribed as oral NSAIDs were contraindicated post nephrectomy. At his 4-week follow-up appointment, he reported improvement in pain but was still experiencing mechanical symptoms and pain limiting his ability to adequately perform his job. His right knee examination showed improved range of motion but continued swelling and tenderness centered over the joint lines. At this point, the decision was made to proceed with arthroscopic treatment with the goal being to return him to full duty and normal activities. During routine arthroscopy, extensive gouty tophi were noted diffusely throughout the knee including widespread involvement of both femoral condyles and menisci. The meniscal lesions were on the surface of the menisci as well as within the meniscal tears (, , , , , ). Furthermore, noted were the expected posterior horn medial and lateral meniscal tears with tophaceous deposits within the tears. Partial meniscectomies were completed, followed by extensive debridement and excision of the tophi from the articular surface and menisciutilizing a standard arthroscopic shaver and a curved liberator typically used during shoulder arthroscopy. At his initial 10-day post-operative visit, he reported significant pain relief and resolution of his mechanical symptoms. Aggressive physical therapy was initiated as well as a rheumatology referral for medical management of his severe gouty arthritis. By his 6thweek after surgery, he had full range of motion compared to the contralateral side and his activity-related soreness was well-managed with over the counter analgesics, and he was returned to full duty at his job. At final follow-up at 3 months, he continued to have full range of motion with no pain or issues with while working his job in the oil field.