A healthy 21-year-old female presented to the local community ED for evaluation of syncope and abdominal pain. She had been evaluated at the local urgent care three days prior, complaining of constipation and was discharged with a prescription for lactulose. The following day she developed abdominal cramping and several near-syncopal spells. The day of presentation, the patient took a dose of lactulose and then developed sudden onset diarrhea and worsening abdominal pain. While seated on the toilet, she suffered a brief syncopal episode without associated trauma. She reported that her last menstrual period was one month prior and that she had a levonorgestrel IUD in place for contraception. She reported no fever, vomiting, or vaginal bleeding.
On arrival in the ED, the patient was awake, alert, and in no distress. Vital signs included a temperature of 36.5º Celsius, heart rate of 84 beats per minute, blood pressure of 78/64 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg), respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation of 100% on room air. On examination, her abdomen was soft and mildly distended with diffuse tenderness to palpation; she had no guarding. The patient was maintained on a cardiac monitor, and a peripheral intravenous line was established. She was resuscitated with one liter normal saline bolus and her blood pressure improved to 101/55 mm Hg. Initial laboratory evaluation revealed anemia: hemoglobin 7.9 grams (g) per deciliter (dL) (reference [ref] range: 12.0–15.5 g/dL) and hematocrit 23.4% (ref range: 34.9–44.5%). Her electrolytes, blood glucose, and lactate were unremarkable.
The patient’s abdominal pain, unexplained anemia, and history of syncope raised concern for hemoperitoneum. POCUS was notable for free fluid in the hepatorenal recess (Morison’s pouch) in the right upper quadrant (Image 1). Transabdominal point-of-care pelvic ultrasound demonstrated an IUD, but no visible intrauterine pregnancy (IUP) (Image 2). Subsequently, the urine pregnancy test result returned and was positive.
The obstetric physician on-call was consulted, evaluated the patient in the ED, reviewed the POCUS images, and requested comprehensive transvaginal (TV) ultrasound (Image 3). This demonstrated a 10-centimeter heterogeneous mass posterior to the uterus, moderate free fluid in the pelvis, and no evidence of intrauterine pregnancy (IUP) or adnexal abnormality. The IUD was noted to be in good position in the endometrial canal. In consultation with the obstetrician, because these findings raised concern for alternate pathology (such as malignancy) that might require subspecialty care, the decision was made to transfer the patient to the regional tertiary care center for definitive management. Repeat hemoglobin was 6.2 g/dL (ref range: 12.0–15.5 g/dL). Transfusion with one unit of packed red blood cells was initiated, and she was transferred via air ambulance.
On arrival to the referral ED, she was hemodynamically stable with a blood pressure of 119/54 mm Hg and a heart rate of 82 beats per minute. She was evaluated by gynecologic surgery and promptly taken to the operating room. She was noted to have extensive hemoperitoneum and organized clot posterior to the uterus. Once removed, the site of the ectopic pregnancy appeared to be abdominal in the posterior cul de sac medial to the left uterosacral ligament and lateral to the rectum. This was excised and later confirmed by pathology. The patient tolerated the procedure well and was discharged later that day. Because of the abdominal location of the ectopic pregnancy, she was treated with intramuscular methotrexate and followed until beta human gonadotropin (hCG) levels were negative approximately four weeks later.