A 42-year-old man is presented with complaints of persistent fever and left chest pain since 2 weeks. He had no remarkable medical history. Chest radiograph showed diffuse consolidation of the left lung. Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed a large abscess with an air-fluid level in the left upper lobe and extensive consolidation of the whole left lung . He was diagnosed with severe pneumonia with a lung abscess. Antibiotic therapy was started empirically with meropenem and vancomycin. Antibiotic therapy administered for 5 days did not demonstrate a satisfactory clinical outcome. Thereafter, he underwent CT-guided percutaneous catheter drainage of the lung abscess with a 1-Fr pigtail catheter, and 42 mL of pus fluid was evacuated. However, the catheter became clogged the next day, after which the patient developed respiratory failure and required a ventilator. Chest CT revealed pneumonia of the right lung and residual abscess content due to incomplete initial drainage . We suspected that pneumonia of the right lung was caused by aspiration of the abscess content due to the right lateral position of the patient at the time of the CT-guided percutaneous catheter drainage. Frequent bronchoscopies were performed to remove the endobronchial pus; however, his respiratory failure worsened further and he underwent tracheostomy. To achieve and maintain effective drainage, insertion of a larger size catheter to replace the 10-Fr catheter was planned. Since the route was expanded sufficiently without a lung trauma, large enough catheter, 28 Fr, was chosen as a new one in favor of avoiding clogging. The procedure of exchange of catheter was performed under general anesthesia and one-lung ventilation with a double-lumen tube to isolate the left lung and prevent aspiration of abscess content to the right lung due to the right lateral position of the patient. Expansion of the route reaching the abscess cavity was safely performed by utilizing the old catheter as a guide; additional skin incision of 2 cm was made at the insertion point of the old catheter, and subcutaneous tissue and muscle layers around the catheter were cut with an electric scalpel, and the route was expanded with a straight Pean forceps inserted along the catheter, confirming the tip of the forceps to be reaching to the cavity by x-ray fluoroscopy. Since the route was expanded sufficiently without a lung trauma, enough large catheter, 28 Fr, was chosen as a new one in favor of avoiding occlusion. After placing the new catheter into the cavity, the old one was removed . The new catheter was led out to a new wound through a subcutaneous tunnel.
The larger sized catheter enabled the maintenance of adequate drainage of a total of 650 mL for 8 days. A suction pressure was set at − 10 cmH2O. Although air leakage from the drainage catheter continued until the catheter was removed, it did not cause any clinical problems. The antibiotic therapy was de-escalated to sulbactam sodium/ampicillin sodium owing to identification of the causative bacteria from a culture of the initial evacuated pus fluid; Prevotella buccae, Streptococcus anginosus, and Fusobacterium necrophorum were detected. His respiratory condition and laboratory results immediately improved, and he was free of ventilator support on day 5 post-catheter exchange. The catheter was removed on day 18. In addition, the antibiotic therapy was switched to oral garenoxacin and discontinued on day 35. He was discharged on day 40 post-catheter exchange with no complications. Figure shows the clinical course of this case. After 7 months, his chest CT confirmed complete cure of the lung abscess, albeit with only a small residual thin wall cavity .