A 37-year-old woman presented with complaints of blurred and distorted vision in her left eye for more than 1 year.
There was no family history of ocular diseases. One month ago, she was diagnosed with left eye macular retinoschisis, and optic disc pit and underwent a left eye vitrectomy in another hospital.
The patient had no systemic diseases.
There was no family history of ocular diseases.
Ophthalmic examination showed the unaided visual acuity was 20/1000 in the right eye which was improving up to 20/20 (with -10.25 D) and 20/1000 in the left eye, improving up to 20/200 (with -10.75 D). Intraocular pressure (IOP) measured with Goldmann applanation tonometry was 10 mmHg and 12 mmHg in the right and left eye respectively. Examination of the anterior segment of both eyes showed no abnormality. Gonioscopy examination showed the normal width of the anterior chamber angle of both eyes. Fundus examination demonstrated choroidal atrophy around the optic disc in both eyes, with a cup-to-disc ratio of 0.9. Serous retinal detachment in the macular area of the left eye.
Magnetic head imaging revealed no brain abnormalities. Optic disc stereography (Kowa nonmyd WX 3D, Japan) demonstrated choroidal atrophy around the optic disc in both eyes, with optic disc coloboma is illustrated in Figure . Visual field examination for both eyes were performed with Humphrey Field Analyzer II (Zeiss) using 24-2 Swedish Interactive Threshold Algorithm (SITA) standard strategy. Binocular visual field examination revealed that the physiological blind spots of both eyes enlarged. Using IOL Master 700 (Zeiss), the axial length was measured as 27.72 mm and 27.42 mm for the right and left eyes, respectively. Blood flow imaging optical coherence tomography (United States Optovue, Angio-OCT) three-dimensional (3D) mode showed local defects in the temporal disc edge of the binocular optic disc. Moreover, the optic disc circular scan mode indicated that the thickness of the nerve fiber layer around the optic disc in the left eye was thinned. OCT B-scan of the left eye revealed macular serous neurosensory retinal detachment, discontinuity of the ellipsoid zone, and fracture of the outer nuclear layer of the retina. En-face OCT showed that the canal and gully-like structure formed by the defect of the optic disc nerve fiber layer between the optic disc and macula, serous detachment area, and the enlarged optic disc coloboma inferior to the temporal area were connected via the canal and gully-like structure. The fluid was considered to leak from the enlarged partial defect of the optic disc, gully-like thinning of the optic disc nerve fiber layer, and gully-like structure into the retinal layer of the macular area .