A 4-year-old girl was diagnosed with ALL after presenting with generalised malaise, leg pain and fever lasting a month of duration. She was born at term with uneventful pregnancy and received approximately one day of phototherapy on day 3 of life to treat newborn jaundice. Her highest bilirubin level reported at this time was 337 µM, with a conjugated bilirubin concentration of 37 µM (normal ranges: bilirubin 3.4–20.5 µM; conjugated bilirubin 0.06–0.48 µM) , and she was discharged in good medical condition. At one month of life, the patient again presented with prolonged neonatal jaundice and suspected sepsis. She was treated with intravenous antibiotics and septic work-up was carried out, identifying her blood group as O RhD positive, with a negative direct Coombs test and normal glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD), galactose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase (GALT), alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) and coagulation profile. An incidental finding of transient neutropenia on a blood film was discussed with the local haematology consultant and the case was also reviewed by a superregional liver unit. She was initially followed up regularly at the general paediatric clinic and liver unit, but no definitive diagnosis was made for hyperbilirubinaemia.
At 4 years of age, the patient presented with episodic bilateral lower leg pain, which was reviewed by the trauma and orthopaedic team and assessed as likely growing pain. Following discharge she was then managed by the paediatric team for generalised malaise and fever lasting for a month of duration. A routine investigation was carried out and 44% blasts CD10/19/34 positive were seen on her initial blood film, with a bilirubin level of 41 µM and normal alkaline phosphatase and aspartate transaminase (AST) levels. At this point, she had a 3 cm enlarged liver with smooth texture but no spleenic enlargement, and bilateral cervical lymphadenopathy. A diagnosis of ALL was made on peripheral blood and bone marrow examination and ETV6-RUNX1 gene rearrangement was detected by fluorescent in situ hybridisation, indicating a good prognosis.
Treatment utilising the UKALL 2011 chemotherapy protocol was initiated with standard 3 drug induction of dexamethasone, vincristine and PEG-asparaginase. The patient initially received a full vincristine dose of 1.5 mg/m2. This initial treatment was conducted without any measurement of patient drug concentrations or therapeutic drug monitoring. Deranged liver tests are commonly seen in ALL, potentially related to ALL infiltrating the liver, with the abnormal liver tests often resolving rapidly. However, this was not the case in this patient. Her bilirubin level before the first dose of vincristine was 68 µM, with elevated AST and alanine transaminase (ALT) levels of 52 and 32 U/L, respectively. Coagulation screen prothrombin time was normal. The patient had parainfluenza and Covid-19 during this admission, with deranged liver function test and hepatomegaly, and received 50% of the second dose of vincristine. Both bilirubin and ALT increased and an abdominal ultrasound showed hepatomegaly with diffusely echogenic parenchyma. During this time her blood white cell count dropped and serial bone marrow examination showed a rapid early response of the leukaemia. This suggested that initial control of the leukaemia had been achieved but the liver tests remained deranged. Fat-soluble vitamin supplementation and ursodeoxycholic acid treatment was commenced and the case was reviewed by the surgical team, but no surgical intervention was deemed necessary. Samples for genetic blood tests were obtained as part of a hyperbilirubinaemia work-up and analysed by next generation sequencing (NGS), based on the Genomics England gene panel for cholestasis. Serial ultrasound scans of the abdomen were undertaken during the induction chemotherapy period, with the last ultrasound scan showing diffusely enlarged liver with slight echogenicity. No focal lesion was found with patent hepatic vein and no portal hypertension noted. The patient received 50% doses of vincristine through the induction phase of treatment but two doses were omitted due to deranged liver enzymes.
A diagnosis of DJS (OMIM 237500 with ABCC2 gene), was confirmed through genetic testing 7 weeks after the initiation of chemotherapy and the patient was reviewed by the genetics team. The patient was determined to be homozygous for a rare intronic G to A transition immediately 3’ of the last coding nucleotide of exon 3 (rs533334893), believed to result in aberrant splicing and loss of ABCC2 function. Following discussion of the case at a multidisciplinary team meeting, it was decided to adopt a therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) approach to vincristine treatment and the patient was registered on the national TDM study (ISCRTN 10139334). The first TDM cycle was conducted following administration of a full vincristine dose of 1.5 mg/m2 as the patient no longer had elevated bilirubin levels at this point in treatment. Further dosing of vincristine in the patient was determined based on drug tolerability alongside an evaluation of drug exposure as described below. The patient experienced hypertension during her induction chemotherapy which was well controlled with oral antihypertensive medications. At the end of induction (week 5) bone marrow aspirate examination showed morphological remission and low levels of measurable residual disease by molecular methods (quantitative polymerase chain reaction of disease specific Immunoglobulin and T cell receptor gene rearrangements). Prior to initiation of the delayed intensification phase at week 20 of treatment, the patient had a bone marrow aspirate which was negative for measurable residual disease.