A 68-year-old previously healthy male presented with four days of constant pain in the right lower abdomen, associated with nausea and vomiting. There was no history of fever or weight loss. Physical examination revealed normal vital signs, a soft distended abdomen with hyperactive bowel sounds, and a palpable tender mass in the right lower quadrant. Digital rectal examination revealed hemorrhoids and guaiac positive stool. Laboratory evaluation was notable for low hematocrit (31%) and albumin (2.6 g/dL) levels. A plain abdominal radiograph showed a nonspecific gas pattern in the bowel with fecal loading of the descending and sigmoid colon.
A CT-scan of the abdomen with contrast showed ileo-colic intussusception . At laparoscopy, ileocecal intussusception and two more ileo-ileal intussusceptions were found along with multiple tumors involving the entire length of jejunum, ileum and ascending colon .
The patient underwent a laparoscopically-assisted right hemicolectomy, with extended ileal resection and a stapled ileo-colic anastomosis. The postoperative period was uneventful and the patient was discharged on the fourth postoperative day.
The pathology confirmed multiple lesions of about one inch diameter, involving the small bowel, cecum, and asceding colon . Histology revealed a malignant B-cell lymphoma. Immuno histochemistry and immunophenotypic analyses were positive for Cyclin D1 , CD20 , CD5 and CD 79a , but negative for BCL6, CD23 and CD10, thus confirming the diagnosis of mantle cell lymphoma .
Upon hospital discharge, the patient underwent staging investigations with negative bone marrow involvement. He received 6 out of 8 planned cycles of chemotherapy with rituximab-CHOP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone) with moderate to severe toxicity in form of fatigue, febrile neutropenia despite growth factors and dose reduction, and failure to thrive. Restaging with PET CT confirmed complete response with no residual disease. At one year follow-up, he remains in remission with a good performance status.