A 77-year-old Japanese man with alcoholic cirrhosis had been undergoing a follow-up laboratory examination every month for three years. He had been undergoing imaging studies such as ultrasonography and computed tomography every month as screening procedures for hepatocellular carcinoma, and endoscopic examination every year to monitor esophageal varices. During one such routine examination, he was diagnosed as having minute cancer of the esophagogastric junction (EGJ) based on the histological examination of the biopsy specimen and esophageal varices . One month later, he was referred to our institution for endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) evaluation (Olympus UM2000, Olympus Optical Company, Tokyo, Japan) and endoscopic therapy. The ultrasonography findings showed that the minute cancer was a noninvasive carcinoma (carcinoma in situ) and a blood vessel, 2 mm in diameter feeding the esophageal varices, pierced the lesion .
Following the EUS examination, we carried out endoscopic treatment of the minute cancer and esophageal varices. The endoscope (GIF-Q200, Olympus Optical Co., Tokyo, Japan) was preloaded with an overtube, which was passed into the oropharynx over the already introduced endoscope. The tip of the endoscope was loaded with a pneumatic EVL device (Sumitomo Bakelite, Tokyo, Japan). Under full endoscopic suction, the minute cancer was tightly packed inside the cap of the endoscope, and the tripwire was pulled, creating an artificial polyp that included the lesion. After confirmation that the electrocautery markings were contained in the ligated band, resection was not performed for the lesion. EVL was successively done for the esophageal varices in three places. All EVL bands were placed in the esophagus and EGJ. The iatrogenic ulcers in the esophagus and EGJ resulting from the EVL were treated with the administration of a proton pump inhibitor and sodium alginate.
The ulcers were observed endoscopically three months after the procedure to check for the presence of any residual lesion or other lesions, and forceps biopsy specimens were obtained from the site of the resection. A follow-up examination after two years did not show recurrence of the disease .