A 74-year-old man presented with a nodule in the right upper lobe on radiographic scan during a pneumonia treatment. The patient had suffered from bacterial pneumonia caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae. Following piperacillin/tazobactam administration, the pneumonia improved itself. He had been diagnosed with adenocarcinoma through a transbronchial biopsy. His medical history included chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, severe emphysema, and diabetes mellitus. His diabetes was controlled with a single dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitor, and his preoperative hemoglobin A1c level was 6.4%. Preoperative blood samples revealed no abnormalities and no symptoms of an inflammatory reaction. The surgical plan was thoracoscopic right upper lobectomy. A right upper-middle bilobectomy was performed to control the massive air leakage from the residual lung parenchyma. The approach was a lateral thoracotomy, and the serratus anterior muscle was split and spared as indicated by the white arrow in Fig. a. Prophylactic antibiotics were administered until the first postoperative day. On the third postoperative day, the patient underwent OK-432 pleurodesis because of a persistent air leak. On the 5th day after onset, the leak improved, and the thoracic drain was removed. The patient complained of loss of appetite but did not have a fever exceeding 37 °C. On the 10th postoperative day, the patient exhibited atrial fibrillation and hypotension. The contrast-enhanced computed tomography findings revealed fluid accumulation in the chest cavity, and intrathoracic abscess was suspected. Thoracocentesis of the right pleural effusion yielded white gray pus-like fluid with a pungent odor. Gram stain of the pleural effusion indicated a polymicrobial infection, including numerous gram-positive cocci in chains and gram-positive and gram-negative bacilli with phagocytosis. The pleural effusion culture yielded Streptococcus anginosus, Prevotella oris, Porphyromonas species, and Gemella species. Meropenem antibiotic was used for the infection. On day 11, a second surgery was performed for open debridement and intrathoracic lavage. From the day following the second operation, pus persistently drained again, and Streptococcus anginosus was isolated from the pleural effusion. The fever and inflammatory reactions showed improvement with antibiotics; however, on day 18, redness and warmth were evident in the buttocks ipsilateral to the surgical site . A third surgery was performed because of the suspicion of a subcutaneous abscess. The skin incision was made just above the most reddened area of the buttocks and split along the muscle bundles of the external oblique abdominis muscle. Pus adhered to the fascia, and necrotic fascia was observed. Debridement was performed, and the initial debridement wound revealed similar findings . The chest and buttock abscess wounds were debrided, and both wounds remained open for infection control . Streptococcus anginosus was isolated from the necrotized fascia. After the third surgery, both abscess cavities were treated with daily gauze changes, and the buttock wounds were treated with negative-pressure wound therapy (V.A.C.ULTA Therapy System, KCI USA, Inc., San Antonio, TX; Fig. c). Approximately 4 months after the second surgery, the wound was completely closed without surgical intervention, and the patient remained alive without any symptoms .