A 77-year-old Thai female with kidney failure on continuous ambulatory PD (1.5%D × 4 exchanges/day with ANDY.disc system since March 2013) presented at the PD clinic with acute abdominal pain and catheter malfunction on 17 June 2019 (day 0). Reviewing her PD logbook, negative to smaller positive ultrafiltration (-300 to + 100 mL) was disclosed in the past few days before this visit. No increased turbidity of the PD effluents had been observed before and during the onset of peritonitis. A plain abdomen radiogram revealed an excellent position of the PD catheter tip. Among testing the catheter function, numerous white colonization was observed inside the PD catheter lumen , the attending PD nurse stopped proceeding to the ‘push–pull’ syringe test. The catheter malfunction was confirmed with delayed both inflow and outflow rates. The dialysate cell counts disclosed numerous erythrocytes and leukocytes of 230/mm3 (35% neutrophils, 35% eosinophils, and 30% mononuclear cells). Clumping of filamentous hyaline and septate hyphae was detected by bedside wet smear ; thus, fungal peritonitis was initially diagnosed. The PD catheter was removed, and temporary hemodialysis (HD) was initiated on day + 2 via a temporary hemodialysis (HD) catheter through the right internal jugular vein. The removed catheter was found to be partially occluded with fungal biofilm. Liposomal amphotericin B, 5 mg/kg daily, was started on day + 3, and continued for 14 days, followed by oral itraconazole, 400 mg daily (started on day + 17).
In microbiological exams of the PD effluent (PDE) and catheter, the colonies on Sabouraud dextrose agar (SDA) were initially white. However, after 14 days, they gradually developed a membranous aspect with floccose texture and started to darken, turning white to orange and brown . Microscopic examination of the colonies demonstrated classic features of the Penicillium genus, including conidiophores and conidia . The pathogen harvested from the colonies was confirmed the species of T. flavus by molecular phylogeny using ribosomal DNA (ITS and 28 s rDNA) sequences. The fungal susceptibility test was reported as an inconclusive result on D + 21 since there is no minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) breakpoint value for Talaromyces from the European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing (EUCAST) . Using Aspergillus spp. as a reference, the organism was considered resistance to all common use of antifungal medications (amphotericin B > 8 µg/mL, fluconazole 8 µg/mL, itraconazole > 8 µg/mL, caspofungin > 16 µg/mL) besides voriconazole < 0.5 µg/ml.
A root-cause analysis was performed. The patient was doing well with PD without a history of peritonitis in the past 2 years. She was a farmer and self-autonomy in performing PD exchanges and exit-site dressing. She could perform daily living activities without an assistant. The patient reported strict compliance with aseptic handwashing, wearing a mask, and PD exchange instructions. However, she reports fuming homemade biocontrol agents on her garden against soil-borne pathogens and rushing to perform PD bag exchange without changing her clothes on day -17. Nine days later (8 days before the peritonitis onset), she noticed tiny white spots inside her PD catheter, but she did not report to the treatment team. Cultures were performed from white/brown spots inside her PD bag exchange room, storage room, and bathroom, as well as the patient's hands, nail dirt, and the biocontrol agent. Only the biocontrol agent was positive with T. flavus, confirming a potential source of the infection. Of note, the patient used non-antiseptic soap solution for handwashing. Although the traditional soap, a salt of dodecyl sulfate, can eradicate bacteria from the washed skin, it has limited activity against fungi and mycobacterium. Antiseptic agent, retraining, and hand hygiene had been repeatedly emphasized.
She was discharged from the hospital on day + 21 with partial response to the antifungal medications, as shown by the modified Edmonton Symptom Assessment System score decreasing from 20 at the onset of infection to 7 on the discharge date (day + 21). On the discharge date, she was afebrile and had mild hypertension (blood pressures 140–150/80–90 mmHg), moderate anorexia, and constipation (Bristol stool scale of 1–2 and passing stool every 2–3 days) without nausea/vomiting. The patient was rescheduled for an HD visit in the next 3 days; however, the patient passed away at home 1 day before the appointment (day + 23) from unknown etiology. Her death was classified as peritonitis-associated death according to the 2022 ISPD Peritonitis Guidelines (defined as death occurring within 30 days of peritonitis onset or death during hospitalization due to peritonitis) . The patient’s clinical course is demonstrated in Fig. .