An 11-year-old boy treated with anticoagulation after aortic valve replacement surgery presented to the pediatric intensive care unit in our hospital following fever and abdominal pain for 2 d, and coma for 2 h on May 27, 2020.
An emergency brain surgical intervention was carried out immediately to relieve the intracranial pressure and, subsequently, reduce brain injury. Assisted by neuronavigation, both left ventricle and hematoma drains were established under general anesthesia. In addition, critical life support consisting of tracheostomy, intracranial pressure probe implantation, and mechanical ventilation was also established.
Approximately 6 wk (41 d) after surgery, the patient was still in a completely bedridden vegetative state (VS) with a Coma Recovery Scale-Revised (CRS-R) score of 3 (auditory function: 0, visual function: 0, motor function: 1, verbal function: 0, communication: 0, and arousal: 2). Although his life support relied on nasal tube-feeding, the patient had normal heartbeat and breathing rates.
As the patient’s VS status did not show signs of improvement for more than 4 wk after brain surgery, he was transferred to the rehabilitation department of the same hospital and was diagnosed with PVS, and neuroprotective treatments and rehabilitation training were initiated. The neuroprotective treatments included nasal administration of nerve growth factor, baclofen, and hyperbaric oxygen. The functional rehabilitation therapies included comprehensive bedside rehabilitation therapies, such as anticonvulsive treatment, range-of-motion maintenance, and swallowing and feeding training. Unfortunately, despite these therapeutic interventions for 4 more weeks, his PVS symptoms and severity showed no improvement. Therefore, it was necessary to explore a new and safe therapeutic intervention with potential effects on the patient who had been in a VS for over 2 mo.
At the age of 3 years, the patient underwent repair of an atrial septal defect and ventricular septal defect due to complex congenital heart disease. In October 2018, the patient underwent aortic valve replacement surgery. He received warfarin anticoagulant therapy for nearly 2 years after aortic valve replacement.
The patient had no personal or family history.
The patient could occasionally open his eyes and yawn, but he had no response to pain stimulation, and could not distinguish between his family members and strangers. Moreover, he was unable to listen and follow instructions or speak. Furthermore, his body posture was abnormal, with bent elbows and ulnar deviation, wrist flexion, fists with high tonic metacarpophalangeal joints, and stiff, straightened lower limbs with inverted feet. His muscle tone was significantly high in the lower limbs with a modified Ashworth spasm scale score of 2. Additionally, the patient had no voluntary movement control and could not hold his head steady, sit down, stand alone, or walk. The patient, however, had normal reflexes, including biceps reflex +, triceps reflex +, cough reflex +, knee reflex +++, Achilles tendon reflex +++, and Babinski sign and ankle clonus +.
Blood analysis revealed mild leukocytosis of 8.35 × 109/L, with predominant neutrophils (67%), and normal hematocrit and platelet count. Prothrombin and partial thromboplastin times were normal, and D-dimer was slightly increased at 1.08 mg/L. Blood biochemistry analyses and urine analysis were normal. Electrocardiogram showed a sinus rhythm, frequent atrial premature beats, abnormal left atrium, large left ventricle, and complete left bundle branch block.
A computed tomography (CT) scan of the patient showed irregularly shaped and low-density CT images of the left frontal, parietal, and basal ganglia regions, which covered most of the left hemisphere . Similar low-density CT images were also observed in the posterior horn of the bilateral ventricles and the third and fourth ventricles near the sickle and sulci regions of the left brain. The left lateral ventricle was compressed and narrowed by the hematoma and cerebral edema compared to that of the right ventricle, and midline brain structures were also slightly shifted to the right.