A 61-year-old woman had suffered from worsening neurogenic claudication for 1 year and low back pain with radiation to the legs. L3–L4–L5 spondylolisthesis was diagnosed with magnetic resonance imaging, which revealed spinal stenosis between L4/5 making L5 bilateral nerve root compression, more severe on the left side . Microscopic transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion (TLIF) with cages had been discussed and planned. During the operation, L3/4/5 TLIF was performed through the left side under microscopy after paraspinal muscle dissection. A Kerrison rongeurs was then applied for L3/4 and L4/5 left-side laminectomy. However, one 3-cm ureter segment was clipped out unexpectedly . We confirmed urine extravasation with an intraoperative portal X-ray taken 5 min after contrast medium injection, which demonstrated that urine leaked from the right upper ureter .
Transperitoneal laparoscopic ureter realignment was attempted. Prior to repair, we indwelled a retrograde ureter catheter with ureteroscopy to make the distal ureter stump easier to recognize. One 10-mm periumbilical trocar was set up for the camera, followed by two working ports (10 and 5 mm) created along the right-side mid-clavicular line. With pneumoperitoneum and dissection, the avulsed two ureter stumps were found successfully. To reduce the gap between the stumps, we performed extensive mobilization of the right kidney, in which dissection was carried out along the kidney low pole, lateral side, hepatic flexure, and subhepatic area, with preservation of perirenal fat tissue, and great care of hilar vessels. Both stumps were trimmed out of the devitalized ureter tissue and spatulated well. The end-to-end anastomosis was conducted with care to minimize handling of the ureter adventitia; interrupted sutures were performed meticulously with 3–0 Vicryl in four stitches . After this procedure, one retrograde double-J stent was placed under ureteroscopy, and a Jackson–Pratt drain was also left next to the anastomosis site.
In spite of the patient’s uneventful postoperative course, she received 14 days of parenteral ciprofloxacin to prevent adjacent spine infection. The Foley catheter was removed on the seventh postoperative day; she was discharged on the 15th day. The Jackson–Pratt drain was removed at the outpatient clinic 3 weeks after ureter repair, and the double-J was also removed 2 months after the anastomosis. However, excruciating back pain and vomiting developed, and hydronephrosis and an elevated creatinine level (increased from 0.67 to 1.87 mg/dL) were noted. Ureteroscopy revealed a short segment (<1 cm) of ureter stricture at the suture site ; therefore, this patient received long-term double-J stenting for ureter stricture. The associated flank pain and vomiting subsided once she received restenting in the repaired ureter.