A 6-year-old Albanian boy presented in emergency unit of our hospital with signs of acute airway obstruction and stridor. These signs and symptoms had begun the day before, with a grippal infection and had rapidly progressed. In history occurred that child ate peanuts the same day. On arrival, the boy was in the severe condition. He was restless and agitated, in the “chest-knee'” position, with dyspnea, tachypnea and audible inspiratory stridor in the head up position. Cyanosis was present on the fingernails and lips. The chest examination revealed bilaterally decreasing breath sounds, with transmitted sounds from the upper airway, wheezing and whispery sounds.
His vital signs upon admission were as follows: temperature, 37.8ºC; blood pressure, 90/60 mmHg; heart rate, 150-160 beats/min; respiratory rate, 30-35 breaths/min and peripheral oxygen saturation, 85-87%.
The treatment of airway obstruction in the child was managed with algorithm used in our institution .
Systemic corticosteroids (dexamethasone) and 100% oxygen via facial musk were performed immediately. After pediatrician, anesthesiologist and otolaryngologist consultations and chest-X ray the initially diagnosis at this stage was foreign body aspiration. The same day, the emergent direct bronchoscopy was performed.
The induction at anesthesia was made by combination of intravenous propofol (1 mg·kg−1) and inhalation of halothane (2-4%) in 100% O2. Anesthesia was maintained with continuous infusion of propofol, mean dose 8 mg kg h1 and 100% O2.
The otolaryngologist performed direct bronchoscopy with rigid bronchoscope. Oxygen was delivered through a side arm of the bronchoscope. Initial direct bronchoscopy showed bizarre anatomy, a tiny laryngeal inlet almost totally occluded by densely purulent secret, viscous crusts and edema in both bronchi. Crusts were removed by bronchoscopy and the secret was aspirate from airways. The surrounding tissue was sprayed with 3 ml of 4% lidocaine.
At the end of procedure, the child was intubated with uncuffed size 5.0 tracheal tube and transferred in the intensive care unit ( presents chest radiography immediately after bronchoscopy).
In intensive care unit, the mechanical ventilation was sated in BIPAP mode and sedation with propofol 1 mg kg h−1 was continued. O2 saturation was 95%.
Antiedematous therapy was performed with dexamethasone 0.6 mg kg −1. Bacterial and viral cultures were obtained at bronchoscopy and Staphylococcus aureus and nontypeable influenza virus was isolated. Antimicrobial therapy due to antibiogram was performed.
On day three, control examination with fiberoptic bronchoscope revealed significant regression of the edema and granulation tissue; endotracheal tube was removed and the patient woke up uneventfully with no further airway problems. The child was discharged from ICU in day 4.