A 36-year-old male presented to us with PAA and CHD following echocardiographic detection in another hospital. He had a 10-year history of heart fatigue after activities and aggravated for 2 years without any examination or treatment. He exhibited no clinical symptoms other than heart exhaustion. He had no past medical or family history of any other related diseases.
On admission, physical examination revealed left thoracic elevation. Rumbling pathological diastolic and systolic murmurs were heard along the sternal border in the third-fourth intercostal space in the subxiphoid and apical regions. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) showed a pronounced dilation of the pulmonary artery (PA) trunk, with a maximum diameter of 14 cm, and a diameter of 2.5 cm for the left and right PA . CTA also revealed ventricular septal defects (3 cm), a small patent ductus arteriosus, aortic coarctation (diameter 1.3 cm) , and distal arterial dilation. No intrapulmonary thrombi were observed. Echocardiogram showed mild mitral in the long axis of the left ventricle and tricuspid insufficiency in four-chamber view, severe pulmonary insufficiency and the dilated PA trunk in short axis view of great artery. Right heart catheterization demonstrated a systolic pulmonary artery pressure of 87 mmHg. Both preoperative CTA and echocardiogram failed to detect PAD.
The patient received combination sildenafil-bosentan therapy to reduce PA pressure conservatively 26 days prior to the operation. Subsequently, he underwent a very complicated surgery. A right atrial incision in the parallel atrioventricular groove and a pulmonary artery longitudinal incision were made, respectively. The atrial septal defect, tricuspid valve, ventricular septal defect, pulmonary valve were explored later. Chronic PAD was found intraoperatively, located 2.5 cm above the pulmonary valve with a length of approximately 10 cm . The ventricular septal defect was repaired with an autologous pericardium patch of 3.5 × 3.5 cm. Then, the mitral and tricuspid valvuloplasty were performed respectively with kay’s technique. Atrial septal incision and atrial septal defect were directly sutured with 3–0 prolene. Pulmonary valvuloplasty was performed with three pulmonary valve commissure suspension. The dilated pulmonary artery wall was partly cut off, and the PAD was folded with 5–0 prolene, then the pulmonary artery longitudinal incision was directly sutured with 5–0 prolene. Finally, the patient received artificial vascular graft bypass from the ascending aorta to descending aorta at the diaphragm plane. No residual shunt in the level of atrial septum and ventricular septum, and no significant regurgitation in the mitral and tricuspid valves were found by transesophageal echocardiography. Mild to moderate regurgitation was found in the pulmonary valve.
After the surgery, the patient was transferred to the Intensive Care Unit and subsequently to the general ward 7 days later. Postoperative echocardiogram showed a significant reduction in the size of PAA to 3.6 cm and PA pressure to 34 mmHg. His postoperative course was uncomplicated and without any special clinical complications. At 3 months after the operation, there was no significant increase in pulmonary artery diameter or in pulmonary artery pressure.