A 75-year-old Caucasian woman presented to a large teaching hospital with a 1-month history of progressive dyspnoea. She had a history of pericardial effusion since 2011, which had been drained twice. A definitive diagnosis had not been established despite extensive evaluation.
On admission the patient had a blood pressure (BP) of 122/60 mmHg with a heart rate (HR) of 65 bpm. A transthoracic echocardiogram was performed, showing a severe pericardial effusion measuring 38 mm posterior and 23 mm anterior, with a mild diastolic collapse of the right ventricle.
The next day a fluoroscopy-guided pericardiocentesis was performed and 1,000 ml of lightly blood-stained pericardial fluid was removed. However, the procedure was complicated by aspiration of a large volume (1,500 ml) of haematic fluid from an unknown site.
After the procedure, the patient became hypotensive but responded to a fluid bolus and a low dose of norepinephrine (0.1 μg/kg/min). Serial haemograms were performed showing a nadir of 7.5 g/dl of haemoglobin, so the patient was transfused with 2 units of packed red blood cells. The echocardiogram after the pericardiocentesis showed normal bi-ventricular function with a small pericardial effusion.
On the second day after the procedure, the patient was haemodynamically stable without norepinephrine so was allowed out of bed but then collapsed. Immediate examination showed BP of 84/40 mmHg and HR of 110 bpm. The patient was brought to the ICU, where she was agitated, restless and diaphoretic with a stabbing chest pain and cold extremities. Importantly, there was progressive worsening of her haemodynamic status and increasing chest pain. A fluid bolus was given and norepinephrine was reinitiated with no response. An echocardiogram was performed and excluded cardiac tamponade but showed a moderately to severely enlarged right ventricle with impaired systolic function and McConnell’s sign. Acute pulmonary hypertension was suggested by a mildly increased tricuspid regurgitation velocity and mid-systolic notching of the pulse wave Doppler profile in the right ventricular outflow tract (–).
An emergency CT chest angiogram (CTA) was ordered, but the patient’s clinical situation deteriorated, so life-saving fibrinolysis was administered with a bolus of 10 mg of alteplase. Minutes after fibrinolysis, BP started to increase and the patient became less agitated. The CTA was eventually performed and showed signs of bilateral PE, involving the segmental branches of the right lung, left superior lobar branch and segmental branches of the lower left lobe . After less than an hour the patient was haemodynamically stable and the chest pain had resolved.
Due to the very high bleeding risk and in light of the favourable initial response, the medical team did not follow the usual thrombolysis protocol (10 mg bolus followed by infusion of 90 mg of alteplase over 2 hours) but switched to unfractionated heparin (UFH) in the first hour. UFH was given for 24 hours, before being replaced with low molecular weight heparin. The patient was transferred to the general ward after 48 hours and discharged 5 days later. She was anticoagulated with apixaban 10 mg twice a day.
The aetiological study was repeated but no abnormalities were identified. Venous ultrasound of both limbs was negative for deep vein thrombosis. The patient was reviewed in the outpatient clinic for 1 year but was asymptomatic and echocardiograms were normal.