A 36 years old man presented with a painless right scrotal mass of 2 years duration without weight loss or other associated symptoms. Neither hematuria nor other lower urinary tract symptoms were reported by the patient. He had no past medical history. The mass continued to increase in size and volume becoming functionally uncomfortable. Therefore, he decided to see a urologist.
On physical examination, the palpation of the right testicle revealed a firm and painless upper polar mass of a diameter of 3 cm. The controlateral testicle was normal in size and in shape.
Biologically speaking, the tumor markers (Lactate dehydrogenase, alpha fetoprotein and beta human chronic gonadotropin) were within the normal limits. The scrotal US showed well limited left mass, well circumscribed and with highly vascularized color doppler echostructure, measuring 35 × 20 mm . The rest of the testicular parenchyma appears homogeneous. No varicocele or hydrocele was observed. Patient was explained the probability of malignant tumor to occur, and the possibility to make frozen section intraoperatively and then decide whether or not to remove the testicle. The patient agreed to the second option.
A midline incision over the median raphe was performed, and dissection of the scrotal layers was performed. An intratesticular mass of the upper pole was found, measuring approximatively 4 cm. A frozen section showed no sign of malignancy. Therefore, a wide local excision of the mass was performed with 1 cm of safety margin . Post-operative course was uneventful and patient left the hospital the next day.
Histologically speaking, gross examination revealed nodular mass measuring 4 × 2 × 2 cms, whitish in colour, with fasciculated aspect on section . Microscopically, it showed well limited mass, encapsulated, formed by smooth muscle tissue organized in interlaced bundles. The cells are elongated, with fusiform nuclei, rounded ends, an inhomogenic chromatin, thin nucleoli and an eosinophilic cytoplasm with poorly defined cytoplasmic limits . Cytonuclear atypias were exceptional and mitosis was absent. The final conclusion led to a 4 cms intratesticular leiomyoma without any sign of malignancy.
The patient was kept on both clinical and radiological follow up, and 2 years after the surgery, he showed no sign of local or distant recurrence.