A 61-year-old woman (weight, 70 kg; height, 155 cm; body mass index, 29.14) developed respiratory difficulties with inspiratory stridor after extubation for each of her surgeries.
First surgery: The patient underwent a cervical laminectomy to resect an extradural tumor at the C2 to C3 vertebral level. No premedication was administered, and standard anesthetic monitoring, including electrocardiogram, non-invasive blood pressure, and pulse oximetry, was conducted after arriving at the operating room. Anesthesia was induced with propofol and rocuronium, and a 7.5 mm armored endotracheal tube was used, without difficulty, during intubation. The Cormack-Lehane grade observed on laryngoscopy during intubation was grade 1. Anesthesia was maintained with desflurane and 50% oxygen for 3 h and 30 min. There were no notable intraoperative events. Pyridostigmine and glycopyrrolate were injected to reverse the neuromuscular blockade, and the patient was extubated without difficulty. Spontaneous breathing was maintained immediately after extubation, and no abnormal respiratory signs were observed. However, 5 min after arriving at the post-anesthesia care unit (PACU), breathing difficulties and tachypnea were observed. The patient developed respiratory difficulty with inspiratory stridor.
Second surgery: Ten months after the first surgery, the patient was scheduled to undergo laparoscopic cholecystectomy for gallstones and polyps. Preoperative evaluations conducted by an otolaryngologist revealed normal structure and movement of the vocal cords. Intravenous propofol and rocuronium were administered to induce anesthesia. Before intubation with the endotracheal tube, intravenous lidocaine was administered to attenuate airway reflexes and hemodynamic fluctuations. As a vocal cord disorder developed after the previous operation, a 6.5 mm cuffed endotracheal tube was used with special caution, and dexamethasone 5 mg was administered 30 min before extubation. Anesthesia was maintained with desflurane, 50% oxygen, and an infusion of 0.5-1.5 μg/kg/min of remifentanil for 50 min. There were no special intraoperative events. After clinical confirmation of adequate neuromuscular blockade reversal using train-of-four (TOF), the endotracheal tube was removed. Shortly after extubation, the patient developed respiratory difficulty, and stridor was heard again. An O2 mask was applied with 100% oxygen, and breathing was assisted with a bag-valve mask. Despite these efforts, the respiratory distress and inspiratory stridor did not improve.
There were no abnormal findings in the preoperative evaluation, including physical examination, laboratory tests, electrocardiogram, and chest X-ray. The patient had an average-sized neck, and the preoperative Mallampati score was grade 1.
Three years before the present admission, the patient was diagnosed with thyroid cancer and had undergone total thyroidectomy. No perioperative complications related to anesthesia were observed at that time. The patient’s medical history was unremarkable. The patient did not smoke or drink alcohol and had no history of allergies.
First surgery: Immediately after extubation, the patient’s oxygen saturation (SpO2) in the operating room was 99%. After arriving at the PACU, 100% oxygen was administered at 2 L/min via a nasal cannula; SpO2 was 99%. Complete clinical reversal was confirmed by observing a TOF (peripheral nerve stimulator) after the development of inspiratory stridor.
Second surgery: Adequate reversal of neuromuscular blockade was clinically confirmed by TOF immediately before extubation. Oxygen saturation was maintained above 98% by providing 100% oxygen immediately after the stridor started.
The preoperative laboratory test results were within normal limits. However, mild hyperventilation (pH, 7.48; PaCO2, 31.6 mmHg; PaO2, 106 mmHg) was observed in arterial blood gas analysis when reintubation was performed due to postoperative stridor.
After the second surgery, an otolaryngologist performed a nasal fiberoptic bronchoscopy to resolve these repetitive episodes. No laryngeal trauma, edema, or vocal cord paralysis was observed. However, the vocal cords moved paradoxically during inspiration .