A 75-year-old woman presented with a 3-year history of pain and swelling of the left knee, with the pain particularly intensifying over the past month. Because oral medications and intra-articular injections of unidentified agents did not help improve her symptoms, the patient had undergone left total knee arthroplasty at a local hospital 32 months ago. C. pelliculosa was isolated from the tissue collected by intraoperative biopsy, but no antifungal treatment was initiated. One year after the total knee arthroplasty, C. pelliculosa was repeatedly isolated from the left knee synovial fluid, and the patient received the following antifungal agents for 9 weeks: intravenous amphotericin B deoxycholate (0.5 mg/kg/day) for 4 weeks, then intravenous fluconazole (6 mg/kg/day) for 3 weeks, followed by oral fluconazole (4 mg/kg/day) for 2 weeks. However, progressive bone loss around the prosthetic components was seen on follow-up radiographs, and the patient was referred to a tertiary hospital. The patient had no other significant medical history.
At the time of admission, the patient’s vital signs were stable, with blood pressure of 130/70 mmHg, pulse rate of 76 beats/minute, and body temperature of 36.8 °C. On physical examination, there was an erythematous, swollen, warm, and tender lesion measuring 3 cm × 5 cm on the anterolateral aspect of the left knee. Laboratory tests revealed a white blood cell count of 5460 cells/mm3 with 50.7% neutrophils, erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 49 mm/h (reference range 0–20), and C-reactive protein of 15.73 mg/L (reference range 0–5). All other blood chemistry results were within the reference ranges. Radiography of the left knee at admission showed loosening of prosthesis owing to bone resorption of the proximal tibia and distal femur . Synovial fluid analysis revealed the following: white blood cell count of 608 cells/mm3 (neutrophils 54%, lymphocytes 22%, macrophages 24%), red blood cell count of 2737 cells/mm3, glucose of 7 mg/dL, protein of 5.9 g/dL, and lactate dehydrogenase of 6547 IU/L. Magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated destruction of the lateral tibial condyle, filled with granulation tissue extending to adjacent diffuse cellulitis with a large abscess on the anterolateral aspect of the left knee . Routine bacterial culture of the synovial fluid using the Vitek 2 microbial identification system (BioMerieux, France) was positive for C. pelliculosa. Results of other microbiological tests including acid-fast bacilli staining, mycobacterial culture, and real-time PCR assay to detect Mycobacterium tuberculosis and non-tuberculous mycobacteria were all negative.
The isolate was confirmed as C. pelliculosa using internal transcribed spacer 1 (5′-TCCGTAGGTGAACCTGCGG-3′) and 4 (5′-TCCTCCGCTTATTGATATG-3′) region PCR, followed by sequencing. Minimum inhibitory concentrations for antifungal agents were determined according to the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute guidelines by broth microdilution, and the results are as follows: 0.125 mg/L for amphotericin B, 0.06 mg/L for anidulafungin, 0.125 mg/L for caspofungin, 1 mg/L for fluconazole, 0.06 mg/L for micafungin, and 0.06 mg/L for voriconazole.
After 2 weeks of micafungin therapy (100 mg/day), the patient underwent surgery for prosthesis removal with debridement of soft tissue and bone, total synovectomy, and placement of an antibiotic-impregnated spacer. Operative findings showed infected granulation tissue in the whole joint space and bony fistula, extending to the anterolateral aspect of the lateral tibial component . Histopathology showed acute and chronic inflammation with fibrinous exudation and necrotic debris. There was no isolated pathogen from intraoperative specimens. After the surgery, the patient was given micafungin for 4 weeks, followed by oral fluconazole (6 mg/kg/day). There were no signs of infection around the left knee, and the patient was discharged from the hospital. New prosthesis was implanted 12 months after the stage 1 procedure, and the patient is on taking oral fluconazole (6 mg/kg/day) and is scheduled to maintain for up to 3 months after the stage 2 procedure . The prolonged antifungal therapy with oral fluconazole was well tolerated, and the patient was very compliant with the treatment.