AD, a 64-year-old man was an emergency admission with vague abdominal discomfort of two weeks duration, acute upper abdominal pain, loose stools, fresh rectal bleeding and vomiting. His past medical history included pulmonary embolism 14 months previously for which he had been under anticoagulation therapy with warfarin for six months and hypertension treated with lisinopril and amlodipine. He previously smoked a pipe (one ounce per day) for 12 years and stopped eight years prior to admission. He had no history of obesity.
On admission he exhibited tenderness in the mid-abdominal and right upper quadrant regions. Routine laboratory evaluation revealed leucocytosis [count of 12.7 × 109/L, with predominant neutrophilia (neutrophils 11.4)], a raised C-reactive protein (CRP) of 111 (normal: 0.1–5 mg/L) and normal liver function tests. On suspicion of biliary pathology, an abdominal Ultrasound was performed, which revealed significant free fluid within the abdomen and a long segment of thickened small bowel thought to be due to inflammatory bowel disease. A contrast enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed extensive thrombosis of the proximal portal vein and the entire length of the superior mesenteric vein (SMV) with small bowel ischaemia extending from the terminal ileum to the mid jejunal loops . An incidental finding of a 6 mm well defined, peripherally based nodule in the right lower pulmonary lobe was noted but this was discounted when a follow-up thorax CT performed three months later without any progression.
AD was started on anticoagulation with high dose of enoxaparin (low molecular weight heparin) 150 mg daily in addition to IV antibiotics (co-trimoxazole and metronidazole). Furthermore, he was commenced on IV fluids; a nasogastric tube was inserted to relieve bowel obstruction, and parenteral nutrition via a central venous catheter. AD responded to these conservative measures and resumed normal bowel movement. The fluorescently labelled inactive toxin aerolysin (FLAER) test for paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria (PNH) and DNA PCR V617F detection of Janus Kinase 2 (JAK2) mutation yielded negative results. Anticoagulation was changed to warfarin, aiming on an INR of 2.5, and he was discharged home 12 days after admission. AD was seen in the outpatient clinic at three and six months and finally discharged for care.
AD was readmitted as an emergency with a one day cramping abdominal pain, distention and biliary vomiting seven months after his initial presentation. Examination revealed abdominal distention with palpable bowel loops, diffuse abdominal tenderness and normal digital rectal examination. Routine laboratory evaluation revealed leucocytosis (11.8 × 109/L) and a CRP of 10 mg/L. CT imaging of the abdomen revealed features of mechanical small bowel obstruction , most probably due to a post ischaemic small bowel stricture. The previously noted thrombus in the SMV had resolved. The symptoms resolved with conservative treatment, but he was electively re-admitted one week later for segmental resection of 30 cm of small bowel with end-to-end anastomosis. He did well and was discharged home five days later. Histological evaluation of the specimen revealed ulceration and active chronic inflammation with perforation (histopathological finding only) and surrounding granulation tissue formation without any evidence of neoplasia.