A 45-year-old male patient sustained a Garden IV fracture of the left femoral neck caused by a fall and underwent cannulated hip screw surgery at a local hospital in April 2019. Medical history revealed no diabetes mellitus, chronic disease, hypertension, smoking, alcoholism, or long-term medication. The patient was followed up every 4 weeks with x-ray and three-dimensional computed tomography (CT) examinations. The x-ray and CT still showed bone resorption at the fracture site with internal fixation loosening and slipping 8 weeks after operation. After experiencing local swelling and soreness in the affected area, the patient consulted with the Department of Orthopedics of our hospital on July 2019 (12 weeks after operation) . The x-ray and CT images showed poor fracture healing, screw loosening, and slipping. Arthroplasty was recommended by the doctor of the hospital where the patient had first consulted. Physical examinations showed no redness, local heat, swelling, and pain. Laboratory examinations including those for determining the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP), as well as white blood cell (WBC) count with their normal ranges, were performed to exclude postoperative infection and infectious bone non-union. A series of laboratory examinations, including parathyroid hormone (PTH), serum alkaline phosphates, calcium, phosphorus, creatinine, and 25-(OH)2D3 within the normal ranges, were performed to exclude possible metabolic disorders. A dual-energy x-ray bone mineral density test indicated normal bone mineral density. Finally, the patient was diagnosed with non-union and he consented to empirical, off-label therapy with the approved dose of teriparatide (20 μg/day for osteoporosis) instead of a second surgery. Trabeculae bridging through fracture sites and fracture space reduction were seen on the radiological images after 3 months of the patient taking the drug. No side effects of the drug or any abnormal laboratory test value were observed throughout the 6-month treatment regimen. It is worth mentioning that the value of Procollagen type I N-terminal propeptide (P1NP) increased significantly (75.57–165.7 µg/L) during the period of medication, which could be seen as a sign of bone healing . X-ray and CT film showed the bone healing completely after 6 months of stopping the drug. The internal fixation screws were removed in July 2021 when the patient returned to normal activity feeling no pain. The treatment timeline of the case is showed in .