A 78-year-old female with a history of a “spinal mass” first documented in 2014, presented with the subacute onset (i.e., over several weeks) of a bilateral paraparesis right greater than left .
The lumbar MRI revealed an 81 × 30 × 25 mm intrathecal intramedullary conus mass with extramedullary extension into the lumbar canal at L1-L4. The mass was accompanied by multiple complex cysts [ and ].
The patient underwent an urgent L1-L4 laminectomy with removal of the conus-cauda equina multicystic tumor. (i.e., a large and multilobulated cystic lesion compressing the neural elements). Fenestration of a cystic lobule resulted in extrusion of a nonpurulent milky fluid that proved to be sterile. The cyst was safely dissected off the conus and filum terminale with the use of intraoperative neuromonitoring. Interestingly, there was no gross evidence of accompanying teeth, hair, or visible adipose tissue. There were no intraoperative complications.
Immediately postoperatively, the patient was neurologically intact. However, on postoperative day 2, she experienced an acute change in neurologic status of unknown etiology (i.e., severe disorientation, persistent gaze preference with facial droop, and left-sided hemiparesis). CT brain was immediately conducted following the acute decline and showed no evidence of a potentially causal pathology. Subsequently, MR brain and EEG were performed to definitively rule out a new stroke or lesion and seizure activity, respectively. Both were unremarkable. The patient was eventually discharged fully orientated and with progressively improving lower extremity strength. Imaging obtained on postoperative day 0 showed successful resection of the mass without evidence of acute complication .
Microscopically, the tumor was composed of both solid and cystic components (i.e., that contained blood/debris and showed predominantly pseudostratified ciliated and nonciliated columnar epithelial lining with focal stratified squamous epithelium [endoderm]). The surrounding fibrous connective tissue contained lobules of mature adipose tissue (mesoderm), mature hyaline cartilage (mesoderm), peripheral nerve bundles (ectoderm), Pacinian corpuscles (ectoderm), and focal smooth muscle bundles (mesoderm) [ and ]. No immature structures were seen.