A 74-year-old woman, who had a history of dyslipidaemia and systemic hypertension treated with 10 mg amlodipine for 10 years, was referred to our facility by a primary care doctor for exertional dyspnoea and chest pain. Her heart failure condition, according to the New York Heart Association Classification (NYHA), was considered stage III, and the symptoms continued for 3 months. A right parasternal pansystolic murmur and bilateral leg oedema were detected on physical examination. Serum N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) was found to be as high as 2826 pg/mL (normal range, 0–125 pg/mL), while the chest X-ray demonstrated cardiac enlargement with bilateral pleural effusion. Electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm with a heart rate of 90 beats per minute with strain-pattern ST-segment depression in V4–V6 leads . Transthoracic echocardiography on admission demonstrated normal left ventricular ejection fraction, global left ventricular hypertrophy with 14.5 and 15.1 mm of septal and posterior wall thickness, LVOT obstruction with a peak pressure gradient of 93 mmHg, and ‘moderate’ AS with 3.9 m/s peak velocity and mean pressure gradient of 26 mmHg (see , ). Asymmetric septal hypertrophy in LVOT and a systolic anterior movement of the mitral valve leaflet were also recorded. Coronary angiography did not show any significant coronary artery disease . The severity of LVOT obstruction and AS was evaluated by the following: (i) A pressure wire (PressureWire™ X, Abbott, USA) was placed into the left ventricle through an angiographic diagnostic catheter with a 0.014 inch wire to stably record the simultaneous pressure between the left ventricle (LV) and aorta . (ii) Intraventricular pressures were measured by pressure-wire pullback from LV to aorta. The systolic, diastolic, and mean pressures at each point were as follows: 202/4/83 mmHg at LV, 168/10/81 mmHg at LVOT, and 92/53/69 mmHg at the ascending aorta . Right cardiac catheterization was subsequently performed, in which cardiac output (CO) and pulmonary artery wedge pressure (PAWP) were measured as 5.44 L/min and 21 mmHg. Aortic valve area (AVA) was estimated as 1.32 cm2 calculated by the Gorlin equation. (iii) Intravenous 2 mg propranolol and 70 mg cibenzoline were administered to minimize the LVOT obstruction. (iv) Intraventricular pressures were measured again, and the respective pressures were changed as follows: 192/9/83 mmHg at LV, 190/9/81 mmHg at LVOT, and 94/58/69 mmHg at ascending aorta . CO and PAWP were measured as 4.08 L/min and 20 mmHg, and the estimated AVA was changed to 0.90 cm2.
Oral 5 mg bisoprolol and 300 mg cibenzoline were prescribed after the cardiac catheterization. Follow-up TTE on Day 9 demonstrated LVOT obstruction with a peak pressure gradient of 29 mmHg and severe AS with 4.4 m/s of peak velocity and 50 mmHg of mean pressure gradient. Based on these invasive and non-invasive evaluations, the patient was diagnosed as ‘severe’ AS concomitant with LVOT obstruction. Therefore, surgical aortic valve replacement and myectomy were performed on Day 22. During the procedure, severe calcified aortic valve was replaced with INSPIRIS RESILIA 19 mm, and myectomy was performed to the massive myocardium in LVOT. The patient underwent cardiac rehabilitation without any significant periprocedural complications, and her heart failure condition had improved to NYHA Class I, continuing oral 5 mg bisoprolol and 10 mg amlodipine. She was discharged from our hospital without any dyspnoea or angina on Day 32. Her heart failure condition was well-controlled without bilateral leg oedema or gain weight 1 month after the discharge. Serum NT-proBNP was decreased to 1458 pg/mL, and cardiac enlargement was improved on chest X-ray. Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated LVOT obstruction with 12 mmHg peak pressure gradient and mild AS with 2.5 m/s of peak velocity and 25 mmHg of mean pressure gradient.