The successful outcome of pregnancy in a 45-yr-old woman with RIF diagnosis received infertility treatment between 2013 and 2016 due to primary infertility that was reported.
The primary routine infertility assessment and basal cycle day 3 serum levels of hormonal parameters were found to be normal (follicle-stimulating hormone: 7.4 mU/mL, luteinizing hormone: 4.3 mU/mL, and estradiol: 42.0 pg/mL). She described usually regular 26-day menstrual cycle with no history of gynecological disorders and no abnormal bleeding. As a result, intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) with controlled ovarian hyperstimulation was recommended. Two attempts of ovarian stimulation and embryo transfer were unsuccessful. Patient was diagnosed as a case of poor responder due to the production of less than five follicles after a standard stimulation protocol. Then she was counseled regarding her poor prognosis for conception and the option of ovum donation for ICSI.
During the first ovarian stimulation, 25 oocytes were obtained from a young donor woman and fertilized after conventional ICSI. Twenty good quality embryos were frozen at cleavage. The routine clinical approach to RIF investigation including uterine evaluation (hysteroscopy), thrombophilia testing (Lupus anticoagulant and anticardiolipin antibody) was normal.The third and fourth consecutive frozen-thawed embryo transfer cycles with good quality day 5 blastocysts were performed.
Despite multiple embryo transfer, the patient remained committed to achieve pregnancy with the diagnosis of RIF. The couple was reconciled for poor outcome. Following informed consent, she underwent the frozen-thawed embryo transfer and intrauterine administration of autologous PRP. Blood samples were obtained from patient and PRP was prepared according to the standard protocol of the Iranian Blood Transfusion Organization (9). 0.5-1 mL PRP was infused to the uterine cavity under ultrasound guidance using Wallace catheter (Classic Embryo Replacement Catheter; Smiths Medical, Hythe, Kent, U.K) about 24 hr before undergoing frozen-thawed embryo transfer. Three embryos were transferred on the 5th day of progesterone administration.
Intramuscular progesterone (100 mg daily) for luteal support was provided.
on day 15 following embryo transfer, serum beta human chorionic gonadotropin was positive (>200 mIU/ml). Then transvaginal sonography was performed 15 days later to detect and confirm pregnancy and 2 wk later, clinical heart activity was observed.
The woman delivered a healthy baby boy weighing 2350 gr in the cesarean section in January 2017.