A 26-year-old Pakistani man presented with history of new-onset seizures. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed a contrast-enhancing lesion in the right frontoparietal region with compressions and a shift of the midline. The mass was resected in August 2007 and confirmed to be a mixed glioma with components of both astrocytoma and oligodendroglioma, WHO grade II. About six weeks after surgery, the patient was brought back with a new history of seizures. An MRI examination revealed a gross local recurrence at the site of the previous surgery, which was infiltrating within the sulci of the brain matter. Based on the clinical behavior and surgical unresectability of the tumor, he was treated with concurrent chemoradiation therapy (radiation: 6000 cGY/temozolomide, 75 mg/m2). He showed an excellent response to concurrent chemoradiotherapy, with a complete disappearance of the recurred lesion. He was given a total of six cycles of TMZ (150 mg/m2, days one to five, every 28 days). He completed chemotherapy in January 2008 and remained well, without evidence of recurrence, on surveillance MRI scans. He recently came in complaining of easy bruisability; blood counts revealed an elevated white blood cell count (total leukocyte count; 20,000 per deciliter; 16% neutrophils; 78% lymphocytes) and thrombocytopenia (platelet count, 16,000 per deciliter). Bone-marrow aspirate revealed diffuse infiltration with blast cells consistent with acute leukemia. Peripheral blood flow cytometry on immunophenotyping with five-color cytomics (fc500 Beckman Coulter flow cytometer) showed this population of cells with bright reactivity with Pan-T-markers (that is, CD5, CD7, and cytoplasm cCD3, along with CD45). Positivity of this population with Tdt was also very prominent, so immunophenotypic results were consistent with precursor-T-acute lymphoblastic leukemia (Pre-T-ALL). Bone marrow cytogenetics revealed a normal karyotype and negative Philadelphia chromosome. He is currently undergoing treatment.