A 38-year-old gravida 1, para 0 was transferred to our unit at 26 weeks of gestation with severe right iliac fossa pain and a suspicion of threatened preterm labour. She presented with a 3 day history of right iliac fossa pain, nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea. Vaginal examination and her fetal fibronectin test was negative. However, transabdominal and transvaginal ultrasound examination revealed a 6.0 × 5.5 × 5.9 cm vascular mass within the right pelvis with a clear arterial feeder and turbulent swirling intraluminal flow, leading to the diagnosis of a pseudoaneurysm . The diagnosis was subsequently confirmed by Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) . The patient was discussed in our multidisciplinary team meeting with interventional radiologists, vascular surgeons, and anaesthetists. The risk of imminent rupture was assessed as high due to the severity of her symptoms and a 5–10 mm overall increase in the size of the pseudoaneurysm documented by sequential MRI 14 days apart. Surgery was considered high risk and so selective embolization of the pseudoaneurysm was performed. This was performed under local anaesthetic in the Interventional Radiology suite with full preparation for emergency delivery by the obstetric and anaesthetic team in case of fetal distress. The right uterine artery was identified angiographically from a contralateral femoral arterial puncture and selectively catheterised using a microcatheter. The artery was small but extravasation into the presumed pseudoaneurysm was identified near its proximal portion. The artery was embolised with a series of microcoils across the neck of the pseudoaneurysm to block flow. The procedure was uneventful and the fetus showed a continuous reactive heart rate pattern. Follow up ultrasound showed a completely thrombosed pseudoaneurysm with no flow. She had regular follow ups in the antenatal clinic with no sign of recurrence. A planned caesarean section was performed at 38 weeks gestation. A healthy baby boy was born weighing 2696 g with a blood loss of 1100mls. During the caesarean section, the thrombosed pseudoaneurysm was seen below the right broad ligament and all other pelvic organs looked completely normal . An ultrasound scan 3 months postpartum showed a small completely thrombosed pseudoaneurysm .