A 48-year-old female with family history of colon, rectal, and lung cancer , and a past medical history of obesity and type 2 diabetes mellitus, presented in July 2018 with a several-month history of an enlarging pruritic labial mass. This was found to represent a high-grade squamous intraepithelial neoplasm for which a radical right partial vulvectomy was performed. Final pathology demonstrated a stage IB squamous cell carcinoma. Due to the presence of bilateral inguinal lymph node enlargement, a bilateral inguinal lymph node dissection was performed which demonstrated that all 15 lymph nodes removed were negative. At follow-up, the patient complained of fecal incontinence. To evaluate this, upper and lower endoscopies were performed which demonstrated a large rectal mass representing adenocarcinoma characterized by a low probability of microsatellite instability and an anal mass representing a second adenocarcinoma. No polyps were encountered.
In January 2019, colonoscopy revealed a large, circumferential, fungating, infiltrative, ulcerative, and nonobstructing rectal mass . Biopsies of this mass demonstrated adenocarcinoma . In February 2019, further staging work-up included an elevated CEA level of 416.9 ng/mL, a CT chest/abdomen/pelvis, and a pelvic MRI. In addition to demonstrating the rectal and anal neoplasms, , the CT chest/abdomen/pelvis demonstrated a multinodular thyroid, a 1.5 cm right adrenal adenoma, a thin-walled pulmonary nodule or cyst, bilateral iliac chain lymph node enlargement, a single enlarged portocaval lymph node, and a large ventral hernia. Staging pelvic MRI redemonstrated the rectal lesion which was noted to be 15.6 cm in size, invading 50 mm in depth, extending from above the peritoneal reflection down to within 1 cm of the anal verge, possibly involving the pelvic floor musculature, posterior cervix, and vaginal cuff. Local lymph node involvement was radiographically suspected . Due to concern for local lymph node involvement and extracolonic extension, the patient was in clinical stage IIIC (T4b, N1, Mx). The asymptomatic thyroid mass was evaluated via ultrasonography which demonstrated two TI-RADS 5 left-sided thyroid nodules and a TI-RADS 4 right-sided thyroid nodule . Left lobe thyroid biopsies demonstrated papillary thyroid carcinoma.
Due to the presence of multiple primaries, genetic testing was performed and demonstrated heterozygosity for a p.G396D MUTYH mutation. The patient was negative for a multitude of other mutations including APC, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PMS2, BRCA 1&2, MEN1, RET, PTEN, and TP53. Counseling was provided regarding associated risks, and early screening colonoscopy for her offspring was recommended. The presentation of colorectal cancer alongside extracolonic malignancies raises suspicion for germline mutations and familial cancer syndromes.
The patient underwent neoadjuvant chemoradiation prior to undergoing a total thyroidectomy with central lymph node dissection. Papillary carcinoma was found within both lobes, and three of nine lymph nodes were positive for associated metastases. Radioactive iodine ablation was planned. A follow-up CT scan in May demonstrated a response by the rectal tumor to neoadjuvant chemoradiation, with a decrease in size of the rectal tumor from 8.7 × 7.7 × 10.7 cm to 6.6 × 5.0 × 6.9 cm . In June, the patient underwent a posterior pelvic exenteration with a total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, as well as a concurrent sigmoid colectomy with en bloc radical vaginectomy and perineal proctectomy. No gross metastatic foci were encountered intraoperatively, and the tumor was noted to be confined to the anorectum during resection. The wound was closed primarily, a pelvic drain was placed, and a ventral hernia repair was performed. A single hyperplastic polyp was found in the colon. In addition to the two separate adenocarcinomas in the anus and rectum, a left ovarian serous implant of psammocarcinoma was identified. Scattered foci of low-grade serous carcinoma (psammomatous carcinoma) were found within the ventral hernia sac tissue. All 22 lymph nodes were negative for malignancy. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 3 after an uncomplicated hospital stay.
The patient was discharged to a skilled nursing facility for continued wound care. Ongoing plans include adjuvant therapy for her anorectal cancer, as well as further therapy to treat her low-grade peritoneal primary serous cancer. This patient's clinical course and timeline of diagnoses are summarized in Figure . This patient's disease was investigated by both our genetics and dermatology departments thoroughly and was presented at a multidisciplinary conference to discuss the possibility of Cowden syndrome. They further recommended obtaining genetic testing for her children which is being considered.