An 81-year-old man with a history of hypertension was admitted to our hospital with a 4-day history of fever and rapid visual deterioration of the left eye. On presentation, his body temperature was 38.7°C and blood pressure was 132/49 mmHg, with a regular pulse rate of 60 beats/min, respiratory rate of 20 breaths/min, and oxygen saturation of 97% on room air. On physical examination, a grade 2 aortic diastolic murmur was noted. Funduscopic examination revealed a Roth spot in the left eye. His white blood cell count (normal range: 3800–8600 cells/mm3) and procalcitonin level (normal value: <0.5 ng/mL) were 17 720 cells/mm3 and 14.08 ng/mL, respectively. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed mild mitral regurgitation (MR), moderate aortic regurgitation (AR) with a 347 ms of pressure half time, and no retrograde holodiastolic flow in the abdominal aorta (, Video 1, , Video S1b–d). The left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction (LVEF) was 53% with diffuse global hypokinesis of the LV wall and mild LV dilation (LV diastolic dimension: 55 mm; LV systolic dimension: 38 mm). Transoesophageal echocardiography revealed 8 mm thickening and a perforation on the right coronary cusp (RCC) that caused moderate AR (, Video 2a, ). There was no evidence of an aortic root abscess, septal wall abscess that may cause a decreased heart rate regardless of the actual sepsis, or abnormal mitral apparatus. His vitreous and blood cultures were positive for Group G Streptococci that were sensitive to penicillin G. Aortic valve endocarditis complicated with endogenous endophthalmitis was diagnosed on the basis of the modified Duke criteria. Both the 2015 European Society of Cardiology (ESC) and 2015 American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology (AHA/ACC) guidelines recommend early surgery for patients with IE who present with symptoms or signs of heart failure (HF), persistent infection, and recurrent emboli. Early surgery, which is a class I level B recommendation according to both the guidelines, is recommended for patients with persistent bacteraemia or fever lasting for >7 days after the initiation of appropriate antimicrobial therapy., The management plan was discussed with a multidisciplinary care team, and the decision to perform surgery was made after the initiation of antibiotic therapy and relevant observations. Intravenous penicillin G was started based on the susceptibility study findings after empirical therapy. On Day 5, the blood cultures were negative for Streptococci, and the white blood cell count and procalcitonin level were decreased to 10 100 cells/mm3 and 1.80 ng/mL, respectively. No symptoms of HF were observed, and the vital signs other than low-grade fever were stable. Follow-up TTE demonstrated no remarkable changes from the initial findings. However, on Day 7, his condition suddenly deteriorated and he developed HF symptoms consistent with those of New York Heart Association functional class III. Follow-up TTE demonstrated a newly diagnosed severe MR with normal LV wall motion and 69% LVEF (, Video 3a, ), and electrocardiography revealed sinus tachycardia without ischaemic changes. The differential diagnosis for acute MR in patients with IE included destructive endocarditis extending to the mitral valve and coronary emboli.
The patient was immediately transferred to the operating room. Intraoperatively, vegetations were observed on the perforated RCC without any evidence of aortic annulus infection. Close inspection of the mitral apparatus revealed complete rupture of the posteromedial PM head with presence of vegetations. No gross evidence of infection was found in the mitral leaflets . After resecting the aortic valve leaflets, the anterior mitral leaflet and a part of the P2 and P3 scallops, debridement of all infected tissues were performed. Mitral valve replacement was completed with a 27-mm Epic bioprosthesis (St. Jude Medical Inc., St. Paul, MN, USA) followed by aortic valve replacement using a 23-mm Crown RPT bioprosthesis (Sorin Group, Burnaby, Canada). Although the postoperative course was complicated by persistent fever due to panophthalmitis requiring left ophthalmectomy on postoperative Day 17, the patient was discharged in a stable condition after completing antibiotic therapy. The culture of the resected PM was positive for Group G Streptococci. The histopathological examination of the PM indicated numerous neutrophilic leucocytes suggesting myocardial infection . A postoperative follow-up after 3 years did not reveal any sign of a recurrent infection.