A 56-year-old woman was first admitted to our hospital in January 1990, complaining of loss
of appetite, body aches, and palpitations. Past medical history included hypertension and
dyslipidaemia. Clinical examination revealed a blood pressure of 200/100 mmHg, a heart rate
88 b.p.m., temperature 37°C, and a respiratory rate 20 breaths per minute. She had normal
heart sounds on auscultation, with regular rate and rhythm. Jugulovenous pressure was not
elevated. There was no pedal oedema, and her lungs were clear to auscultation bilaterally.
Home medications included nifedipine 10 mg three times a day.
Urinalysis showed few pus cells. She was given amoxicillin/clavulanic acid 500 mg/125 mg
three times a day for 7 days.
Electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm, and a chest X-ray was normal. Transthoracic
echocardiography which showed a left atrial mass measuring 3.6 × 2.9 cm, attached to the
interatrial septum, highly suggestive of left atrial myxoma. There was trace tricuspid
regurgitation, normal right ventricular function, and systolic pressure. Left ventricular
function was normal. The mitral valve was not obstructed by the left atrial myxoma, and
there is normal mitral valve gradient and only trace mitral regurgitation. Transoesophageal
echocardiography on 17 February 1990 was also highly suggestive of left atrial myxoma.
Surgical removal of her left atrial mass was recommended. However, she was reluctant to
undergo surgery, as she felt better by then. Nifedipine was changed to verapamil 40 mg twice
a day plus enalapril 10 mg twice a day. She was discharged home with blood pressure
145/80 mmHg. The patient had been noncompliant with her antihypertensive medications. She
also had a minimal access to health care resources, including international normalised ratio
(INR) checks and follow-up, limiting warfarin use as an option for anticoagulation.
Therefore, she was discharged on aspirin 81 mg once a day. She was advised to comply with
her medications and diet, and strongly advised to reconsider surgical resection for her left
atrial myxoma.
Thereafter, the patient lost to follow-up for 10 years and did not visit any outpatient
clinics until 2004. Unfortunately, most of the old echocardiography videos from the 1990s
were lost when the echocardiography system was changed to a digital archiving system.
However, a printed transthoracic echocardiography from 29 March 1994 that was attached to
her paper file clearly showed the left atrial mass suggestive of left atrial myxoma
.
The patient was later admitted in 2008 with bronchiectasis, type 2 respiratory failure and
grade 3 chronic kidney disease. She was again admitted in 2009 with a stroke resulting in
left-sided weakness, but she recovered. Workup during that admission showed significant
bilateral carotid artery stenosis, and echocardiography showed the same left atrial mass,
although it was smaller and more calcified .
Surgery was recommended for the carotid stenosis and the left atrial myxoma. However, due
to her bronchiectasis, type 2 respiratory failure and moderate renal impairment, she was
informed of the high risk of complications, therefore she refused both surgeries due to the
high surgical risk. Clopidogrel 75 mg once a day was added to her home aspirin dose. She
then had recurrent strokes in 2013 and 2014.
During admission for the stroke in 2014, she underwent transoesophageal echocardiography
, followed by
cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in October 2014, which showed 2.9 × 2.4 cm atrial
mass attached to the fossa ovalis, mildly heterogeneous on steady state free precession MRI,
bright on T2 weighted images, and partially enhanced on late gadolinium enhancement. There
was no evidence of fatty contents and the mass was minimally perfused on the first pass
.
She was rehospitalized with another stroke in 2015, with worsening memory. During this
admission, she underwent carotid stenting with no further clinically detectable strokes
since then.
The patient was followed-up until November 2019, with last transthoracic echocardiography
being performed on 26 November 2019 . During the last 16 years, the patient underwent 13
transthoracic echocardiograms, showing that the left atrium had gradually increased in size,
diastolic parameters worsened gradually, the right ventricular systolic pressure increased
to approximately 50–60 mmHg, and the left atrial myxoma became smaller and more calcified
. She had
worsening renal impairment, and atrial fibrillation, but due to her increased risk of
bleeding, warfarin was not considered appropriate and she continued on a combination of
aspirin and clopidogrel. Unfortunately, vascular dementia developed and eventually she
became bedridden.