A 57-year-old previously healthy Sri Lankan woman presented to our hospital with 3 months’ history of intermittent fever, anorexia, and weight loss. She had lost 8 kg over this period. A worsening of the fever characterized by daily episodes with spikes prompted admission. She complained of significant hair loss and on and off confusional episodes over the last 2 weeks, but denied symptoms of focal infections including respiratory symptoms. Also, she disaffirmed any history of arthritis and features of autoimmune diseases such as photosensitive rashes, oral ulcers, or symptoms of Raynaud’s phenomenon. On examination her body mass index was 16 kg/m2. She was febrile with a temperature of 37.8 °C (100 °F), pale, and non-scarring alopecia was evident. Her other vital parameters were normal (blood pressure 130/80 mmHg, pulse rate 92/minute, respiratory rate 16 breaths/minute). The rest of the examination was unremarkable.
A full blood count done a month before admission revealed a bicytopenia with leukopenia and thrombocytopenia. Her erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 70 mm/hour and C-reactive protein (CRP) was 6 mg/l at that time. The differential diagnoses considered at this point were infections such as tuberculosis (TB), infective endocarditis, hematological and solid organ malignancies, and autoimmune diseases.
Initial full blood count after admission showed a pancytopenia which was confirmed on blood picture: white blood cell count (WBC) 1690/mm3, hemoglobin (Hb) 6.0 g/dl, and platelets 102,000/mm3. Her ESR was 76 mm/hour and CRP was 2 mg/l. A sputum culture was positive for Gram-negative coliforms. A chest X-ray was normal. Intravenously administered antibiotics were started according to the antibiotic sensitivity tests (ABSTs) but her fever continued. Repeated blood and urine cultures were negative. A urine full report was normal. A diagnosis of a respiratory tract infection was unlikely because she did not have any respiratory tract symptoms, examination of her lungs was normal, her CRP was normal repeatedly, and her fever did not subside despite continuing apparently sensitive intravenously administered antibiotics with no clinical improvement.
A two-dimensional echocardiogram revealed no evidence of infective endocarditis. Sputum for acid-fast bacilli and Mantoux test were negative. Bone marrow aspiration was done and it revealed hemophagocytic activity in her bone marrow suggestive of primary or secondary hemophagocytic syndrome. There were no features of hematological malignancy in the bone marrow . Serum ferritin was highly elevated (>1650 ng/dl). Serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) was elevated (926 U/l). Serum triglyceride level was 270 mg/dl. Serum protein electrophoresis showed only a polyclonal gammopathy, thus excluding the presence of a monoclonal band. Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level was normal.
Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), and rubella virus antibodies were negative. Screening for hepatitis B, hepatitis C, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was negative. Bone marrow for TB polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and culture were negative. An ultrasound scan of her abdomen and pelvis was normal.
An autoimmune screen was negative with ANA, anti-double-stranded-deoxyribonucleic acid (dsDNA), rheumatoid factor, cytoplasmic antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (c-ANCA), and perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (p-ANCA) being negative. A direct antiglobulin test was positive with specificity to immunoglobulin A (IgA).
Due to her persistent fever, a diagnosis of hemophagocytic syndrome secondary to an evolving autoimmune disease was made and she was started on intravenously administered methylprednisolone pulses. She was given intravenously administered methylprednisolone 1 g daily for 3 days which was followed by orally administered prednisolone 60 mg daily. She showed a dramatic response with clinical improvement, resolution of fever, resolution of pancytopenia, reduction in LDH and ferritin, and reduction in ESR. She was discharged and was sent with a tapering dose of orally administered prednisolone. On follow-up, she reported no adverse effects of medication and she was compliant with her treatment regime.
After 6 months while on a tapering dose of prednisolone, she experienced intermittent fever, oral ulcers, frothy urine, and ankle swelling for 3 weeks which motivated a second admission. An evaluation revealed subnephrotic range proteinuria with active sediment on urine analysis. ANA (>1/80) and anti-dsDNA (>1/10) were positive. Complement C3 and C4 (74 mg/dl and 2.9 mg/dl) were reduced. A renal biopsy was done and it revealed class IV-G lupus nephritis with immunofluorescence pattern consistent with SLE. A diagnosis of SLE with renal involvement was made. A summary of investigation results are given in Table .
She was started on orally administered prednisolone 60 mg daily and mycophenolate mofetil with good response. On follow-up she was clinically improved and has remained asymptomatic to date (9 months after discharge from hospital) while on immunosuppressive treatment. The prednisolone dose was gradually reduced and maintained at a dose of 7.5 mg daily. Mycophenolate mofetil was continued. Thus with this new irrevocable evidence of SLE, the diagnosis of the previous admission was revised as ALHS .