A 74-year-old Caucasian male with a history of remote myocardial infarction (MI) was admitted to Emergency Department (ED) with a haemodynamically stable broad complex tachycardia (BCT) of 180 b.p.m., having recently undergone an outpatient Holter for evaluation of syncopal palpitation. He reported dizziness and palpitation but no chest pain. His blood pressure was 102/78 mmHg. General clinical examination, in particular cardiovascular and respiratory examination, was normal. Twelve-lead ECG demonstrated BCT with classical findings suggestive of VT (VT-1, ), supported by its refractoriness to intravenous adenosine administered via a large cannula at the antecubital fossa. Successful administration of adenosine (6 mg, 6 mg, 12 mg) was validated by patient reporting short-living physiological side effects of flushing, chest tightness, dyspnoea, and ‘sense of doom’. Patient was initially managed with intravenous amiodarone but subsequent haemodynamic compromise with a blood pressure of 80/60 mmHg necessitated an external direct current cardioversion.
Two hours later, patient had recurrent stable VT with a different morphology (VT-2, ) whist on telemetry. Patient reported symptoms similar to those of the haemodynamically compromised VT-1. A trial of VM led to immediate VT-2 termination. In the first 12 h, the patient had recurrent episodes of VT-2, all of which terminated by VM . Twelve hours after initiation of intravenous amiodarone, he had no further VT. He was transitioned to oral amiodarone and bisoprolol.
Routine blood tests were normal. Adjusted serum calcium was 2.39 mmol/L (2.20–2.60), serum magnesium was 0.93 mmol/L (0.7–1.0), and serum potassium was 4.7 mmol/L (3.5–5.3). His baseline ECGs showed sinus rhythm, normal axis, as well as Q waves in V1–V3 and T-wave inversion in V4–V6 . A recent outpatient 7-day Holter revealed 1122 VT episodes during which patient experienced dizziness. Coronary angiogram demonstrated single-vessel disease with chronic total occlusion (CTO) of the left anterior descending artery (LAD) (Videos 1 and 2). Transthoracic echocardiography showed severe left ventricular (LV) systolic impairment (ejection fraction 31%) with akinetic mid-anterior and anteroseptal wall including LV apex. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated transmural infarct at the mid-LAD territory implying non-viability and lack of benefit of revascularization of the LAD-CTO .
Based on these findings, the likely diagnosis is scar-related VT. Following discussion with cardiac electrophysiologists, a VT stimulation study was deemed unnecessary given freedom from VT 12 h after admission. Prior to patient’s discharge, an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) was inserted for secondary prevention of ventricular arrhythmias. He was followed up in the heart failure clinic and device clinic. There is no ventricular arrhythmia detected on routine ICD monitoring since ICD implantation. The patient remains clinically well to this date.