A 58-year-old Caucasian male with acute myelogenous leukemia with myelodysplastic-related changes achieved a complete response following treatment with liposomal cytarabine-daunorubicin. The remission was consolidated with an allogeneic SCT from a 10/10 human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-matched unrelated donor, following a reduced-intensity conditioning regimen with fludarabine and melphalan. The graft-versus-host disease prophylaxis regimen consisted of post-transplant Cy (50 mg/kg on days +3 and +4 along with mesna at 50 mg/kg), tacrolimus (Tac) and mycophenolate mofetil (MMF). His transplant course was complicated with Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) viremia successfully treated with rituximab, delayed engraftment, and poor graft function. On day +70 post-SCT, he presented with acute kidney injury, severe gross hematuria with clots, and difficulty urinating. The patient had no history of pelvic irradiation, trauma, or urolithiasis. Physical exam was unremarkable apart from gross bloody urine with medium-sized clots . Urinalysis and culture were negative for bacteria. Viral studies in serum and urine were negative for cytomegalovirus, adenovirus, and BK virus. Regenerating islet-derived 3 alpha (REG3α) and suppression of tumorigenicity 2 (ST2) were elevated on admission, triggering the use of prednisone at 1 mg/kg for the possibility of bladder acute GVHD. MMF was stopped on day +35, and Tac was stopped due to the acute kidney injury. A bladder biopsy was not obtained due to the risk of worsening hematuria and perforation. Prednisone was discontinued 2 weeks later due to the lack of clinical benefit and absence of any other clinical signs of GVHD. Complete blood count showed severe anemia and thrombocytopenia requiring multiple blood and platelet transfusions. Computed tomography scanning of the pelvis obtained on admission showed a 1.7–cm round density at the posterior wall of the bladder consistent with a blood clot. As the patient complained of lower pelvic discomfort and difficulty urinating, an 18 Fr Foley catheter was inserted under continuous irrigation. A cystogram showed a large right-sided filling defect concerning for a large blood clot; this was followed by cystoscopy that revealed bleeding and friable bladder mucosa. Due to the severity of the hematuria and the need for multiple blood transfusions, the patient underwent bilateral urinary diversion using nephrostomy tubes. Aminocaproic acid infusion was also initiated with 4 g intravenous push followed by 1 g/hour, discontinued a week later due to lack of clinical benefit. The patient was next started on orally administered conjugated estrogen at 3.75 mg every 8 hours, consistent with a previously published report . However, gross hematuria persisted. Following all these unsuccessful attempts at stopping the HC, the patient was started on daily (Monday through Friday) HBO treatment sessions with 100% oxygen at 2.4 atm for 110 minutes, with two 5-minute air breaks, on day +110 post-SCT. After 20 sessions, the frequency of required bladder irrigation decreased, and the hematuria resolved, with urine transitioning to clear yellow color . The patient completed the 40 planned sessions as the most commonly adopted HBO schedule. The Foley catheter was removed on day +139, and serial bladder scans performed confirmed the patient’s ability to void spontaneously. The patient’s transfusion requirements decreased significantly, and his urinalysis confirmed resolution of microscopic hematuria. Currently, the patient is on day +250 and remains without hematuria and transfusion-independent. Bone marrow biopsy at 6 months post-SCT confirmed disease remission with 100% donor chimerism (CD33 and T cells).
HBO rarely results in barotrauma in the middle ear, sinuses , or lungs , reversible myopia , seizures , or decompression sickness . Our patient had none of these manifestations but reported initial worsening of his lower pelvic discomfort, described as pressure, which eventually resolved by the completion of HBO. The patient reported significant improvement in his quality of life upon resolution of HC. He also described HBO as tolerable and actually would recommend it to other patients if they had the same clinical challenge, that is, PTCy-induced HC.