The patient was a 53-year-old man who was suffering from a moderate pain in his right shoulder because of lifting a heavy object. Two days after the incident, due to falling on an outstretched hand while climbing, he felt a very severe pain in the same area. Three days after the second incident, he visited Rasool-E-Akram Hospital's Sports Medicine Clinic. He reported a severe pain in his right shoulder in the first visit (Visual Analog Scale (VAS) = 9-10). In evaluation with goniometer, right shoulder had 150 degree forward flexion and 130 degree painful abduction. Internal rotation could be done very painfully, not suitable for goniometer measurement. The other movements of the shoulder were relatively normal and the left shoulder was perfectly normal. Tests on the right shoulder showed positive result for Neer impingement sign, Empty Can test, Hawkins Kenedy test and Speed test. In evaluating the neck, range of motion was normal and there was no pain. In patient's posture evaluation, there was thoracic kyphotic posture, forward head posture, right scapular winging; and tightness in right upper trapezius and levator scapulae muscles.
During the mentioned 5 days, no treatment had been used other than manual massage on the suffered shoulder. There was no disease in the patient's medical history and he didn't use any specific medication.
His sport history showed that in the last 10 years he had regularly gone swimming twice a week for 2 hours each session, he had gone mountain climbing approximately 10 hours per week, and ran 20 kilometers at least 2 days a week.
In ultrasonography of the right shoulder there was a complete tear in supraspinatus tendon and the other cuff tendons were suspicous for rupture and fluid was reported around the biceps tendon which was in favor of biceps tendonitis.
In MRI without contrast on the patient's shoulder, a 17-mm gap was reported in insertion of supraspinatus tendon. Fluid in joint space of sub-acromial sub-deltoid was also reported. Rupture in the other cuff tendons and biceps tendon was not reported in MRI. Bone marrow edema was evident in greater tuberosity.
After the first visit, 10 sessions of physical therapy modalities (TENS, US, Superficial heat) were done once every two days, each session for 45 minutes. Beside modality, 15 mg Meloxicam tablet was prescribed for the patient twice per day, which was taken for only the three first days by the patient. An exercise program began from the fifth session of physical therapy modalities (2 weeks after injury).
Exercise program was under the physician's supervision twice per week in the first month and trained exercises were performed daily at home. Patient's cooperation during 6 months of treatment was excellent and he performed taught exercises with high precision. In the initial days of exercise program, the patient consulted two shoulder surgeons, both of whom suggested surgery on cuff tendons. However, because of his fears he decided to perform exercise program for 6 months. If the exercise program had failed, he would have undergone surgery.
In the first phase of the exercise program, passive ROM exercises were done in the form of forward flexion, internal rotation, external rotation, and abduction. Pendulum exercise, isometric exercises on the shoulder, chin tuck, back extension, shrug exercise were done in this phase too. All of these exercises were done 30 times daily. Stretching exercises for posterior capsule, anterior capsule, the inferior capsule, and trapezius muscle were done twice per day. Each time 5 repetitions were done for 15 seconds. During the first month of treatment, training exercises were supervised twice a week for one hour under the supervision of the physician. If there was a problem in conducting exercises by the patient, necessary recommendations were given. In other days the exercises were done at home.
After obtaining full passive ROM in the involved shoulder and reducing pain, strength training for rotator cuff was initiated from the second month as the second phase of the treatment. The phase included scaption exercise (0 -30 degree abduction), internal, external rotator strengthening exercise (0 degree of abduction, scaption (0-60 degree), internal and external rotators (45 degree of abduction), and biceps (0-90 degree) exercise. Three weeks later exercises of the third phase started and strength training and stretching exercise on neck were conducted.
At the beginning of the third month of therapy, strength training for periscapular muscles was added to the previous exercises. Wall push up, wall push up with medicine ball, push up, push up plus were conducted as 3 sets 10 repetitions daily beside other exercises. Cuff strength training severity was increased gradually during the next months as 3 sets 15 repetitions and abduction was done in higher angles. Exercises on medicine ball were done as push up, quadruped exercise, diagonal exercise. At the beginning of each treatment sport session, 10-15 min systematic warm-up as brisk walking was done. At the end of each treatment session, ice was applied on the right shoulder for 20 min. After three months of exercise therapy, the patient was allowed to swim twice per week. Given a slight pain in full abduction, ha was advised not to have full stroke.
At the end of 6-month exercise program, patient's pain reached to 0 according to VAS. In the evaluation after the 6-month exercise program, there was a negative result for Neer impingement sign, Empty Can test, Hawkins Kenedy test, and Speed test; however, winging of scapula persisted. These results continued to the 9th month (to this report's time). In goniometer examination, there were 146 degree abduction and 170 degree forward flexion in the right shoulder.
At the end of the 6 months of treatment, ultrasonography of the shoulder showed no difference compared to the time before the treatment. In MRI without contrast on the patient shoulder, a 14-mm gap was reported in insertion of supraspinatus tendon. The fluid in joint space of sub-acromial sub-deltoid was reported. Bone marrow edema was evident in greater tuberosity. After termination of the program, the patient initiated mountain climbing twice per week, and he swam twice per week each time for 2 hours.