A 64-year-old female patient with prior THA presented with a seven-year history of groin pain and weakness during initial hip flexion. The THA was initially performed at a different hospital to address painful dysplastic osteoarthritis. Ipsilateral groin pain was presented soon after the THA. Moreover, stair climbing and exiting cars were aggravating activities. Pressure on the iliopsoas tendon of the groin was painful, especially during the Stinchfield test. A relatively large cup was implanted (58 mm in diameter) in the shallow hypovolemic acetabulum. Insufficient medialization was observed on the anteroposterior (AP) radiograph from the first outpatient clinic . It was thought that periprosthetic joint infection could be the cause of the pain and was excluded using laboratory tests and ultrasound screening. The pelvis tilted upward posteriorly due to global sagittal malalignment associated with multiple spondylolistheses and degenerative kyphotic deformity in the lumbar spine. The upper border of the pubic symphysis was at the level of the third sacral vertebral body on a standing pelvic AP radiograph. The abduction angle of the acetabular component was 57.3°. On the axiolateral radiograph, the anteversion angle of the cup was 30.3°. The protrusion of the acetabular component was approximately 25 mm on the sagittal computed tomography image .
NSAIDs and physical therapy failed to manage the pain. Multiple ultrasound-guided injections provided only transient analgesia. After conservative treatment failed, revision THA was offered as a treatment of choice, but she refused a revision arthroplasty because she was not satisfied with the index THA. Informed consent was obtained for arthroscopic tenotomy. It had been sufficiently explained that revision THA is necessary if there is no effect. Finally, she agreed to undergo arthroscopic iliopsoas tenotomy instead of a cup revision as an alternative minimally invasive manner instead of revision THA. Hip arthroscopy was performed using a standard traction device in the supine position. Under sufficient hip distraction confirmed via AP fluoroscopic imaging, we used the standard anterolateral viewing portal and a modified midanterior working portal.
Sixty mmHg of fluid pressure was used with an intermittent increase up to 80 mmHg. After arthroscopic interportal pseudo-capsulotomy, psoas bursitis and iliopsoas tendinitis were observed near the acetabular cup overhang . A bifid iliopsoas tendon was identified and tenotomized using a monopolar hook-shaped diathermy probe under endoscopic visualization without incident. Postoperatively, she was managed in a brace with physiotherapy. Her groin pain during initial hip flexion resolved immediately following arthroscopic iliopsoas tenotomy. She was delighted with the result and the minimally invasive surgery. One month postoperatively, she presented to the emergency department with an anterior dislocation of the THA after sitting on the floor in Buddha’s position . After closed reduction, the anterior apprehension test was positive. Hip bracing of the reduced THA was used as she refused further surgery. When reviewed three months after the arthroscopic tenotomy, she still complained of anterior instability and apprehension and subsequently experienced a second dislocation. She gave informed consent for revision surgery of the acetabular component. Revision THA was performed using the previous posterolateral approach. During revision surgery, tenotomized iliopsoas tendons were observed adjacent to the overhang of the protruding acetabular component .
The acetabular component was explanted using a cup removal instrument (X-plant, Zimmer). The hip center was medialized to improve coverage of the cup by reaming toward the medial direction. The femoral component was retained. A porous-coated multihole cup was carefully implanted and fixed using multiple screws. A 36-mm delta ceramic head was used. After the multidirectional stability test was performed, the short external rotators were repaired using transosseous fixation. She recovered entirely by three months postoperatively. At 18 months postoperatively, she had a negative Stinchfield test, and she was pleased with the outcome of no subsequent groin pain, flexion weakness, apprehension, or dislocation .