A 41-year-old male presented to the urology OPD in September 2014 with complaints of colicky pain in the right flank and dysuria of 3 months duration. Examination revealed right renal angle tenderness. The renal function was normal, and an ultrasonography revealed 2.3 × 1.5 cm renal abscess, 1.5 cm left calyceal cyst, 2.8 mm right renal calculus, with a normal bladder, and post-void residual urine (PVRU) of 16 ml. A mild splenomegaly (13 cm), with multiple enlarged lymph nodes in periumbilical region, largest measuring 20 × 19 mm, was also identified; there were no other nodes and no free fluid in the abdomen. A FNAC from lymph nodes was performed which was inconclusive; however, a clinical diagnosis of tuberculosis was made and the patient was started on antitubercular treatment.
The patient completed the prescribed antitubercular treatment and remained asymptomatic for 2 years. No follow-up scans were done. In October 2016, the patient again presented to the urology OPD with complaint of recurrent pain in the right flank for 10 days. The pain was moderate in intensity, radiating to the back along with high-grade fever with rigors. There were no urinary complaints this time. Abdominal examination was normal, the renal function was normal, no scans were done, and the patient was referred to orthopedics for treatment of back pain, wherein symptomatic treatment was given. In November 2016, the patient presented to the surgical oncology OPD with complaints of painless progressive ulceroproliferative lesion in the oral cavity, fever, and abdominal pain. On examination of the oral cavity, there was a grayish-brown ulcerative growth starting from the first premolar and continuing till retro molar trigone (RMT) region, involving the right lower gingivobuccal sulcus (GBS), alveolus, and floor of mouth . Level Ib lymph nodes were palpable in the right neck. The abdominal examination revealed a hard mass in the umbilical and another in the left lumber area with well-defined borders and limited mobility in the lumber mass while the paraumbilical mass was mobile. There were no other significant findings on abdominal and systemic examination.
The CECT of the oral cavity and neck was performed that showed ill-defined thickening in the right inferior gingiva buccal sulcus (premolar and molar region), buccal mucosa, and RMT measuring approximately 54 × 30 × 19 mm; the mass was seen infiltrating the masseter muscle, and destruction of the right inferior alveolus in the molar region and floor of mouth medially was also noted . Multiple subcentimeter neck nodes level I and II were seen in the CT scan with the largest of size 25 × 18 mm in the right submandibular region. Abdominal CECT showed a matted lymph node mass in the mesentery of the small bowel and another well-defined mass lesion just posterior to the spleen and superior to the left kidney. The left adrenal was not identified separately .
A punch biopsy was taken from the right buccal mucosal lesion that showed features suggestive of round cell tumor . The IHC was performed that showed positivity for CD45, CD 20, CD 10 (immunoreactive score of 4+), and bcl-2 (immunoreactive score of 2+) . The KI-67 showed immunoreactive score 4+ in > 90% cells . The CD3, CD 138, CD 99, ALK-1, CK, chromogranin A, desmin, and HMB-45 were negative . The morphological and IHC features a diagnosis of diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL). The patient was started on R-CHOP regime and had complete response with regression of the disease after 6 cycles. He continued on maintenance therapy for 1 year and is alive and disease free 14 months after completion of the treatment and stoppage of maintenance therapy.