A 40-year-old Slovenian man with high myopia was referred to the Eye Hospital, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Slovenia complaining of a 2-day deterioration in the visual acuity of his right eye (OD). He described the presentation as a curtain-like dark zone in the inferior part of the visual field that progressively enlarged superiorly. He denied any eye injury.
On presentation, the patient’s best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) in the right eye was 6/38 (Snellen chart) and the intraocular pressure was 10 mmHg. Slit-lamp examination of the anterior segment revealed pigment dispersion on the corneal endothelium; otherwise, the status was normal. Indirect ophthalmoscopy showed a vitreous hemorrhage and a macula-off subtotal bullous retinal detachment superiorly with two U-shaped retinal tears .
The patient had high myopia and had undergone photorefractive keratectomy on both eyes 9 years previously. His previous refraction was − 9.50 Dsph (diopter sphere) in the right eye and − 5.50 Dsph in the left eye. Ophthalmoscopy of the left eye showed multiple degenerative changes on the retinal periphery.
The medical history of the patient included colon perforation, muscle and arterial rupture in both lower limbs, and recurrent shoulder joint luxation, as well as suspected EDS. His family history for connective tissue diseases was negative. The patient underwent genetic testing for EDS, which showed a pathogenic mutation in the COL3A1 gene that is associated with EDS type IV (vascular type). The inheritance pattern of this type of EDS is autosomal dominant and there is typically a heterozygous mutation in the COL3A1 gene that encodes type III collagen .
Whole-exome sequencing indicated the presence of a pathogenic heterozygous missense variant in the COL3A1 gene. Heterozygous variant c.1052G>T (LRG_3t1) in the COL3A1 gene causes substitution of the amino acid glycine with valine at position 351 in the amino acid sequence coded by COL3A1. The variant was previously established as pathogenic, in line with the corresponding American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics/Association for Molecular Pathology (ACMG/AMP) criteria for interpretation of sequence variants, based on the following. First, the variant was reported to be pathogenic in a patient with vascular EDS (PS4_MOD) . Second, the variant affects a glycine residue in a Gly-X-Y tripeptide repeat of the triple-helical region, which is a well-established mechanism of pathogenicity in collagenopathies (PM1) . Third, the variant was not present among approximately 141,000 controls in the gnomAD project v2.1.1 (PM2) . These findings indicate a missense variant in a gene for which missense variants are a common mechanism of disease. Fourth, with the gene also demonstrating evolutionary intolerance for missense variants (PP2) , multiple algorithms for theoretical pathogenicity predictions, including MutationTaster2 and MetaSVM, provide a unanimously pathogenic prediction of the effects of the variant on protein function, which is further supported by the location of the variant affecting an evolutionary conserved amino acid (PP3) [, ]. In accordance with ACMG/AMP standards and guidelines for the interpretation of sequence variants, this variant was therefore classified as a class 5–pathogenic variant .
A 25-gauge pars plana vitrectomy was performed. After cleaning the vitreous hemorrhage, eight more retinal breaks were found positioned in all four quadrants, which could not be seen preoperatively due to the vitreous hemorrhage .
During the surgery, bleeding was prevented by endodiathermy applied at the edges of the retinal breaks. After shaving the vitreous periphery, fluid/air exchange was done. Laser photocoagulation around the retinal tears was performed under air. The endotamponade at the end was 10% perfluoropropane (C3F8) gas. The patient was instructed to maintain a face-down position for a few days after the surgery. Immediately after the surgery, we noted both a mild vitreous hemorrhage which resorbed within 1 week and extensive pigment dispersion on the posterior lens face which persisted for several weeks . Otherwise, there were no other complications.
The patient underwent several postoperative examinations. At the last checkup, 8 months after the surgery, the retina remained attached. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) of the macula lutea showed normal retinal structure with distinctive layers .
The slit-lamp examination of the anterior segment revealed an initial posterior subcapsular cataract. Since the patient was satisfied with the functional outcome, he was not scheduled for cataract surgery. The BCVA of the right eye was 6/6.6 and the intraocular pressure was 9 mmHg.