An 11-year-old girl was born (weight of 3200g) as the second offspring of the related parents. She presented repeatedly, since 3 months of age, the symptoms of restlessness and icterus, which became intractable and unresponsive to common treatments. Laboratory work-up yielded no infectious etiology. Urine culture, sweat test, serum antinuclear antibody (ANA) levels, anti-dsDNA, anti-smooth muscle antibody, serum IgA, and anti-endomysial IgA levels were all in the normal range. Serum ceruloplasmin, gamma-glutamyl transferase and cholesterol had normal results. The bilirubin level was high and indicative of obstructive cholestasis. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed hepatomegaly with coarse surface and mild splenomegaly. The gall bladder contained multiple small stones. Analysis of repeated biopsies demonstrated mild to moderate ductal cholestasis and progressive biliary fibrosis in the last biopsy. On physical examination, the patient was short stature (height - 118 cm; weight - 22 kg; resulting a position under the third percentile for age), without mental retardation. Icterus was evidenced by excoriations all over the body, scaly skin with hyperpigmentation, and enlargement of fingers and toes . A diagnosis of Byler's disease was proposed, considering patient history and occurrence of icterus and severe pruritus at early age and also the biochemical and pathological evaluations. Therefore, the patient was recommended to undergo a biliary diversion surgery because of unresponsiveness to medical treatment.
We decided to perform an internal drainage procedure because of problems associated with ostoma placement in the external drainage. With respect to previous studies using the appendix for external drainage, we decided to evaluate its efficiency for the internal drainage (, ). The conditions were thoroughly explained to the patient's parents and after acquisition of informed consent, the operation was planned. After bowel preparation, an incision was made on the right upper quadrant. Grossly, the liver was hardened in texture, mildly enlarged with sharp edges and coarse surface. The gall bladder was enlarged with thickened wall and contained multiple stones. The cecum was free, and therefore was fixed beneath the liver to the abdominal wall. Then, the appendix tip was cut and cleaned with a 12F catheter. A longitudinal myotomy was performed from the appendix tip towards the cecum. Then, a longitudinal 3 cm long incision was made in the tip of appendix, similarly to the gall bladder fund us, to avoid stricture at the site of anastomosis. All the visible stones were extracted and a single layer cholecystoappendicostomy was performed using a Vicryl 5/0 suture .
One day after the procedure, the patient could tolerate oral feeding and dismissed. After 48 hours, her icterus and pruritus were alleviated. Stool was green and loose. However, 15 days after the operation, pruritus and icterus returned gradually and stool appearance was the same as before the operation indicating treatment failure. The patient was recommended to be reoperated with a different approach in a month's time. The abdomen was incised transversally at the previous cut. A significant stricture at the anastomosis site was the reason for failure and led to appendectomy. To resume internal diversion, a 15 cm long jejunal segment was excised and installed between the proximal gall bladder and the lower segment of the anterior ascending colon with is operistaltic approach, using a single layer of Vicryl 4/0. Then, a3 cm long invagination was made at mid jejunum to prevent colon regurgitation into gall bladder . The abdominal wall was closed conventionally and antibiotic prophylaxis administered (cefazolin 50 mg/kg/day). Two days after the operation, the child was completely asymptomatic. After 4 days, she began oral feeding and, on day 5, she was discharged. She passed green stool once daily. Low-dose cefixime was administered for a month. During a 9-month follow-up, she was well, except for a transient self-remitting abdominal colicky pain, and the pruritus was completely relieved. Stool was green and loose and she gained about 4 kg.