A 33-year-old Sri Lankan woman presented with sudden-onset severe headache, neck pain, vomiting, and transient loss of consciousness. On presentation, she was in pain, alert, and oriented. There was neck stiffness. There were no neurological deficits including normal vision. Pulse rate was 80 beats per minute, and blood pressure was 130/70 mmHg. The rest of the examination was normal.
Urgent non-contrast computed tomography (CT) of the head showed high-density areas in the basal cisterns suggestive of acute subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH). There was nonspecific hypodensity in the sellar area . Digital subtraction angiogram (DSA) showed a bi-lobed saccular ACOM aneurysm . The aneurysm opacified predominantly during right internal carotid artery (ICA) injection. She was in grade 1 of World Federation of Neurological Surgeons (WFNS) classification scale for SAH. She underwent right pterional craniotomy and ACOM aneurysm clipping 9 days from the onset of symptoms. A routine aneurysm clipping surgery was performed without any intraoperative adverse events. Any mass suspicious for a sellar lesion was not found in the vicinity during surgery.
Pre- and postoperative periods were complicated with partial cranial diabetes insipidus. After recovery from the surgery, on further questioning, it was revealed that she has had polyuria, polydipsia, nocturia, and secondary amenorrhea for 6 months before the presentation. She has not sought any medical advice for the symptoms. She had no other symptoms or co-morbidities. She has not had any intracranial lesions in the past.
She was started on desmopressin, which produced improvement of symptoms. Pituitary hormone profile and pituitary magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were performed after recovery from the acute event. Low gonadotropins for an amenorrheic female with low estradiol were noted 6 weeks after the surgery. Partial cranial diabetes insipidus persisted. Biochemical investigation results are summarized in Table . There was bitemporal upper quadrantanopia on visual field testing.
MRI-pituitary showed a 1.5 cm × 1.7 cm × 1.7 cm lesion occupying enlarged sella turcica with suprasellar extension and optic chiasmal compression. This lesion had high signal intensity on T1 and low signal intensity on the T2 phases of MRI. There was no contrast enhancement. . A recurring or residual aneurysm was excluded with a CT angiogram.
She underwent trans-sphenoidal excision of the sellar lesion. The dural defect was repaired with a fascia lata graft harvested from the right thigh in combination with an artificial dural substitute. She was commenced on hydrocortisone replacement following surgery. Morning cortisol was 341 nmol/L, and free T4 was 0.603 ng/dL (0.93–1.7). Hydrocortisone, levothyroxine, and desmopressin were continued. The recovery was uneventful.
Histology showed cyst wall focally lined by stratified columnar epithelium. Wall showed sheets of foamy cells with multinucleated giant cells and pigment-laden foamy cells. Normal pituitary tissue was seen. There was no evidence of a pituitary tumor. Features were in favor of a Rathke’s cleft cyst.
Three-month postoperative MRI did not show any residual masses. She remained amenorrheic with low gonadotropins. She was started on combined oral contraceptive pills. At 1 year follow-up, she was clinically well while on levothyroxine and oral contraceptive pills. Hydrocortisone and desmopressin were omitted due to clinical and biochemical evidence of resolution of adrenocorticotrophic hormone and vasopressin, respectively. She is stable and satisfied with her current clinical status with a Global Physical Health Raw Score of 18/20 (90%) and Global Mental Health Raw Score of 16/20 (80%) according to the patient-reported outcomes measurement information system (PROMIS) scale .