A 65-year-old Caucasian woman with refractory non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma and neutropenia was undergoing radiation treatment to a lymphomatous mass involving the left lung apex and adjacent third and fourth ribs. Her past history was also relevant for complicated diverticulitis and a colovaginal fistula requiring surgery 2 years ago. At that time, a small inadvertent ureteral perforation occurred intraoperatively, and an indwelling left ureteral stent was placed and subsequently exchanged every 3 months thereafter. Her urine was persistently colonized with vancomycin-resistant enterococci and Enterobacter, for which she was treated multiple times when symptomatic.
During the course of her radiation to the lymphomatous mass (timeline noted in Figure ), the patient noted a 4×3cm tender fluctuant mass on her left mid-back outside the field of radiation. Laboratory tests showed an absolute neutrophil count of 0.9×109/L, which was consistent with myelosuppression from her most recent systemic chemotherapy. The patient was afebrile and hemodynamically stable, but given her immunocompromised state, immediate surgical consultation was obtained and drainage was recommended. An incision immediately yielded approximately 50mL of turbid fluid, but a drain was unable to be placed at that time. Given the concern of a subcutaneous abscess infected with Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, and anaerobic organisms, amoxicillin and clavulanic acid was started initially. A Gram stain demonstrated Gram-negative rods and treatment was continued; however, cultures grew quinolone-sensitive, beta-lactam resistant Enterobacter cloacae, and the patient was treated with oral ciprofloxacin for 14 days.
A percutaneous drain was later placed within the ‘abscess’, and over the following 2 weeks, she had increasing drainage (approximately 400mL/day) through it. She also developed a new, moderate-sized left pleural effusion. There was concern that the percutaneous drainage catheter was communicating with the pleural space. Her percutaneous drain inadvertently fell out, and was replaced by a pigtail catheter placed in the pleural space.
Within hours, the patient acutely developed septic shock and was admitted to the intensive care unit. Computed tomography (CT) demonstrated significant left hydronephrosis, suggesting malfunction of the indwelling ureteral stent . A CT urogram demonstrated a ruptured calyx with contrast extravasation at the site of the previously placed percutaneous catheter tip . Creatinine in the ‘abscess’ fluid was elevated at 17.8g/dL. Upon review, our patient’s urine and urinoma grew the same bacteria, whereas the pleural fluid cultures had remained sterile. Given advanced malignancy and sepsis, comfort care was initiated and the patient died.