Mr. B is a 19 year old transgender man admitted to the hospital due to diabetic ketoacidosis secondary to Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus. Mr. B had a history of Obsessive–Compulsive Disorder, Major Depressive Disorder, recurrent, severe without psychotic features, and Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder. The primary pediatric team discovered that Mr. B had not been using his insulin appropriately and was severely underweight, and they believed this could be due to his underlying mental illness. The psychiatry consult/liaison team was thus asked to evaluate Mr. B to address these concerns.
On interview, Mr. B reported that he had OCD and this drove a severe aversion to numbers. He had already asked his pediatric team not to tell him any numbers relevant to his care such as his blood glucose level. He also reported an aversion to needles due to his OCD. Mr. B went on to describe issues relating to his body image. Mr. B identified as a man saying that he idealizes a masculine body type. He stated his endocrinologist had already stopped his testosterone because his diabetes had not been well controlled. Mr. B reported restricting his intake leading to significant weight loss, stating that he liked the way his body looked after the weight loss and he enjoyed seeing the bones under his skin. He noted a sense of guilt associated with eating too much, though denied vomiting or other purging behaviors.
Most notably, Mr. B went on to describe his perception that he is in fact already dead consistent with Cotard’s Delusion. Mr. B reported that at the age of 16 he tried killing himself, and he believed that he had in fact succeeded and that he was a ghost. He reported that due to his belief that he was dead it didn’t feel real to him that he was a person who needed to eat, take medicine, or care for himself. Mr. B specifically described his belief that going several days without eating would not harm him as he was already deceased. He endorsed visual hallucinations of seeing skeletons and ghosts, and auditory hallucinations of overhearing conversations with dead people that occasionally seemed to address him directly. He reported delusions of reference regarding the TV and food labels, and delusions of thought broadcasting.
Throughout this interview and on subsequent interviews, Mr. B was calm and cooperative with a linear thought process, normal speech patterns, and a child-like affect. He appeared grossly underweight with a BMI of 15.46. He denied suicidal ideation though reported self-harm behaviors in his early teens consisting of cutting and burning himself and an intentional overdose of lamotrigine resulting in a psychiatric admission 3 years prior. Mr. B had a tumultuous childhood as one of many siblings in a non-intact family with a father who was frequently hospitalized psychiatrically for an unknown reason. Mr. B began to cry as he described ongoing sexual abuse by his mother and her boyfriend.
Mr. B had been being seen by a psychiatrist in the community who had diagnosed Mr. B with schizophrenia. He had been receiving treatment with aripiprazole with great effect as prior to antipsychotic initiation Mr. B was reportedly much more disorganized and delusional than he presented during his hospitalization. Ultimately, Mr. B agreed to voluntary psychiatric admission following stabilization of his DKA. The decision was made to admit Mr. B to the child and adolescent unit due to his low BMI and significant child-like presentation. He had a short stay on the child and adolescent unit and was discharged after coordination with his outpatient psychiatrist.