A 33-year-old woman with a history of depression and anti-depressant drugs therapy was referred to the endocrine clinic due to headache, weight gain about 16 kilograms and purple stria on the skin during last year. The patient's medications included sertraline and quetiapine, which weight gain continued despite quetiapine discontinuation and change to bupropion. The menstrual cycle was normal but the patient complained of hypomenorrhea and occasional galactorrhea since last year. She did not mention history of hirsutism, hypertension and diabetes mellitus. On physical examination, blood pressure was 120/80 mmhg and weight was 101 kg. Given the mentioned symptoms, the patient was evaluated for Cushing’s syndrome. In primary laboratory findings, morning basal plasma cortisol was 29 mic/dl and UFC (urinary free cortisol) 82.7 mic/dl (in normal range of laboratory). Morning fasting cortisol was not suppressed after 1 mg dexamethasone suppression test (9.9 mic/dl). Liddle test (low dose dexamethasone suppression test) was done and the results for serum and urinary cortisol were 10 micgr/dl and 15.5 micgr/dl respectively. The ACTH level was 118 pg/ml and a 14*15 mm pituitary adenoma was found in MRI. The patient’s visual field was normal. Except for prolactin which was high (907 miu/ml: normal up to 495), other pituitary axis functions were normal .
The patient was treated with cabergoline 0.5mg/week for 3 months, though the prolactin level decreased to 10 miu/ml but the pituitary adenoma did not shrink and finally she underwent TSS (Trans spheroidal surgery) with the diagnosis of corticotroph adenoma. In a pathology report, pituitary tumor was confirmed. In IHC study, the GH and ACTH markers were positive in majority of the tumor cells, but TSH, FSH, LH, P53 and prolactin were negative. Synaptophysin and chromogranin A were positive and ki67 was positive in 1% of tumoral cells.
After pituitary surgery prednisolone tablet, 5 mg/d and nasal desmopressin spray was started and is continued until now. The weight gain stopped and the skin steria disappeared. After 1 year follow-up, the patients was well but complained of lumpy filling in neck. The thyroid examination was suspicious for thyroid nodule in right lobe. Morphologic characteristic of the nodule in sonography included a solid hypoecho signal, 10*9 mm in size, ill defined, taller than wide without calcification in right thyroid lobe. In addition, another 6*4 mm nodule with benign appearance was reported in right thyroid lobe. A sonography guided fine needle thyroid nodule aspiration (FNA) was performed. The thyroid cytopathologic diagnosis was atypia (or follicular lesion) of undetermined significance (AUS/FLUS). The FNA of thyroid nodule was repeated 3 months later and the papillary thyroid carcinoma diagnosis was reported in second cytology report. Total thyroidectomy was performed. In final pathology report, the tumor size was 1 cm without extrathyroidal extension and capsular or vascular invasion and there was one follicular adenoma in right lobe. No lymph node was involved. Based upon the clinicopathologic report and low risk of recurrence (papillary thyroid cancer confined to thyroid) the patient did not receive Radioiodine ablation or treatment. Thyroglobulin and ant-thyroglobulin antibodies were undetectable three months after thyroidectomy.
After 3 years of follow-up, the patient is well with her weight and has normal menstrual cycle. She is on levothyroxine 150 micgr in addition to carbonate calcium, vitamin D. The laboratory and radiology findings (neck sonography and brain MRI) are acceptable and the patient does not need to prednisolone or desmopressin.