Forty-four-year-old Caucasian female proband suffering from progressive bilateral SNHL since the second decade of her life and positive family history for hearing loss was referred to the Department of ORL-HNS at the University Hospital in Bratislava. Detailed family history questioning revealed other five affected family members in three generations with autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. After excluding the DFNB1 etiology in the proband as a routine step in our diagnostic pipeline for hereditary hearing loss, peripheral blood was taken for DNA analysis and general ENT examination together with audiological tests (tympanometry, stapedial reflexes, ABR, pure tone audiometry in frequency range 250–6000 Hz) were performed in all affected and unaffected family members, who agreed to participate. Additionally, the affected individuals were also subject to vestibular examination (VEMPs, video Head Impulse Test, videonystagmography, caloric testing, and postural tests) to evaluate the vestibular function of the inner ear. Moreover, the proband underwent imaging studies (temporal bone CT and MRI).
After WES results were obtained and hearing loss etiology was determined, three affected subjects older than 40 years underwent detailed cardiological assessment including ECG and echocardiography. All participants or their legal representatives signed informed consent and the study was approved by the Ethics Committee of University Hospital in Bratislava.
Genomic DNA was isolated from peripheral blood using standard procedures. WES was done by a service provider (BGI, HongKong). DNA library was prepared using BGI 59 M Human Exome kit and was sequenced on Complete Genomics Black Bird platform (BGI, Shenzen, China).
Sequencing data was processed by BGI’s standard bioinformatics pipeline which encompassed base calling, alignment of generated reads to the GRCh37 reference genome without the unplaced or alternate loci and variant calling. Aligned reads and called variants were obtained in standard bioinformatics formats and subjected to following bioinformatics pipeline. Variants were decomposed and normalized using vt . Variant effect predictor was used to annotate the variants with respect to their potential effects on genes and transcripts and to add scores from in-silico prediction algorithms PolyPhen and SIFT. As the last step of variant annotation, the Gemini framework was used to insert variants into newly created SQLite database and to add additional data from genome annotation databases like dbSNP , ENCODE , ClinVar, 1000 Genomes , Exome Sequencing Project (ESP) and Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC) .
Then, variant prioritization and filtering were realized by removing those with a MAF ≥ 0.01 (based on dbSNP v138, ESP, ExAC v0.3) and the resulting variant set was further narrowed down by removing variants not lying inside regions of 91 genes with known association with nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss (NSNHL) in human. Set of evaluated NSNHL genes was based on the Hereditary Hearing Loss webpage .
Functional consequences of candidate variants were evaluated using CADD, PolyPhen and SIFT prediction algorithms [–]. The strength of wt and mutated splice donor site was assessed using MaxEntScan, Human Splicing Finder and NNSplice [–].
Sanger sequencing was performed to verify variants identified by WES and to determine co-segregation of the candidate variant with hearing loss in all participating family members. PCR primers amplifying exon 10 and 100 bp of surrounding intronic regions of EYA4 were designed using Primer BLAST software. Sequencing reactions of PCR products were carried out using BigDye Terminator v3.1 chemistry and separated on ABI 3500 genetic analyzer (Applied Biosystems) according to manufacturer’s instructions. GenBank RefSeq NM_004100.4 was used as the EYA4 reference sequence.
Minigene assay was performed as described in . The pSpliceExpress vector was a gift from Stefan Stamm (Addgene plasmid # 32485). Briefly, EYA4 exon10 was amplified from patient DNA using primers with attB1 and attB2 tails and was cloned into the pSpliceExpress using Clonase BP (Invitrogen). Competent cells (SIG10 5α, Sigma) were transformed and positive clones were selected on ampicillin (100 mg/ml). The sequence of selected clones was verified using colony PCR and sequencing. Purified plasmids from two clones, one wild type and one carrying tested mutation, were used for lipofection of HeLa (Sigma) cells. Cells were lysed after 24 h, RNA was extracted with DNaseI step included, reverse transcribed, the minigene cDNA was amplified, and presence/absence of EYA4 exon10 was tested on agarose gel electrophoresis and verified by sequencing. Quantification of band densities was carried out with ImageJ and counted ratio was corrected for the molecular weight of compared fragments.
The pedigree of the family presenting with autosomal dominant NSNHL is shown in Fig. . In total, 8 affected individuals in 4 generations could be identified presenting with postlingual bilateral progressive sensorineural hearing loss. From 12 individuals available for genetic and audiological testing we identified 6 subjects with bilateral sensorineural hearing loss corresponding to the phenotype of the proband. In female subject III:9 this was the primary diagnosis of hearing loss, as she was not aware of any major subjective hearing problems yet. The degree of hearing loss in the affected subjects ranged from moderate to severe hearing loss based on pure tone average at frequencies 500, 1000, 2000 and 4000 Hz . Moreover, one subject (III:5) demonstrated unilateral SNHL. The age of hearing loss onset varied between 10 and 40 years and had a progressive course in all subjects based on serial audiograms. One mutation carrier (IV:1) had yet normal pure tone thresholds at the age of 21 years. Construction of age-related typical audiogram (ARTA) showed the most rapid hearing deterioration in the 5th and 6th decade of life . All subjects requiring hearing rehabilitation benefited from conventional hearing aids. Tinnitus was inconstantly present in 3 subjects, without any association to age or hearing loss severity. Vestibular symptoms (vertigo with occasional headache) only occurred in the proband. Based on the clinical history and results of vestibular testing we supposed the diagnosis of vestibular migraine independently from the etiology of hearing loss. Temporal bone anatomy in the proband was normal based on CT and MRI scans.
Cardiologic findings demonstrated normal heart morphology and function in all three investigated subjects (II:2, II:6, III:2), without any signs of dilation cardiomyopathy. Similarly, no history of sudden cardiac death or increased prevalence of cardiac disease was recorded in the family. Additional clinical findings, which were only present in the mutation carriers, but did not clearly cosegregate with the mutation included blindness in subject II:10 due to bilateral retinopathy with onset in childhood.
Whole exome sequencing was performed in the proband (III:2). In total, 558 million uniquely mapped reads with MAPQ ≥30 were generated, covering 93.45% of exome target regions at least 20x. The overall mean sequencing depth was 162.22x . A total of 46,457 variants were called, transition vs. transversion ratio and values of heterozygous vs. non-reference homozygous genotype ratios were within recommended boundaries for WES data [, ]. Of those, 482 variants were novel and 1348 variants were present in at least one SNP polymorphism database (dbSNP, ESP, ExAC) with minor allele frequency (MAF) less than 1%. Finally, 19 rare/novel variants were found inside regions of 91 genes which had been associated with NSNHL before.
Ultimately, only 5 from 19 variants left by upstream analysis were localized within coding regions of NSNHL genes and only 3 variants were predicted to result in a change of amino acid sequence . The only novel variant was EYA4: c.804G > C transversion, which in respect to the amino acids is inferred to replace the glutamine with histidine residue at position 268 in the eyes absent 4 protein. However, since the changed nucleotide is the last base of EYA4 exon 10, and similar variants surrounding splice sites in other genes can induce changes in mRNA splicing [, ], additional analysis using in-silico splice site prediction tools was performed.
The Human Splicing Finder algorithm score was near the threshold value for exon being recognized by the spliceosome, whereas MaxEntScan with NNSplice indicated that the mutated sequence is not likely to be functional splice donor site . In combination, these scores suggested a high likelihood of splicing modification with resulting deleterious impact on protein sequence.
Presence of the c.804G > C variant in proband’s DNA and its heterozygous genotype were confirmed by Sanger sequencing . Additionally, DNA from all available affected and unaffected family members (n = 12) was investigated by cosegregation of the variant with hearing loss. Together 6 relatives of the proband were shown to have the EYA4 c.804G > C variant, all of them diagnosed with bilateral hearing loss, except individual IV:1, the youngest mutation carrier (21 years), who had yet normal hearing based on pure tone thresholds . This variant was not present in the DNA of unaffected family members older than 30 years.
The effect of the c.804G > C variant on splicing was tested using minigene assay. The results showed that the wild type exon was correctly incorporated in 89% of transcripts, while the exon carrying the c.804G > C variant failed to be retained in the mature transcript and was cut out during splicing .