This is a 54-year-old male who was brought to the hospital as a trauma patient (Tier 2 activation) with a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of fourteen after being found in a ditch from a motorcycle collision. He had a past medical history of tobacco, methamphetamine, and alcohol use. His urine drug screen was negative, and the alcohol screen was above the legal limit of intoxication (i.e.,>0.08). Computed tomography (CT) imaging showed a grade 3 blunt aortic injury, mild mesenteric injury, right adrenal gland hematoma, fractures of the right scapula, left clavicle, open book pelvic fracture, and multiple lumbar transverse process fractures. There was bleeding along the right sacroiliac joint extending into the pelvis. Injuries to his thorax included costochondral separation of right ribs one to five , displaced posterior fractures of right ribs five and seven to ten, a nondisplaced posterior fracture of right rib six , laterally displaced fractures of ribs five and six , bilateral pulmonary contusions, and a right hemothorax. Upon return to the trauma bay from the CT scanner, he became hemodynamically unstable and was upgraded to a Tier 1 trauma activation (highest activation level). A right thoracostomy tube and pelvic binder were placed. He was intubated, and an arterial line was placed. A massive transfusion protocol was activated, and he was taken emergently to the hybrid Operating Room.
He underwent an exploratory laparotomy with colonic serosal tear repair, preperitoneal pelvic and abdominal packing, and temporary abdominal closure. Vascular surgery performed a thoracic endovascular aortic repair (TEVAR), and interventional radiology (IR) performed bilateral internal iliac artery embolizations. Despite these interventions, the patient remained hemodynamically unstable. Given that the right chest tube had >1.5 l output of sanguineous output, the decision to perform a right thoracotomy and place a left thoracostomy tube was made. No major hemorrhage was identified, the right chest was packed and temporarily closed, and the patient was taken to the intensive care unit (ICU).
Throughout the night, he remained hemodynamically unstable with continuous sanguineous output from the right chest tube. At this point, he had received twenty-four units of packed red blood cells (PRBC), twenty-four units of fresh frozen plasma (FFP), three units of cryoprecipitate (CRYO), and three rounds of plateletpheresis (PLT). The decision was made to return to the operating room (OR) for chest exploration. An intercostal artery transection was identified, likely due to further resuscitation and resolution of traumatic vasospasm, and hemorrhage control was obtained with ligation. He received a total of thirty-nine units of PRBC, thirty-six units of FFP, three units of CRYO, six rounds of PLT, and two units of whole blood (WB).
Post-operation day (POD) two, he returned to the OR for a re-exploration of his abdomen and thorax, and three transverse colon serosal injuries were repaired. A right lower lung pleural tear was identified and resected. The abdomen was closed, and his chest was again temporarily closed with the replacement of the thoracostomy tube and a plan for SSRF and SSSF the following day.
POD three, he underwent a difficult pelvic external fixation with sacroiliac screw placement and received an intraoperative transfusion of two units of PRBC, one unit of plasma, and one unit of PLT. The pelvic external fixation was to remain for six weeks with followup X-rays.
POD four from his original thoracotomy, he was taken back to the OR for definitive chest closure and rib fixation. The chest wall soft tissues were noted to have an area of fibrinous exudate, which was excised and sent for culture. A unicortical SSRF of the right posterolateral fifth and sixth ribs was performed. A unicortical SSRF of the right anterior fourth and fifth ribs with sternal fixation was performed to address the severe displacement of the costochondral junction. The thoracostomy tube was replaced. The fourth intercostal space was reapproximated with #1 vicryl. There was noted to be difficulty approximating the anterior aspect sufficiently (, ), and the lung parenchyma was noted to be herniating at this location with every inhalation. The decision to place a mesh was made. Due to the nature of the chest wall being opened for four days (and limited mesh options), a bovine pericardium biologic mesh was sutured in place to the anterior wall of the pleural cavity with a 2-0 polydioxanone suture (PDS) suture in a “parachute” fashion. Vancomycin powder was placed in the area, and the muscle was reapproximated. A subcutaneous drain was inserted medially along the incision in the soft tissues, and a wound vacuum was placed to augment skin closure.
POD eight, he underwent a tracheostomy and received a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tube . A bronchoalveolar lavage grew Pseudomonas Aeruginosa and Klebsiella Pneumonie, and he was started on appropriate antibiotics. The intraoperative chest wall exudate grew Bacillus, not Anthracis, and he was started on intravenous vancomycin. Progressing well, he stepped down from the ICU on POD sixteen. His thoracotomy tubes were removed. Eventually, the wound vacuum was removed, and a delayed primary closure of the thoracotomy incision was performed. POD twenty-six, his tracheostomy was decannulated, and he was started on an oral diet. POD thirty-two, he was declared to be as weight-bearing as possible and was transferred to a skilled nursing facility.
POD forty-nine, the pelvic external fixation apparatus was removed, and he was cleared to bear weight as tolerated. POD fifty-eight, he was seen at the clinic for removal of the PEG tube with no issues. Two weeks following the external fixation removal, he was seen in the orthopedic clinic and found to be improving significantly, ambulating with the assistance of a cane and beginning physical therapy.