A 67-year-old Caucasian male presented to the department of gastroenterology at Tishreen University hospital, Lattakia, Syria, complaining of fatigue and weakness that began 1 month earlier accompanied by an unintentional weight loss of about 15 kg over a 15-day period.
Medical history includes hypertension and a cerebrovascular accident with no residual complications. The patient could not recollect the etiology of this accident. There was no history of familial lymphoma or cancer.
The patient had no vomiting, fever, or diarrhea but had polyuria and urine hesitancy, exertional dyspnea, and orthopnea.
Clinical examination revealed epigastric and left lumbar region tenderness with enlarged spleen during palpation, arthralgia, and enlarged hard left axillary lymph nodes. Vital parameters were pulse 100 beats per minute, blood pressure 110/70 mmHg, SpO2 95%, temperature 38°C. Positive laboratory tests included microcytic anemia (Hgb 7.6 g/dL, MCV 65.8 fL), decreased platelets (133 × 103/µL), relatively decreased WBCs (4000 cells/µL), and increased ESR (69 mm/hour) .
Ultrasound study of the abdomen and the pelvis showed a hypoechoic nodule in the liver (3 × 3 cm), a massive spleen enlargement (22 cm) with a few hypoechoic nodules, and a node above the splenic vein, possibly in the pancreas. The kidneys had a clear corticomedullary differentiation with a few simple cysts, the largest of which was (45 × 59 mm) in the left kidney and (67 × 78 mm) in the right one . Computed tomography (CT) with intravenous (IV) contrast was then performed and showed homogeneous node measuring 35 mm in diameter in the fourth segment of the liver, homogeneous lobular splenic enlargement, bilateral cysts in the kidney with heterogeneous fixation of the contrast agent in the renal cortex, and calcifications in the coronary arteries, celiac trunk, and splenic artery. Based on investigations, lymphoma was suspected. Later, bone marrow aspiration showed normocellular, granular leukocytes in all stages of differentiation, increased eosinophils and neutrophils, plasma cells < 3%, and red blood cell precursors in all stages of differentiation without abnormalities. Megakaryocytes were normal in number with a slight decrease in size. The biopsy of the left axillary lymph node was then studied.
Macroscopically, the lymph node was large (6 × 4 × 3 cm) and gray-tan in color with a soft consistency. Microscopy with the following immunostaining revealed foci with complete effacement of lymph node architecture and diffuse proliferation of cohesive large neoplastic lymphoid cells with large irregular nuclei and prominent nucleoli . These cells were positive for CD20 and Bcl-2. The background cells were predominantly T lymphocytes (CD3+) and histiocytes, whereas B cells (CD20) were markedly depleted and Reed–Sternberg-like cells (LP cells) were absent. Other foci in the lymph node showed proliferation of LP cells with a background of mixed inflammatory exudates in the absence of CD20+ large lymphoid cells. LCA (CD45) and CD20 were positive for LP cells, whereas CD30 and CD15 were negative . This panel supports the diagnosis of composite lymphoma.
After the initial diagnosis of lymphoma, the patient was treated with once-every-2-weeks dose of adriamycin (doxorubicin), bleomycin, vinblastine, dacarbazine (ABVD) chemotherapy regimen for two sessions; then, he was switched to rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone (R-CHOP) regimen after the diagnosis was confirmed with immunostaining and had 11 sessions every 3 weeks. Another CT scan with IV contrast was carried out 2 months after the initiation of the therapy, and it reported the presence of a left axillary nodule measuring 3.5 cm in diameter with smaller nodules in both axillae no more than (12 × 7 mm) in size. It also showed thickening in the stomach wall (up to 24 mm), in the cardia, and in the upper half of the body, as well as a mild splenic enlargement .
The patient, unfortunately, died from cardiac arrest 2 months after the completion of the chemotherapy regimen. The patient’s family refused to perform an autopsy, which prevented the establishment of an accurate causative relationship between the death and the disease.