A 53-year-old male presented to emergency department with complaints of pain, swelling, and deformity around the right elbow joint with inability to move his right elbow . He had a history of fall on palm with hyperflexed elbow while performing his household chores in the same morning. On presentation, he was holding his left elbow semiflexed and supported by opposite hand. On examination, his elbow was at 30° flexed attitude, forearm in mid-prone position swelling and tenderness was observed around the right elbow and wrist region. The three point relationship of the right elbow was lost. Olecranon was not palpable posteriorly; there was increased tenderness on palpation over medial condylar region. There was also tenderness over the right wrist and restriction of movement around the wrist joint. The range of motion around the right elbow was painful and restricted without any distal neurovascular deficit. Radiological examination (X-Ray) revealed anterior dislocation of the right elbow with medial epicondyle fracture of humerus . X-Ray of the right wrist revealed comminuted fracture distal radius. A posterior longarm slab was given, and the patient was advised for limb elevation. Then, we planned for reduction of the dislocation and fracture fixation under general anesthesia. Close reduction of the elbow joint was achieved by applying longitudinal traction in line of supine forearm with the elbow in 60–70° flexion. With the assistant giving counter traction in line of the humerus, the elbow was taken into mild valgus, the forearm was pushed backward, and the elbow reduced with a clunk. To maintain the reduction, a 2.5 mm K-wire was given to transfix the ulnohumeral joint. The medial epicondyle was fixed with open reduction and K-wire, due to its smaller size . Distal radius fracture was fixed with forearm distractor due to its high comminution. All the fixations were confirmed with the help of image intensifier. A forearm pouch was given to the patient and advised for limb elevation in the post-operative ward. The patient was discharged on post-operative day 3 after wound inspection and advised for non-weight lifting. The patient was followed up after 1 month. The ulnohumeral K-wire was removed. Elbow arc of motion encouraged with active physiotherapy, following after a period of 3-month elbow range of motion, was found 30–100°. He was advised further physiotherapy.