A 64-year-old Japanese male patient was referred to our hospital to treat a floating mass of the right atrium (RA). He had undergone resection of sigmoid cancer 5 years previously and endoscopic submucosal dissection for early carcinoma of the esophagus 5 years ago. Follow-up computed tomography (CT) revealed a mass of 45 × 27 mm in the RA with a low-density area . Preoperative transthoracic echocardiography revealed a round mass with low echo density on the free wall of the RA , which was suspected to represent thrombosis, cardiac myxoma, or a relapsed metastatic tumor. Although the patient was asymptomatic, we planned to urgently resect the floating mass on the next day of admission due to the risk of pulmonary embolism.
The operation was performed under cardiopulmonary bypass. Normothermic cardiopulmonary bypass was established by using an arterial cannula to the ascending aorta and two venous cannulas into the superior vena cava and inferior vena cava with a left ventricular venting cannula through the right upper pulmonary vein. The ascending aorta was cross-clamped, and the heart was arrested with cold blood cardioplegia.
We observed a large, pedunculated, relative tense mass of 45 mm × 27 mm in size on the free wall of the RA. We could directly identify a small part of the mass protruding though the RA wall, which was connected to the RA wall . We resected the tumor with at least 1.5 cm of the RA wall as a margin . We added tricuspid annuloplasty with Carpenter Edwards Physio-ring II of 28 mm (Edwards Lifesciences Corporation, CA, USA) for tricuspid valve regurgitation, and the left atrial appendage was closed with a 40-mm AtriClip (AtriCure, Inc., Mason, OH, USA) and bilateral pulmonary vein isolation by an AtriCure (AtriCure, Inc.) to prevent thrombosis formation due to chronic atrial fibrillation. The operation time, cardiopulmonary bypass time, and aorta cross-clamp time were 317 min, 145 min, and 88 min, respectively. The patient recovered uneventfully and returned to home on foot on the 13th day after the operation.
The postoperative pathological diagnosis of the mass was compatible with a primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET), a form of Ewing’s sarcoma. Atypical cells with small oval nuclei propagated into a micropapillary form with a partial rosette formation ; some parts contained necrotized tissue. These cells were positive for CD56 , CD99 , and Vimentin and negative for S-100 and Desmin. No malignant cells were observed in the margin of the resected RA wall. Although the sarcoma was completely resected, he was transferred to another hospital to undergo adjuvant postoperative chemotherapy and radiotherapy to improve the prognosis by preventing subclinical micrometastasis. The final diagnosis was primary cardiac Ewing’s sarcoma because no primary lesions were observed in other organs on fludeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) or bone scintigraphy, which was performed in another hospital. As the adjuvant postoperative chemotherapy protocol, he received VDC-IE therapy as follows: VDC with vincristine 1.4 mg/m2 (d1), doxorubicin 37.5 mg/m2 (d1–2), and cyclophosphamide 1200 mg/m2 (1d); and IE with ifosfamide 1.8 g/m2 (d1–5) and etoposide 100 mg/m2 (d1–5). VDC-IE therapy was the same as that for born-derived Ewing’s sarcoma. He had experienced no recurrence as of 2 months after the operation.