A 74-year-old Albanian man from Kosovo presented to our cardiology department because of unstable angina. The associated risk factors included diabetes, tobacco smoking, and hypercholesterolemia. Four months earlier, he had experienced a lateral wall myocardial infarction which was not treated percutaneously because he was admitted 3 days after the onset of myocardial infarction. His left ventricular ejection fraction was 52 %. He underwent coronary angiography. We were unable to selectively cannulate his left coronary artery, and a nonselective injection disclosed no coronary artery arising from the left coronary sinus. On selective injection of his right coronary sinus, all three coronary arteries originated from a single ostium in the right coronary sinus. Close to the right coronary ostium originated an aberrant large vessel which coursed transversely and anterior to the right ventricular outflow tract , from which the left anterior descending artery arose and coursed to the anterior interventricular groove continuing distally and proximally as a normal left anterior descending artery, it had the shape of a “T-vessel”, presenting a critical stenosis at the bifurcation of the first diagonal artery . Another aberrant vessel arose at the mid portion of his right coronary artery, coursed to the left, behind the aorta, and in front of the atria to reach the atrioventricular groove on the left and then travelled the normal course with an important obtuse marginal artery presenting a critical proximal stenosis. His right coronary artery followed a normal course presenting a critical stenosis at the origin of the posterior descending artery .
He underwent coronary artery bypass grafting. His heart was arrested employing intermittent anterior cold blood cardioplegia. The aortic cross clamping time was 57 minutes and extracorporeal circulation was 70 minutes. Intraoperatively the aberrant vessel from which the left anterior descending artery originated was easily found . The coronary revascularization consisted in left internal mammary artery anastomosed to the left anterior descending artery, and vein graft to the first diagonal artery, obtuse marginal artery and posterior descending artery . His postoperative course was uneventful.