A seventy-year-old male patient presented with a history of intermittent cough, white sputum, and shortness of breath triggered by exercise (modified Medical Research Council 3), and was admitted to the outpatient clinic.
Intermittent cough and white sputum for a period of 5 years, and shortness of for 3 years. He had taken sulbactam ampicillin 2 × 440/294 mg for 14 d and gemifloxacin for 7 d and had consulted a physician twice during the previous 2 mo because of recurrent complaints.
The patient had a medical history of hypertension and diabetes mellitus for 15 years and coronary artery disease for 4 years.
He was a current smoker who smoked 60 packs of cigarettes/year. His father had a diagnosis of lung cancer.
Lung examination findings included a prolonged bilateral expiratory phase, while physical examinations of his other systems were found to be within normal limits. His body temperature was 36.9 °C, pulse rate 86 bpm at rest, blood pressure 130/85 mmHg, respiratory rate 18/min, and oxygen saturation 98% while the patient was breathing room air.
Laboratory examination revealed that his hemoglobin level stood at 12 g/dL and his hematocrit level was 35.4%, indicating mild anemia. The pulmonary function test revealed that the forced expiratory volume in the first second (FEV1) was 3060 mL (103%), forced vital capacity (FVC) was 4130 mL (107%), and the FEV1/FVC ratio was 74%. The patient’s shortness of breath triggered by exercise was interpreted as secondary to his chronic diseases. Gram staining of the sputum sample showed many epithelial cells and a small amount of leukocytes. The Genexpert tuberculosis-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test could not be performed due to technical reasons. Acid-fast staining of the sputum yielded negative results three separate times. There was no growth in the culture of bacteria including of tuberculosis, bacillus, or fungi.
There were signs of bilaterally increased aeration on plain chest radiography. Computed tomography (CT) of the thorax revealed densities of bilateral apical pleuroparenchymal fibrotic lesions, and paraseptal and centrilobular emphysema in the upper lobes of both lungs, an 11-mm nodule with cavitation in the superior segment of the right lung lower lobe, and a 7-mm nodule the lower lobe posterior basal segment of the lung . Positron emission tomography-CT (PET-CT) revealed a 10-mm nodular lesion in the superior part of the right lung lower lobe with a maximum standard uptake value (SUV max) of 6.43, and minimal focal fluorodeoxyglucose uptake in the 7-mm nodular lesion in the posterior basal part of the right lung lower lobe .
The wedge resection of the right lower lobe superior and posterior basal segments were performed. Pathologic examination revealed a squamous cell carcinoma with dimensions of 1.5 cm × 1 cm × 0.7 cm (T1b), in the wedge resection material of the right lung lower lobe superior segment, and a Langerhans cell histiocytosis at 0.7 cm in diameter in the wedge resection material of the right lung lower lobe posterior basal segment . Immunohistochemical analyses revealed positive staining with S100 protein, CD1a, and Langerin, while real-time PCR identified a BRAF V600E mutation. Gene detection was not performed for squamous cell carcinoma.