A 77-year-old woman who had undergone distal gastrectomy (Billroth I) for early gastric cancer 3 years earlier then underwent a subtotal esophagectomy for esophageal squamous cell carcinoma that was followed by esophageal reconstruction with an antethoracic pedicled jejunal flap using the supercharge technique. No postoperative complication, except grade 1 surgical site infection according to the Clavien–Dindo classification [, ], occurred throughout the postoperative course. For the last 8 years, the patient had chronic constipation caused by a lumbar intervertebral disk herniation, and usually strained to pass stool, with resultant high abdominal pressure.
Four months after the surgery, the patient complained of distention and discomfort without tenderness in the epigastric region. On examination, her vital signs were normal, but she had abdominal distention extending from the xiphoid process to the umbilicus . No other abnormalities were present on examination, and results of blood tests were normal. Computed tomography showed a herniation of the small intestine, measuring 9 × 15 cm, surrounding the pedicled jejunum, but without strangulation . As the size of the hernial orifice was increasing, conservative therapies, such as a hernia band, seemed to be contraindicated because of possible compression of the pedicled jejunum. Thus, surgical treatment was considered necessary.
Because the hernial orifice was large and the abdominal wall around it was thin and fragile, re-suturing would potentially provide insufficient strength for the abdominal wall to resist abdominal pressure. Therefore, we decided to reinforce the abdominal wall with the mesh repair method. A 14 × 18 cm large composite mesh that composed of two layers—polypropylene mesh and expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (Gore-Tex), named Composix Kugel Patch (C.R. Bard Inc.)—was selected as the mesh prosthesis. We applied a parastomal hernia repair technique—the keyhole technique [–], which is a modification of the Lichtenstein technique for inguinal hernia repair.
In the supine position, the patient was administered general anesthesia, a median incision was made over the hernia, and scar revision was completed. Then, the edge of the incision was retracted upward, and the subcutaneous fat was carefully dissected to create a skin flap over and around the distal portion of the pulled-up jejunum . Then, the distal portion of the pulled-up jejunum was completely exposed , and the prolapsed jejunum was carefully separated from the area for complete exposure of the hernial orifice.
Because a piece of 14 × 18 cm Composix Kugel Patch was too small to cover the attenuated area around the orifice, we prepared two pieces of the mesh . The mesh was stretched out to the original shape by the elasticity of a shape-memory ring, which was stitched into the mesh immediately after the inferior edge of it was rolled up and introduced to the subcutaneous layer. The mesh was positioned on the inferior two thirds of the hernial orifice overlapping the fragile abdominal wall around the orifice. Interrupting sutures of 3–0 Vicryl at intervals of 1.0 cm along the edge of both the mesh and the orifice secured the mesh to the abdominal wall.
The other mesh was cut with a lateral slit and a medial blunt oval shape for the pulled-up jejunum. The manufacturer does not recommend making incisions on the Composix Kugel Patch (C.R. Bard Inc.), because reshaped patches may cause complications such as bowel perforation or surgical site infection; therefore, the cut edges of the shape-memory ring wire were folded down and fixed tightly by several sutures to prevent tissue injuries . After the mesh was positioned on the superior one third of the hernial orifice encircling the pulled-up jejunum, it was sutured to the abdominal wall and the orifice similarly as the inferior mesh . Then, we anchored the superior mesh to the inferior one by placing several sutures on the overlapping edges of the two meshes.
To prevent jejunal prolapse and seroma formation in the subcutaneous space, we approximated the skin flap and the surface aspect of the polypropylene mesh with 3–0 Vicryl sutures at intervals of 1.0 cm. Moreover, we placed tight sutures between the skin flap and the expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE) side of the mesh at the edge of the oval margin circumferentially to keep the serous membrane of the reconstructed jejunum away from the surface of the polypropylene mesh. This procedure was undertaken to prevent adhesion between the mesh and the reconstructed jejunum. Two catheters were introduced into the subcutaneous space and attached to a closed system of suction, followed by the usual approximation of the subcutaneous tissue and skin closure.
The patient had an uneventful recovery postoperatively and was discharged without complications. Although she continues to suffer from constipation, her oral intake has been good and without discomfort. No hernia recurrence or complications have occurred in the 3 years and 5 months since the surgical intervention .