An HIV-negative male in his early 50s presented with a history of unintentional weight loss (15 kg in 6 months). His past medical history was only significant for hypertension, dyslipidemia, and gastroesophageal reflux disease. On further evaluation, he did not have any history of travel, exposure to bird or bat droppings, use of alcohol, or unsafe sex. His vitals, physical examination, and relevant labs [CBC (complete blood count) with differential, BMP (basic metabolic panel), AM cortisol (morning cortisol), and ACTH (adrenocorticotropic hormone) stimulation] were all within normal limits, which ruled out adrenal insufficiency secondary to destruction of the adrenal glands. Suspecting malignancy, a computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen was done, which revealed hepatosplenomegaly with bilateral adrenal hyperplasia. Both the adrenal glands were diffusely bulky and hypodense with heterogeneous post-contrast enhancement. The right adrenal gland measured 5.3×3.3 cm, and the left measured 6.3×5 cm. . The liver was enlarged, measuring 16 cm, and the spleen was enlarged, measuring 14 cm. An endoscopic ultrasound of the abdomen was done, which also showed hypoechoic and heterogeneous bilateral bulky adrenal glands . Transgastric fine needle aspiration (FNA) was done and the sample was sent for cytology, Gene Xpert, tuberculosis (TB) culture, and immunohistochemistry evaluation. Gene Xpert for TB was negative, and no acid-fast bacilli indicating TB was isolated after 42 days of incubation. On histopathological evaluation, numerous budding yeast forms of Histoplasma were seen intracellularly within the macrophages and in the background. The fungal stain highlighted numerous fungal organisms consistent with Histoplasma . Upon the diagnosis of adrenal histoplasmosis, liposomal amphotericin B was started.
Liposomal amphotericin B 200 mg/day was started for 7 days, followed by itraconazole 200 mg twice a day for 1 year. On his subsequent visits, he was asymptomatic, gained weight, and tolerated his treatment well. Repeat CT scans showed a marked reduction in the sizes of both adrenal glands.