A 48-year-old male patient underwent L4/5 and L5/S1 TLIF in another hospital due to “low back pain” in 2014 . The patient showed low back pain that disappeared postoperatively but was accompanied by radiative pain in the left lower limb that recurred occasionally, with normal muscle strength. After TLIF, the patient had been taking anti-inflammatory and analgesic drugs. However, 3 months prior, the patient developed recurrent lower back pain after bending and lifting heavy objects, accompanied by numbness, which became worse while walking and was relieved while lying in the supine position. Physical examination of the patient showed 40° (+) in the straight leg raising test of the left limb, positive (+) result of the augmentation test, decreased acupuncture propagated sensation in the left L5 dermatome, and extensor muscle strength grade IV of the left hallux dorsum.
In 2018, an X-ray of the patient on admission to our hospital showed no obvious loosening of the original internal fixation screws. MRI of the patient on admission to our hospital showed stenosis of the left lateral recess in the 4/5 space of the lumbar spine . The posterior part of the interbody cage in the 4/5 space of the lumbar spine protruded into the spinal canal, with stenosis of the left lateral recess of the corresponding level . The patient experienced aggravated pain when extended and flexed backward, difficulty standing on one leg of the left lower limb and poor elevation outcome of the left straight leg.
The following is the diagnosis and treatment process as well as the technical introduction of the patient.
Combined with the imaging data, it was considered that the adverse symptoms might be related to the nerve compression caused by the position deviation of the cage. For the identification of the source of symptoms, a L5 nerve root block was conducted in the left L4/5 space . After injection of 1 ml diluted lidocaine, the original lumbar pain and radiating pain in the left lower limb completely disappeared.
On the first day after the block, radiative pain occurred again in the lower back and left lower limb of the patient. In view of a definite diagnosis, a treatment plan was made for percutaneous transforaminal endoscopic L4/5 lateral recess decompression.
With the lateral recess structure exposed, soft tissues in the spinal canal were cleaned by radiofrequency. The posterior edge of the cage was shown to be higher than the posterior vertebral body . Subsequently, the rear part of the cage was ground using a grinding drill under the endoscope, and the cage surface was observed to be worn . The grinding range was then expanded and exposed to the inner edge of the cage. The inner posterior edge of the cage was broken, and the exposed soft tissue structure was removed . The residual upper corner of the cage after grinding was broken by rotating the sleeve . A probe hook was then used to detect the thickness of the residual cage on the inner edge , and the grinding drill was continued until the residual part became thinner .
After the operation, the patient achieved complete relief of lower back pain and radiating pain in the lower limb.
As shown in Fig. , postoperative X-rays showed no loosening or displacement of the original implant, and the L4/5 posterior edge marker disappeared. In Fig. , postoperative CT showed that the posterior edge of the cage was abraded, and the left superior articular process of L5 was partially removed, forming a bone tunnel. Postoperative MRI review showed the removal of part of the left superior articular process of L5 and enlargement of the space of the left intervertebral foramen and lateral recess of L4/5 . The patient was satisfied with the curative effect, with complete disappearance of low back pain and radiative pain in the left lower limb.