A 39-year-old male patient presented to the emergency room due to pain and swelling in the dominant right wrist, following an in-car traffic accident. His physical examination revealed limited and painful movement in the right wrist and tenderness over the radial and ulnar styloids. No ne- urovascular deficits were detected. The patient did not have a history of any disease. A non-displa- ced radial styloid fracture and a minimally displaced fracture of the ulnar styloid were observed on the anteroposterior and lateral X-ray view of the wrist . The patient underwent MRI in the emergency room, as a requisite of a M.D. thesis planned to be published later . The radi- ology department of our hospital reported findings of “rupture and retraction in the APL tendon” in the MRI report. Based on these findings, the previously intended surgical treatment of the non-disp- laced fracture with closed fixation was switched to open reduction and fixation.
Following general anesthesia, the patient was operated via the longitudinal dorsal approach over the anatomical snuff box. A single EPB and two APL tendons were observed in the 1 st dorsal compartment, as reported in 70% of the cases in the literature . Following gentle traction with a tendon hook, the musculotendinous avulsion was visualized on the proximal aspect of the tendons . The radial styloid fracture of the patient was fixed using a cannulated compression sc- rew (Medartis®; Germany) . The tendons were cut off the musculotendinous juncture and the tendon stumps were left free beneath the forearm fascia for a probable tendon transfer in the fu- ture. The patient was postoperatively followed with a palm-based thumb spica splint for three week and then hand and wrist exercises were performed to the extent the patient could tolerate. The pati- ent exhibited no limitation of movement or functional loss throughout the two-year follow-up peri-od.
The abductor and extensor muscle strengths of the operated and non-operated thumbs were objectively measured at the second year follow-up. Ethical approval had not been applied by authors for this study. The measurements of isometric muscle strength were performed using a digital hand dynamometer MicroFet 2 (Hoggan Health Industries, Draper, UT), used safely in numerous studies, and the muscle strengths were recorded in Newtons (N) [, , ]. Patients were verbally encouraged and asked to exert full force on the dynamometer for 5–10 seconds. The process was repeated five times with two-minute intervals of rest[,,].
The paired sample t-test was used in comparing the extensor and abductor muscle strengths of both thumbs. The mean extensor force exerted by the affected thumb was 13.48+-0.36 N and 13.44+-0.36 N for the left thumb. The mean abductor force exerted by the affected thumb was 9.3+-
2.23 N and 12.22+-0.9 N for the left thumb. No statistically significant difference was found in the extensor and abductor muscle strengths between the two thumbs (p > 0.05).