Black 22-year-old female was referred to our center with a history of severe progressive neck pain, more intense on the right side, without radiation, associated with paresthesia in the right arm. Symptoms started during pregnancy and progressed for 5 months. Neurological examination showed increased reflexes in all four limbs, bilateral Hoffman's sign, right Babinski's sign, normal muscle strength and right hemi-hypoesthesia. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the cervical spine showed a right posterior space-occupying cervical lesion with heterogeneous contrast enhancement extending to the neural foramina of the atlas and axis [Figure –]. The lesion had an anterior lateral intraspinal component compressing the spinal cord.
After informed consent, the patient underwent microsurgical removal of the lesion via suboccipital craniotomy and removal of the right posterior arch of the atlas by the senior author. The initial diagnosis of the frozen material was meningioma. shows the MRI performed in the immediate postoperative period, with adequate decompression of the spinal cord. Histopathological analysis showed a primitive neuroectodermal tumor, and immunohistochemical analysis showed positivity for CD99, synaptophysin, and EMA and negativity for desmin, myogenin, S-100 protein, and pancytokeratin AE1/AE3, favoring the diagnosis of pPNET. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed no malignant cells.
The patient had a good recovery after surgery, with improvement of the sensory deficit and without cervical pain, being discharged five days later.
Treatment was supplemented with cycles of chemotherapy and radiotherapy for 12 months. Despite complications during adjuvant therapy, such as infection (pneumonia), dysphagia, and dysphonia, the patient improved and regained good quality of life, and returned to work.
shows the radiological follow-up after adjuvant treatment, the absence of contrast enhancement in the region previously occupied by the tumor.
Approximately three months after completing the adjuvant treatment, the patient presented with intense generalized headache and vomiting. Emergency CT scan showed communicating hydrocephalus. The patient underwent ventriculoperitoneal shunting, with significant improvement of neurological symptoms. CSF analysis was positive for neoplastic cells, leading to the decision to administer salvage chemotherapy. However, the patient died before any treatment was begun.