A 24-year-old Pakistani male presented to the emergency department following a high-speed motor vehicle accident. The patient was riding a motorcycle when the vehicle flipped over. The patient reported extensive generalized pain in his pelvic region, as well as sharp pain down his thigh. At the time of admission, the patient’s vitals were stable, and the patient was responsive to questions. The patient had obvious deformity of the right thigh. On initial observation, the right leg appeared to be slightly shorter than the left leg. Open wounds were observed on the right forearm and right leg.
The trauma surgery team responded appropriately. Following advanced trauma life support (ATLS) protocol, it was determined that the patient had experienced dislocation of the right hip joint along with fracture of the proximal shaft of the femur . An X-ray was completed to confirm fracture in the shaft of the femur and posterior dislocation of the hip. There were no associated ligament or tendon injuries; there were no deformities in the upper extremities. Furthermore, no vascular compromise was observed. Dorsal pedal and posterior tibial pulses were palpable 2/2.
Joint dislocation is an orthopedic emergency. Thus, the procedure was completed within 6 h of injury. A closed reduction with Allis maneuver was first attempted without external fixation, but ultimately proved unsuccessful.
In the case management, we then applied a temporary external fixator to the femur shaft while under general anesthesia. All of the procedures were completed under the same anesthesia – external fixator was first applied for manipulation/reduction of the hip joint. When reduction was achieved, we then converted the bicortical fixation to unicortical for manipulating fracture fragment of femur. After passing of guide wire for interlocking nail (ILN), we removed the external fixator to complete the procedure of ILN. We then proceeded to complete a closed reduction of the hip joint using an Allis maneuver. Secondary to the reduction, the fixator was removed. An ILN was placed in the femur for purposes of fixation. Skin traction was applied to the affected leg for 2 weeks to rest the joint. Isometric exercises of the affected limbs were held of the affected limbs in traction. Post-operative recommendations were for non-weight-bearing activity with axillary crutch walking for 4 weeks. This was followed by partial weight-bearing with fracture with union of femoral shaft.
Skin traction was applied to the affected leg for 2 weeks to rest the joint. Follow-up period was 4 months for the union of femur shaft fracture and 2 years for avascular necrosis of femoral head.