In June, a 68-year-old Chinese woman with severe hypertension and renal dysfunction was admitted to our hospital for further treatment. The patient had no remarkable medical history or family history. The patient had noticed puffy swollen fingers and leg edema 1 year previously, as well as the gradual development of skin thickening and Raynaud phenomenon. She had been diagnosed with SSc by a local doctor and had been prescribed PSL 20 mg/day 25 days before admission. At 11 days before the current admission, the patient had visited the previous hospital with acute-onset chest and back pain with blood pressure 101/51 mmHg and pulse rate 111 beats/min, and contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed massive intraperitoneal bleeding . At this time, contrast-enhanced CT showed normal findings of renal arteries, and laboratory findings showed serum creatinine (Cre) 1.1 mg/dl and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 37.4 mg/dl. The patient accordingly underwent emergency laparotomy, and the bleeding from the gastroepiploic artery was stopped surgically. After surgery, she developed severe hypertension (260/129 mmHg) and progressive renal dysfunction (Cre, 6.4 mg/dl; BUN, 125.3 mg/dl). She was transferred to our hospital for further treatment.
On admission, physical examination showed bilateral lower limb edema, trismus, nail fold telangiectasia, and diffuse skin thickening. The patient’s modified Rodnan total skin thickness score was 33 points. No lung lesions were detected on chest CT. Laboratory findings showed normocytic, normochromic anemia and severe renal dysfunction with elevated levels of plasma renin activity at ≥ 20 ng/ml/h (normal, 0.3–2.9 ng/ml/h) and plasma aldosterone concentration 433 pg/ml (normal, 35.7–240 pg/ml). Immunological tests revealed positive antinuclear antibody and anti-RNA polymerase III antibody. Echocardiography showed mild left ventricular hypertrophy, a small amount of pericardial effusion, preserved ejection fraction of 80%, and no pulmonary hypertension. Renal artery ultrasound examination showed no evidence of renal artery stenosis.
The patient was diagnosed with SSc and developed severe hypertension and progressive renal dysfunction with proteinuria and hematuria, thus fulfilling the criteria for SRC [, , , ]. The patient also had several risk factors for SRC (duration of disease < 4 years, diffuse cutaneous form, administration of PSL ≥ 15 mg/day, and anti-RNA polymerase III antibody) [–]. No obvious thrombocytopenia, schistocytes, or elevation of direct bilirubin was present; hence, we had little evidence to diagnosis the patient with complications of thrombotic microangiopathy.
The pathological examination of excised gastroepiploic artery at the previous hospital showed the dissection at the media–adventitia junction, and the dissected cavity was filled with hematoma, indicating gastroepiploic artery aneurysm . In addition, multiple vacuoles were revealed in the medial muscle layer , which was characteristic of SAM [, ]. We diagnosed a gastroepiploic artery aneurysm caused by SAM, with intraperitoneal bleeding due to rupture of the aneurysm. This patient was therefore confirmed as having a very rare case of coexisting SSc with SRC and SAM.
From the first day of admission, she received the angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACE-I) enalapril at 5 mg/day, and maintenance hemodialysis was started. PSL was gradually reduced to 2.5 mg/day because of its increased risk of SRC. Her plasma aldosterone concentration decreased gradually (to 75.6 pg/ml on hospital day 45); however, the control of blood pressure was insufficient, and use of a combination of multiple antihypertensive drugs was required. Eventually, maintenance antihypertensive therapy included enalapril 5 mg/day, olmesartan 40 mg/day, and nifedipine 80 mg/day. Despite these treatments, her renal dysfunction did not improve at all. She was discharged on hospital day 57 and continued maintenance hemodialysis and blood pressure control thereafter. At the 1-year follow-up visit, she remained on dialysis, and her blood pressure was well-controlled with enalapril 2.5 mg/day and nifedipine 10 mg/day.