In July 2014, a 55-year-old Caucasian man with cervical and mediastinal polyadenopathies was diagnosed with a non-Hodgkin follicular lymphoma (WHO grade 2) in our institution . There was no clinical general symptom, and the disease stage was II. He had no specific personal or familial medical history. Because of the low malignancy grade and the low tumor mass, no treatment was introduced, and a monitoring was set up. In June 2015, because of increase in size of cervical adenopathies, therapy combining rituximab (375 mg/m2) and bendamustine (90 mg/m2) was initiated. Six monthly cycles were delivered, with good tolerance and complete metabolic response (PET-scan of October 2015), then followed by maintenance rituximab (375 mg/m2, 1 injection every 2 months) started in December 2015 and planned for 2 years .
In June 2016, before the fourth maintenance injection, the patient developed diarrhea alternating with constipation, nausea, associated with weight loss. Colonoscopy showed sigmoiditis, with a 4-mm-depth rectal ulceration at 20 cm of the anal canal , compatible with ulcerative colitis. Multiple biopsies were performed, and the provisional diagnosis of ulcerative colitis was retained before availability of pathological results. No fecal calprotectin measurement was done. Mesalazine therapy (2 g/day) was introduced in September 2016. Pathological analysis of the colic biopsies showed aspects of non-specific subacute colitis. However, the rectal biopsy showed a spindle-cell proliferation with high cell density. Cell atypia were moderate, the cytoplasm was scarce, and the nuclei were slightly dyscaryotic, with rare mitoses. There was no necrosis. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) revealed positive staining of cancer cells for CD34 and negative for CD117. The diagnosis of Kaposi’s sarcoma was suspected, and the samples were sent to our Department of Pathology for reviewing by expert pathologist within the French Sarcoma Network (Réseau de Référence en Pathologie des Sarcomes, RRePS). The diagnosis of rectal Kaposi’s sarcoma was confirmed in October 2016: there was an ill-defined, fasciculated to diffuse proliferation of spindle cells with little to moderate nuclear atypia and few mitoses, outlining vascular slots; IHC showed positive staining of tumor cells for CD31 and ERG endothelial markers and for HHV8, and negative staining for CD117, DOG1, and STAT6 . No cutaneous lesion was present. The patient stopped mesalazine after 1 month treatment because of relief of digestive symptoms and the diagnosis of ulcerative colitis was not finally retained because of pathological results Blood tests did not detect HHV-8 viremia, and the patient was serologically negative for HIV-1 and HIV-2, hepatitis B and C, and HTLV1 viruses. The circulating CD4+ T-cell count was 387/mm3.
Given the description in the literature of rituximab-induced Kaposi’s sarcoma in HIV-positive patients, rituximab was prematurely discontinued in October 2016 after the sixth maintenance injection. At this time, PET-scan showed neither suspect hypermetabolism of lymphomatous recurrence, nor digestive FDG uptake likely because of the disappearance of colitis after mesalazine treatment and the low proliferation rate of sarcoma. We noted only the appearance of lung lesions of infectious appearance without concomitant respiratory and infectious clinical symptoms . In December 2016, after complete disappearance of digestive symptoms, the patient underwent a colonoscopy, which was strictly normal without any sign of rectal Kaposi’s sarcoma or colitis. Because of the infectious images on the PET-scan, explorations were carried out with pneumocystis PCR, and CMV, HSV, and HTLV1 serologies. All these explorations remained negative, as well as a bronchoscopy. Of note, in July 2017, the colonoscopy was normal, notably at the rectal level. In October 2017, 12 months after the last dose of rituximab maintenance, our patient was still in complete remission of his lymphoma.