A 73-year-old man was diagnosed with a left adrenal mass that measured 14.8 × 11.2 × 9.8 cm following a contrast-enhanced abdomen/pelvis CT scan obtained to evaluate left back pain. He reported no flushing, sweating, palpitations, headache, weight changes, or proximal muscle weakness. Subsequent basic metabolic panel, renin and aldosterone, random plasma cortisol and low-dose dexamethasone (1 mg) suppression test, 17-hydroxyprogesterone, testosterone, deoxycorticosterone, androstenedione, adrenocorticotropic hormone, and plasma metanephrines were within normal limits; dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate level was mildly elevated to 474 µg/dL (age-adjusted normal: 31–296 µg/dL). 18 F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) scan revealed a large, markedly hypermetabolic necrotic left suprarenal mass of adrenal origin without other findings of metastatic disease.
He underwent a left robotic-assisted transperitoneal adrenalectomy without disruption of tumor capsule (Additional file ). The excised adrenal containing the encapsulated tumor measured 15.0 × 14.0 × 9.8 cm and weighed 1091 g. The tumor was located 0.2 cm beneath the intact capsule and replaced the entire adrenal gland with no viable adrenal parenchyma grossly identified. The tumor was sectioned once per every centimeter of tumor to ensure appropriate tissue representation. Surgical pathology revealed an oncocytic adrenal cortical tumor with diffuse architecture, necrosis, focal nuclear pleomorphism (high nuclear grade), capsular invasion, and proliferation rate by Ki67 of 10–15%. The tumor was negative for p53 immunostaining and beta-catenin was negative in terms of cytoplasmic staining. Surgical margins were negative for tumor and there was no evidence of vascular invasion and no increased mitotic index. The patient was discharged without complications on postoperative day 1. Adjuvant radiation therapy and adjuvant mitotane were considered but shared decision-making resulted in surveillance with CT scans and blood work every 3 months for at least 2 years. At 3 months postoperatively, CT scan was negative for recurrent disease.