A 28-year-old woman with spontaneous conception, was admitted to the University Hospital of Patras at 29 weeks of gestation due to fever, fatigue, pharyngitis, and cough. Several tests were performed, including nasopharyngeal swab for SARS-CoV-2, Influenza virus antigen and RSV antigen, which were negative. The maternal serum revealed elevated CRP (C-reactive protein) (7.18 mg/dl, normal values: < 0.5 mg/dl), as well as positive both CMV IgM and IgG with low IgG avidity test (< 10%). She was seronegative for both ΗΙV I&II, HSV and EBV. The woman was also seronegative for CMV through the first and second trimester. Maternal whole blood test was also strongly positive for CMV DNA (40,917 iu/mL, positive > 178 iu/mL) by real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Serological immune control tests were not indicative of autoimmune disorder (ANA, p-ANCA, ASMA, RF, complement system and control for the major immunoglobulin classes). The upper abdominal ultrasound showed splenomegaly, whereas the obstetric ultrasonography did not show any fetal abnormalities.
During the first 5 days of hospitalization the patient was under observation, according to the suggestions of the infectious disease department and she was in good clinical condition. On the 6th day, the patient experienced acute chest pain and shortness of breath. She underwent a chest x-ray, which revealed a reticular pattern indicative of pneumonia. Bronco-alveolar lavage fluid was negative for bacterial superinfection. Therefore, oxygen, prophylactic anticoagulant injection, and broad spectrum antibiotics were administered (intravenous piperacillin/tazobactam) due to a further increase of inflammatory markers, CRP (15.5 mg/dl).
However, on the 10th day she developed progressive dyspnea, fever, and shallow breathing. She underwent a chest CT (computed tomography), which revealed infiltration of both lungs . Her clinical condition deteriorated with increasing oxygen needs and respiratory failure (acute respiratory distress syndrome), so intubation was needed, and a preterm emergency cesarean section was performed at 30 weeks of gestation.
Postnatally, the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU), where she remained for 10 days and received intravenous ganciclovir (450 mg/12 h) and subsequently to the postnatal ward for another 10 days under same therapeutic scheme, after which she was discharged in a good clinical condition. She was discharged with already two negative consecutive PCR CMV DNA tests (< 178 iu/mL). Overall, ganciclovir was administered to this patient for 20 days. Meanwhile, glucocorticoids were not used during her hospitalization. The male new-born weighed 1700 gr and had an Apgar score of 6/10 at 1st min. He was intubated at 5th minute, as he experienced neonatal respiratory distress syndrome and consequently was admitted to the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit. The newborn was not given antiviral agent. In admission to NICU and three times during his hospitalization CMV DNA test were sent and come back negative. (CMV DNA test through RT-PCR in both blood and urine test < 178 iu/mL). After 62 days he was discharged without any clinical signs or blood test revealing CMV infection.