A 72-year-old Greek male patient, which had undergone transurethral resection of prostate 14 years ago, was followed up with contrast enhanced computed tomography (CECT), which revealed a 4.5 × 4 cm macrocystic lesion in the tail of the pancreas. The patient complained for vague postprandial abdominal pain. Physical examination was not contributory. Ultrasonography (US) revealed a 4.5 × 4 cm hypoechoic lesion in the tail of the pancreas as well as cholelithiasis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) also revealed a 4.5 × 4 cm macrocystic lesion in the tail of the pancreas. In addition, computed tomography-angiography (CTA) showed that the tumor distorted and compressed the splenic vessels . The level of serum CEA and CA19-9 were within the normal range. Preoperative evaluation led to the possible diagnosis of mucinous cystic neoplasm of the pancreas. The patient was subjected to laparoscopy. Intraoperatively a cystic mass of approximately 4.5 cm in diameter was found in the tail of the pancreas in addition to atrophy of the adjacent parenchyma. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy and distal splenopancreatectomy was performed. Postoperative recovery of the patient was uneventful, while the drainage was removed and the patient stepped out on the second and fourth postoperative day respectively.
Despite the preoperative diagnosis of mucinous cystadenoma the histology was consistent with a pancreatic pseudocyst, which was subsequenced to moderately differentiated ductal adenocarcinoma. Resection margins were negative, as well as perineural invasion was not present and no metastasis was found in eight peripancreatic resected lymph nodes.
Patient underwent adjuvant chemotherapy, with gemcitabine 1000 mg/m2 weekly for 3 weeks followed by a rest week, and for 6 cycles. He tolerated treatment well without side effects. The patient was followed up with US, abdominal CECT and chest X-ray after 6 months. The level of CA19-9 was determined one month after surgery and then every 3 months and it was within the normal range. The patient remains asymptomatic 6 months after the operation.
The patient was placed in supine position with his legs apart. A gastric tube and a bladder catheter were inserted. The monitors were placed over the left and right shoulders of the patient. A Veress needle was inserted under the umbilicus to induce pneumoperitoneum. The intra-abdominal pressure was monitored and maintained at around 12 mmHg. A 10 mm camera port was inserted in the umbilical position. A 10 mm port was placed in the subxiphoid area. Another two 5 mm trocars were placed, one near the midclavicular line (in the right subcostal area), and another on the anterior axillar line. The operating table allowed changing the patient's position easily: a slight (35°) anti-Trendelenburg tilt was obtained. We used a 10 mm 30-degree telescope for visualization. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy was initially performed. Subsequently the operating table was rotated about 30° to the right. The surgeon stood between the legs of the patient, while the first and second assistants, respectively, stood on the left and right of the operating surgeon. The scrub nurse was on the right side of the operating surgeon. A 12 mm port, through which the stapler could be introduced, was inserted in the left upper quadrant. The operating surgeon used the instruments placed in the right subcostal area and in the left side. The pancreas was explored through the infragastric access. Using an atraumatic grasper introduced through the subxiphoid trocar, the assistant grasped the stomach at the great curvature and raised it. The operating surgeon used an ultrasound dissector to mobilize the splenic flexure. All suspensory ligaments of the spleen were divided, including the short gastric vessels. The gastrocolic omentum was divided, preserving the gastroepiploic artery. Thus, a window was opened in the gastrocolic ligament, below the gastroepiploic arch. The lesser sac was entered and the window was then enlarged to expose the pancreas. The peritoneum overlying the inferior border of the pancreas was incised, and via this largely avascular plane of dissection the lower border of the pancreas was elevated, allowing for retroperitoneal pancreatic access. A linear cutter stapling device [ENDOPATH®, ETS Flex 45 Endoscopic Articulating Linear 45 mm staple line, 2.5 mm Staple Leg Length (Vascular/Thin) 45 mm Vascular/Thin, Johnson & Johnson, USA] was then placed across the pancreas at the selected resection line (the middle of body). The splenic vein and artery were deeply embedded within the parenchyma of the pancreas. The splenic vessels were dissected en bloc together with the parenchyma, using 2 mechanical stapler fires . Additionally, an endoscopic clip was applied to the splenic artery at the level of transection of the pancreas. Once the pancreatic remnant was dissected, the spleen was mobilized by sectioning any remaining attachments. The specimen was removed using a gel-port through an incision in the left upper quadrant . A Jackson-Pratt drain was placed in the bed of the pancreatic dissection and drawn out through the 5-mm port site on the anterior axillar line. It was removed on the second day postoperatively, once it was determined that there was no pancreatic fluid leak.