A 17 year-old male was diagnosed with metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinoma and started on chemotherapy with Oxaliplatin and Gemcitabine. He received the first two courses without any complications. The chemotherapy schedule was then modified to include FOLFIRINOX, on the basis of published data regarding the superiority of this drug combination compared to gemcitabine for the treatment of advanced pancreatic carcinoma . He then received oxaliplatin, 85 mg/m2, followed by leucovorin, 400 mg/ m2, irinotecan, 180 mg/ m2 and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) at a dose of 400 mg/m2 by intravenous bolus, followed by a continuous intravenous infusion of 2400 mg/m2 over a 46-hour period. Approximately 4 h after the start of the first 5-FU infusion, the patient experienced vomiting and chest pain as well as an altered level of consciousness with extreme agitation. Progressive diuresis contraction was also recorded. Vital signs were: blood pressure 112/87 mmHg, heart rate 134/min and regular. Brain and thorax CT scans and abdominal x-ray were normal. Monitoring of vital signs revealed a progressive decrease of blood pressure down to 90/50 mmHg. Echocardiography showed severe and diffuse LV hypokinesis with an ejection fraction of 20 %. Moderate right ventricular hypokinesis and a 20 × 16 mm thrombus in the right atrium were also revealed (Additional file : Clip 1). Plasma level of B-type natriuretic peptide was 800 pg/ml (normal value 0–100), while creatine kinase-MB, myoglobin and troponin levels were normal. Seventy-two hours later troponin and myoglobin levels rose to 0.16 ng/ml and 356 ng/ml respectively (normal values 0-0.10 and 0–170 respectively).
The patient was then transferred to the intensive care unit and placed on mechanical ventilation. Treatment with milrinone 0.75 mcg/kg/min, dopamine 12 mcg/kg/min, and epinephrine 0.05 mcg/kg/min was started together with anticoagulation based on heparin 20 UI/kg/h. Twenty-four hours later echocardiography showed no improvement in LV systolic and diastolic function. Levosimendan 0.1 mcg/kg/min and norepinephrine 0.06 mcg/kg/min were added while dosage of milrinone was decreased to 0.5 mcg/kg/min. Dobutamine and fenoldopam were also used. Vital signs improved slowly and echocardiography showed a progressive improvement in ventricular systolic and diastolic function (Additional file : Clip 2) with complete recovery after 14 days (Additional file : Clip 3). Under anticoagulation with low molecular weight heparin, the right atrial thrombus disappeared after 3 months. The final diagnosis was: reversible cardiomyopathy induced by 5-FU. Consequently, the chemotherapy schedule was modified and 5-FU administration excluded.