A 21-year-old Chinese man was diagnosed in June 2002 with muscular dystrophy. His genetic test and muscle biopsy revealed a diagnosis of DMD. The data of that time are no longer accessible due to distance in time.
A ten-day period of intermittent fever occurred in October 2018, when he was 18 years old. During the past 2 years, he suffered from liver disease, suspected brucella infection, and obesity. One year later, he fell ill with sepsis. Despite the fact that fevers had a fairly clear cause of infection, DMD had no concomitant symptoms except weakness of the lower limbs. Accordingly, systematic treatment hadn't been applied. At admission, the body temperature was 38°C, the heart rate was 90 beats/min, blood pressure was 110/72 mmHg, and breathing was 20 beats/min. Laboratory findings are as followed: creatine kinase (CK) 664 U/L, creatine kinase isoenzymes (CK-MB) 35.9 U/L, C-reaction protein (CRP) 29.66 mg/L, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 273 U/L, α-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase (αHBDH) 190 U/L, mycoplasma antibody: 1:160 positive. This patient was discharged after undergoing effective antiviral therapy (ganciclovir 0.25 g iv. Bid), mannatide (20 mg iv. Qd2) and creatine phosphate sodium (1g iv. Qd2). Because he did not have heart symptoms at that time, he did not have cardiac echocardiography test.
He was admitted to the hospital with a high fever and numerous joint pains throughout his body for 4 days, with a temperature of up to 39°C in January 2020. At admission, his body temperature was 36.8°C, his heart rate was 84 beats per min, his blood pressure was 126/69 mmHg, and he was unable to walk upright. He is 175 cm tall and weighs 97 kg. His BMI is 31.67 kg/m2, which is overweight. Laboratory findings are as followed: CK 514U/L, CRP 43.41 mg/L, Interleukin-4 (IL-4) 3.42 pg/ml, IL-6 10.17 pg/ml, IL-10 8.13 pg/ml, tumor necrosis factor-α(TNF-α) 3.16 pg/ml. CT scan of the lungs revealed a small amount of inflammation in the left lower lobe and in the right lower lobe. After anti-infection treatment, he was discharged. After half a year, he was hospitalized again for a fever and muscle pain. Laboratory findings are as followed: CK 411 U/L, CK-MB 7.40 ng/ml, troponin I (Tn I) 0.067 ng/ml, N-terminal pro-B type natriuretic peptide (NT-pro BNP) 1250.0 pg/ml, CRP 45.67 mg/L, LDH 257U/L, mycoplasma antibody: positive. The lung CT was similar to the last one. In the abdominal CT, it was found that the patient had fatty liver, multiple enlarged lymph nodes around the abdominal aorta, and less muscle density on both sides of his back and buttocks, which should consider the possibility of fat infiltration. During echocardiography , the left ventricular ejection fraction (EF) was 39%, and left ventricle were enlarged (left ventricle endomesosomal diameter was 63 mm), abnormal ventricular movement, decreased left ventricular systolic and diastolic function, weak mitral regurgitation and trace pericardial effusion. The ECG showed sinus rhythm, a normal ECG. This time his cardiac function was level III and was placed on hormone therapy. He was discharged when his condition improved.
In order to test if his heart disease was related to DMD, he and his family had another genetic test 2 months later. The results of sequencing suggested a nonsense mutation (c.1207G > T) in the exon eleven region of the DMD (Muscular dustrophy, Duchenne) gene, encoding amino acid p.G403X (guanine > thymine). It was found that neither his parents nor his sister carried heterozygous variation of this locus, and neither of them exhibited any clinical signs of muscular dystrophy .
In April 2021, again, he suffered from a fever and aching muscles. However, his heart function deteriorated. ECG showed left anterior branch block. The echocardiography revealed EF 29%, left atrial and left ventricle enlargement (left ventricular endomesosomal diameter 63 mm), reduced ventricular wall pulsation diffusion, decreased left ventricular systolic and diastolic function, and trace pericardial effusion. Diuretics, nitrates, and beta blockers are taken orally following discharge. His heart function was Grade III at that time. The hormone dose was reduced because his fever was controlled. Hormone should not be stopped immediately and should be reduced gradually. Even though he had another fever 8 months later, his heart function improved significantly, with his EF reaching 42%. The lung CT shows atrophy of the chest and back muscles and an increase in fat. His medication regimen was changed to oral beta blockers, coenzyme Q10, and hormones.
Palpitations began in June 2022, becoming more frequent over the following month. He developed acute myocardial injury. A rise of 0.18 ng/mL in TnI, a normal creatine kinase level, and 44% in EF were observed. The myocardial injury was persistent and troponin did not increase or decrease significantly. 24-h Holter electrocardiography showed a mean heart rate of 86 BPM, occasional premature ventricular contractions in pairs (673), occasional premature atrial contractions, and paroxysmal atrial tachycardia (total > 100 BPM, 283, maximum 6 min) . To treat the condition, the oral drugs were adjusted as hormone (in reduction), coenzyme Q10, trimetazidine and ARNI. Afterwards, the patient improved, and he was discharged .