A 63-year-old man was referred to our hospital due to miosis, ptosis, hypohidrosis of his left side, polydipsia and polyuria. Computed tomography (CT) showed multiple lesions involving the pituitary gland, the apex of the left lung (Figure A), and the left adrenal gland (Figure B). 18F-fluorodeoxy glucose positron emission tomography / CT (18F-FDG PET/CT) imaging indicated high 18F-FDG uptake in the pituitary gland, bilateral adrenal glands and the lesion at the apex of his left lung (Figure C-F). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed an enhanced suprasellar lesion (φ13 mm) and thickening of the pituitary stalk (Figure G,H). Surgical biopsy of the pituitary lesion showed that the pituitary gland was almost completely replaced by large abnormal lymphocytes (Figure A,B), which were positive for B-cell markers (CD20) (Figure C), but negative for T-cell markers (CD3) (Figure D).
Laboratory data on admission are shown in Table . Mild anemia and slight elevation of lactate dehydrogenase were seen, and soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sIL-2R) levels were within the normal range. Bone marrow aspiration and cerebrospinal fluid examination were negative for the presence of lymphoma cells. Basal levels of growth hormone (GH), luteinizing hormone (LH), follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), plasma adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), serum cortisol, thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), free thyroxine (f-T4), testosterone, dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) and aldosterone were low, and endocrine function tests revealed hypo-responsiveness to stimulation, indicating panhypopituitarism and adrenal insufficiency (Table ). As the patient had polydipsia and polyuria (intake and urine volume approximately 5 liters / 24 hours)) with excessive thirst, and further testing showed low urinary osmolality and low antidiuretic hormone compared with serum osmolality (Table ), the diagnosis of diabetes insipidus could not be excluded. The overall condition of the patient did not allow a deprivation test.
Based on these data, the patient was diagnosed with DLBCL with pituitary and adrenal involvement. Hormone replacement therapy was initiated with thyroxine (25 μg/day), desmopressin (5 μg/day), and hydrocortisone (30–40 mg/day). Since his international prognostic index was consistent with poor prognosis, we performed six cycles of chemotherapy with rituximab (375 mg/m2, day 1), cyclophosphamide (750 mg/m2, day 2), vincristine (1.4 mg/m2, max 2 mg/body, day 2), doxorubicin (50 mg/m2, day 2) and prednisolone (100 mg/body/day, day 1–5) (R-CHOP) followed by planned autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (auto-HSCT). To prevent infiltration of DLBCL into the central nervous system, two cycles of intravenous high-dose methotrexate (3.5 g/m2/day, day 1) therapy (HD-MTX) and two cycles of intrathecal injection of MTX (15 mg/body), cytarabine (40 mg/body), and dexamethasone (3.3 mg/body) were performed (Figure ). Following administration of these chemotherapies, the pituitary and bilateral adrenal lesions disappeared on MRI, CT, and 18F-FDG PET/CT. Although the lung lesion remained on CT scan, no significant 18F-FDG uptake was shown in PET/CT, so the lung lesion was considered as not viable. The level of sIL-2R had been within reference range during the chemotherapy (Figure ).
The results of endocrine function tests before and after chemotherapy are shown in Figure . Panels A-F show the results of corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), and the LH-releasing hormone (LHRH) loading test. These 3 loading tests were combined and performed at the same time. Secretion of LH, FSH, TSH, and ACTH were severely suppressed at the time of diagnosis, but dramatically improved after the completion of chemotherapy (Figure A,B,D,E), and the basal ACTH level improved to the upper limit of the reference range, according to the reduction of hydrocortisone.
Although the basal and stimulated values of PRL were within the reference range before treatment, a decrease in the basal level and an increase in the peak level were found after successful treatment of the lymphoma, suggesting resolution of hypothalamic compression (Figure C). This notion was supported by results for head MRI, showing disappearance of the suprasellar region projecting to the hypothalamus after treatment of the lymphoma (Figure I and J). As shown in Figure F and
G, the impairment of cortisol secretion was explained by the functional defects in the pituitary gland. After chemotherapy, improvement in cortisol secretion indicated recovery from secondary hypoadrenalism. Considering the involvement of DLBCL in bilateral adrenal glands, a possibility of primary hypoadrenalism cannot be excluded. Nonetheless, the successful treatments lead to the recovery of adrenal insufficiency. Figure H shows the results of the GH releasing protein-2 (GHRP-2) loading test; the deficit in secretion of GH persisted after chemotherapy. As the treatment progressed, the symptoms of diabetes insipidus decreased, and the desmopressin dose was gradually decreased to 1.25 μg/day, and then, the requirement of hydrocortisone was also decreased to 7.5 mg/day (Figure ). Under this replacement regimen, basal hormone levels of cortisol, TSH and f-T4 improved to 15.8 μg/dl, 0.43 μU/ml and 0.94 ng/dl respectively. The basal level of testosterone was not improved (0.02 ng/ml). The basal level of testosterone was not improved, so testosterone replacement therapy will be initiated with the next follow-up visits.