We present a case of a 16-year-old boy who was referred to our hospital because of palpitations triggered by exercise. Besides occasional lightheadedness, he never experienced symptoms such as syncope or angina. He denied using recreational or homeopathic drugs, energy drinks, or dietary supplements. On physical examination, his pulse was irregular with a heart rate of approximately 120 b.p.m., blood pressure of 127/63 mmHg, and oxygen saturation of 100%. Cardiac auscultation was normal and edema was absent.
Electrocardiographically, sinus bradycardia was interrupted by multifocal atrial tachycardias (ATs) with variable ventricular rates (123–240 b.p.m., ). Sporadic AV block occurred at high rates. P-wave amplitudes were strikingly reduced. QRS width and morphology were normal; T waves were inverted in the right precordial leads. Laboratory investigation showed normal electrolytes, high-sensitivity troponin T, thyroid-stimulating hormone, and C-reactive protein. N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-pro-BNP) levels were slightly elevated, 38.5 (>35) pmol/L. Serology for Borrelia burgdorferi was negative. On transthoracic echocardiography, the left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction (EF) was 55% (fractional shortening 28%) with normal right ventricular (RV) function and no valvular abnormalities. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a larger RV than LV volume (98 and 89 mL/m2, respectively) with a slightly reduced right ventricular ejection fraction (RVEF) of 44%. No late gadolinium enhancement was noted.
The tentative diagnosis of multifocal ATs with variable AV conduction was established. An electrophysiological study (EPS) was conducted after shared decision-making with the patient and his parents. Normal His-ventricular (HV) interval (40 ms) and sinus-node recovery times were noted. Extremely low voltages (<0.15 mV) were observed in a large portion of the right atrium (RA) and the coronary sinus . Three focal ATs were targeted in the RA free wall and at the lateral aspect of the tricuspid annulus. Because of the persistent inducibility of different ATs, flecainide (after a negative ajmaline provocation) and verapamil were initiated, successfully suppressing the arrhythmogenic foci. An implantable loop recorder was implanted before discharge. Panel-based screening of genes involved in cardiomyopathy or congenital heart disease, including SCN5A, titin (TTN), and filamin C (FLNC), did not yield a (likely) pathogenic mutation.
Over a 5-year period, a persistent bradycardia of 45 b.p.m. with complete right-bundle branch block, delayed RV activation, and T-wave inversions occurred despite cessation of flecainide . Progressive RA/RV dilatation [right ventricular end-diastolic volume (RV EDV)/body surface area (BSA) 222 mL/m2], akinesia and hyperenhancement of the basal/mid RV free wall, fatty infiltration, and impaired RV function (EF unchanged with 44% but grade 3–4 tricuspid regurgitation) became apparent on MRI . Aneurysms and shunting were absent. The LV, with LV EDV/BSA 115 mL/m2 and EF 53%, had delineated mid-wall fibrosis in the basal LV inferolateral segment. RV myocardial biopsies showed hypertrophy with dominant interstitial and replacement fibrosis. Atrial contractions were absent during tissue-Doppler measurements ; hence, apixaban was given. Repeat EPS revealed progressive low voltages in the entire RA and failure of capture at physiological thresholds, indicative of atrial standstill. The HV interval was 90 ms with a fragmented His potential . CT excluded anomalous or obstructed coronary arteries. According to the modified arrhythmogenic RV cardiomyopathy/dysplasia (ARVC/D) task force criteria of Marcus et al., these findings were consistent with arrhythmogenic RV cardiomyopathy (ARVC).
The patient developed shortness of breath [New York Heart Association (NYHA) II] and significant fatigue. LVEF on echocardiography was 45%. Volume overload required treatment with bumetanide 2 mg b.i.d. Heart failure medication eplerenone, bisoprolol, and empagliflozine was started. Valsartan/sacubitril at a low dose resulted in symptomatic hypotension without any improvement in dyspnea and fatigue and was stopped. Later that year, the patient experienced syncope during an 8 s arrest recorded on the loop recorder . A dual-chamber pacemaker implantation was planned, but no adequate atrial position could be found. Acceptable pace/sense thresholds were ultimately obtained with His-bundle pacing . Recently, the general condition is slowly deteriorating, and non-sustained ventricular tachycardias were noted. VO2 max was 18 mL/min/kg (37% of predicted). Referral for heart transplantation is postponed based on the patient’s explicit wish.
Familial WES was performed in the patient and his parents, revealing a hemizygote missense variant [NM_005681.4: c.407T>C, p.(Ile136Thr); variant of unknown significance] in the TAF1A gene. This amino acid is strongly conserved across vertebrate species, has not been previously reported in the literature, and was only found once in the 250 710 alleles in gnomAD . In addition, a 1.62 Mb sized deletion was identified on chromosomal region 1p36.33, which contains the TAF1A gene. This loss-copy number variant was transmitted through the father, whereas the proband inherited the missense variant from his mother (, both with normal cardiac phenotypes). According to these genotype–phenotype relations, we conclude that this progressive AV electrical, mechanical, and structural cardiomyopathy is based on defective ribosome biogenesis owing to the compound heterozygosity of genetic variants in TAF1A.