A 56-YEAR-OLD WOMAN with type 2 diabetes mellitus and depression was admitted to the emergency department after injecting herself with 1,800 units each of insulin aspart and insulin degludec. She also overdosed on 2 weeks of anti-anxiety and other medication (zolpidem, brotizolam, flunitrazepam, clonazepam, and trazodone). When the patient arrived at the hospital, she was in a coma with a score of 3 (E1V1M1) on the Glasgow Coma Scale and had sinking tongue root. Multiple needle injection scars were noted on her lower abdomen. We administered 20% glucose i.v. and started a continuous 50% glucose infusion because her blood glucose level was 30 mg/dL. As her consciousness did not improve with the amelioration of hypoglycemia, she was intubated and transferred to the intensive care unit.
We used the STG-55 artificial pancreas to control blood glucose levels because difficulties were associated with predicting the duration and degree of hypoglycemia. The target blood glucose level was set at 120 mg/dL, and, thus, 1,000 mU/mL human insulin and 20% glucose were prepared. We gave 50 mEq potassium i.v. per day and checked potassium every 2 h, because insulin overdose is a risk for low potassium. Sulbactam/ampicillin were given simultaneously because she developed aspiration pneumonia.
Transient hyperglycemia was initially observed and attributed to the treatment with glucose in the emergency department. The artificial pancreas did not inject insulin consistently, and only injected 20% glucose when necessary. When blood glucose levels were controlled at nearly target levels, the i.v. administration of 50% glucose was tapered. Eight hours after the artificial pancreas used, we reduced the number of measurements to twice per day because potassium levels were not changed significantly. Tube feeding was started at 480 kcal/day on day 3 and was increased to 960 kcal/day on day 4. On the same day, the mechanical ventilator was removed and the patient was extubated because the course of aspiration pneumonia improved. We removed STG-55, started the ingestion of food, and controlled blood glucose levels using an insulin sliding scale on day 5. She was transferred to the psychiatric ward on day 6 following the discontinuation of the i.v. administration of 50% glucose. The patient was discharged without any complications on day 7. STG-55 was used for 96 h and 21 min, the total amount of insulin given was 80.20 units, and the total amount of glucose injected by STG-55 was 539.217 g. Her average blood glucose level was 116.6 mg/dL. Figure shows the course of blood glucose levels, the insulin injection ratio, and glucose injection ratio.