A 12-year-old girl with KOS (weight 30 kg, height 140 cm) was scheduled for a pectus excavatum repair for cosmetic reasons. She has a family history of KOS. She was born at 30 weeks gestation with a birth weight of 1546 g, and had been kept in a neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) for 4 months. During her NICU stay, she presented with respiratory failure from her thoracic configuration and required mechanical ventilation. She underwent a tracheostomy at 3 months and a gastrostomy for feeding at 3 years. At 6 years of age, the tracheostomy was closed and the gastrostomy tube was removed. These procedures were all uneventful.
She had no physical symptoms and complications associated with the prior tracheostomy. Several craniofaciocervical features were noted such as frontal bossing, depressed nasal bridge, full cheeks, anteverted nares, protruding philtrum, micrognathia. and short webbed neck. Although she had mental retardation, she was able to follow simple instructions given by us and make simple conversation. She did not have symptoms such as dyspnea, fatigue, or precordial pain after exercise despite remarkable chest wall asymmetry . Sternocostal elevation was scheduled for pectus excavatum.
Anesthesia was planned as a combination of general and epidural anesthesia. With no premedication, general anesthesia was induced with 8 % sevoflurane with 6 L/min O2 via a facemask. Snoring occurred during a slow inhalation induction. The endotracheal tube (φ5.5 cm) was easily inserted. Under general anesthesia, an epidural catheter was inserted via the T7–T8 intervertebral space without any difficulty. General anesthesia was maintained with 2% sevoflurane, remifentanil, and rocuronium. Local anesthetics (0.25% levobupivacaine and 0.2% ropivacaine) were administered from the epidural catheter, a total of 29 ml of levobupivacaine was administered intermittently during operation. Epidural patient-controlled analgesia was initiated with 5 ml/h of 0.2% ropivacaine, with a 3 ml bolus dose and 30-min lockout time. The volume of 0.2% ropivacaine injected during operation was 18 ml.
Her sternocostal elevation was initiated with a median vertical incision. Pediatric surgeons resected parts of her costal cartilages (3rd to 8th on the right; 2nd to 8th on the left), adjusted them to appropriate lengths, and reattached them to the sternum. Then, the lower part of the sternum was resected. The surgery was uneventful and lasted 4 h 40 min. Blood loss was 202 ml.
We measured her spontaneous breathing pattern, while keeping a sufficient depth of anesthesia (2% sevoflurane and 0.7 μg/kg/h dexmedetomidine). At the end of surgery, we used 60 mg sugammadex to reverse the neuromuscular block. She presented with respiratory rate of 20 breaths/min, tidal volume of 200 ml, and end tidal CO2 of 43 mmHg. Her respiratory status was stable. Before extubation, we performed a bronchoscope to confirm edema and/or stenosis in the pharyngolaryngeal region. Bronchoscopic examination did not show pharyngolaryngeal edema and stenosis.
Tracheal extubation was performed 30 min after administering 0.7 μg/kg/h dexmedetomidine. Bronchoscopy was performed soon after extubation to evaluate vocal cords and detect laryngomalacia. Dexmedetomidine was continued for sedation and analgesia during bronchoscopic examination. The movement of the vocal cords and larynx was normal; a floppy epiglottis was not observed. She was then transferred to the ward. The anesthesia time was 6 h 25 min. Her post-operative recovery was uneventful. She was discharged on the 9th day after her surgery.