A 62-year-old female patient presented at our hospital with pain in the left lateral keen and an acute foot drop. She had had a traffic accident 12 days before and received neurotrophic drug treatment (Methylcobalamin 1500 μg, intramuscular, daily). The patient had no history of lumbar disc disease. Physical examination showed complete foot dorsiflexion in the left ankle. Neurologic examination revealed numbness on the contiguous side of the first and second toes. Tinel’s sign was positive at the level of the proximal fibular head. Ankle dorsiflexion and large toe extension showed severe weakness (Medical Research Council (MRC) rating scale grade 2). Ecchymoses were seen in the left lateral of knee and calf . She did not receive magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) because of her cardiac pacemaker and was not examined by ultrasound because no superficial mass was detected. Electromyography (EMG) showed a deep left peroneal nerve axonal neuropathy, decreased nerve conduction velocity, motor amplitude, and denervation potential in the extensor hallucis longus (EHL) and tibialis anterior muscle (TA) . X-ray and computed tomography (CT) revealed no fractures . Laboratory studies revealed routine blood test results and tumor markers, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein was within the normal range.
We explored the common fibular nerve surgically. The common fibular nerve was identified and was traced to its bifurcation. The deep peroneal nerve was swollen. A fusiform cystic mass was located within the epineurium . The cyst was found to track along the deep branches of the peroneal nerve . A longitudinal incision was made on the cystic wall, mucoid material was evacuated from the cystic mass , and part of the cystic wall and synovium were removed. The articular branch was not found. The surgical procedure was carried out with surgical loupes. Pathology showed a cystic wall structure with mucoid material, blood vessel scar fibrotic tissue, and neural tissue proliferation. From the operation and pathology report, the diagnosis was intraneural ganglion cyst with tissue hemorrhage and hydrosarca . The patient was kept non-weight bearing for one month postoperatively with physiotherapy. She reported the return of sensation to the first and second toes three months after surgery and achieved a significant recovery. EMG investigations showed that the nerve conduction velocity improved three months later, the motor amplitude and denervation potential in the extensor hallucis longus (EHL) and tibialis anterior muscles improved. The muscle strength was fully restored relative to the contralateral leg. The patient was asymptomatic and able to return to her normal activities at one-year follow-up.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. Ethical approval was given by the medical ethics committee of the First Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University.