A seven-year-old Kurdish girl from northern Iraq presented to our hospital with fever, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting and diarrhea for one week duration, followed by fresh bleeding per rectum after 10 days from her illness for three days before her admission. She had history of neither chronic medical disease nor surgical operation. Her physical examination on admission revealed the following: pallor, BP = 80/50 mmhg, PR = 97 b/m, rapid respiration (shock state), temperature = 40.2 ˚C. Her abdominal examination revealed mild splenomegaly with diffuse abdominal tenderness mainly in the right lower quadrant. Blood profile showed a hemoglobulin of 7.1 g/dl, white blood cell of 4500/ml, and agglutinations for O. salmonella antigens at 1:160. Culture from our patient grew Salmonella typhi. An abdominal ultrasound of our patient revealed splenomegaly.
Once she was admitted to our hospital's emergency department, supportive measures were performed on her, including intravenous line, blood transfusion (five pints) and the administration of broad spectrum antibiotics in the form of third generation cephalosporin (Ceftriaxone) 1 gm daily. An urgent colonoscopy was arranged for our patient, which showed that her colon was full of fresh blood. After suction and irrigation the terminal ileum of our patient was intubated, which revealed multiple variable size punched-out ileal ulcers up to 25 cm from the ileocecal valve, as well as ulceration of the ileal mucosa with characteristic dilated aberrant submucosal vessel that erodes the overlying epithelium.
In the absence of a primary ulcer, Dieulafoy's lesion was seen in the terminal ileum with oozing hemorrhage from this lesion 10 cm away from the ileocecal valve . The bleeding could not be controlled by endoscopic hemostasis using thermal coagulation or any other endoscopic intervention. A decision was made accordingly for urgent explorative laparotomy to save her life. An ileocolectomy (emergency limited segmental resection for a known bleeding source) was also done on our patient . Histology revealed this to be of the Dieulafoy type of lesion in the distal ileum .
Our patient had a very smooth post-operative course. Her hematochezia disappeared the next day and she was discharged in good health within eight days. One month later, she was completely asymptomatic. The biopsy specimen of the distal 25 cm of her ileum located 20 cm from her right colon had numerous irregular punched out-ulcers, extensive inflammation, and focal suppuration infiltrating mucosa and submucosa.
Macroscopic examination revealed a vascular malformation with a visible clot within. Microscopy revealed a lesion comprising of thick-walled arteries and veins representing an arteriovenous malformation (AVM). A degree of thrombosis and recanalization was also observed. The appearances were those of an AVM of the Dieulafoy type. Ulcers were also revealed, and some of them were deep. Mixed inflammatory cell infiltrate predominated the ulcers without caseous necrosis. The mesenteric lymph nodes of our patient revealed reactive sinus hyperplasia .