The patient, a 29-year-old man employed as a machine operator in a Suzhou printing and dyeing factory in Jiangsu Province, China, experienced respiratory symptoms between April and May 2022 due to exposure to alkali steam from a malfunctioning machine. During the approximately one-hour repair process, he wore a standard disposable mask while working in a confined space of approximately 10 m2 filled with alkali steam. Subsequently, he developed symptoms including chest tightness and coughing. Antibacterial infective and steroid therapies were used as the first line of treatment at a nearby Suzhou hospital for a suspected pulmonary infection, but they only provided a temporary relief from his symptoms. By July 25, 2022, the patient had visited multiple hospitals in Suzhou due to recurrent fever, cough, tightness in the chest, and dyspnea. His history of exposure to printing and dyeing auxiliaries, combined with the lack of other significant medical history, led physicians to consider a diagnosis of chemical pneumonitis. He was directed to a hospital specializing in occupational diseases in Suzhou for further evaluation. On July 26, he consulted the outpatient clinic of occupational diseases at our hospital. Multifocal nodular opacities, patchy regions, and honeycombing were seen on the high-resolution chest CT (HRCT) scans, mostly in the upper lung lobes. These regions showed heterogeneous densities, some dense foci with lucencies, and bronchial images (as shown in ). The outpatient physician recommended further diagnostic investigations and symptomatic treatment, which the patient initially declined. But on August 13, he showed up at our hospital’s emergency room because his symptoms were getting worse, he felt more difficulty breathing and needed oxygen. He was admitted for a thorough examination and treatment.
His vital signs showed a temperature of 36.2 °C, pulse rate of 82 beats per min, respiratory rate of 21 breaths per min, blood pressure of 123/72 mmHg, and SpO2 at 96%. The results from the laboratory tests showed that the patient had a white blood cell count of 1.11×109 /L, red blood cell count of 4.13×1012 /L, hemoglobin level of 128 g/L, platelet count of 139×109 /L, direct lymphocyte count of 0.36×109 /L, albumin level of 27.1 g/L, Hypersensitive C-reactive protein (HsCRP) 25.9 mg/L. The arterial blood gas analysis showed a pH of 7.426, PCO2 of 36.6 mmHg, PO2 of 91.5 mmHg, lactate of 2.5 mmol/L, and a PF Index of 223.24 mmHg. The patient denied a history of tuberculosis and denied alcohol consumption or smoking. Initially, we considered that this was a common pulmonary bacterial infection and administered antibiotics for anti-infection treatment and other symptomatic treatment. We continued to complete the other further examinations. When the patient’s HIV antibody screening results were positive on the third day, we asked a specialist for consultation and reexamined the blood results. The patient admitted to being homosexual, and his weight dropped at least 10 kg and and had recurrent fever in the past half year. The result of the consultation was to transfer the patient to the infection department for further treatment and to review some examinations. After the transfer, on the fourth day of hospitalization, the patient’s examination results revealed a white blood cell count of 7.37×109 /L, red blood cell count of 4.14×1012 /L, hemoglobin level of 130 g/L, platelet count of 141×109 /L, direct lymphocyte count of 0.30×109 /L, albumin level of 28.5 g/L, T-lymphocyte percentage of 57.8%, CD4+ T-cell percentage of 3.97%, CD8+ T-cell percentage of 51.1%, and a CD4+/CD8+ ratio of 0.08. The arterial blood gas analysis showed a pH of 7.427, PCO2 of 38.2 mmHg, PO2 of 87.0 mmHg, lactate of 3.0 mmol/L, and a PF Index of 142.70 mmHg. The results of the tests for anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA), autoimmune antibodies, and T-cell test for tuberculosis infection were negative, TORCH test showed negative for IgM antibody. The combination test for HIV antigen and antibody was positive. A repeat HRCT scan revealed uneven lung lucency, thickening of the interlobular septa, disorganized lung markings, multifocal patchy and nodular opacities of different sizes with cystic lucencies, and honeycomb-like changes in the upper lung lobes (as shown in ).
The final diagnosis was AIDS and pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP).
We used compound sulfamethoxazole for anti-PCP treatment, while considering the possibility of combined opportunistic infections, antibiotics and fluconazole were used to fight bacterial infections and antifungal infections.
Unfortunately, the patient was discharged to home t the day after transfer for personal reasons, and we could not follow up his condition.