Mr. A, a 24-year-old man with bipolar disorder, presented with irritable mania in July 2009. His father had schizophrenia, and his sister had a schizoaffective disorder. He had never taken antipsychotics prior to this manic episode. Aripiprazole (5 mg/d) was administered to manage the manic symptoms, and gradual titration was tried. However, the patient and his family refused to take more than 5-mg aripiprazole because of a concern of adverse events by dose escalation. His manic symptoms slightly improved by December 2009. Though he was still manic, he was not aggressive enough to be suicidal or violent. Between September and October 2010, an agreement was obtained from the patient and his family for dose escalation, and gradual titration up to 15 mg/d was achieved by October 2010. The patient’s manic symptoms were partially remitted by December 2010, and sodium valproate was later added to the treatment strategy in August 2011 (titrated to 800 mg/d by November 2011) to improve residual manic symptoms. Propranolol (20 mg/d) was also added to the treatment regimen because the patient complained of a twitching sensation in the periocular area (September 2011). Propranolol was titrated up to 40 mg/d by December 2011, and the patient reported improvement in his twitching symptom (January 2012).
In July 2012, 3 years after the initiation of drug treatment, the patient began complaining of neck stiffness. By this time, he was taking daily doses of aripiprazole (15 mg), sodium valproate (800 mg), and propranolol (30 mg). He was not taking any other medication that could potentially cause tardive dystonia, including herbal medication, within 1 month before dystonia developed. Benztropine (4 mg) and valium (2 mg) were prescribed to treat his neck stiffness, but these were not effective. By September 2012, he had gradually developed cervical dystonia with right-side convexity and neck hyperextension. The patient could voluntarily reposition himself at first. However, 1 month later, this had become impossible. His symptoms satisfied the following diagnostic criteria for tardive dystonia : (1) he had dystonia; (2) he developed dystonia during antipsychotic treatment; (3) Wilson’s disease was ruled out, and there were no other neurological signs to suggest one of the many causes of secondary dystonia; (4) there was no family history for dystonia. He showed slight abnormalities in liver function (Aspartate transaminase 27 IU/L, Alanine transaminase 52 IU/L), ceruloplasmin (15 mg/dL), and 24-h urine copper tests (77.99 μg/day); however, further studies, including ultrasonography of the liver and ophthalmologic examination did not reveal or confirm Wilson’s disease. Otherwise, there were no abnormal findings on hematology tests, biochemistry tests, or serum valproate levels. A thorough neurologic examination confirmed that he had no other movement disorders. No abnormalities were detected in brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
Aripiprazole was continued for about 6 months even after the onset of dystonia, because he and his family refused to change medication because of fear of adverse events by new medication. Because his dystonia became worse as time progressed we decided to discontinue aripiprazole. The daily dose of aripiprazole was tapered and discontinued over 11 weeks after the appearance of torticollis. By January 2013, administration of aripiprazole ceased completely. The patient reported experiencing an irritable mood and frequent anger outbursts in February 2013. No other accompanying tardive syndromes other than neck tardive dystonia were observed in this patient. To treat tardive dystonia and to prevent relapse of mania, clozapine treatment was recommended to the patient in March 2013; however, he refused to take clozapine because of fear of developing agranulocytosis. By April 2013 the patient was experiencing severe dystonia (Score of Dystonia = 10) based on the Extrapyramidal Symptom Rating Scale (ESRS). Despite withdrawal from aripiprazole, the dystonic symptoms persisted, and the index of severity, measured by the ESRS, was unchanged, even 8 months after complete discontinuation of aripiprazole. His neck dystonia caused severe distress and impaired social and occupational function. He was concerned about what people would think about his posture, and tended to stay home from work and social events. He ultimately quit his position at his university. Moreover, the patient continued to experience fluctuating irritability and uncontrolled anger.
We decided to administer clozapine for the treatment of tardive dystonia because it was a promising candidate for improving motor symptoms [, ] and was expected to control his manic symptoms. The potential efficacy of clozapine in treating aripiprazole-induced tardive dystonia had not yet been previously reported. The starting dose of clozapine was 12.5 mg/day, and the dose was gradually titrated weekly up to 87.5 mg/day until August 2013. Dystonic symptoms began to improve 1 month after clozapine was started, and tardive dystonia was completely resolved 3 months after clozapine administration was started (September 2013). His ESRS score reached zero. At that time, the dose of clozapine was 87.5 mg/day. Additionally, by November 2013 his manic symptoms dramatically improved, and his daily dose of clozapine was 100 mg/d.