In May 2021, a 52-year-old man who had previously been diagnosed with HER2-positive gastric cancer presented himself to the Second Affiliated Hospital of Shandong First Medical University with symptoms of abdominal distension, poor appetite, and fatigue.
The patient experienced recurrence and metastasis more than two years after undergoing a laparoscopy-assisted D2 radical gastrectomy for gastric cancer in May 2019. Postoperative pathological analysis revealed infiltrating gastric adenocarcinoma, some of which exhibited signet-ring cell morphology.
In May 2019, the patient was admitted to the Second Affiliated Hospital of Shandong First Medical University with paroxysmal dull pain in the upper abdomen. A painless gastroscopy was performed, and the pathological findings of the biopsy were consistent with poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma and signet-ring cell carcinoma. The concentration of cancer antigen (CA) 199 was 151.84 U/mL, while carcinoembryonic antigen and CA724 were within the normal range. Contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed abnormal enhancement was observed on the greater curvature of the gastric body and antrum, with enlarged lymph nodes around it . In late May 2019, the patient underwent laparoscopy-assisted radical gastrectomy. The postoperative pathological report indicated a low-to-moderately differentiated invasive adenocarcinoma involving the entire stomach, with some parts displaying signet-ring cell morphology. The tumor measured 9 cm × 4.5 cm × 1.2 cm. It had penetrated the entire abdominal wall, broken through the mesothelial cell layer, and showed extensive vascular and nerve invasions. The upper incisal margin was not involved, but the lower incisal margin was affected. Cancer metastasis was observed in 8 out of 8 Lymph nodes at the greater curvature of the stomach with three cancerous nodules, 16 out of 18 Lymph nodes at the lesser curvature of the stomach as well as in the omentum and mesenteric nodules, and 2 out of 2 Lymph nodes of group 12. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed HER2 positivity (3+), PDL1 negativity (-), MSH2 positivity (+), MSH6 positivity (+), PMS2 positivity (+), and weak MLH1 positivity (+). Gastric cancer-related gene detection revealed ERBB2-IGR fusion, ERBB2 gene amplification (tissue abundance of 7.8 times), and missense mutations in exon 3 of RHOA p.L69Q (tissue abundance of 11.5%) and exon 5 of TP53p.R175H (tissue abundance of 14.9%). After surgery for newly diagnosed gastric adenocarcinoma (pT4aN3M1, stage IV, positive margin), metastases occurred in the omentum and mesentery. For economic reasons, the patient declined anti-HER2 therapy. Instead, he underwent six cycles of postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy with oxaliplatin plus tegafur from July 2019 to November 2019, followed by tegafur monotherapy from December 2019 to May 2020. Afterward, the patient refused further treatment and was observed without medication until May 2021, which is when he showed stable disease (SD) during evaluation.
The patient had an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Performance Status (ECOG PS) score of 1. He had no history of underlying diseases or family history of cancer. His cardiopulmonary examination results were normal.
The concentration of the tumor marker CA199 was 135.25 U/mL (normal range: 0-35). A hemoglobin level of 83 g/L and serum protein level of 30.2 g/L, which indicated moderate anemia and hypoproteinemia, respectively, was also observed.
Contrast-enhanced abdominal CT revealed significant local thickening and enhancement of the ileum wall, along with abdominal and pelvic effusion and multiple enlarged lymph nodes surrounding the ileum .