We report a case of a 51-year-old man, 1.72 cm tall and weighing 87 Kg, with a suspected glottic cancer that underwent transoral laryngeal microsurgery (TLM) under general anesthesia in order to perform biopsies for the histological diagnosis. He's a smoker of 25 cigarettes per day for 35 years, without alcohol habits. He doesn't report history of previous surgeries under general anesthesia. He suffers from gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) and obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS). During the pre-operative period, he underwent blood tests, neck and chest computed tomography with contrast medium, cardiologic and pneumological visits that didn't reveal any disease or abnormalities. The pre-operative fiber optic laryngoscopy showed a suspected lesion that involves the whole left vocal cord – from the anterior commissure to the vocal apophysis of the arytenoid cartilage – and extended to the left Morgagni's ventricle and to the anterior third of right vocal cord. Anesthesiologic pre-operative evaluation revealed: overweight condition (BMI 29.4 kg/m2), normal dentition, no trismus, interincisive opening distance greater than 3 cm, thyromental distance lesser than 6 cm, with good cervical mobility, Mallampati III, ASA III. Based on this evaluation, the patient was classified as a difficult intubation case.
Once in the operating room, in a supine position on the operating table, vital signs of patients were monitored: peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2), non-invasive blood pressure (NIBP) on his left arm, heart rate (HR), and cardiac activity by electrocardiogram (ECG). First, the patient was pre‑oxygenated for 5 min and premedicated by administration of intravenous midazolam 2 mg and fentanyl 100 μg. Then, GA was induced by administration of intravenous propofol 200 mg and rocuronium bromide 100 mg.
So, based on the pre-operative evaluation of the airway and on the type of surgery (transoral laryngeal laser surgery), a combined technique of intubation was performed by two skilled anesthetists: video laryngoscopy combined with FFS .
In particular, one anesthetist held the videolaryngoscope in place to keep the mouth and the oropharynx open and to facilitate the correct direction of the fibroscope. So, the second anesthesist introduced the fibroscope orally and, thanks to the dual vision on the screen (of videolaryngoscope and fibroscope), reached the glottis and the trachea avoiding hitting the anatomical structures and the ulcerated vocal cord lesion that was at high risk of bleeding. Once in the trachea, the fibroscope is placed immediately above the tracheal bifurcation to prevent the displacement and exit of the fibroscope from the trachea during the intubation maneuver. Indeed, the ET – previously loaded on the fibroscope – has been slid down to the trachea, under dual vision. At the end of the procedure, with the tip of fibroscope, the anesthesist has checked the correct position of the ET .
Using this approach, intubation succeeded at the first attempt: the patient was intubated with a 5.5 mm armored endotracheal tube. Ventriculotomy and multiple glottic biopsies were performed by the ENT surgeon. At the end of surgery, a safe extubation was performed according to the international guidelines .
During post-operative, the patient didn't report dysphagia or dyspnea and didn't show any sign of mandibular subluxation. On post-op day 1, no signs of injuries or lesions due to intubation have been found during oropharyngoscopy and fiberoptic pharyngo-laryngoscopy, except for the surgical site that is the glottis.