A 55-year-old female presented with idiopathic pain in the dorsum of the right foot and lateral leg, for more than 2 mo.
There was no obvious cause for pain on the back of the right foot and the outside of the lower leg for more than 2 mo. When the pain was severe, it affected movement of the affected limb.
The patient had no significant medical history.
The personal and family history did not reveal any problems.
Physical examination revealed pigmentation of about 6 cm × 6 cm on the right foot dorsum, with a clear boundary and pain upon pressure; local pressing pain on the lateral side of the right leg; limited ankle joint activity; good peripheral blood supply; and normal sensation. During surgery, many nodular masses around the ankle joint were observed, and the incision surface of the tumor was brown.
The prothrombin and partial thromboplastin times were slightly low, and D-dimers were normal. The blood biochemistries and urinalysis were normal. The blood analysis, electrocardiogram, chest x-ray, and arterial blood gas were also normal.
Magnetic resonance imaging showed multiple nodules and soft tissue swelling around the right ankle, which was consistent with pigmented villonodular synovitis.
Pathological examination revealed grayish-yellow irregular tissues, with a total volume of 7 cm × 6 cm × 1.5 cm, with multiple nodules within. The largest was 2.5 cm × 1.5 cm × 1.2 cm, and the smallest was 0.8 cm × 0.7 cm × 0.5 cm. The section was grayish-white and grayish-yellow and slightly tough . Under the microscope, the tumor cells in the fibrous connective tissue were nodular and lobulated, and the tumor cells grew around blood vessels. The blood vessels consisted of small arteries and veins, capillaries, and dilated veins showing diffuse hyperplasia . With eosinophilic staining, the tumor cells appeared round or oval, uniform in size, with abundant cytoplasm and clear boundary. Necrosis and pleomorphism were absent. In the surrounding adipose tissue, a proliferation of oval cells adjacent to small vessels was observed, which was consistent with tumor cell morphology . Mast cells were scattered in the stroma .
Immunohistochemistry revealed diffuse immunoreactivity for smooth muscle actin (SMA, Figure ), vimentin, type IV collagen, and Bcl-2. Caldesmon was weakly positive, CD34 was partially positive, and calponin was slightly positive. The Ki-67 value-added index was about 3%. Desmin, S-100, and HMB-45 were negative.