A 41-year-old woman with type II BD presented with a history of recurrent episodes of hypomania, depression, and anxiety symptoms. Her symptoms had first appeared 12 years prior, at which point, she experienced the concurrent onset of multiple physical symptoms. Among these, diarrhea, insomnia, and general malaise were particularly difficult to endure. Three years post-symptom onset, she was transferred to our clinic as the pharmacological treatment that she had received at another clinic had not resulted in symptomatic improvement. At our clinic, she was diagnosed with type II BD by a psychiatrist and her medication regimen was adjusted. Despite several attempts to treat her with various types of medication and psychotherapy, none of these therapeutic options led to substantial improvements in her mood. Additionally, mood stabilizers, such as lithium carbonate and lamotrigine, were discontinued due to their side effects. Although the standard therapeutic regimen was maintained, the patient continued to experience episodes of hypomania and depression. To address this problem, acupuncture treatment was performed as a potential complement to pharmacotherapy.
Acupuncture treatment was initiated 9 years after the patient’s diagnosis. At her first treatment visit, she presented with symptoms consistent with a depressive episode, as defined by DSM-5. The patient had experienced episodes of hypomania in the past, but there were no current episodes of hypomania. Type I BD was negative because the past manic symptoms were mild. Symptoms related to psychomotor retardation, such as lethargy and lack of motivation, were particularly noticeable. She did not demonstrate hallucinations, delusions, thought disorders, or suicidal tendencies. Physical symptoms included diarrhea, insomnia, and general malaise, which worsened with the deterioration of psychiatric symptoms. She had no family history of BD or other psychiatric comorbidities. The medication used were suvorexant (20 mg/day), ethyl loflazepate (2 mg/day), and perospirone (2 mg/day).
The acupuncture treatment was performed weekly for 3 months (a total of 12 treatments) with the aim of improving depressive and physical symptoms. The acupoints used for the treatment are shown in . LV3, SP6, ST36, LI4, PC6, BL15, BL18, BL20, GB20, and GV20 were used as acupoints for depressive symptoms. These have previously been used in the investigation of acupuncture for the treatment of depression. The acupoints ST25, ST27, and CV4 were used to target abdominal symptoms by triggering a gastrointestinal reaction through the viscero-somatic reflex. The acupoint GB21 was used to alleviate increased trapezius muscle tonus that was detected by palpation. Acupuncture was started in the prone position and switched to supine position after 10 minutes of indwelling. Neck and back acupoints were used with the patient in the prone position, while the head, abdomen, and extremity acupoints were used with the patient in supine position. All acupoints were used in each treatment. These acupoints are officially defined by the World Health Organization. Sterilized, single-use 0.16 mm × 40 mm acupuncture needles (SEIRIN Co., Shizuoka, Japan) were inserted into all the selected acupoints at a depth of 10 to 20 mm from the skin and were left for 10 minutes. The duration of retention was determined based on the sensitivity of the patient. We did not deliberately trigger de qi. After insertion, the needles were not manually manipulated.
All outcome measures were administered before each acupuncture treatment for the entirety of the treatment duration.
Depression and anxiety symptoms were evaluated using the Himorogi Self-Rating Depression Scale (HSDS) and Himorogi Self-Rating Anxiety Scale (HSAS), respectively. The HSDS and HSAS both comprise 10 items to identify a patient's symptoms within a short period of time. Scores range from 0 to 39 points, with higher scores indicating more severe symptomology. The reliability and validity of these questionnaires have been verified. HSDS and HSAS data were collected 4 months before the start of acupuncture using an electronic medical record to demonstrate the course before the acupuncture intervention as a run-up period.
The visual analoge scale (VAS) was used to evaluate physical symptoms such as diarrhea, insomnia, and general malaise. Using the VAS, the patient evaluated symptom severity by marking a point along a 100 mm straight line, where the ends represented the extremes of the severity scale; the left end indicated “no symptoms” and the right end indicated “very severe symptoms.”