A 49-year-old woman with hypothalamic amenorrhea (a subtype of secondary amenorrhea)
caused by anorexia nervosa fell from a chair and hit her coccyx. She visited a nearby hospital,
and undisplaced bilateral rami fractures and right sacral fracture were diagnosed by X-ray
investigation and CT scan . She was diagnosed with FFP but she chose to stay at home since the
pain was slight and she could still walk.
She fell to the floor several times at home after returning there. Three months
later, she had walking difficulty accompanied with severe pain, and visited our facility at the
Department of Emergency Medicine, Fujita Health University Hospital. X-ray examination and CT scan revealed delayed sacral union and a fresh fracture, accompanied with severe deformity
(, ), and
she was diagnosed with FFP type IVb according to Rommens Classification. She was admitted to the orthopedic ward to prepare for
surgery.
On admission, body mass index was 16.7 (height 149 cm and weight 37 kg),
bone mineral density investigated by dual energy X-ray absorptiometry was
0.423 g/cm2, and Young Adult Mean (YAM) showed only 50%. On blood examination,
tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase isoform 5b was 1300 mU/dL, total type I procollagen
N-terminal propeptide was 399 ng/mL, and estradiol was <25.0 pg/mL.
The patient was diagnosed with FFP caused by amenorrheic osteoporosis caused by
anorexia nervosa.
Dietary nutrition management was immediately started, and general preoperative
examination was carried out. Medication with teriparatide was also started. On planning surgery,
percutaneous IS and TITS screws seemed necessary to achieve rigid stability of the left
iliosacral joint. However, because of the severe sacral deformity, it was considered that
conventional fluoroscopy guidance for screw placement would fail easily. Therefore, we planned
to use the CT-3D-fluoroscopy matching navigation system to support appropriate placement of
percutaneous IS and TITS screws . The navigation
procedure was performed with the combination of portable 3D C-arm (ARCADIS Orbic 3D; Siemens
Healthcare GmbH, Erlangen, Germany) and the navigation application (Trauma Navigation
Application, Brainlab, Munich, Germany).
Manual examination after anesthesia revealed instability in both iliosacral joints.
During surgery, preoperative and intraoperative CT images were fused, and combined with the
3D-navigation system, guide pins were placed percutaneously at the appropriate angle and depth
in the supine position. Intraoperative CT imaging was performed after insertion of the guide
pins to confirm the position of insertion. Finally the φ6.5 mm cannulated IS screw and TITS
screw were inserted along the guide pin. After placing these screws, internal fixation of the
pubis was performed using the locking plate .
The patient was allowed full-weight bearing from the day after surgery, and was able
to walk without using a walker or crutches on day 7. She was discharged home on day 15 after
surgery without complaining about any pain.
Six months after surgery, bone union was confirmed by CT scan and she was able to
walk without complaints or symptoms .
This report was prepared with the consent of the patient.