An 8-year-old Yemeni boy was referred to our hospital for chronic diarrhea workup and management.
Upon admission to our hospital, he had diarrhea with 9-12 episodes of loose bowel motion per day with mucus but no blood. There was no history of vomiting, fever, cough or shortness of breath.
He had a history of recurrent skin abscesses, eczema, and multiple food allergies since the age of nine months. He was admitted at the ages of 18 mo and 3 years with community-acquired pneumonia. He had a history of recurrent chronic diarrhea that occurred 3-5 times per year and lasted 3-6 wk with increased baseline bowel habits (2-3 times/day). Two months before admission to our hospital, he developed severe diarrhea that led to hypovolemic shock and was admitted to the pediatric intensive care unit at the referring hospital. He stayed in the hospital for 45 days and lost approximately 7 kg of body weight (decreased from 21 kg to 14 kg).
The patient was born through a normal vaginal delivery with no major events or hospital admission in the first year of life. He had a history of poor weight gain since the age of three years. His developmental milestones were normal for his age. He had been vaccinated for up to 2 years of age.
The patient was evaluated at the age of 7 years for primary immunodeficiency, and the workup showed elevated IgE at a level of 2200 IU/mL (reference 25-550 IU/mL) with normal lymphocytes on flow cytometry. The primary immunodeficiency (PID) genetic testing panel, including the DOCK 8 gene, was negative for any pathogenic mutation. This panel uses a syndrome-based technique via simultaneous next-generation sequencing of the targeted genes (Saudi Mendeliome Group, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2015). In addition, whole-exome sequencing (WES) was sent from the referring hospital before transfer and later turned negative for any pathogenic mutation (details regarding the WES methodology are outlined in .
The parents were first-degree relatives with another 10 and 3-year-old male and 5-year-old female healthy offspring.
On examination, he appeared ill and cachectic, with a loss of subcutaneous fat. His vital signs were normal without fever. His weight was 13.2 kg (below the 3rd percentile), height was 107 cm (below the 3rd percentile), and body mass index was 11.5 kg/m2. Systemic examination revealed dry eczematous skin with ulcerated lesions behind the left ear.
Initial and follow up laboratory investigation showed leukocytosis (15–32 × 109/L; normal range: 4–11 × 109/L), eosinophilia (0.9-3 × 109/L; normal range: 0.1-0.35 × 109/L), and mildly elevated liver enzymes. The workup for chronic diarrhea showed a positive stool culture for Salmonella spp., for which he received ciprofloxacin for 10 days. The patient was started on total parenteral nutrition and was scheduled for upper and lower GI endoscopy to rule out celiac disease and other pathologies.
Upper GI endoscopy with duodenal biopsy showed increased intraepithelial T-lymphocytes, consistent with a clinical history of celiac disease. In addition, there were increased kappa light chain-restricted plasma cells present in the lamina propria. The patient was diagnosed with celiac disease with celiac crisis based on his clinical presentation and duodenal biopsy findings. A gluten-free diet, along with other nutritional supplements, was initiated.
Abdominal ultrasound and chest radiography showed unremarkable findings.