A 71-year-old East Asian woman with a 6-month history of right upper extremity swelling was referred to our hospital. She had undergone resections of a thyroid tumor at 35 years old and brain tumor at 65 years old, neither of which had shown any sign of recurrence. She showed no sign of MG preoperatively. Results of blood tests and electrocardiography were unremarkable. Preoperative vital capacity was 84.3% and forced expiratory volume in 1 s was 66.67%. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a large mass with a diameter of around 12 cm occupying the RA and extending into the SVC and left brachiocephalic vein (LBCV) . No lymphadenopathy was detected on CT. Transthoracic and transesophageal cardiac ultrasounds revealed a partially mobile, 5.6 × 5.4 cm mass adherent to the anterior side of the right atrial wall . To avoid tumor embolization and resolve the SVC syndrome, resection of the intracardiac tumor was performed via median sternotomy. The absence of any mass in the mediastinum was also confirmed during the surgery. A patch of pericardium was harvested in advance for the RA and SVC reconstructions. Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was instituted after cannulation of the inferior vena cava through the right femoral vein and the ascending aorta. The RA was opened under induced ventricular fibrillation, revealing a large mass. The tumor was firmly adherent to the anterior RA and SVC walls and the LBCV. The tumor was removed en bloc with the involved wall of the RA, SVC and LBCV. The SVC and RA wall defect were repaired with an autologous pericardium patch. The LBCV was bypassed by anastomosing an 8-mm conduit (Gore Propaten vascular graft; W. L. Gore and Associates, Flagstaff, AZ, USA) to the RA wall in an end-to-side manner. The patient was weaned off the CPB uneventfully, and was extubated uneventfully on postoperative day 1. However, she started to complain of severe dyspnea on postoperative day 7 and required mechanical ventilation for respiratory deterioration with atelectasis of bilateral lower lobes and mild pneumonia from postoperative day 9. Improvement of collapsed bilateral lower lobes led to extubation on postoperative day 14. However, she complained of dyspnea again, 10 min after extubation due to carbon dioxide (CO2) narcosis with a PaCO2 of 66.7 mmHg and a PaO2 of 54.6 mmHg. The patient was immediately reintubated and again required mechanical ventilation support. She complained of dyspnea again 4 h after another attempt at weaning from ventilation on postoperative day 18, and histopathological diagnosis of the resected mass identified ectopic thymoma. The possibility of myasthenic crisis (MC) was therefore considered despite negative results for anti-acetylcholine receptor (AChR) antibody and anti-muscle-specific tyrosine kinase (MuSK) antibody. An edrophonium test showed temporary improvement of tidal volume (from 350 mL/min to 400 mL/min) and grip strength (from 10/13 kg to 13/17 kg, right/left, respectively) on postoperative day 19 resulted in a diagnosis of MC. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) was initiated at 20 g/day for 5 days from that day. She was extubated on postoperative day 32 after confirming a negative response to the edrophonium test. Postoperative CT revealed no masses in the SVC or RA . Swelling of the right upper extremity improved and she was discharged uneventfully at 25 days after the last extubation.
The excised specimen showed a bosselated mass measuring 85 × 70 × 35 mm, elastic hard in consistency with a smooth surface . The cut surface revealed a solid mass, pale tan in color and with lobulation. Histologically, the tumor showed two components: portions of lymphocyte-poor epithelioid or spindle cell area , and portions rich in lymphocytes with scattered epithelioid cells . The epithelial cells were spindle-shaped, oval, or polygonal without atypia. Immunohistochemically, TdT-positive immature T cells were abundant in the lymphocyte-rich areas. The tumor was completely covered by a fibrous capsule without tumor cell invasion. The pathological diagnosis was type AB thymoma.