A 13-year-old girl presented with intermittent chest tightness and dyspnea for 3 months. She was admitted to a local hospital twice. On her first admission, blood smear examination showed a significantly increased eosinophilic ratio, and the cysticercus antibody was weakly positive. Chest and abdomen computed tomography (CT) showed a little left pleural effusion, uneven density of pancreas, and pelvic effusion. She was treated with albendazole, but the girl failed to follow medical advice, she stopped taking medicine after 5 days. Ten days later, her chest tightness and dyspnea aggravated, so she was readmitted to the hospital, chest CT showed a large left pleural effusion with atelectasis. She was then treated with thoracic tube drainage and albendazole. After 2 weeks, her chest tightness and dyspnea improved. However, she still complained of intermittent chest tightness and dyspnea within 2 months after discharge and lost 5 kg in the last six months. To further clarify the cause, the girl was referred to our hospital. In fact, she was complaining of intermittent abdominal pain for more than 1 year; however, since the pain was not intense, her parents did not pay attention to the complaint. The patient did not have any bad habits, such as smoking or drinking, and she had no history of abdominal trauma and surgery and biliary and pancreatic diseases. Her parents, sister, and brother were all in good health.
The patient’s height and weight were 165 cm and 36 kg, respectively. Physical examination revealed decreased vocal fremitus and breath sounds and dullness to percussion on the left hemithorax. Other components of her physical examination were unremarkable. Serum revealed mildly elevated amylase levels of 193 IU/L and lipase levels of 536 IU/L, whereas pleural fluid amylase was elevated with levels of > 2400 IU/L. Chest x-ray and thoracic CT scan confirmed massive left hydropneumothorax with atelectasis . Abdominal CT scan showed a small low-density lesion at the distal pancreas, accompanied by a pancreatic pseudocyst and main pancreatic duct dilatation . Subsequently, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) revealed an abnormal tubular structure extending from the pancreatic pseudocyst along the spine to the pleural cavity, which was considered as a fistulous tract . Hence, due to the radiological appearance and elevated pleural fluid amylase, massive recurrent pleural effusion was thought to be secondary to PPF, which was a complication of chronic pancreatitis. The patient and her parents underwent genetic tests, which revealed that the SPINK1 gene had “splice site variation c.194+2T> c (heterozygosity)”. The mother carried this site variation (heterozygosity), while her father had a normal genotype.
A pleural drain was maintained for the patient. For fasting conditions, total parenteral nutrition was followed, and somatostatin and ulinastatin were initiated for 12 days. However, she still complained of intermittent chest tightness; bloody fluid continued to flow out from the chest drainage tube. The patient then underwent an endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) that showed segmental stenosis and dilatation of the pancreatic duct and a pseudocyst at the pancreatic body and tail . Endoscopic retrograde pancreatic drainage was performed. Two days later, there was a relief of chest tightness, and pleural effusion was significantly reduced. Due to the intractable pneumothorax, erythromycin was injected into the pleural cavity to fix the pleura for 5 days. Thirty- seven days after ERCP, the pleural drain was removed, and the patient was discharged at hospital day 52. Chest x-ray and serum amylase of the patient was followed-up regularly for 5 months, eventually revealing normal results. Five months after discharge, abdominal CT showed that the pancreatic pseudocyst was completely cured. Another ERCP was performed, which showed segmental stenosis and dilatation of the pancreatic duct, and the pseudocyst disappeared; hence, nasopancreatic drainage was performed for 3 days after the pancreatic duct stent was removed.
An extensive review of the literature was performed using the databases of PubMed, OVID, EMBASE, Medline, CNKI, and WANFANG, with keywords such as “pancreaticopleural fistula” and “child.” We retrospectively analyzed 22 cases, including the current case and 21 additional patients derived from six Chinese articles and eight English articles .
All available data were entered into a customized database and then analyzed by SPSS software version 23.0 (IBM Corp, Armonk, NY, USA), quantitative data were summarized as mean ± standard deviation (SD) or number with percentage, where appropriate. Statistical analysis was performed using independent t-test, one-way ANOVA test, and Tukey’s post hoc test; statistical significance was defined as P < 0.05.
The mean time to diagnose PPF was 2.69 (0.25 ~ 6) months. Etiology analysis revealed 17 cases (77.3%) of CP, 4 cases (18.2%) of traumatic pancreatitis and one case (4.5%) of suspected congenital ductal anomaly. In addition, 16 of 22 cases accompanied by a pancreatic pseudocyst. Among the 22 cases, 3 cases had complete genetic tests; one case revealed SPINK1 gene mutation, and one case revealed PRSS1 gene mutation. The main manifestations were dyspnea (15 cases, 68.2%), abdominal pain (8 cases, 36.4%), and thoracalgia (6 cases, 27.3%). Except for three patients who were not clearly reported, amylase levels of the pleural effusion were significantly increased (950 ~ 157,000 U/L) in other patients. Seventeen cases (77.3%) of fistula can be diagnosed by complementary imaging tests; among the 17 patients, only 9 cases (53%) of fistula and its anatomy were identified through the esophageal hiatus (6 cases) and the aortic hiatus (3 cases) extending to the thoracic cavity. CT scan was performed in 14 cases, but fistulas were only found in 8 cases, with a sensitivity of 57.1%; MRCP was performed in 9 cases, then 7 cases showed fistula, with a sensitivity of 77.8%; ERCP was performed in 12 cases, of which 7 cases were therapeutic operations, and 5 cases were diagnostic operations, only 3 cases showed fistula, with a sensitivity of 25%. Three cases (13.6%) of fistula were confirmed during surgery; 2 cases (9.1%) of fistula could not be demonstrated by imaging tests or surgical operation. Surgery alone was performed in four cases. Eighteen cases were first managed with conservative treatment; however, 14 cases needed endoscopic treatment (7 cases) or surgical intervention (7 cases) .
Endoscopic treatment is a safe therapeutic option, among the 7 cases, only one case needed to reset a stent due to the pancreatic stent was removed spontaneously via defecation 8 days after stent insertion. However, one patient had empyema and bleeding after surgery. The efficacy of endoscopic treatment has also been proven; through endoscopic treatment, clinical symptoms and pleural effusion were improved significantly after 4 ± 1.6 days, compared with 5 ± 2.8 days after surgical intervention, there were no statistical differences; but compared with 17 ± 4 days after conservative treatment, statistical differences could be seen(p = 0.02). All patients improved and were discharged; the mean hospitalization time of endoscopic treatment was 34 ± 17 days, and conservative treatment was 50 ± 12 days, there were no statistical differences between the two groups. It’s because endoscopic treatment was carried out after ineffective conservative treatment; the hospitalization time would have been prolonged. Patients treated by endoscopic treatment were in good health within three to fourteen-months follow-up, and those treated by surgical intervention also remained healthy within eleven to twenty-four months follow-up. Unfortunately, the hospitalization time of surgical intervention and follow-up information about conservative treatment could not acquire from our review, so that no more analysis can be made.