A 50-year-old otherwise healthy male patient was emergently referred by his primary care physician with recurrent unprovoked syncope which led to multiple hospital visits.
The patient was on beta blocker therapy for supraventricular and ventricular extrasystole, as well as arterial hypertension. There were no other prior medical conditions.
At the time of admission to our hospital, the patient had experienced four episodes of transient loss of consciousness; the last episode lasted 30 s and took place in the office of the primary care physician. The first episode took place after mowing the lawn and caused a minor head trauma leading to his admission to the hospital. A head CT after this incident was deemed normal ; the physical and neurologic exams, as well as repeat EEGs revealed no pathologies.
There were no syncope provoking factors. Since there had been a recent death in the family causing the patient increased psychosocial stress, psychogenic pseudosyncope was also considered. After each episode of transient loss of consciousness, the patient was fully alert and oriented. The patient reported no family history of sudden cardiac death or other cardiovascular diseases.
In 24-h Holter monitoring ordered by the primary care physician, a 6 s sinoatrial arrest had been documented. Later, in our clinic, asystole of 12 s was documented . During the episodes, there were no clinical signs of generalized seizure (no involuntary movements, tongue bite, incontinence, postictal confusion).
After ruling out Lyme disease, relevant coronary artery disease, a structural heart disease, and pulmonary embolism, a dual chamber magnetic resonance (MR) conditional pacemaker was implanted.
On the first postoperative day, the patient suffered another transient loss of consciousness. During this episode we observed sinus rhythm transitioning to atrial pacing by the device without a pause on telemetric monitoring. This event prompted a neurological consultation. Again, the clinical neurological exams showed no pathological findings; however during EEG, a hyperventilation provocation test triggered a focal seizure . Therapy with antiepileptic medication was initiated; at this time the patient’s medication list consisted of an angiotensin-converting-enzyme (ACE) inhibitor because of arterial hypertension, and both acetylsalicylic acid and a statin due to coronary artery sclerosis. He was transferred to a neurology clinic.
Subsequent neurological exams in the neurology clinic, including EEG testing for photosensitive epilepsy triggering and a hyperventilation test, as well as duplex sonography of extra- and intracranial arteries showed normal results and the patient was discharged without changes to his medications.
Six months later, the patient presented with focal seizures, aphasia, and recollection difficulties. Stage IV glioblastoma was diagnosed by CT and MRI and treated surgically .