In September 2012, a 48-year-old man presented with progressive back pain, weakness in the lower limbs, significant weight loss for 1 year, and paralysis of both lower limbs for 1 mo.
Patient’s symptoms started 1 year ago with progressive back pain, paralysis of both lower limbs for 1 mo. The patient was misdiagnosed with spinal tuberculosis in an outside hospital and underwent anti-tuberculosis treatment for 9 mo.
His past medical history was normal.
The patient was a herder living in a pastoral area for a long time.
Local examination of the spine revealed tenderness in the spinous process of the T8 and T9 vertebrae. There was hypoesthesia below the umbilical plane. Neurological examination revealed spastic paralysis with lower extremity motor powers of 0/5. Deep tendon flexes revealed hyperreflexia, and the Babinski sign was positive. Anal reﬂex, anal tonus, and voluntary anal contraction were present.
The initial laboratory examination showed normal leukocytes (6.24 × 109/L), neutrophils (4.14 × 109/L, 66.3%), and eosinophils (0.21 × 109/L, 3.4%). C-reactive protein was 0.6 mg/dL, and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 1 mm/h. The T-SPOT test result for tuberculosis was negative, but the ELISA test result for Echinococcus granulosus was positive.
Radiography images revealed that the T8–9 disc space narrowed and the vertebral body height of T9 decreased . Axial computed tomography (CT) of the thoracic spine confirmed osteolytic destruction of the T8 and T9 vertebrae and the posterior part of the 4th, 5th, and 6th ribs on the left. Heterogeneous lesions containing hypodense cystic areas and partial calcification were also detected on the left paravertebra . Thoracic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed hyperintense cystic components on the sagittal, coronal, and cross-sections of T2-weighted images and hypointense heterogeneous components on T1-weighted images. It showed a lobulated, multiocular, honeycomb appearance and a septated cystic mass protruding intraspinally, compressing the spinal cord at segments T8–T9. Paravertebral polycystic lobular lesions presented as a “bunch of grapes” . Further CT of the head, abdomen, and pelvis showed no further cystic lesions.