An 81-year-old man, during a follow-up of asbestos lung disease at his previous doctor's office, showed an elevated lesion in the esophagus using a CT scan. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed type 1 advanced esophageal cancer in the mid-thoracic esophagus, and the patient was referred to our department. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a 20-cm incisor at the entrance, a 43-cm EGJ, and a 30-mm type 1 + IIc lesion between the 23-cm and 26-cm incisors, and a biopsy revealed squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). Contrast-enhanced CT showed mural thickening of the anterior wall of the upper thoracic esophagus, with no evidence of multi-organ invasion or lymph node metastasis . In addition, a break in the right pulmonary vein passing dorsal to the right main bronchus and flowing directly into the left atrium was observed , and preoperative 3D CT was performed for better three-dimensional positioning during lymph node dissection . Positron emission tomography (PET)–CT showed a high degree of accumulation (SUVmax 19.95) in the upper thoracic esophagus. The patient was diagnosed with upper thoracic esophageal cancer, cT2N0M0 cStage II. The standard treatment is preoperative chemotherapy plus surgery, but we decided to treat him with surgery alone, without preoperative chemotherapy considering his age and other factors. In response to the above diagnosis, thoracoscopic subtotal esophagectomy (three-region dissection) and gastric tube reconstruction were performed. The dorsal inflow of the pulmonary vein of the right main bronchus, which was recognized on preoperative CT, was confirmed. The lymph nodes at the tracheobronchial bifurcation (#107, #109R, #109 L) were contiguously dissected from the epicardial surface, and the right main bronchus dorsal inflow pulmonary vein was dissected and preserved . The pathological diagnosis was basaloid SCC, pT1b(SM1)N0(0/58)M0 pStage I. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 20.