A 45-year-old male patient presented with a complaint of progressive pain and soreness in the lumbosacral region persisting for more than 3 months. The pain radiated to the left thigh and perineum but did not affect walking. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT) scans with and without intravenous contrast showed a tumor mass adjacent to the left side of the fifth lumbar spinous process. The tumor was located in the lower left part of the erector spinae and extended onto the fifth lumbar vertebra, the first sacral vertebra, and the iliac wing. Positron emission tomography with CT (PET/CT) showed a hypermetabolic lesion in the erector spinae adjacent to the left side of the fifth lumbar spinous process. No sites of regional or distant metastases were found. A core biopsy of the tumor mass revealed spindle-shaped cells with infiltrating inflammatory cells. Together the morphological and immunohistochemical features indicated a low-grade inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor. The expression profile based on immunostaining was as follows: overall positive for vimentin, CD34, ALK (SP8), and p53; focally positive for smooth muscle actin (SMA); sporadically positive for S-100; partially positive for CD68; and negative for cytokeratin (CK) (AE1/AE3), desmin, and CD117. The Ki-67 nuclear labeling index was 10%.
The patient reported no other symptoms. Physical examinations revealed no neuro-pathological signs or symptoms. He denied smoking, alcohol, or illicit drug usage. He also denied recent radiation or toxin exposure. He had no history of unintentional weight loss, fever, or chills. He had no family history of malignant or other chronic diseases, with the exception of a sister who had breast cancer.
The treatment plan of the case was discussed by our multi-disciplinary team including experts from orthopedics, neurosurgery, chemotherapy, radiotherapy, pathology, and radiology. Considering that the boundary of the tumor was unclear and involved the sacrum, a complete resection would be difficult. Therefore, we administered neoadjuvant radiotherapy to the affected area at a dose of DT 5000 cGy in 25 fractions to the planning target volume (PTV). After shrinkage of the tumor volume, the patient underwent complete extensive resection at 1 month after radiotherapy. Postoperative pathology confirmed that resection of a lesion measuring 7.5 cm × 4 cm × 3.5 cm achieved negative histological margins and indicated a classification of the specimen as a mesenchymal-derived malignant tumor involving the sacrum. Histologic examination of the resected tumor revealed undifferentiated pleomorphic spindle cells surrounding an area of geographic necrosis with frequent atypical mitosis. Microscopically, the morphology conformed to that of a high-grade spindle cell sarcoma consistent with UPS. The result from MDM2 amplification using fluorescence in situ hybridization was negative, and thus, lipogenesis on histology could be excluded (Additional file ). The expression profile of the UPS tissue is described in Table , and representative images of staining tumor tissue are presented in Fig. .
A postsurgical MRI scan obtained 1 month after surgery showed postoperative changes and no obvious mass in the surgical area. The patient underwent adjuvant chemotherapy with liposomal doxorubicin and ifosfamide but had to discontinue chemotherapy after 2 cycles due to intolerance of grade 3 fatigue and grade 2 nausea. At 3 months after surgery, three new lesions were discovered in the bilateral pulmonary region on a routine follow-up CT scan . Further radiographic imaging with PET/CT showed hypermetabolic metastases involving the erector spinae of the left posterior sacral, fifth lumbar spine, sacrum, left ilium, and twelfth thoracic vertebra, accompanied by multiple lung lesions and a suspected metastasis adjacent to the spleen . At this stage, the patient refused further chemotherapy.
With the standard therapeutic options exhausted, primary tumor tissue was subjected to DNA sequencing via next-generation sequencing (NGS) with an ILLUMINA Nextseq 500 (3DMedicines, Inc.). The MasterView 381 cancer-gene panel covered 4557 exons of 365 cancer-related genes and 47 introns of 25 genes frequently rearranged in 381 cancer-related genes (Additional file ). The genomic DNA was extracted with the QIAamp DNA formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue kit (Qiagen) following the manufacturer’s protocol and quantified with the Qubit™ dsDNA HS Assay kit (Invitrogen). Bioinformatics analyses involved analyzing the clipped reads, which can be extracted by the tag information of bam files, which mapped the individual reads to the reference human genome (hg19) with bwa aligner v0.7.12. Candidate reads that were discordant or aligned in the same direction were filtered. Read pairs with reads mapped to separate chromosomes or separated by a distance of over 2 kb on the same chromosome were kept for fusion detection at the probe level. Output rearrangements contained translocation, inversion, long deletion, etc. . Through this profiling, a LMNA-NTRK1 gene fusion encoding exons 1–2 of lamin A/C and exons 11–17 of the NTRK1 gene was identified , and the other unlisted genes were all wild-type. The sequencing results for the LMNA-NTRK1 gene fusion are presented in Additional files and .
After extensive discussion and consultation with the patient and his family, we initiated crizotinib therapy per os at 450 mg per day on January 23, 2017. One month later, chest CT scanning showed that all lesions in the bilateral lungs had almost disappeared, and the patient had achieved a near-complete clinical response (CCR, Fig. ). PET/CT imaging was repeated after 4 months of treatment and continued to show the same response to crizotinib therapy. PET/CT revealed that local FDG metabolism was slightly increased at the lesions of the fifth lumbar spine, sacrum, left ilium and left paraspinal muscle. However, with crizotinib treatment, the FDG metabolism was significantly reduced in comparison with that seen in the first PET-CT examination. The bilateral pulmonary nodules had disappeared, and the twelfth vertebra, which had shown osteolytic bone destruction, now showed signs of healing, with an increased density and a lower FDG metabolism. The volume of the left front nodule of the spleen was significantly reduced after treatment . A timeline of the treatment course is presented in Fig. . As of July 2018, clinical assessments in this patient showed an ongoing near-CCR of 18 months. In general, the side effects of oral administration of crizotinib at 450 mg per day were tolerable for the patient. During the course of treatment, the patient experienced grade 3 myelosuppression and grade 2 weakness, but myelosuppression could be alleviated with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF)-based supportive treatment.