A 31-year-old pregnant woman was referred to our centre for further evaluation of the foetus due to HLHS. On foetal echocardiography at 25 + 6 weeks gestation a small left ventricle with severe endocardial fibroelastosis, aortic atresia, and mitral stenosis could be seen. The pulmonary veins presented enlarged with reduced antegrade flow and significant reverse flow on Doppler sonography (0.47 pulmonary vein TVI ratio; ). The foramen ovale seemed to be small and restrictive but of sufficient size for postnatal interatrial shunting. The mother was then given an appointment for caesarean section in our centre at 39 + 0 weeks of gestation. In the foetal echocardiography follow-up study 1 week before admission the flow across the foramen ovale further reduced and there was still a pathological pulmonary vein TVI ratio of 0.33. After careful consideration and informed consent was given by the mother the decision to perform foetal atrial septum stenting was made. The procedure was then performed at 38 + 3 weeks of gestation under ultrasound guidance. All foetal intracardiac procedures are performed with an interdisciplinary team consisting of two paediatric cardiologists with one cardiac catheter laboratory nurse, one perinatologist with experience in intrauterine therapy, and one anaesthesiologist. General anaesthesia was used for the mother without separate analgesia of the foetus. The right atrium was punctured with an 18 G needle. Then the atrial septum was perforated and a 0.014 wire was placed into a left pulmonary vein. A 3 mm × 9 mm coronary artery stent (ProKineticEnergy®, Biotronik) was then placed into the atrial septum and dilatation was performed up to 16 bars correlating with a 3.4 mm stent diameter. Then the needle was removed without signs of tamponade or other complications. In the follow-up echo the day after the procedure the stent was in place with improved left to right shunting . There was furthermore increased antegrade and decreased retrograde flow in the pulmonary veins measured by TVI in Doppler sonography (0.24 pulmonary vein TVI ratio). The mother was then again admitted for caesarean section at 39 + 2 weeks of gestation. There was completely uncomplicated postnatal adaption with Apgars 9 and 9 at 1 and 5 min and saturations of 86%. The newborn was then admitted to our pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) to start prostaglandin E1 infusions. On postnatal echocardiography, the stent was still in place with a mean velocity of 1.5 m/s measured by PW Doppler . On the 7th day of life the boy then underwent a Norwood procedure. The stent was removed and an atrioseptectomy performed. There was an uncomplicated secondary closure of the chest on the 4th postoperative day. Due to recurrent supraventricular tachycardia an antiarrhythmic therapy with amiodarone was started. There were no signs of severe pulmonary vascular disease during the entire stay in hospital and the patient was ultimately discharged on aspirin on the 63rd postoperative day with adequate saturations and sinus-rhythm. The postoperative course after discharge was uncomplicated without further episodes of supraventricular tachycardias. Bidirectional Glenn surgery was then performed at 3.5 months of age and the boy was discharged on the 9th postoperative day. After 5 months the antiarrhythmic therapy with amiodarone was stopped. The last check-up at our centre was done at the age of 10 months and the boy did not show any symptoms or abnormal findings with saturations of 84%.