A 77-year-old man was referred to our hospital with clinical conditions such as high alkaline phosphatase (1,1076 U/L) and prostate-specific antigen (PSA, 783 ng/mL) levels, persistent fatigue, and a 3 month history of both appetite and weight loss. Histological examination of transrectal prostate biopsy confirmed the presence of Gleason grade 5 prostate cancer. Moreover, computed tomography revealed multiple liver (maximum size: 6.6 cm in diameter) and lymph node metastases. The largest liver metastasis invaded the hepatic capsule with hepatic surface discontinuity. Bone scintigraphy confirmed high-volume bone metastases .
After 2 weeks of hormonal therapy with goserelin acetate (Zoladex, Astrazeneca, Cambridge, UK) and bicalutamide (Casodex, Astrazeneca), the patient received upfront docetaxel (Taxotere, Sanofi, Paris, France) every 4 weeks for six cycles. He experienced mild fatigue, and there were no findings of bone marrow dysfunction during the first four cycles of docetaxel. After four cycles, the patient's PSA levels reduced to 14.45 ng/mL. On the 14th day of the fifth course of docetaxel, the patient was admitted to the emergency section on account of hematemesis, tarry stools, and hemodynamic shock. His hemoglobin levels rapidly dropped from 6.2 g/dL to 2.3 g/dL within an hour; he received eight units of red blood cells. Enhanced computed tomography revealed rupture of hepatic metastases with substantial hemoperitoneum while blood tests indicated deteriorating liver function . Transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) of the right hepatic branch using gelfoam particles was performed without delay . Although vital signs stabilized after TAE, hepatic dysfunction progressed rapidly. The clinical data of the patient on the following day was as follows: bilirubin, 1.7 mg/dL; aspartate aminotransferase, 1094 IU/L; alanine aminotransferase, 238 IU/L; lactate dehydrogenase, 3,294 IU/L; alkaline phosphatase, 1,152 IU/L; gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, 418 IU/L; and white blood cell count, 71.9 × 109/L. The patient was discontinued for the last docetaxel course. Despite receiving optimal care, the patient died of general prostration 3 weeks later, which occurred as an adverse event of ADT combined with upfront docetaxel. An autopsy was not performed per the family's request.