A 25-year-old woman (gravida 0, para 0) presented with a 4-year history of an asymptomatic pelvic mass that had increased in size in the previous few months. The women had an unremarkable medical and gynecological history with a regular menstrual cycle.
Ultrasonography confirmed the presence of a hypoechoic cystic mass of undetermined origin. Further evaluation was performed, including laboratory tests and computed tomography (CT). The serum level of CA 125 was found to be elevated (139.0 U/mL), and a CT scan revealed tumors in both the ovaries. The right ovary showed a 7.0 × 4.5 cm fat-containing cystic mass with internal calcification, and the left ovary showed 16.0 × 14.0 cm fat-containing cystic mass with multiple septa and internal calcification . The radiologic findings suggested that both the ovarian tumors were mature teratomas, and the patient underwent bilateral ovarian cystectomy. Macroscopically, the left ovary revealed a multicystic mass containing viscous sebaceous material and hairs, measuring 20.0 × 12.0 × 7.5 cm. The cystic wall also contained adipose and bony tissue. Similarly, the right ovary showed a cystic mass filled with sebum and hairs, measuring 6.5 × 5.0 × 4.0 cm. Frozen sections of the left ovarian mass were made. On microscopic examination, mature squamous and respiratory epithelium, as well as mesenchymal tissue including the bone, cartilage, smooth muscle, and adipose tissue were observed. In addition, abundant brain tissue, such as glial tissue and choroid plexus, were observed. Through the frozen sections, the left ovarian mass was diagnosed as MCT, and therefore, no further intervention was performed at the time of the operation.
However, formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded multiple sections of the left ovary revealed an incidental microscopic focus that displayed a monomorphic population of polygonal cells beneath the respiratory epithelium. The focus measured 0.5 cm in diameter and was not observed in the frozen sections. The tumor cells formed cords and trabeculae and had scant, eosinophilic cytoplasm, and round nuclei with mild atypia . Immunohistochemical staining showed positivity for neuro-specific enolase (NSE), synaptophysin, and CD56 . One mitosis was seen per 10 high-power fields, and the Ki-67 proliferative index was 1 % . Therefore, the tumor was classified as low grade. Based on the morphological and immunohistochemical findings, the tumor was diagnosed as a carcinoid tumor (trabecular type) arising from a MCT. The right ovary, on the other hand, had no evidence of somatic type tumors.
The patient received no further treatment. And she had no clinical symptoms associated with carcinoid syndrome including cardiac involvement that might be a major cause of death in this syndrome, so cardiac ultrasound had not performed. Also, no evidence of recurrence or metastasis was detected on abdomen and pelvic computer tomography (CT) after 8 months of follow-up.