A 57-year-old Caucasian, ECOG PS 0 male patient, was referred to our hospital to be examined and treated for a resectable cancer of the hooked process of the pancreas. The levels of carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (CA19–9) and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) were 50 U/ml (normal value < 37.0) and 1.2 ng/ml (normal value < 5 ng/ml), respectively.
Therefore, in July 2013, pancreatoduodenectomy and regional lymphadenectomy were performed. The histopathological diagnosis revealed pancreatic adenocarcinoma of ductal origin with moderately differentiated mucinous aspects, G2, pT3 pN0 (0/30) Mx (AJCC 8th revised edition). The surgical resection margins were positive. The margin involved was the superior mesenteric artery (SMA). There were no post-operative complications. The CA19–9 value (8 U/ml) was negative. The patient underwent six cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy with gemcitabine 1000 mg/mq 1,8,15 q28, followed by chemoradiotherapy. Radiotherapy consisted of an external beam treatment administered to the pancreatic bed with a total dose of54 Gy in 25 fractions associated with concurrent radiosensitizer bi-weekly gemcitabine 50 mg/mq.
Subsequently, the patient underwent follow-up, which was negative for 3 years until a computerized tomography (CT) scan showed at least six secondary hepatic lesions, as shown in Fig. . Liver metastases were located exactly at hepatic segments VIII, VII, V-VI, V, IV and II.
The CA19–9 value was > 900 U/ml, and the CEA was negative.
The patient started the first-line treatment with six courses of FOLFIRINOX: oxaliplatin 85 mg/mq, irinotecan 180 mg/mq, leucovorin 400 mg/mq and fluorouracil 400 mg/mq given as a bolus followed by 2400 mg/mq as a 46 h continuous infusion,1q 14; the patient required a 20% dose reduction and prophylactic granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) for grade 4 neutropenia.
After six cycles of chemotherapy, the re-evaluation CT scan showed only three liver lesions with increased (18)F-FDG PET uptake. Multiple lymphadenopathy masses measuring 1.5 cm, without focal uptake on the (18)F-FDG PET, were observed; these lesions also had disappeared at the subsequent re-evaluations, hence they were not considered pathological lymphadenopathies.
The case was discussed in a multidisciplinary context; in consideration of the haematological toxicity (persistent grade 4 neutropenia), despite good gastroenterologic tolerability, optimal performance status, the partial response of the disease and its exclusive hepatic localization, the patient was judged suitable for surgery. The patient underwent a laparotomic wedge resection (without intraoperative ultrasound) of the three remaining hepatic lesions localized at hepatic segment VIII, VII and V.
The post-operative course was characterized by intermittent fever associated with positive blood cultures and the appearance of fluid collection, which resolved with antibiotic therapy and drainage of the post-operative collection.
The histopathological examination confirmed hepatic metastases from adenocarcinoma with aspects of poor differentiation compatible with pancreatic origin; the surgical resection margins were negative. In consideration of the patients’ good general condition, and even though there was no clear evidence of a post-metastasectomy chemotherapy role, after collegial discussion, we decided to resume chemotherapy at further reduced doses, given the previously observed haematological toxicity.
Afterwards, the patient was treated for two more months with FOLFIRINOX (oxaliplatin 85 mg/mq, irinotecan 180 mg/mq, leucovorin 400 mg/mq and fluorouracil 400 mg/mq given as a bolus followed by 2400 mg/mq as a 46-h continuous infusion, 1q 14).
At the end of chemotherapy, CEA and CA19–9 were at normal levels.
Seven months after the end of chemotherapy, there was evidence of liver recurrence at the S8 level, which was confirmed by contrast-enhanced ultrasound (CEUS) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI); a lesion of 1,4 × 1,2 cm was identified . A biopsy of this hepatic lesion was performed, and the histological test showed metastases from pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
There were no complications after CEUS and subsequent biopsy. CEA and CA19–9 were negative.
After multidisciplinary discussion, in consideration of the previous post-surgical septic complication and according to the patient’s will (he refused both systemic chemotherapy and surgical approach), radiofrequency ablation of the lesion was performed. This was performed via the ultrasound-guided route through two needle insertions (maximum power 140 W, 12 and 6 min, respectively); on the subsequent CEUS, there was complete necrosis of the lesion. Afterwards, the patient underwent follow-up. After 12 months from the first RFA, CT scan showed secondary abnormalities at the V-segment with a maximum size of 1.8 × 1.1 cm; the lesion was heterogeneously vascularized in the arterial phase. There was a slight rise in CA19–9 (32.5 U/ml) but the value was still within the normal range; CEA was also negative.
Biopsy with a Biomol 18-G needle was performed, and the histological examination was indicative of a metastatic lesion of pancreatic origin. Therefore, the patient underwent radiofrequency thermoablation of the lesion at the V hepatic segment measuring 1.9 cm.
Radiofrequency thermotherapy treatment was carried out with an exposed tip of 13 cm and length of 20 cm, with 1 needle insertion on the nodule of the V segment (maximum power 147 W for 11 min).
The post-procedure course was regular, and the ultrasound check after 1 day showed necrotic outcomes without complications.
At the date of the last follow-up (March 2019), the patient was in excellent general conditions and free from recurrence with an overall survival of 6 years from the diagnosis. CEA and CA19–9 were negative. In the Fig. we resumed the clinical time course of the patient.