A 64-year-old white male, resident in Rio de Janeiro, has been managing our hospital due to insulin dependent diabetes mellitus, arterial hypertension, chronic coronary disease and renal failure. In August of 2011, he began hemodialysis in our hospital as his renal glomerular function became worse. In March 2012, one month after implanting a permcath catheter he came for the emergency department with signs of infection to elucidate. The results of the microscopic examination of urinary sediment showed 15 to 20 white blood cells (WBC), and so cephalexin was begun to treat a possible urinary infection. However, three days after the antibiotic therapy was begun the urinary sample did not show any bacterial growth. The patient returned with signs of systemic inflammatory response syndrome. A clinical examination of the patient showed an inflammation at the insertion site of the hemodialysis catheter. The patient was admitted in our critical care unit on 7 March 2012 with suspicion of CRBSI. The catheter was removed and another was implanted in his right femoral vein. Two samples of peripheral blood were sent for culture and empiric therapy with vancomycin and piperacillin-tazobactam was initiated within one hour of admittance to the ICU. The microbiology analysis of blood samples revealed MRSA. The therapy was changed to daptomycin on 12 March 2012. After 30 doses of daptomycin intravenously based on his glomerular filtrate rate (GFR), the patient was discharged from the hospital on 18 April.
On 9 May 2012, 20 days after the last dose of daptomycin, he returned to the hemodialysis department with a respiratory syndrome. The chest computed tomography demonstrated signs of pneumonia. Therefore, three samples of peripheral blood were sent to the hospital laboratory. Antibiotic therapy (vancomycin, meropenem and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole) was initiated according to the microbiology data. The vascular catheter was withdrawn because there was free purulent secretion at the insertion site. Once again, a new catheter was implanted, this time, in the right femoral vein for hemodialysis therapy.
The new MRSA isolate from the blood samples showed a multidrug resistance pattern. The isolate was resistant to ciprofloxacin, rifampin, chloramphenicol, clindamycin and erythromycin but showed susceptibility to linezolid, quinupristin-dalfopristin, tetracycline and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole by the disk-diffusion test. The minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) assessed by broth microdilution method showed MICs of >256 μg/mL, 4 μg/mL and 8 μg/mL for oxacillin, vancomycin and daptomycin, respectively. The SCCmec typing , pulsed field gel electrophoresis and multilocus sequence typing (MLST) revealed that the isolate belonged to the SCCmec II/USA100/ST5 lineage. After 3 months in hospital, the patient died from a hemorrhagic stroke and pneumonia associated mechanical ventilation due to Acinetobacter baumanni.