A 20-year-old Japanese woman presented to a local hospital with lower abdominal pain. She had mental retardation and epilepsy, and was unable to indicate her intentions. She was found to have a multicystic tumor in her pelvic cavity and was referred to our gynecologic department. Her lower abdomen was soft and showed slight swelling without tenderness. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed that a multicystic tumor occupied her abdominal cavity. Because the tumor did not have a solid component or enhancement with gadolinium enhancement and tumor markers were normal (carbohydrate antigens [CA] 125, CA19-9 and carcinoembryonic antigen), a benign ovarian tumor was suspected. A laparotomy was performed, unexpectedly revealing swelling of her bilateral ovaries. The right ovarian tumor was the size of an adult head and the left ovarian tumor was the size of a fist. A right oophorectomy and left ovarian cystectomy were performed. Gross findings were that the bilateral ovarian tumors seemed benign without a solid or papillary component. The pathological diagnosis of the right ovarian tumor was mucinous cystadenoma; however, the pathological diagnosis of the left ovarian tumor was an intestinal type mucinous borderline tumor. Our patient did not receive any adjuvant therapy and we planned to follow up every three months.
Two years and nine months after the primary surgery, a multilocular tumor, approximately 10 cm in diameter, was detected in her pelvic cavity on follow-up ultrasonography. A computed tomography scan revealed a multicystic tumor in her pelvic cavity, without contrast by a radiopaque agent . Magnetic resonance imaging revealed round cystic lesions in her pelvis, with low to intermediate intensity on T1-weighted images and high intensity on T2-weighted images . A small part of the cyst wall was slightly enhanced with the administration of gadolinium. The preserved left ovary was not separately identified. Therefore, a recurrent ovarian borderline tumor was suspected.
Our patient could not give her own opinion regarding her disease so her parents made all decisions regarding her treatment. Our patient had suffered from dysmenorrhea for a long time and her parents therefore requested removal of her uterus and remaining ovary.
Our patient then underwent a second surgery and a multicystic tumor measuring 10 × 10 cm was found in her pelvic cavity. The tumor consisted of many non-isolated cysts of diverse sizes , which adhered to the surface of her ovary, mesentery, mesocolon and pelvic wall. Slight transparent ascites was present. Her uterus was normal and her left ovary was thumb-sized without swelling. A hysterectomy, left oophorectomy, omentectomy, pelvic lymph node biopsy, appendectomy and tumorectomy of her abdomen were performed. Complete resection of the lesion was achieved.
On histology, epithelium with a mucinous component was not seen in the cyst or cyst wall . In the removed left ovary, a tiny component of mucinous cystadenoma was present though neither a mucinous borderline tumor nor a mucinous adenocarcinoma was present. Immunohistochemical staining of the lining cells of the cyst wall were positive for calretinin and Wilms’ tumor protein and negative for D2-40. The removed uterus, lymph nodes and omentum were normal. Our patient was finally diagnosed with BMPM. She recovered uneventfully and was discharged from the hospital on the seventh day after the operation. Our patient received estrogen replacement therapy and remains free from recurrence nine months after the second operation.