A 23-year-old Croatian man without any significant past medical history was admitted to our intensive care unit (ICU) due to a parapharyngeal abscess on the left side of the neck with spreading of infection in the mediastinum and the left side of the thorax. Urgent surgery was performed with incision of the parapharyngeal abscess, neck dissection, and left side thoracotomy with incision and drainage of the mediastinum and thorax. In the postoperative period in the ICU, the patient was sedated and mechanically ventilated with antibiotic therapy according to microbiological findings (blood, urine, bronchoalveolar lavage, and tissue sample taken during surgery). After the first surgery, Streptococcus mitis was isolated from the parapharyngeal abscessus. In the second surgery, Staphylococcus sp. was isolated from the mediastinal and neck swab wounds. From the beginning (upon admission to the ICU), the patient was treated with meropenem and linezolid. During the second week of treatment, he started to develop a nosocomial infection of the lung caused by multiresistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa, which was treated with ceftolozane/tazobactam 3 × 3 g intravenously. In the next 10 days, control computed tomographic (CT) scans of the neck and chest showed progression of mediastinal infiltrates and the formation of organized pleural effusion on the left side that required additional surgery. Due to atelectasis of the left lung that persisted during the second week of treatment in the ICU, bronchoscopy with bronchoaspiration and recruitment maneuvers were performed several times. Residual pleural effusions were drained several times before and after weaning procedures with a small-bore pleural catheter and Seldinger technique. On the 30th day of the patient’s illness, sedation was stopped, and the patient awoke promptly. He was hemodynamically stable and ready for weaning, which was successfully done in the next 24 hours. When the patient was extubated and started to breathe spontaneously, we enhanced his active physical therapy in combination with a cough assist device (CoughAssist E70; Philips Respironics, Hamburg, Germany). After the weaning procedure, the patient was fully conscious and hemodynamically stabile with blood pressure 115/70 mmHg, heart rate of 86 beats/minute, and body temperature of 36.7 °C. The patient was spontaneously breathing with oxygen saturation (SpO2) of 94%, fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) of 50%, partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2) of 9.19 kPa, carbon dioxide pressure (pCO2) of 5.7 kPa, and PaO2/FiO2 ratio of 138, but almost no rising of the left side of the thorax and no breath sounds on the same side.
We performed lung ultrasound, which showed atelectasis of the major part of the left lower lobe and the posterior part of the upper lobe on the 34th day of the patient’s stay in the ICU. We used electrical impedance tomography (Dräger PulmoVista 500; Dräger, Lübeck, Germany) as additional diagnostic support for the ultrasound, which confirmed reduced air entrance in the major part of the left lung. Finally, according to local protocol, we performed a CT scan of the chest, which confirmed previous findings of complete atelectasis of the left lower lobe and major atelectasis of the left upper lobe .
We decided to apply a new method whereby we used different experiences of single-lung ventilation respecting all basic principles of various types of mechanical ventilation. Our trial, which we named “targeted segmental recruitment,” was one of the last attempts to avoid the proposed life-threatening surgical reduction of the lung parenchyma in our young patient. His Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation II (APACHE II) score upon admission was 7, and his Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score upon admission was 6. On the day before we performed the segmental recruitment maneuver, his APACHE II score was 12, and his SOFA score was 6. His procalcitonin level on the day before segmental recruitment maneuver was 0.171 μg/L.
The patient was analgosedated, intubated with the Univent 8.5-mm tube (tube with integrated endobronchial blocker; Vitaid, Lewiston, NY, USA), and mechanically ventilated. We removed the endobronchial blocker and replaced it with a pulmonary artery (PA) catheter. With the help of a bronchoscope, using a loop through the working channel of the bronchoscope, the PA catheter was placed in the entrance to the lower left bronchus, and the PA catheter balloon was inflated to achieve bronchial closure. Using the appropriate connectors, we connected the PA catheter to the second ventilator (Dräger Evita 2) and applied 30 cmH2O of pressure of the 30% oxygenated air in CPAP ventilation mode for 30 minutes. The decision for the pressure of 30 cmH2O was made on the basis of the fact that pressures higher than 35 cmH2O are associated with barotrauma and the clinical appearance of pneumothorax . The right lung and the upper lobe of the left lung were ventilated the entire time by controlled mechanical ventilation with protective ventilation parameters using the Dräger Evita XL ventilator. After 30 minutes, we removed the PA catheter from the lower left bronchus and placed it in the upper left bronchus with the described procedure and repeated the CPAP maneuver. Again, the right lung and the lower lobe of the left lung were simultaneously ventilated by controlled mechanical ventilation with protective ventilation parameters. Within the next 12 hours of the performed procedure, the patient was awakened and extubated. After the targeted segmental recruitment, he was breathing spontaneously with improved clinical parameters as well as better rising of the left side of the thorax with audible respiratory sounds on the left side. The PulmoVista 500 monitoring was applied continuously, and better ventilation of the left lung was noted in the first hours after the procedure. In the next 48 hours, we applied the CoughAssist device to the patient, and he was encouraged to cough. After 48 hours (36th day of treatment), a CT scan of the thorax was performed, indicating significantly better ventilation of the left lung . During and after the procedure, SpO2, end-tidal carbon dioxide (EtCO2), invasive blood pressure, and pulse were monitored. The patient did not have any significant decrease in SpO2 or increase in EtCO2, nor did he have hemodynamic instability or changes in heart rhythm. Before and after the procedure, arterial blood gas analyses were performed as part of routine laboratory processing . The patient was discharged to home 49 days after admission, and he was mobile on his own with stabile hemodynamic and respiratory status and without signs of infection.