A 70-year-old Caucasian man, a former heavy smoker, was admitted to a general surgery department to cure a right inguinal hernia, despite having progressive symptoms and signs of heart failure. A preoperative evaluation emphasized the need for cardiac assessment in a cardiology unit. At the time of his admission, the patient complained of fatigue, insomnia, moderate chest tightness, shortness of breath, vomiting, coughing, pain in the lower left limb, and gastrointestinal symptoms (constipation alternating with diarrhoea and bloating).
The patient’s medical history was notable for showing hypertension and an aortic valve replacement (Medtronic Hall tilting disc 23 valve) 22 years prior for severe aortic valve disease due to infective endocarditis. A few years later, vascular surgery for a fissured thrombosed mesenteric artery aneurysm was successfully performed. Moreover, a right ischemic sylvian stroke was noted at the age of 55, a left ischemic sylvian stroke was noted at the age of 59, and intestinal subocclusive syndrome secondary to adhesive small bowel obstruction (ASBO) was diagnosed at the age of 65.
A physical exam revealed a body mass index of 22.1 kg/m2; facial hyperaemia; ecchymosis in the upper third of the right forearm; moderate bilateral calf oedema; abolished right basal vesicular murmur; and a painless, uncomplicated right inguinal hernia. Cardiovascular examination identified a regular heart rate of 108 beats per minute, the presence of the opening and closing sounds of the aortic prosthesis, a tricuspid regurgitation murmur, and blood pressure of 115/75 mmHg. Signs of congestion (jugular vein distension and hepatomegaly) were also present.
The laboratory findings were as follows: normocytic normochromic anaemia (haemoglobin of 10.9 g/ dL and a haematocrit value of 31.2%), a white blood count (WBC) of 10,400/μL (85% neutrophils), an international normalized ratio (INR) of 6.1, C-reactive protein of 45.5 μg/mL, an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 69 mm/h, and a N-terminal-prohormone B-Type Natriuretic Peptide (NT-proBNP) value of 6,100 pg/mL. Other tests (blood and nasopharyngeal cultures, routine urine examination) were negative.
The rest electrocardiogram recording displayed a sinus rhythm, left axial deviation, negative T waves in the V5-V6 leads, and low voltage in the limb leads.
Plain chest X-ray revealed right basal pulmonary consolidation associated with mild pleural effusion, an enlarged projection area of the upper and middle mediastinum, cardiomegaly, and aortic atherosclerosis.
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) (Samsung HS60 ultrasound machine, Samsung Medison Co., Ltd., Seoul, Korea) showed a 6.87 cm ascending aortic aneurysm, normal left ventricular size and function, and normal functionality of the Medtronic Hall 23 (Medtronic Inc, Minneapolis, Minn, USA) tilting valve. TTE also identified a large hypodense pericardial mass, with a smooth rounded margin and no internal flow detectable, which exerted significant compression of the right atrium but without signs of tamponade (see ). A strong suspicion of chronic ascending aortic dissection with pericardial hematoma was raised, although the entry tear of the dissection was not detected via TTE.
Ultrasound examination of the abdomen (Samsung HS60 ultrasound machine, Samsung Medison Co., Ltd., Seoul, Korea) was performed, and highlighted the presence of a well-defined 53×65 mm pericardial mass, with minimal ascites, hyperechogenic liver lesions, polycystic kidney disease, and prostatic hyperplasia.
Cardiac computed tomography angiography (CCTA) and contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography (Iomeron® 350/100 mL, Bracco Imaging S.p.A, Milan, Italy) were subsequently performed (Somatom® Definition AS64, Siemens AG, Munich, Germany). A partially thrombosed ascending aortic aneurysm (63 mm in the axial plane) with ulcerated aortic plaques was identified; the aortic arch and descending aorta (29 mm) were not affected. CCTA also unveiled a solid intrapericardial, well-defined (80×65×70 mm) and delineated, and non-iodophilic tumour with a hyperdense architecture. The tumour exerted marked compression on the right atrium, the superior and inferior caval veins, and the right pulmonary artery (see ). No paravalvular leak, valve dehiscence, or structural deterioration was observed.
Furthermore, abdominal CT scans showed subcapsular liver haemangioma (segment VIII) and bilateral polycystic kidney disease (maximum diameter 71×56 mm in the left kidney and 34×33 mm in the right kidney).
A pharmacological regimen was then started using carvedilol (Coryol®, KRKA, d.d. Novo mesto, Slovenia) spironolactone (Spironolactona Bioeel®, Bioeel S.R.L., Targu Mures, Romania), atorvastatin (Atoris®, KRKA, d.d. Novo mesto, Slovenia), pantoprazole (Pantoprazol® SUN, Sun Pharmaceutical Industries Europe B.V., Hoofddorp, The Netherlands), intravenous furosemide (Furosemid Zentiva®, S.C. Zentiva S.A., Bucharest, Romania) and antibiotics [cefuroxime (Cefuroxima Atb®, Antibiotice S.A., Iasi, Romania), and gentamicin (Gentamicina EIPICO®, E.I.P.I.Co MED S.R.L., Bucharest, Romania)], and fresh frozen plasma (FFP). The patient did not experience any significant improvement of his symptoms, and the clinical signs of right heart failure persisted.
Preoperative coronary angiogram did not show significant atherosclerotic lesions at the level of the whole coronary tree.
The patient was then transferred to cardiac surgery. The surgical approach was performed via remedian sternotomy. A total cardiopulmonary bypass (total time: 267 min; aortic cross-clamp time: 135 min) was undertaken with the cannulation of the right femoral artery and vein. A vent catheter was placed through the pulmonary artery (see . The core body temperature was 28°C. For myocardial protection, Bretschneider’s Histidine Tryptophane Ketoglutarate (Custodiol®HTK, Essential Pharmaceuticals, Durham, NC, USA) cardioplegic solution was used.
A massive intrapericardial organized hematoma compressing the right atrium, right pulmonary artery, and superior and inferior caval veins was peeled off from the pericardium and surface of the heart (see . A longitudinal supracoronary aortotomy was performed on the anterior aneurysmal wall. A circular dissection flap was observed on the circumference of the aortic wall originating distal to the sinotubular junction. The dissection flap extended on the ascending aorta towards the inferior wall of the aortic arch; the origin of the large vessels was unaffected. The ascending aorta was resected above the sinotubular junction up to 2 cm proximal to the origin of the brachiocephalic trunk and was replaced with a 30 mm-diameter FlowWeave Bioseal® vascular graft (Jotec GmbH, Hechingen, Germany) (see and . The Medtronic Hall 23 aortic valve was in good condition, and no pannus was observed.
Postoperatively, the patient arrived to the ICU intubated and mechanically ventilated and standard monitoring was started. The invasive mechanical ventilation P-SIMV (pressure-synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation) was continued until the morning of day 1 without any acute events at the moment of extubation. Vasoactive-inotropic support [Dobutamine (Dobutamina®, Panpharma Luitre, France) 5 μg/kg/ min + Noradrenaline (Noradrenaline Norepinephrine (tartrate) Aguettant®, Laboratoire Aguettant, Lyon, France) 0.2 μg/kg/min, inotropic score of 25], and vasodilators [Nitroglycerine (Nitronal®, G. Pohl-Boskamp GmbH&Co. KG, Hohenlockstedt, Germany) 7.5 μg/kg/min], were continued from operating room. Antibiotic therapy [Cefazoline (Zolinef®, Medochemie Ltd. (Factory C), Limassol, Cyprus) 6 g/day + Vancomycin (Vancomicina Rompharm®, S.C. Rompharm Company S.R.L., Otopeni, IL, Romania) 2 g/day] was started in order to prevent infectious complications.
In the first three days postoperatively the patient experienced an expected normal clinical, hemodynamic and paraclinical evolution, with mean values pCO2 of 27.61±5.41 mmHg, pO2 of 138.67±52.87 mmHg, pH 7.39±0.08, haemoglobin 7.85±0.85 g/dL, and electrolytes (Na+ of 139.36±2.7 mEq/L, K+ of 3.89±0.51 mEq/ L). On continuous oxygen mask with a flow of 4-6 l/min, oxygen saturations (SpO2) range from 97-99% (98.36±0.79%).
In the third postoperative day, an unexpected cardiopulmonary arrest suddenly occurred. Successful CPR manoeuvres were performed, and P-SIMV was reinitiated for the next 2 hours, continued with pressure support ventilation (PSV) for 8 hours. Later on he was once again extubated without any acute events. The next 2 days in the intensive care unit were uneventful, blood gas values were in physiologic parameters (pCO2 31.06±3.35 mmHg, pO2 145.39±33.45 mmHg, SpO2 98.61±0.61%, pH values of 7.45±0.05). Vasoactive-inotropic support was gradually stopped in day 4 (Norepinephrine) and day 5 (Dobutamine), respectively.
Our patient was discharged after 25 days of hospitalization on a pharmacological regimen consisting of a vitamin K antagonist (Trombostop®, Terapia a Sun Pharma Company, Cluj-Napoca, Romania) beta-blockers (Coryol®, KRKA, d.d. Novo mesto, Slovenia), a fixed-dose combination (FDC) of sartan and a calcium channel blocker (Twynsta®, Boehringer Ingelheim International GmbH, Ingelheim am Rhein, Germany), combined diuretics [spironolactone + furosemide (Diurex®, Terapia a Sun Pharma Company, Cluj-Napoca, Romania), and statins (Sortis®, Pfizer Manufacturing Deutschland GmbH, Freiburg, Germany).