A 78-year-old man with a history of persistent atrial fibrillation, on rivaroxaban 15 mg, presented to our hospital with breathlessness. His New York Heart Association (NYHA) class was III. His CHADS2 score was 2, and his HAS-BLED score was 1. His blood pressure was 134/83 mmHg, heart rate 90 b.p.m., oxygen saturation 98% (room air), with no fever. Physical examination revealed mild pitting oedema and no chest murmurs or rales. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a left ventricular ejection fraction (51%) and left atrial and ventricular enlargement (left atrial dimension, 53 mm; left ventricular end-diastolic dimension, 55 mm; and left ventricular end-systolic dimension, 40 mm). Doppler ultrasonography revealed left atrial pressure elevation (E/e′: 15.8), trivial tricuspid regurgitation, and a large shunt flow into the pulmonary artery . Cardiac computed tomography revealed giant CPFs from the left anterior descending artery (LAD) and right coronary artery (RCA) to the pulmonary artery. Furthermore, a small coronary artery aneurysm (10 × 12 mm) was observed in the ostium of the LAD . Coronary angiography revealed that the coronaries had no significant obstructive lesions. Right heart catheterization revealed a significant left-to-right shunt (Qp/Qs 2.1), and oximetry analysis revealed a significant oxygen step-up of 15% (72–87%) in the pulmonary artery. Right atrial pressure was 10/9/8 mmHg; right ventricular pressure, 35/6/8 mmHg; mean pulmonary artery pressure, 37/19/29 mmHg; pulmonary capillary wedge pressure, 21/21/18 mmHg; cardiac output, 5.92 L/min; cardiac index, 3.48 L/min/m2. Thus, the CPFs were considered the main cause of the symptoms.
Coronary-to-pulmonary artery fistula coil embolization was performed twice to reduce the left-to-right shunt flow. Initially, the fistula arising from the RCA was embolized using a 6 Fr Judkins Right guiding catheter (Launcher®, Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA), a guide-extension catheter (Guideplus™ Ⅱ, Nipro, Osaka, Japan), and a guidewire (ASAHI SUOH 03®, ASAHI Inc., Aichi, Japan) running through a strongly bent malformed vessel. After inserting a microcatheter (Excelsior®1018®, Stryker, Kalamazoo, MI, USA) into the vessel, the malformed blood vessel was embolized using detachable coils (three Target XXL®s: 6 × 400 mm, 5 × 200 mm, and two Target XL® Softs: 4 × 120 mm) (Stryker Inc., Tokyo, Japan) (, , ). The procedure improved Qp/Qs from 1/2.1 to 1/1.5. One month later, a second embolization procedure was performed for fistulas arising from the LAD. Intravascular ultrasonography (Opticross™; Boston, Natick, MA, USA) identified two fistulas arising separately from the LAD. A 6 Fr EBU 3.5 guiding catheter (Launcher®, Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA), a guide-extension catheter (Guideplus™ II, Nipro, Osaka, Japan), and a guide wire (SION blue, Asahi Inc., Aichi, Japan) were inserted into the LAD. A steering microcatheter (Excelsior®1018®, Stryker, Kalamazoo, MI, USA) was inserted into the malformed vessel. Rapid pacing was delivered via a temporary pacing catheter placed in the right ventricle to reduce the coronary blood flow and prevent the coils from being washed away. Two fistulas were embolized using detachable coils (two Target XXL®s: 8 × 400 mm and four Target XL® Softs: 8 × 300 mm and 4 × 120 mm) (, , ). After coil embolization, the major shunt flow disappeared angiographically, and Qp/Qs significantly decreased to 1/1.2. Further, the LAD’s resting full-cycle ratio, tested using Pressure Wire™ X (Abbott, Illinois, USA), increased from 0.79 to 0.93. Bepridil 100 mg was prescribed the day after the reduced cardiac load due to the reduction or amelioration of shunt flow. His atrial fibrillation became sinus rhythm.
One month post-procedure, no shunt flow due to the CPF was detected using transthoracic echocardiography. His breathlessness improved (NYHA class I). Six months later, follow-up coronary angiography revealed a small shunt flow from both CPFs; however, the aneurysm size never changed angiographically . We planned to monitor the coronary artery aneurysm using echocardiography and coronary angiography; if it enlarges to meet the surgical criteria, surgery will be considered.