A 27-year-old Japanese woman was admitted to a local hospital for treatment of a painful bilateral hip joint. Based on assessment of the radiological findings, she was diagnosed with AVN and referred to the study site for surgical management of her condition. The patient had no history of disease (for example, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) or human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)), alcohol abuse, steroid use, trauma or diving (causing dysbarism), and her laboratory findings were normal. However, as shown in her family pedigree, and her family clinical findings, more than three generations of her family have hip joint lesions: the proband (IV-1), her father (III-20) and her grandmother (II-9), II-1, 3, 5, III-3, 6, 11, 15 (Figure , Table ). These findings suggest the presence of autosomal dominant inheritance with a high level of penetrance within this family (not shown).Although our patient’s radiological findings indicated osteonecrosis-like lesions of both femoral heads, the plain radiographic (Figure ), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (Figure ), and computed tomography (CT) (Figure ) findings were negative for AVN induced by steroids and alcohol. Our patient’s anteroposterior (AP) radiographs of the other sites (knees, ankles, spine, hands, elbows) revealed almost normal findings (Figures and
).
Haplotype analysis of the family members was performed by examining select candidate genes from the critical interval for epiphyseal dysplasia of the femoral head on 12q13. The entire coding regions of COL2A1, along with the flanking intronic regions, were amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using the Ex Taq™ system with an ABI PRISM® 3100 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster, CA, USA) and a BigDye® Terminator Cycle Sequencing Kit (Applied Biosystems). The complementary deoxyribonucleic acid (cDNA) sequence of COL2A1 was obtained from GenBank (accession no. NM_001844.4). For cDNA numbering, +1 corresponds to the A of the ATG translation initiation codon 1 in the reference sequence (Figure ). A G→A transition of COL2A1 (c.1744G>A (p.Gly582Ser)) was detected in the affected member in each of the three generations of the family (Figures and
). This transition predicts the replacement of glycine with serine in COL2A1. Based on this finding, members of the family were diagnosed with inherited epiphyseal dysplasia located on the femoral head. For those three affected members in whom autosomal dominant inheritance of the disease was strongly suspected (IV-1, III-20, II-9), the chromosomal position of the gene to COL2A1 (c.1744G>A (p.Gly582Ser)) was mapped. No mutation was detected in the COL2A1 coding region of the mother or in a normal control (Figure ).