A 14-year-old female presented with mild pain and difficulty in walking since childhood, difficulty in squatting and crossed leg sitting, having had no previous diagnosis or treatment for the hip. On examination, there were restriction of internal rotation and abduction of the hip with mild shortening on the left side. Pelvic radiograph showed a subluxation and partial deformation of the left femoral head with a shallow dysplastic acetabulum and a disrupted Shenton’s line. The acetabular index was 38 degrees and the neck shaft angle on CT scan and X-ray was 160 degrees. Femoral head anteversion was more than 20 degrees and center-edge angle was 17 degrees (, ). A multiplanar CT scan was done to evaluate the acetabular volume and orientation. Three-dimensional model was printed to plan the osteotomy intraoperatively.
Two-stage surgery was planned. Triple innominate osteotomy to increase the anterolateral femoral head coverage using the Smith Peterson approach with bikini incision was carried out as a first stage and proximal femoral varus derotation osteotomy was done as second stage .
Initial osteotomy was planned and performed on the sterilized 3D model intraoperatively and then on patient. Single cut was made from greater sciatic notch to anterior superior iliac spine, additional osteotomy cuts were made through pubis and ischium, and the entire acetabulum is rotated as a unit to increase the anterolateral coverage, the acetabular part was more displaced laterally than anteriorly to provide femur head coverage without uncovering it posteriorly. A triangular wedge of bone was taken from the iliac crest and was inserted at osteotomy site and fixed with 2 long K-wires. Postoperatively, non-weight-bearing mobilization was commenced and indomethacin was started to prevent heterotrophic ossification.
A lateral closing wedge varus derotation osteotomy was performed as second stage 6 weeks later fixed with a 95 degree blade plate. Post-operative radiologic parameters improved with neck shaft angle of 128 degrees, ante-version of 14 degrees, center-edge angle of 28 degrees, and restored Shenton’s line. Clinically, there was no limb length discrepancy with improvement in hip abduction and no pain in the hip at 3-year follow-up (, ).