An 84-year-old Japanese man with a dual-chamber pacemaker implanted via the left cephalic vein for complete atrioventricular block 7 years prior was admitted to our hospital with syncope due to pacing failure caused by an RV lead fracture (impedance: 1671 Ω, threshold: 2.25 V at 0.4 ms) . He was on 10 mg amlodipine besylate and 100 mg aspirin once a day for hypertension and atherosclerotic stroke, and not on any medicine precipitating syncope. There were no signs of neurological deficits. The previous device check-up conducted 6 months prior to pacing failure showed normal impedance, threshold and pacing status (562 Ω, 1.25 V, 70% of atrial and 100% of ventricular pacing). He had no finding of heart failure, and the transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) on admission showed normal LV contraction (ejection fraction was 55%) and mild tricuspid valve regurgitation. There was no visible dislocation or lead fracture on the chest X-ray.
On the following day, a new RV lead, a thin lumenless lead with a diameter of 1.37 mm (SelectSecure 3830-69, Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) was inserted. It was carefully screwed into the RV septum with a non-deflectable delivery catheter (C315S10, Medtronic). This lead was selected because of its thinness as there was a narrowing of the left cephalic vein caused by the two previous leads. Moreover, we considered that it might be easy to screw it to a specific position by a non-deflectable delivery catheter despite of the obstruction by the previous RV lead. There were no abnormalities and no complications during and immediately after the surgery (intraoperative RV lead impedance and threshold were 814 Ω and 0.9 V, and those immediately after operation were 646 Ω and 1.0 V, respectively).
On the first post-operative day (POD), transient ventricular pacing failure appeared with more than 10-s pause causing syncope. His electrocardiogram showed the right bundle branch block pattern , but there was neither detectable pericardial effusion on TTE nor pneumothorax or dislodgement on X-ray . However, such pacing failure became more frequent. Finally, on the second POD, he had a pacemaker exit block with a slow ventricular escape rhythm (20 b.p.m.) . Right ventricular lead data did not show any remarkable change (RV lead impedance and threshold were 513 Ω and 1.75 V, respectively). A temporary transvenous pacemaker was inserted emergently, and we first found the additional lead penetrating through the cardiac wall on fluoroscopy . Computed tomography (CT) and TTE showed the tip of the additional lead exiting in the left thoracic cavity passing through the septum and the LV free wall . On the fourth POD, an additional new lead (CapSureFix NOVUS 5076-58, Medtronic) was inserted in the RV septum, and the temporary transvenous pacemaker was removed. Finally, an off-pump open chest surgery for the extraction of the penetrating lead was performed on the 20th POD, with prior discontinuation of aspirin for 2 weeks. The tip of the lead was found piercing through the LV posterior free wall into the thoracic cavity . The parietal pleura was scratched by the tip of the lead without lung damage. The lead was extracted from the generator pocket smoothly, and the perforation wounds of the LV and pericardium were sutured using the felt sandwich technique. The clinical course after the open chest surgery was uneventful. On subsequent pathological examination, the tissue sample from the extracted lead showed the normal structure of the myocardium.
The patient was discharged on the 34th POD, and he had been uneventful for a year.