The subject was a 27-year-old, right-hand dominant, male, active-duty U.S. Army Soldier with a chief complaint of acute 12-day history of left-sided neck pain . The subject’s neck pain was preceded by a relatively short, two-hour airplane flight, in which he reported falling asleep in an “awkward position” for approximately 20 minutes. Following the flight, the subject initially reported experiencing neck stiffness which progressed to mild pain by the next morning, and to moderate pain by day 8, prompting the subject to schedule an initial encounter for neck pain with his PCP. The subject denied significant past medical history or recent events of trauma to his neck but did report having awoken with similar neck pain about three months prior which resolved on it’s on within the same week. The subject was in excellent overall health with the exception of a healing Lisfranc injury to his left lower extremity which he incurred two months prior and had used bilateral axillary crutches for approximately six weeks after the lower extremity injury. The timeline of encounters is represented in .
Treatment for this episode of neck pain included the subject visiting a civilian chiropractor twice and a massage therapist once before seeing his PCP for neck pain. The subject reported minimal temporary relief of his symptoms and growing difficulty in being able to maintain any prolonged positions with his visits to the chiropractor and massage therapist. Nine days following onset of pain, and the subject’s first visit with his PCP, he was treated with trigger point injections (Marcaine/Lidocaine) in the upper trapezius muscle with temporary relief in symptoms. His PCP also prescribed Hydrocodone/Acetaminophen (5mg/325mg), Ibuprofen (800mg), and Cyclobenzaprine (10 mg).
On day 11 following initial onset of symptoms, the subject was unable to sleep or find any relief with medication or changing positions and visited a civilian emergency department. The emergency room physician ordered cervical spine radiographs which were unremarkable and diagnosed him with a neck strain. He was prescribed Percocet for pain relief and instructed to follow-up with his PCP. The next day he followed-up with his PCP (PCP visit number 2, 12 days since the onset of his pain) during which a D-dimer test was ordered and he was referred to physical therapy. The subject’s PCP requested he be seen as soon as possible for acute neck pain. The subject’s most immediate goal was to manage pain so that he could get some sleep.