A 62-year-old male patient received open radical gastrectomy with a Billroth I reconstruction for distal gastric cancer in another hospital. One year after the primary operation, he underwent gastroscopic examination due to complaint of upper abdominal pain lasting for one month. A 1.5 cm × 1.5 cm mass was discovered at the gastroduodenal anastomosis, which was confirmed by pathological biopsy as a gastric adenocarcinoma. There was no metastasis on radiological screening (clinical stage: cT1bN0M0). Then the patient was referred to our hospital for treatment of recurrent gastric caner. He has no comorbidities and his body mass index (BMI) was 31.0 kg/m2. He had a history of smoking and drinking for more than 30 years. There was no significant family history.
The patient was operated under general anesthesia as American Society of Anesthesiologists Grade 1. He was placed in the functional lithotomy position and the conventional V glyph 5-port method was used to set the trocars . Radical total gastrectomy was performed in a complete laparoscopic approach. Upon resection, the specimen was transferred to the pelvic cavity for extraction later. Then an intracorporeal Roux-en-Y digestive tract reconstruction was completed, in which the esophagojejunostomy was handsewn.
The specimen extraction procedure was as follows. The anus was sufficiently dilated and the rectum was extensively rinsed with iodine water. Electrocautery was used to cut the anterior wall of the upper rectum just above the peritoneal reflection longitudinally by 3 cm in length. A sterile plastic sleeve was introduced into the peritoneal cavity through the anus. The specimen was grasped with an ovary clamp through the anus-rectum and pulled out of the body. After removal of the plastic sleeve, the rectal incision was repeatedly disinfected with iodophor gauze, and then interrupted sutures were used for full-thickness closure of the incision. The operation was completed after irrigation of the pelvic cavity and rectal lumen with iodine water.
The operative time was 470 min and intra-operative blood loss was 100 mL. The postoperative pathological examination showed T1bN0M0 gastric adenocarcinoma. Postoperatively, the patient followed the same protocol of nutritional support with the standard total gastrectomy patients. He was allowed to take sips of water on the first postoperative day. A fluid diet was introduced on postoperative day 3, and he was allowed to eat soft bread 5 days postoperatively.
Ten days after the operation, the patient presented with sudden onset of abdominal pain, accompanied by fever, chills and sweating. Physical examination revealed tenderness in the lower abdomen with rebound pain. Meanwhile, 200 ml turbid fluid drained from the pelvic drainage tube. We injected ioversol into the pelvic drainage tube under X-ray and found it leaking into the rectal lumen , thus confirmed the diagnosis of proctotomy leak. After nine days of conservative treatment including adequate pelvic irrigation and drainage, parenteral nutrition and antibiotics administration, the leak persisted and the intra-abdominal infection deteriorated, so a diverting ileostomy was performed. Then the patient gradually recovered and was discharged from hospital. Colonoscopy was performed 6 months later, revealing healed proctotomy leak with only a streak of mucosal hyperplasia and edema ; no stenosis or scar contracture was present in the rectal lumen. So the ileostomy was closed. After 3 years of follow up, no tumor recurrence or anal dysfunction was detected.