On April 22nd 2015 a 68-year-old Swiss woman complained about nausea, headache and fever. She had slightly elevated transaminases and elevated C-reactive protein. The general practitioner interpreted the abnormal liver function tests as complication of MTX therapy she had received for treatment of RA since 2002. As transaminases increased over the following eight days to values above upper limit in point-of-care testing, the patient was admitted with preliminary diagnosis of MTX-induced liver injury . On admission the patient complained of nausea, pain below right rib cage and in lower extremities and buttocks. She was afebrile, showed no jaundice and further physical examination was unremarkable. Abdominal ultrasound showed slight liver steatosis. Liver magnetic resonance imaging revealed no further abnormalities. The low-dose MTX therapy (10 mg/week) for erosive RA (positive for anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide-antibody) and the weekly prednisolon dosis (5mg) that she had received for treatment of chronic obstructive lung disease were stopped. The therapy with bronchodilators (ipratropium bromide, budenoside, albuterol) was continued.
Liver transaminases, alkaline phosphatase, gamma-glutamyl transferase, and acute phase proteins (C-reactive protein, ferritin, haptoglobin) were elevated . Leukocytes and platelets were slightly above normal reference limit. Bilirubin, prothrombin time, and activated partial thromboplastin time laid within normal ranges. Serology for hepatotropic viruses and parasites (Hepatitis A virus, Hepatitis C virus, Cytomegalo-virus (CMV), Echinococcus alveolaris, Echinococcus granulosus, Toxoplasma gondii) and anti-mitochondrial-antibody as well as markers for autoimmune hepatitis (anti-liver kidney microsome type 1-, anti-smooth muscle-, anti-soluble liver antigen- antibody) were negative.
To note, tests for specific IgM-antibody against EBV viral capsid antigen (VCA), Hepatitis B-Virus (HBV)-core-antigen (Architect®, Abbott, Wiesbaden, Germany), and HEV (Diapro, Milan, Italy) were positive, indicating a recent infection with three different viruses. Subsequent viral load testing revealed low copy numbers of EBV DNA (928 copies/ml corresponding to 566 IU/ml calibrated to World Health Organisation EBV standard; TaqMan real-time PCR assay according to Berger et al. with modified primers) and HEV RNA (8959 copies/ml; Real-time reverse transcriptase (RT)--PCR assay according to Jothikumar et al. with minor primer modifications to account for HEV genotypic diversity). No HBV DNA could be detected in plasma (COBAS AmpliPrep-COBAS TaqMan 48 HBV Test, Version 2.0, Roche, Switzerland). Additional HEV IgG- and IgM-specific ELISA tests (Beijing Wantai Biological Pharmacy Enterprise), retrospectively done on a serum sample from day 8 of illness confirmed positive results.
One month follow-up showed clearing of both Hepatitis E- and Epstein-Barr viral load and seroreversion of anti-HB core-IgM and anti-HB core-Ig antibody, with significant increase of HEV IgG index. Results of blood tests are shown in Table .
The patient fully recovered after 40 days and suffered no relapse after reinitiation of MTX and prednisolon therapy, in the following five weeks.