A 57-year-old woman with a history of psychosis, obesity and dyslipidaemia was referred to our Unit. She admitted to smoking 120 packets of cigarettes a year but denied alcohol misuse. Her medical and surgical histories were otherwise unremarkable. For many years she had been voluntarily providing foster care and reported exposures to potentially contaminated water. The patient sought medical advice after a 2 month history of fever, which displayed peaks at 39 °C with chills and exhibited remitting courses lasting on average 4–6 days, followed by brief (1–2 days) afebrile spells. During this time, she had received two courses of antibiotics, both of 7 day duration (the first with oral amoxicillin, started 5 days after symptom onset; and the second, 3 weeks later, with oral levofloxacin). The patient was transiently responsive to both courses, displaying abatement of temperature for 5–6 days after each treatment.
Upon admission, the patient was febrile (38.5 °C) and slightly hypotensive, with blood pressure of 100/70 mmHg. She displayed reduced diaphragmatic excursion due to morbid obesity (weight 108 kg, height 155 cm) but chest and cardiac auscultation, as well as abdominal and neurological examinations, were normal. Pertinent laboratory results included a white blood cell count of 8400 cells µl−1 with normal neutrophils, a C-reactive protein (CRP) of 4.3 mg dl−1, procalcitonin (PCT) of 1.05 µg l−1, and normal kidney and liver examinations. Reverse transcriptase PCR testing for SARS-CoV-2 was negative. A chest X-ray revealed mild broncho-vascular markings in the left pulmonary base.
Given the patient's stable clinical condition, no antibiotics were administered pending the results of peripheral blood cultures collected upon admission, which further signalled positivity for Gram-positive bacilli. The micro-organism was identified as spp. by 16S rRNA gene amplification and sequencing with matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time of flight (MALDI-TOF) MS. MS analysis was performed on a mass spectrometer (Bruker Reflex III time-of flight spectrometer; Bruker Daltonics Inc); the cut-offs of identification scores were categorized into ≥2.000, 1.700–1.999 and <1.700 according to the manufacturer’s recommendation. A score of ≥2.000 represented reliable identification at the species level, and <1.700 was interpreted as no identification. Our strain was identified as representing with a score >2.01. It was fully sensitive to ampicillin, gentamicin, ciprofloxacin, linezolid, rifampicin, vancomycin and tetracycline, but resistant to clindamycin.
Based upon sensitivity testing, the patient was started on intravenous amoxicillin/clavulanate 2.2 g t.i.d. plus oral doxycycline 100 mg b.i.d. for 2 weeks. Her fever abated at day 9 after treatment initiation and the patient remained afebrile until being discharged. CRP and PCT returned to normal levels 10 days after antibiotic commencement. Both trans-thoracic and trans-oesophageal echocardiograms failed to reveal endocardial vegetations. Amongst the other investigations performed, orthopantomography showed partial edentulism and periapical granuloma of the left lower molar, and colonoscopy (performed as required by an internal diagnostic protocol for febrile disease) detected a tubular adenoma with low-grade dysplasia at the right colonic flexure, which was endoscopically excised. Given the patient's history of long-lasting febrile disease with transient response to antibiotics, a total-body positron emission tomography/computed tomography examination was also done to rule out endocarditis and/or alternative septic foci, without revealing significant hypermetabolic focalities.
The patient was asymptomatic and displayed normal serum inflammation markers when discharged at completion of antimicrobial treatment, with no further follow-up available.