A 26-year-old female with Loeys-Dietz syndrome complicated by multiple aortic aneurysms and aortic dissection, congenital hydrocephalus treated with a ventriculoperitoneal (VP) shunt, was evaluated after developing new-onset ascites of unclear etiology. She had recently undergone resection and grafting of a thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm with multiple vascular bypasses complicated by bowel wall edema and injury to her inferior vena cava necessitating chest and abdominal washouts. On post-operative day ten, she developed abdominal distension. Physical examination revealed a thin, young woman with multiple abdominal incisions that were stapled, clean, dry and intact without evidence of erythema, purulent drainage or infection. Her abdomen was distended, with bulging flanks and evidence of shifting dullness. CT of her abdomen and pelvis revealed massive ascites and diffuse anasarca. Paracentesis was performed and three liters of straw-colored fluid was removed. Analysis of ascitic fluid revealed 225 WBCs/mm3 (60% neutrophils) with total protein 2.0 g/dL, albumin 1.1 g/dL, and SAAG of 1.5. Bacterial, viral, fungal, and mycobacterial cultures of the ascites were negative. Given the elevated SAAG, there was initial concern for underlying hepatic disease and portal hypertension. Liver biochemical tests, complete blood count, and urinalysis were normal. Doppler interrogation of the hepatic vasculature and echocardiography were normal. A shunt study of the ventriculoperitoneal shunt revealed a normally functioning shunt. Invasive hepatic venous pressure measurements were performed. This revealed a right atrial pressure of 6 mmHg, free hepatic vein pressure of 8 mmHg and a wedged hepatic vein pressure of 10 mmHg for a hepatic venous portal gradient of 2 mmHg (normal < 5 mmHg), demonstrating an absence of portal hypertension. Liver biopsy revealed hepatic parenchyma with mild sinusoidal dilation but without inflammation, steatosis, or fibrosis. A reticulin stain revealed mild irregularity of hepatic cords and focal nodularity but this was not felt to be diagnostic of nodular regenerative hyperplasia . Given the results of the evaluation, a diagnosis of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) ascites was made, possibly related to decreased peritoneal absorption in the setting of post-operative peritoneal inflammation. A peritoneovenous (Denver) shunt was successfully placed into the right internal jugular vein. Initially, her ascites remained persistent and there was concern regarding limited drainage through the Denver shunt. Conversion of her existing VP shunt to a ventriculoatrial (VA) shunt was considered but given her underlying genetic vasculopathy and potential cardiac risks of another procedure, this was deferred. The Denver shunt was evaluated and was deemed to be functioning properly. Over the next several weeks, her ascites gradually resolved and she required no further therapeutic paracenteses.