A 27-year old Caucasian man, referred to our Division in November 2008, underwent to a renal biopsy because of progressive proteinuria. The patient had a history of congenital hearing impairment. At the age of 9 years, he underwent a corrective surgery of pre-auricular fistulae and lateral fistulae of the neck. At the same time, he was discovered to have a right auricular malformation, for which he had a new surgery at the age of 10 years. Urinary anomalies were first discovered at the age of 21 years. No cases of deafness, renal diseases, or branchial fistulae were reported in the patient’s family. Clinical examination showed surgical scars of the pre-existing fistulae in pre-auricular site and on both sides of the neck . A CT scan revealed a complex dysplasia of external, middle and inner ear, with ossicular dislocation, abnormal stapedial–ovalar ratio, dysplasic vestibule and incomplete development of the cochlea of both ears. The external auditory canals were asymmetric. Audiometric exams showed a bilateral, mostly conductive hearing loss. Laboratory values showed serum creatinine of 0.9 mg/dL with a creatinine clearance of 130.6 mL/min and a proteinuria of 2.5 g/day without microhematuria. Renal ultrasound showed hypoplasia of the left kidney and bilateral mild hydronephrosis, even if the cistography did not show signs of vesicoureteral reflux. The renal biopsy was performed with histological pattern compatible with focal glomerulosclerosis . IgM and C3 deposits were focally positive.
This study have been performed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the Ethical Committee of University Hospital in Foggia. Informed consent for genetic studies was obtained from proband and all family members. Genomic DNA was purified from peripheral blood samples of proband and all available family members (two siblings and father), using standard procedures. Mutational analysis of EYA1 gene (NM_000503.4; GeneID: 2138) was performed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and bidirectional sequencing of the coding exons and intron/exon flanking regions. EYA1 flanking intronic primers were designed using primer3 program . PCR products were sequenced using the Big Dye Terminator v3.1 cycle sequencing kit on 3130 Genetic Analyzer (Life Technologies, Ltd). EYA1 mutation was named according to Human Genome Variation Society recommendations . The potential effect of splice site mutation on mRNA splicing was analyzed using Splice Site Prediction server . A skin biopsy was performed in order to get fibroblasts for RNA analysis. Total RNA was extracted from normal and proband’s cultured skin fibroblasts by Qiagen’s RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen) and cDNA was synthesized using High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Life Technologies, Ltd). RT-PCR and sequencing analysis were performed by specific primer pairs (F: 5′-CCGCTACAGACGGGTAAAAG-3′; R: 5′-CCCATACAGCAGGACTTTCG-3′) surrounding the region of exon 15.
Sequence analysis of proband revealed a novel EYA1 heterozygous mutation in the donor splice site of exon 15, c.1475 + 1G > C , which was absent in siblings, father and 100 healthy controls. Mother blood sample was not available. Splice Site Prediction server showed that this change affects heavily the predicted efficiency of the intron 15 splice donor site (score from 0.98 to 0.00). RNA was extracted from normal and proband’s cultured skin fibroblasts and cDNA was synthesized to identify EYA1 aberrant transcripts. cDNA analysis showed that c.1475 + 1G > C mutation affects EYA1 splicing, producing an aberrant PCR product of 119 bp lacking exon 15 respect to the wild type fragment of 241 bp . The aberrant transcript is predicted to encode an EYA1 truncated protein of 456 aa compared to wild type protein of 592 aa .