In December 2009, a 55-year-old female who had never smoked was noted to have left lung opacity on a routine chest X-ray. No significant previous medical history was reported. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest revealed a 1.5 × 1.5 cm nodular lesion in the left upper lobe and hilar lymph node metastasis. Transthoracic needle biopsy histology revealed adenocarcinoma, and the histopathological subtype of the specimen was papillary adenocarcinoma with signet-ring cell components . The specimen was positive for periodic acid–Schiff (PAS) . On immunohistochemical staining, the tumor cells were positive for thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) . Laboratory findings were within normal range, except for the carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level of 158.0 ng/mL (normal range, 0 to 4.3 ng/mL) in the serum. She had multiple dorsal vertebra metastases (cT1N1M1b, stage IV).
Analysis for EGFR gene mutation was performed using a cytological specimen by means of the peptide nucleic acid–locked nucleic acid (PNA-LNA) polymerase-chain-reaction (PCR) clamp method as described previously [,]. The specimen showed a deletion in exon 19 (L747-A750del T751S). We collected mRNA from the same tumor specimens using Pinpoint Slide RNA Isolation System in order to clarify whether there was EML4–ALK (echinoderm microtubule-associated protein-like 4 gene and the anaplastic lymphoma kinase gene) fusion gene in each tumor. Reverse transcription polymerase-chain-reaction (RT-PCR) followed by direct sequencing confirmed the presence of EML4–ALK variant 2 . In addition, EML4–ALK was identified by using fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) for ALK rearrangements and was confirmed by immunohistochemistry for ALK expression in tumor .
A platinum doublet was chosen as first line therapy according to existing treatment protocol in 2009. Four cycles of combination chemotherapy comprising cisplatin and pemetrexed was administered at 3-week intervals. She was judged as having a stable disease. After 7 months, spinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed progression of the dorsal vertebra lesions. Therefore, EGFR-TKI was chosen as a 2nd-line therapy. She received gefitinib therapy at 250 mg/day administered orally for 2 months. CT imaging of the chest showed that the pulmonary nodule was not growing after gefitinib therapy, and the tumor marker levels had not changed. However, spinal MRI demonstrated growing dorsal vertebra metastases 2 months after the start of gefitinib therapy. The carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level increased from 117 ng/ml to 250 ng/ml. Therefore, the patient was judged as having progressive disease. After local radiation therapy with a total of 30 Gy for dorsal metastases, a second EGFR-TKI was chosen given the stable primary disease. She received another EGFR-TKI, erlotinib (150 mg/day), as 3rd-line therapy. After being progression-free for 3 months, spinal MRI revealed a growing thoracic vertebra metastasis. She received 4th-line treatment with 2 cycles of docetaxel (DTX). However, her disease progressed 6 months later. Finally, she received a targeted inhibitor of ALK. The patient initially had SD associated with a temporary decrease in the CEA level from 743 ng/ml to 520 ng/ml, but her disease progressed after 4 months of therapy. The ALK inhibitor treatment was ceased and full supportive care was given. All lines of therapy were well tolerated.