A 58-year-old Japanese man fell from a ladder and sustained a left acetabular fracture. His injury was managed conservatively by a previous physician and he was able to walk without pain. He developed left coxalgia six months after the injury, and was unable to walk when he visited our institution, one year after the onset of pain. He had a past history of hepatic cirrhosis due to hepatitis C and had undergone a living liver transplantation 12 years prior to the current admission. He had consumed no alcohol since the liver transplantation and had no history of corticosteroid therapy.
Plain radiography and computed tomography (CT) images obtained at his first visit to our institution showed a fused acetabular fracture and collapsed left femoral head . Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging demonstrated a low-intensity area on T1-weighted images consistent with the collapsed area . Fat-suppressed T2-weighted images demonstrated a diffuse region of high intensity in the proximal and medial portions of his femoral head. The initial images obtained at the time of injury showed fractures in the acetabular roof and inner wall of his acetabulum without hip dislocation, and an approximate 2mm step-off was observed on the articular surface of the acetabular roof . The acetabular fracture was classified as an anterior column-posterior hemitransverse fracture according to the Judet-Letournel classification system . There was also a fracture on the medial articular surface of his femoral head.
Retrospective revaluation of the plain radiographs and CT images revealed that the weight-bearing area of his femoral head had progressively collapsed, with residual displacement of the acetabular fracture . Dual X-ray absorptiometry showed that our patient’s bone mineral density was 0.657g/cm2 in the unaffected right femoral neck, which was 76% of the young adult mean, indicating the presence of osteopenia. Our patient underwent left total hip arthroplasty for advanced osteoarthritis associated with the collapse of his femoral head. The resected femoral head exhibited a flattened widespread surface with a flap of articular cartilage and subchondral bone, and the cut section demonstrated a subchondral fracture line parallel to the articular surface . Histological examination demonstrated repair tissue consisting of marked fracture callus and vascular rich granulation tissue on both sides of the fracture line . There was no evidence of antecedent osteonecrosis. Based on these histopathologic findings, we determined that the collapsed lesion was caused by a subchondral fracture of his femoral head resulting from acetabular fracture.