An 80-year old Hispanic American female patient presented for the evaluation of recurrent abdominal pain, and excessive bloating after every meal, without any significant past history of weight loss and change in bowel habits. At initial presentation, her vital signs were within normal range. CT abdomen was insignificant. At this point, she was scheduled for the esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD), which showed no significant abnormality. However, her symptoms persisted, and one week later she was scheduled for colonoscopy by a senior gastroenterologist for the evaluation of lower gastrointestinal tract. She was vitally stable, and colonoscopy was passed through the anal canal under the direct visualization. Shortly after the introduction of the scope, significant diverticulosis and kinking were seen the level of the sigmoid colon. Every effort was made to pass, the scope safely beyond that level, but it was not successful; the procedure caused significant discomfort requiring higher dose of propofol and midazolam and the decision made not to proceed further. The scope was withdrawn, and the patient returned to the recovery room. Two hours following colonoscopy, the patient complained of severe LLQ abdominal pain, but she was vitally stable. Additionally, her abdomen was soft; however, significant tenderness in the LLQ of abdomen and subcutaneous crepitus in the right upper thigh was noticed. She was immediately rushed for CT abdomen which revealed massive pneumoperitoneum, pneumo-retroperitoneum, and subcutaneous emphysema (, , ).
At this point, the decision was made to take her back to the operating room (OR). She received proper preoperative intravenous fluids and broad-spectrum antibiotics. Distal sigmoid colon perforation with feculent peritonitis was seen, and laparoscopic Hartman procedure was performed. The postoperative period was uneventful, and her condition improved gradually. Her stoma was functioning very well, and diet advanced gradually. She was discharged home with home health care and scheduled for postoperative follow up in the clinic.