A 19-year-old Brazilian woman who was a nonsmoker and a student was admitted to the emergency ear, nose, and throat department of a university hospital complaining of dysphonia and progressive dyspnea, mainly exercise-related, over the course of approximately 1 year. During videolaryngoscopy, a massive supraglottic lesion was found originating in the left aryepiglottic fold and causing significant obstruction of the laryngeal lumen. The patient required an emergency tracheostomy, and biopsy was performed by direct laryngoscopy. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a well-circumscribed, clearly outlined tumor with regular edges and hyperintensity in T2-weighted images .
Histopathology revealed a proliferation of spindle cells with indistinct cytoplasmic boundaries. The cells were arranged in compact bundles or interlacing fascicles, forming areas of nuclear palisading and Verocay bodies. Few typical mitotic figures were found. There were few hypocellular areas with loosely arranged myxoid matrix. Immunohistochemistry showed positivity for S100 protein, confirming the diagnosis of schwannoma.
Because of the size and location of the lesion, an external surgical procedure was performed, with the tumor being excised via a laryngofissure approach. The lesion involved the aryepiglottic fold, the arytenoid cartilages, and the left vocal cord . Excision of the tumor therefore also required removal of the aryepiglottic fold, the ventricular band, and the upper two-thirds of the left arytenoid, preserving the vocal process of the left arytenoid cartilage. The petiole of the epiglottis was rotated to the left and reinserted to help supraglottic closure. Histopathological results confirmed the diagnosis of schwannoma, with the surgical margins being free of disease.
The patient recovered satisfactorily, with the tracheostomy and nasogastric tubes being removed 15 days after surgery. The patient’s swallowing was normal, and her voice quality was good. The patient was seen in follow-up for 8 years with no signs of recurrence of the lesion .