A 34-year-old woman (height 155 cm, weight 89 kg) suffered from recurrent cholecystitis and was scheduled to undergo laparoscopic cholecystectomy under general anesthesia. She had PAH that was induced by abuse of various drugs, particularly methamphetamine. She had long-term, repeated exposure to methamphetamine and toluene from 17 to 28 years old. When she was 31 years old, she developed whole-body edema and dyspnea and was diagnosed with right ventricular (RV) heart failure due to M-A PAH based on sufficient exposure to methamphetamine and exclusion of other common cases of PAH. Pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) decreased after the administration of epoprostenol (prostaglandin I2); however, alveolar hemorrhage induced by high pulmonary perfusion occurred. She developed hemoptysis and respiratory failure, which required mechanical ventilation. At that point, we observed tolerance to the sedative effect of propofol.
Preoperative assessment of pulmonary arterial catheterization revealed that pulmonary arterial pressure (PAP) and PVR were 82/32 (mean, 50) mmHg and 460 dynes･s/cm5, respectively, with a normal cardiac index of 3.6 L/min/m2. She was receiving multiple PAH-specific medicines, including macitentan 10 mg, tadalafil 40 mg, selexipag 3.2 mg, and sildenafil citrate 60 mg, and several benzodiazepines and antidepressants for the treatment of sleep impairment. Her activated partial thromboplastin clotting time was 47.1 s. The cardiologist and anesthesiologist assessed that her intraoperative risk was very high in accordance with previous reports showing higher mean PAP as a risk factor for increased mortality [–]. We obtained informed consent for cardiorespiratory resuscitation and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation if critical complications occurred.
On arrival in the operating room, we used the standard monitors, including a pulse oximeter, electrocardiograph, capnometer, and bispectral index (BIS) monitor, and monitored the artery blood pressure via a radial artery. In addition, we placed a pulmonary arterial catheter and performed transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) after induction of anesthesia and intubation. Anesthesia was induced with thiopental, rocuronium, and remifentanil and maintained by sevoflurane, remifentanil, fentanyl, and rocuronium. After intubation, we performed a transverse abdominal plane block for postoperative pain control. The ventilation settings were a tidal volume of 5 ml/kg (450 ml), positive end-expiratory pressure of 5 cmH2O, and ventilation rate of 12/min. The BIS value was between 47 and 60 during the operation. As shown in Fig. , the mean PAP and the ratio of mean PAP to mean artery pressure were gradually elevated from 28 to 40 mmHg and 0.36 to 0.58, respectively, after peritoneal insufflation was initiated at 8 mmHg. We regulated the dosage of dobutamine and nitroglycerin, and the target range of endo-tidal CO2 was set around 35 mmHg to decrease PVR. Intraoperative TEE demonstrated RV dilation without significant change after peritoneal insufflation. Cholecystectomy was uneventfully performed, followed by the replacement of the tracheal tube with the i-gel (Intersurgical Ltd., UK) and discontinuation of anesthesia.
When all procedures had been performed, anesthesia was discontinued. The patient was extubated after confirming smooth emergence. The patient was transferred to an intensive care unit, and the mean PAP was around 40 mmHg during the intensive care unit stay. Three days after the operation, she was discharged without complication.