An 82-year-old monocular man attended the outpatient unit with complains of metamorphopsia and reduced vision of 1-week duration in his only eye. The patient’s general medical history was significant for arterial hypertension treated with metoprolol, balloon angioplasty, and cardiac pacemaker insertion several years previously. His ophthalmic history was significant for severe ocular trauma in the right eye in childhood, which eventually caused phthisis. His left eye had undergone uncomplicated phacoemulsification 3 months previously in our center and according to the patient’s charts the 1-month postoperative best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was logarithmic mean angle of resolution (logMAR) 0.0. There was no history of other ocular conditions. Written informed consent for the publication of this report was obtained from the patient.
At presentation, the patient’s BCVA was logMAR 0.2, the Amsler test was positive, and cystoid macular edema was evident. The rest of the ophthalmic examination was unremarkable. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) revealed the presence of cystoid macular edema due to VMT . No breaks were found at the peripheral retina. On the basis of these findings, the patient was scheduled for ocriplasmin injection. On the day the ocriplasmin injection was scheduled, the patient reported that his vision had spontaneously improved. Indeed, BCVA was logMAR 0.1 and no VMT could be detected . Consequently, the ocriplasmin injection was not administered.
Three weeks later the patient presented with complains of metamorphopsia, while VMT was evident on OCT . Ocriplasmin was injected, and at the 1-month post-injection visit the patient’s BCVA was logMAR 0.1 without evidence of VMT . However, at the 2-month post-injection visit, VMT reappeared . After counseling with the patient, conservative management with observation and topical administration of nepafenac three times daily was advocated.
At the 3-month post-injection visit there was no VMT, while BCVA was logMAR 0.0 . More than 3 years after the ocriplasmin injection the patient is free of metamorphopsia and VMT, while BCVA remains logMAR 0.0.