A Filipino male in his 30s presented with a persistent non-tender erythematous plaque over his right upper back for many years. It began as a faint erythema that slowly developed into a ring-like plaque lesion. It was non-pruritic in nature and the plaque did not respond to topical antifungal treatment. He had this skin lesion prior to arriving in Singapore but decided to seek medical attention as the lesion progressed with new erythematous papules developing over the face, trunk and upper limbs in the past 2 months. There was no prior trauma or irritants applied to the skin and the patient did not complain of any systemic symptoms of fever, loss of weight and night sweat. There was no numbness or weakness and he did not have another co-existing medical condition. He denied ingestion of medication and sexual contact with a commercial sexual worker. The patient came to Singapore 7 years ago to work as nursing personnel and travelled back to the Philippines once to twice a year to visit his family. His housemate and family members did not have any skin complaint.
On physical examination, there was a large well demarcated annular plaque of 10 by 7.5 cm over the right upper back, which extended to the axilla . It was erythematous, infiltrated and not scaly. There were also multiple monomorphic papules of 0.5 to 1 cm in size over the upper limbs , face, proximal aspect of lower limbs and the gluteal region. Punch biopsies of the skin lesions were taken from the plaque at the back and one of the papules at the upper limb. Microscopic examination of the skin biopsies revealed a diffuse superficial dermal infiltrate of epithelioid histiocytes without well-formed granulomas surrounded by lymphocytes or any multinucleate Langhans giant cells. Foamy cytoplasm was seen in only a portion of the histiocytes and was subtle . Fite-positive bacilli were identified within the inflammatory infiltrate . All the controls demonstrated appropriate reactivity. In view of the histopathological findings, the microbiologists were consulted and deparaffinized samples from the skin lesions were sent for non-tuberculous mycobacteria (NTM) and leprosy molecular testing, which were performed using commercially available line-probe assays INNO-LiPA Mycobacteria v2 (Innogenetics, Belgium) and GenoType LepraeDR v1 (Hain LifeScience, Germany), respectively. The result was positive for with no mutation detected at rpoB (rifampicin), gyrA (ofloxacin) and folP1 (dapsone) gene targets by the assay.
The patient was followed up with the history and physical examination revisited. He came from a rural area with rice paddy fields and subsequently moved to the city to work. In Singapore, he worked in the operating theatre and assisted the anesthetist in intubation. A surgical mask and gloves were worn in the workplace at all times. He did not recall coming into contact with people suffering from leprosy. A detailed physical examination also revealed diminished sensation at the centre of the large annular indurated plaque over the right upper back and the ulnar nerves were mildly thickened bilaterally. Coarse facies was not noted. The patient was diagnosed to have borderline lepromatous leprosy and was counselled for the disease with the management explained. He was subsequently treated with multi-drug therapy (MDT) consisting of rifampicin, clofazimine and dapsone and responded to the treatment. The plaque and papules flattened with minimal induration. The case was notified to the relevant health authority and the infection control department in the workplace. Screening of his housemate was advised and he was offered a single dose of rifampicin for chemoprophylaxis.