A 56-year-old female presented with a primary complaint of persistent insomnia and anxiety over the past 3°years, which had progressively worsened over the last 3°months. The patient reported chronic psychological distress arising from familial conflicts, resulting in difficulties falling asleep. Typically, she reported experiencing a delay of 1−2 h before falling asleep on almost a daily basis. Her sleep was described as shallow without any instances of snoring or choking, but frequently interrupted by 3−4 awakenings throughout the night. These interruptions further hindered her ability to return to sleep, leading to fatigue, daytime drowsiness, and mood fluctuations. Although she reported occasionally relying on medication to get to sleep, such as diazepam, these interventions had not significantly alleviated her symptoms. Previously, the patient had underwent SGB treatment at another tertiary hospital; unfortunately, this resulted in the development of a neck hematoma and hoarseness of her voice. Since experiencing these adverse effects, her condition had gradually deteriorated.
Based on the patient’s diagnosis and treatment records regarding previous insomnia treatments received at other medical facilities, we performed routine physical examination (e.g., maxillofacial and throat examination, cardiopulmonary auscultation, electrocardiogram, and blood pressure) and laboratory tests (routine blood tests, coagulation function, liver and kidney function, and blood sugar tests) when the patient was first seen. These examinations did not reveal any significant abnormalities. Simultaneously, we assessed the patient’s Sleep Apnea Scale (SAS) scores and Insomnia Severity Index (ISI) scores. The results revealed that the patient obtained an SAS score of 64 and an ISI score of 15, thus confirming the presence of both insomnia and anxiety. Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with chronic insomnia using the Guidelines for Diagnosis and Treatment of Insomnia in China . With the patient’s informed consent and explicit agreement to proceed with treatment, she underwent ultrasound-guided SGB using the lateral paravein out-of-plane approach at our medical facility.
Initially, the neck vessels were examined by an ultrasound scan. The results indicated that the left vertebral artery and its branches covered a significant portion of the longus colli muscle at the C6−C7 level, while the right vertebral artery ran outside the longus colli muscle at the same level . Consequently, it was determined that a bilateral paracarotid approach would not be suitable for this patient. Instead, we proposed a new method for SGB called the lateral paravein out-of-plane approach. This approach is similar to a recently reported ultrasound-guided SGB technique that employs the lateral out-of-plane approach but eliminates the need to puncture the internal jugular vein, which is a useful benefit, because following the puncture of the internal jugular vein, some patients may experience local hematoma, venous inflammation, venous thrombosis, pneumothorax, and other complications. Although these complications are not frequently encountered during the procedure, attempts should be undertaken to mitigate their incidence .
Specifically, the patient was positioned in a supine position with her head tilted backward. The long axis of the ultrasound probe was aligned parallel to the plane of the cricoid cartilage, forming a 45° angle with the sagittal plane of the neck. Moving from the medial side, the probe was used to scan beyond the lateral border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. The ultrasound image clearly displayed the transverse process of C6, as well as its anterior and posterior lymph nodes, along with the anatomical relationship between the sternocleidomastoid muscle, internal jugular vein, and carotid artery . However, the presence of a prominent anterior tubercle on the C6 transverse process hindered the puncture. To overcome this hurdle, the ultrasound probe was slightly shifted toward the direction of C7 until the anterior tubercle was no longer visible on the screen. Subsequently, the patient was asked to rotate her head 60° to the left, which maximally extended the internal jugular vein toward the left. Although not an issue in the presented case, in cases where the internal jugular vein remains filled to a significant extent, it may be beneficial to contemplate assuming a 30° head-up, feet-down posture, while also inclining the patient’s head toward the opposite side to elongate the sternocleidomastoid muscle .
The patient was instructed to open her mouth slightly, relax the anterior neck muscles, and to stay steady to allow for the planning of the puncture path, which was done using color Doppler and ultrasound guidance, avoiding important structures, such as the vertebral artery, internal jugular vein, and cervical nerves . The crucial step in enhancing the lateral paravein out-of-plane approach for SGB involves conducting puncture guidance along the median line of the linear array probe. By rotating the probe adjacent to the patient’s internal jugular vein, with the patient’s spine serving as the axis, the most optimal route for administering the SGB can be identified. It is essential to record the requisite distance for the puncturing and subsequently implement the puncture on the exterior of the internal jugular vein while following the guidance delineated along the median line .
The puncture pathway can be simulated by opening the guide wire. Distance 1 corresponds to an out-of-plane approach, which is adjacent to the outer aspect of the internal jugular vein. The simulated puncture distance for this approach in the present case was 2.59 cm . Distance 2 represents the in-plane approach from the lateral aspect, with a simulated puncture distance of 3.63 cm, which posed a higher risk here due to the presence of the carotid and vertebral arteries along the puncture trajectory. It is advisable to compress the internal jugular vein as much as possible before performing the puncture. By using the out-of-plane approach, the needle was advanced along the puncture guide wire, and a saline test was performed during the procedure to verify the position of the needle tip . Once the needle position was confirmed, 5 mL of 1% lidocaine was injected into the surface of the longus colli muscle and the deep aspect of the prevertebral fascia in order to complete the blockade. The success of the blockade was determined by observing the presence of Horner’s syndrome (drooping eyelid, constricted pupil, and sunken eye), as well as flushing of the conjunctiva and skin on the same side, blockage of the nose, and a lack of sweating on the blocked side.
Following the procedure, the patient was subjected to a 30-minute observation period in the hospital. We administered SGB therapy to the patient every other day, along with 12-day pyrazolone treatment (starting initially with a dosage of 10 mg and then reducing this to 5 mg on the fourth day). After eight sessions of SGB therapy, on the 15th day, the patient’s initial ISI score of 15 had decreased to 4, and their PSQI score had improved from 17 (indicating poor sleep quality, assessed on the third day) to 8 (indicating good sleep quality). Additionally, there was also a notable improvement in the SAS standard score, reducing from 64 (moderate anxiety) to 56 (mild anxiety). Importantly, the patient did not report experiencing any discomfort throughout the entire treatment process. Furthermore, there were no occurrences of SGB-related complications, such as infection or bleeding, and no signs of nerve damage were observed.