A 24-year-old Hindu female, known case of bilateral polycystic kidney disease, presented to medical out-patient department (OPD) with complaint of watery diarrhea for one month. It started with the frequency of 4–5 episodes per day and was non-blood stained. It was associated with malaise, vomiting, abdominal pain, loss of appetite and weight loss. Gradually, it was severe enough to affect her daily activities. There was no history of fever, food poisoning and travel to distant places. She had no prior history of tuberculosis (TB), hypertension and diabetes mellitus. There was also not any relevant surgical and medication history for any disease.
On general examination, she was ill-looking, cachectic but conscious and oriented. She had pallor in eyes, tongue and hands and edema in bilateral lower limbs. There were multiple palpable cervical lymph nodes as shown in . At admission, her vital parameters were stable and no abnormality was detected during systemic examination. Later during hospital stay, she had bilateral decreased air entry with conducted sounds and bilateral (right > left) crepitations on chest examination. On per abdomen examination, she had distended abdomen with positive shifting dullness test. The differentials considered at the time of admission were tuberculosis, malabsorption syndrome, irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).
The laboratory investigations are shown in .
During etiological workup, the tropical fever profile was negative. During the anemia workup, peripheral blood smear (PBS) had findings of microcytic hypochromic anemia. The chest X-ray showed consolidation, bilateral pleural effusion with no miliary shadows as in . Ultrasonography of abdomen and pelvis revealed bilateral pleural effusion with gross ascites. There was evidence of pleural and pericardial effusion with normal ejection fraction on contrast enhanced computed tomography (CECT) of chest and 2D-echocardiography respectively. The CECT (chest, abdomen and pelvis) also showed multifocal consolidation in lungs with surrounding ground glass opacities in left lung suggesting tuberculosis (TB) etiology. The CECT chest and abdomen showing pleural effusion is shown in . Likewise, multiple enlarged mesenteric and retroperitoneal lymph nodes with gross ascites and peritoneal thickening were also seen. All these findings were suggestive of disseminated TB. Mantoux test revealed no induration after 48 hours. Fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) of right cervical lymph node was done. It revealed tubercular lymphadenitis with acid fast bacilli (AFB) seen in Ziehl-Neelsen (ZN) stain as shown in , . USG guided aspiration of ascitic, pleural and pericardial fluid was done and sent for fluid analysis. The Gene Xpert of pleural fluid detected Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) without rifampicin resistance. All these investigations were done to find out the etiology for symptoms and signs at the time of presentation and polyserositis that was developed later during the hospital stay. The fluid analysis is shown in .
The serum ascites albumin gradient (SAAG) was >1.1 g/dl, not suggestive of TB pathology. Similarly, pleural and pericardial fluid did not fulfil the Light's criteria for exudative effusion . But the lymphocytic predominance in ascitic and pleural fluid still suggested TB pathology in accordance with FNAC findings. Despite the dilemma of exudative or transudative polyserositis, diagnosis of disseminated TB was done and anti-TB therapy (ATT) was started with 2 months HRZE (Isoniazid, Rifampicin, Pyrazinamide and Ethambutol) plus 7–10 months HRE based on the national guideline . Two pint of packed red blood cell (PRBC) was also transfused during the course of stay in hospital as her hemoglobin dropped down to 6.5 g/dl.
She accepted the treatment and was tolerating medications well. She was then discharged on ATT with counselling to have good nutrition and follow up on regular basis.