Our 78-year-old male presented with the complaint of bilateral lower limb swelling, weakness, and tingling sensation of finger and toes for 4 days, following 15 days after the second dose of AstraZeneca vaccination. Weakness was acute in onset and gradually progressed to the upper limbs within a week and was associated with difficulty in sitting, standing, and walking activities. He had no history of trauma, headache, photophobia, double vision, abnormal body movements, loss of consciousness, bowel or bladder incontinence, and respiratory or gastrointestinal illness. However, there is a past history of Hashimoto thyroiditis, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and have been taking medicines for these conditions.
On examination vitals were stable (blood pressure 160/80 mm, respiratory rate 18/min, pulse rate 86 bpm, and SpO2 96%). The Glasgow Coma Scale was recorded at 15/15 and all cranial nerves were intact. Muscle bulk was normal but the tone and power were diminished. Power of both the shoulder and elbow 3/5, left: wrist flexor 2/5, extensor 3/5, handgrip strength 50% and right: wrist flexor 2/5, extensor 2/5, handgrip strength 60%, left: hip flexor, abductor, and extensor 2/5, knee flexor and extensor 3/5, dorsal flexion, plantar flexion, and great toe 1/5, right: hip flexor abductor and extensor 2/5, knee flexor 2/5, extensor 3/5, dorsiflexion and plantar flexion 1/5 and great toe 1/5. Sitting balance test: static was good and dynamic was fair and reflexes were preserved. The sensation was decreased on the right lower limb more than on the left lower limb to the pinprick test.
Laboratory investigation showed hemoglobin (12.7 g/dl), packed cell volume (38.7%), increased C-reactive protein (66.6 mg/l), hypoalbuminemia (2.90 g/dl), aspartate aminotransferase (103 U/l), and elevated alkaline phosphatase (488 U/l). The patient was hyperkalemic (5.40 mmol/l) and his serum urea was 47 mg/dl. Also, the random blood sugar was 175 mg/dl and free T3 was 1.70 pg/ml. Cerebrospinal fluid showed adenosine deaminase 2.86 Ul, glucose 60 mg/dl, and total protein of 53 mg/dl. No significant findings on the computed tomography scan. Nerve conduction findings were consistent with acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy.
Nerve conduction study tables show the electrophysiological evidence of sensorimotor axonomylenic polyneuropathy of a severe degree along with the abnormal motor, sensory, and F-wave patterns in Figures and , respectively.
With the help of clinical findings and nerve conduction findings, Brighton’s criteria patient was diagnosed with GBS and was admitted to the Mediciti Hospital Kathmandu. Five doses of Intravenous immunoglobulin were commenced from the day of admission and his condition gradually improved afterward. Along with the medical treatment patient also underwent physiotherapy. He was discharged after 10 days following the treatment with immunoglobulins. With three follow-ups in between and 6 months later, he finally recovered with no neuromotor or sensory dysfunction at the time. Our patient believes that his conditions were due to COVID vaccination and also satisfied with the treatment provided in Figure .