A 72-year-old woman with a history of Graves’ disease treated by radioiodine ablation and no smoking history presented with subacute proximal muscle weakness, accompanied by myalgia and a rash. Dermatologic examination was significant for non-pruritic, macular erythema over the posterior arms; discrete papules on the second and fourth distal interphalangeal joints of the left hand; dusky, reticulated erythema involving the proximal, lateral thighs (evoking the “holster sign” ); and linear, erythematous plaques extending inferiorly from the nape. Elevations were noted in the levels of creatine kinase (CK), aldolase, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), aspartate transaminase (AST), and alanine transaminase (ALT). Suspicion for dermatomyositis prompted initiation of high-dose prednisone (1 mg/kg) on hospital day 2, in spite of which symptoms failed to improve and enzyme levels continued to rise, peaking on hospital day 8 (cf. Fig. ; peak values were as follows: CK 3108 U/L, aldolase 25.9 U/L, LDH 594 U/L, AST 252 U/L, ALT 344 U/L). Immune serology studies, encompassing general and myositis-specific antibodies, were uniformly negative (ANA, Jo-1, PL-12, PL-7, EJ, OJ, Mi-2, SRP, Ku, U2 snRNP, PM/Scl). Electromyography revealed fibrillations and positive sharp waves, indicative of an irritative myopathic process affecting the proximal muscles. Muscle biopsy demonstrated immune myopathy with perimysial pathology (IMPP). Given the presumptive diagnosis of dermatomyositis, a malignancy work-up was initiated, and computed tomography (CT) of the thorax revealed a 2.1-cm subsolid nodule in the right middle lobe. Relative to a CT scan acquired four years earlier, the nodule was stable in size but had progressed in fractional solidity from 15% (i.e., predominantly ground-glass opacified) to 90% . PET/CT showed minimal 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) avidity (standardized uptake value (SUV) 1.3) in the right middle lobe lesion, consistent with its indolent nature, and no evidence of lymph node or metastatic disease. Given the refractoriness of symptoms to high-dose corticosteroids and biopsy evidence of a DM-spectrum process (IMPP), methotrexate (gradually dose-escalated from 7.5 to 15 mg weekly) and IVIG (2 g/kg monthly) were initiated on hospital day 11. Despite the indolence of the pulmonary lesion, the heightened risk of malignancy in the setting of presumed DM prompted thoracoscopic right middle lobectomy and mediastinal lymph node dissection, which the patient underwent on hospital day 16, after spirometry and diffusion capacity testing demonstrated satisfactory pulmonary function. Histopathologic analysis revealed a 2.1-cm, moderately differentiated, invasive adenocarcinoma, arranged in papillary (60%), acinar (30%), micropapillary (5%), and lepidic (5%) proliferative patterns. There was one intraparenchymal node involved by direct extension; level 4R, 7, and 11 lymph nodes were negative for malignancy. Her stage was pT1cN1M0 or IIB (AJCC 7th edition ). Molecular studies of the tumor (specifically, short-read sequencing of a target-enriched library of 130 genes that are frequently mutated in solid tumors) disclosed a constitutively activating mutation of EGFR (c.2156G>C; p.G719A) and a mutation of β-catenin (CTNNB1) within the GSK3 β (GSK3B) phosphorylation region (c.97T>C, p.S33P), with variant allele fractions of 23.5 and 8.6%, respectively. Following surgical excision of the lung tumor, the patient experienced a dramatic improvement in muscle strength and disappearance of the rash. Deltoid and hip-flexor strength increased from 5/10 at the time of surgery to 8/10 within a week. Her enzyme levels continued to decline and were all within the normal range at the time of discharge on hospital day 29. Upon discharge, the corticosteroid dose was tapered from 1 to 0.083 mg/kg/d over a one-month period and the methotrexate discontinued, without relapse of dermatomyositis symptoms; the corticosteroid and IVIG were both discontinued approximately one month thereafter. At the time of writing, the patient continued to show improvements in functional status, and had recently discontinued adjuvant chemotherapy with carboplatin and pemetrexed owing to toxicities.