A 64-year-old male (167 cm tall, weighing 52 kg) was scheduled for gastrojejunostomy because of gastrointestinal obstruction owing to pancreatic cancer. He could not ingest solids but took liquid nutrition without problems before admission. Preoperative examination indicated slight hypoproteinemia and renal dysfunction (total protein: 6.1 g/dl, albumin: 3.9 g/dl, estimated glomerular filtration rate: 46.5 ml/min/1.73 m2). He was admitted to our hospital on the weekend, and intravenous rehydration was performed for 3 days. He was permitted to take oral rehydration until the night before surgery. A nasogastric tube for evacuating the gastric contents was not used before induction of general anesthesia because the patient had no abdominal complaints. General anesthesia was induced with a target-controlled infusion of propofol 3.5 mcg/ml and remifentanil 0.3 mcg/kg/min. Soon after loss of consciousness, 50 mg of rocuronium was administered, and cricoid pressure was applied. Suddenly, the patient vomited a massive volume of gastric contents. While suctioning the vomitus, intubation was achieved using a direct laryngoscope. During intubation, we did not observe a pharyngeal reflex or a laryngeal reflex. Six liters of gastric contents were evacuated via the nasogastric tube. With suction via the tracheal tube, we were able to drain the aspirated gastric contents. At this point, we considered postponing the operation; however, considering the patient’s prognosis for the primary disease and that the operation time was not anticipated to be long, we discussed the options with the surgeon and decided to perform gastrojejunostomy.
Gastrojejunostomy was completed without surgical complications, and the patient was admitted to the high care unit for respiratory management postoperatively, including mechanical ventilation with prone positioning. A chest radiograph obtained at admission to the high care unit is shown in Fig. a. Arterial blood gases were measured after admission to the high care unit after initiating mechanical ventilation using synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation with the following settings: fraction of inspired oxygen (FIO2): 0.7, positive end-expiratory pressure: 8 cm H2O, pressure support: 5 cm H2O, tidal volume: 400 ml, and respiratory rate: 12 breaths/min. Blood gas results were as follows: pH: 7.205, partial pressure of arterial oxygen: 91.6 mmHg, partial pressure of arterial carbon dioxide: 74.1 mmHg, and bicarbonate: 29.3 mmol/L. Prone positioning was performed for approximately 4 h on the first day after the surgery. Additionally, a huge volume of sputum drained during the prone positioning, and oxygenation improved drastically the next day. The partial pressure of arterial oxygen/FIO2 ratio was 381 mmHg with an FIO2 of 0.7 and positive end-expiratory pressure of 8 cmH2O.
Tazobactam/piperacillin 13.5 g/day, sivelestat 250 mg/day, and methylprednisolone 1000 mg/day were administered. Both the patient’s respiratory status and his hemodynamic status were difficult to manage; however, the hemodynamics were responsive to treatment with noradrenaline and vasopressin and fluid resuscitation. He was extubated on postoperative day (POD) 2. His general condition gradually improved, and he was discharged from the hospital on POD 25. A chest radiograph obtained on POD 10 is shown in Fig. b.