A 50-year-old male patient was referred to the department of oral and maxillofacial surgery for a voluminous mandibular and median palatal exostosis . The patient, who was from Ivory Coast, had no medico-surgical history, treatment, allergies or history of tobacco use. There was no specific family history, in particular no history of oral exostoses. He reported frequent consumption of saltwater fish.
Clinical examination revealed signs of bruxism, with the presence of marked linea alba, significant dental attrition (Stage III according to the Rozencweig classification), and hypertrophy of the masseter muscles. The palatal torus was small in diameter (0.4 cm) and was not a cause of discomfort. The mandibular tori were voluminous (1.67 and 1.16 cm) and bothered the patient, especially in the lingual position. There were signs of mucosal inflammation due to constant rubbing of the tongue on the exostoses. A surgical resection was indicated due to functional discomfort and the results of the CT scan.
The surgical procedure, carried out in September 2018, by the maxillofacial surgeon consisted of an excision of the mandibular tori by subtractive osteoplasty after an intrasulcular incision and detachment at the level of the base of the teeth . The full thickness flap was raised to the base of the tori bilaterally.
Removal of the tori was performed with piezotome® under 0.9% saline irrigation and separation with bone scissors. Bone regularization was performed with a round burr until a smooth and regular mandibular lingual slope was obtained. Re-application of the flaps was performed by suturing with Fast Vicryl® 4/0. Antibiotic prophylaxis was administered intraoperatively.
Histological analysis found mature cortical bone tissue with no cellular atypia. The two tori measured 1.67 cm and 1.16 cm maximum thickness, with full thickness excision .
At one month of follow-up, a local recurrence with a similar volume as initially (+/− 0.1 cm) was found in the same area. A CT scan was performed to confirm the new recurrence. Considering patient discomfort, a second surgery was carried out (same procedure as the first surgery), but we prescribed a mouth guard, made by our prosthetist, in the postoperative period.
Histological analysis of the recurrence revealed a nodular cortical bone structure with very small caliber interosseous spaces containing capillary vessels. The second analysis was similar to the first, confirming recurrence.
Follow-up one year after the second surgery found no recurrence, and the patient was satisfied with the outcome .