A 28-year-old female patient with a familial tumor history complaining of hematochezia was referred to our hospital in April 2018. Colonoscopy revealed ulcerative lesions in the rectum 7–10 cm from the anal verge with an increased CEA level of >1000 ng/mL. Pathological inspection demonstrated poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. Enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed multiple lesions in the liver that were suspected as metastases . We also found the enlargement of the liver portal and retroperitoneal lymph nodes . The clinical stage was cT4aN+M1 (multiple liver metastases, liver portal and retroperitoneal lymph nodes metastasis) according to AJCC version 8.0.
A paired tumor molecular profile indicated microsatellite stability and somatic mutations of K-RAS, ATM, PARP1, MAP3K1 and FANCG but showed no mutations in N-RAS/PIK3CA/BRAF. We also detected no UGT1A1*6/UGT1A1*28/DPYD mutations and investigated family tumor history of the patient ( and ). After a multi-disciplinary team (MDT) discussion, the patient was young in good performance status and surgical resection was not indicated. The treatment strategy was to minish burthen of the tumor and increase overall survival by systemic chemotherapy. The patient underwent a XELOXIRI plus bevacizumab regimen consisting of irinotecan (150 mg/m2), oxaliplatin (100 mg/m2) on day 1, capecitabine (1700 mg/m2 per day from day 2 to 15), bevacizumab (7.5 mg/kg) on day 1 (on second cycle), given every three weeks. The treatment was well tolerated and major toxicities during the whole treatment were G1 vomiting and neurotoxicity and G3 neutropenia. We administered recombinant human granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) in preventing neutropenia during chemotherapy and the dose of TRIPLET regimen was not modified.
Two and four cycles after the beginning of therapy, enhanced abdominal CT showed significant tumor regression of liver metastasis and primary rectal lesions . The sizes of the liver portal and retroperitoneal lymph nodes were stable and tumor markers (CEA) returned to normal . After six cycles of treatment, positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) showed that the tumor had continued to shrink with a maximum standard uptake value (SUV) of 8.1 for the liver metastasis and 2.1 for the rectal lesion . There were no signs of other parts metastatic lesions. The patient then finished eight cycles of XELOXIRI plus bevacizumab. Colonoscopy showed thickening of the rectal mucosa with a slightly rough surface about 8 cm from the anal margin and the remaining mucosa was smooth . Enhanced abdominal CT showed the size of the liver metastasis continued to shrink .
On November 20, 2018, after the decision of the MDT group, the patient underwent right hemihepatectomy, partial liver IV resection and cholecystectomy. The intraoperative findings were a 6.0×4.0 x 4.0 cm mass on the surface of sections VII, VIII and IV of the liver, and a 5.0×4.0 × 4.0 cm mass on the surface of section VI of the liver. Pathology showed the absence of neoplastic cells in all of the examined specimens . Treatment was then discontinued after eight cycles of a single oral dose of capecitabine and the patient started a follow-up program with a physical examination and blood tests were performed every three months and an abdominal and chest CT every 3–6 months . Colonoscopy and rectal or liver magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were also performed every six months ( and –). To monitor the signs of recurrence, we also obtained blood samples to analyze circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) in May 21, 2019 and April 13, 2020. The results were negative. The patient remained free of disease and the duration of OS (from time of diagnosis to present) was more than three years .