A 35-year-old Pakistani man presented to our emergency department with a 1 h history of central chest pain radiating to the left arm with associated nausea and diaphoresis.
He was an ex-smoker of 10 pack/years, and he suffered from hyperlipidemia, for which he had been on lifestyle modifications and statin for the last 2 years. He had a positive family history of coronary artery disease. He denied any history of acute illness or hospital admission in his childhood.
On examination, the patient was sweating and in pain, with a pain score of 8/10. He was conscious and alert with no neurological deficit. His initial vital signs were as follows: heart 63 beats per minute, regular; blood pressure, 126/81 mmHg, and respiratory rate of 20 per minute. He was afebrile, and had normal breath sounds and normal heart sounds with no murmur. His abdominal examination was normal. His 12-lead electrocardiogram showed ST-segment elevation in the inferior leads, with reciprocal changes in the anterior charges . A diagnosis of an acute ST-elevation myocardial infarction was made, and he was transferred for percutaneous coronary intervention. He received 5000 units of unfractionated heparin, 300 mg of aspirin, 80 mg of atorvastatin, 180 mg of ticagrelor, and 5 mg of intravenous morphine.
Laboratory findings were remarkable for initial troponin T 9.6 ng/L (< 14 ng/L), low-density lipoprotein 6.56 mmol/L (< 3.36 mmol/L), triglyceride 1.73 mmol/L (0.45–1.69 mmol/L), cholesterol/high-density lipoprotein 9.96 (3.35).
A portable chest radiograph was normal.
His angiogram showed a medium-size aneurysm in the circumflex artery, and a large aneurysm (14.46 mm) in the proximal right coronary, followed by multiple sequential aneurysms and 100% clot occlusion . His left main and anterior descending arteries were normal. The clot was removed with an aspiration catheter. Thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI) grade 2 flow was established . The ostium was dilated but not stented. He was placed on statin, ezetimibe, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACE-I), beta-blocker, and dual antiplatelet therapy.
Six hours later, and while recovering in the high dependency unit, his polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test for COVID-19 came back positive. The patient was informed of the findings of his PCR and the result of his positive COVID-19 PCR test. He was also made aware of the medical and surgical options for the management of his coronary artery aneurysms and that these would be discussed with him after he had recovered from COVID-19. The hospital policy for managing COVID-19 was explained to him, and he was subsequently transferred to the regional COVID-19 hospital. This was in accordance with our healthcare service reorganization plan to manage all COVID-19 patients at dedicated facilities to protect the non-COVID hospitals. He remained asymptomatic at the COVID hospital and was later discharged to an isolation facility. He did not keep his cardiology clinic follow-up appointment at our institution on two separate occasions. Following a telephone inquiry, he claimed to be stressed due to his experience at the COVID hospital and was unwilling to return for a follow-up. He presented again to the emergency department of our hospital 2 months after with symptoms suggestive of an acute stress reaction secondary to COVID-19 infection and hospital experience. He was managed for stress and was discharged home. The patient has provided a written consent for this publication.