A 46-year-old woman was referred to our hospital for further examination and treatment of persistent hypoglycemia and a giant pelvic mass. She had no relevant medical history, including diabetes. No evident mass was palpable in the abdomen. Laboratory examination, including tumor markers, revealed no abnormalities except for hypoglycemia and suppressed serum levels of insulin and C-peptide upon endocrinological evaluation . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a giant hypervascular tumor occupying most of the pelvic cavity, displacing and compressing the rectum. The tumor showed marked enhancement with a heterogeneous pattern suggestive of a mesenchymal tumor . The inferior mesenteric artery and vein were speculated to be the feeding artery and draining vein of the tumor, respectively . Colonoscopy showed no sign of tumor invasion to the mucosa of the rectum. Based on the suppressed serum levels of insulin and C-peptide accompanying the giant pelvic mesenchymal tumor, a preoperative diagnosis of SFT with NICTH (Doege–Potter syndrome) was made. During the diagnostic work-up, intravenous hyperalimentation in addition to oral normal diet was needed to control hypoglycemia; nevertheless, she often suffered from hypoglycemia, and oral or intravenous glucose intake was needed.
To prevent excessive surgical hemorrhage, preoperative TAE was scheduled 2 days before surgery. Angiography revealed that the tumor was supplied by branches arising from both the inferior mesenteric artery and the bilateral internal iliac artery. Super-selective catheterization and embolization of these vessels were performed using coil and gel-foam particles . After the TAE, blood glucose level had stabilized, and no intravenous administration of glucose was needed . On the other hand, the patient had fever and lower abdominal pain, which was controlled by oral analgesics. Ingestion was stopped, and preoperative mechanical bowel preparation was omitted. The fever had disappeared before surgery, and as scheduled, the tumor was safely resected with the rectum (low anterior resection with diverting ileostomy) 2 days after TAE. The operative time was 308 min, and the estimated blood loss was 335 mL, without the need for a blood transfusion. Considering the tumor’s size and hypervascular nature, we chose open laparotomy over a laparoscopic approach.
The tumor measured 17 cm in diameter and weighed 850 g. The tumor size had not reduced following embolization. The cut surface was yellowish-white in color and elastic-soft. A part of the rectum wall showed necrosis because of preoperative TAE . Histologically, the tumor consisted of monotonous spindle cell proliferation without atypia. The mitosis rate was low (2/10 high-power fields). Immunohistochemical staining demonstrated that the tumor cells were positive for CD34, CD99, Bcl-2, STAT6, and vimentin, consistent with a diagnosis of SFT . The tumor was also positive for IGF-II staining, and we confirmed by western blotting that the circulating high-molecular-weight IGF-II had decreased after tumor removal, concomitant with remission of hypoglycemia . The patient had an uneventful postoperative course. Six months later, she underwent ileostomy closure. No evidence of recurrence has been reported in the 2-year follow-up after the initial surgery.