A 45-year-old Arab male presented with a 4-years history of chronic pelvic pain accompanied by straining to defecate and dysuria, but without perineal discharge, rectal bleeding, headaches or weight loss. The patient reported to be operated for anal fistula 10 years ago with satisfactory clinical evolution. His family history was unremarkable and no smoking or chronic alcoholism were noticed. In the proctologic (knee-chest) position, physical examination revealed a 4–5 cm, soft and painless mass in the left perineal area. This mass seemed freely mobile with lower edge extending to the pectinate line but the upper limit was not perceived. No inflammatory signs, fistulous tracts or postanal skin dimple were observed. The mucosa was normal on digital rectal examination and exterior pressure was detected in the posterior region.
Abdominal ultrasound detected a hypoechoic solid pelvic mass with regular contours and heterogeneous echostructure, but relationship with the surrounding structures was not clear. On computed tomography (CT) scan the lesion appeared as a large heterogeneous mass measuring approximately 7 cm in diameter. This mass, developed in the latero-rectal space, extended to the left side of the pelvis causing displacement and compression of the rectum and urinary bladder. There was no pelvic effusion, deep lymph nodes or bone destruction . Additionally, pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed the presence of a 7 cm × 7 cm well-limited lesion in continuity with the left rectal wall and extending from the fourth sacral vertebra (S4) level to the coccygeal region. The lesion had low signal intensity on T1-weighted images and heterogeneous high signal intensity on T2-weighted images without any signs of bladder invasion or any evident communication with the lumen of the rectum . Moreover, rectoscopy detected a bulging mass with intact mucosa in the posterior wall of the rectum. Routine blood tests and serum tumor markers including carcinoembryonic antigen, cancer antigen 19–9, cancer antigen 125, prostatic specific antigen and α-fetoprotein were within normal range.
According to these findings, the patient was planned for surgical excision without a preoperative fine-needle biopsy. We chose a perineal approach under spinal anesthesia. The patient was placed in the lithotomy position. Through a vertical para-anal skin incision of about 10 cm centered on the lesion, the subcutaneous planes were divided and the retrorectal space was exposed. We discovered a soft tumor-mass, deeply extending into the ischiorectal fossa, and intimately adherent to the posterior face of the rectum and levator ani, but with a cleavage line making easy the tumor dissection from the surrounding tissue. The mass was carefully dissected (essentially blunt dissection) and completely excised, with special attention to avoiding injuries to the sphincter complex and rectal perforation . After tumor excision, the wound was closed in anatomical planes and drains left in the retro-rectal space for 48 h.
Pathological examination of the resected specimen revealed an encapsulated mass measuring 82 × 70 × 60 mm. Microscopically, the tumor was composed of spindle shaped cells arranged in interlacing fascicles with focal myxoid change and areas of necrosis. Number of mitoses was 4 per 10 high power fields (HPF) and all surgical margins were free of disease. In addition, tumor cells exhibited positive staining for smooth muscle actin and desmin, and negative staining for CD-117, CD-34 and S-100 protein. With these findings, final diagnosis was low-grade leiomyosarcoma. According to the low grade of the tumor and the complete surgical excision, no adjuvant treatment was decided and the patient was discharged after an uneventful postoperative period. He is currently in 4-years follow-up with no evidence of recurrence or metastasis. He underwent periodically physical examination with abdomen/pelvic CT every 3 months for 2 years, then every 6 months for the next 2 years.