A 63-year-old Japanese woman working as a farmer presented with slowly progressive gait disturbance and voiding dysfunction of approximately six months’ duration. One month prior, she complained of general fatigue. She was diagnosed with chronic post renal failure caused by urinary retention. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan revealed a space-occupying lesion at the level of L1 to L3. She was subsequently referred to our institution for surgical treatment. She was medicated for mild hypertension. There was no past history of lumbar tap, myelography, spinal surgery or spinal injury.
On admission, she could barely walk without holding on to a wall or table. Neurological examinations revealed bilateral muscular weakness (manual muscle testing one to two levels) and numbness at her distal lower extremities. A pin-prick test showed sensory disturbance in her bilateral lower legs. A deep tendon reflex test showed hypoactivity in her Achilles tendon, without pathological reflexes. Urinary catheterization was initiated because of urinary retention. She had dyschezia, with difficulty on defecation. A laboratory analysis included complete blood analysis and biochemical examination of blood on the day of admission showed no apparent abnormalities, except for elevation of creatinine and blood urea nitrogen.An MRI scan revealed an intramedullary mass lesion extending from vertebral level L1 to L3, with mixed iso- and high-intensity change in T1-weighted images, and with isointensity change in the T2-weighted image . Upon gadolinium enhancement, the mass lesion was heterogeneously enhanced . A myelography and computed tomography (CT) myelography showed a filling defect at the L1 to L3 vertebral levels . Therefore, we diagnosed the lesion as an intramedullary spinal cord tumor.
She underwent surgery under general anesthesia. A laminectomy was performed at the level of Th12 to L3. Surgical microscopic observation revealed a subpial yellowish lesion with apparent spinal cord swelling. There were bifurcations of rootlets on the dorsal surface of the spinal cord at the L2 to L3 vertebral level, showing evidence of a low conus. Upon spinal cord dissection along the posterior medial sulcus, a yellowish milky exudation erupted from the cystic lesion. We resected white cartilage-like pieces from the cystic cavity . Because the wall of the cystic lesion tightly adhered to the spinal cord parenchyma, we abandoned complete resection of the cyst wall. A pathological examination revealed ramified keratinized contents with a fibrous capsule . The final pathological diagnosis was an epidermoid cyst.
The postoperative course was uneventful. Upon a six-month follow-up visit, she showed recovery of muscle weakness; she could walk without crutches. However, voiding dysfunction remained unchanged.