This case report is in line with the SCARE 2020 .
A 79 year old male with a known case of diabetes mellitus, hypertension, chronic kidney disease, and atrial fibrillation presented to the otolaryngology clinic with history of intermittent left progressive nocturnal otalgia for the past 2 months. The pain was dull, localized, rated 5 out of 10 in severity. There was no associated active ear discharge, hearing loss, facial nerve palsy, or any nasal symptoms. Upon physical examination, the patient was vitally stable. Left ear examination showed a patent, erythematous ear canal, with no evidence of infection or granulation tissue. However, there was bulging of the tympanic membrane. The right ear was normal. Accordingly, the patient was started on oral moxifloxacin and ciprofloxacin for one week.
During follow up appointment, it was noted that the patient did not finish his antibiotics course because the pain improved. However, he noticed sudden onset hearing loss in the left ear. When examined, the left ear canal was normal, without erythema or swelling, but the tympanic membrane was dull. The right ear was completely normal. Tympanometry and pure tone audiometry were done (, ), showing type B and conductive hearing loss respectively in the left ear, while the right ear was completely normal. Complete blood count (CBC) showed slightly elevated white blood cells (WBC) (12.6, the normal range is 4–11), with neutrophils predominance, and low hemoglobin (Hb) level. C-Reacive Protein (CRP) was high (38.24, the normal range is 0–10), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was also high (120, the normal range is 0–20). At this stage, myringotomy and grommet insertion were done in the clinic for the left ear. One week later, grommet was in place and patient was doing well.
After one month, the patient presented again to the clinic with left ear pain with intermittent discharge for two weeks duration. The discharge was yellow in color with no blood. There was no tinnitus, dizziness, or symptoms of facial nerve palsy. Left ear examination showed an inflamed ear canal with yellowish discharge. The tympanic membrane was dull. Ear swab culture showed no organisms. Patient was also referred for bone scan . The scintigraphic findings of the scan were suggestive of bone remodeling of left middle ear bones extending to mastoid air cells and sphenoid bone suggestive of active bone infection. This indicated a necrotizing process originating from the ear.
Since the external ear looked normal, without edematous changes, swelling, granulation tissue, and most importantly, pain upon ear examination, necrotizing otitis externa was unlikely. Meanwhile, there was a suspicion of the condition being that of necrotizing otitis media, especially because the patient was having active ear discharge, along with bone invasion. Additionally, the inflammatory markers were persistently high. The CRP increased to 52.07, the WBC increased from 11.3 to 12.3 (the normal range 4–11) and the ESR increased to 85.
Although necrotizing otitis media is not a common disease, it was suspected in this case, due to the patient age, comorbidities, namely diabetes, and due to progression of symptoms. Since the patient was vitally stable and looking well, aggressive oral antibiotic course was the treatment of choice. Patient was started on ciprofloxacin and ofloxacin, and tetrahydrozoline.
One week later, patient was still having left ear pain, but the discharge reduced significantly. Therefore, patient was sent for further imaging. Fused positron emission tomography (PET)/computed tomography (CT) image showed progression of the active bone infection, compared with the previous bone scan. There was involvement of the left side of the skull base bones to currently involve the sphenoid body and right petrous with currently detected hypermetabolic nasopharyngeal mucosal thickening and hypermetabolic activity at prevertebral space and right carotid space .
Patient was admitted immediately to a tertiary center and was started on intravenous (IV) ceftazidime antibiotic course and topical ofloxacin antibiotics. ESR and CRP were continuously monitored during admission as shown .
Upon discharge, he completed a six weeks course of IV ceftazidime and topical ofloxacin. The pain improved, but the hearing loss did not. Otherwise, the patient was stable. He was discharged home on topical ofloxacin.
One month later, the patient was seen in the otolaryngology clinic again. He was doing well. The left ear pain and otorrhea had completely resolved. However, he was still complaining of hearing loss and recently developed tinnitus. Audiometry and tympanometry were repeated. (, ) The patient developed mixed hearing loss in the left ear and sensorineural hearing loss in the right ear. Patient was advised to use hearing aid to improve the hearing and eventually the tinnitus will improve as well.