A 43-year-old man presented with a thyroid nodule detected on screening carotid ultrasonography. He had shown hypertension at 42 years old and he had no contributory family history, including coagulopathies. He was referred to our hospital for diagnosis and treatment of the nodule. Blood tests showed: hemoglobin, 15.1 g/dL; platelets, 27.5 × 104/µL; prothrombin time (PT), 11.0%; and activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), 32.0 s. Coagulability was normal. Ultrasonographic findings showed an 11 × 11 × 14-mm, hypoechoic nodule with irregular margins on the left lobe of the thyroid gland. No obvious extrathyroidal extension or lymph node metastasis was identified. Fine needle aspiration biopsy revealed findings suggestive of papillary thyroid carcinoma. Computed tomography showed a nodule in the left lobe of the thyroid gland and no distant metastatic findings in the lung.
The patient underwent left lobectomy and central compartment lymph node dissection under the diagnosis of papillary thyroid carcinoma (cT1bN0M0). The histopathological diagnosis was papillary thyroid carcinoma (pT2N1aM0). Intra-operatively, there was no finding of abnormal hemostasis and intraoperative blood loss was less than 1 ml. Operative time was 54 min. No sign of bleeding was seen on examination at 20-h postoperatively. However, the patient’s neck appeared swollen at 27 h postoperatively. Emergency reoperation was performed to evacuate hematoma. No arteriovenous points of bleeding were evident, but diffuse oozing was identified. Two days after the reoperation, on removal of the drainage tube, fresh red blood was seen dripping from the drain insertion site. We therefore applied pressure around the drain insertion site with gauze for 2 days, and prescribed carbazochrome and tranexamic acid for 3 days. The patient was discharged from hospital on postoperative day (POD) 6 after confirming that neck swelling had resolved. We had recommended continued hospitalization and observation, but the patient strongly desired to be discharged to home. On the fifth day after discharge (POD 11), neck swelling was observed again. Since the swelling was mild, the hematoma was conservatively absorbed. We considered the possibility that repeated postoperative hemorrhages were attributable to abnormalities in blood coagulation factors. Subsequent testing revealed factor VIII antibody activity had decreased to 33.9%, van Willebrand factor (vWF) was within the reference range , and cross-mixing test showed a downward convex pattern . The patient was also found to have shown difficulty in achieving hemostasis during a previous tooth extraction. He had factor VIII deficiency, normal level of vWF and bleeding episode. Eventually, congenital hemophilia A was diagnosed.