A 41-year-old Asian man from Korea was referred for treatment of MDR-TB. He had been previously treated for MDR-TB with second-line anti-TB drugs for six years at another institution. Despite this treatment, his sputum smear and culture examinations were persistently positive. He used to smoke. He had a white blood cell count of 6260/μL, an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 60 mm/h, and his C-reactive protein levels were elevated at 0.65 mg/dL. His human immunodeficiency virus antibody test was negative. On his chest X-ray examination, two cavities were observed in his left upper lobe. Acid-fast bacilli (AFB) stain revealed florid bacilli in his sputum (4+).
Meanwhile, isolation and drug susceptibility testing revealed a strain of Mycobacterium tuberculosis that was resistant to all first-line anti-TB drugs including isoniazid, rifampin, ethambutol, pyrazinamide, and streptomycin. Among second-line agents this strain was also found to be resistant to prothionamide, para-aminosalicylic acid, and ofloxacin. The isolate retained sensitivity to kanamycin, capreomycin, cycloserine, and moxifloxacin.
Accordingly, our patient was treated with a combination of anti-TB drugs including kanamycin, moxifloxacin, cycloserine, amoxicillin-clavulanate, and clarithromycin. Despite six months of chemotherapy, however, he still failed to convert to sputum negative status, so he was advised to undergo a left upper lobectomy and superior segmentectomy of the left lower lobe. Tissue collection from adult patients undergoing lung resection for the management of MDR-TB was approved by the Samsung Medical Center Institutional Review Board (IRB).
A thick-walled lesion containing multiple cavities was observed in the left upper lobe of our patient by computed tomographic (CT) examination . A dilated bronchus with thickened wall and two individual granulomas with central caseation were located close to his cavity wall . His bronchial epithelium was degraded and replaced with a severe inflammatory cell infiltrate. AFB were detected in the caseum inside the bronchus , indicating that this bronchus was connected to the neighboring cavity. Several multi-nucleated giant cells were found in his peribronchial region . Metaplastic ossification with fatty marrow replaced a portion of the cartilage plate . Distribution of calcium deposits was determined by von Kossa staining and a dense band of calcium rimmed the outer edge of his marrow cavity in the cartilage plate .
To further evaluate the cellular components in his marrow cavity, immunohistochemical stains were performed using antibodies to CD34 (DakoCytomation; monoclonal; N1632) and CD68 (DakoCytomation; monoclonal; 1:50). Some hematopoietic cells (CD34+) and macrophages (CD68+) were found in the marrow cavity .