The patient was a 50-year old, right-handed woman who experienced a haemorrhagic stroke in 2010. The computed tomography scan performed immediately after the acute event revealed a right lenticular-capsular, lateral thalamic and intraparenchymal hematoma, with a midline shift toward the left side. Two days after the acute event a magnetic resonance imaging scan of the brain confirmed the presence of this lesion . After six weeks as inpatient for a rehabilitation program in our Institute, the patient entered a daily physiotherapy program for two months as outpatient, which led to a good recovery in motor control and strength.
Five years after the acute event, she returned to the Outpatient Service complaining of a CPSP syndrome, a persisting difficulty in the functional use of the left side of her body, especially of the lower limb during walking and stair climbing and a reduced postural balance. She was autonomous in everyday life activities (Functional Independence Measure = 120) , used a cane for walking outdoor, and needed augmented time for self-care.
The patient suffered from persistent allodynia and dysesthesia at her left upper extremity and at the left side of her face. The soft touch of an open hand was perceived as burning. Proprioception of the left upper and lower limbs was also impaired, as in the absence of vision she was unable to locate her left arm and leg. Three years before, she was prescribed Pregabalin to relieve pain (the patient does not remember the dosage), however she quit its use after few months because of its inefficacy. At the moment of the treatment she was not taking medications. At clinical examination, she presented low weakness at her left side (grade 4 out of 5 at Medical Research Council grading for strength of shoulder abductors, elbow flexors, wrist extensors, hip extensors, hip abductors, knee extensors, ankle dorsiflexors and plantarflexors) and slight spasticity (modified Ashworth Scale grade 1) during the elbow and wrist extension; the knee flexion and the foot dorsal flexion . She was able to perform isolated movements of the foot correctly and to move each finger of the left hand singularly.
The postural balance improved after few sessions of specific training on the treadmill and on instable surfaces, the patient achieved the ability to maintain the standing position on the left leg for some seconds. Afterwards, during one session targeted at improving coordination of the lower extremity, the patient performed exercises with a visual feedback provided by a mirror. After these exercises, the patient presented a positive good sensation at the leg, not related to movement, reporting that the leg was “more sensitive”. In the light of this unexpected finding, she was proposed to start MT in order to reduce pain at the upper extremity. The patient completed two consecutive weeks of MT training for five days a week. In each session, she was asked to perform symmetrical bilateral movements with the upper extremities while watching the image of the sound limb reflected by a parasagittal mirror superimposed to the image of the affected arm. Each session lasted 45 min. The requested movements were: forearm prono-supination, wrist extension and opening and closing the hand . These movements were always proposed in a random order. Each movement was performed for 10 min at spontaneous speed (about one movement every second). Five minutes were spent for resting and for self-mobilization of the left arm and hand without the mirror. During the exercise, the patient was supervised by a physiotherapist. No further instructions, corrections or encouragements were given.
Pain severity was assessed by the visual analogue scale (VAS 0-10 cm): the patient was asked to draw a vertical line on a horizontal 10 cm line, where she felt the pain intensity would be better represented, in a range from the left end of the line indicating “0 = no pain” to the right one indicating “10 = worst pain imaginable”. Hand and finger strength was assessed by the dynamometers Jamar and Pinch Gauge, and finger dexterity by the 9-Hole Peg Test . The patient was evaluated at baseline, about one month before starting MT in two different occasions one week apart (to assess reproducibility), immediately before treatment and after treatment. VAS score was also obtained at one-year follow-up. VAS was used to assess pain severity at the hand and at the shoulder in two separate conditions: at rest and during a maximal squeeze left hand contraction .