A 42-year-old man presented to the emergency department with symptoms including choking, drooling from the mouth, holding his neck with his hand, and aphonia. His family revealed that the patient had psychological abnormalities and depression and he had attempted suicide with swallowing a metallic object. The patient was hemodynamically stable. The arterial blood pressure was 130/80 mmHg and the pulse rate was 88 beats per minute. He was sent for chest, anterior-posterior, and lateral view radiographs that showed an abnormal radiopaque FB inside the esophagus and a shadow in the middle of the chest radiograph with a part of it obliterated by the heart and the vertebral shadow . The FB had a shape similar to a spanner. Before the endoscopic intervention, the patient could not talk. His family gave an unclear history of the nature of his psychological problem. The patient was prepared for emergency surgery. He was admitted to the operation theater under general anesthesia and endotracheal intubation and rigid esophagoscopy was performed. The mouth was opened using a laryngoscope and blood and saliva were aspirated from the oropharynx. After passing a rigid esophagoscope through the orifice of the esophagus, we observed the open end of a spanner (wrench) that appeared stuck in the esophagus. After aspiration of blood and saliva around this part of the spanner, it was held with forceps and drawn out forcefully with the esophagoscope. After it reached the mouth, it was pulled out with Magill forceps (, ). The esophagus was checked again using esophagoscopy for signs of injury. The esophagus was intact with no signs of perforation. After discontinuation of anesthesia, the patient was extubated and kept under observation. Subsequently, he was discharged without any complications. After surgery, he denied having any psychological problems, but was unable to sleep and showed irritability and restlessness. He also denied having any auditory or visual hallucinations. We advised him to visit the psychology department for a consultation, but he refused and was discharged from the hospital with his relatives.