A 44-year-old Hispanic woman presented to our emergency department (ED) complaining of generalized weakness for the previous 3 days. She denied having associated fever, vomiting, diarrhea, or shortness of breath. She denied experiencing any pain. Her past medical history was remarkable for diabetes mellitus (DM), for which she was taking metformin 500 mg twice daily, sitagliptin 100 mg twice daily, and canagliflozin 100 mg daily. The canagliflozin had been added to her medication regimen approximately 4 weeks earlier in the hopes of assisting her attempts to lose weight. The patient had been taking insulin as well up until 2 weeks before ED presentation, when it was discontinued by her endocrinologist who felt it was no longer needed for glycemic control.
On ED presentation, the patient was afebrile (36.7 °C), with a pulse rate of 79 bpm, blood pressure of 115/77 mmHg, and a respiratory rate of 18 bpm. She appeared well and in no distress. Her physical examination was notable for a normal neurologic exam including mental status, gait, and strength testing. Laboratory testing revealed a serum glucose of 163 mg/dL, a low serum bicarbonate of 14 mmol/L (reference range 21–31 mmol/L), and an elevated anion gap of 18 mmol/L (reference range 3.6–11.0 mmol/L). The remainder of her serum electrolytes as well as her blood urea nitrogen and creatinine was within normal limits. A serum lactate level was within the range of normal. Ketones were present in the urine, and acetone was present in the serum. Venous blood gas analysis found a pH of 7.27 with a PCO2 of 29 mm/Hg.
After an initial bolus of intravenous (IV) 0.9% normal saline, the patient was started on a continuous IV infusion of insulin with a second infusion of 5% dextrose and sterile water added to prevent hypoglycemia. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit for treatment of EDKA. All further doses of canagliflozin were withheld. On hospital day 3, the patient’s ketosis and acidosis had resolved and she was discharged with insulin glargine, metformin, and sitagliptin for future control of her serum glucose levels.