A 6-year-old male with early infantile encephalopathy, global developmental delay,
and recurrent respiratory infections since the first year of life, visited the
emergency room of a community hospital with low-grade fever, irritability, and
grunting on day 1 of the disease. During the physical examination, the patient
presented skin pallor, 88% peripheral oxygen saturation, signs of respiratory
distress, and pulmonary auscultation with diminished respiratory sounds and crackles
on the lower half of the left hemithorax. Laboratory findings included: hemoglobin
11.0 g/dL, white blood cell count 12,100/uL with 9.8% lymphocytes and 71.6%
neutrophils, platelets 640,000/uL, and C-reactive protein (CRP) 103 mg/L. The chest
X-ray showed hypolucency on the left hemithorax. The patient was admitted and
initiated amoxicillin plus clavulanic acid 50 mg/kg/day, twice a day, intravenously.
On day 2, multiloculated pleural effusion was detected with thoracic ultrasound.
Next, the child underwent a left thoracic drainage with drain placement; the pleural
fluid was macroscopically purulent, and the laboratory analysis revealed a fluid
with 62,700 cells/mm3 (85% neutrophils), pH 6.5, glucose <5 mg/dL,
total protein 5 g/dL, cholesterol 80 mg/dL, triglycerides 36 mg/dL, adenosine
deaminase 45 U/L, and lactate dehydrogenase 1,440 U/L; cultures were also requested.
At this stage, antibiotic therapy was changed to ceftriaxone 80 mg/kg/day. In the
following 48 hours, the patient had clinical improvement, without fever or
respiratory distress. The bacteriological examination of the pleuritic fluid
identified Streptococcus anginosus, sensitive to penicillin and
cefotaxime; blood cultures were sterile.
On day 11, the child had a recurrence of fever, and the left pulmonary sounds ceased.
At this point, the child was transferred to a tertiary hospital, and his blood test
revealed leukocytosis (38,000/uL) with neutrophilia (81.7%), thrombocytosis
(843,000/uL), and elevated CRP (122 mg/L). He had an ill-appearance, severe signs of
respiratory distress, and hypoxemia. Thoracic computed tomography scan showed left
empyema, atelectasis, and consolidation with necrosis on the lower pulmonary left
lobe . Abdominal abscesses and
endocarditis were excluded by abdominal ultrasound and echocardiogram. Clindamycin
(30 mg/kg/day, 4x a day, intravenously) was added to the therapy for anaerobic
coverage as the clinical state of the child was severe.
On day 12, the patient underwent a left decortication via video-assisted
thoracoscopic surgery, which revealed large fibrin deposits and adhesions between
the lung and the pleura; two thoracic drains were placed and kept for eight days.
The patient showed significant clinical improvement in the first 24 hours after
surgery. Pulmonary sounds gradually improved, and he had a full recovery after a
four-week course of ceftriaxone and a two-week course of clindamycin. In the
follow-up one and three weeks after discharge , the child was well, and the chest X-ray was normal.