A 23-year-old male presented to our cardiovascular department with progressive exertional chest distress and fatigue for over one year. One month before the admission, the patient experienced novo occasional precordial pain in addition to the presenting symptoms. On admission, physical examinations revealed heart rate of 96 beats/minute with a sinus rhythm, blood pressure of 130/55 mmHg, high myopia, 190.5 cm of height and a diastolic murmur at the aortic valve area. Laboratory examinations for systemic vasculitis and infectious diseases were unremarkable. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) demonstrated a giant aortic root aneurysm, an enlarged left ventricle (LV; 99 mm in end-diastolic dimension) and severe aortic regurgitation combined with extremely poor ejection fraction (EF; 18%). No mitral regurgitation or tricuspid regurgitation were observed. Enhanced thoracic CT scan performed with a 16-detector row confirmed the extensive dilated aortic root aneurysm, bulging against the sternum , while the morphology of the distal of ascending aorta and descending aorta were normal (30 mm in short-axis). Three-dimensional enhanced CT scan revealed that the aortic root aneurysm is like a “bulging balloon” . According to the patient’s self-statement, both of his grandpa and father died from aortic dissection caused by MFS, and he was identified with FBN1 mutations when he was a child. Unfortunately, the patient was lost to follow up owing to his poor compliance. Taken together, this patient was diagnosed with MFS based on the Revised Ghent Criteria .
The cardiac dysfunction of this patient was improved after receiving cardiotonic and diuretic therapy. After multidisciplinary discussion, surgical intervention, instead of continuously medical therapy, was accepted as reasonable and life-saving, in consideration of the risk of rupture/dissection of the aortic root aneurysm and deteriorating cardiac function. The specific surgical approaches should be decided based on the intraoperative exploration results. Elective femoral arteriovenous cardiopulmonary bypass was performed to avoid unexpected rupture of the giant aneurysm during median sternotomy. Following pericardiotomy, the aneurysm almost completely filled the pericardial cavity and compressed the right atrial and the pulmonary artery . After clamping the aorta and opening the aneurysm sac, we observed a tricuspid aortic valve with multiple fenestrations occurring towards the commissures, a torn leaflet and a dilated aortic annulus which was measured over 38 mm. Further exploration verified the morphology of mitral valve was normal. Considering the patient’s poor cardiac function with bad aortic valvular condition and he may not be able to tolerate time-consuming procedures, we decided to perform Bentall procedure with a 28-mm conduit composite a 25-mm mechanical aortic valve . Postoperative three-dimensional enhanced CT scan revealed a normal sized reconstructed aortic root and pre-discharge TEE examination confirmed the patient’s EF was improved to 40% and the LV end-diastolic dimension was reduced to 59 mm. The patient received anticoagulation therapy and he was discharged uneventfully 7 days later. Regular follow up was required to reduce the risk of anticoagulation-related complications. Moreover, enhanced thoracic CT scan and echocardiography examination were required at least once per year to monitor the morphology of valved conduit and the cardiac function and valvular condition of this patient.