A 38-year-old male diagnosed with schizophrenia is currently in partial remission. He had visited the hospital for 2 years to treat psychotic symptoms including auditory hallucinations and persecutory delusions. These symptoms had developed a week before his first visit to the hospital. He had no family history related to psychiatric or other medical conditions. He worked in a large company after graduating from college. On being diagnosed with schizophrenia, he took medicines: amisulpride 800 mg, procyclidine 5 mg, propranolol 80 mg, and diazepam 2 mg. His psychotic symptoms were improved after medication, while auditory hallucinations remained unchanged. He reported that he found it hard to work because the voices reproached him. After consulting a doctor, he stopped the work for a moment due to aggravated symptoms. Although the doctor recommended him admission for controlling residual hallucinations, he insisted on keeping outpatient clinic treatment.
With uncontrolled residual psychotic symptoms, he attempted suicide by inhaling charcoal fumes. He was taken to an emergency room at a hospital and underwent symptomatic care, not HBOT, for CO poisoning and rhabdomyolysis. A month later, severe cognitive dysfunction occurred to him. It was composed of memory decline, gait disturbance, and ataxia at the time of admission. He showed marked deterioration of visuospatial function; he stated that he lost all sense of direction. In a clock-drawing test performed on the day of evaluation, he could not tell the hour hand from the minute hand and could not draw the hour hand (as dictated by a doctor; ).
Due to his deteriorated state, physicians decided to apply HBOT and taper psychotropic medications. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and a neuropsychological test were executed to confirm his structural and functional brain conditions before therapy. The tests were repeated after 10 times HBOT. The treatment schedule is shown in . Pre-and-post-HBOT data are shown in . In short, HBOT did not change his brain structure and function ( and ).
We used the scale Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS), Clinical Global Impressions-Severity (CGI-S), Clinical Global Impressions-Improvement (CGI-I), and Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) to assess the psychotic symptoms and cognitive dysfunction (–). Despite continuous treatment, the overall patient's cognitive function and psychiatric status had been unchanged without worsening during the 10 times HBOT sessions. Changes in symptoms through pre-and-post therapy are shown in . He was somewhat inconsistent and ambiguous when discussing his underlying psychotic symptoms. For getting more information on him, we had a retrospective interview with a caregiver. Regardless of HBOT, mild to moderate psychotic symptoms and very severe depression were found consistently.
We prescribed donepezil 5 mg once daily to him; after 4 days, the MMSE score improved from 19 to 22. He explained that his subjective cognitive decline had improved by ~70% at the time of discharge. He had no difficulty in activities of daily living and gradually improved with gait. Despite the short-term treatment donepezil seemed to be effective. The dose was increased to 10 mg daily to improve cognition further. He could deal with household matters without any other's help. His MMSE score was 30; additionally, he stated that psychotic symptoms had disappeared as increasing the dose of donepezil. Three months after discharge, remaining on donepezil, he is mentally stable and has returned to work. shows a change in scores on the Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom Severity (Dimensional) scale in the DSM-5 , both the psychotic and cognitive symptoms.