A 26-year-old man with severe TS complained of difficulty opening his eyes. He was diagnosed with TS at 10 years of age and had tried multiple medications including trihexyphenidyl, clonazepam, risperidone, olanzapine, and aripiprazole. However, his symptoms were refractory to medication, so he was referred to our department to consider surgical treatment. His past medical history was not significant for other neuropsychiatric disorders. On examination, he had frequent blepharospasm-like tics accompanying premonitory urge. Other signs and symptoms of his motor and phonic tics were mild, such as twitching of the mouth and trunk and cough. His total Yale Global Tic Severity Scale (YGTSS) severity score was 20 and the impairment score was 50. His daily living activities were severely impaired by the blepharospasm-like tics, and thus DBS therapy was indicated. GPi DBS for both tics and blepharospasm (Meige syndrome) has been reported (1), but there are very few reports on targeting the anteromedial part of the GPi or centromedian thalamic nucleus for blepharospasm. Since we could not completely rule out the possibility that his abnormal blinkings are due to dystonia complicated with TS, we selected the pvlGPi as a DBS target in this patient. He was only on trihexyphenidyl at the timing of surgery.
High-resolution MRI sequences were fused using software for stereotactic planning to determine placement of the DBS lead. The mid-commissural point was used to center the planes and use Cartesian coordinates in the surgery. The route was decided considering the pvlGPi structures that could be seen and a safe insertion angle. The target coordinates of the left pvlGPi were X = 20.5 mm to the left, Y = 4.0 mm anterior, Z = 7.0 mm inferior, AC-PC angle = 60.3°, and center line angle = 10.1° to the left; those of the right pvlGPi were X = 21.0 mm to the right, Y = 4.0 mm anterior, Z = 5.5 mm inferior, AC-PC angle = 60.5°, and center line angle = 11.1° to the right (, ). We implanted the pvlGPi DBS lead (model B33015; Medtronic, Minnesota, MN) under local anesthesia and then the pulse generator (model B35200; Medtronic) under general anaesthesia on the same day. Lead placement was confirmed on postoperative computed tomography .
The blink frequency was determined (times/min) from video recordings of the patient made at baseline, on postoperative day (POD) 1 and POD 7, and at 6 months after the surgery . The blink frequency was improved from 70 times/min at baseline to 27 times/min on POD 1. DBS was initiated on POD 7 after evaluating the blink frequency (25 times/min). The patient was discharged on POD 9, and followed up at clinic once a month.
We initially activated the second ventral contacts (contact 1 on the left; contact 9 on the right) at 60 microsec, 130 Hz, and 1.5 mA, and the stimulation intensity was gradually increased as the microlesion effects waned. The DBS parameters at the 6-month follow-up were as follows: left, 1– (0.7 mA), 2– (1.6 mA), 3– (0.5 mA), Case+, 60 microsec, 135 Hz; right, 9a–v(0.5 mA), 9c–v(0.3 mA), 10a–v(0.7 mA), 10b–v(0.3 mA), 10c–(0.3 mA), 11–v(0.5 mA) Case+, 60 microsec, 135 Hz . At the 6-month follow-up, blink frequency was slightly improved to 22 times/min, with the YGTSS severity and impairment scores substantially improved to 4 and 0, respectively. He stopped taking trihexyphenidyl after evaluation on POD 7, and was able to return to work without uncomfortable feelings in his blinking behavior after discharge. There were no adverse effects and the patient was satisfied with the therapeutic effects.