A 37-year-old woman purposely came to the outpatient department of our district hospital in the North West Region of Cameroon for a refill of her propranolol medication. She reported taking the drug routinely for palpitations. On further inquiry, she reported being well until 12 months prior to presentation when she suddenly became aware of her heartbeat, initially on moderate exertion and then even at rest. It had been recurrent and lasting several minutes each time it occurred. It progressively became associated with dyspnoea initially on moderate exertion and then on mild exertion, such that she had to quit farming which was her main source of income. After consulting at various health facilities in the North West Region of Cameroon, she was prescribed irregular and alternate daily regimens of 40 mg propranolol and 0.25 mg digoxin which she had been taking for 12 months at the time she presented at our hospital. Although the medications conferred her some relieve, she noticed a progressive weight loss over the 12-months period prior to consulting at our hospital, from 85 to 58 kg despite an abnormal increase in her appetite for food. She also experienced frequent watery stools (averagely six times daily). About 6 months prior to presentation, she complained of heat intolerance and profuse sweating resulting in sleeping with minimal clothing. In addition, she noticed spontaneous resting tremors of her hands which started at the same time as the heat intolerance. Three months prior to presentation at our hospital, she noticed a painless lump on her neck that progressively increased in size.
On reviewing her medical records, we noticed a number of investigations requested at various hospitals which she visited during the 8 months preceding her presentation at our hospital. These included electrocardiographs, echocardiograms, HIV tests, full blood counts, fasting blood sugar, thyroid hormone assays, which were all without particularity but for the electrocardiography results which always showed a sinus tachycardia. She has no known history of exposure to radiations or family history of malignancies.
Physical examination revealed a chronically ill-looking middle aged woman. Her eyes were normal . Her voice was clear. She had fine resting tremors of her hands with her arms outstretched. There was a left anterolateral neck mass measuring 4 × 3 cm . The mass was rubbery, mobile, non-tender, moved with swallowing, and not fixed to overlying or underlying tissue. No bruit was heard over the mass. There was no palpable cervical lymphadenopathy. Her vital signs were normal but for regular respiratory and pulse rates of 35 breaths/min and 104 beats/min respectively. Her BMI was 20.1 kg/m2. There was discrete bilateral pedal pitting oedema. The rest of the physical examination was without notable findings. In view of this presentation, a presumptive diagnosis of HT was made and we placed her on propranolol, 40 mg twice daily. Our hospital was not equipped with the necessary diagnostic tools, so we referred the patient to a regional hospital which is about 10 km from our locality. To confirm our diagnosis, we requested for a functional [serum T3, T4, Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH)] and structural (ultrasound) assessment of the thyroid. The patient was counter-referred to us with the following results:Functional assessment of the thyroid: levels of serum T3, T4, and TSH . Structural assessment of the thyroid (ultrasound scan): The left thyroid lobe appeared enlarged, heterogeneous, with a fairly iso-echoic, well-defined homogenous solid mass (3.6 × 1.8 × 2.9 cm in size). The right lobe was without particularity. No cervical lymphadenopathy was observed.
In view of these findings, we concluded on a primary HT most likely due to a toxic uninodular goiter. Again, due to the limited resources in our hospital, we referred the patient to a hospital which is over 30 km from our locality for initiation of a course of methimazole. She was placed on 60 mg methimazole daily, 4 weeks after which she underwent a left thyroid lobectomy. The resected lobe was sent for histopathology. The postoperative course was uneventful.
The lobe weighed 33.5 g and was received in formalin as two grey-tan soft tissue fragments: a large (6.5 × 5 × 3.5 cm) and a small (3 × 1.5 × 1 cm) fragment. Cutting demonstrated a red tan cut surface with a 3 × 2.3 × 2 cm nodule inside the bigger piece. Microscopic examination of representative sections of the large fragment with a full thickness section of the nodular structure revealed a nodular proliferation of enlarged pale cells with marginated chromatin and overlapping nuclei. Pink “bubble gum”-like colloid was focally noted. The lesion was partially encapsulated and displayed areas with fibrosis and more follicular appearance of the aggregates. Based on these, a histological diagnosis of PTC (pT2N0M0) was made.
We monitored the patient through scheduled regular visits and referrals. Figure shows the Incision site on the anterior aspect of the neck 2 weeks after lobectomy. We observed a progressive decline in hyperthyroid symptoms and signs: the palpitations regressed as well as the diarrhoea and polyphagia; the heat intolerance regressed and 1 month postoperatively, her weight increased from 58 to 68 kg.