A 59-year-old man with diabetes underwent uneventful phacoemulsification in 1990 in the left eye with implantation of a one-piece polymethylmethacrylate IOL. Open-angle glaucoma developed postoperatively and was treated with brimonidine (Alphagan, Allergan, Irvine, CA), timolol maleate (Timoptic, Merck & Co, West Point, PA), and latanoprost ophthalmic solution (Xalatan, Pfizer Inc., New York). The right eye had phthisis bulbi secondary to a surgery to repair a retinal detachment. The patient did not instill sufficient medication and the optic disc damage increased. In 2006, iris rubeosis with uveal ectropion developed secondary to diabetic retinopathy. Gonioscopy found new vessels in the angle with synechiae in 360° of the angle. The intraocular pressure (IOP) was 45 mmHg in the left eye. The best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 1 logarithm of the minimum angle of resolution (logMAR) unit in the left eye. Two intravitreous injections of bevacizumab (Avastin, Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, CA) (1.25 mg/0.05 mL) were administered in January and March 2007. Panretinal photocoagulation was applied at the same time to permanently ablate the ischemic retina, and the new vessels resolved. The IOP was 40 mmHg in the left eye after panretinal photocoagulation. In April 2007, an Ahmed Glaucoma Valve model FP7 was implanted with the plate positioned superonasally. Six months later, the bleb in the plate was encapsulated and the IOP was 14 mmHg. Two years later in April 2009, the IOL-CB complex became dislocated . The BCVA was 2 logMAR units and the IOP was 16 mmHg. The patient denied any ocular or head trauma in the months before the examination. However, Valsalva maneuvers during an episode of coughing may have occurred because the patient had chronic obstructive lung disease. Transscleral 10/0 Prolene sutures were placed over and under both subluxated haptics through the anterior and posterior capsules to capture the haptics. The Prolene sutures were pulled to retract to the sclera and then were tied off. The IOL was centered, but the superior CB was folded over the optic IOL . The BCVA was 1 logMAR unit and the IOP was 15 mmHg. Two months later, the BCVA decreased again after another episode of coughing, and the patient described intense ocular pain. The IOP was 40 mmHg and the BCVA was 2 logMAR units. The tube was placed behind the optic of the IOL; it was obstructed by the IOL, which increased the IOP . A 25-gauge pars plana vitrectomy was performed, and the tube was again moved in front of the optic of the IOL using the tip of a forceps through one of the sutureless sclerotomies. One year after vitrectomy, the IOP was 15 mmHg and the BCVA was 1 logMAR unit. No other changes in the tube placement were seen .