A 60-year-old woman presented with aggravated abdominal pain and was admitted to the emergency department.
According to the patient’s statement, she had suffered from general abdominal bloating and distension since August 2022. Since October 2022, the discomfort had developed into non-remitting dull pain, accompanied by occasional stabbing pain in the right lower quadrant. The pain, initially eased by over-the-counter analgesics, progressed to become intolerable, and she could barely walk and sleep for days. She also suffered from lower urinary tract symptoms characterized by obstructive etiology, including intermittent urinary flow, hesitancy, need for straining, incomplete emptying, and frequency. Her body weight had decreased substantially from 59 kg in August to 54 kg at the time of recording, while the abdominal circumference increased. No fever or unstable vital signs were noted.
Her body mass index was 22.2 kg/m2 without remarkable gynecologic disorders or chronic illness. Menopause onset was at 54 years. Sexual activity and use of exogenous hormones were both ruled out.
Personal and family history was unremarkable.
A detailed physical examination revealed diffuse abdominal tenderness and equivocal rebound tenderness. An ovoid enlarged abdominal surface with a protruding mass on the right was observed.
The blood test yielded leukocytosis with left shift (white blood cell count: 12620/μL, segment: 87.7%) and a high C-reactive protein level (CRP 18.2 mg/dL), indicating an active systemic inflammatory status. The levels of tumor markers, including cancer antigen 125 (17.6 U/mL) and carcinoembryonic antigen (0.8 ng/mL), were within the normal ranges; however, cancer antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9 367.8 U/mL, normal value < 35 U/mL) was elevated. Post-operative cultures of the abdominal contents collected during surgery showed no microbial growth.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed a 14-cm cystic tumor occupying the pelvic cavity and lower abdomen . The tumor probably originated from the adnexa, contained a few septations, had a mixed density of fluid and fat components, and lacked an enhancing mural nodule. Bilateral hydronephrosis might be a consequence of the compression effect of the tumor. Notably, a small amount of mildly turbid ascites was observed in the cul-de-sac. Based on the imaging findings, tubo-ovarian abscess was the primary impression, while ovarian torsion, ovarian tumor of either benign or malignant nature, or pyometra required differentiation. The computed tomography (CT) findings were echoed by the transabdominal ultrasound images, revealing a heterogeneous tumor with hyperechoic hair strand-like materials and papillary growth, which mimicked ovarian cancer .