A 36-year-old female, a resident of north of Iran, presented with a complaint of few subcutaneous nodules during a visit to renal transplant clinic. She also had history of large, warm, erythematous, nontender plaques on the mildly edematous right leg and ankle since one month ago. She had been in her usual health status until one month ago. The nodules were painful and warm, and the skin over the nodules consisted of focal superficial ulcerations . She was admitted for further evaluations.
On admission, she was conscious, alert, and oriented. Her vital signs were stable. There was no history of fever, cough, hemoptysis, dysuria, oliguria, headache, or vomiting. Also there was no lymphadenopathy or hepatosplenomegaly. Physical examination by a consultant dermatologist showed multiple erythematous plaques and nodules on the anterolateral portion of right leg and dorsum of calcaneus. There was a central ulceration on one plaque on the leg as well. The margins were discrete. Sanguineous and purulent exudative materials were observed from both margins and center of the lesion . The pulse of the dorsalis pedis artery was well palpable.
She had undergone renal transplantation 15 years earlier for end-stage renal disease due probably to Alport syndrome. Her immunosuppression regimen consisted of prednisolone 5 mg/day, cyclosporine 50 mg/BD, and mycophenolate mofetil 500 mg/BD. Laboratory investigations are shown in .
The leg ulcer was noted to have signs of infection, and swab cultures were reported as positive for Escherichia coli. She was treated with a course of ciprofloxacin and clindamycin, but no improvement was achieved after 96 hr of antimicrobial therapy. She developed erythema, tenderness, and edema of the right calf; the ulcers extended progressively over the tibial crest.
C3 and C4 levels were 93 and 36 mg/dL, respectively; ANCA was negative (3.6) and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) level was 65 µL. Urine analyses and urine culture showed normal results. She was negative for hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis B core antibody, hepatitis C virus, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and cytomegalovirus (CMV). The purified protein derivative (PPD) test was negative as well. The chest X-ray showed no abnormal lesion.
One day later, an incisional biopsy taken from the subcutaneous nodule over the leg showed panniculitis with small- to medium-sized vasculitis .
During this period, lower limb swelling and pain increased. Ulcers developed on her mid to lower leg over the tibial crest and the dorsum of calcaneus, with sharply demarcated red border. The lesions were almost circumferential, with no hyperpigmentation or purpuric-type rash on the skin. There was no peripheral neuropathy. Over a period of a few days, her condition deteriorated, and the ulcerative area rapidly increased in size .
Cyclosporine was changed to rapamune 1 mg/day. Also vancomycine and ceftazidim were prescribed for bacterial super infection. Her renal functions remained stable during therapy.
The culture of tissue biopsy revealed the yeast colonies. Then, she was treated with conventional amphotericin B 50 mg/day and oral fluconazole 200 mg/BD (adjusted due to her renal function) subsequently.
But, the patient developed edema and tenderness over the right leg, with extensive ulcerations of her right leg and foot. The result of a test received. Results of direct India ink examination and culture of an aspirate from the leg were positive for cryptococcus.
Reevaluation of skin biopsies showed the presence of chronic panniculitis associated with round yeast forms. Unless specifically searched for, the organisms were difficult to find on hematoxylin and eosin preparations. Periodic acid-Schiff reagent, alcian blue, and mucicarmine showed single, small yeast forms surrounded by a clear halo. These organisms were present in moderate numbers in the fat and occasionally in the reticular dermis. Giemsa and Prussian blue stains were negative . Foci of fat necrosis, coagulative necrosis, and rare foci of vasculitis involving small- to medium-sized vessels resulting luminal occlusion were also evident, as well as foci of RBC extravasation. The above findings were suggestive of cryptococcal panniculitis associated with secondary vasculitis.
The culture of biopsy from the leg's necrotic ulcer grew C. neoformans var. grubii. The overall colonies appearance was creamy, smooth, and mucoid.
The serum cryptococcal antibody titer was positive (1 : 16), and it was confirmed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Cerebrospinal fluid was negative for cryptococcus. No evidence of disseminated disease was found. Two weeks later, she developed right knee arthritis which was negative for cryptococcus in synovial assay. Blood cultures were also negative. Amphotericin B was continued (1 mg/kg/day). Chest radiography was normal. Subsequent questioning revealed that she had no contact with pigeons.
The skin lesions regressed gradually, and ulcers started healing, however leaving eschars. Black eschars remained persistent despite administration of fibrinolysin ointment. Surgical debridements were carried out to remove the necrotic tissue, and then graft was performed for her. The plan is to continue fluconazole for at least 1 year.