A 77-year-old man was admitted to our hospital for the treatment of a liver tumor. His body mass index was 25 kg/m2, and he had a history of diabetes mellitus and hypertension. Laboratory tests on admission showed the following results: alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 68 IU/L (normal, 7–37 IU/L); aspartate amino transferase (AST), 104 IU/L (normal, 13–34 IU/L); serum albumin, 4.3 g/dL; prothrombin time/international normalized ratio (PT/INR), 0.99; total serum bilirubin, 0.8 mg/dL; and indocyanine green dye retention rate at 15 min (ICG-R15), 14.5 % . The Child-Pugh score was 5; serum creatinine and estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) were 1.25 mg/dL and 43.7 mL/min/1.73 m2, respectively. Serological findings for hepatitis B virus (HBV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV) were as follows: hepatitis B surface antigen (−), hepatitis B surface antibody (−), hepatitis B core antibody (−), and HCV antibody (−). Serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) was 46,300 ng/mL (normal, <10 ng/mL), and serum protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist (PIVKA-II) was 28,555 mAU/mL (normal, <28 mAU/mL).
Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed a large HCC with intrahepatic metastasis and HVTT extending from the RHV to the IVC . Because of the advanced stage of the HCC, HAIC was started by placing a standard angiography catheter in the right hepatic artery and subcutaneously connecting it to a port system (Piolax Medical Device Co., Ltd, Yokohama, Japan) inferior to the groin. Powdered CDDP, IA-call® (Nippon Kayaku Co., Ltd, Tokyo, Japan), was used for HAIC. CDDP was generally administered with a total dose of 65 mg/m2 via the right hepatic artery every 4–6 weeks. To prevent nephrotoxicity, adequate hydration was ensured before and after drug administration by intravenous infusion (1000–1500 mL of an infusion solution). After completing 11 courses of HAIC, serum creatinine increased to 1.8 mg/dL, and eGFR decreased to 29.2 mL/min/1.73 m2. Thus, the dose of CDDP was decreased by 50 % in the 12th and 13th courses of HAIC.
After 13 courses of HAIC, CT showed a marked decrease in the size of the main HCC, with no obvious intrahepatic metastases, thus indicating a partial response of the main HCC . Furthermore, the advanced part of the HVTT went down to the root of the RHV . Serum AFP and PIVKA-II levels decreased to 13 ng/mL and 15 mAU/mL, respectively . However, after two months from the last HAIC, serum creatinine increased to 1.93 mg/dL, and eGFR decreased to 27.1 mL/min/1.73 m2. Because continuation of HAIC using CDDP became difficult due to progressive renal dysfunction, liver resection was selected as a radical treatment.
The results of liver function tests after 13 courses of HAIC were the following: ALT, 14 IU/L; AST, 19 IU/L; serum albumin, 4.5 g/dL; PT/INR, 1.11; total serum bilirubin, 0.6 mg/dL; and ICG-R15, 9.7 % . The Child-Pugh score was 5. The volume of the whole liver was predicted to be 1082 mL by CT volumetry, and the volume of the estimated remnant liver (left lobe) was predicted to be 785 mL, resulting in an estimated resection rate of 27.4 %. Because of the 13 courses of HAIC, we assumed that the HVTT rigidly adhered to the wall of the RHV from the peripheral side to the root of the RHV, and a hepatectomy with patch graft venoplasty of the root of the RHV was planned. To avoid further progression of renal dysfunction, active veno-venous bypass was planned for preventing renal venous congestion and hypotension during IVC clamping.
After laparotomy via a thoracoabdominal incision, the right hepatic artery and the right portal vein were resected. Parenchymal transection for the right hepatectomy was performed by the anterior approach using the liver hanging maneuver. After the short hepatic veins were resected, the IVC was encircled at the suprahepatic IVC, the retrohepatic IVC just below the confluence of the common channel of the left and middle hepatic veins, and the retrohepatic IVC below the RHV. After cannulation of the axillary vein and the common iliac vein through the saphenous vein, veno-venous bypass using the Bio-Pump was activated. The IVC was clamped below the RHV with a DeBakey clamp and above the RHV with a straight vascular clamp, which was diagonally positioned to preserve the blood flow of the common channel of the left and middle hepatic veins. Since rigid adherence of the HVTT to the wall of the root of the RHV was suspected, the IVC wall located caudally to the root of the RHV was incised . The HVTT progressed to the cranial side and adhered to the IVC wall. Thus, the IVC wall at the cranial side of the root of the RHV was resected . The resultant surgical defect created in the wall of the IVC measured 4.5 cm × 3.0 cm . Reconstruction of the IVC was performed by patch graft venoplasty using bovine pericardial tissue (Edwards Lifesciences Co., Ltd, Tokyo, Japan), resulting in good patency of the IVC . IVC clamp time was 31 min, and the duration of active veno-venous bypass was 42 min. During IVC clamping, systolic blood pressure was maintained at around 90–110 mmHg.
Macroscopic findings of the resected specimen showed the main HCC and the HVTT that rigidly adhered to the wall of the RHV from the peripheral side to the root of the RHV . Histological examination revealed foci of a moderately differentiated HCC with extensive fibrosis and necrosis in the main HCC . Histologically, the HVTT in the RHV showed massive necrosis and tightly adhered to the vascular wall of the RHV . The patient had an uneventful postoperative course, with good remnant liver function. Serum creatinine and eGFR were 1.52 mg/dL and 35.1 mL/min/1.73 m2, respectively, indicating preservation of renal function. The patient did not show signs of recurrence 15 months after the surgery.