A 63-year-old woman presented with recurrent foreign body sensation, itchiness, conjunctival hyperaemia and sometimes painful eyes in her left eye for 1 year. According to the patient, symptoms actually occurred after a surgical correction of ptosis of the same eye 16 months ago, aggravating gradually for a year before she turned back to her doctor. Her surgery was quite successful and she was able to close her eyes completely, indicating a low possibility of complications such as exposure keratitis due to overcorrection. According to her medical record, a non-invasive tear breakup time and a schirmer test were performed, the results of which were 10 s and 12 mm/5 min in the right eye, while 6 s and 13 mm/5 min in the left eye. She also had her meibomian glands assessed by noncontact infrared meibography, showing few signs of meibomian gland dysfunction . She was then diagnosed of conjunctivitis and dry eye and given levofloxacin eye drops and artificial tears.
Two weeks later, the patient complained of aggravation of symptoms. Slit-lamp examination revealed small corneal filaments in her left eye this time. Under topical anesthesia, the filaments were removed by forceps and bandage contact lenses were placed. Tobramycin dexamethasone eye ointment twice daily was also added to the former two drops by her doctor.
3 days later, she could not stand the aggravating ocular discomfort and resorted to our clinic this time. Slit-lamp examination revealed corneal filaments in the interpalpebral zone of her left eye . Meanwhile, eyelashes with cylindrical dandruff, lid margin hyperemia and foamy tears were noticed . We therefore performed a microscopic examination of the eyelashes and a severe Demodex infestation was confirmed . She denied systemic symptoms such as fatigue, xerostoma, arthralgia, muscular soreness, rashes and loss of appetite or nausea. Combined with her previous diagnosis, we added an additional diagnosis of Demodex blepharitis and long-term lid hygiene and warm compresses were advised. Lid scrub containing a 0.5% solution of tea tree oil twice daily and erythromycin eye ointment once daily were prescribed for Demodex blepharitis. Tobramycin dexamethasone eye ointment was replaced by the relatively low potency fluorometholone 0.02% eye drops. Antibiotic eye drops and artificial tears were continued.
Three weeks later, the patient reported a drastic improvement of her ocular discomfort. Her cornea was clear without filaments and there was hardly any cylindrical dandruff on her eye lashes. Accordingly, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory eye drops were applied for another 2 weeks, coming as a substitution for fluorometholone to avoid the long-term adverse effect of topical steroids. In the following 1 year, the patient visited on a monthly basis, presenting a continued symptomatic relief and without signs of filament keratitis . Lid hygiene, warm compresses and preservative-free artificial tears were still recommended to avoid the recurrence of Demodex blepharitis. Timeline of her disease progression is shown in Fig. .