A 44-year-old woman presented with a chief complaint of abdominal distension. Her primary physician found a retroperitoneal tumor on palpation. She had no medical history and no comorbidities. Laboratory tests showed no significant abnormalities in total blood count, inflammation, liver function, renal function, electrolytes, or coagulation. Various hormone tests were all negative. Computed tomography (CT) showed a 16 × 16 × 10-cm tumor in the right retroperitoneum, which ventrally displaced the duodenum and right kidney . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) also showed the tumor in the retroperitoneum, with a low signal at T1 , and a partial high signal at T2 .
No distant metastases were found, and the retroperitoneal mass was curatively resected by laparotomy. The tumor was detachable from the right adrenal gland and other organs, and was judged to be a retroperitoneal tumor. The specimen was 20 cm in size, elastic with soft tissue , and had a solid part and a cystic part. Histologically, the tumor consisted of spindle-shaped cells with a patternless pattern and hemangiopericytomatous appearance . The cells immunostained positive for CD34 and vimentin and negative for c-KIT, EMA, Desmin, α-SMA and S-100. No necrotic tissue was seen; the specimen showed 1–2 mitotic cells/10 high power fields (HPF). No tumor cells were found on the surgical margin. The tumor was diagnosed as a morphologically and immunologically benign SFT of the retroperitoneum.
The tumor was diagnosed as benign, but because of its huge size, CT scans were performed every 6 months for 5 years. Ten years after resection, a CT scan incidentally revealed metastasis lesions. A CT scan found three nodular shadows in her left lung, including a 15-mm nodular shadow on the lower left lobe, and contrast effects indicating 9-mm and 8-mm margins on the upper lobe . They were suspected to be metastases of the SFT. She underwent a thoracoscopic-assisted partial left lower lobectomy and an upper left lobectomy. As with the SFT, the resected lung nodules exhibited a patternless pattern , positive immunostaining for CD34 and vimentin , and negative stains for other interstitial markers. No evidence was seen to contradict these tumors as metastases of the retroperitoneal SFT. However, for the metastatic specimen, the mitotic figure count was 50/10 HPF, and the MIB-1 index was 20% , indicating much greater malignant potential. Six months have passed, since the lung metastasis was resected, but she is alive without recurrence.