A 58-year-old woman was referred and admitted to our department for surgical treatment with a rapidly growing subcutaneous mass and pain over the right frontal forehead of 2 months’ duration. She presented with mild ptosis of her right eye associated with the mass. She had no history of head injury, serious illnesses, operations, or hospitalizations. The mass was approximately 13 cm at its greatest diameter, elevated 3 cm above the contour of the peripheral scalp, firm, nonpulsatile, mildly tender, and attached to the skull; the skin overlying the area was stretched and reddish. Neurological examination showed no abnormalities. She was afebrile. Laboratory tests, performed as routine preoperative testing and to detect other lesions, showed abnormally high levels of lactate dehydrogenase (13.58 µkat/L, normal range: 1.99‒3.82 µkat/L), alkaline phosphatase (6.43 µkat/L, normal range: 1.92‒5.98 µkat/L), amylase (3.07 µkat/L, normal range: 0.62‒2.09 µkat/L), and lipase (12.75 µkat/L; normal range: 0.17‒0.83 µkat/L). Beta-2-microglobulin, a marker of malignant lymphoma and obtained with other tumor markers to screen for the possibility of primary malignant tumors in other organs, was normal. The patient was not immunocompromised and tested negative for human immunodeficiency virus. Skull X-rays showed slight permeative deossification of the outer table and diploic space, sclerosis of the inner table, and preserved outline of the skull underlying the subcutaneous tumor [ and ]. Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) showed a partial tumor stain from the bilateral middle meningeal arteries, left superficial temporal artery, and bilateral supraorbital arteries, with a large avascular area [ and ]. Computed tomography (CT) of the head showed a hyperdense subcutaneous mass and mixed mildly hyper and hypodense subdural mass . Bone windows of CT showed mild periosteal reaction, permeative lytic changes of the outer and inner tables, smudgy interfaces between the diploe and the outer and inner tables, and preserved original skull contour despite the large tumor sandwiching the cranial vault . Contrast-enhanced (CE) CT of the head showed a diffuse and heterogeneously enhanced mass sandwiching the cranial vault, with hypodense edema in the right frontal lobe. On magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the mass lesion was isointense on T1- and T2-weighted imaging (T1WI and T2WI, respectively) and heterogeneously enhanced with subarachnoid extension on CE-T1WI [-]. Diffusion-weighted imaging showed a hyperintense mass (data not shown). Our first diagnostic hypothesis was a malignant meningioma with extracranial extension. We thought that a mesenchymal or a metastatic tumor with intracranial extension would cause more apparent skull destruction, and so would be the second or third differential diagnosis. We performed a biopsy in the marginal region of the frontal mass to obtain specimens of the pericranium. The mass was firm and moderately vascular; it was located under the pericranium and attached to the skull, suggesting that it originated from the skull. The skull under the subcutaneous mass had a rough surface with periosteal bone formation and with many ostia through which the tumor entered the skull. Histological findings were characteristic of a diffuse large B-cell lymphoma . Immunohistochemistry revealed that the tumor was positive for CD8, PAX5, Bcl-6, and CD19; weakly positive for CD4, CD10, and CD20; focally positive for Bcl-2 and c-Myc; and negative for CD3, CD5, CD7, CD30, CD56, CD79a, MUM-1, CCR4, granzyme B, p80 (ALK), and PD-1, suggestive of a B-cell lymphoma with aberrant expression of T-cell markers. Unfortunately, we did not receive the results of the preoperative level of soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sIL2R) until after the operation; it was 5390 U/mL, more than 8 times higher than normal (normal range: 121–613 U/mL). Postoperatively, a staging workup was completed. CE-CT of the abdomen, chest, and pelvis, as well as fluorodeoxyglucose F 18 positron emission tomography (FDG-PET), showed metastatic lesions in the lymph nodes of the head and neck, in the pancreas, and in the kidneys [-]. This pancreatic lesion probably caused the slight increase of serum amylase and lipase. FDG-PET also showed a stronger signal in the cranial vault lymphoma than in the brain parenchyma . A bone marrow biopsy and ophthalmologic examination showed no lesions. This case was a malignant lymphoma initially appearing in the calvarium and, hence, we diagnosed it as a primary cranial vault lymphoma.
The patient received one course of chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisolone (CHOP) and then one course of CHOP with rituximab (R-CHOP) in the hematology department of our hospital. The tumor, including the intracranial component, shrank markedly after the R-CHOP therapy. To treat the intracranial extension of the tumor, the patient received one course of intrathecal prednisolone, methotrexate, and cytarabine. She was well 2.5 months after the biopsy and was transferred to the hematology department of the hospital near her house to continue chemotherapy. She died of disease progression 10 months after the biopsy.