A 79-year-old man who had been suffering from anemia for 7 weeks presented to another local hospital. Because a pancreatic head tumor was detected by computed tomography (CT), he was referred to our hospital for the further examination and treatment. Laboratory tests showed severe anemia with hemoglobin levels of 7.4 g/dl, and tumor markers were within normal ranges (CEA 3.9 ng/mL, CA19–9 24 U/mL). CT showed a microcystic lesion that was enhanced as a honeycomb-like-structure, 87 mm in size, in the pancreatic head. Vascular hyperplasia had developed around the cystic lesion and duodenum . The artery and vein of the abnormal vessel around the SCN were enhanced in the arterial phase . On magnetic resonance imaging, the microcystic lesion was hyperintense on T2-weighted imaging with the septum , so the lesion was diagnosed as microcystic-type SCN. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, capsule endoscope, and colonoscopy failed to detect the cause of anemia, so the patient was followed closely without treatment.
Three months later, the patient developed anemia (Hb 5.8 g/dl) again. Gastrointestinal endoscopy showed oozing from the mucosa in the duodenum via the swollen vascular hyperplasia . Duodenal hemorrhage caused by the abnormal vessels around the SCN was highly suspected as the culprit. Therefore, pancreatoduodenectomy was performed. First, the inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery and gastroduodenal artery were divided to control intraoperative bleeding from the abnormal vessels around the SCN. After removing the specimen, reconstruction was performed via the modified Child method. The operative time was 479 min, the intraoperative blood loss was 611 mL, and red blood cell transfusion was performed (560 mL). Postoperatively, the patient developed biochemical leak of pancreatic fistula (the International Study Group of Pancreatic Fistula), but this complication was successfully treated conservatively. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 22.
Macroscopically, the pancreatic head lesion was 90 mm in diameter, circumscribed, and well-demarcated from the surrounding pancreas, and had innumerable microcysts . Microscopically, the lesion was composed of cyst locules lined by epithelial cells with round central nuclei . The lesion was diagnosed as pancreatic SCN. Abnormal vessels had developed around the SCN and duodenum. In the pancreatic SCN and duodenal submucosa, the development of abnormal vessels, which demonstrate a variety of wall thicknesses, was observed. The elastic fibers of these abnormal vessels showed heterogenous thickness and stained positively for Elastica van Gieson staining. In addition, the structure of these abnormal vessels was different from that of the arteries and veins . The abnormal vessels were thus diagnosed as being AVM, and this was thought to most likely be the cause of the duodenal hemorrhage observed in this case.
The patient showed no recurrence of anemia or SCN in the 16 months after the operation.