A 46-year-old paraplegic woman presented to the outpatient urology department, complaining of recurrent febrile urinary tract infections and severe urinary incontinence for 2 years. She suffered from persistent malodorous urine and skin breakdowns from constant urine leakage. She typically used long-term urethral catheters, which had resulted in dilatation and pressure necrosis of the urethra with subsequent severe incontinence.
The vaginal examination revealed destruction of the urethra and a 10 cm opening permitting the urinary bladder wall to prolapse into the vagina . Three fingers could be easily inserted into the urethra, and the bladder wall could practically be observed from the outside. A diffuse scar tissue area had replaced bladder trigone, and ureteral orifices were visible through the bladder opening. An intravenous urography was performed to check the anatomy of the upper urinary tract, which was within normal limits. The computed tomography (CT) scan did not assist in the diagnosis because of the artifacts caused by the bilateral total hip replacements.
The patient underwent a combined transvaginal urethral closure with anterior colporrhaphy and a Mitrofanoff procedure to ensure a continent stoma for future CISC. The patient was placed initially in the dorsal lithotomy position, and a retractor was placed in the vagina. The labia were retracted laterally with stay sutures. The damaged bladder wall was circumcised, and an anterior vaginal flap was raised. Special care was taken to entirely free the lateral part of the bladder base and the attachments of the pubic bone. There was extensive destruction of pubourethral ligaments, and that allowed a complete mobilization of the bladder wall from the symphysis pubis. The opening was closed with a 2/0 polyglactin (Vicryl™) suture. A second layer, using the same suture, was applied to invaginate further the bladder opening to ensure an excellent postoperative result. An anterior colporrhaphy was accomplished to push anteriorly further the bladder (third layer). Finally, the anterior vaginal flap was advanced to cover the area where the previous urethra and bladder neck were present, forming the last (fourth) layer of closure.
A laparotomy followed immediately after that, and an appendicectomy was done, maintaining its blood supply. The tip of the appendix was transected, and a catheter was introduced to ensure patency. A Mitrofanoff procedure was performed, and the appendix brought out through umbilicus. A small cystostomy was made, and the bladder mucosa was prepared to accomplish an appendico-vesical anastomosis. Recovery from this procedure took six weeks. Initially, the Mitrofanoff channel was not used for draining urine. During this time, a suprapubic catheter was inserted to drain urine. The suprapubic catheter was removed once CISC through the Mitrofanoff channel started. The suprapubic catheter opening closed easily.
During the initial postoperative period, the patient received oxybutynin for three months. The patient is compliant with CISC and remains continent twelve years after surgery. She has a normal renal function with no upper tract dilatation on ultrasonography. The woman underwent evaluation recently, and she is still dry with no urinary fistula reported .
The patient reported complications concerning recurrent urinary tract infections and urine leakage when delays the emptying. She performs four CISC per day and undergoes annual evaluation with an ultrasound examination to ensure that any stones that may have formed are removed.