A 4-year-old boy was admitted to our centre with the complaint of poor vision in his right eye, which had been detected at school vision screening performed 6 months earlier. There was no pain, redness or any other discomfort in either eye. The patient was born at full term via uncomplicated vaginal delivery. His ocular, medication, traumatic and familial histories were unremarkable. A general physical examination was normal. An ocular examination revealed a best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of 20/100 in the right eye and 20/20 in the left eye. There was no evidence of strabismus. Intraocular pressure and the anterior segment of both eyes were normal. Fundal examination showed a glistening light reflex from a feather-shaped white membrane in the macular region of the right eye . The left eye was normal . The membrane of about 1.5-papilla disc size was located near the superotemporal arcade vessels, and caused radial wrinkling of the central macula and vascular distortion. The vitreous was clear, and posterior vitreous detachment (PVD) was not evident. The optic disc was unremarkable. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) revealed a hyper-reflective band on the retinal nerve fibre layer (RNFL) in the thickened retina . The surface of the retina was nearly smooth and uninterrupted.
We suspected that the decreased vision was caused by the membrane in the right eye. The patient was treated by pars plana vitrectomy using a 25 G vitrector with membrane dissection under general anaesthesia. Surprisingly, the surgeon found intraoperatively that the ILM was intact and the white membrane was located just beneath the ILM. The surgeon first peeled away the ILM following indocyanine green staining. The edge of the membrane was then lifted using forceps to separate the membrane from the underlying retina, despite its strong adhesion to a retinal artery of the superotemporal arcade . There was no obvious retinal bleeding or tears. Air tamponade was used at the end of surgery. Vision training was performed 1 month after the operation. At postoperative follow-up visits, fundus photography and OCT showed successful removal of the membrane and improvement in the retinal structure with disappearance of the hyper-reflective band and reduced retinal thickness, respectively . One year later, the patient’s BCVA in the right eye was stable at 20/100. Postoperative scanning electron microscopy revealed that the membrane was composed of collagenous fibre, fibrinoid deposits and cell debris containing clusters of dense iron particles (hemosiderin) . Combined with the ultrastructural results and the sub-ILM location, we speculated that the organized membrane was caused by sub-ILM haemorrhage.