A 63-year-old male presented with 4 weeks of malaise and fever in the setting of a prior pancreatic pseudocyst co-infection with Enterococcus faecalis, Klebsiella pneumoniae and mixed coagulase negative staphylococci, on a background of alcoholic pancreatitis. This infected pseudocyst had been drained followed by 6 weeks of intravenous piperacillin-tazobactam and a further 2 weeks of oral ciprofloxacin with amoxicillin-clavulanate. Treatment was completed 5 months prior with complete clinical recovery, marked radiological reduction in the collections and resolution of inflammatory markers. His medical history was also notable for hypertension and alcoholic cardiomyopathy.
Examination at representation to hospital demonstrated right basal crackles in the lungs and a non-tender abdomen. Investigations demonstrated an elevated white cell count of 16.33×109 per litre with a predominant neutrophilia and a C-reactive protein of 156 mg l−1 (normal limits: 0–8 mg l−1). Other abnormalities included sodium, potassium and creatinine levels of 123 mmol l−1, 5.3 mmol l−1, and 201 μmol l−1 respectively. Liver function tests remained normal with a normal lipase level of 36 U l−1. A computed tomography (CT) scan of his abdomen showed interval progression of pre-existing retroperitoneal and intraperitoneal collections with the largest collection measuring 129×58 mm .
Ceftriaxone and metronidazole were commenced empirically, and CT-guided drains were inserted into the largest two collections. Sixty millilitres of purulent specimen was aspirated. Although there were no immediate complications, the patient later developed hypotension secondary to the underlying cardiomyopathy and transferred to the intensive care unit. Antimicrobial therapy was changed to piperacillin-tazobactam. Following haemodynamic stabilisation, he returned to the surgical ward 48 h later. A repeat CT scan showed near resolution of the two main collections.
Gram-stain of aspirated material demonstrated numerous polymorphic leukocytes and Gram-negative bacilli under high powered field microscopy . After 2 days of incubation, tiny white non-haemolytic colonies were cultured on horse blood agar under anaerobic conditions at 37 degrees Celsius . The organism was oxidase-positive, catalase-negative, H2S non-producing, urease-negative, and motile. Using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionisation time of flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry (Bruker; Preston, Victoria), the isolate was identified as with a score of 2.143.
Genomic DNA was extracted from the cultured colonies and amplicon libraries prepared using Nextera XT Library Preparation kit. Sequencing was performed on a NextSeq 500 platform with a NextSeq Mid-Output (2×150 bp) kit (Illumina Inc., CA, USA). Raw FASTQ files were used to construct draft genomes using shovill (v1.0.9), and genome annotation was performed using prokka (v1.14.6) . Pangenome analysis was performed using roary (v3.13.0) with 90 % minimum percentage identity for BLASTP. Whole-genome sequencing supported speciation of . Abricate (v1.0.1) was used to detect antibiotic resistance genes from the genomic sequence, however, no antimicrobial resistance genes could be detected from the draft genome.
Antibiotic testing using E-test diffusion methods showed a ciprofloxacin and erythromycin minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of 0.19 ug ml−1 and 16 ug ml−1 respectively. The patient completed 10 days of intravenous piperacillin-tazobactam followed by oral ciprofloxacin for a further 3 weeks. At the time of antibiotic cessation, the patient had near radiological resolution of the drained collections and normalisation of his inflammatory markers. He remained clinically stable 2 months post-antibiotic cessation following hospital discharge.