A 26-year-old man presented with progressive keratoconus. The patient had no history of contact lens use, allergy, herpetic keratitis, dry eye, or autoimmune disease. Uncorrected visual acuity (UCVA) was 20/60 in his right eye and 20/30 in the left eye. Preoperatively, best spectacle-corrected visual acuity (BSCVA) was 20/20 in the left eye with no improvement in the right eye. Minimum thickness of the cornea was 434 μm in the left eye.
Under strict sterile conditions using topical anesthesia, and following central 9-mm mechanical epithelial debridement, CXL was performed according to the standard method. At the conclusion of the procedure, topical chloramphenicol eye drops were instilled and a bandage soft contact lens was fitted. Postoperatively, chloramphenicol and betamethasone 0.1% eye drops were prescribed every 6 hours.
On postoperative day-1, there was a central area of epithelial defect measuring about 5.0 mm × 5.0 mm and the stroma was clear. The bandage contact lens was in place. Three days after the procedure, the patient came back complaining of redness and low visual acuity. Slit lamp examination revealed diffuse conjunctival injection, a small epithelial defect measuring 3.0 mm × 1.5 mm, and multiple superficial stromal infiltrates in the central cornea. There were no keratic precipitates or anterior chamber reaction . With a presumptive diagnosis of bacterial ulcer, the contact lens was removed and frequent fortified topical antibiotics consisting of cephalexin (50 mg/ml) and gentamicin (14 mg/ml) were initiated. One day later, when the epithelial defect completely improved, the frequency of topical antibiotics was reduced to every 4 hours and betamethasone 0.1% eye drops were resumed every 12 hours.
On confocal scan, performed on postoperative days 3, multifocal hyperreflective areas with irregular borders and scattered inflammatory cells were observed in the corneal stroma. A couple of high contrast elongated structures measuring about 3 μm in diameter were noted adjacent to the hyperreflective areas, raising a suspicion of fungal keratitis . However, the clinical course was not compatible with this diagnosis as the stromal infiltration remained stable with no anterior chamber reaction. Therefore, the medications were changed to chloramphenicol eye drops every 6 hours and fluorometholone eye drops every 8 hours, at 7 days after surgery. Thereafter, the infiltrations were gradually replaced with scars leading to an increase in the frequency of the topical steroid and discontinuation of chloramphenicol. Three months later, visual acuity was 20/400 in the left eye and slit lamp examination demonstrated a dense stromal scar overlying the pupil entrance . At this time point, the patient underwent deep anterior lamellar keratoplasty (DALK) using Anwar's big-bubble technique which yielded a bared Descemet's membrane. Histopathologic examination of the harvested cornea revealed subepithelial bulla and non-specific fibro-inflammatory changes in the anterior stroma where scattered myofibroblast-like cells with plump nuclei, immune reactive for α-SMA (alpha smooth muscle actin) and a few macrophages, immune reactive for CD68 were present. The post-keratoplasty course was uneventful and BSCVA was 20/30 with + 3.50 − 3.50 × 50, 15 months after corneal transplantation.