A 62-year-old woman visited an eye clinic with a 2-month history of vision loss in the left eye and left ocular pain during eye movement. She reported neither photophobia nor night blindness. The critical fusion frequency (CFF) was decreased in her left eye, and she was referred to our hospital for detailed examination. She had a history of left breast cancer for which she underwent a mastectomy 24 years earlier. She experienced chest wall recurrence of breast cancer 19 and 11 years earlier and received several chemotherapy and radiation therapy cycles. Two years earlier, multiple liver metastases were discovered, and at the time of her first visit to our department while she was still undergoing chemotherapy.
Her best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) at the first visit was 1.5 in the right eye and 0.5 in the left eye with a Landolt C chart. Intraocular pressure was 17.0 mm Hg in the right eye and 15.0 mm Hg in the left eye. CFF was 45 Hz in the right eye and 15 Hz in the left eye, and the left eye showed a relative afferent pupillary defect. Slit-lamp microscopy and fundus examination showed no swelling of the optic nerve head or other abnormalities (a, b). Goldmann perimetry (GP) showed a central scotoma in the left eye and a dense nasal scotoma in the periphery (c, d). Fluorescein angiography showed no abnormal findings in the left eye including the optic nerve head (e, f). Contrast-enhanced MRI of the brain including the orbital region was reported as normal (g, h). Blood examinations, including anti-aquaporin-4 antibodies, were negative for any evidence of neuromyelitis optica. Since there were no findings to suspect metastases of breast cancer to the optic nerve or intracranial space on contrast-enhanced MRI, no further examinations, including lumbar puncture, were performed. Based on the clinical findings, a therapeutic trial for idiopathic optic neuritis was started with steroid pulse therapy (prednisolone 1,000 mg/day for 3 days, 2 courses). Fifteen days after the initial visit, at the end of the second course of steroid pulse therapy, her left BCVA was 0.3, the left CFF was 5 Hz, and there was little improvement in the visual field defects on GP (a). Therefore, the effect of steroids was considered poor, and the patient was followed up every 1.5 months without treatment.
Four and a half months after the initial visit, the patient had no subjective deterioration, but her left BCVA was reduced to 0.06, CFF was unmeasurable, and the GP showed an exacerbation of the central scotoma (b). Therefore, contrast-enhanced MRI was repeated and showed enhancement of the swollen left optic nerve and sheath, left occipital lobe, and left cerebellar hemisphere, which were considered to be metastatic breast cancer in the optic nerve sheath and brain . In addition, computed tomography showed an increase in the liver metastases; she then underwent chemotherapy with radiation. Fifteen months after the initial visit, the left optic nerve head was pale, and her left BCVA remained poor at 0.04.