A 57 year old man presented to the clinic with a chief complaint of vague left sided abdominal pain for two weeks. One year earlier he had been admitted on two separate occasions for left shoulder pain with significant tenderness over the bicipital groove, lateral border of the scapula, and sternocleidomastoid. The patient had survived a mine explosion in 1967 while serving in the Vietnam War resulting in surgical asplenia. Physical examination at the time of presentation was unchanged from previous admissions. CBC revealed a decreased RBC count (4.47 cells/L) with a borderline low hemoglobin level (14.5 gm/dL) and a slightly elevated MCV (98.1 fL). Fecal occult blood study was positive.
A colonoscopy was performed under IV sedation with 25 mg of meperidine and 2 mg of midazolam. Colonoscopy revealed a large number of diverticula in the sigmoid and descending colon. The scope was negotiated up to the splenic flexure at which point the lumen was no longer visualized. The patient was turned supine and to the right lateral decubitus position. Despite these maneuvers the colonoscope could not be advanced past the splenic flexure. The scope was withdrawn and the injected air was removed.
Within 24 hours of colonoscopy the patient presented to the emergency department with complaints of abdominal distension, epigastric pain, nausea, and dyspnea. A CT scan of the abdomen was interpreted as normal. The patient was discharged with analgesics. Two days later he returned with similar complaints. A second CT scan was read as normal. The patient was again discharged. Four days post colonoscopy the patient was admitted to the hospital due to worsening pain and dyspnea. He had not had passed flatus or stool since the colonoscopy. Physical examination now revealed a tachycardic, diaphoretic man in respiratory distress with a distended abdomen and faint bowel sounds. Laboratory analysis revealed the following at the time of admission: urine positive for protein, WBC's, and RBC's; serum WBC 11.3 cells/L; RBC 4.12 cells/L; Hgb 13.1 gm/dL; HCT 39.4%; MCV 96.6 fL; PLT 306 K; neutrophils 51.3%; monocytes 9.9%; glucose 140 mg/dL; BUN 54 mg/dL; Cr 4.4 mg/dL; Na 133 mEq/L; K 3.6 mEq/L; Cl 97 mEq/L; CO2 17 mEq/L; Ca 8 mEq/L; cardiac enzymes CK 213 U/L; CK-MB 0 U/L; troponins 0 U/L; Mb 124.9 ng/ml; pH 7.42; pCO2 24 mmHg; pO2 71 mmHg; HCO3 15.6 mmol/L; O2-sat 78% on room air, 98% on 4 L. Abdominal imaging revealed distended right and transverse segments of the colon without gas in the left side of the colon or free air under the diaphragm . Chest x-ray showed infiltrates in the left lower lung. A CT scan revealed a large amount of air and fluid in the left hemithorax causing a shift of the mediastinum to the right. Soft tissue density was also noted on the left side of the diaphragm . A chest tube was placed on the left side and 800 ml of foul smelling fluid was drained and sent for culture. Follow-up imaging revealed that the lung field had reexpanded to 75% and the patient's shortness of breath had improved. Analysis of the pleural fluid revealed gram positive cocci in pairs - later shown to be enterococcus and an alpha strep species.
The patient was treated for sepsis. He was given a 1 L bolus of lactated ringer's solution and maintained on D5 in normal saline at 200 ml/hour. Acute renal failure secondary to sepsis led to a metabolic acidosis. A CT scan of the abdomen without contrast revealed herniation of the stomach and splenic flexure of the colon through the left diaphragm with extensive inflammatory changes in the area of the splenic flexure. Marked thickening of the colonic wall suggested incarceration. Exploratory laparotomy revealed that the splenic flexure had herniated through a defect in the posterolateral portion of the left diaphragm. Six inches of strangulated bowel was removed with adjoining mesentery. The defect in the diaphragm was closed and a cecostomy was created. The patient was treated with vancomycin and gentamicin.
The patient developed hypoxia soon after leaving the operating room. An EKG revealed ST segment elevation in the lateral leads. Seven days after admission the patient expired.