A 13-year-old intact male spaniel was presented for the evaluation of a 4 × 4 cm, ulcerated, and hemorrhagic mass, since 3 months, in the right perianal region . The mass was flat and hard 2 months ago, but had increased in size since then. Two days before the visit to the hospital, it had ruptured and shown hemorrhage.
A CBC test revealed regenerative, mild microcytic normochromic anemia (RBC: 5.09 M/μl, RI: 5.6–8.8; HCT: 30.7%, RI: 37.3–61.7; MCV: 60.3 fL, RI: 61–73.5; reticulocyte: 1.6%, RI: 0–1.2). A serum biochemistry profile showed increased ALT and GGT concentration (ALT: 193 U/L, RI: 10–130; GGT: 10 U/L, RI: 0–7). In the abdominal radiograph, the presence of fecal stasis in the descending colon was observed, and the presence of feces in the anus could not be verified because of the mass. A fine-needle aspirate of the perianal mass was performed and stained with Diff-quick stain for cytologic evaluation .
A large number of erythrocytes as hemorrhagic manifestation with many microfilaria were observed throughout the slide. Erythrophagia and inflammatory cells such as neutrophils, eosinophils, monocytes and macrophages were also observed. In some of the fields, cell populations derived from mesenchymal origin with high-grade malignancy were seen (increased nucleus to cytoplasm ratio, macrokaryosis, anisokaryosis, anisonucleoliosis, and distinct multiple nucleoli). Low cellularity, eosinophilic materials outside cells, and cytoplasmic appearance suggested that the cells were derived from mesenchymal origins. Thus, malignant mesenchymal tumor with inflammation and heart worm infection was the diagnosis.
Based on the results of cytologic evaluation, punch biopsy of 3-mm size was conducted at three sites under locoregional anesthesia with lidocaine spray and bupivacaine intralesional injection (< 2 mg/kg) and the biopsy samples were submitted for histopathologic evaluation (IDEXX Laboratories, Inc., Lenexa, KS, USA). Deep dermal and subcutaneous hemangiosarcoma (3 mitotic figures/10 high power field (HPF, 400×)) was diagnosed and histopathological findings were as follows: the specimen was characterized by a poorly demarcated and non-encapsulated proliferation of atypical vascular endothelium . These cells proliferated as tortuous sinusoids or capillary like structures within the dermal connective tissue. There was an invasion up to the level of the deep dermis and subcutaneous tissue. Individual cells were characterized by scanty amphophilic to eosinophilic cytoplasm and mild to moderate pleomorphic, euchromatic nuclei with variably sized nucleoli. Immunohistochemistry results revealed strong cytoplasmic staining for cluster of differentiation 31 (CD31) and moderately strong cytoplasmic staining for factor VIII-related antigen in the neoplastic cells .