A 59 year old female with a past medical history of Guillain-Barré syndrome and previous gastric ulcer on multiple medications including naproxen 500 mg and omeprazole 20 mg daily presented with longstanding abdominal pain and progressive postprandial nausea, vomiting and weight loss over 6 months’ period. CT showed mural thickening of the proximal duodenum . The patient received gastroscopy on multiple occasions, the most recent gastroscopy showed a clean-based antral ulcer extending into the duodenum with severe obstructing duodenal stricture that impeded the ability to pass an adult size gastroscope . Biopsy of the duodenal stricture showed acute on chronic duodenitis with gastric biopsies negative for helicobacter pylori infection. Initially, peptic ulcer disease was thought to be the etiology. However, malignancy could not be ruled out, and surgical management with Whipple’s procedure was therefore pursued.
Gross examination of the resected specimen revealed a large ulcerated mass (2.5 × 1.2 × 1.0 cm) involving stomach and duodenal wall . Microscopically, sections showed a duodenal ulcer and associated underlying extensive sclerosing fibrosis and lymphoplasmacytic inflammation involving the duodenal wall and extending into the adjacent pancreas . There was no malignancy or dysplasia present. IgG4 stain demonstrates up to 50 IgG4 positive cells per high power field .
Postoperatively, the patient developed an anastomotic leak that was managed conservatively with antibiotics and drainage resulting in significant symptomatic improvement. MRCP did not show any pancreatic or biliary abnormalities.
A few weeks later, she represented with abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting, with trivially elevated serum IgG4 at 0.965 g/L (0.039–0.864 g/L). CT scan revealed inflammatory changes at the anastomosis site with severe duodenal thickening . Therefore, upper endoscopy was repeated; which showed very subtle perianastomotic erosions and erythema , and a patent small bowel with non-diagnostic random biopsies. These changes likely represented recurrent IgG4-RD. To induce remission, prednisone was started (1 mg/kg, then 40 mg), with symptom resolution within two weeks, and marked improvement of the perianastomotic changes on follow up imaging . Subsequently, she was started on mycophenolate mofetil 500 mg with a slow prednisone taper, with no recurrence at 3 months .
Retrospectively, the patient’s pre-operative duodenal biopsy was reviewed and IgG4 stain was performed. In addition to the chronic and active duodenitis reported initially, there was ulceration with submucosal fibrosis and inflammation. IgG4 positive cell counts were 27/HPF.