A 71-year-old woman presented with ten-day history of general weakness and muscle pain. The patient was on Simvastatin 40 mg daily for approximately 10 years without any complaints of side effects, especially no muscle pain or muscle fatigue.
In the year 2000, the patient was diagnosed with ER positive and HER-2 negative breast cancer. The patient underwent a surgical resection followed by adjuvant local radiation therapy of the pectoral region. In 2012 the patient had local recurrence of the tumor and was treated with a total mastectomy, followed by adjuvant treatment with aromatase inhibitors, which acts by facilitating key steps in the production of estrogen . In 2017 the patient developed thoracic back pain and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of the spine revealed four bone metastases in thoracic and lumbar vertebrae. A whole body positron emission tomography (PET) excluded additional metastases. 1 month later the patient was prescribed Palbociclib 125 mg daily for 21 days and Fulvestrant 500 mg on day one and 14 receiving 1 cycle of treatment. Prior to initiation of the first cycle of Palbociclib, the patient was in good condition with no complaints of myalgia, normal gait function, full bladder control and the light back-pain was managed with paracetamol and tramadol.
After 3 days of Palbociclib treatment the patient experienced onset of mild myalgia worsening over 7 days to pronounced muscle pain and severe proximal muscle weakness. After 10 days she could not raise her arms above shoulder level, she had difficulty getting up from a sitting position, and progressive impairment of walking that within 10 days resulted in complete loss of gait function and ability to stand upright without aid. Additionally, the patient experienced dark colored urine. There were no sensory complaints or sphincter dysfunction.
Neurological examination showed weakness of neck flexors and mainly proximal muscle weakness in both upper and lower limbs; shoulder abduction medical research council (MRC) grade 3, elbow flexion / extension grade 4, and bilateral hip flexion MRC grade 2. There was no independent gait function, and the patient was confined to a wheelchair. The patient could stand when assisted but could not walk. Cranial nerve examination, sensory evaluation and reflexes were unremarkable. The patient was initially admitted at a local emergency department under suspicion of metastatic spinal cord compression, but MRI of the spine showed, beside the known vertebral metastases, no sign of cord compression or myelopathy. Six days later the patient was transferred to our neurology department at a tertiary center for the suspicion of myositis. Simvastatin, Palbociclib, and Fulvestrant were immediately discontinued. At that time the patient had received Palbociclib daily for 21 days.
Blood samples showed increased creatine kinase (CK) 13,000 U/L on arrival at the neurology department increasing to above 22,000 U/L during day three to five reaching a plateau, and slowly decreasing to near normal on day 14. Plasma-myoglobin was elevated as well (10,400 μg/L) and decreased subsequently under treatment. Creatinine levels were low and glomerular filtration stayed within normal range throughout . A diagnostic panel for detection of myositis-specific and myositis-associated autoantibodies was not contributive .
A muscle biopsy was obtained from the left vastus lateralis muscle. In hematoxylin and eosin (HE) stain the biopsy showed no signs of cell necrosis. No mononuclear cell infiltration verified in the macrophage and CD8+ stains, and no HLA-ABC positive fibers were found. There were no ragged-red fibers on trichrome staining and all fibers had normal cytochrome oxidase (COX) staining. There were no regenerated fibers in vimentin staining and biopsy showed type 2 atrophy .
An MRI of the lower extremities showed edema in multiple muscle groups . The right leg showed edema at the level of the adductor magnus, vastus intermedius, proximal vastus lateralis, distal vastus medialis and biceps femoris muscle. The left leg showed edema at the level of the vastus lateralis and biceps femoris. The MRI Short-TI Inversion Recovery (STIR) signal was abnormal at the left vastus lateralis indicating muscular necrosis .
To prevent kidney injury, the patient was hydrated with 4 l saline i.v., and a trial of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) 0,4 g/kg over 5 days was initiated under suspicion of an autoimmune etiology for the muscle injury. This was initiated before autoantibody and muscle biopsy results were available.
The patient recovered gradually over 2 weeks. One month after hospitalization the patient had regained cane-assisted gait and was discharged to outpatient rehabilitation. Approximately one-year after hospitalization, the patient was seen at the neuromuscular outpatient clinic, showing no signs of neuro-muscular deficit.
A blood sample was obtained after discharge, and genetic analyses revealed heterozygous presence of the common SNP rs4149056 in the SLCO1B1 gene.