An 80-year-old woman who underwent thoracic endovascular aortic repair (TEVAR) for subacute phase Stanford type B ulcer-like projection aortic dissection revealed type Ia and Ib endoleaks (ELs) on a 1-year follow-up computed tomography angiogram (CTA). We determined that additional stent grafting was indicated.
Preoperative CTA showed that the proximal neck diameter was between 40 and 43 mm; therefore, during the initial TEVAR, two stent grafts (SGs) were utilized. Under general anesthesia, 8-F, 5-F, and 6-F sheaths were inserted via the left common femoral artery, right femoral artery, and left brachial artery, respectively.
The type Ib EL, located in the distal descending thoracic aorta, was identified using digital subtraction angiography (DSA). A 0.035-in. Lunderquist (Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN, USA) guidewire (GW) was inserted via the left common femoral artery. Thereafter, a Zenith Alpha proximal component (diameter/length: 46/233 mm) with an introduction system diameter of 20-F was inserted. It was placed approximately 15 mm from the SG inferior component (Th12 level), implanted previously.
The type Ia EL was identified in the aortic arch, and a Zenith Alpha proximal component (diameter/length: 46/179 mm) with an introduction system diameter of 20-F was inserted. An attempt was made to deploy the SG directly posterior to the bifurcation of the left subclavian artery in Zone 3 (approximately 15 mm from the previously placed SG’s upper end); however, the inner curved side of the proximal portion stopped perpendicular to the vascular wall and failed to deploy properly . Various unsuccessful attempts at repositioning were performed. Finally, the sheath in the left brachial artery was replaced with a 6-F guiding sheath (length: 53 cm), which was inserted into the aortic arch. The right femoral artery sheath was replaced with a 6-F sheath, and an Amplatz Goose Neck snare (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) (wire diameter: 25 mm) was inserted through it and used to grasp the distal side of the abovementioned guiding sheath . The end of the left brachial artery sheath was rotated toward the inner curved side of the SG proximal component. Using a 4-F shepherd hook catheter, we passed a 0.035-in. Radifocus (Terumo Medical Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) GW under the inner curved side of the SG proximal component.
We then pulled the snare wire forward, to the greatest extent possible, and by placing tension on it, faced the left brachial artery sheath toward the lesser curved side of the proximal portion of the SG ; we used the 0.035-in. Radifocus GW, to insert a 6-F internal mammary artery (IMA) catheter as deep as possible into the insufficiently deployed portion. After passing through and rotating it, we passed the Radifocus GW through the temporarily opened snare loop, and by grasping it , we could pass the hard loop structure (guiding sheath end/IMA catheter/GW) under the inner curved side of the SG proximal portion . We then carefully and slowly pulled the guiding sheath to its original position, which repositioned the inner curved side of the SG proximal portion to a position parallel to the vascular wall , where it was successfully deployed .
We opened the snare loop and used a Tri-Lobe Balloon Catheter (W. L. GORE & Associates, Flagstaff, AZ, USA) to apply pressure from the lumen side of the SG, which allowed us to remove the 6-F IMA catheter. Once again, we applied pressure on the SG proximal side using the Tri-Lobe Balloon Catheter, reinforced the proximal sealing , and performed DSA. Type Ia and Ib ELs remained but were less than those before additional TEVAR. One week later, she was discharged. One year later, CT showed no interval change in size of aortic aneurysm with dissection, and she has been followed on an outpatient basis.