A 71-year-old woman with a history of hypertension, hyperlipemia, and angina was admitted to our Department of Neurology for tinnitus in the head. On physical examination, bilateral hearing impairment was found. The cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) detected signal changes consisted with multiple cerebral infarctions and bilateral demyelination in the centrum semiovale. And the cerebral MRA detected atherosclerotic cerebral arteries and bilateral stenosis of the middle cerebral arteries . For further diagnosis, the patient underwent DSA subsequently. The total amount of iopamidol (Bracco Imaging Italia S.r.L.) administered during the procedure was 110 ml. The DSA showed that the patient had bilateral embryonic posterior cerebral arteries, 40% stenosis of the left middle cerebral artery and tortuous vertebral arteries bilaterally. There was no obvious calcification of the aortic arch; angiography of the arch using 25 ml iopamidol was performed only once. Ten minutes after the aortic arch angiography, the patient experienced mild headache. The pain was bearable, and the patient could cooperate during the remainder of the procedure. The DSA was completed 20 min later. No haemorrhage or vasospasm was detected during the procedure. The headache was continuous, and the patient suffered nausea and vomiting. The immediate physical examination showed no obvious abnormal sign. The patient was treated with 8 mg ramosetron and 10 mg dexamethasone. After 20 min of observation, the symptoms were relieved. Her cerebral CT scan at the time was normal . Two hours later, the patient manifested dizziness with nausea and vomiting and was treated with 8 mg ondansetron and 20 mg diphenhydramine. Meanwhile, compound sodium chloride injection was used to facilitate the elimination of the contrast agent. The treatment alleviated her symptoms. Four hours after the procedure, the patient re-experienced dizziness; thus 5 mg dexamethasone was administered but resulted in no alleviation until after 11 h wherein dizziness was relived but her blood pressure was 183/92 mmHg. The patient was drowsy but could answer questions correctly. The pupil were symmetric and reactive, and limb movements were preserved. To manage hypertension, 30 mg nimodipine tablets were used. Fourteen hours after the procedure, the patient fell asleep, but at 17 h, respiratory failure progressed and oxygen saturation dropped to 88%. The patient was in a coma state, with sighing respiration. Anisocoria with non-reactive pupils developed, limb drop test was positive along with flexor plantar and Babinski sign was negative. Therefore, cerebral hernia was considered. The patient was treated with 20% mannitol, nikethamide, lobeline and diprophylline, and was transferred to the intensive care unit for further treatment after cardio-pulmonary resuscitation, endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation. Two days after the procedure, cerebral CT scan indicated diffuse cerebral oedema, loss of grey-white differentiation, effacement of the cerebral sulci and decrease in cerebrospinal fluid space . The patient was treated with dehydration, mechanical ventilation, and anti-infectious agent, but the diffuse cerebral oedema did not improve. Nine days after the procedure, the third cerebral CT scan showed that the cerebral oedema had become much more severe, the ventricles had disappeared and there was hyperdense signal in the subarachnoid space, which was considered to be indicative of a pseudo-subarachnoid haemorrhage due to the severe cerebral oedema . Fifteen days after the procedure, the cerebral CT scan detected unrelieved diffuse cerebral oedema, and the hyperdense signal in the subarachnoid space persisted . None of these cerebral CT scans showed intracerebral haemorrhage or infarct in this patient. The patient remained in a continuous deep coma state, and the brainstem reflexes had disappeared; she died 56 days after that sudden deterioration.