A 32-year-old male presented to our emergency department (ED) complaining of painful right lower limb swelling, difficulty to walk, generalized weakness, and fever for 5 days. He had no history of trauma or any chronic medical illnesses, such as diabetes mellitus or coronary artery disease. He had a positive history of hepatitis C (positive anti-hepatitis C virus) and a longstanding history of intravenous drug abuse. His last use was 5 days ago around groin region. Further, physical examination revealed identifying points of focal tenderness, ecchymosis, and marked edema of knee joint . He was admitted in the department of pathology for further evaluation. A total of 60 ml of turbid yellowish synovial fluid were aspirated from the right knee joint and were sent to the laboratory for culture. At this time, neurological and vascular examination of the limb was satisfactory. A preliminary clinical diagnosis of cellulitis and the suspicion of septic arthritis of the knee ( and ) were made, while a regimen of empiric intravenous antibiotics (piperacillin and metronidazole) and intravenous fluids was commenced.
His initial vital signs were abnormal, with blood pressure of 98/54 mmHg, heart rate of 123 b/min, respiratory rate of 22/min, oxygen saturation of 92% on room air, and temperature of 38.1°C. The patient was alert, oriented, and neurovascularly intact in both lower limbs. In the ED, the patient was given intravenous fluids and was placed on a cardiac monitor with continuous pulse oximetry. He was given nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for analgesia. The initial blood investigation revealed 11,060/μL white blood cells, C-reactive protein: 36.8 mg/dL, hematocrit: 40.7%, hemoglobin:14.3 g/dL platelets of 184,000/μL, D-dimers: 127,5 μg/L, urea: 100 mg/dL, creatinine: 0.81 mg/dL, erythrocyte sedimentation rate: 108 mm/h, Na: 145 mmol/L, K: 4.6 mmol/L, creatine kinase: 1210 IU/L, and lactate dehydrogenase: 355 IU/L. After the initial evaluation, the area of cutaneous ecchymosis appeared worse . Urgent contrast-enhanced computed tomogram (CT) scan of his right thigh and knee was performed and revealed marked inflammatory stranding and low attenuation with suspicion of necrosis mainly in rectus femoris and vastus lateralis . The CT added important value to the previous clinical and laboratory findings, enhancing the suspicion of NF. Immediately, the patient was guided to the operation theater and underwent prompt surgery. The surgery consisted of knee arthrotomy, extensive synovectomy, irrigation with 9 L of saline, and debridement of all infected soft tissues. Moreover, wide fasciotomy through anterolateral approach of the thigh and the debridement of extensive necrosis of subcutaneous fat and vastus lateralis were performed . The diagnosis was confirmed intraoperatively by the necrosis of the fascia and later on by the analysis of the tissue samples, which revealed S. aureus infection. As a result, intravenous vancomycin was added to the antibiotic regimen.
After the operation, the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) and daily evaluation of the open wound with irrigation and aggressive surgical debridement was made whenever was necessary, to control a possible new infection and reduce mortality. However, 7 days later, the lesions became worse with foul-smelling necrotic materials. The decision of surgical exploration (in the operation theater) was made, to remove extensive necrosis of the fascia and surrounding tissues in the wound . During surgical debridement of the infected tissues in the thigh, knee, and tibia, a major vessel bleeding was observed. For this reason, an angiography was made, which revealed a large popliteal and peroneal artery thrombosed aneurysm. Surgical management consisted of hematoma/thrombus evacuation and stent insertion. Within 20 days, his clinical condition was very improved so the reconstructive and plastic surgeries were scheduled, to repair the damaged tissues . Unfortunately, 2 weeks later, his clinical picture deteriorated into septic shock and he underwent a life-saving above-the-knee amputation to control this devastating condition . Following amputation, he remained to ICU for metabolic and hemodynamic support. He stayed 104 days in the ICU and then he was transferred to the department for further local wound care and fluid management. In total, the patient was admitted for 174 days and discharged and followed-up at regular intervals.