A 64-year-old Caucasian woman was diagnosed in 2002 with a stage IIIc epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC). She underwent optimal cytoreductive surgery that included bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, hysterectomy, omentectomy, appendectomy, sigmoidectomy and partial stripping of the peritoneum from the right diaphragm. After six cycles of paclitaxel and carboplatin chemotherapy, she had no evidence of disease as evaluated by computed tomography (CT) scan or CA-125 levels. However, second-look laparoscopy revealed several small malignant nodules (less than 3 mm each) on the right diaphragm. Our patient received three courses of intra-peritoneal cisplatinum followed by four courses of docetaxel as maintenance treatment.
Two years later the patient experienced an intra-abdominal recurrence and was treated again with paclitaxel/carboplatin doublet. Due to stable disease after six courses of treatment she further received topotecan for eight courses followed by gemcitabine, doxil and etoposide. Despite this aggressive therapy, the woman suffered from progressive disease, accumulation of malignant ascites that needed to be drained weekly, abdominal pain, vomiting, anorexia and severe weakness.
Cells from our patient's ascites fluid were isolated for the detection of H19 RNA by in situ hybridization analyses (ISH) and by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis . The isolated ascites cells were also positive for CA-125 expression as was tested by immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis (data not shown). Figure shows strong hybridization signals in the cytoplasm of our patient's ascites cells . In addition, the RT-PCR analysis of RNA isolated from our patient's ascites cells also showed high levels of H19 RNA transcript . Since almost all available treatment options had been administrated and high levels of H19 RNA transcripts were detected, she was offered a compassionate treatment with DTA-H19.
The study protocol was approved by the medical center's local ethics committees, and the ethical committee of the Israel Ministry of Health. The study was conducted according to the Helsinki Declaration and followed the principles of good clinical practice. Our patient provided written informed consent. Pre-treatment evaluation by positron emission tomography (PET)/CT showed an intra-peritoneal fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake without extra-peritoneal spread. An intra-peritoneal port-a-cath© (Smiths Medical) catheter was placed via laparoscopy during which extensive peritoneal spread of tumor was found especially in the upper abdomen.
Our patient was treated with weekly intra-peritoneal instillation of 80 mg of DTA-H19 vector diluted in 2000 cc NaCl 0.9%, and injected at a rate of 10 cc per minute (approximately 0.4 mg plasmid per minute). During the first hour after the treatment, our patient suffered from nausea, vomiting, fever and chills: blood, urine and ascetic fluid cultures were all negative for bacterial infection. Thus, in the next cycles she was pre-medicated with paracetamol, H2 blocker and anti-emetics and did not experience any further toxicities except for mild nausea.
At week four we increased the dose of the injected plasmid to 108 mg. Since there were no adverse events, we further increased the dose of the plasmid to 120 and 140 mg during weeks five to six and week seven, respectively . Our patient was closely monitored for adverse events during the whole study period. Complete blood count, serum chemistry (kidney and liver functions) and urine analysis were performed. DT-A DNA was analyzed in the blood and in urine samples (at different times following the treatment) by quantitative real time PCR (QPCR) analysis.
Blood and urine were collected before and after the first three infusion cycles. As shown in Figure , two peaks of plasmid were detected after each treatment at two and 12 hours in the bloodstream and in the urine at six and 24 hours following plasmid infusion. The first peak was much higher than the second one. The plasmid DNA was still detectable by 48 hours after the infusion.
Ultrasound imaging performed before each treatment showed a reduction in the ascites volume. After ten weekly intra-peritoneal plasmid infusions our patient had complete resolution of her ascites .
Clinically, our patient experienced an excellent response with improvement in her general condition, appetite, weight gain and daily activities.
A sample of ascites fluid was collected before treatment number five and examined for malignant cells. Cells were isolated from ascites fluid using percoll gradient. Only a few tumor cells were observed microscopically.
CT and PET-CT scans were performed at six weeks and 3.5 months after the first treatment, respectively. Both scans showed that although there were still multiple intra-peritoneal areas of 2-Deoxy-2-[18F]fluoro-D-Glucose (FDG) uptake indicating the presence of cellular activity of the tumor, an arrest in disease progression and disappearance of ascites were noticed.