A 23-year-old man complained of recurrent right lower extremity pain and swelling for three days.
Approximately six months after withdrawing Rivaroxaban, the patient experienced recurrent right lower extremity pain and swelling.
One year ago, the patient came to the hospital complaining of right lower extremity pain for a week. Laboratory examinations before treatment showed the followings: D-dimer level 5.74 μg/mL, hemoglobin level 135 g/L, hematocrit 40.3%, erythrocyte sedimentation rate 6 mm/h, platelet count 241 × 109/L, fibrinogen level 2.28 g/L, prothrombin time 15 s, active partial thromboplastin time 51.9 s, and the functional AT level AT3 50.5%. Doppler ultrasound revealed venous thrombosis in the right femoral and popliteal veins. After two weeks of initial therapy with low-molecular-weight heparin, the patient left the hospital. He took Rivaroxaban 15 mg twice daily as continuous therapy for a week, which was then changed to Rivaroxaban 10 mg twice daily. The therapy was continued for seven months. The patient then decided to stop anticoagulation therapy.
There was no record of trauma, malignancy, or other medical issues in his personal history. His parents had no history of thrombosis .
During physical examination, his vital signs were recorded as follows: body temperature 36.0 °C, blood pressure 110/50 mmHg, heart rate 76 bpm, and respiratory rate 18 breaths/min. Furthermore, the right lower limb was swollen.
The patient's functional AT level was 50.5%, indicating AT3 deficiency. Since there were no tests available to measure the antigenic AT level, it is not feasible to identify the subtype of AT3 deficiency in this patient.
Computed tomography pulmonary angiography indicated the presence of filling defects in both lobar and partial segmental arteries. Doppler ultrasound of the deep veins in both lower extremities revealed the presence of deep vein thrombosis in the right lower extremity, as well as thrombosis in the middle and lower sections of the right external iliac vein. By computed tomography pulmonary angiography and Doppler ultrasound, the patient was diagnosed with right lower extremity DVT and PE.