A 35-year-old male with no known past relevant medical or drug history (including alcohol and herbal), was diagnosed with multibacillary leprosy at a leprosy referral hospital in Ghana and was started on the standard MDT on outpatient basis. He reported 6 weeks later, while on his second blister, with generalized peeling of his skin, occurring for the first time and which had progressively worsened during the previous 3 weeks before presentation.
The patient was additionally found to be clinically pale, jaundiced, tachypneic (24cpm) and tachycardic (pulse-102 bpm), but had no fever or lymphadenopathy. The liver was palpable but non-tender. The cardiorespiratory system was normal. Examination of the skin showed scaling and shedding on face, trunk and all the limbs, but without evidence of ulceration.
Provisional diagnosis of exfoliative dermatitis secondary to dapsone and severe anemia to query cause were made. Dapsone was immediately discontinued, topical salicylic acid and steroid cream were started, and laboratory tests requested.
Blood work revealed low hemoglobin (HB) of 6.0g/dl (normal range: 11.5–16.0g/dl), deranged liver function: AST >250U/l (upper limit-34U/l), ALT- 216.6U/l (upper limit-50U/l), GGT-189.8U/l (upper limit-36U/l) and ALP>700U/l (upper limit −270U/l), hypoalbuminemia of 19.4g/dl (lower limit-34), hyperbilirubinemia of >342.1 µmol/l (upper limit-25.7µmol/l) with significant elevation of both indirect (360µmol/l; upper limit −17µmol/l) and direct bilirubin (299.63 µmol/l; upper limit −10.3µmol/l); renal function test showed Creatine-130.4µmol/l, Estimated Glomerular Filtration Rate (EGFR)- 57.91mL/min/L (>90mL/min/L), Urea of 15.32mmol/l (upper limit- 7mmol/l) and blood urea nitrogen/creatinine ratio-117 (upper limit −36).
Hepatitis B and C serology, and Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) and malaria rapid tests were negative. Full Blood Count (FBC) was requested following a spot HB test which showed a low hemoglobin level, but this was not done.
The patient was admitted and transfused two units of blood with 100mg intravenous hydrocortisone as premedication. He was given 15mg lactulose twice daily as prophylaxis for constipation during his hospitalization on account of the observed liver derangement. Serially monitored urine showed no cola-like discoloration. He received paracetamol for a low-grade fever of 37.8°C, which developed 2 days after admission, peaking at 39.9°C on the 8th day of admission. Intravenous antibiotics, 1g ceftriaxone twice daily was started on day four of admission at the peak of the fever. He vomited once; vomitus was scanty, predominantly mucoid with some streaks of bright red blood.
An abdominopelvic ultrasound on the 7th day of admission confirmed an enlarged echogenic liver and the main portal vein was 1.5cm dilated. The spleen was sonographically determined to be enlarged but with a homogenous appearance. No focal lesions were observed in either liver or spleen, and the other intra-abdominal organs appeared normal. There was also no ascites or other intra-abdominal masses, and the aorta was normal in size and appearance.
Diagnosis was revised to entertain an underlying chronic liver disease with portal hypertension and likely acute hepatorenal syndrome, complicated by severe anemia (with high possibility of upper gastrointestinal bleeding).
His condition, however, deteriorated over the next 24 hours with the patient noticed to be suddenly gasping for air on the morning of the 8th day, soon after which he ceased breathing. All cardiopulmonary resuscitation efforts were unsuccessful.
In hindsight, the diagnosis of DHS is suspected on account of exfoliative dermatitis, multiorgan involvement (hepatitis, splenomegaly and kidney injury) and fever, in a patient with multibacillary leprosy after 6 weeks of MDT.