A 71-year-old male presented with a scalp mass found incidentally one month prior to presentation. He did not have a history of a recent head trauma or of any significant medical problems, including liver disease. However, he had consumed seven alcoholic beverages (distilled liquor) per week for the last 20 years. On admission, neurological and physical examination revealed no neurological deficits or hepatomegaly. A soft and non-movable mass about 3 × 4 cm over his occipital area was noted. The mass was slowly growing and caused occasionally mild regional tenderness. Laboratory tests demonstrated normal liver function test, an alpha-fetoprotein level of 2.5 ng/ml and a positive serologic test for hepatitis C-virus (HCV) antibody. Identifiable risk factors for HCV infection such as intravenous drug use, multiple sexual partners, blood transfusion and receipt of blood-clotting factors were not revealed in this patient. Polymerase chain reaction to detect HCV RNA in the serum was not performed. X-ray film of the skull showed an osteolytic skull mass over the occipital midline area. On brain MRI, the tumor was a homogenous, well-defined mass with involvement of the inner and outer skull table. It revealed iso-signal intensity on T1-weighted and T2-weighted imaging , with strong enhancement by Gadolinium . A percutaneous needle biopsy showed pleomorphic tumor cells with eosinophilic cytoplasms and prominent nucleoli arranged in both a trabecular and solid pattern, findings that are consistent with metastasis of HCC . A retrograde diagnostic work-up for detecting the primary cancer was performed. An abdominal CT scan revealed two separate, low-density, 2-cm hepatic masses in segments II and IV of the liver . An abdominal sonogram identified nodular liver suggestive of cirrhosis. A total skeletal bone scan and contrast-enhanced chest CT scan revealed no other lesions.
Under general anesthesia, the tumor was radically resected with surrounding normal bone via occipital craniectomy. At the time of surgery, a grossly well-demarcated reddish-brown mass (reflecting its high vascularity) penetrated both tables of the skull through the diploic space . The underlying dura matter was intact and did not show evidence of gross tumor-invasion. The dural surface attached to the tumor was curetted and cauterized by the bipolar forceps. To treat the primary cancer, transarterial chemoembolization with adriamycin (30 mg), lipiodol, and Gelfoam particles was performed after selecting a feeding artery of the tumor on aortography.
The patient was still alive after 9 months of follow-up without hepatic dysfunction due to the progression of primary cancer. He also did not show any evidence of the recurrence of skull metastasis.