The patient was a 72-year-old woman who presented with chest pain without obvious inducement (lasting 3–5 min each time and would relieve following rest) accompanied by palpitation, chest tightness, shortness of breath, dizziness, and syncope. The patient had a history of diabetes for more than 10 years, and she regularly took metformin. Her blood sugar was within the normal range. The patient denied a family history of heart cancer. There were no obvious abnormalities on a cardiac ultrasound examination that was performed one year ago. Auscultation of the heart showed that the pulse was deficient, the heart rhythm was absolutely irregular, and the heart sound was erratic, indicating atrial fibrillation. There was no pericardial fricative rub. The N-terminal B-type natriuretic peptide precursor was 1010.0 pg/ml (normal range 0–125 pg/ml). The electrocardiogram (ECG) suggested atrial fibrillation. An emergency ultrasound indicated an enlarged left atrium. The anteroposterior diameter of the left room was about 42 mm. Two moderate echogenic masses were found in the left atrium; one was about 48 × 31 mm in size and was closely related to the posterior wall of the left atrium and the mitral lobe ring, and the other was about 25 × 24 mm in size and was attached to the middle of the atrial septum. The masses had irregular morphology, clear boundary, poorly uniform echo, small deformation, and a wide base. The larger mass caused a mild obstruction of the inflow tract during the diastolic phase . The left ventricular ejection fraction was about 60%. Ultrasound was more likely to consider tumors. The clinical diagnosis was an atrial tumor and atrial fibrillation.
The patient underwent left atrial tumor resection + mitral valvuloplasty + atrial fibrillation radiofrequency ablation + left atrial appendectomy on December 3, 2021. During the operation, a huge tumor was located in the left atrium, about 8 × 5 cm. The tumor was partially solid and partly jelly-like; it invaded the junction of the left upper pulmonary vein and the left lower pulmonary vein, the left atrial base, the atrial septum, and the mitral valve ring. The tumor and part of the lesion, atrial septum, and mitral valve ring were removed by surgery. The patient did not receive radiotherapy or chemotherapy after surgery.
Pathological findings were as follows: there were 4 masses in the left atrium, the largest of which was about 5 × 5 × 2.5 cm. The mass section was grayish-red, some of which were gelatinous and slightly tough. The tumor was diagnosed as a malignant tumor derived from spindle cells of soft tissue. Combined with immunohistochemistry, myxofibrosarcoma with partial differentiation into leiomyosarcoma and multifocal hemorrhage and necrosis were considered . Vimentin, Bcl-2, CD99, CDK4, MDM2, SMA, Desmin, STAT6 and Ki-67 were positive, while CD31, CD34, D2-40, S-100, EMA, and dog-1 were negative. Pathological images were obtained with a digital sectioning scanner KF-PRO-005 (the digital slice reading software K-ViEWER was used and the image resolution was 120Dpi).
The patients were reexamined by ultrasound at 6, 42, and 91 days after surgery, and no obvious abnormalities were found. On day 115 post-surgery, a moderate echoic mass was detected on the posterior wall of the left atrium, nearing the mitral valve ring, with a size of about 28 × 23 mm. The mass was well-bounded, irregular in shape, uneven in echo, and broad in base. Ultrasound suggested that the mass in the left atrium was a tumor, as shown in Fig. . The patient showed no symptoms, such as chest tightness. Due to the patient's age, the family refused further treatment. The last follow-up time was 6 months after surgery. The patient is still alive and is currently being followed up.