A 47 year-old Asian female was transferred to the authors’ institution from another hospital with a subacute history of shortness of breath, bilateral lower extremity swelling, pleuritic chest pain, cyanosis, episodic loss of consciousness and hypotension. Two years prior to admission she had underwent an abdominal hysterectomy for uterine fibroids, which were complicated by symptomatic anemia from associated menorrhagia. Two months prior to admission, she sustained a brief loss of consciousness, then two weeks before admission she developed gradual onset of pleuritic chest pain and lower extremity edema. One day prior to admission, she complained of some shortness of breath and a non-productive cough. There were no known risk factors or family history of thromboembolism. She had no other significant past medical, surgical or obstetric history. She was a non-smoker, non-alcoholic and denied use of illicit substances. She had no history of drug allergy.
On the day of admission, she developed dizziness at home and fell to the ground. Her family helped her to bed wherein she had a witnessed four-minute period of loss of consciousness. She was taken by ambulance to an outside hospital where she appeared cyanotic and hypotensive with a weak pulse, was immediately sedated, endotracheally intubated and started on intravenous norepinephrine. Physical examination, prior to intubation, revealed a dusky blue skin suggestive of cyanosis. She had a tachycardia with pulse rate of 110 per minute, hypotension with systolic blood pressure of 70 mmHg and tachypnea with respiratory rate of 34 breaths per minute. There was teeth clenching and hypersalivation. An electrocardiogram and serum troponin levels were normal, her initial arterial blood pH was 7.25 with a PCO2 of 2.93 kPa (22 mmHg) and a PO2 of 67.46 kPa (506 mmHg) on an inspired fraction of oxygen of 1.0. The leukocyte count was 12.9 x 103 /μL with 81% neutrophils and 16.2% lymphocytes. Other hematologic and coagulation parameters were within the normal range. The serum bicarbonate was 14.6 mmol/L while other serum chemistries, renal and liver function tests were unremarkable. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the head was normal. A venous duplex ultrasound scan showed the presence of a right lower extremity proximal deep venous thrombosis (DVT) extending to the groin and she was commenced on intravenous standard unfractionated heparin.
Later that day the patient was transferred to our hospital where a pulmonary embolism protocol computed tomography (CT) scan of the thorax and pelvis (, , ) and a repeat transthoracic echocardiogram were performed . Because of the positive venous duplex ultrasound finding of a DVT, a D-Dimer was not requested.
The patient was seen by a pulmonologist who made a differential diagnosis of an intracardiac tumor thrombus versus a thromboembolism-in-transit, and advised a surgical opinion. Because of delays in obtaining a concensus on appropriate surgical management from the cardiothoracic, vascular and gynecologic surgeons together with the need for further imaging studies, ongoing hypotension, presumed transient complete occlusion of the tricuspid valve and a confirmed deep venous thrombosis, the patient was initially thrombolysed intravenously with 100 mg of tissue plasminogen activator to treat any life-threatening component of venous thrombosis. Following this, the patient’s hemodynamic indices improved only slightly. The next day, the patient underwent a joint procedure with single stage median sternotomy and exploratory laparotomy, extraction of an inferior vena cava, common iliac vein and right atrial tumor thrombus, and included bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. The histopathology of the tumor was consistent with leiomyoma .
Post-operative transoesophageal echocardiogram and CT showed complete removal of the intravascular lesion with minimal residual pelvic mass. There were no complications and the patient was subsequently taken off pressors, extubated and discharged to follow-up on oral anticoagulation.