A 70-year-old Hispanic female presented to the psychiatric emergency room with worsening confusion, grossly disorganized behavior, forgetfulness, impaired activities of daily living, and inattentiveness. The patient’s family reported that her symptoms started a month prior to her presentation. Her outpatient provider also reported that during patient’s recent outpatient follow up visit, she demonstrated grossly disorganized behavior and reported noncompliance with her psychiatric medication regimen. The patient’s history was notable for schizophrenia, hypertension, hypothyroidism, dyslipidemia, and mild dementia.
On evaluation, the patient appeared disheveled with poor grooming. Her affect was constricted. She endorsed auditory hallucinations. Paranoid and persecutory delusions were elicited. Her speech was also markedly disorganized. Her chest radiograph, urine studies, and serum electrolytes were unremarkable. Head computed tomography (CT) at presentation revealed bitemporal lobe microvascular changes and electrocardiogram (EKG) was normal. She was recommenced on her home medications of haloperidol 5 mg orally twice per day and olanzapine 7.5 mg orally at bedtime. Psychosis improved with recommencement of her home medications in the inpatient psychiatric unit. However, she remained confused, and short and long-term memory loss persisted. Other patients reported that she was very distressed. She was evaluated by the neurology team and commenced a trial of donepezil 5 mg PO daily on the 7th day of inpatient psychiatric stay.
Baseline vital signs prior to the commencement of donepezil indicated blood pressure of 118/73 mmHg, pulse rate of 73 bpm, respiratory rate of 16 cpm, temperature of 98.4 F, and oxygen saturation of 98%. Basal metabolic rate (BMI) was 19.5 kg/m2. The baseline thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) at the time of admission was normal at 2.69 mIU/L, and free thyroxine (T4) was 1.23 ng/dL.
On her 9th day of inpatient psychiatric admission, she was observed to have fallen in the day room but was immediately arousable. Her heart rate was 42 bpm, and her blood pressure was 110/76 mmHg. There was no head trauma. She was transferred to the telemetry unit.
The EKG done in the telemetry unit showed marked sinus bradycardia of 40 bpm. Her corrected QT interval (QTc) was unremarkable at 430 ms. Her blood pressure was normal in the telemetry unit. Chest radiograph showed no infiltrates or acute cardiopulmonary disease. Her hemoglobin (10.8 g/dL) and hematocrit level (33%) remained unchanged from baseline. The iron panel was normal except for a slight elevation in ferritin of 158 mg/L. The echocardiogram showed an ejection fraction of 60% with mild tricuspid and mitral valve regurgitation. Cardiac pacing or atropine was not indicated as her vitals remained stable. The carotid Doppler study showed no stenosis and repeat head CT imaging showed no acute changes. Fasting blood glucose was 118 mg/dL. All medications were stopped with an improvement of her heart rate to the 60 seconds over a 48 hour period. The patient did not have any repeat episodes of syncope or dizziness. Haloperidol 5 mg orally twice daily and olanzapine 7.5 mg orally at bedtime were recommenced on the 12th day of admission without any reduction in heart rate. Recommencement of donepezil on the 14th day reduced her heart rate from baseline 60s to late 40s and was identified as the causal agent.
She was subsequently discharged home from the medical unit on haloperidol 5 mg orally twice daily and olanzapine 7.5 mg orally at bedtime on the 20th day of admission. Patient followed up with outpatient cardiology and psychiatry clinic and recorded clinical improvement with stable vital signs.