A 54-year-old Caucasian female with no past medical history or co-morbidities presented to an outside institution with 3-month history of an enlarging palpable mass in her left breast associated with skin thickening and nipple retraction. The patient reported rapid growth of the mass over the preceding month. Mammography was ordered and revealed a 10 × 4 × 6 cm mass in the upper outer quadrant of the left breast associated with pleomorphic calcifications . Ultrasound-guided biopsy of this ill-defined hypoechoic mass demonstrated poorly-differentiated, grade 3 of 3, ER-negative, PR-negative, HER2-positive infiltrating ductal carcinoma. Biopsy of an enlarged 1.4 cm left axillary lymph node revealed metastatic adenocarcinoma. Human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2) protein expression was 3+ by immunohistochemistry and HER2 gene was amplified with a ratio of 6.7 by fluorescence in situ hybridization; Ki-67 was markedly elevated at 50%. High-grade comedo and solid ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) was also identified. Metastatic workup with computed tomographic scans of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis revealed an 8.2 × 6.8 cm mass in the left lobe of the liver , but no evidence of metastatic disease elsewhere. The liver lesion was biopsied and showed adenocarcinoma that was ER/PR-negative and HER2-positive , consistent with metastatic breast cancer.
Given the HER2-positive status, the patient was scheduled to receive chemotherapy in combination with HER2-targeted monoclonal antibody trastuzumab, which binds to HER2 and disrupts cell signaling and proliferation . Prior to the initiation of therapy, the US Food and Drug Administration approved another anti-HER2 targeted monoclonal antibody, pertuzumab, for first-line treatment of HER2-positive metastatic breast cancer in combination with docetaxel and trastuzumab. The approval was based on results from the randomized Phase III Clinical Evaluation of Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab (CLEOPATRA) trial which showed increased progression-free survival (PFS) in HER2-positive metastatic breast cancer patients treated with docetaxel, trastuzumab, and pertuzumab compared to docetaxel and trastuzumab alone.
The patient underwent eight cycles of docetaxel (75 mg/m2 every three weeks), trastuzumab (8 mg/kg loading dose on Day 2 of the first cycle followed by 6 mg/kg every three weeks thereafter), and pertuzumab (840 mg loading dose on Day 2 of the first cycle followed by 420 mg every three weeks thereafter) over a total period of six months. The patient tolerated therapy without adverse effects and underwent re-staging with PET/CT after the 4th cycle of treatment, demonstrating near 75% reduction in the breast lesion. Additionally, the liver metastasis decreased in size from 8 cm to 5 cm. Re-staging imaging studies after the 8th cycle of therapy showed radiographic resolution of the left breast mass and interval decrease of the liver mass to 2 cm.
Since retrospective studies have suggested improved survival for patients with stage IV breast cancer with resection of the primary tumor [,] and given the patient’s remarkable therapeutic response, consideration was given to resection of the primary breast cancer following the 8th treatment cycle. As such, the patient underwent left modified radical mastectomy with tissue-expander reconstruction seven months after the diagnosis of stage IV breast cancer was made. Final pathologic examination revealed residual high-grade DCIS with necrosis (2.7 cm); however no residual invasive carcinoma was identified. Therefore, pathologic complete response (i.e., ypTisN0M1) of the invasive tumor was observed. Due to the original size of the primary lesion, the patient received standard post-mastectomy radiation therapy to the left chest wall and nodal basin. After the breast operation the patient was continued on trastuzumab 6 mg/kg and pertuzumab 420 mg given every three weeks.
The patient subsequently transferred her care to our institution and was evaluated for resection of the liver metastasis. Triple-phase CT scan at our institution taken 12 months after her initial presentation revealed the left hepatic lobe metastasis to be 2.3 × 2 cm without evidence of metastatic disease elsewhere . The liver lesion was deemed to be resectable and the patient underwent left hepatectomy approximately five months after modified radical mastectomy had been performed. The patient’s post-operative course was uncomplicated and she was subsequently discharged home in excellent condition. Final pathologic examination of the resected specimen revealed an area of scar tissue with stromal hyalinization, scattered histiocytes, and lymphocytic infiltrate measuring 1.2 cm. No residual malignant cells were identified in the resected liver, thus indicating a complete pathologic response . On surveillance imaging approximately three months after resection, repeat CT of the abdomen/pelvis demonstrated no evidence of new or recurrent disease in the liver . The patient continues to do well without disease approximately 6 months after liver surgery. Currently the optimal duration of anti-HER2 therapy for patients with long-term disease control is not known , and as such the patient will remain on dual agent pertuzumab and trastuzumab given every three weeks indefinitely.