A 70-year-old female was referred for treatment of a painless nodular lesion with a diameter of 2 cm in the scalp, localized in the frontal region of the cranium. Her past medical history was unremarkable. A biopsy was taken and tested positive for metastatic ductal carcinoma. Further analysis revealed Estrogen Receptor positivity. Mastrography and CT did not demonstrate any evidence of a primary tumor, while PET CT showed hypermetabolic nodules localized as follows: 11 mm in the left parotid gland, 10 and 12 mm in the right parotid gland, 11 mm submandibular node and 10 mm left cervical node. At this point, there was clinical suspicion of a primary salivary ductal carcinoma. The patient was started on tamoxifen, 20 mg daily, with a complete response in the scalp nodule and left parotid nodule, although a partial response was observed on the right parotid lesions (Figure B). The patient continued stable for two years, after which progression of the right parotid nodule was observed through clinical palpation and through CT as a lesion 2 cms in diameter located in the right periaricular area (Figure C), without cranial nerve involvement or palpable cervical lymphadenopathy. There was no evidence of any metastatic lesions. Anastrozole 1 mg/day was started, achieving stable disease within 8 months of treatment (Figure D). Local control of the parotid lesion was obtained via surgical resection (Figure E), tissue was sent to pathology, where a Hematoxylin and Eosin (H & E) stained section showed ductal structures (Figure A). Immunohistochemistry was performed using standard procedures with monoclonal antibodies: 6 F11 (Novacastra Laboratories Ltd., Burlingame, CA) for ER and 1A6 (Novacastra Laboratories Ltd., Burlingame) for PR and AB-8 monoclonal antibody (NeoMarker Lab Vision Co., Fremont, CA) for Her2, which proved negative for Her2neu and positive for Estrogen and Progesterone Receptors (Figure B, C, D). The tumor was classified as a salivary duct carcinoma of the parotid gland. At this time, the patient had been receiving anastrozole as pseudo adjuvancy for two years without further evidence of disease (Figure F).