A 53-year-old man without past illness was brought to the emergency department complaining of shortness of breathing. Two days before admission, he had a high fever and dry cough. He showed a cold sweat and bilateral lower pedal oedema. On auscultation, wheezing was heard in all lung fields, and the third and fourth heart sounds were audible. His vital parameters were as follows: HR, 149/min (sinus tachycardia), blood pressure (BP), 98/48 mmHg, and peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2), 84% on 10 L oxygen. He received non-invasive positive-pressure ventilation (continuous positive airway pressure 6 cmH2O; fraction of inspired oxygen, 60%), after which his SpO2 improved to 100%.
Chest X-ray revealed cardiomegaly (cardiothoracic ratio, 56%) and pulmonary congestion . Electrocardiography revealed sinus tachycardia and non-specific bundle blanch block with secondary ST-segment changes . Echocardiogram showed diffuse myocardial oedema and hypokinesis left-ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 20%. The results of the blood test performed on admission are presented in . An elevated lactate level, acidosis, and a low oxygen level were observed on arterial blood gas analysis. The white blood cell count (15 180/μL) and levels of C-reactive protein (3.00 mg/dL), lactate dehydrogenase, creatine kinase, creatine kinase-MB, and troponin I levels were elevated. Additionally, the brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) level was 316.0 pg/mL, indicating positive inflammation and acute myocardial injury and congestion. Emergent coronary angiography revealed no significant stenosis. Since acute myocarditis was highly suspected, we performed a right-sided endomyocardial biopsy, the results of which confirmed the diagnosis of lymphocytic myocarditis 3 days later . The patient was placed on IABP support and transferred to the ICU.
The patient’s clinical course and management during admission at the ICU are shown in . We immediately initiated guideline-directed medical therapies. The patient received carperitide (0.02 μg/kg/min), milrinone (0.33 μg/kg/min), dobutamine (2.5 μg/kg/min), and furosemide (2.5 mg/h); nonetheless, he showed no improvement in symptoms, LVEF, or urine output. He had a high HR (131/min), low BP (92/52 mmHg), low cardiac index (1.7/min/m2), and low urine output (100 mL/h) on Day 2. Echocardiography revealed an LVEF of 23.6%, inferior vena cava diameter of 23.8 mm without respiratory fluctuation (, ).
We introduced the administration of ivabradine (Coralan® 2.5 mg twice daily) on Day 2 because we suspected his high HR was responsible for his unchanged condition. The results of Swan–Gantz catheterization for the first 48 h after the initiation of ivabradine are shown in . After 12 h of administration of ivabradine, his vital parameters were as follows: HR, 115/min, BP 91/53 mmHg, cardiac index (CI) 2.5/min/m2, urine output, 150 mL/h. After 24 h of administration of ivabradine, his symptoms improved, and parameters are as follows: HR, 103/min, BP, 96/49 mmHg, CI 2.6/min/m2; BNP, 482 pg/mL; urine output, 180 mL/h. Concurrently, pulmonary arterial pressure improved due to increased urine output and CI improvement. The required dose of inotropic agents and furosemide decreased. On Day 6, the IABP was removed. On Day 19, ivabradine was replaced by a beta-blocker (bisoprolol 0.625 mg once daily) because the patient’s condition was stable even without IABP support or inotropic agents. On Day 20, chest X-ray revealed no cardiomegaly (cardiothoracic ratio, 43%) and no abnormality except that the costo-phrenic angle was slightly opaque (, ). Electrocardiography revealed sinus rhythm (HR, 52/min) and no specific abnormality (, ). Echocardiogram revealed a LVEF of 42.5% and inferior vena cava diameter of 13.2 mm with respiratory fluctuation .
The patient was discharged on Day 22.
He had no symptoms and his general condition was good after 3 weeks post discharge. He has not been hospitalized since discharge.