A 54-year-old Japanese man presented with a change in character and memory loss beginning one month prior to the initial presentation. The patient had a history of gout and hyperuricemia, which were well-controlled without medication prior to presentation. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging showed a large lesion spanning both frontal lobes, the right temporal lobe, and the corpus callosum. The lesion showed hypointensity on T1-weighted imaging (T1WI) (A), hyperintensity on T2WI (B), fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) (C) and diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) (D), homogeneously enhanced on post-contrast MR images (E). A pronounced perifocal edema was observed. The lesion was characterized by slightly high density on pre-contrast computed tomography (CT) with accompanying perifocal low density, and homogeneous enhancement was observed on post-contrast CT (F). No systemic lesions were detected on pre- or post-contrast body CT scans.
The lesion in the right frontal lobe was endoscopically biopsied. Histological examination revealed perivascular and diffuse distribution of relatively large lymphoma cells (A,B) positive for CD20 (C) and smaller lymphocytes thought to be reactive. The tumor cells were highly positive for SLFN11, a marker of sensitivity to DNA-damaging agents (D).
Intravenous dexamethasone was started at a dose of 16 mg/day and tapered. Subsequently, the tumor size considerably decreased, and the symptoms improved before the commencement of chemotherapy (A,B).
For induction therapy, MTX (3.5 g/m2), procarbazine (100 mg/m2/d for 7 days), and vincristine (1.4 mg/m2) (MPV regimen) were simultaneously started (Day 0) in accordance with our previously published protocol . After administration, the patient experienced nausea, appetite loss, diarrhea, and acute swelling, discoloration, and severe pain in the left ankle. Before the initiation of induction chemotherapy, no abnormal data were observed in the complete blood count or biochemical testing. Blood examination revealed acute renal failure (serum Cre, 4.87 mg/dL; BUN, 31 mg/dL; eGFR, 10.93 mL/min/1.73 m2) on Day 2 and hyperuricemia (serum UA, 10.5 mg/dL) on Day 6. Urine volume was maintained at 2520–2880 mL/d and electrolytes, including serum potassium, phosphorus, and calcium, were within the normal range. Therefore, ARF was treated by increasing the volume of intravenous fluids and the dosage of leucovorin, MTX was eliminated from the plasma after 10 days , and the renal function was normalized over a period of 3 weeks . Diuretics and blood dialysis were not used.
ARF was thought to be due to either acute MTX toxicity or hyperuricemia. Because clinical and radiographical response to treatment was observed, we decided to continue MTX treatment by decreasing the dose of the second MTX course to 1.5 mg/m2 and treating hyperuricemia with rasburicase; 0.2 mg/kg rasburicase was administered from Day 28 to Day 31, and 1.5 mg/m2 of MTX on Day 29. Serum uric acid levels did not increase after the second course of MTX, although swelling of the right ankle was observed, and the renal function was preserved. Similarly, rasburicase was administered from Day 42 to Day 45, and the third course of MTX was administered at a maximal dose of 3.5 mg/m2 on Day 42 without complications. The fourth and fifth courses of MTX (3.5 mg/m2) were administered on Days 57 and 71, respectively, without complications. The Naranjo Adverse Drug Reaction Probability Scale score was 11 out of a possible 13, suggesting a definite probability that MTX was responsible for ARF and hyperuricemia. Due to concerns regarding a relapse of renal dysfunction after continuation of MTX, hyperuricemia was treated with febuxostat and not allopurinol. On Day 80, Ara-C (2000 mg/m2/d for two days) was successfully administered, and the patient was discharged. Post-contrast MR images showed a dramatic response (unconfirmed complete response (CRu)) after three courses (C) of MTX and a complete response (CR) after five courses (D). Dramatic improvements in the cognitive function were observed after induction chemotherapy (the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) improved from 21/30 to 28/30 and the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale 4th edition (WAIS-IV) total IQ improved from 54 to 98), and the patient was able to return to work.
Informed written consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this case report and inclusion of clinical and imaging details in the manuscript.