A 56-year-old woman presented with painful urination and discomfort in the right waist for one year. Examination revealed irregular cystic masses (diameter, 25 cm) in the right abdomen. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed irregular low-density lesions measuring approximately 28 × 22 × 8 cm in the right ureter area, beginning from the lower pole of the right kidney to the bladder neck. Contrast-enhanced CT showed obvious enhancement of the cyst wall, but the borderline of the lesion and the lower part of the right ureter were unclear during the renal excretion stage . The preoperative diagnosis of this patient was a duplicate right-sided kidney malformation with renal ureteral dilatation.
A partial nephrectomy for a duplex kidney was scheduled using a robot-assisted laparoscopic approach. The trocars were successfully established. After the lateral peritoneum was opened, we found an independent cystic mass close to the right kidney, rather than a duplicated kidney malformation. The tumour cyst wall was then opened and a cream-like liquid was observed. Another cystic mass was found under the tumour. Both lesions were removed.
The operation time was 470 min, and intraoperative blood loss was approximately 600 mL. The patient recovered well and was discharged four days postoperatively without any postoperative complications. The final pathological diagnosis was PRMC-BM . During follow-up, the patient experienced tumour recurrence six months after the operation .
A 68-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital with a mass in the lower left retroperitoneum. A physical examination revealed a local bulge in the left lower abdomen, and a palpable mass approximately 15 × 10 cm in size. The mass was tough and could be moved without tenderness. Abdominal contrast-enhanced CT revealed a cystic mass with the size of 15 × 11 × 9 cm below the left kidney. The borderline between the cystic mass and the left ureter was unclear. The left kidney showed a double renal pelvis and ureter accompanied by hydronephrosis and dilatation of the ureter. There was no obvious enhancement of the cyst wall or cyst . It was difficult to differentiate the cyst from a duplicated kidney with hydronephrosis. Ultrasound-guided puncture of the cyst was performed, and the cyst fluid was viscous but not urine. Thus, the preoperative diagnosis of this patient was retroperitoneal lymphangioma.
Retroperitoneal mass resection was performed using an open approach. Before tumour resection, a double J was placed in the left ureter. A transverse incision of approximately 15 cm in length was made on the left abdomen. After exploring the peritoneum, a large cystic mass was observed below the lower pole of the kidney. The mass surrounded the ureter and was underneath the renal hilum. The mass was completely removed without secondary injury to the cystic wall. The duplicated ureters were intact . The cystic mass was then dissected and showed viscous fluid and pale yellow jelly .
The operation time was 210 min, and intraoperative blood loss was approximately 30 mL. The patient recovered well and was discharged six days postoperatively without any complications. The final diagnosis was PRMC-BM . No additional therapy was administered, and the patient was healthy without recurrence or metastasis 12 months after the surgery.