A 32-year-old male patient presented with an 8-month history of generalized tonic-clonic seizures. The patient was conscious, oriented, and without any neurological deficit.
A contrast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain revealed a significant extra-axial lobulated altered signal intensity left parasellar mass showing T1 isointense with few hyperintense foci, T2 and fluid attenuated inversion recovery heterogeneous signal intensity with areas of cystic degeneration and necrosis, small areas of bleed on gradient-echo, and post-contrast heterogeneous enhancement but no intra-axial edema. A positive dural-tail sign was also evident at the posterior basal dura.
Medially, the lesion was extending into the sella, and the pituitary gland was not visualized separately. The lesion extended posteriorly in the prepontine cistern and left ambient cistern, compressing the brainstem and encasing the vertebral artery. Laterally, it involved the left cavernous sinus, displacing the left cavernous internal carotid artery (ICA) and producing a mass effect on the left medial temporal lobe. Anteriorly, the lesion extends to the left orbital apex, abutting the left optic nerve and compressing the optic chiasm .
A two-stage surgery, a transcranial followed by transsphenoidal surgery, was planned, with the fronto-temporoorbito-zygomatic (FTOZ) approach as the first stage, being a significant left parasellar component. With the patient’s consent, a left FTOZ craniotomy was performed. A soft, suckable, moderately vascular lesion was found during surgery, encasing the left third cranial nerve, left internal carotid, and the basilar artery and filling the left cavernous sinus. A maximum safe resection was performed to avoid a neuro-vascular deficit.
On histopathology, formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded sections showed sheets and nests of round to polygonal cells with moderate to abundant eosinophilic granular cytoplasm and central nuclei. Interrupted reticulin network identified on reticulin stain. Multiple foci showed extracellular deposits of eosinophilic laminated spheroids with radial striations, which showed apple green birefringence with Congo red stain suggestive of amyloid. Strong prolactin (PRL) immunoreactivity with a low Ki67 labeling index, whereas no reaction with other pituitary hormones and cytokeratin renders a diagnosis of prolactinoma [ a-f].
Retrospectively, in view of pathological findings, a hormone analysis revealed an elevated PRL level of more than 2000 ng/mL. Rest pituitary hormone levels were within normal limits, confirming the lesion to be a giant prolactinoma.
Postoperative MRI showed good tumor decompression but a significant residual in the sellar-suprasellar region . The patient refused a second transnasal surgery. Hence, treatment was decided to be continued medically with bromocriptine therapy.
The patient remained asymptomatic; serial imaging showed a gradual decline in adenoma size , and serum PRL levels dropped to 44.2 ng/mL on dopamine agonist therapy over the next two years of follow-up.