In January 2017, a 65-year-old woman with a history of essential hypertension and an old myocardial infarction was admitted to a local hospital for sigmoid colon tumour surgery. In 2012, she had suffered an inferior AMI, which was successfully treated with primary angioplasty for a critical proximal right coronary lesion with two overlapping drug-eluting stents. She remained asymptomatic under cardioprotective treatment. Soon after colon surgery, she developed angina that was accompanied by ST-segment elevation as shown by electrocardiography . She had blood pressure of 112/63 mmHg, heart rate of 108 b.p.m. and oxygen saturation of 98% on room air. On physical examination, she had regular cardiac rhythm with normal S1 and S2, with no murmurs appreciated and clear lungs. The operative wound was unremarkable. Cardiac enzymes were increased with a maximum troponin-I concentration of 657 ng/mL (upper normal limit <14 ng/mL), maximum total creatine phosphokinase (CPK) concentration of 450 U/L (upper normal limit <192 U/L), and maximum CKP mass concentration of 20.45 ng/mL (upper normal limit <3.61 ng/mL U/L). Post-operative haemoglobin was 12.3 g/dL. Based on a diagnosis of acute coronary syndrome, 500 mg of aspirin, 600 mg of clopidogrel, 80 mg of atorvastatin, 2.5 mg of bisoprolol, opioids and intravenous nitroglycerine were administered, and the patient had a good clinical response with disappearance of the chest pain and regression of the ST-segment elevation.
The following day, the patient was transferred to Clinica Reñaca, a tertiary hospital in Viña del Mar, Chile, for coronary angiography and specialized management. On admission to the intensive care unit, she was asymptomatic without signs of heart failure. Her brain natriuretic peptide concentration was elevated to a maximum of 1285 pg/mL (upper normal limit <286 pg/mL). Electrocardiography showed prominent symmetric negative T waves . Transthoracic echocardiography showed akinesis of the mid-apical segments of the LV with balloon-like dilatation and akinesis of the inferoseptal and inferior walls with impaired left ventricular systolic function, as shown by an ejection fraction of 40%. Coronary angiography did not identify any coronary artery lesions , and a tentative diagnosis of TCM was suggested.
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging on Day 3 confirmed the segmental contraction abnormalities seen by echocardiography . On T2-weighted short-time inversion recovery images, high signal intensity was present in middle and apical segments of the LV, which suggested the presence of myocardial oedema without late hyperenhancement after intravenous gadolinium administration . However, late gadolinium enhancement was present in the inferoseptal and inferior walls of the LV, reflecting old myocardial scarring . These findings confirmed the diagnosis of TCM and ruled out acute ischaemic damage. Clopidogrel was stopped and enalapril 5 mg was started twice daily along with bisoprolol and aspirin 100 mg daily, and the patient was discharged when asymptomatic.
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging at the 2-month follow-up revealed persistence of the left ventricular inferoseptal and inferior wall late gadolinium hyperenhancement , which reflected myocardial scarring caused by the AMI in 2012. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging also revealed disappearance of the mid-apical contraction abnormality of the LV , regression of the myocardial oedema and normalization of global left ventricular systolic function (, Videos S5–S8).