A 44-year-old female presented with a 1-week history of rapidly enlarging swelling on right nose, cheek, and lower eyelid. Her previous medical history included a 2-year history of diabetes mellitus. She took daily oral medication regularly and the fasting blood glucose was controlled at 8–10 mmol/L. One week ago, she underwent gastrointestinal decompression after pancreatitis in another hospital. Laboratory tests showed random blood sugar 9.6 mmol/L, lactic acid 0.8 mmol/L, pCO2 35.2 mm Hg, pO2 74 mm Hg, serum kalium 3.1 mmol/L, urine sugar +, blood urea nitrogen 1.65 mmol/L, and creatinine 41.4 µmol/L. Later, she developed swelling, ache, and necrosis from her right nose. The lesions were derived from the nasal area where the nasogastric tube had been placed. Then the swelling and ache spread rapidly to right cheek and eyelids. When admitting to our hospital, this patient was observed that her right facial skin swelled with dark in color. The right nasal passage was partly blocked by a black scab. The right eyelids swelled severely, leading to ptosis, hypophasis, and limited ocular movement. Further examination showed the right eye – exophthalmos, mild bulbar conjunctival hyperemia, high edema, small amount of white, thin secretions in the conjunctiva sac, cornea still transparent, no pus found in the anterior chamber, pupil dilated about 6 mm, direct and indirect response to light disappeared, and fundus optic disc pale and the left eye – only mild ectropia, cornea clear, pupil about 4 mm, slow response to direct light, and fundus optic disc color slightly light. The visual acuity of the right eye was light perception, while the left eye was 6/60. Fundoscopy revealed bilateral neuropapillitis in a, b. Laboratory tests results showed leucocyte 18.22 × 109/L, random blood sugar 15.5 mmol/L, postprandial blood sugar 20.3 mmol/L, urine sugar +++, urine ketone body +, blood urea nitrogen 1.50 mmol/L, and creatinine 59.8 µmol/L. Nasal sinuses computed tomography images showed swollen subcutaneous tissues in the right cheek and lower eyelid, bilateral maxillary sinusitis, ethmoiditis, and right prosopantritis. Orbital magnetic resonance images showed widespread necrosis infiltrated into right sinus cavity, orbit, and zygoma in .
Immediate treatment including intravenous insulin, fluid infusion, and correction of ketoacidosis were performed. Surgical debridement of facial lesions was performed after obtaining the patient’s consent. A large amount of necrotic tissue was extracted along the edge of the lesions and sent for bacterial and fungal evaluation. Fungal masses and hyphal elements were extracted from the biopsy tissue. KOH wet mount showed broad, transparent, and nonseptate hyphae with right-angle branching and characteristic of mucormycosis. Based on the biopsy results and clinical manifestations, ROCM was diagnosed and combination antifungal medications were administered.
Micafungin (150 mg/day) was administered intravenously immediately after ROCM was diagnosed as upfront therapy for 10 days. Then, LAmB was administered intravenously at an initial dose of 5 mg/day. Two weeks later, 50 mg/day was applied as the maintenance dose. Meanwhile, the patient underwent surgical debridement on the right facial region including the maxillary, cellulae ethmoidales and frontal sinus. After 2 months, the overall general condition of the patient was improving the usage of antifungal medicine terminated. Later, the patient underwent surgical debridement, and the ethmoid sinuses, frontal sinuses, and maxillary sinuses were fully opened and drained. After conventional irrigation of the operative cavity during each debridement, the local area was rinsed with LAmB-diluted solution (25 mg LAmB + 500 mL water for injection). Postoperative treatment included cleaning, irrigating, and local dressing of operative cavity using LAmB-diluted solution each day. LAmB was used daily as binocular eye drops (5 mg/mL, 4 times a day) against deep infection on eyeballs. Postoperative eyes conditions in both eyes showed that conjunctiva sacs were clean without secretion, corneas were transparent anterior chamber, and aqueous humor was clear. The dilated pupil diameter is 6 mm in the right eye and 4 mm in the left eye consistent with those preoperatively. The visual acuity of right eye remained almost the same level of light perception as that when the patient admitted to the hospital, while the left eye went down to FC/20 cm. The patient recovered well and was discharged 4 months later. She remained free of disease after 40 months of follow-up shown in .