Persistent anemia in the early postoperative period after SPKT.
A 63-year-old man with poorly controlled type 2 diabetes mellitus and end-stage renal failure received SPKT in September 2019. The organs were recovered from a 47-year-old man who died from brain injury caused by a traffic accident. HPV B19 immunoglobulin (Ig) M antibodies in the peripheral venous blood, from both the donor and recipient, were negative. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) DNA polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) DNA PCR in the serum of the patient yielded negative results. No blood transfusion was performed during the operation. The patient received induction therapy with antithymocyte globulin for a total dose of 300 mg combined with methylprednisolone for a total dose of 2.5 g. The perioperative antimicrobial prophylaxis included sulperazon and metronidazole. Maintenance immunosuppression consisted of tacrolimus, enteric-coated mycophenolate sodium (EC-MPS), and prednisone. Argatroban was infused for the first two days postoperatively and was withdrawn due to the patient experiencing melena at postoperative day (POD) 3. The hemoglobin (Hb) level declined from 82 g/L to 67 g/L, hemocoagulase was used, and the melena resolved in two days. Blood transfusions were not performed. The Hb level increased above 70 g/L . The dosage of EC-MPS was reduced from 1080 mg/d to 720 mg/d, and erythropoietin was administered at 10 KU twice per week. The kidney and pancreas graft function recovered well within one week, but erythropoietin therapy had no effect on correcting anemia. At POD 20, the patient reported weakness without other discomfort. The reticulocyte count was 0.27% (normal 0.8% to 2.2%), and reticulocytopenia was diagnosed. The Hb level declined to 59 g/L. We withdrew EC-MPS due to severe anemia. At POD 22, the creatinine level increased to 1.61 mg/dL and amylase level increased to 197.2 IU/L with glucostasis. The PRA was negative. Ultrasound of the kidney and pancreas graft was normal. Acute rejection was suspected, but due to lack of sufficient symptoms, kidney biopsy was not performed. Methylprednisolone was given with a total dose of 1.0 g experientially (500 mg for the first day, 250 mg for the second day and third day), and the creatinine level declined to 1.44 mg/dL and blood amylase level declined to 140.5 IU/L. At POD 26, the patient received suspended erythrocyte transfusions (2U) as the Hb level declined to 51 g/L; after the transfusion, the Hb level increased to 74 g/L. At POD 34, the Hb level declined again to 66 g/L, but the reticulocyte count increased to 1.7%. The HPV B19 IgM antibody in serum was negative. The Hb level was maintained at more than 60 g/L. At POD 44, a bone marrow aspirate and biopsy were taken, which showed decreased erythropoiesis and the presence of giant pronormoblasts . PRCA was diagnosed by a hematologist. Suspended erythrocytes (4U) were infused and the Hb level increased to 73 g/L. Treatment with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) at a dose of 25 g/d was started at POD 51 and continued for 10 d. Additionally, methylprednisolone was infused at 80 mg/d for one week. The reticulocyte count then increased to 7.39%, but the Hb level remained low, at approximately 60 g/L. At POD 66, the Hb level declined to 59 g/L, and the reticulocyte count declined to 1.67%. IgM antibody of HPV B19 in serum was negative. Due to lack of experience, we realized that the IgM antibody might be false negative and HPV B19 infection could not be excluded. Blood specimens were sent to BGI PathoGenesis Pharmaceutical Technology (Shenzhen, China) for metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS). Only HPV B19 DNA was detected and the sequencing reads number was 48857. HPV B19-related aPRCA was diagnosed. The evolution of relevant data and treatment over time in this patient are shown in Figure .
The patient had undergone cystolithotomy 20 yr previously, he had a history of hypertension for 14 yr and was taking regular felodipine to control his blood pressure. Before SPKT, the patient had a history of hyperglycemia for 11 yr, abnormal renal function for 1 yr, and hemodialysis for 5 mo.
The patient’s height was 179 cm and body weight, 71 kg, with a body mass index of 22.16 kg/m2. Physical examination on admission revealed pale palpebral conjunctiva and hyponychium.
No hypoleukocythemia or thrombocytopenia was detected after the operation. Additionally, the erythropoietin-resistant anemia and reticulocytopenia persisted and the evolution of Hb and reticulocytes are shown in Figure . At POD 20, results of direct and indirect Coombs test and laboratory examination of ferritin and transferrin and unsaturated iron-binding capacity were normal. BK virus DNA PCR, CMV DNA PCR and EBV DNA PCR all yielded negative results in the serum. At POD 66, mNGS for pathogens was performed and the sequencing reads number of HPV B19 DNA was 48857 .
At POD 44, a bone marrow aspirate and biopsy were obtained, which showed decreased erythropoiesis and the presence of giant pronormoblasts .