An 84-year-old female with a 16-year history of Janus Kinase-2 (JAK-2) positive ET presented with a lower respiratory tract infection and was found to have pancytopenia with occasional circulating blasts. Previous therapies included busulfan and hydroxycarbamide. She then became transfusion dependent and blast counts increased rapidly. Bone marrow biopsy showed a hypercellular marrow with markedly reduced trilineage haematopoiesis and 65% myeloblasts, with mildly increased reticulin deposition. Cytogenetics showed a normal karyotype 46XX. Molecular studies found no JAK2, Calreticulin (CALR) or Myeloproliferative Leukaemia Gene (MPL) mutations or variants, however did show two somatic mutations in DNA (cytosine-5)-methyltransferase 3A (DNMT3A) in trans: G707S missense mutation and H506P missense mutation.
LSD1 inhibitor, Bomedemstat, was commenced at an increasing dose of 3 mg/kg in 14 day cycles following enrolment in a clinical trial. The initial blast response was remarkable, with peripheral blast counts falling from 15.49 × 109/L to <1.00 × 109/L by the end of cycle 2. Peripheral blood and three monthly marrows showed reducing blast counts with a rising percentage of monoblasts. This was noted on morphology and supported by flow cytometry , indicating differentiation of blasts from an immature phenotype down the monocytoid pathway with reduction in blasts , in response to LSD-1 inhibition. Supportive transfusions of packed red cells and platelets were continued intermittently and she was admitted to hospital for febrile illness requiring intravenous antibiotics on four occasions while on study, each time demonstrating a neutrophil response and recovering.
Bomedemstat was mostly well tolerated, with the only direct side effect being gastrointestinal symptoms when dose was increased to 6 mg/kg at C10, which resolved on dose reduction back to 3 mg/kg. Combination therapy with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) was given for 3 months, however ceased due to dry skin and eyes and desquamation of feet. The patient was admitted to hospital for febrile illness requiring intravenous antibiotics on four occasions while on Bomedemstat, recovering each time and demonstrating a peripheral blood neutrophil response. She also developed Sweet's syndrome (neutrophilic dermatitis) after 15 months on therapy, which resolved with steroid treatment. In the setting of neutropenia, 26 months after being enrolled on study, the patient developed urosepsis and osteomyeltis, withdrawing from active therapy prior to demise.