A 36-year-old White male presented to the emergency department (ED) with a four-month history of left-sided chest pain with associated shortness of breath on exertion. He described the pain as a dull ache that occurred at rest and was not worsened by exertion. He also noted a chronic dry cough that he had for the prior several years that was not associated with illness or exercise and a 12-pound weight loss over the previous month. Past medical history was noted for ureterolithiasis several years prior and he took no medications on a daily basis. His last purified protein derivative skin test was several months prior and was negative. He also denied ever smoking or a family history of autoimmune or inheritable disorders.
Upon arrival, his vital signs were all within normal limits and his examination exhibited only scant wheezes and coarse breath sounds in the left upper lobe. Egophony and whispered pectoriloquy were both negative in the concerned area. He also had no discernible skin lesions or clubbing.
Electrocardiogram showed a normal sinus rhythm with 82 beats per minute without any signs of ischemia. Laboratory testing including a complete blood count, complete metabolic profile, and troponin T test were all negative. Chest radiograph (CXR) demonstrated diffuse interstitial nodular opacities throughout the lungs bilaterally with bilateral perihilar consolidations that were worse on the left . Computed tomography with intravenous contrast of the chest showed mid and upper lung nodularity with a perilymphatic distribution involving the central peribronchial vascular regions as well as subpleural and fissural surfaces causing conglomerate in the upper lobes centrally . There was also mild symmetric bilateral hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy.
After discussion with pulmonology, the differential included lymphoma, tuberculosis, fungal infections, and pulmonary sarcoidosis. The following day, the patient underwent bronchoscopy with endotracheal ultrasound and transbronchial biopsies. Bronchoalveolar lavage was negative for fungal infections, acid-fast bacilli, and malignant cells. Endobronchial biopsies revealed numerous non-necrotizing, well-formed granulomas embedded in dense hyaline sclerosis.
The patient was subsequently diagnosed with stage 3 pulmonary sarcoidosis and started on prednisone daily and sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim three times a week for eight weeks. Following treatment, he had resolution in his symptoms.