A 75-year-old lady presented to our emergency room after a trivial fall and severe pain in her right thigh and inability to walk. There was a history of BP intake for the treatment of osteoporosis for 5 years duration. There was no history of prodromal thigh pain. Radiographs of the right femur showed a complete fracture of the right femur shaft at the isthmus with the transverse lateral cortex, medial spike, and increased cortical thickening suggestive of atypical nature of this fracture . As per the criteria given by the Task Force of ASBMR, the patient had all major and minor criteria except that the patient had no prodromal symptoms and bilateral association . These signs led to a diagnosis of Atypical fracture of the femoral shaft. The radiograph of the contralateral femur showed no signs of an incomplete fracture. Subsequently, BP was stopped and the patient underwent closed intramedullary nailing with post-operative radiograph showing acceptable reduction and stable fixation . Postoperatively, the patient was started on active exercises and non-weight-bearing with a walker on day 1, and subsequently, the patient was discharged on day 3. The radiographs at 3months showed evidence of callus formation, and the patient was advised weight-bearing walking. Subsequent radiographs at follow-ups showed slow healing of the fracture with minimal callus formation. At 9 months, the patient again presented to the emergency room with thigh pain after getting up from sitting position. Clinical examination showed varus deformity of the right thigh with radiographs showing refracture with segmental breakage of the nail at the level of fracture and distal bolts with minimal callus formation . This led to the impression that the AFF in the diaphyseal region did not unite in 9 months. Subsequently, the patient was treated with exposure of the fracture site, removal of the nail, and fibrous union. The sclerotic bone ends were removed until there was punctuate bleeding from the bone ends. The fixation was performed with K-nail and augmented plating, as shown by Sancheti et al. and was supplemented with osteoperiosteal flaps and iliac crest bone grafting (ICBG) . Postoperatively, the patient was started on active exercises and non-weight-bearing walking with walker support on day 2and was discharged from the hospital on day 5. The patient was followed up regularly at 1-month intervals. The radiographs at 3 months showed good callus formation and the patient was advised to complete weight-bearing. The fracture healed successfully at 6 months and the patient started walking without support. At 1-year follow-up, the patient had full hip and knee range of motion and radiographs showed complete fracture healing with consolidation .