A 47 year old HAN female, with no past medical history, presented to our clinic complaining of shortness of breath and a productive cough with white sputum. After thorough investigation, she was diagnosed with pulmonary alveolar proteinosis. High resolution CT scan (HRCT) of her chest demonstrated the classic PAP features of crazy paving . Her bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) was milky in appearance, and periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) staining of the lavage fluid revealed accumulation of an excessive pinkish protein-like substance. Hematoxylin and eosin staining of the patient’s transbronchial lung biopsy (TBLB) showed multiple alveolar spaces and bronchioles filled with a granular acidophilic acellular material, which stained bright pink with PAS. Her room air arterial blood gas analysis was consistent with type 1 respiratory failure, but could be corrected with oxygen via nasal cannula (NC) at 2 L/min. Her blood chemistry panel was normal, with a LDH of 195 U/L. Pulmonary function testing revealed a restrictive pattern with impaired diffusion: FVC 2.14 L/71.4% predicted, FEV1: 1.95 L/75.8% predicted, FEV1/FVC 90.94%, and DLco 3.19 mmol/min/kPa/39.5% predicted, respectively.
The first bilateral sequential WLL was performed under general anesthesia in September of 2010, which improved her symptoms and her P(A-a)O2 substantially for about 1 year. However, in October of 2011, her cough and exertional dyspnea returned, with a room air PaO2 of 42 mmHg. Supplemental oxygen was given at 7 L/min via NC to help correct her severe hypoxemia. At this time a second bilateral WLL was performed, which did not improve her symptoms or hypoxia. Thus, a third WLL was to be repeated in one month (November 2011). Three months later, in February of 2012, the patient had a third flare of PAP which was thought to have been triggered by the common cold. Considering the limited efficacy of WLL therapy, plasmapheresis was considered as a possible alternative treatment. She then received bilateral WLL followed by 5 sessions of plasmapheresis over 2 weeks, at an exchange volume of 2.5 L. Her clinical symptoms and radiological manifestations improved temporally. In May of 2012, her PAP relapsed again , and O2 8-9 L/min via NC was required to maintain adequate oxygenation. With the approval from the Ethics Committee of our hospital, exogenous GM-CSF inhalation was given. Considering that patients treated with GM-CSF usually take time to respond to therapy, we applied GM-CSF inhalation therapy in combination with WLL. The patient received WLL on June 1st 2012 first, and then was started on rhGM-CSF inhalation therapy at a dosage of 150 μg twice daily for 8 days, which was then stopped for 6 days. This cycle was repeated every 2 weeks over the next 3 months. In her follow-up visit in September of 2012, she showed no signs of dyspnea, and had a PaO2 of 68 mmHg on room air, as well as a significant improvement in her chest CT . No substantial adverse events were reported. Another course of GM-CSF inhalation at a dosage of 150 μg was suggested. Again given in cycles of once daily for 8 days, and then every 2 weeks over 6 months. Until now, the patient has had no further flares of her PAP, and was able to take care of herself without difficulty. The patient’s complete course of treatment has been listed in Table .