In 2010, a 45-year-old female had presented to us with recurrent right wrist fullness and pain managed surgically once 3 years before presentation to us. She had undergone curettage and bone grafting from ipsilateral iliac crest back then, but details of adjuvant treatment given to the cavity were not available. On examination, she had fullness of her right distal forearm; there was no tenderness and range of motion (ROM) of wrist was restricted. The radiograph showed expansile lytic lesion with thinned out cortices .
Chest computed tomography was done to rule out pulmonary metastasis.
Different options of reconstruction were offered to the patient. Considering the recurrent nature of the lesion and patients desire to maintain a mobile wrist joint, a plan was made to reconstruct the distal radius with ipsilateral fibula non vascularized autograft. In late 2010, she underwent en bloc resection of the right distal radius, followed by proximal fibula harvest. Proximal fibula autograft was fixed to the remnant of the radius with a 7 hole DCP and contralateral iliac crest grafting was done at the fibuloradial junction. Wrist ligaments were reconstructed and a wrist transfixing K-wire was put for immobilization to facilitate healing of ligaments .
K wire was removed at 6 weeks and wrist ROM was initiated. At 12-week follow-up, there was union at the osteotomy site . She had 30° volar flexion, 20° dorsiflexion, 60° pronation, and 30° supination. Patient was lost to follow-up after 6 months.
She presented to us in 2014 with recurrence of wrist pain and restriction of wrist ROM. Repeat X-ray showed lytic lesion in the proximal fibula graft .
A core needle biopsy was performed and diagnosis of recurrent GCT of bone was confirmed. In an attempt to preserve the wrist motion, patient underwent curettage, adjuvant treatment with phenol-alcohol, high speed burring, and electrocautery, followed by cementing .
Procedure was uneventful. Patient was maintained on a volar slab for 4 weeks. Wrist ROM was initiated at 4 weeks. At 1-year follow-up, patient had 20° volar flexion, 10° dorsiflexion, 50° pronation, and 20° supination. Her plain radiograph was satisfactory .
Patient presented to us again in 2017, with increasing pain, deformity, and restriction of ROM in the right wrist. She also had reduced grip strength .
On evaluation with X-ray, she was found to have carpal collapse and volar wrist subluxation .
Because of the significant morbidity due to repeat surgeries, a salvage procedure was ruled out. Patient was counseled regarding loss of wrist joint motion. In July 2018, patient underwent, resection of the distal third of radius, spanning wrist arthrodesis plate fixed proximally in the ulna shaft and distally in the third metacarpal base, with a resultant single bone forearm .
She progressed uneventfully.
At 12-month post-operative, her wounds had healed well, she had 60° pronation and 10° supination . shows her wrist X-ray at 18-month follow-up. It shows satisfactory implant status. Her upper limb MSTS score was 21.