A 92-year-old male patient with a personal history of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, colonic angiodysplasia and aneurysm of the right hepatic artery (34 mm) incidentally diagnosed 6 years ago by ultrasound during the evaluation of right upper quadrant abdominal pain. Given the age of the patient and the lack of symptoms, it was decided not to perform any therapeutic actions, so a closed follow-up was effectuated by the Angiology and Vascular Surgery Service of our centre.
The patient was admitted to the emergency department with abdominal pain, hematemesis and melaena as well as 30-min evolution hemodynamic instability. After resuscitation, an upper digestive endoscopy was performed, reporting a 20 mm round lesion on the anterior side of the duodenal bulb with submucosal compromise and a visible vessel with a clot attached and jet bleeding; initially suspicious of gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST). Bleeding control was achieved by performing pharmacological sclerosis with 3cc adrenaline and 5cc ethoxysclerol.
Subsequently, a CT angiogram was performed to assess the submucosal lesión and rule out other possible causes. This test showed and abscence of active bleeding and an increase in the size of the previously known hepatic aneurysm (74 mm) (A). The aneurysm had a fusiform morphology and encompassed the right hepatic and gastroduodenal arteries, and its growth had caused an erosion of the duodenum wall that eventually produced and arterio-eneteric fistula. The patient presented an anatomical vascular variation, with an aberrant left hepatic artery originating from the left gastric artery (B).
The case was reviewed in a multidisciplinary session and given the findings of the complementary tests, surgical treatment was offered to the patient, which he rejected assuming the poor prognosis of conservative treatment in the event of a new bleeding episode. The following day, due to the characteristics of the lesion and previous comorbidities, endovascular treatment was offered as an alternative therapy. This time the patient accepted, so embolization of the aneurysm with Interlock® coils (Boston Scientific, Natick, Massachusets, U.S.A.) and Tisseel® thrombin (Baxter International, Deerfield Illinois, U.S.A.) was perfomed under sedation. The procedure was successful and no additional sessions were needed .
The patient was discharged fifteen days after admission, maintaining an outpatient follow-up. He has not present new bleeding episodes or other complications derived from the procedure thus far.