A 34-year-old young woman was admitted to our department for “recurrent cough for 6 months, acute exacerbation with dyspnea for 1 month” on 7 January 2019. The female presented with a 6-month history of slight nonproductive cough, shortness of breath after exercise, and complained of mild fever and night sweating with yellow-brown sputum for several days but denied chest pain. After the application of antibiotics (the detail was not clear) in a local hospital, temperature declined to normal, but she still had cough and dyspnea with exercise. A chest computed tomography (CT) scan (1 January 2019, ) showed multiple ground glass opacities with multiple bullae in both lungs. The patient had been slightly immunocompromised (the detail was not clear) since infancy, and had undergone several surgical treatments for suspected pleurisy and skin infection around the left ear. She had a history of viral hepatitis B, but was not on regular treatment, and no smoking or alcohol history. She was born in Gansu province, northwest of China, and moved to Hangzhou 10 years ago.
On physical examination, vital signs appeared normal, moist rales could be heard in both lungs, and there was no obvious cyanosis. Her HIV test was negative. The serum CA125 and NSE levels were 65.3 (reference 0–33 kU/l), 21.9 (reference 0–16.6 μg/l), respectively. The total T-lymphocyte count and CD4+ were 900 and 380 cells/µl, respectively. Hemoglobin was only 91 g/l. Blood gas analysis was normal. Serum immunoglobulin (Ig)E, IgG, IgA, and IgM were all normal. The plasma galactomannan antigen test and serum cryptococcal antigen agglutination test were normal. The sputum and blood cultures for both fungus and bacteria and sputum acid-fast bacillus test were negative. Other routine laboratory examinations were normal, such as the white blood count, C-reactive protein, glucose, aminotransferases, creatinine, vasculitis antibodies, and autoantibodies. The CT scan showed multiple disseminated ground glass opacities with multiple bullae in both lungs , no pleural effusion and pleural thickening, and no swollen superficial lymph nodes throughout the body, and no abnormal echocardiography, abdominal B-ultrasonic, and brain CT were observed.
Bronchoscopic examinations revealed uneven local membrane surface , hypoechoic areas in group 7, 4R, and 11Rs mediastinal lymph nodes through convex-probe endobronchial ultrasound , and hypoechoic shadow in the dorsal segment of the right lower lobe (RLL) through radial-probe endobronchial ultrasound . Cultures of the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) for bacteria and acid-fast bacilli were all negative. The galactomannan test and cryptococcal antigen agglutination test of BALF were also negative. Upon histological examination, chronic granulomatous inflammation was found in the dorsal segment of RLL and the group 7 lymph node. Next generation sequencing (NGS) of the BALF confirmed lung infection with T. marneffei 2 days later . About 1 week later, culture of BALF and the biopsied tissue mass also showed the existence of T. marneffei. Based on the pathogen’s temperature-dependent dimorphic growth characteristic and the production of soluble red pigment and PAS-negative cell content, the isolate was identified definitively as T. marneffei .
On the other hand, considering that the patient’s HIV test was negative but the total counts of lymphocytes and CD4+ were slightly decreased, together with her history since infancy, we could not rule out congenital immunodeficiency. A blood gene detection test was taken, which indicated a loss-of-function mutation in the gene STAT3; however, there were no similar mutations in her parents (, ).
So far, the patient was diagnosed as having a STAT3 mutation and lung infection with T. marneffei. Considering her financial condition, she was prescribed oral itraconazole (200 mg, every 12 h) therapy on 13 January 2019 and later discharged. Two repeated chest CT, on 26 January 2019 and 27 April 2019 , revealed distinct resolution of both lungs. The symptoms of shortness of breath and cough were also obviously alleviated, and the patient continues to receive treatment (itraconazole, 200 mg per day) and follow up at present.