A 60-year-old female was admitted with a 4-day history of right upper quadrant pain. She was treated with oral antibiotics for suspected acute cholecystitis. She had a past medical history of Type-2 diabetes and hypertension. She was a non-smoker. The patient had no fever, sweating or rigors but described similar intermittent pain with associated nausea and vomiting over the preceding 6-weeks. On examination, the patient was comfortable and well nourished. Her clinical parameters (pulse and blood pressure) were normal and she was apyrexic. Abdominal examination revealed right upper quadrant tenderness with a palpable liver edge. There were no other masses or organomegaly.
Haematological analyses showed a haemoglobin level of 13.9 g/dl, white cell count 10.8 × 109/l and C-reactive protein 19 mg/L. All other indices were normal as were the plain chest and abdominal X-rays. An abdominal ultrasound showed a markedly abnormal liver appearance with multiple hypoechoic lesions suggestive of multiple metastases. The remainder of the biliary tree was normal. A contrast-enhanced computerised tomography (CT) scan of the chest, abdomen and pelvis confirmed multiple liver metastases within both lobes of the liver but also a 6 × 7 cm tumour mass in the right iliac fossa . There was associated lymphadenopathy extending through the ileo-colic branch of the superior mesenteric artery and further large lymph nodes measuring up to 1.9 cms in diameter in the aorto-caval and para-aortic regions. Although the lesion was separate from the ileo-caecal valve, radiological imaging suggested an appendiceal or caecal origin. Further extrinsic pressure to the distal third of the right ureter was present with mild hydronephrosis. No lung parenchymal abnormality was identified.
Gastrointestinal investigation with colonoscopy was planned but cancelled due to deteriorating symptomatology with conservative treatment. Laparotomy revealed a large tumour mass which appeared to originate from the ascending colon. This was adherent to but not invading the right ureter and lateral abdominal wall. Liver metastases and multiple enlarged lymph nodes along the ileo-colic branch of the superior mesenteric artery were also identified. Due to the involvement of surrounding structures and a suspected caecal origin a right hemicolectomy was performed with a primary ileo-colic anastomosis. The right ureter was preserved as the tumour was dissected free of both the ureter and lateral abdominal wall. No synchronous colorectal tumour was identified during surgery.
Macroscopic examination showed that the tumour had replaced the appendix without caecal involvement . Histological examination showed a small cell carcinoma tumour composed of small cells with round to ovoid nuclei, dispersed chromatin, scanty cytoplasm and abundant mitoses . The tumour had extended through the peritoneum and involved the surrounding adipose tissue replacing the entire appendiceal mucosa. There was extensive lymphovascular invasion and metastatic involvement of regional lymph nodes. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated positivity for the epithelial markers CAM 5.2 and AE1/AE3 and the neuroendocrine markers PGP 9.5, synaptophysin and TTF1. Ki-67 staining index was approximately 90%. Tumours cells were negative for cytokeratin 7, cytokeratin 20, CD 45 (LCA), desmin, WT-1, CD 56, chromogranin and CD 99. The morphology and immunohistochemical features were in keeping with a neuroendocrine carcinoma of small cell type. In the absence of an identified pulmonary tumour, a diagnosis of primary appendiceal small cell carcinoma was made.
She made an uneventful surgical recovery and was transferred to the oncology department 12-days after surgery for palliative chemotherapy. The patient developed a right flank abscess after receiving one cycle of carboplatin. The abscess was drained percutaneously. Subsequently the patient was referred to the palliative care team and passed away 2-months after surgery. A post mortem was not performed.