65-years-old female patient with history of diverticulosis developed large bowel obstruction and underwent sigmoidectomy which complicated by IIA injury required ilioiliac graft placement. Approximately 2 months later, the patient developed fever wand was hypotensive, Due to concern of graft infection, patient underwent exploratory laparotomy which confirmed graft infection, the graft was removed as well as abdominal washout was done. Following day left common iliac to left common femoral artery bypass was performed using left common femoral vein graft with closure of rectal stump leak. The patient developed acute bleeding from the graft area resulted with hemorrhagic shock, and controlled by graft ligation.
Follow up CT scan showed a 3 × 6 cm mycotic pseudoaneurysm of the left IIA with adjacent inflammatory strandings . This was initially embolized by CT guided direct access using 20 Gauge chiba needle (Cook, IN, USA) and onyx (Medtronic, MN, United states) . Post embolization angiogram showed successful embolization of the sac . However, the mycotic pseudoaneurysm continued to enlarge on follow-up CT angiogram and measured 8 × 4 cm with partial filling of sac . The patient underwent second embolization of the mycotic pseudoaneurysm through SGA access. While patient was in prone position, the left SGA was accessed under color Doppler ultrasound guidance using a 21 Gauge 15 cm length needle (Cook, IN, USA). Contrast injection confirmed the left SGA position of the needle. A 0.018-inch Nitrex wire (Medtronic, MN, United states) was advanced into the left SGA. Subsequently, the needle was exchanged for a 5 French 15 cm transitional sheath. The dilator and microwire were traded for 2.8 Fr Progreat microcatheter (Terumo, NJ. United states). Then, the mycotic pseudoaneurysm was embolized with penumbra coils (Penumbra Inc. CA, Unites states) followed by onyx 18 embolization of the feeding vessels, iliolumbar artery and superior and inferior gluteal arteries . The patient was also placed on an extended course of intravenous antibiotics. Follow-up CT Angiogram of the pelvis performed approximately 2 months after showed stable size and completely embolized left internal iliac mycotic pseudoaneurysm without any sign of enlargement and new contrast in the sac .