This is a case report of a 70-year-old retired female non-smoker with a history of breast cancer, anemia, hyperthyroidism, neuropathy, and s/p right 1MPTJ arthrodesis for hallux valgus and hallux rigidus and first tarsometatarsal (TMT) arthrodesis for midfoot arthritis 3 years ago. She presented with dissatisfaction and pain secondary to functional limitations imposed by her extensive fusion. She stated her foot felt rather stiff. The patient had an interval of symptom relief following the index procedure and radiographic evidence of successful fusion without experiencing a surgical complication. She reported that she had been compliant with index surgery postoperative protocols. She insidiously developed stiffness 2 years postoperatively that progressively worsened since onset. The patient believed that she experienced surgical failure and was dissatisfied with her altered gait and believed ipsilateral knee and hip pain were a consequence of her hallux stiffness. Clinical examination demonstrated well-healed surgical scars without signs of infection, a fused hallux metatarsal-phalangeal joint (MTPJ) in good position with pain overlying the dorsal aspect of the first toe and residual second toe deformity with skin irritation. Weight-bearing radiographs showed that hardware was maintained in proper alignment without signs of failure or loosening with radiographic evidence of successful fusion at the MTPJ and midfoot ( and ). In addition, slight hallux valgus interphalangeous with encroachment onto the second toe was noted. She was diagnosed with right foot hallux interphalangeus with painful retained hardware.
The patient was extensively counseled about her symptoms and provided reassurances regarding the outcome of her index surgery. Conservative management including activity and shoe wear modifications were recommended but failed to improve dissatisfaction or symptoms. Surgical treatment options were discussed with the patient, and she was requesting a takedown of her hallux MTPJ fusion. A review of the literature did not reveal any specific technique for achieving a mobile hallux MTPJ following previous fusion. Outcomes associated with conversion to arthroplasty could, therefore, not be stated due to lack of evidence and no prior investigations. The patient was adamant about pursuit of surgical takedown of her fusion with conversion to MTPJ arthroplasty, removal of hardware, and second toe proximal phalanx exostectomy. Appropriate written and signed consents were obtained including the possibility of later requiring a first ray resection. The patient underwent hardware removal from the proximal phalanx and first metatarsal, tibial sesamoid resection followed by a fused MTPJ, osteotomy through the cancellous bone was residual with removal of 4 mm thick bone section. With use of an ArthroFlex patch for joint recreation and mobility.
The patient was positioned supine and a thigh tourniquet was utilized. Surgery was done through a medial approach and hardware was removed without difficulty. Bone was resected from the metatarsal head and neck as well as the proximal phalanx. The tibial sesamoid was found to be partially fused and as a result partially resected to improve motion and relieve some of the patient’s plantar medial foot pain. A 4 mm wedge of symmetric bone was removed. The Guidewire for the metatarsal head reamer was inserted and metatarsal head subsequently reamed to recreate a metatarsal head like shape in the cancellous bone. Two guide wires were positioned into the metatarsal neck and overdrilled with a 2.5 mm drill to establish holes for suture passing. A luggage tag suture was placed through the ArthroFlex 3 mm patch after soaking the decellularized dermal allograft in irrisept and chlorhexidine solution. The graft was slid plantarly between the sesamoids and metatarsal heads. Suture passers were then used to pass sutures from plantar to dorsal. The dorsal flap of the graft was brought around and the plantar sutures brought up dorsally were secured in place with 3.0 mm bioabsorbable anchors . A needle was used to pass sutures through the graft and secure it dorsally into a single anchor. To further secure the graft two additional 2.4 mm, medial and lateral proximal anchors were utilized . After joint recreation, range of motion was tested and found to be approximately 40–50° of dorsiflexion and approximately 30° of plantar flexion . We pinned the toe with a 0.62-mm K wire to secure the position of the toe .
Sterile dressings were placed and a splint was applied with the ankle in neutral dorsiflexion in the operative theater. At 1 week follow-up, the splint and dressing were removed, and the patient was transitioned into a CAM boot. She remained non weight-bearing with utilization of a knee scooter for 4 weeks. Postoperatively, the pin was removed at 4 weeks, and the patient was transitioned to weight-bearing in a CAM boot. She experienced cellulitis and a minor surgical site infection that was successfully managed with oral antibiotics. She reported satisfaction and resolution of symptoms as her mobility increased during rehabilitation. At 10 weeks, she was successfully transitioned to a tennis shoe from the CAM boot.
At 3-year follow-up, she had radiographic evidence of a well-healed and functional interpositional arthroplasty unchanged from radiographs obtained at prior visits ( and ). She experienced no pain or restriction in activity level. On clinical examination, she had a minimally shortened hallux with a painless 50° arc of dorsiflexion/plantar flexion motion (40° of dorsiflexion/10° of plantar flexion. The patient commented that she was happy with her decision to undergo the procedure and very satisfied with her result.