A now 69-year-old male was diagnosed in 2016 with cT3N10M0 Gleason 5 + 4 = 9 prostate adenocarcinoma. The patient received 6 months of neoadjuvant androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) followed by definitive radiotherapy (70 Gy/35 fractions) along with concurrent ADT. ADT then continued for a total duration of 18 months. Seven months after completion of the ADT, the serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) raised; however, there was no evidence of distant metastasis on Tc-99m bone and whole body computed tomography (CT) scans. Therefore, hormone manipulation by initiating ADT (goserelin acetate implant, 10.8 mg, every 12 weeks) plus an antiandrogen were administrated. Despite this treatment, the PSA continued to rise. Consequently, six cycles of docetaxel were administrated [docetaxel (75 mg/m2) D1 + prednisolone 5 mg twice daily D1-21, every 3 weeks]. Due to the lack of response and rising level of PSA, docetaxel was discontinued, and abiraterone acetate (AA) was administrated [AA (1000 mg) D1-28 + prednisolone 5 mg twice daily D1-21, every 4 weeks]. Meanwhile, the patient complained of progressive neck pain, and the physical exam demonstrated spinal tenderness. Therefore, a 99mTc-MDP bone scan and a whole-body CT scan were ordered and showed widespread bone metastases with no evidence of visceral metastases. Along with AA, zoledronic acid [4 mg, every 28 days] and palliative radiotherapy of the cervical spine were initiated (30 Gy/10 fractions). Three months after the start of AA, the assessment of PSA showed no considerable response, leading to a change in chemotherapy regimen to mitoxantrone. However, there was no clinical or biochemical response to three cycles of the new treatment. Due to lack of access to cabazitaxel and enzalutamide, all treatments were discontinued, and only zoledronic acid was prescribed.
After 3 months, the patient presented to the clinic complaining about recent headache, true vertigo, impaired vision in the right eye, diplopia, and balance disturbance. These complaints had evolved over the prior 7 days. His Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status was recoded as the grade I. Physical examination showed gait disturbance (wide-based gait), papilledema, and palsy of nerve III at the right side. At presentation, serum PSA level was 300 ng/mL. Oral dexamethasone 4 mg every 6 h was administered, and in order to evaluate the patient, a brain MRI was ordered. During the next 7 days, the patients' lower extremities became increasingly weak, and eventually, he was unable to walk independently. In addition, overall functional status deteriorated, and ECOG performance status reduced to the grade III. The brain MRI revealed meningeal diffuse enhancement (which was highly suggestive of LC) with a bulky focus of metastatic tumor attached to the dura . The patient was clinically diagnosed with LC originating from prostate cancer based on the history of the aggressive disease, physical examination, and clinical presentation, high level of PSA, and highly suggestive MRI findings. The results, other diagnostic options including cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) studies, and the poor prognosis were discussed with the patient and his family, and then the patient was treated with palliative whole-brain radiation (30 Gy/10 fractions). Figure shows the courses of disease during 2016–2020. One month after the completion of whole-brain irradiation, the neurological symptoms progressed leading to the patient's death.