In March 2010 a 77 year-old male patient was shown to have a tumor mass of about 1.7 cm diameter in the inferior lobe of the left lung (see Figure ). Since 2005, this asymptomatic tumor mass had hitherto been known with a diameter of approximately 1.7 cm. It showed almost no increase in size and could therefore be classified as "stable disease". The patient suffered from prostate cancer 4 years ago and was treated with TUR-P, radiation therapy and the application of leuprolide. Other pre-existing conditions were arterial hypertension and chronic obstructive lung disease. The physical examination was without pathological findings. A preoperative PET/CT scan was not performed due to the fact that neither a positive nor a negative PET/CT scan result rules out a surgical intervention. Therefore, we conducted a left anterolateral thoracotomy with atypical segment resection for curative tumor treatment. The pathological examination of the resected tissue revealed a malignant tumor with a diameter of 1.5 cm. As a first histological diagnosis, a metastasis of prostate cancer with lymphangiosis carcinomatosa was assumed. Further immunohistochemical studies for PSA, CK7, CK20 and TTF1 were performed. Stainings for PSA and CK20 were both negative, stainings for TTF1 showed a strong nuclear and for CK7 a strong cytoplasmatic reaction (see Figure ). Therefore, the initial diagnosis of a metastasis of prostate cancer was changed to adenocarcinoma of the lung. Relying on this new diagnosis, we conducted a re-thoracotomy with lobectomy and systematic lymphadenectomy as an adequate treatment 12 days after the above-mentioned operation. The resection margins were free of tumor cells. To this point, the tumor stage was pT1 N0 MX G2 L1 V0. Further immunohistochemical studies were performed. These revealed cytoplasmatic expression of chromogranin A and synaptophysin, plasma membrane associated expression of CD56 and a Ki-67 labelling index of approximately 5% (see Figure ). After re-evaluation of all results and particularly with regard to the little progress in tumor size, the diagnosis was ultimately changed to typical bronchopulmonary carcinoid tumor. A re-examination of the sample showed no invasion of tumor cells in lymphatic vessels. The patient recovered well from surgery and received postoperative rehabilitation therapy. In addition lung function testing revealed no evidence of impairment. Follow-up care is carried out by our department of oncology. The typical carcinoid tumor described in our case report showed almost no progression in 5 years. We suspected a correlation between the lack of tumor growth, application of leuprolide and the Raf-1/MEK/ERK-1/2-pathway. Therefore, we examined GnrH receptor status in the examined specimen. An expression of GnrH receptor could not be detected.