A 12-year-old boy came to us in emergency department with an injury to his left leg in the form of a direct impact to the anterior aspect of his proximal leg from an oncoming biker who was driving on the wrong side of the road. He was not able to put weight on the injured limb and had to be carried to the hospital.
Examination showed a gross swelling in his knee region and posterior sag in his left leg, with a visible step distal to the joint line. There were some bruises and marked tenderness was present in the proximal tibial region. The calf had no tenderness and was soft on palpation; however, the periphery was relatively cold with absent peripheral pulses and, delayed pin prick, and capillary refilling time. He did not have any motor or sensory deficit in the limb.
Radiographs revealed SH I proximal tibial physeal injury with posteriorly displaced tibial metaphysis . Doppler sonography revealed a monophasic flow in the anterior tibial, posterior tibial, and dorsalis pedis arteries. The flow was normal above the level of the injury.
He was shifted to the operating room within 45 min of presentation. Under general anesthesia, in supine position, the fracture was reduced in a closed manner with traction and extension followed by flexion at the fracture site. Care was taken not to hyperextend or hyperflex the limb at any time during the maneuver. The reduction was held with two thick smooth K-wires in a crossed configuration . The patient’s peripheral pulses had returned by the time the fixation was completed and hence the circulation was restored. Pin prick bleeding and capillary refill time returned back to normal. This was confirmed with a portable Doppler which showed biphasic flow in the peripheral arteries.
Patient’s knee was immobilized in an above knee plaster cast. The post-operative period was uneventful except that the patient developed some blisters in the proximal leg on the 3rd postoperative day; however, there were no signs of any neurovascular compromise. The blisters were punctured, painted with Povidone-iodine and dressed in a dry manner. The skin healed well in a few days and the patient was discharged. The cast was removed at 3 weeks following which knee range of motion was started and the K-wires were removed at 6 weeks. Weight bearing was allowed at 3 months and gradually progressed as tolerable. Radiological healing was seen at 4 months . At the last follow-up of 1 year, the patient had a good knee range of motion (ROM), no limb length discrepancy or deformity and was able to squat and sit cross legged without any difficulty.