A 48-year-old man presented with altered mental status and shortness of breath. Medical history was significant for rheumatoid arthritis, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, cerebellar hematoma, chronic kidney disease, sarcoidosis, and polymyalgia rheumatica. Home medications included 5 mg prednisone twice daily, 10 mg methotrexate weekly, and tocilizumab injection weekly. The patient was not on Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (PJP) prophylaxis. Vital signs on admission: temperature 102.6 °F, heart rate 150 beats/minute, blood pressure 101/54 mmHg, respiratory rate 22 breaths/min, and an oxygen saturation in the low 80s on room air. The patient was agitated, diaphoretic, and in respiratory distress with accessory muscle use. He was alert, but disoriented, and moved all extremities. On physical exam, his neck was supple and rhonchi were auscultated in the right middle and lower lung fields. Laboratory tests were significant for glucose 304, lactate 7.4 mmol/L (reference: 0.7–2.0 mmol/L), hemoglobin 8.1 g/dL (reference 11.9–15.7 g/dL), potassium 5.4 mmol/L (reference: 3.5–5.1 mmol/L), and creatinine 3.8 mg/dL (reference: 0.70–1.50 mg/dL). CD4 count was 984, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was negative, and hemoglobin A1c was 9.5%. The patient was intubated for acute hypoxic respiratory failure. Chest x-ray showed right lung opacities and was started on broad-spectrum antibiotics. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest revealed multifocal pneumonia with a right upper lobe cavitary nodule with halo sign and mediastinal lymphadenopathy . A bronchoscopy was performed and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) samples were obtained for further testing.
Approximately one week after extubation, the patient’s mentation did not improve and he reported a headache. CT head was negative for any acute intracranial process. A lumbar puncture (LP) was performed. LP revealed an elevated white blood cell count 1130, glucose 81, and an elevated opening pressure. The patient received serial LPs which provided symptomatic relief and improved his headache; LP had elevated opening pressures initially ranging from 25 to 30 and decreased to 14. His LP was positive for Cryptococcus neoformans within 5 days. Serum Cryptococcus antigen was also positive. He was started on 3 mg/kg liposomal amphotericin B for cryptococcal meningitis and was treated for two weeks. Flucytosine was also started, but was discontinued due to the association with the patient’s anemia and risk of bone marrow suppression. The patient was started on 600 mg fluconazole daily and was discharged home. BAL results yielded Cryptococcus neoformans one month later. Two months after his initial presentation, the patient presented back to the ED for syncope followed by cardiac arrest and unfortunately expired.