A 70-year-old woman presented with a 4-month history of numbness in the left chest that had gradually worsened and then spread to both lower extremities with associated gait disturbance. She was, therefore, admitted to our hospital. She had no obvious history of trauma, systemic diseases, or metabolic disorders. Neurological examination on admission revealed dysesthesia, decreased warm and pain sensations in the thoracic (Th)4 vertebral region and lower and hyperreflexia in both lower limbs. Complete paralysis and pronounced numbness were apparent in both lower limbs. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a longitudinally spreading, intradural spinal cord lesion in the cervical (C)7–Th2 region, with gadolinium (Gd) enhancement on T1-weighted imaging (WI) with diffuse swelling within the C2–Th6 levels . No other lesions were identified within the spinal cord or intracerebral region. Markedly high 18F-FDG uptake was seen on 18F-FDG-PET within the enhanced region (tumor-to-contralateral normal brain tissue ratio [TNR]: 2.52) , with no obvious 18F-FDG accumulation in the brain or other organs. CSF analysis revealed a slightly elevated lymphocytic cell count (11/μL) and highly elevated β2-MG (4.2 mg/L).
Transverse myelitis was initially suspected, and steroid pulse therapy and simple plasma exchange therapy were performed, but no symptom improvement was obtained. Therefore, to confirm the histological diagnosis and plan effective treatment for the primary disease, a surgical biopsy of the lesion was performed under a posterior approach (total Th1–Th3 laminectomy). The dura mater was incised to identify the spinal cord; then, gentle blunt dissection of the posterior median sulcus was performed to locate the lesion. The lesion did not show an obvious macroscopic margin, but abnormal tissue was easily removed for biopsy . Histological examination with hematoxylin and eosin staining revealed glial tissue with diffuse infiltration of atypical medium-to-large lymphocytes with irregular nuclei and prominent nucleoli in the edematous tissue. Immunohistochemical examination demonstrated a positive result for cluster of differentiation (CD)20 and a negative result for CD3, suggesting a B lymphohematopoietic system tumor, and the histological diagnosis was diffuse large B-cell lymphoma [-]. In addition, a non-germinal center B-cell -like phenotype was identified from the results of CD10(−), bcl-6(+), and MUM1(+) according to the decision tree proposed by Hans et al. Since no evidence suggested malignant lymphoma in the CNS, including the eyes other than the spinal cord, and FDG-PET of the thorax and abdomen showed no systemic lymph node enlargement, PISCL was diagnosed.
The patient was placed on rituximab, methotrexate, procarbazine, and vincristine (R-MPV regimen). He was administered a total of four cycles, but serial MRI during the care process did not show any tumor shrinkage effect, so local radiation therapy was performed (40 Gy in 20 fractions). The subsequent course was uneventful, with MRI and 18F-FDGPET at ten months after completion of chemoradiotherapy, showing a complete disappearance of Gd and 18F-FDG accumulation in the spinal cord . The patient was judged to have achieved complete metabolic remission. The ethics committee of our institution approved the clinical study of this case, and informed consent was obtained from the patient.