A 70-year-old man with a history of hypertension, but not on oral medication, was diagnosed with salivary duct carcinoma (T4bN0M0, stage IVB). The patient received 70 Gy of radiotherapy, followed by immunotherapy with pembrolizumab at a dose of 200 mg every 3 weeks. Two weeks after the second administration of pembrolizumab, the patient developed fatigue, micturition pain, urinary frequency, and gross hematuria. CT revealed a thickened bladder wall and strongly enhanced bladder mucosa , and cystoscopy revealed diffuse mucosal edema and bladder redness. Urinalysis revealed a red blood cell count of >100/HPF and a white blood cell count of 20–29/HPF. No causative bacteria were detected in the urine cultures, and the urine cytology was negative. Despite the discontinuation of pembrolizumab and administration of antibiotics and anticholinergic drugs, the urinary tract pain worsened to grade 3 based on the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events v5.0. He urinated more than 30 times a day and his functional bladder capacity was less than 50 milliliters. Bladder biopsy and bladder hydrodistension under spinal anesthesia were performed approximately 2 months after the onset of the symptoms. Before the biopsy, the bladder was distended three times with saline at a pressure of 80 cm H2O for 3 min. The maximum bladder capacities during the distensions were 120, 140, and 140 mL. Mucosal bleeding in the posterior wall of the bladder was observed after the first distension (Video ). Histological analysis showed non-neoplastic bladder mucosa with epithelial detachment, interstitial edema, vascular hyperplasia, and inflammatory cell infiltration . Immunohistochemical analysis revealed the infiltrated inflammatory cells to be positive for CD3 and CD8, partially positive for CD4 and CD20, indicating that cytotoxic T cells were predominant . Based on the clinical course, we diagnosed immune-related cystitis and considered the administration of steroids. However, the patient's symptoms were alleviated when the urethral catheter was removed on the second day after the endoscopic surgery. CT performed a month after surgery showed mild shrinkage of the parotid tumor. The patient underwent a repeat needle biopsy of the tumor, and no viable cancer cells were observed in the histopathological analysis. He has been monitored carefully, and there has been no recurrence of cancer or bladder symptoms 11 months after surgery.