A 42-year-old female patient with no significant medical history visited the emergency department (ED) due to the sudden onset of generalized weakness. The patient reported she had received surgery for a vocal cord cyst removal 30 min prior. After the operation, she had walked out of the operating room unassisted and then felt generalized weakness and malaise. As a result, her muscle power dramatically decreased and subsequently the patient could not walk or move unassisted.
She was sent to the ED for further evaluation of her sudden symptoms. Upon arrival, her Glasgow Coma Scale score was E4V5M6. Her vital signs were taken: body temperature of 36.8 °C; heart rate of 60 beats per minute; and respiratory rate of 20 breaths per minute, with a blood pressure of 102/59 mmHg. She had no complaints of headache, chest pain, or neck pain. Physical examination showed neither limited eye movement nor nystagmus. The patient had no tongue deviation or fasciculation. Her sensory tests (proprioception and vibratory sensation) results showed that her relevant senses were intact and symmetrical. However, her muscle power was at grade 2 of 5 for her bilateral upper limbs and at grade 1 of 5 for her bilateral lower limbs. The Babinski sign showed no bilateral response and an absence of the sensation of pain. Her laboratory data—including her potassium, magnesium and calcium levels—were unremarkable. Electrocardiography revealed a sinus rhythm without prolonged QTC. C-spine X-ray images were obtained and revealed no bony deformity or spur formation.
In the available operation notes, it was recorded that the patient had been administered an epinephrine and lidocaine spray as a nasal decongestant, and a 2% lidocaine (5–10 mL) injection into the larynx for gargling. Then, dexamethasone (0.6 mL) was injected into the area of the right vocal cyst. Upon arrival at the ED, the patient’s serum lidocaine level was 0.54 µg/mL.
Suspecting an atypical presentation of LAST, we administered a 20% fat emulsion bolus (75 mL, 1.5 mL/kg). After 30 min, the patient’s muscle power improved: her upper limb muscle power increased from grade 2 of 5 to grade 4 of 5and her lower limb muscle power increased from grade 1 of 5 to grade 5. Muscle power had returned to normal 60 min after the patient had received the fat emulsion. The patient was discharged two hours after arriving at the ED. No further similar episode occurred after discharge.