In June 2020, a 41-year-old man was admitted to the Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University. More than two months prior, the patient had been injured by heavy objects. The patient developed chest and back pain and limited movement, accompanied by multiple injuries including in the right knee and right ankle. He received surgical treatment for knee and ankle joint fractures, and conservative treatment for thoracic vertebra and left clavicle fractures. Following the trauma, his chest and back pain were not completely relieved, and he gradually developed kyphosis . Neurological examination showed hypoesthesia of the skin on the lateral side of the right knee and right ankle and no other apparent neurological injuries. Anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the thoracolumbar segment showed that the T12 vertebrae had become wedge-shaped and the patient had developed severe kyphosis (thoracolumbar cobb angle is 57°). Three-dimensional CT showed that the anterior edge of the T12 vertebral body was compressed to ¾ of the normal range, the anterior and left hemivertebra showed a severely comminuted fracture, the right hemivertebra was transversely split, and the bilateral pedicle and accessory structures had flexion-distraction injuries (FDI). Magnetic resonance imaging showed fractures of T12, wedge-shaped vertebrae, and no apparent spinal cord compression. He was diagnosed with an old AO type B2.3 thoracic fracture based on imaging findings of posterior disruption of the osseous tissue, with vertebral body compression. He had an LSC score of 8 based on the following: 30%–60% comminution (2 points), fragments of at least 2 mm in size which were displaced >50% of the cross section of the structure (3 points), and kyphotic correction of ≥10° (3 points) . His chest and back VAS score was 6, and an ODI score could not be calculated accurately because the affected limb was accompanied by multiple unhealed fractures of the right lower limb. The patient had chest and back pain that did not respond to conservative treatment, unhealed local fractures and an unstable spine. Based on the above indicators, surgery was planned.
The patient was placed in a prone position after general anesthesia. A longitudinal incision was made with T10-L2 as the center, and a total of eight suitable pedicle screws were inserted into the bilateral pedicles of T10, T11, L1, and L2. Approximately 3 cm of the left rib connected to T12, the left transverse process of T12, the lamina, the facet joint, and the left half vertebra of T12 were removed with an ultrasonic bone knife. The left side of the T11/12 and T12/L1 intervertebral discs were removed via repeated curetting to expose the bony endplate. A bone chisel was inserted into the broken end of the right T12 vertebral body from the left side for local release. The right pedicle screw was implanted with a titanium rod under the radian convex side, and the local kyphosis was corrected by the pull-reduction technique. Autologous granular bone was grafted between the intervertebral spaces of T11/12 and T12/L1 near the midline, and onto the fractured ends of the right vertebral body of T12. Autologous bone trimmings obtained from decompression was made into granular bone, and an appropriate titanium cage was filled and placed at the left edge of the T11-L1 gap. Titanium rods of suitable length were pre-bent to fit the physiological curvature of the spine and placed into the bilateral pedicle screw openings. Local moderate pressure was applied, and a crosslinking device was installed after locking with the top wire. C-arm fluoroscopy showed that the screws and titanium rods were well-positioned and that the length was suitable. The wound surface was repeatedly washed, two rubber tubes were placed beside the spinous process for drainage, and hemostasis was performed. Layered suturing was used to close the incision. Open reduction and internal fixation of the left clavicle fracture were performed in the supine position, and the patient was returned to the ward. Postoperative anti-infection, analgesic, and symptomatic treatments were performed as necessary, and one week after surgery, the patient was able to move out of their bed while supported.
One week after the operation, external observation images were taken. Re-examination of thoracolumbar x-rays and thoracolumbar 3D CT showed that the physiological curvature of thoracolumbar was restored(thoracolumbar cobb angle is 11°), the fracture end of the right pedicle and posterior vertebral body of T12 was closed, and the left half of the vertebral body was well reconstructed. Nine months after surgery, the patient had no apparent thoracolumbar discomfort and had recovered well. A review of his thoracolumbar 3D CT showed no significant changes in the physiological curvature of the thoracic vertebrae, good titanium cage positioning, continuous callus formation between adjacent vertebrae, and bony fusion of the fractured ends of the residual vertebrae. Eighteen months after the operation, 3D CT of the thoracolumbar segment was reviewed and showed that the titanium cage was surrounded by the callus and had fused with the adjacent vertebrae.