We report a 15-year-old African-American male who presented with a six-week history of polyarthralgias, fevers, and bilateral eye and foot swelling. Initial laboratory studies revealed an elevated ALT of 337 units/L and AST 380 units/L. Infectious workup was negative. Over the next 3 weeks, he developed worsening polyarthralgias and progressive muscle weakness.
Review of systems revealed substernal chest pain while lying down, intermittent dysphagia and Raynaud’s phenomenon in his hands and feet. Physical examination revealed 4/5 proximal muscle weakness in upper and lower extremities, heliotrope rash, and telangiectasias upon nail fold capillaroscopy but no Gottron’s papules. Laboratory values included: CK 11426 units/L (19–191 units/L), aldolase> 50.0 units/L (3.4–8.6 U/L), CRP 64.5 mg/L (< 8 mg/L), ESR 77 mm/h (0–15 mm/h), positive ANA (1:640 titer, nuclear membrane pattern). MRI hip and femur revealed bilateral multifocal patchy muscular edema, most markedly within the distal gluteus medius proximally and the distal semimembranosus muscles. The patient was subsequently diagnosed with JDM based on fulfillment of Bohan and Peter criteria. He was admitted for further workup and treatment.
While admitted, prior to treatment, he developed tachycardia (96–121 bpm), with diastolic blood pressures in the 30–40s despite normal systolic blood pressures at 99–111 mmHg. The cardiovascular examination showed regular rhythm without a murmur, rub, or gallop. Echocardiogram revealed diffuse dilation of the left main coronary artery (LMCA) (5.91 mm, Z-score 4.2) as well as the left anterior descending (LAD) artery (4.42 mm, Z-score 3.1), with normal intracardiac anatomy and normal ventricular size, wall thickness, and systolic function. Electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia. Chest x-ray was negative, without any evidence of interstitial lung disease. He was treated with IV methylprednisolone (IVMP) 1 g daily for 4 days and intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) at 1 g/kg for 1 dose. Afterward, his diastolic BP improved and tachycardia resolved. CK improved to 3300 units/L. He went home on 40 mg daily prednisone, 100 mg cyclosporine twice daily, 25 mg methotrexate weekly, 1 mg folic acid daily, and aspirin 81 mg daily.
Four weeks after discharge, he developed progressive right-sided shoulder pain, shortness of breath, and dyspnea, with 10 pound weight loss. CT chest showed bilateral diffuse pulmonary infiltrate, with lower lobe predominance, with prominent parenchymal interlobular septa, ground-glass opacities, subpleural cystic changes, consistent with non-specific interstitial pneumonia pattern. Due to progressive symptoms refractory to outpatient management, he was admitted again for further workup and treatment. Subsequent lung biopsy showed severe, extensive interstitial fibrosis with a mixed inflammatory infiltrate and focal subpleural cystic change. Muscle biopsy revealed mild variation of muscle fiber size, mild atrophy of fibers, predominately type 2, and a slight increase of internal nuclei. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated positive MHC1 stain with a membranous pattern. An inflammatory infiltrate, perifasicular atrophy, calcifications, necrosis, fibrosis or tubulo-reticular inclusions were not seen. Myositis-specific antibody panel was positive for an anti-PL-12 antibody. Given the severity of symptoms, monthly cyclophosphamide IV was added to his treatment regimen, and methylprednisolone IV ‘pulses’ at 1 g IV daily for 3 days were started. Follow up echocardiogram revealed borderline dilation of the left main coronary artery (4.6 mm, Z-score of 2) and a left anterior descending coronary artery of normal size (2.9 mm). There was no evidence of coronary artery aneurysm. Three weeks after discharge, he reported symptomatic improvement with improved joint mobility, muscle strength, and no further chest pain.