In April 2014, a 52-year-old Caucasian male with a history of cigarette smoking was diagnosed with cavitating squamous cell lung carcinoma (SCC) cT4N2M0 of the inferior left lung lobe. Between August 2015 and January 2016, he underwent 10 cycles of second-line treatment with nivolumab (3 mg/kg every 14 days) at our institute. Fourteen days after the end of the last treatment the patient developed low-grade fever (38.3 °C). A chest X ray excluded the hypothesis of pneumonia. Levofloxacin 500 mg/day was prescribed for 7 days and the patient initially responded. Two further cycles of nivolumab were administered. At a follow-up appointment in February 2016, the patient reported having had low-grade fever (38 °C) for about a month and complained of pain in his chest wall over the area of the lung cancer. He also had a productive cough and had lost around 7 kg over a period of 6 months. Performance status was poor. The patient was urgently admitted to our inpatient oncology ward; initial vital signs were blood pressure 110/60, heart rate125 beats/min and oxygen saturation 92% in room air. Auscultation of the patient’s lungs revealed decreased breath sounds over the whole lung field. The abdomen was soft, without organomegaly. Laboratory exams showed a white blood cell count of 22.10 × 109/L with 84.5% neutrophils, 4.7% lymphocytes and 10.5% monocytes. Hemoglobin was 10 g/dl and platelets 690 × 109/L. Electrolytes, renal and liver function tests and coagulation studies were all normal apart from C-reactive protein (320 mg/L) and albumin (28 g/L). Urine analysis showed protein 25 mg/dl. A chest X ray confirmed the presence of the cavitary lesion of the primary tumor and pleural effusion. A blood culture was performed and empirical treatment was started with amikacin 20 mg/kg on day 1 (15 mg/kg/day thereafter) plus ceftazidime 2 g 3 times/day. The patient also started oxygen therapy (oxygen therapy eyeglasses) 5 L/min and became apyretic after 3 days of the dual antibiotic treatment. Bronchoscopy was performed to investigate the continuous productive cough and foul-smelling pus was removed, mainly from the left lower lobe. The patient’s clinical conditions worsened after 7 days of the dual therapy, with a reappearance of fever and chills. A chest computerized tomography (CT) scan revealed the presence of multiple bilateral parenchymal accumulations mainly in the left lower lobe, leading to a first hypothesis of inflammatory phenomena . Minimal left pleural effusion was also noted, together with an increase in the size of the cavitary lesion in the inferior left lobe and increased lytic rib disease in the adjacent vertebral structures. Treatment with amikacin was maintained but ceftazidime was replaced by teicoplanin 6 mg/kg twice on the first day and once a day thereafter. Blood culture remained negative. Tests for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and quantitative cytomegalovirus DNA (< 233 UI/ml) were negative. Bronchoscopic alveolar lavage (BAL) revealed the presence of B. bronchiseptica 10,000 CFU (colon-forming units) which was resistant to cefepime (minimal inhibitory concentration [MIC] ≥ 64), cefotaxime (MIC ≥64) and ceftazidime (MIC 16), but sensitive to amikacin (MIC 8), gentamicin (MIC 2), imipenem (MIC 0.5), meropenem (MIC ≤0.25), piperacillin/tazobactam (MIC ≤4) and ciprofloxacin (MIC 1). The bronchoalveolar material was negative for Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex DNA. After several days of apyrexia the fever returned and the patient’s clinical conditions deteriorated. A blood culture was repeated and amikacin and teicolplanin were replaced by piperacillin 4 g plus tazobactam 500 mg three times/day. After 2 weeks’ therapy, the chest CT scan showed an improvement in the bilateral parenchymal inflammatory areas and a slight reduction in the pleural effusion. Blood culture remained negative. Antimicrobial treatment was continued for a total of 17 days after which, given the improvement in the pneumonia, clinical conditions and performance status, the patient was discharged. Levofloxacin 500 mg twice a day was prescribed for the first 6 days at home. The patient died 3 months later due to disease progression.