A 49-year-old woman complaining of exercise intolerance for 10 years was admitted to our center. Her echocardiography presented mild tricuspid regurgitation and a congenital ASD with a significant left-to-right shunt that caused structural enlargement of the right heart (echocardiographic data: LV: 41 mm; LA: 38 mm; RV: 24 mm; RA: 54 × 40 mm; EF: 60%). She denied any previous arrhythmia events or other past medical history. On admission, her preoperative 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed sinus rhythm with an incomplete right bundle branch block . Apart from grade 2 heart murmurs, her physical examinations were otherwise normal. Initial laboratory test results revealed normal levels of N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NTproBNP), magnesium, and potassium. Moreover, her coagulation, biochemical, and hematological indices remained within the normal range. The patient presented as New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class II, albeit with moderate lesions in the proximal segment of the left anterior descending artery confirmed by coronary computerized tomography (CT).
The patient underwent ASD repair with combined tricuspid valvuloplasty. After a median sternotomy, the surgeons placed an aortic cannula in the ascending aorta with bicaval cannulation to establish cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB). Under aortic cross-clamp conditions, cardiac arrest was achieved with antegrade cold blood cardioplegia. Then, CPB was instituted under mild hypothermia (34 °C). After opening the right atrium, a superior sinus venosus ASD with a size of 2.0 × 2.5 cm was identified. Then, the surgeons fixed the defect with running 5–0 Prolene sutures. Meanwhile, they carried out a concomitant DeVega's annuloplasty for tricuspid regurgitation. Ultimately, she was weaned from CPB uneventfully, with an overall duration of CPB of 63 min and a cross-clamp time of 17 min. Of note, two transient episodes of ventricular arrhythmias (VAs) occurred at the end of surgery. However, as sinus rhythm was restored promptly, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) while intubated for further observation. At the first admission to the ICU, her blood pressure remained within the normal range (102/63 mmHg), and the electrocardiogram revealed sinus rhythm.
However, unanticipated VTs and sequent VFs occurred one hour after admission . Then, the ICU staff applied external defibrillation with a 200-J biphasic shock for prompt resuscitation and added antiarrhythmic medications (including amiodarone and lidocaine) to migrate subsequent premature ventricular contractions. Soon after, the patient recovered sinus rhythm. However, after an initial uneventful recovery, the patient frequently experienced recurrent episodes of VT/VFs. The whole event is shown in Fig. .
The heart team suspected four possible etiologies at the first episode: electrolyte disturbances, pericardial tamponade, retained air embolism or thrombosis in coronary arteries. However, point-of-care testing revealed the standard range of potassium. Although her EF was 10% when the first severe VT/VF storm occurred, the echocardiographic findings failed to show evidence of pericardial tamponade (no diastolic right ventricular collapse or pericardial effusion). Moreover, the central venous pressure (CVP) remained at 5–8 mmHg, despite a temporary elevation during the VT/VF storm. There were no significant ST-segment or T-wave changes during the interval between attacks and at the end of surgery . These results implied that coronary ischemia caused by coronary thrombosis or intracoronary air embolism was unlikely.
As VT/VF storm frequently transpired in the early postoperative stage and the transient arrhythmias also occurred before admission to the ICU, the cardiac experts hypothesized that the severe VA episodes might be associated with the surgical intervention. They attempted to explore the definite causes of this issue and focused on the two most likely explanations: trauma from the surgical sutures or underlying stenosis or occlusion of the right coronary artery caused by tricuspid valvuloplasty. Given the greater value of re-exploration in this emergent situation, we chose to forgo coronary angiography since it might not be able to detect the underlying coronary problem. After a thorough discussion, the surgeons decided to conduct an emergent re-exploration in case more life-threatening events occurred. Three hours after the first surgery, a senior surgeon initiated the re-exploration. Although no significant stitching errors were detected during the second surgery, the senior surgeon carefully replaced all sutures with slight adjustments and fixed the ASD and tricuspid leaflets again to address the two possible causes simultaneously. Ultimately, the patient was weaned from CPB, with a duration of 49 min and a cross-clamp time of 18 min.
After re-exploration, the patient’s clinical status improved, and no arrhythmias occurred. The EF was restored immediately when her status improved. Furthermore, the results of various examinations kept within normal limits before discharge. We asked cardiac electrophysiologists to help with ECG in the whole event. They agreed that no underlying signs of inherited arrhythmias were detected in the preoperative ECG, and it’s risky to conduct electrophysiological examination in that situation. As the patient displayed normal ECG over the 24 h after surgery, there was no indications for further electrophysiological examination postoperatively. Accordingly, we failed to obtain the electrophysiological study. During the 6-month follow-up, her recovery remained uneventful, without any episodes of arrhythmias.