A 69-year-old postmenopausal caucasic woman with previous two pregnancies and two deliveries was referred to our department for a vaginal recurrent leucorrhoea which lasted for over one year despite multiple vaginal local treatments. Her past medical and surgical histories revealed two episodes of diverticulitis managed with antibiotics, appendectomy, and breast cancer treated with breast-conserving surgery followed by radiotherapy and hormonotherapy with complete remission of the disease. Unlike other cases from the literature reports, our patient presented with gynecological problems and her only symptom was the vaginal discharge, the patient did not complain about abdominal pain, fever, or other symptoms. The clinical examination was unremarkable, and vaginal swab revealed the presence of Escherichia coli and Streptococcus constellatus. The transvaginal ultrasound examination showed a heterogeneous intrauterine collection. Hysteroscopy was performed as an additional exam. The presence of air in the uterine cavity in the absence of uterine fistula or neoplasic process made us suspect the tubo-intestinal fistula. The endometrial biopsy was compatible with endometritis secondary to E. coli. To confirm the diagnosis, CT scan and hysterosalpingography were performed and the communication between the tube and sigmoidal diverticulum was visualized ( and ).
Based on the medical history, age, and symptoms, elective surgical treatment was performed by gastrointestinal surgeons. This was a one-stage surgery with sigmoidal and concomitant left salpingo-oophorectomy and primary anastomosis. Intraoperative, the affected area of the colon was densely adherent to the left fallopian tube. Inflammation was present in the proximal rectum, therefore dissection was extended more distally and a low anterior resection with primary anastomosis was performed. The colon and fallopian tubes were successfully separated using finger fracture technique. Pathological examination confirmed the diverticular disease associated with neutrophilic cryptitis and serosal inflammation. The 6.5 cm length fallopian tube was characterized by a dilated lumen. At the microscopic level, the fallopian tube showed evidence of chronic and subacute salpingitis whereas the peritubal environment revealed some stercoral debris mixed with extensive abscessation beaches (see A,B). There were no intraoperative complications. The patient had a favorable evolution during hospitalization and was discharged home on day 7 post surgery. One month later, she remained asymptomatic.