A 67-year-old Caucasian female of Lebanese ethnicity presented following a 3 week history of retrograde amnesia, intermittent emesis, lethargy, and insomnia. Her family reported occasional expressive dysphasia which spontaneously resolved. Cerebral Computed Tomography (CT), performed on presentation, showed left frontal lobe oedema with associated mild mass effect . Physical examination found no focal neurological deficits and she was on regular aspirin (100 mg daily) for previously diagnosed ischaemic heart disease. Her past medical history included schizophrenia, dyslipidemia, and hypertension. She migrated to Australia in 1974 and, except for a 10-year period between 1984 and 1994 when she moved back to Lebanon, she has lived in Australia. She underwent three episodes of Electro-Convulsive Therapy (ECT) between 1974 and 1994. At no time was she treated with steroids during her hospital admission.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of her brain showed bi-frontal, left parietal, and temporal vasogenic oedema with associated punctate white matter contrast enhancement (A,B). There was nothing to suggest a space occupying lesion, and the patient was commenced on prophylactic treatment for meningo-encephalitis with BenzylPenicillin 2.4 g Q4hrly, Ceftriaxone 2 g twice daily and Aciclovir 700 mg three times a day for a total of 7 days, after undergoing a lumbar puncture. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed no leucocytes, and the rest of the infectious and inflammatory screen, including meningitis panel (consisting of assays targeting nucleic acid of Neisseria meningitidis, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Varicella Zoster, Herpes simplex virus 1 and 2, and Enterovirus), mycobacteria, and fungal cultures were also negative. Although oligoclonal bands were detected in the CSF, without associated presence in serum, the patient’s clinical presentation and examination did not satisfy the diagnosis of multiple sclerosis. She also underwent central nervous system (CNS) lymphoma and autoimmune screen, including an extended panel of antibodies for limbic encephalitis that included antibodies for Neuromyelitis Optica (NMO), N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDA), and Myelin Oligodendrocyte Glycoprotein (MOG) in the CSF. Further tests were performed to provide inflammatory and infectious screening on the patient’s serum, targeting other uncommon viral, bacterial, fungal, and mycobacterial etiologies, which also returned negative results for an acute infection. Her serum was also negative for the screening of common autoimmune pathologies.
A brain biopsy was performed and neurohistopathological analysis of the biopsy tissue showed an unusual destructive inflammatory process with a prominence of macrophages/microglia and plasma cells involving the white matter . The white matter was markedly oedematous and contained reactive astrocytes, as well as parenchymal and perivascular inflammation (A). The inflammatory infiltrate consisted of numerous plasma cells (B) (which were polyclonal on kappa and lambda staining), macrophages (C), and lymphocytes. GFAP staining highlighted reactive astrocytes with abnormal nodularity of their processes (D), as did aquaporin-4 staining. Of the lymphocytes, CD-3 positive T cells predominated over CD20-positive B cells (E,F). There was no evidence of a primary demyelinating process.
In the absence of any use of steroids, during this admission, the patient had not undergone any treatment which could have raised the possibility of a partially treated CNS lymphoma. A Positron-Emission Tomograph (PET) and whole body CT scans showed no evidence of high grade lymphoma in the CNS and the only positive feature on the PET scanning was a moderately metabolically active left inguinal lymph node. This was biopsied and showed only reactive changes, presumably due to infection, with no evidence of malignancy. A progress PET scan, performed two months later, showed significantly reduced activity within this lymph node.
Further testing, to investigate for an array of rare auto-immune and typical paraneoplastic conditions, was performed. This included antibodies against CASPR2, GABA-B, DPPX, IgLON5, Amphiphysin, ANNA1 Hu, ANNA2 Ri, PCA Yo, PNMA2, MA2 Ta, CV-2 CRMP5, Recoverin, Sox-1, Titin, Zic4, GAD65, and Tr(DNER), and did not yield a positive result. Multidisciplinary teams, consisting of neurologists, radiologists, immunologists, haematologists, and histopathologists were convened to discuss this atypical presentation and, despite casting the net ‘far and wide’, the case remained a diagnostic dilemma after multiple deliberations. The consensus opinion favoured Glial Fibrillary Acid Protein (GFAP) astrocytopathy autoimmune encephalopathy, although initial staining of the CSF, for neuronal antibodies, was not supportive of the diagnosis, thereby restricting access to further testing which was not available within Australia.
The patient’s confusion, lethargy and insomnia improved over the course of her admission, and she was discharged home, with plans for outpatient follow up. An ensuing cerebral MRI, performed three months following the initial presentation, showed an interval reduction in the previously noted multifocal enhancing foci, with only subtle residual punctate foci of enhancement within the left periventricular white matter . The patient was recently contacted to ascertain her current status and, despite her not receiving any specific treatment to address her cerebral pathology, she currently remains well. She has not subsequently presented to a health care facility with any of the symptoms described at the outset of her complaint, and will receive ongoing follow-up in the neurology outpatients clinic.