A 21-year-old male patient occasionally visited our outpatient clinic due to symptoms of epigastric pain and dysphagia. His past medical history included BA during infancy for which he had undergone Kasai’s procedure when 5 months old and LTx from a deceased donor at age 2 years due to advanced liver failure. Patient family history included the death of his father due to tongue cancer. The patient had received tacrolimus as immunosuppressive treatment and underwent routine blood tests at our outpatient clinic. During the patient’s adult years, his liver function was almost within the normal range, with trough levels of tacrolimus ranging from 1.0 to 1.5 ng/mL at our outpatient clinic. Although he had slight mental retardation, he was able to achieve a normal school life. At the age of 20, he often experienced general fatigue and appetite loss, which were improved by simple rehydration. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopic examination revealed the presence of a type Ш tumorous lesion at the gastroesophageal junction . No obvious abnormal findings were noted in the non-cancerous area of the stomach. Histological evaluation of the biopsied specimen demonstrated moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma . Immunohistopathological examination of the tumor cells revealed that he was positive for human epidermal growth factor type 2 (HER-2) but negative for Epstein–Barr virus (EBV)-encoded small RNA in situ hybridization (EBER-ISH) . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed tumor invasion beyond the serosal layer of the stomach and extensive areas of lymph node enlargement, including the para-aortic region. Moreover, multiple metastatic lesions were detected in the liver . Based on the aforementioned findings, the patient was diagnosed with stage IV advanced gastric cancer. Systemic chemotherapy comprising trastuzumab, capecitabine, and oxaliplatin was selected according to the therapeutic guidelines for gastric cancer in Japan. After initiating first-line chemotherapy, his symptoms improved, with an apparent shrinking of the tumors on diagnostic imaging. However, he was transferred to second-line therapy with nab-paclitaxel plus ramucirumab due to adverse effects to capecitabine, such as severe toe paronychia and numbness in the extremities. Unfortunately, the patient developed resistance to chemotherapy, and eventually succumbed to his disease 2 years after the diagnosis.