A 22-year-old female presented to the emergency department (ED) with the complaint of left-sided jaw pain, left cheek swelling, dysphagia, and odynophagia that developed 48 hours after a dental extraction. The patient had been seen in the ED earlier that day for left jaw pain but did not endorse odynophagia at that time and was capable of eating and drinking. She denied any fever, headache, vision change, eye pain, nausea, vomiting, dyspnea, or use of straws. Her past medical history did not contain any pre-existing cardiopulmonary disease and she was in good health without any prior surgeries. She denied tobacco or alcohol use. Two days prior to her visit to the ED, she underwent a tooth extraction at her dentist’s office where her left mandibular first molar was removed. The patient received bupivacaine with epinephrine injection for local anesthesia. Later review of dental records indicated that a pressurized air turbine dental drill had then been used for resection of the tooth prior to extraction.
Her vital signs in the ED were as follows: blood pressure of 124/68 millimeters of mercury; heart rate 82 beats per minute; respiratory rate 15 breaths per minute; oxygen saturation of 98% on room air; and oral temperature 36.8° Celsius. Physical examination showed an uncomfortable-appearing female who was expectorating saliva into an emesis basin. She exhibited slight dysphonia but no stridor, and was able to speak in full sentences without difficulty. The patient exhibited tenderness to palpation over the left mandible with mild cheek edema, without erythema. Partial dislodgement of blood clot overlying the left first mandibular molar (tooth number 19) was noted. The trachea was midline and there was no meningismus, although she had increased midline neck pain with resistance to neck extension (secondary to pain). She had palpable crepitus over the neck and anterior chest wall.
Laboratory findings showed a white blood cell count of 6.8 thousand per microliter (K/uL) (reference range 3.5–11.3 k/uL), hemoglobin of 15.2 grams per deciliter (g/dL) (ref range 11.9–15.1 g/dL), platelet count of 300 (K/uL) (ref range 138–453 K/uL), and C-reactive protein 8 milligrams per liter (mg/L) (ref range < 5 mg/L). A computed tomography (CT) soft tissue neck with intravenous (IV) contrast was performed, which demonstrated extensive air accumulation involving the oral, retropharyngeal space, and pneumomediastinum . After consultation with a cardiothoracic surgeon, the decision was made to begin prophylactic antibiotics. She was started on IV maintenance fluids and ampicillin-sulbactam for broad spectrum coverage including oral flora.
The patient was admitted for observation and discharged three days later. An esophagram taken to rule out esophageal damage showed that the esophagus appeared to be without injury and was functioning normally. The patient received a follow-up phone call one week after being discharged and reported complete resolution of symptoms.