A 50-year-old male was hospitalized mainly because of “repeated loss of consciousness, convulsions of limbs, and abnormal mental behavior for 10 d”.
Ten days before his admission into the hospital, the patient suddenly fell onto the ground while working. After his fall, people tried to speak to him, but he did not reply, his teeth were clenched and his eyes turned upwards. About 2-3 min later, his convulsions stopped and he gradually recovered consciousness. Then he complained that he felt pain and discomfort throughout his entire body, but no incontinence was present. His limb movement was disorderly and his pronunciation was unclear. He was admitted to the local hospital for treatment and his disease was considered to be “epilepsy”, and thus sodium valproate was used to treat him. On the night of admission, the patient began to exhibit nonsensical behavior: he played with his fingers, kept making the beds, and was biting the quilts. At night, he was in high spirits and walked around. After treatment in the local hospital, the symptoms of loss of consciousness and limb convulsions still repeated. After performing chest computed tomography (CT) and considering lung cancer, the lung puncture examination indicated that the lower leaf of the right lung was on base section: small cell lung cancer, low-differentiated adenocarcinoma, salivating adenocarcinoma, immunohistochemistry which signaled small cell lung cancer. After the patient underwent convulsion again and did not recover consciousness, he was then urgently transferred to our hospital. The emergency department diagnosed him with “epileptic continuity”. He was also diagnosed with lung cancer and admitted to our hospital.
He had no special medical history.
He had been smoking for 30 years with 20 cigarettes per day. He had no alcohol habits.
Admission check: body temperature 38.6 °C, wet rales can be heard at the base of both lungs. There were no obvious cardiac abnormalities. Nervous system check: sleepy, inability to cooperate with cognitive function tests. Double pupils were circular and their diameters were about 2.5 mm, but they appeared dull to light reflection. No obvious facial tongue palsy and the post-group cranial nerve was not willing to cooperate. There was no atrophy or involuntary movement of the limbs, and the muscle tone of the limbs decreased. During pain stimulation, flexion movements of the limbs were visible. Sensory system and working movement were not willing to cooperate. No movement in the limbs and weak tendon reflexes. Negative pathological signs and signs of meningeal irritation.
The number of blood leukocytes was 20.69 × 109/L (3.5-9.5 × 109/L), of which neutral cells accounted for 94% (40%-75%). CRP 0.499 mg/L (0.5-10 mg/L), blood sink, serum tumor markers, clotting, acute infection-related items, liver and kidney function, electrolytes, blood lipids, and a functional, autoimmune antibody spectrum were negative.
CT revealed no abnormality in his brain essence. After scanning and strengthening the chest CT, an increase of soft tissue cluster shadows near the lower left of the right lung was visible . The local bronchial was slightly blocked and there was a strip of increasing density shadow in the distant lung. Considering the possibility of central lung cancer, we recommended him to undergo further fiber optic examination. Scanning and strengthening the head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed that the left hippocampus was thickened, and there was a signal that fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) was slightly higher. After the thickening of the left hippocampus, there was a strip of high signal shadow near the left hippocampus and temporal lobe. There was no dispersion restriction near diffusion-weighted imaging .
Serum paratumor-related series anti-collapsing response mediator protein-5 (CRMP5/CV2) and anti-neuronal nuclear antibody-type 1 (ANNA1/Hu) antibody were positive. After perfecting lumbar puncture, the results indicated that the cerebrospinal fluid was colorless and transparent, pressure 260 mmH2O (1 mmH2O = 0.009 kPa), protein quantification 0.69 g/L (0-0.43 g/L), cerebrospinal fluid nuclear cell 0.008 × 109/L (0-0.015 × 109/L), adenosine deaminase: 5 U/L (0-4 U/L). Cerebrospinal fluid AE examination showed GABA-BR antibody IgG (++1:10), anti-GAD antibody IgG (+1:10). Cerebral spinal fluid nervous system paratumor syndrome series, herpes simplex virus DNA testing, TB DNA, ink staining, antacid staining were all negative. Video electroencephalography showed that before the illness, the patient’s electroencephalography was in sleeping I waveform. The left forehead to the top was most significant. There were many fast waves between medium and high wave amplitude and then there was a collection-like trend spreading to the whole guide wave range and exhibiting high waves. It was mixed with ratchet rhythm and myoelectric promiscuity phase and the patient exhibited synchronized strong straight state. When the patient underwent numerous convulsions, the brain wave fully showed very high wave amplitudes until 2-3 Hz, after which a gradual slowdown appeared. This decrease to restore the background brain wave indicated that the background brain waves were mainly low, medium-wave slow wave activities. There was no obvious α wave in the top area. As for the sleep brain wave, there was no obvious K-composite wave . During the sleeping period, there was slow wave and rapid eye rotating.