A 30-year-old male presented with posterior left thigh pain of 18 months’ duration and 1 year of urinary frequency/urgency, constipation, and scrotal/perineal pain. The lumbosacral MR imaging (MRI) revealed a Tarlov cyst (Nabors Type 2) arising from bilateral S2 nerve root sheaths with marked pelvic extension.
A Nabors-2 Tarlov cyst was diagnosed based on both lumbosacral CT and MR studies. The CT showed a hypodense lesion filling the pelvic cavity origination from bilateral S1 sacral roots, accompanied by chronic bony erosion of the sacrum at multiple levels (i.e., specially from S2 to 4) . The MR showed cerebrospinal fluid [CSF] signal cystic lesions with air-fluid levels, communicating with the thecal sac bilaterally, involving bilateral S1 and S2 neural foramina, and demonstrating anterior extension . The right lesion contained the S2 nerve root (measured 4.5 × 3.3 × 3.7 cm [Antero-Posterior (AP) x Transverse (TR) x Cranio-caudal (CC)]), while the left lesion (11 × 9.5 × 9.7 cm [AP × TR × CC]) contained the left S2 nerve root. The extremely large cyst displaced the urinary bladder and adjacent bowel loops inferolaterally. Notably, the cyst additionally contained irregular T2 hypointense septae. Further, the dural sac herniated bilaterally through the posterior lamina of the S1 and S2 vertebrae.
Following a S1, S2 laminectomy, dural fistula closure, and excision/marsupialization of the cyst, he remained asymptomatic for a few months. However, 6 months later symptoms recurred at which point he underwent, lumbar drainage that relieved his urinary complaints; a TP shunt was then placed. At surgery, two separate large tense cysts were encountered extradurally surrounding the bilateral S2; these cysts extended ventrally into the pelvis. Another small cyst compressed the left S1 root as it exited the canal. The three cysts were incised and drained (i.e., around 1.5 L of Cerebro-Spinal Fluid (CSF). Biopsies were taken from the cyst walls, and the cysts were marsupialized. In addition, gel foam was placed over the neck of the bilateral cysts bilaterally in conjunction with the application of fibrin glue (i.e., over the dura and cyst necks).
The postoperative spine/pelvic MR revealed air-fluid levels in both cysts which were reduced in size vs. the preoperative scans.
Postoperatively, the patient had severe headaches that resolved within the 1st postoperative day by keeping the head of bed flat. By postoperative day 2, there was complete resolution of the deep pelvic pain and no further urinary symptoms. The remainder of the postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 5.
Within 6 postoperative months, the patient presented with recurrent symptoms (i.e., pelvic pain and urinary dysfunction).The lumbosacral MR spine now revealed a posterior dural sac-CSF collection, measuring 4 × 4.4 × 10 cm (AP × TR × CC) with recurrent bilateral presacral tarlov cysts communicating with the thecal sac (i.e., thorough the neural foramina of S1-S2, right Cyst 4.6 × 3.3 × 4.2 cm, left cyst 12.3 × 12 × 15.4 cm [AP × TR × CC]) . Cysts extended into the pelvis, causing compression of the urinary bladder/ rectum, and were notably larger than the initial cysts, but did not contain the previously noted septae. A lumbar drain was inserted at the L3-L4 disk space, that improved the patient’s symptoms, and was followed by application of a TP shunt at the L4-L5 level . The postoperative course was uneventful, the patient remained asymptomatic up to the 1-year follow-up examination.