A 50 years-old woman, G1P1 was referred to gynecological consultation for uterine prolapse. Her medical history was positive for a spinal schwannoma, surgically removed the year before and her family history was negative for cancer. Transvaginal ultrasound (TV-US) showed a solid hypoechoic pelvic mass, with irregular margins, vascularized to power Doppler (color score 3), not fixed to surrounding structures . Because of the site and the proximity to the ovarian vessels it was considered as a right ovarian mass of 54 × 37 mm of diameter. Left ovary appeared normal except to two small anechoic images (< 1 mm) mimicking ovarian follicles . The subsequent computed tomography (CT)-scan evaluation confirmed the presence of an expansive right adnexal lesion, with lobulated margins and heterogeneous enhancement on post-contrast CT images . The woman was counseled to perform hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy with intraoperative frozen section on right adnexa and simultaneous correction of prolapse with laparoscopic access. Thus, the patient underwent surgery. Laparoscopic abdominal exploration showed a round shaped, reddish, easily bleeding mass that originated from one ileal loop displaced in the pelvis. Right ovary was normal and covered by the mass, left ovary presented a normal volume but an irregular and vascularized surface and a round shaped, reddish, exophytic vegetation of 1 cm of diameter originated from the ovarian surface. Small nodules with similar appearance of the pelvic mass suspected for diffusion of disease were showed in the peritoneum of the pouch of Douglas .
In consideration of the size and the uncertain nature of the mass, of the suspicion of peritoneal diffusion, the surgeon decided to carry out a laparotomy. The explorative laparotomy shows that others peritoneal surfaces and organs were free from disease and no enlarged retroperitoneal lymph nodes were detected. Patient was submitted to removal of the mass with ileal loop resection and ileal anastomosis without stoma. Frozen section showed a GIST. Surgery was completed with hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, pelvic peritonectomy, peritoneal washing and Burch procedure. At macroscopic examination, the pathological examination revealed an ileal tumor mass measuring 7 × 5 × 5 cm and both ovaries showed two bilateral nodular lesions of 2 cm and 0.5 cm, respectively. The ileal mass was solid, soft, pink-tan tissue with areas of hemorrhage. Microscopic examination of the small bowel tumor showed circumscribed proliferation of intersecting fascicles of spindle cells with moderate atypia. Mitoses numbered 19 per 50 High Power Field (HPF); occasional atypical mitotic figures were noted. Immunohistochemistry showed strong and diffuse positivity for DOG-1 and c-kit leading to the diagnosis of GIST. The ovarian nodules, grossly yellowish, solid, with circumscribed borders, were composed, on microscopy, by a proliferation of stromal spindle cells arranged in short fascicles, with pale, occasionally vacuolated eosinophilic cytoplasm and mild atypia. Considering the coexisting ileal GIST, immunohistochemical stains for DOG-1 and c-kit were also performed resulting strongly and diffusely positive. The uterus was unremarkable. Cytology from peritoneal washing was negative. The final diagnosis was GIST (spindle cell type) of small bowel with bilateral ovarian metastases .
Molecular analysis performed on the primary tumor by direct Sanger sequencing revealed a KIT exon 11 c-1653_1670del mutation, with a consequent p.M552_W557 deletion. Then we performed the mutational analysis on all sites of disease, including the left ovary lesion, confirming the same KIT exon 11 deletion of the primary, without secondary mutations.
The patient was referred to the GIST Study Group of our Institution for an appropriate clinical management and follow-up. A daily treatment with imatinib at the standard dose of 400 mg was then started, with a surveillance program by CT-scan every 4 months. At the last follow-up the patient is still alive and free of disease (Additional file ).