A 71-year-old Greek woman complaining of rotational vertigo was admitted to the ENT (ear, nose and throat) department at the "G. Genimmatas" General Hospital of Thessaloniki, for investigation and treatment. The patient had an unexplained fever, with an axillary body temperature of over 39°C, taken in several measurements during the 15 days before admission.
During ENT clinical examination and Romberg's test, the patient tended to fall towards the right. Observation using Frenzel glasses showed spontaneous nystagmus with the fast component toward the left.
Otomicroscopic examination revealed serous otitis media on the left ear. ENT endoscopic examination for rhinopharyngeal, oropharyngeal or hypopharyngeal lesions was negative. Neurologic examination was normal. A block of the axillary lymph nodes, not fluctuant or accompanied by overlying erythema, was presented on the left side. A skin lesion resembling a round, red to brown, non-tender papule was observed on the left subclavicular area during clinical examination . The patient did not report any previous history of influenza or virus infection. However, she mentioned having daily contact with two kittens. This history, along with the skin lesion on the left subclavicular area, raised the suspicion for CSD, although the patient did not remember any cat scratching or biting.
Rinne's test was negative on the left and positive on the right ear, respectively. The patient localized the tone on the left side during Weber's test. Tympanometry appeared as a flat curve on the left side (a type B tympanogram) due to serous exudate in the middle ear. The right-ear tympanogram showed a normal type A curve. A pure-tone audiogram showed a conductive hearing loss on the left side with a gap of 10 dB to 15 dB. On electronystagmography testing, the main abnormal finding was the presence of an intense spontaneous nystagmus of a peripheral type, both with and without an optic fixation. The direction of the fast phase of the nystagmus toward the site of the lesion along with the presence of a directional preponderance (83%) towards the side of the lesion showed an impaired horizontal semicircular canal of the left labyrinth.
Differential diagnosis for specific lymphadenopathy includes tuberculosis, sarcoidosis, syphilis, diphtheria, tularemia, toxoplasmosis and CSD. The specific history and the skin lesion pointed towards CSD. The chest radiogram was normal. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 78 mm per hour, and C-reactive protein was 56 mg/dL. Immunoglobin (Ig) M and IgG serologic control was negative for toxoplasmosis, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus and HIV.
Serologic control for Bartonella henselae was sent to National Institute of Pasteur in Athens. Azithromycin was administered for 6 days in combination with methylprednisolone and dimenhydrinate during the wait for the test results, which confirmed the diagnosis of CSD. Paracentesis of the tympanic membrane was performed, and 2 cc of fluid materials from the mesotympanum were taken and sent for culture tests. After wide tympanostomy, mucosal pieces were taken from the promontory area using micro ear forceps with oval cupped jaws and sent for polymerase chain reaction (PCR) control. Culture results were negative for Bartonella henselae. Total DNA was isolated from promontory mucosal cells, according to the standard procedures (QIAGEN-Tissue DNA isolation kit, QIAGEN GmbH, Germany) and was used as a template in a real-time PCR (ROCHE LightCycler 1.1), with primers and probes (FRET technology) specially designed to multiply and detect the OspA region of Bartonella species (B. bacilliformis, B. elizabethae, B. vinsonii, B. quintana and B. henselae). The results obtained by the PCR analysis revealed the presence of Bartonella henselae DNA in the clinical specimen. The first serologic results for Bartonella henselae strengthened our suspicion for CSD (IgM: 20, IgG: 270). IgG blood antibodies increased impressively 3 weeks later (IgG: 1100). This four-fold rise of IgG blood antibodies finally confirmed the diagnosis of CSD. The patient was discharged from the hospital symptom-free one week after admission.