A 26-year-old male patient felt chest and back tearing pain and developed a coma four days later. He was diagnosed with subarachnoid hemorrhage and hydrocephalus in another hospital. External brain drainage was undergone immediately, and his consciousness recovered after the operation. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) showed aortic dissection with intracranial aneurysms of the left vertebral artery and basilar artery. Then the patient was transferred to our hospital. Seven days later after admission, his condition suddenly deteriorated with shock (BP 85/58 mmHg) and hypoxemia (PaO2 58 mmHg) accompanied by shortness of breath, nausea, vomiting, and abdominal distension, but without abdominal pain or early signs of peritonitis. Thoracic and abdominal CTA showed type B aortic dissection with the coarctated lumen of the initial segment of the superior mesenteric artery and a noticeable vessel tree in the enhanced sequence . The small intestine dilated and presented signs of paralytic intestinal obstruction. An ileus tube was inserted but the abdominal distension was not relieved significantly, and the symptoms of peritonitis gradually appeared. Abdominal CT showed that the small intestine was still extremely dilated with a paper-like thin wall even though the ileus tube was in the correct position. Intestinal wall pneumatosis was also observed . There was a sizeable gas–liquid level in the right subphrenic region which led to the diagnosis of perforation and emergency laparotomy.
At operation, the bowel wall supplied by the superior mesenteric artery appeared pale with palpable but weak pulsation of the peripheral artery, though there is no purplish-black necrosis. The small intestine was unable to be sutured since it was extremely dilated and easily to be ruptured due to a paper-thin and fragile wall. Besides, there were two typical perforated holes in the cecum and hepatic flexure of the colon with a significant amount of suppurative fluid in the abdominal cavity. Most of the small intestine and the whole right hemicolon were resected. The initial part of the jejunum approximately 8 cm long and the other two segments of the intestine approximately 55 and 37 cm long remained and were marked as No. 1, No. 2, and No. 3. Thickness of intestinal wall was the leading indicator for preservation. Pezzer's catheter was placed at the end of each segment and drawn out through the abdominal wall, and the end of the small intestine was fixed on the peritoneum .
The postoperative course was complicated. When radiography revealed that there is no leakage from the remaining intestinal segments, enteral nutrition started to be given gradually, which is beneficial for intestinal resuscitation and early nutritional support.
On June 19, the patient underwent endovascular repair of the aorta. Stents were placed in the left common carotid artery, innominate artery, and thoracic aorta. Postoperative angiography showed that the diameter of the true lumen of the abdominal aorta was widened, and the diameter of the SMA was also significantly widened . The blood supply to the digestive tract was improved.
Four days later, blood clots gushed from the NO. 3 intestine. We used a choledochoscope to detect the cause of bleeding because it was thin enough to pass through the drainage. A large clot was found in the middle part of the small intestine, tightly adhered to the intestinal wall with no active bleeding. Reperfusion injury was speculated to be the main reason for the bleeding after aortic repair. From July 11 to August 20, the NO. 1 and NO. 2 intestines were reconnected. The patients could intermittently take liquid food and enteral nutrition orally, while the supplementation of parenteral nutrition solution was reduced. Because of the obstruction, the NO. 3 intestine was not bridged to other segments.
Reconstruction of the digestive tract was performed on August 22. At operation, it was found that the middle part of the NO. 3 small intestine adhered tightly to the abdominal wall of the right iliac fossa and formed an angle. The digestive tract was reconstructed with end-to-end anastomosis, and the NO. 3 small intestine was anastomosed in the reverse peristaltic direction. The remaining small intestine was approximately 100 cm long. Postoperatively, the patient began to eat food on the seventh day and made a gradual recovery.
The patient ate regular food and did not need parenteral nutrition during the first eight months of follow-up. He maintained a weight above 49 kg, hemoglobin at a level of 110 g/L, and serum albumin greater than 40 g/L. He was also able to carry out light physical labor. However, after March 2019, his hemoglobin decreased progressively, and stool occult blood was positive. The test found that serum ferritin and vitamin B12 were low. Digestive endoscopy revealed multiple small polyps in the residual intestine. The patient was diagnosed with iron deficiency anemia, and it was challenging to rectify this condition by giving vitamin B12, folic acid, and iron. Therefore, blood transfusion and parenteral nutrition were needed intermittently. Unfortunately, the patient's condition worsened in the following days. With chronic heart failure and malnutrition appearing, ectopic bacteria from the digestive tract, sepsis, and uncontrolled toxic shock finally occurred. The patient died in August 2021.