An 86-year-old man who complained of blurred vision and decreased visual acuity in the right eye visited a local eye clinic. This patient had received the second dose of the BNT162b2 mRNA-based COVID-19 vaccine 8 days before the onset of his ocular symptoms. Since the patient was also aware of pain with eye movement, he was referred to our hospital on suspicion of optic neuritis. He had a history of arrhythmia, but had no abnormalities such as flu-like symptoms before vaccination. At presentation, the best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/200 in the right eye (OD) and 20/20 in the left eye (OS), with intraocular pressure (IOP) 14 mmHg OD and 15 mmHg OS. Critical flicker frequency (CFF) was 16 Hz OD and 47 Hz OS. Relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD) OD was observed and fundus examination revealed optic disc swelling OD (A,B). Fluorescein angiography (FA) OD showed only hyperfluorescence of the optic disc (C,D), with no findings such as papillary filling deficiency and choroidal delay that would suggest ischemic optic neuropathy. Humphrey’s visual field analysis (HFA) and spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) OD revealed central scotomas (E,F) and apparent thickening of the retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) around the optic disc . Alternatively, laboratory tests including erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) indicated no abnormal values. Anti-myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) antibodies or anti-aquaporin 4 (AQP4) antibodies were also examined by commercial-based cell-based assays (CBAs) using live transfected cells, but were negative. Intracranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) indicated neither a contrast-enhanced effect of gadolinium on the optic nerve nor abnormalities such as demyelinating lesions. Non-arteritic anterior ischemic optic neuropathy (NA-AION) was suspected based on the patient’s age and his medical history of arrhythmia; however, FA findings and HFA results were consistent with acute idiopathic optic neuritis OD, contrary to NA-AION. Since the patient had received the second BNT162b2 mRNA-based COVID-19 vaccine 8 days before the onset of ocular symptoms OD, a side effect of the COVID-19 vaccine was suspected to be the possible cause. Considering the patient’s advanced age, methylprednisolone pulse administration was avoided and oral corticosteroid therapy was initiated from 0.6 mg/kg. One month later, although the optic disc swelling OD had gradually resolved (A,B) and BCVA OD had improved to 20/100, the central scotoma remained (C,D) and no further improvement in visual function OD was obtained. There was no inflammation in the left eye during these events.