A 16-year-old male presented to our center with sudden-onset left chest pain after strenuous exercise. For 6 months prior to presentation, he experienced slight left chest pain several times after exercise, which could be relieved by rest. He denied other previous symptoms or comorbidities. On admission, his pain was persistent, severe, prickling-like, with radiation to the back, and was accompanied by mild wheezing and dyspnea. He was of leptosome type and presented with the following: body temperature of 36.7°C, pulse rate of 100 beats/min, respiration rate of 28 beats/min, and blood pressure of 117/73 mmHg. His left lung had diminished breath sounds and tympanic percussion. Hemoglobin and leukocyte levels were 147 g/L and 7.06 × 109/L, respectively. Two chest X-rays 3 h apart showed a pneumothorax volume of approximately 30% and slight dulling of the left costophrenic angle, without tendencies to worsen .
The patient was initially diagnosed with spontaneous pneumothorax. After admission, he was monitored and treated conservatively, which provided pain relief. At the 14th hour after admission, he developed dizziness, amaurosis, and urinary incontinence twice, and the symptoms resolved spontaneously after brief rest. When the symptoms occurred, he had pale lips with profuse sweating, but with good skin elasticity. Blood glucose level was normal. Blood pressure of the two times was 115/64 and 108/60 mmHg, respectively. Bedside chest X-ray suggested left pneumothorax with massive pleural effusion , and hemoglobin level was 105 g/L. Furthermore, he underwent closed thoracic drainage under local anesthesia, and dark red bloody fluid was drained. After slowly releasing 860 mL of fluid, the drainage tube was clamped. Considering the massive blood loss, he was given intravenous fluids. To clarify its etiology, contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) was performed and suggested a high-density lesion in the left dorsal pleural cavity without enhancement, which was considered to be a blood clot. Meanwhile, the dorsal side of the left lower lobe was significantly enhanced, which was considered as consolidation and atelectasis after compression. No large blood vessels with abnormal morphology and density or contrast agent leaking into thoracic cavity were found . Additionally, no intrathoracic space-occupying lesions were found by ultrasonography. At the 21st hour after admission, the hemoglobin level was 105 g/L, while blood biochemistry and coagulation were normal. Considering the stable condition and hemoglobin level of the patient, the patient was closely monitored. At the 27th and 37th hours after admission, hemoglobin levels were 99 and 94 g/L, respectively. However, after transfusing 1 unit of red blood cells and 200 mL plasma, the hemoglobin level dropped to 88 g/L at the 51st hour. As unexplained active bleeding was considered, urgent exploratory thoracoscopic surgery was performed.
During intraoperative exploration, 700 mL of old bloody effusion was seen in the pleural cavity wherein blood clots were found. An abnormal branch from the left subclavian artery at the top of the thoracic cavity was ruptured, and the ruptured end was 2 mm in diameter. The proximal end was spasmodic, and the distal end formed a thrombus, which was bleeding slowly . Meanwhile, abnormal lung tissue, measuring 1 × 1 × 1 cm in the apical segment of the upper lobe of the left lung, eroded and appeared red. A ruptured blood vessel supplying the abnormal lung tissue could be seen, with a diameter of 2 mm (, ). The abnormal blood vessel, arising from the left subclavian artery and suppling the abnormal lung tissue, ruptured and caused the hemothorax. Finally, the ruptured blood vessel from the abnormal branch was ligated, and the abnormal lung tissue in the apical segment was resected.
Microscopic examination of the specimen revealed lymphocytic infiltration in the pulmonary interstitium and mild hyperplasia of the pleural fibrous tissue. Numerous foam cells, cholesterol crystals, and multinucleated giant cell reactions were seen in the alveoli near the pleura . These non-specific manifestations were considered as emphysema and endogenous lipoid pneumonia secondary to sequestered lung tissue.
The hemoglobin level and chest X-ray findings returned to normal after surgery, and the patient was discharged on the 6th day of hospitalization after removing the chest drainage tube. He was followed up for 1 year without related complications.