A 59-year-old male was admitted to our emergency department with general weakness and 12 kg weight loss over 3 months. He had been a heavy smoker (45 packs per year); however, he did not have any past medical condition. He also denied taking any medication. The patient had no personal or family history of heart disease based on previous electrocardiography (ECG), echocardiographic examination, and other documents. On examination at first hospitalization, he was afebrile with a respiratory rate and blood pressure of 16 breaths/min and 125/74 mmHg, respectively. He had a widespread wheeze of auscultation of the chest. His skin had no special lesions. There was no lymphadenopathy in the examination. The thyroid was of normal size and consistency with no nodules. An abdominal examination showed no organomegaly.
The ECG on admission revealed atrioventricular (AV) dissociation with an atrial rate of 68 b.p.m. and ventricular rate of 50 b.p.m., a normal axis, normal P wave, normal PR interval, normal QRS voltage and duration, and R-wave progression, a short QT interval (293 ms) due to a short ST segment, a generalized ST elevation (STE) and normal T wave . Echocardiography ruled out any cardiac structural, valvular, or functional abnormalities. The initial complete blood count revealed a haemoglobin count of 9.2 g/dL (reference range: 14–17.5 g/dL) with an mean corpuscular volume of 87.1 (reference range: 80–100), which suggested chronic disease anaemia. The initial calcium level was 14.2 mg/dL (reference range: 8.4–10.2 mg/dL). Serum levels of parathyroid hormone (PTH), vitamin D, and phosphorus were 29 pg/dL (reference range: 14–65 pg/dL), 19 mg/dL (reference range: 30–55 mg/dL), and 4.9 mg/dL (reference range: 3.5–6 mg/dL), respectively. A complementary laboratory workup showed a normal range of potassium, magnesium, urea, creatinine levels, serum levels of albumin, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and C-reactive protein. Also, the liver function test and thyroid function test results were normal. Following the results of the lab tests, a chest computed tomography (CT) scan was performed with a suspicion of paraneoplastic hypercalcemia. Chest CT showed a large, central mass with cavitation in the right lung. Evidence of hyper-inhalation and emphysema was also seen in both lungs .
Following a diagnosis of lung cancer and paraneoplastic hypercalcemia, the patient was treated with normal saline, calcitonin (200 IU every 6 h, subcutaneous injection), and zoledronic acid (4 mg, a single dose), whose calcium levels decreased to 10.4 mg/dL after 3 days. Pathological ECG findings (short QT, ST elevation, and CHB) were also resolved after the correction of serum calcium levels . The patient underwent bronchoscopy, and finally, SCC of the lung was confirmed based on pathological findings . He was discharged with an ECG showing normal sinus rhythm (NSR) and a calcium level of 8.9 mg/dL. Unfortunately, he never came for follow-up and for starting cancer treatment.