An 18-year-old white girl with a history of MCAS presented with flushing, diarrhea, and hypotension. She had chronic swelling of her face and abdomen at baseline. She was initially stabilized by epinephrine and steroids. She experienced multiple prior episodes of anaphylactic reactions at least twice weekly for which she was evaluated in our emergency room and treated per a standard protocol in place for her given the frequency of her visits.
At age 15, she had significant asthma symptoms and was found to have a mildly elevated immunoglobulin E (IgE) level. Prior skin testing resulted in vomiting, dehydration, and hospitalization. She was diagnosed as having food protein-induced enterocolitis with severe anaphylaxis to eggs after undergoing a food challenge test. A bone marrow biopsy was inconclusive without evidence of mastocytosis and the KIT-D816V mutation. Her serum tryptase level was normal between episodes and was elevated to 26.5 ng/ml during flare ups. Her plasma prostaglandin-D2 and 24-hour urine 11 betaprostaglandin-F2 levels were markedly elevated during episodes. A C1 esterase inhibitor test was negative.
She was previously treated with steroids, multiple H1 and H2 antihistamines (diphenhydramine 300 mg daily, loratadine 10 mg daily, cetirizine 10 mg daily, fexofenadine 120 mg daily, and famotidine 80 mg daily), omalizumab (one-time dose of 300 mg), and a monoclonal antibody that inhibited IgE binding to mast cells, which unfortunately also resulted in anaphylaxis. To stress the seriousness of the situation, she had a severe anaphylactic reaction resulting in cardiac arrest with successful resuscitation.
Of interest, the University of Minnesota recommended the use of CDI based on ongoing research that had shown some efficacy. She was admitted to our intensive care unit (ICU) and started on a diphenhydramine infusion at 5 mg/hour. Then, the infusion was increased by 2 mg every 2 hours with a target goal of 15 mg/hour. This approach led to a decrease in the episode frequency to one to two times a month, which felt like a miracle to the patient. Based on ongoing research, we started imatinib at 100 mg once daily and titrated up to 400 mg once daily, because this treatment had evidence of use in patients negative for the KIT-D816V mutation. This approach led to a further increase in intervals between episodes to once every 2 to 3 months. Therefore, our patient can enjoy months before an episode occurs, which is a new scenario for this patient in particular.