A 59-year-old man with a background of hypertension presented to our hospital due to repeated episodes of chest pain. He had a history of allergy to cephalosporin. The physical examination revealed the following: blood pressure, 118/75 mmHg; and heart rate, 97 b.p.m. There was no cardiac murmur and pulmonary rales. The electrocardiogram (ECG) displayed ST-segment depression in lead II, II, aVF and abnormal Q-waves in the anterior wall. The blood test showed elevated cardiac enzyme (troponin I 1.066 ng/mL, normal value <0.15 ng/mL). A presumptive diagnosis of non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction was made based on an elevated troponin level combined with the ECG changes. Echocardiography revealed normal size of each chambers with ejection fraction of 50% and anterior wall motion hypokinesis. According to high risk with GRACE score >140, an angiogram was performed immediately using 20 mL of iodixanol (GE Healthcare) showing a 99% stenosis with TIMI 1–2 flow in the proximal right coronary artery (RCA) and a CTO lesion in the proximal left anterior descending (LAD) artery . The SYNTAX score was 23.5, and J-CTO score was 1 according to blunt stump type. Immediately after angiography, the patient developed irritating rashes on his face and chest which we diagnosed as erythematous multiform. When administrated with desloratadine citrate disodium (8.8 mg) and chlorpheniramine, the patient’s skin condition gradually subsided. The cardiac surgery thought it is not very appropriate to perform cardiac surgery in the acute stage of myocardial infarction, and the patient also refused coronary artery bypass grafting, two-staged PCI procedures without iodinated contrast media were scheduled and performed after detailed discussion with the heart team.
Initially, the patient underwent PCI for the culprit lesion in the RCA, although no viability or ischaemia test was performed previously. Prophylactic corticosteroid was administered just for emergencies. A 6-Fr JL 3.5 guiding catheter (Terumo, Japan) inserted into the RCA. With the previous angiogram as a road map, two guidewires inserted into RCA (VERSATURN, Abbott) and acute marginal branch (SION blue, Asahi). The IVUS catheter (Volcano, CA) was advanced to the RCA and manual pullback imaging was performed . According to the IVUS result, a 4.0*33 mm drug-eluting stent was implanted after sufficient pre-dilatation. IVUS was repeated and showed full stent expansion without edge dissection confirmed by the IVUS ChromaFlo function (Volcano, CA, USA) . We observed no change in vital symptoms and ECG, and there was no pericardial effusion on the echocardiography performed immediately after PCI. The patient was discharged 5 days after PCI without any complications. Optimal medical treatment including dual antiplatelet therapy, statin, beta blocker, and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors were administrated.
The patient was admitted to our hospital for the second stage operation 1 month later because of repeat angina. We intended to perform CTO-PCI of LAD without contrast and prophylactic corticosteroid was administered as mentioned above. A 7-Fr EBU 3.75 guiding catheter (Medtronic, USA) was inserted into the LAD. Previous angiographic images were uploaded the adjunct monitor to guide coronary wiring . A workhorse wire (Runthrough Extra Floppy, Terumo) was placed in the first diagonal branch (DA) which is adjacent to the proximal cap of the CTO. The IVUS catheter was advanced into the DA to identify the intimal plaque position and demonstrate the ‘sweet spot’ for wire advancement at the entry of CTO lesion . At first, we used a flexible tip guidewire (Fielder XT-R, ASAHI) in an attempt to track the microchannel but failed. Then, hydrophilic guidewires (Pilot 150, Abbott) were used to penetrate the proximal fibrous cap, and we reinserted the IVUS catheter into the DA to reconfirm that the starting point is correct . We continued to advance the guidewire within the occlusion segment; however, it then apparently entered the subintimal space. Consequently, the ‘parallel wire technique’ was used by another guidewire (Pilot 200, Abbott) to successfully reach the distal section of the LAD. We manoeuvred the guidewire to a DA, which confirmed that the wire was in the true lumen . Then we exchanged a workhorse to the distal and IVUS-guided PCI was then performed . We adopted a crossover strategy for this bifurcation lesion, however ‘Final Kissing’ was applied to protect the side branch . Echocardiography was performed immediately after PCI to rule out wire-related perforation. The patient was discharged 2 days after the operation, followed-up in outpatient for 1 year and experienced significant improvement in their chest pain symptoms without need for hospitalization.