A female neonate was born by an elective cesarean section due to cephalopelvic disproportion, with a normal birth weight (2,540 g) at term, to a 24-year-old secundigravida mother in the rural setting. Serological testing for TORCH infection for the mother was not done previously. Routine ultrasound screening was within the normal limit. The patient's mother was unaware of having any rubella symptoms nor did she have contact with any patient with rubella during pregnancy. Her mother also had never received the rubella vaccine. There was no history of consanguinity, no known inherited conditions, nor congenital abnormalities and no other ocular malformations occurring in the family.
On physical examination, the neonate had microcephaly and a non-dysmorphic face. Complete cardiac examinations showed a small-moderate secundum atrial septal defect and severe supravalvular pulmonary stenosis which were confirmed using echocardiography. Assessment for hearing impairment using the Brainstem Evoked Response Audiometry showed bilateral profound hearing loss. The abdominal examination identified splenomegaly. Unfortunately, the serology testing for diagnosis of congenital infection, including rubella, was not conducted in the first year of life due to the late case presentation and findings. Based on these clinical findings, she was categorized as clinically compatible CRS .
At four years and three months old, due to visual impairment, the child was brought to the ophthalmologist for an eye examination . The patient's serology results showed positive IgG for the rubella virus. Subsequently, she underwent cataract surgery at four years and four months old. Percutaneous transcatheter ballooning valvuloplasty was performed for the congenital cardiac problem at five years old. There were no complications after both surgeries. The visual acuity for both eyes is 1/60. The vision could not be optimal due to the infection resulting in retinopathy of the entire retinal area. There are no activity limitations after the surgery. The patient is still routinely checked every two months until the writing of this paper.
Viral RNA was extracted from lens samples using the QiaAmp Viral RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay was used to detect the existence of rubella virus RNA in lens samples using the SensiFAST™ Probe Lo-ROX One-Step Kit (Bioline). The assay amplified a 185 nucleotides fragment of the E1 coding region. The nested RT-PCR assays were designed to amplify the RV E1 coding area segments, including the WHO-recommended 739nt region for rubella genotyping using the Center of Disease Control (CDC) protocol .
The E1 glycoprotein gene's 739nt window could be amplified, and the PCR products sequenced. Genotype RVs were determined bidirectionally using a BigDye® Terminator v3.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit and an Applied Biosystems PRISM 3730xl Genetic Analyzer. All analyses were conducted using CDC methods in the Molecular Evolutionary Genetics Analysis version 10 (MEGA X) program [, ]. Phylogenetic analysis with WHO reference viral genomes revealed that our sample belonged to genotype 1E .
Subsequently, we performed a phylogenetic analysis using the maximum-likelihood method to classify genotype 1E into five distinct lineages (L0-L4). Based on the classification, our sample was grouped into L2 . The nucleotide sequences from the sample, found to contain RV of genotype 1E, were submitted to the GenBank database and can be found under accession numbers MZ962315.