A one-year-old boy was referred to our hospital from pediatrician because of frequent premature ventricular complexes (PVCs) on ECG. The main complaint of the child was persistent cough, which was the reason for a visit to pediatrician. The baby was born at 27 weeks of pregnancy by cesarean section because of placental bleeding. At birth his weight was 1050 g and height 33 cm. The child had genetic chimerism with a karyotype of 46XY(12)/46XX(3) and bilateral groin hernia, which was operated at the age of 4 months.
The parents of the child reported also about frequent hospitalizations because of acute bronchitis and pneumonia. The child was under regular follow-up in our clinic too because of presence of small patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), which was diagnosed soon after birth.
The initial physical examination of the child revealed an arrhythmic pulse and a grade 2/6 continuous murmur in the left sternal border. Auscultation of the respiratory system revealed no abnormalities. The body temperature was 36.7°C.
An initial cardiac examination, including electrocardiogram (ECG) and echocardiogram was performed. The electrocardiogram demonstrated normal sinus rhythm with frequent polymorphic premature ventricular complexes (PVC) . The echocardiogram demonstrated a patent ductus arteriosus with restrictive flow from left to right, mild tricuspid insufficiency and moderately enlarged left ventricle with mildly decreased ejection fraction and no signs of elevated pulmonary pressure . A 24 h holter monitor was performed, which showed high burden of ventricular ectopic activity with frequent PVC's and non-sustained episodes of bidirectional ventricular tachycardia (VT) . A hospitalization and initial treatment with beta-blockers was immediately performed. Further, despite the medical treatment with antiarrhythmic drugs (Sotalol, Propafenone, Amiodarone and Verapamil) the ventricular activity continued to increase becoming sustained, near-incessant ventricular tachycardia with high number of external planned and urgent shocks. Unfortunately shocks had only little success, with short reversal to sinus rhythm. That is why deep sedation and intubation was performed to our patient. Genetic testing for genes responsible for common arrhythmogenic disorders, such as catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT), arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC), Brugada syndrome, long and short QT syndromes, hypertrophic and dilated cardiomyopathy and others was performed and was negative. Meanwhile a grandmother and parents of the child were diagnosed with COVID-19 infection. A PCR test for COVID-19 was positive in our patient too. Further the child developed symptoms related to COVID-19 infection, such as renal and hepatic impairment with highly elevated levels of creatinin-110 micromol/L (reference interval 9–32 micromol/L), urea-9.9 mmol/L (reference interval 1.8−6 mmol/L), aspartate aminotransferase (AST)-129 U/L (reference interval 8–60 U/L) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT)-71 U/L (reference interval 5–30 U/L). Also severe leucocytosis (WBC-48*109/L) with lymphopenia (LYM-17%), elevated levels of inflammatory markers such as C reactive protein (CRP)- 42.4 mg/L (reference interval 0–8.2 mg/L) and procalcitonin-0,8 ng/mL (reference interval < 0,1 ng/mL) occured. The repeated advanced echocardiogram showed also an enlargement of posterior descending coronary arteria (d = 2.4 mm). So, the patient met the criterien of multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children. Treatment with Infliximab was performed, which slowly led to normalization of renal and hepatic function. Inflammatory markers were normalized too. Unfortunately ventricular ectopic activity continued to occur.
The patient was diagnosed with COVID-19 associated ventricular near-incessant tachycardia and multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children. Differential diagnosis from catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia, which was the initial diagnosis, remains the main challenge. Considering COVID-19 infection as a serious stressor and given the predominantly bidirectional appearance of ventricular tachycardia, the presence of CPVT is highly suspected, even in the absence of mutations responsible for CPVT.
During hospitalization due to the further treatment with sotalol and propranolol, a significant decrease of ventricular ectopic activity was observed. Even though, one or two unplanned shock episodes were required because of arrhythmia relapse. In this relatively stable period, the patient underwent implantation of cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) and PDA closure .
Ventricular and atrial epicardial electrodes were placed through a medial sternotomy access. A pocket for the ICD device was created subcutaneously on the anterior abdominal wall, on the left side. Unfortunately, soon after the implantation the storm of ventricular tachycardia restarted and caused multiple shocks of the device, despite treatment with Flecainide and Propranolol. This time left partial thoracic sympathectomy was considered and performed in the operating room by an experienced cardiac surgeon. Transection and removal of the paravertebral sympathetic chain was performed through a left posterolateral thoracotomy. The procedure went well without further side effects such as Horner syndrome. After 3 months, a planned replacement of ICD battery was performed due to its premature depletion.
After the left partial sympathectomy during 9 months of follow-up, the patient did not have ICD shocks any more. The last 24 h holter monitor showed preserved sinus function (daily mean frequency of HR—96 bpm) with complete resolution of ventricular activity . The child takes no more antiarrhythmic drugs and is under close follow-up in our clinic. The initially increased left ventricular ejection fraction was fully recovered by the last echocardiogram .