A 38 year-old man with vitiligo and hypothyroidism initially presented in 2011 with gross hematuria. Diagnostic imaging revealed a 6-cm renal mass concerning for malignancy, for which he underwent a right radical nephrectomy at the recommendation of his treating urologic oncologist (WCH). Gross pathology revealed a 6 × 5-cm encapsulated hilar mass with hemorrhage and central necrosis. The mass was limited to the renal parenchyma, without evidence of renal sinus or vascular invasion, and surgical margins were negative for tumor cells. Histologic sections demonstrated sheets of epithelioid cells with sarcomatoid and rhabdoid features as well as round, polygonal cells with pleomorphic nuclei and prominent nucleoli. Mitotic figures were visualized at a rate of approximately three per high-powered field. Immunohistochemical staining revealed tumor cell positivity for: HMB45, melan-A, carbonic anhydrase IX, and to a lesser extent, Cam5.2, vimentin and SMA (cytoplasmic), and negativity for: EMA, keratins (AE1/3), CK7, CK20, P63, Pax-2, AMACAR, S-100, and CD10. Based on these histo-pathologic features, the patient was diagnosed with primary EAML.
The patient had an uneventful course for the next 3 years until April, 2014, when surveillance imaging detected an asymptomatic 13-cm renal fossa mass for which he underwent repeat surgical resection. Surgical pathology confirmed recurrent EAML, again with negative margins. The patient’s tumor recurred again in October, 2014, prompting a third surgical resection. Pathologic evaluation this time demonstrated indeterminate margins, prompted referral to medical oncology for further management.
December, 2014 surveillance imaging obtained by the treating medical oncologist (AVB) demonstrated new retroperitoneal and pelvic implants consistent with metastatic EAML. The patient’s tumor DNA was subjected to FoundationOne® targeted next-generation sequencing , which revealed four oncogenic alterations: truncating mutations in TP53 and APC, a frameshift mutation in ATRX, and a deletion in TSC2, specifically, TSC2 H1746_R1751del, which has been reported both as a somatic variant in AML and as a germline mutation in TSC . Of note, the FoundationOne® assay demonstrated no genomic alterations in the four genes encoding key DNA mismatch repair proteins: MSH2, MSH6, PMS2, or MLH1.
Based on the TSC2 deletion, the patient was initiated on everolimus in January, 2015. Imaging at 3 months demonstrated marked decrease in size of the majority of the soft tissue masses throughout the right nephrectomy bed, retroperitoneum, and mesentery, and no new sites of disease. The patient remained clinically asymptomatic for 8 months, until he noted unintended weight loss in September, 2015. Imaging demonstrated slight enlargement of the dominant right renal fossa mass , which in the context of progressive anemia, was interpreted as disease progression. Everolimus was discontinued, and the patient was referred for a treatment-directed biopsy for consideration of a clinical trial.
He underwent a biopsy of the dominant 6 cm retroperitoneal mass, from which DNA was isolated and subjected to paired tumor-germline next-generation sequencing via MSK-IMPACT , which confirmed the absence of a TSC2 germline mutation. However, no new somatic variants were identified to explain the tumors’ acquired resistance, and he was not eligible for any clinical trials. Given the well-known activity of anti-PD-1 checkpoint inhibition across a range of advanced solid tumors, including renal cell carcinoma , the patient was offered a trial of off-label nivolumab via the Bristol-Myers Squibb Expanded Access program, and he began treatment in October, 2015. After two cycles of nivolumab (administered at 3 mg/kg IV every 2 weeks), the patient felt well, and resolution of his anemia suggested possible clinical benefit. Imaging after 5 cycles demonstrated responding disease .
Nivolumab was well-tolerated, with the exception of immune-related exacerbation of pre-existing hypothyroidism after 2 months of therapy, and immune-related pruritic cutaneous eruption predominantly within areas of pre-existing vitiligo , occurring after 18 months of treatment. Over the course of nivolumab therapy, the patient required increasing doses of levothyroxine to maintain a euthyroid state. An archival thyroid ultrasound reveals an enlarged heterogenous thyroid gland suggestive of possible autoimmune thyroiditis. With regard to cutaneous toxicity, the patient was referred to dermatology (ANF), and a skin biopsy was obtained of an involved area on the upper back. Histologic evaluation by the dermatopathologist (SAM) revealed a thin granular layer, confluent parakeratosis with collections of neutrophils, and dilated capillaries throughout the papillary dermis, consistent with psoriasis .
Although these toxicities were not dose-limiting, the patient had already completed 2 years of therapy , and nivolumab was therefore discontinued. The most recent imaging at the time of discontinuation in November, 2017 demonstrates continued response and interval calcification of his intra-abdominal tumors . Archival tissue derived from the initial surgical resection was analyzed for PD-L1 and CD8 expression via immunohistochemistry utilizing a modified Agilent/Dako 22C3 pharmaDX kit, revealing high PD-L1 expression (> 50% of cells) and a brisk CD8+ T cell infiltrate. Finally, immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated preserved expression of key DNA mismatch repair (MMR) proteins MSH2, MSH6, PMS2, and MLH1 , thus confirming MMR proficiency .