A 69-year-old male presented with chief complaints of shortness of breath, fatigue, and intermittent fevers for the last 6 mo which were treated with antibiotics twice.
The patient’s symptoms of dyspnea and fatigue had been ongoing for the last few months with severe hypotension, bilateral lower extremity edema and dyspnea on exertion. He denied any chest pain or pressure.
The patient had several comorbidities including ischemic cardiomyopathy with left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 25%, prior ST-elevation myocardial infarction status post (s/p) stent to proximal left anterior descending artery, s/p implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) in 2018 for primary prevention, bicuspid aortic valve s/p aortic valve replacement with 25 mm Carpentier-Edwards bioprosthetic prosthesis in October 2012 followed by transcatheter aortic bioprosthetic valve in valve (26 mm Sapien S3) in April 2019, mitral valve repair with 32 mm seguin ring repair in October 2012 and subsequent transcatheter bioprosthetic mitral valve replacement with 29 mm Sapien 3 bioprosthetic valve for mitral regurgitation in June 2019, hyperlipidemia, chronic kidney disease stage III and atrial fibrillation.
The patient denied pertinent family history.
On physical examination, the vital signs were as follows: T max of 100.04 degrees Fahrenheit, blood pressure of 91/61 mmHg, heart rate of 80/minute and oxygen saturation of 96% on room air. The patient’s jugular venous pressure was elevated, and a diastolic murmur was heard at the aortic area, bilateral bibasilar crackles at the lung bases, and minimal bilateral lower extremity edema was present.
Troponin-I level was 0.01 ng/mL (normal) and BNP was 1562 pg/mL. WBC count was normal and multiple blood cultures were negative.
ECG on admission showed atrial paced rhythm with left bundle branch block. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) on admission showed LVEF of 20%-25% with global hypokinesis, mild to moderate aortic regurgitation, mitral valve mean gradient of 10 mmHg (@ HR of 72 bpm) with normal right ventricle size and function and no vegetation. His most recent TTE prior to admission was done at an outside facility on July 2019 and showed LVEF of 30%, no aortic valve or mitral prosthetic valve regurgitation, mean mitral valve gradient of 7 mmHg (@ HR of 67 bpm), and normal RV function. The chest X-ray on admission showed moderate cardiomegaly with central venous congestion and interstitial edema.
To determine his cardiac hemodynamics, shock profile, and whether escalation to temporary mechanical support device is needed, an urgent right heart catheterization was done on admission that showed right atrial pressure 12 mmHg, right ventricular oressure 54/6 mmHg, pulmonary artery pressure 54/25 mmHg, mean pulmonary artery pressure 35 mmHg, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure 24 mmHg and cardiac index by Fick of 2 L/min/m2 with pulmonary artery saturation of 57%. An infectious disease specialist was consulted. He underwent trans-esophageal echocardiogram to look for endocarditis. It showed a moderate paravalvular aortic valve regurgitation, the replaced mitral valve was functioning normally with no stenosis or regurgitation, and no definitive vegetation was noted on defibrillator leads and prosthetic material.
On further discussion with the patient’s wife, his functional status decline was associated with intermittent fevers for the last 6 mo that were treated with antibiotics twice, but no source was identified. On further questioning, the patient reported that he raised horses for the last 30 years and has been in close contact with dogs and cats his whole life. Due to close animal contact, Q fever was suspected. Q fever titers were significantly high: Phase I IgG (1:16384), Phase II IgG (>1:32768), Phase I IgM (1:>2048), and Phase II IgM (>1:2048). 18-Flourine fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) cardiac positron emission tomography (PET) was preferred over magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) due to the presence of ICD. It revealed heterogenous areas of increased 18-F FDG uptake in the left ventricle raising the concern for myocarditis. The heterogenous uptake was identified in septal, lateral, and anterior walls of the left ventricle . The basal anterolateral wall demonstrated maximum SUV of 6.9 and basal anteroseptal demonstrated maximum SUV of 5.3. No increased uptake around the valvular structures was noted.