A 7-year-old male castrated domestic short-haired cat weighing 7.3 kg (14.6 lb) was presented to the University of Tennessee Small Animal Emergency Service for evaluation of chronic vomiting of non-digested food 30–60 mins after feeding. The cat reportedly showed consistent interest in food, but feeding led to ptyalism and vomiting. In addition, the cat had lost 0.45 kg (1 lb) of body weight in the prior month and did not have reported melena or change in stool consistency. A complete blood count was within reference intervals (RIs). Serum biochemistry abnormalities included increases in alkaline phosphatase at 86 IU/l (RI 13–71 IU/l), aspartate aminotransferase at 102 IU/l (RI 12–50 IU/l) and alanine aminotransferase at 234 IU/l (RI 32–110 IU/l). Abdominal ultrasound revealed a diffusely hyperechoic hepatic parenchyma with multiple heterogeneous, oval masses, the largest of which measured approximately 2.2 cm × 3.5 cm and 1.4 cm × 1.1 cm, and were associated with the right liver. A linear, hyperechoic focus measuring approximately 0.8 cm in length was identified in the wall of the stomach near the pylorus and was characterized by indistinct wall layering, distal reverberation artifact and thickening of the gastric wall adjacent to the lesion . Findings were most consistent with a gastric ulcer, with suspected neoplastic lesions within the hepatic parenchyma. Sampling of the liver masses was recommended.
Owing to the presence of gastric ulceration, medications prescribed included sucralfate suspension (41 mg/kg [18.6 mg/lb] orally q8h) for 30 days and the proton pump inhibitor (PPI) omeprazole (0.68 mg/kg [0.3 mg/lb] orally q24h) for 30 days. One week later, a fine-needle aspirate of the hepatic mass was obtained under ultrasound guidance. The aspirate sample was poor in cellularity and was suggestive of hepatic lipidosis. The cat appeared to be improving at home and had a normal appetite, and therefore it was treated as an outpatient with continued administration of sucralfate and omeprazole. Recommendations were made to the owners for either repeated fine-needle aspiration or surgical biopsy of the liver masses. Although the cat experienced intermittent inappetence in the days immediately following re-examination, its condition reportedly improved; therefore, the owners discontinued all medications within 10 days.
Three weeks later, following recurrence of vomiting, inappetence and severe lethargy, the owners resumed administration of the medications and elected to pursue further evaluation. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed several new masses throughout the liver. The previously described liver masses were also found to have increased in size. Little normal hepatic parenchyma was observed. The previously described gastric ulcer was unchanged with no evidence of healing. Cytologic evaluation of fine-needle aspirates from several of the hepatic masses revealed moderately sized epithelial cells present in clusters, packets and occasional linear or acinar-like arrangements on a background of blood. The cells, which were cuboidal to low columnar with a round nucleus, stippled chromatin and a small amount of light blue cytoplasm, were consistent with a neuroendocrine tumor . Owing to the persistent gastric ulcer, the cat was prescribed omeprazole at an increased frequency (0.68 mg/kg [0.31 mg/lb] orally q12h). Given the suspicion of a metastatic neuroendocrine tumor and the presence of non-healing gastric ulceration, serum was obtained 3 days later for measurement of gastrin concentrations, which were found to be markedly increased at 491 ng/l (RI <10–39.5 ng/l). Although administration of omeprazole is associated with a subsequent increase in gastrin levels, the marked increase in gastrin concentrations in this case far exceeded those typically seen in dogs receiving omeprazole. In addition, gastrin concentrations were markedly increased compared with values reported in normal cats and cats with hypergastrinemia secondary to severe azotemia. Hypergastrinemia, the presence of a gastric ulcer, and documentation of multifocal neuroendocrine masses in the liver led to the presumptive diagnosis of gastrinoma (Zollinger–Ellison syndrome), though a pancreatic mass could not be identified on ultrasound.
Further deterioration in the cat’s condition necessitated hospitalization with intravenous (IV) crystalloid therapy, pantoprazole (1 mg/kg [0.45 mg/lb] IV q12h), maropitant (1 mg/kg [0.45 mg/lb] IV q24h) and somatostatin analog (octreotide) therapy (2 µg/kg [0.9 mg/lb] SC q8h for 2 doses, 4 µg/kg [1.8 µg/lb] for two doses and 10 µg/kg [4.5 µg/lb] q8h thereafter). In addition, 48 h continuous gastric pH monitoring was performed to evaluate the cat’s intragastric pH response to therapy for severe hypergastrinemia.
A pH monitoring capsule (Bravo pH monitoring system; Given Imaging) was administered orally using a syringe-style pet piller (JorVet Pet Piller; Jorgensen Labs). The cat was hospitalized in the intensive care unit. Its condition improved rapidly with resolution of ptyalism within 2 h of hospitalization and return of a consistent appetite within 15 h. Radiographs obtained during day 2 of hospitalization confirmed that the capsule remained in the stomach.
Results of pH monitoring on day 1 indicated pH ⩾3.0 was achieved for 89% of the day, ⩾4.0 for 57% of the day, ⩾5.0 for 46% of the day and ⩾6.0 for 31% of the day. During day 2, a pH ⩾3.0 was achieved for 100% of the day, ⩾4.0 for 99% of the day, ⩾5.0 for 85% of the day and ⩾6.0 for 17% of the day ( and ). These values were consistent with our ⩾3.0 pH goal for treatment of gastroduodenal ulcerations. Intravenous pantoprazole was discontinued, and oral omeprazole was prescribed once the cat was eating readily. The cat was discharged following 48 h pH monitoring and was reported to have a normal appetite and energy level at home. Omeprazole (1 mg/kg [0.45 mg/lb] orally q12h) and octreotide (10 µg/kg [4.5 µg/lb] SC q8h) were prescribed indefinitely. Continued therapy with octreotide and omeprazole resulted in complete palliation of clinical signs. In addition, the original site at which ultrasonographic findings were consistent with gastric ulceration was repeatedly identified by the original ultrasonographer, and abnormalities were improved within 1 week. Complete resolution of the ulcer was seen within 8 weeks . Owing to the persistent growth of the hepatic masses on subsequent ultrasonographic imaging, therapy with toceranib was pursued (2.38 mg/kg [1.1 mg/lb] orally q48h). Toceranib was discontinued after 1.5 months because of anorexia, despite a reduction in dosing frequency (2.38 mg/kg [1.1 mg/lb] three times weekly). Overall, clinical signs were well controlled for 5 months (7 months from the time of initial presentation), when acute recurrence of nausea, poor appetite and lethargy led to a decision by the owners to euthanize the cat. A necropsy was not performed.