A 38 year old woman presenting with stage 1B2 histologically confirmed cervical adenocarcinoma and received primary chemotherapy/radiation followed by a brachytherapy boost. Ten months later, a recurrent local cervical mass and small volume nodal and pulmonary disease were identified radiologically. Palliative carboplatin and paclitaxel was given, but follow-up imaging identified continued disease progression and she remained with a persistent continuous, offensive smelling vaginal discharge requiring 7–8 pads daily and impacting her quality of life.
Chemotherapy was stopped 4 months prior to the ablation. Pre-HIFU treatment magnetic resonance imaging measured the cervical mass at approximately 7 × 4 × 4 cm, with invasion into adjacent fat planes and the lower myometrium. A computed tomography scan identified intralesional gas; although, a fistulous connection was ruled out on physical examination.
Fully informed, written consent was obtained prior to enrollment in this study. Under general anaesthetic, an intracavitary-guided HIFU device (Sonablate® 500, Sonacare Medical, Charlotte, NC, USA) currently utilised in the treatment of prostatic malignancy was passed into the rectum, as adequate alignment with the tumour could not be obtained trans-vaginally. The tumour and surrounding structures were visualised using integrated ultrasound imaging in sagittal and cross-axial planes, also providing treatment monitoring. Intralesional gas obscured the majority of the cranial portion of the lesion. Ultrasound energy cannot penetrate air so HIFU was targeted to an approximately 4 × 4 × 1 cm region at the inferior margin, the most likely area causing symptoms.
Hyperechoic greyscale changes and gas formation, representing ablative effects , were visualised using the real-time integrated ultrasound imaging to monitor for the presence of tissue destruction . Additional, trans-abdominal ultrasound imaging was performed using an iU22 (Philips Healthcare, Bothell, WA, USA) with a curvilinear C5-1 transducer during treatment pauses for monitoring targeting accuracy and treatment success. This was used to supplement available trans-rectal imaging in order to more closely observe the procedure. To minimise potential toxicity, the lowest energy input required to cause cell death was used during the procedure. This was determined via integrated imaging, by monitoring for hyperechoic changes. Tissue changes were observed with output powers of 33 W/cm2 per individual foci, lower than the 40 W/cm2 required for prostatic HIFU therapy. Total treatment time was 40 min.
No intra- or immediate post-procedural adverse events occurred. Upon waking from the anaesthetic, vaginal bleeding and discharge had stopped completely. The patient was discharged home within 24 h of the procedure, after a precautionary overnight stay to monitor for unexpected adverse events. She reported mild lower abdominal pain after 48 h, which settled with simple analgesia (1 g oral paracetamol, four times daily). At 7 days, vaginal bleeding and discharge restarted at a lower volume than in pre-treatment and reverted to pre-procedural levels by 30 days. Baseline and post-therapy imaging is shown in Fig. . Despite clinical benefit, there was no significant reduction in lesion size following HIFU ablation, although this was not unexpected as only a small portion of the tumour was treated. The patient received palliative therapy for symptomatic relief under the guidance of the oncologists.
This first time experience of intracavitary cervical HIFU suggests that it is feasible for palliation of advanced cervical cancer, with no early evidence of unexpected toxicity. Rapid symptomatic benefit was achieved that has improved the quality of life. In contrast to radiotherapy, HIFU offers the additional benefit of no dose ceiling, allowing for repeated re-treatments if deemed appropriate on an individual basis.
Ethical approval had also been granted for the use of per-vaginal access if appropriate. Although considered for the procedure, insertion of the transducer into the vagina did not prove possible in this case. The device was not initially intended for gynaecological use, and it proved impossible to obtain satisfactory alignment to the target site as energy delivery is perpendicular to the transducer. This demonstrates the need to have HIFU transducers specifically tailored to individual indications. Alone or in combination with the rectal route, this may provide increased accessibility in future patients with a redesigned device more suited to trans-vaginal ablations. Trans-vaginal ablations would also reduce the risk of post-procedural fistulae when compared to the trans-rectal approach, remove the possibility of skin burns seen with trans-abdominal treatments and lower the potential for damage to the healthy intervening tissue, by shortening the distance to the tumour.