A 49-year-old man was bitten by a snake, with his chief complaint being bleeding for 13 h after that bite.
The patient was bitten on his right index finger by a snake (species unknown) while working on a construction site. The bite caused local swelling, pain, numbness, and bleeding, without dizziness, fever, diarrhea, consciousness disorders, or other symptoms. He was rushed to a local hospital for treatment, where he underwent puncture site drainage and antivenin injection, administration of coagulation factor supplements and other treatments. He was transferred to our hospital 13 h after the snake bite.
The patient was in good health, with no history of chronic or infectious diseases.
The patient had no history of smoking, drinking, or familial cancers.
On admission, the patient’s temperature was 36.9°C, heart rate 107 bpm, respiratory rate 25 breaths/min, blood pressure 91/63 mmHg and oxygen saturation in room air 98%. There was visible swelling of the right index finger and the puncture site was still oozing blood. The patient’s right upper limb had been coated with jidesheng sheyao (a local herbal medicine, specific ingredients unknown).
Laboratory tests for coagulation and fibrinolysis on admission showed a prothrombin time (PT) of > 120 s, international normalized ratio (INR) > 10, FBG < 0.5 g/L, activated partial thromboplastin time > 180 s, thrombin time (TT) > 240 s, D-dimer > 60 μg/mL FBG equivalent units, and FBG degradation products > 150 mg/mL. The timing and results of coagulation and fibrinolysis tests are shown in Table . Multiple markers were beyond the limits of detection for the first 7 d after the bite. Coagulation factor activity levels are shown in Table . Coagulation factor activity decreased slightly after the bite, normalizing within 4 d .
Vascular ultrasonography revealed intermuscular vein thrombosis in the left upper extremity and superficial vein thrombosis in the left lower extremity.
Five days after the bite, thromboelastography (TEG) showed R time, 35.3 min, and no coagulation curve was formed . After addition of 2 g/L FBG preparation to whole blood samples in vitro, the coagulation curve pattern was close to normal : R time, 9.7 min; K time, 1.9 min; α angle, 72.1, maximum amplitude, 72.0; coagulation index (CI), 0.5; and amplitude at 30 min, 0.0.