A 24-year-old male presented to our institution with a complaint of distention in the lower right abdominal wall for 1 year. He had no dizziness, fatigue, palpitation, hyperpyrexia, weight loss, or edema. He denied abdominal surgery and trauma. Physical examination revealed a large, muscle infiltrating prominent lump in the right abdomen, with an irregular shape, without varicosities, hydrocele, or varicocele . The lesion was borderless and rubbery with hard consistency and was situated beneath the deep fascia, and was suspicious for muscle invasion. There was no rebound tenderness or guarding. All laboratory tests were within normal limits. The levels of tumor markers were also normal.
The preoperative contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) was performed; it showed a large, inhomogeneous mass in the right abdominal wall that appeared to be continuous with the right testis, spermatic cord, and right abdominal wall muscles and demonstrated mild enhancement . The lesion showed a spindle configuration with irregular margin, contacting with the abdominal muscular fascia forming the fascial tail sign. Bone involvement was present, located adjacent to the pubis and iliac crest. The nearby organs and tissues were compressed and pushed away.
Upon completion of the preoperative workup, the patient was taken to the operating room. The lumpectomy was performed under general anesthesia. The patient underwent en bloc resection of the underlying musculature (right obliquus externus abdominis, obliquus internus abdominis, transverses abdominis, and rectus abdominis), right testis, and spermatic cord. It originated in the right aspect of the muscular fascia of the abdominal muscle. Indeed, adjacent structures were deformed and displaced because of the tumor's mass effect. The lesion was hard with an incomplete capsule and could not be separated from surrounding tissues easily. The tumor was excised with external iliac artery dissection; however, the vein was sacrificed because of tumor invasion. The abdominal wall defect was then repaired with a polypropylene mesh (Progrip™; Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) . The right partial laparectomy site was then closed in a standard manner. The operating time was 6 h. The intraoperative estimated blood loss was 300 ml.
This excised lesion was 30 cm × 24 cm × 15 cm in size, containing a grossly circumscribed firm texture . On the cut surface, it was pale and had the appearance of fish meat . The histological findings revealed a proliferation of spindle cells surrounded by abundant fibrillar collagen and occasional mitotic . The lesion invasion of the underlying tissue involved resected muscles, soft tissue, and pubis. Immunohistochemical analyses were positive for vimentin , smooth muscle actin (SMA) , and β-catenin , whereas CD34 was negative . <8% of cells were Ki-67 positive .
Postoperative recovery was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the 9th postoperative day. The patient remains in good health and shows no symptoms or imaging modality of recurrence at 20 months postoperative . Physical examination revealed the swelling of the right lower extremity .