A 25-year-old Saudi Arabian woman presented with reports of chronic progressive abdominal pain, fullness, nausea, vomiting and significant weight loss for the past year. She also reported dysphagia to big tablets over the past 10 months. Furthermore, she had bilateral foot numbness that started 4–5 months ago with associated walking difficulty. Her previous medical history revealed frequent hospitalisations for the management of severe idiopathic gastroparesis, septic shock, lactic acidosis, gastrointestinal (GI) blood loss, ascites and pleural effusions. She had extensive diagnostic workup in the past, including laparoscopies, CT enterography, multiple endoscopies, invasive testing for coeliac disease and received empirical treatment for suspected vasculitis without significant success. Family history revealed that the patient had consanguineous parents. Two of her brothers deceased in early childhood under unknown circumstances. No history of severe GI problems was found in the extended pedigree.
On physical examination, she was cachectic with severe muscle wasting, her weight was 22.7 kg, and her body mass index (BMI) was 9.36. Her ophthalmological examination was normal. On admission, electrocardiogram (EKG) revealed sinus tachycardia but no cardiac abnormalities. Laboratory investigations were consistent with severe malnutrition, zinc and copper deficiency. The patient was found to have elevated blood lactate 4.7 (normal 2.2 mmol/L) and elevated blood pyruvate levels. Urine organic acids were submitted to a biochemical laboratory for analysis. It revealed the presence of uracil and thymine. Furthermore, the blood deoxyuridine (dUrd) level was elevated. However, the deoxythymidine (dThd) level was normal. Liver function tests, renal function tests and muscle enzymes were normal. An audiogram showed no loss of hearing.
Nerve conduction studies showed mild length-dependent mixed axonal and demyelinating sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy. MRI brain with and without IV contrast demonstrated relatively symmetric diffuse white matter T2 hyperintensities compatible with leucoencephalopathy and scattered inflammatory changes in the paranasal sinuses, greatest in the sphenoid sinus and right posterior ethmoid air cells .
At that time, the differentials were mitochondrial diseases, gastrointestinal disorders and inherited metabolic and genetic diseases such as leucodystrophies. The appearance of severe gastrointestinal dysmotility symptoms with a demyelinating sensorimotor polyneuropathy, MRI finding and pertinent labs suggested a mitochondrial disorder, specifically MNGIE. Patients with MNGIE typically have normal learning abilities and do not present with seizures or cardiac involvement; leucoencephalopathy is usually asymptomatic.
She underwent genetic testing, which revealed a homozygous likely pathogenic variant in the TYMP gene denoted at the DNA level as c.1048C>T. This nucleotide change is predicted to result in premature protein termination (p.Gln350*). In addition, the deletion/duplication assay for the TYMP gene was negative.
She was started on coenzyme Q10 600 mg in two divided doses, carnitine 3 g in two divided doses and riboflavin 100 mg/day and was asked to follow-up. After careful consideration of all the available treatment modalities, an allogeneic stem cell transplantation was suggested as a definitive treatment to correct biochemical abnormalities in the blood by restoring TP activity. She enrolled herself in an ongoing clinical trial for that.