A healthy 10-year-old female patient was transferred from another hospital to our hospital because of the knee pain she experienced after she fell on her knees while running. The initial clinical complaint was sudden and severe knee pain, with a subsequent inability to walk. In the teaching hospital she initially visited, she was diagnosed with contusion of both knee joints; later, she was referred to our hospital for treatment because of obvious pain and swelling and an inability to walk. She had no significant past medical, drug, or family histories. On physical examination, in addition to pain, swelling, and joint effusion of the bilateral knee joints, a palpable gap at the inferior border of the patellae was found on both sides, and she was unable to raise both lower limbs. The clinical examination of the head and neck, chest and abdomen, spine, and pelvis showed normal results. The radiographs of both knees showed soft tissue swelling and high-riding patellae, indicating sleeve fractures . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was then performed to confirm the diagnoses of quadriceps tendon tear and patellar sleeve fracture and better reveal the extent of the displaced bony fragments . Therefore, isolated and simultaneous bilateral sleeve fractures of the patellae were diagnosed based on clinical signs of extensor mechanism disruption (high-riding patellae and a gap at the lower pole of each patella) and imaging studies. Surgical intervention was performed the day after the diagnosis, with open reduction and internal fixation technique management.
During the surgery, the patient lay in the supine position under general anesthesia, and a tourniquet was applied on the proximal thigh. A midline incision was performed. The paratenon was incised at the midline and dissected off the proximal few centimeters of the proximal patellar tendon, and the fracture site was defined. To clear the debris and hematoma, both knees underwent a copious lavage. Tearing of the medial and lateral patellar retinacula was noted. There were no loose fragments in either knee joint. One-third of the articular cartilage of the patella and a corresponding portion of the patellar retinaculum were avulsed from the distal patella on the left side, and a small bony fragment was avulsed from the distal patella on the right side. The fracture on the left side was reduced and held with a patellar clamp, and the articular surface was evaluated for any malreduction. Three 2.0-mm Kirschner wires were used to maintain the reduction. An 18-gauge stainless-steel wire was placed across over the anterior surface of the patella with a figure-of-eight suture. The wires were sequentially tightened to apply equal tension across the fracture site. On the right side, because the bony fragment was too small to be fixed by two Kirschner wires, only one 2.0-mm Kirschner wire was used to fix the distal fracture of the patella, and an 18-gauge stainless-steel wire was used to encircle the patella. Then, tension banding was performed, and compression was achieved at the fracture site. The full range of patellar movement was assessed, and normal patellar tracking was noted. The wound was washed thoroughly and closed after the retinaculum was repaired. The postoperative radiographs are shown in .
After the operation, both knees were immobilized with a fully extended cylinder cast for four weeks with non-weight-bearing, followed by a hinged knee brace for four weeks, during which the knees’ range of motion and weight-bearing status were gradually increased. Isometric quadriceps strengthening exercises were started after the surgery as well. The patient underwent a continuous rehabilitation program and progressively regained her knee movement. Gradual weight-bearing exercises with crutches were started at four weeks, and the patient regained full weight-bearing status without crutches at eight weeks. At the six-month follow-up, both knees were free of swelling, had a normal appearance, and could move within the full range of motion during free walking. The Kirschner and cerclage wires were removed 10 months after the surgery. The x-rays images after removal of Kirschner and cerclage wires are shown in . The patient’s outcome was excellent, without complaints or symptoms of patellar instability and with normal muscle strength and a full range of motion in daily.