A 84-year-old man presented to a fever clinic of his living community in Wuhan, with a 15-day history of fever, cough, chest discomfort and fatigue. Except for histories of hypertension effectively controlled by oral intake of nifedipine and candesartan and surgery for disc herniation, the patient was a nonsmoker without other previous chronic underlying diseases. After 4 days of the antibiotic treatment (moxifloxacin, 0.4 g per day), his cough and chest discomfort worsened, but the fever was resolved. His two separate oropharyngeal swabs at>24 h intervals were both positive detected by a real-time reverse-transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR) assay for SARS-CoV-2. Finally, he was confirmed with the diagnosis of COVID-19 pneumonia, and transferred to Wuhan Union Hospital. On arrival, he was afebrile, no tachypnea, no tachycardia, no hypotension (blood pressure, BP: 120/75 mmHg), and no hypoxia (SpO2: 95% on room air). Other than rough respiratory sounds, the rest of his physical examination was unremarkable.
Initial laboratory investigations revealed increased leukocytes (15,400/μm) with 91% neutrophils and 3.8% lymphocytes, a normal hemoglobin (15.0 g/dL), normal platelets (23.0 × 104/μL), and elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) (1.62 mg/dL). Occult blood and rRT-PCR for SARS-CoV-2 in stool specimens were both negative. Liver/renal function, myocardial troponin I, electrolytes, total cholesterol, blood gas, and glucose were also normal. The patient received antiviral treatment (arbidol, orally 200 mg thrice daily), but worsening respiratory distress with percutaneous oxygen saturation of 89% even via a face mask was noted on hospital day 5. Intermittent fevers and rales in both of lung areas were also found. Laboratory results reflected increased leukocyte (21,200/μm), procalcitonin (PCT) (1.2 ng/mL), and CRP (6.41 mg/mL). An enhanced chest computed tomography (CT) demonstrated multiple patchy ground-glass opacities, and consolidations of the middle and inferior lobes in both lungs, associated with crazy paving pattern . According to the severity of hypoxemia, the case was defined as the severe SARS-CoV-2 infected pneumonia . High flow nasal oxygen therapy (HFNO), methylprednisolone (intravenously 80 mg per day for 3 consecutive days), piperacillin-tazobactam, intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), and Chinese herbs were given, combined with omeprazole and hydrotalcite for prevention of stress-induced GIB.
The respiratory symptoms of the patient were gradually relieved. The repeat chest CT on hospital day 9 reported no exacerbations of lesions . The patient’s oxygen saturation was stable on a nasal cannula at 2 L/min of supplemental oxygen. However, passage of dark red stools was present on hospital day 17. Laboratory results showed normocytic anemia (hemoglobin 8.8 g/dL), in the absence of coagulation dysfunction. Noticeably, the repeat rRT-PCR for SARS-CoV-2 testing was negative in respiratory specimens, but positive in stool specimens. The serum testing for tumor markers were all within normal ranges. Discouragingly, the site and causes of GIB weren’t well-established by the enhanced abdominal CT and CT angiography. Fasting and parenteral nutrition formulations were implemented. Intravenous resuscitation was started via 0.9% sodium chloride combined with 6 units of red blood cells within 48-h time period. Octreotide, hemocoagulase, and esomeprazole were administered for achieving hemostasis. However, refractory hematochezia was uncontrolled. The patient developed altered mental status, tachycardia (135 beats/min) and hypotension (62/28 mmHg). The hemoglobin progressively declined to 4.0 g/dL. Massive transfusions were administered, including red blood cells, 0.9% sodium chloride, and hydroxyethyl starch, combined with continuously intravenous infusion of dopamine. Unfortunately, on hospital day 21, despite aggressive resuscitation, the patient rapidly deteriorated, suffered from cardiac arrest, and expired, before interventional radiology and endoscopy were available. The family refused to autopsy.