A 25-year-old woman was admitted to our emergency department with a subacute onset of mild confusion and left hemiparesis (Medical Research Council grade 4/5). She was fully alert and orientated, complaining about headaches (Visual Analogic Scale 7/10). She had no history of drug abuse or cigarette smoking.
Pre- and postcontrast computed tomography (CT) scans of the brain revealed a 2 cm diameter hypodense nodular lesion in the right thalamus with perilesional edema causing moderate mass effect, with colliquative features inside. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) pre and post contrast confirmed a right thalamic nodular lesion measuring 25 × 22 mm, with perilesional edema. The nodule appeared hypointense on T2-weighted and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery sequences, isointense on T1-weighted and reg-diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) sequences. The nodule and associated edema resulted in ipsilateral ventricular compression. In the coronal sections , there was an irregular postcontrast enhancement, especially along the nodule walls. Was also visible an inner enhancing nodule, which should have raised the suspicion of parasitic infection [, Panel C].
The clinical presentation (without any known history of immune suppression) and the neuroimaging features of the solitary brain lesion primarily suggested a brain tumor, even if other diagnostic hypotheses could not be rejected.
Considering the deep location in an eloquent area, it was decided to perform a neuronavigated stereotaxic biopsy . Preoperative planning was conducted using three-dimensional reconstruction to simulate the surgical trajectory and avoid functional areas and tracts (StealthStation S8; Medtronic, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA) .[,-]
A coronal trajectory was used passing lateral to the lateral ventricle wall. Histopathology revealed extensive areas of necrosis, vascular thrombosis phenomena and aspects of vasculitis with lymphohistiocytic and granulocytic infiltrate at the level of the vascular walls. Rounded structures containing eosinophilic corpuscles inside the infiltrate were found, suggesting a protozoal infection, and allowing the diagnosis of cerebral toxoplasmosis .
The immediate postoperative course was uneventful without complications. Nevertheless, in the following days, the patient presented with fever and abdominal pain with rapid clinical worsening and septic shock. Therefore, the patient was then transferred to intensive care unit. A total-body CT scan revealed multiple abscesses (liver, kidney, and thyroid gland), intestinal walls thickening, and pleural effusion .
Due to the septic shock and the diagnosis of toxoplasmosis, the patient was evaluated by the infectious disease specialist, who initiated the treatment of toxoplasmosis and performed a serologic test which revealed an HIV infection.
Despite therapy, due to HIV-related immunosuppression, the patient suffered multiorgan failure and died.