The hospitalized patient, a 54-year-old male, complained about fatigue and breathlessness.
The patient had fatigue for 1 mo and progressive breathlessness for 1 wk.
The patient had no other remarkable medical histories, and there was no history of fever.
The patient had no previous or family history of similar illness.
Swelling of cervical, axillary and inguinal LNs was discovered through physical examination.
The patient’s complete blood count showed: white blood cell count 142 × 109/L, lymphocyte count 133 × 109/L, hemoglobin 35 g/L, platelet count 298 × 109/L. Lactate dehydrogenase was elevated at a level of 412 U/L.
Image examination demonstrated splenomegaly and multiple lymphadenopathy of the mediastinum and the enterocoelia.
BM aspirate revealed prominent hyperplasia of lymphocytes, between small and medium size, accounting for 85% of the nucleated cells. Most of the lymphocytes were small with a round nucleus, while a small fraction of them had cleaved or notched nuclei . Flow cytometry analysis proved a clonal population of mature B lymphocytes, positive for CD19, CD20, CD79b and FMC7 instead of CD3, CD5 or CD10 . BM biopsy confirmed the paratrabecular infiltration of the neoplastic lymphocytes and a phenotype consistent with flow cytometry analysis . The fusion of the BCL-2 and IGH genes were detected by fluorescence in situ hybridization of the BM . The next generation sequencing of the BM revealed mutations of genes TP53, CREBBP (p. R1446H) and KMT2D (p. Q1613X).
Then cervical LN biopsy was performed. Hematoxylin and eosin stain of the LN gave the information that the expanded follicles were infiltrated by large centroblasts and relatively smaller centrocytes. The number of large centroblasts in the follicles significantly increased, over 15/high power field. Numerous and serried monocytoid lymphocytes occupied the marginal zone surrounding and between the follicles, forming a dark background . Immunohistochemical examination discovered that the overgrown follicular cells were positive for CD10 , BCL-6, CD20 and Ki-67 (40%) but negative for myeloid cell nuclear differentiation antigen, a marker closely associated with NMZL. The positive CD21 confirmed a follicular dendritic cell meshwork. The neoplastic cells in the marginal zone were negative for CD10 but positive for CD20 . Fluorescence in situ hybridization detection of the LN illustrated the BCL-2/IGH rearrangement in both follicles and marginal zone .