A 79-year-old white man (born in 1937) presented for the first time at our urology department in June 2016. He had several relevant comorbidities: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, infrarenal aneurysm of the abdominal aorta, status post-sigma resection due to acute diverticulitis in 2011, obesity, peripheral vascular disease stage IIa, arteriosclerosis with occlusion of left external iliac artery, several allergies to antibiotics, arterial hypertension, left heart insufficiency, and hyperlipidemia.
He was initially admitted due to acute suprapubic pain on the basis of an acute symphysitis. He had several previous urologic surgeries which are displayed in chronological order in Table .
A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a fistulation between his bladder and a collection in the lower abdominal wall attached to the symphysis with an extended inflammatory reaction of all involved osseous structures and soft tissue . Endoscopic evaluation did then show an excessively resected prostate capsule and an erosion of the ventral part of the capsule. Resection in this area revealed osseous structure which was histologically confirmed . His postoperative recovery was slow. In August 2016 an inguinal/periscrotal abscess formation had to be treated surgically. This abscess was most probably related to the persisting fistulation resulting from the previous surgeries.
As his mobility steadily decreased and he had massive pelvic pain in the following weeks, a ring fracture of the pelvis, most probably on the basis of the destabilizing recurrent symphysitis, was diagnosed radiologically .
In October 2016 we explored his suprapubic region surgically. The fistulation was detected in the transition zone from bladder neck and prostate capsule as expected. In order to definitely cure the fistulation of the prostate capsule and symphysis we performed a total fistula excision and coverage with bladder flap. In the postoperative course he recovered quickly and was discharged 12 days after the surgery. He is regularly seen and conservatively treated in our orthopedic department and he did not have to undergo further surgeries.