The present patient was a 12-year-old girl (weight 83 kg; height 159 cm; body mass index 32.8 kg/m2). She had undergone five laparotomies for long-segment HD by 2 years. After these operations, complications of anal stenosis and fecal incontinence occurred. She was followed up for these complications, but she had refused to undergo periodic medical examinations for the most recent 4 years. Her menarche had occurred at 10 years. The last menstrual period was 3 weeks prior to presentation, and the patient’s menstrual cycle was normal.
She was admitted with lower abdominal and anal pain. Fever elevation (38.5 °C), tachycardia, and tachypnea were noted. Her underwear sometimes became soiled due to fecal incontinence; therefore, a pad was worn. Her laboratory tests revealed an inflammatory response and acute renal failure (WBC 21,250 µL, CRP 54.77 mg/dL, BUN 27 IU/L, Cre 1.21 mg/dL). Computed tomography (CT) showed a multicystic mass in the pelvis and abdominal cavity . In addition, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated that the multicystic mass was dorsal to the vagina and rectum . Transvaginal ultrasound showed findings compatible with those of CT and MRI. She was thus diagnosed with left pyosalpinx and abdominal abscess.
Surgical drainage was necessary, but she had a history of polysurgery and was severely obese, so laparotomy was considered to carry a high risk for her. Transvaginal ultrasound was deemed more likely to reach abscesses safely. Therefore, she was treated with transvaginal ultrasound-guided drainage by a gynecologist skilled in the procedure. Under transvaginal ultrasound, we used an 18G needle to obtain oocytes by puncturing into the pyosalpinx and abdominal abscess . Drainage was performed five times during hospitalization. A total of 370 ml of purulent discharge was collected. Cultures from the pyosalpinx detected Bacteroides fragilis, Escherichia coli, and Fusobacterium nucleatum. Antibiotic therapy was also provided (TAZ/PIPC, MPEM, VCM, MCFG).
Furthermore, she had difficulty avoiding constant perineal fecal contamination because of her obesity. To improve the patient’s pubic hygiene, she underwent daily pubic washing and the insertion of chloramphenicol vaginal tablets. Once her activities of daily living had improved, the method of pubic washing was switched to self-cleaning, and she started wearing a menstrual cup all day to prevent retrograde vaginal infection. Enema and antidiarrheal drugs were used to improve fecal incontinence. Her general condition improved dramatically with multidisciplinary treatment.
She was discharged home after 52 days. CT was performed 1 month after discharge, and the abdominal abscess and pyosalpinx were found to have resolved . The use of a menstrual cup was switched from all day to use only during the day. One year and nine months after discharge, the absence of abscess and pyosalpinx was confirmed. She is currently regularly seen by a pediatric surgeon and gynecologist.