A 13-year-old, previously healthy girl was transferred to Vajira Hospital with high-grade fever, edema, and progressive dyspnea for 3 weeks. Physical examination revealed hypertension, pale conjunctiva, puffy eyelids, and pitting edema in both legs. Cutaneous lesions or hemoptysis was not present. Neurological examination was unremarkable. Laboratory investigations revealed the following: 80 mg/dL blood urea nitrogen, 9.62 mg/dL serum creatinine, and 7.0 mL/min/1.73 m2 estimated glomerular filtration rate according to the Schwartz formula. Urine analysis showed microscopic hematuria with dysmorphic red blood cells and urine protein/creatinine ratio (UPCR) of 1.96. Complete blood count revealed anemia with hemoglobin levels of 4.7 g/dL; white blood cell and platelet counts appeared normal.
Based on her symptoms, rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis was suspected. Ultrasonography of the kidney, ureter, and bladder system showed normal kidney size with diffuse bilateral renal echogenicity. On further examination, we found that erythrocyte sedimentation rate (119 mm/h) and C-reactive protein (66 mg/dL) levels were increased, and MPO antibody titer was also elevated at 76 U/mL (0–10 U/mL). Levels of complements and immunologic markers appeared normal: 1.13 g/L C3 (0.9–1.8 g/L), 28 mg/dL C4 (10–40 mg/dL), 6.15 IU/mL antidouble-stranded DNA antibody (0–15 IU/mL), and 0.8 IU/mL anti-Sm antibody (0–10 IU/mL). Renal biopsy demonstrated crescentic glomerulonephritis with negative immunofluorescence , which led to the diagnosis of MPA. Pulse methylprednisolone (MP) 1,000 mg for 3 consecutive days and cyclophosphamide (CYC) 1000 mg (775 mg/m2/dose) intravenous as well as plasmapheresis were initiated, along with emergency hemodialysis and antihypertensive drug administration. As a consequence, her fever, generalized edema, and dyspnea had subsided. Anti-MPO was returned normal at 7.1 U/mL (0-10 U/mL), however her renal function had not recovered as described in timeline diagram .
Ten weeks after the onset, the patient consequently experienced a brief generalized tonic–clonic seizure with both eyes deviating to the right. Her blood pressure was 153/103 mmHg and she had a fever of 38°C for a few days despite being on prednisolone 45 mg/day (1.2 mg/kg/day), pulse CYC 1,000 mg monthly, and hemodialysis two times per week. During the time, she had minimal urine and her renal function revealed as following: 95 mg/dL blood urea nitrogen, 7.15 mg/dL serum creatinine, and 8 mL/min/1.73 m2 estimated glomerular filtration rate according to the Schwartz formula. Urine examination showed significant albuminuria and active sediments comprising red blood cells 50–100/hpf, white blood cells 2-3/hpf and frequent granular casts. UPCR was of 1.76. Differential diagnoses included posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome, meningoencephalitis, and MPA with CNS involvement. Lumbar puncture was performed, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) of the brain were conducted. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis revealed pleocytosis with negative infectious panel. Her blood glucose and serum electrolytes were normal. Further, contrast MRI studies of the brain showed multifocal patchy T2/FLAIR-hyperintense lesions in the cerebral as well as cerebellum regions, and MRA revealed irregular narrowing along the V4 segment of the right vertebral artery . At the time of admission to the pediatric intensive care unit, her resting heart rate increased from 60–70 to 130–140 beats/min, and clinical dyspnea and edema were observed. Besides, the levels of following cardiac biomarkers were elevated: 40 U/L myocardial band of creatine kinase, >35,000 pg/mL probrain natriuretic peptide, and 577 ng/L troponin T. To investigate acute myocarditis, an experienced pediatric cardiologist performed echocardiography, which indicated a moderate degree of mitral regurgitation with minimal pericardial effusion and no coronary abnormalities (left ventricular ejection fraction, 30% and cardiac index, 2.5 L/min/m2). The possible infectious causes of myocarditis were negative, which led to the diagnosis of acute myocarditis in MPA.
Pulse MP and CYC were administered considering the presence of CNS vasculitis and acute myocarditis. For cardiovascular support, inotropic drugs and oxygen therapy were initiated. Outpatient follow-up, her resting heart rate returned to normal; further, echocardiograph showed 56% left ventricular ejection fraction, trivial mitral regurgitation, and mild aortic regurgitation. The renal function was stable at end-stage renal disease and the modality of replacement was shifted to peritoneal dialysis due to the patient's and family's preference. Neurological symptoms in terms of consciousness improved gradually, and there were no seizures while on stable antiepileptic drug; moreover, electroencephalograms taken 2 weeks and 2 months following treatment revealed an improvement in encephalopathy, with no new symptoms and/or signs after 2 months.