A 31-year-old woman of Han Chinese, gravida 2 para 0, had conceived via IVF-ET. Her first pregnancy at the age of 22, was artificially terminated in the first trimester because it was unwanted. The patient underwent bilateral endometrioma cystectomy at the age of 27. Subsequently, she thereafter had a diminished ovarian reserve with 0.40 ng/mL of anti-Mullerian hormone (AMH). A total of six eggs were obtained by two oocyte retrieval operations and were fertilized in vitro. After two failed double-embryo transfers, the remaining two embryos, respectively, retrieved in August 2020 and April 2021, were transferred after assisted hatching treatment. Her first ultrasonography at 6+2 weeks of gestation documented two yolk sacs within a single gestational sac . The subsequent scan at 10+3 weeks of gestation demonstrated MC diamniotic twins with a T-shaped insertion of the membrane .
Unfortunately, one of the twins (twin A) was revealed to have nuchal cystic hygroma and generalized hydrops without abnormal volume of amniotic fluid on ultrasonography at the time of routine nuchal transparency (NT) screening . On the follow-up ultrasound, a structural malformation of the heart was observed. At the same time, no abnormalities were found on the other fetus (twin B) by detailed ultrasonic examination . The couple underwent genetic counseling and the twins were interpreted as monozygosity due to the MC placenta, so they were informed of a high probability of genetic disorder or congenital anomaly for both twins. The couple intended to terminate the pregnancy accordingly.
After a week, at 13+6 weeks of gestation, both twins died spontaneously as the absences of cardiac activity were indicated on ultrasonography. Following a failed medical abortion, the patient then underwent a surgical curettage to terminate the pregnancy. During the fetal genetic examination, the twins were discovered to be inconsistent in their chromosomal composition. Twin A had a male karyotype with a partial trisomy 9, while twin B had a normal female karyotype. DNA zygosity studies of the twins demonstrated that the twins were dizygotic. A timeline of relevant events to the patient from conceiving to terminating pregnancy is shown in .