A previously healthy 11-month-old female infant (the first child of non-consanguineous Japanese parents) was referred to our hospital with clinical signs of septic shock and purpura, which were preceded by fever for 2 days and signs of upper respiratory tract infection (URI) for 1 week. She had previously received oral antibiotic treatment for the URI. The patient had not received pneumococcal or Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) vaccination because these vaccines were not included in the routine immunization program at that time in Japan. On admission, she had a body temperature of 39.4 °C, heart rate of 180 bpm, blood pressure of 83/46 mmHg, and cold extremities with a capillary refill of >5 s. She was irritable without any focal neurological deficits. She was found to have purpura fulminans with ecchymoses of the face and trunk and purpura of her limbs and ears. Her neck was stiff. Laboratory examination indicated a white blood cell count of 35.1 × 109/L, with 67% neutrophils and 25% lymphocytes; platelet count of 8.1 × 109/L; hemoglobin level of 10.9 g/dL; and C-reactive protein level of 18.5 mg/dL. Prolonged prothrombin time and activated partial thromboplastin time and elevated levels of plasma fibrinogen degradation products (235 μg/mL: normal <5 μg/mL) indicated the presence of DIC. A lumbar puncture indicated the presence of pleocytosis in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), including 11,527 cells/μL (95% polymorphonuclear cells), 11 mg/dL glucose (blood glucose level; 87 mg/dL), and 425 mg/dL protein. The gram stains of CSF revealed the presence of gram-positive diplococci. We diagnosed the patient with bacterial meningitis followed by DIC and treated her with intravenous antibiotics (ampicillin and cefotaxime) empirically and addressed the DIC using anticoagulants. On the day after admission, blood and CSF cultures indicated positive results for S. pneumoniae (serotype not available). The minimum inhibitory concentration for penicillin was <0.06 μg/mL. The patient received antibiotic therapy for 14 days with a good clinical response and was discharged without any sequelae.
Over the clinical course, abdominal ultrasonography (US) was performed to detect adrenal hemorrhage as we suspected Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome; however, US did not indicate the presence of a spleen . In addition, no spleen was visible on abdominal computed tomography . Careful blood smear assessment indicated the presence of Howell-Jolly bodies (HJB) . Based on the suspicion of asplenia, scintigraphy with Tc-99 m phytate colloid was performed and no functioning splenic tissue was detected . The patient had no history of splenectomy. No other malformations such as heart defects, anomalous systemic or pulmonary venous connections, and abdominal heterotaxia were detected, leading to the diagnosis of ICA. Moreover, peripheral blood smears and spleen US examinations of the parents indicated normal results. After that, antibiotic prophylaxis with amoxicillin was initiated as well as vaccinations using 7-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV7) and Hib vaccine, followed by 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV23) when she was 2 years old. The parents were counseled about the need for prompt medical attention after the onset of fever. Subsequently, the patient has not experienced any invasive infections for >5 years.