A 44-year-old woman with a 35-year history of type 1 diabetes presented with a two-month history of progressive lumbar pain, night sweats and difficulty in keeping an erect posture. The patient did not have any history of falls or traumatic injury around the time of onset of symptoms. Diabetes-related vasculopathy and nephropathy had been previously diagnosed, and there was no other medical or familial history. Physical examination showed only discrete trunk forward-leaning. Initial blood tests did not show any abnormalities except for known hyperglycaemia and decreased renal function. To discard spinal infections, Doppler echocardiography to search for endocarditis, a blood culture, a purified protein derivative (PPD) test for tuberculosis and serological tests for brucellosis were performed with unremarkable results.
A lumbar MRI revealed extensive signal intensity changes of both anterior and posterior elements, findings indicated by the radiologist as suggestive of SNA. The MRI sequences demonstrated irregularities of the L2 and L3 vertebral body endplates with markedly hypointense lesions, both on the T1-weighted images (T1WI), due to the loss of normal bone marrow signal, and on the T2-weighted images (T2WI), due to sclerosis. The borders of the lesions presented hyperintensities on the STIR-weighted images (STIR-WI) and the T2WI, indicating oedema. The T2WI also showed enlargement of the paravertebral surrounding soft tissues, suggestive of inflammation with post-contrast enhancement, as depicted on the gadolinium-enhanced fat sat T1-weighted images (T1WI + C). The post-contrast sequences also demonstrated subtle marginal enhancement of the vertebral body lesions and the areas adjacent to interapophyseal articulations and spinous processes from L2–L3 to L5–S1, compatible with the involvement of both anterior and posterior elements. The gross morphology and height of the affected vertebral bodies were still preserved. There was an associated slight retrolisthesis of the L2 vertebral body, suggesting some grade of instability.
There were associated degenerative disc changes with a collapsed L2–L3 intervertebral disc and loss of its T2WI signal, which depicted disc dehydration. These findings were also found with variable degrees at other levels of the thoracolumbar spine, more markedly at the T11–T12, T12–L1 and L1–L2 levels, in association with Schmorl nodules. There were marginal osteophytes and slight diffuse disc bulging present from the T11 to L3 levels without significant reduction of the amplitude of the corresponding neuroforamen or spinal canal. Interapophyseal degenerative changes were present at the levels of L4–L5 and L5–L1. The conus medullaris and nerve roots presented normal signal intensity and no signs of compression or pathological enhancement .
In a complementary way, computed tomography (CT) images of the lumbar spine confirmed the severe grade of sclerosis of the L2–L3 vertebral body endplates, disproportional when compared to the virtual absence of destruction of these structures, which was limited to endplate irregularities. Bone-conditioning CT images also clarified the slight retrolisthesis of the L2 vertebral body. Findings related to degenerative changes, such as an L2–L3 intervertebral disc collapse and adjacent marginal osteophytes, were also observed. There were no signs of significant degenerative changes in the corresponding superior and inferior articular processes .
To exclude neoplastic and infectious disease, a bone biopsy at the L2–L3 level was executed, and the anatomopathological report revealed ‘material compatible with intervertebral disc’, without any cell infiltrate. Gram staining, direct microscopy for fungi, alcohol acid-resistant bacilli (AARB) bacilloscopy and bacteriological, mycobacterial and fungal cultures of the biopsied tissue samples were negative.
It was decided to perform a six-month MRI follow-up, which showed stability of the findings, excluding a possible infectious or malignant aetiology and corroborating the hypothesis of SNA.
After initial diagnosis in August 2018, the patient was evaluated by a neurosurgeon, who reported an agreement with the established diagnosis. Despite the severity of the majority of SNA cases, the patient’s spine was aligned and without signs of compression, therefore without indication for surgical fixation.
The patient received motor physiotherapy sessions until the beginning of the SarS-CoV-2 pandemic in Brazil, in March 2020.
The patient has been followed-up since diagnosis with clinical appointments and routine MRI exams. At the last physical examination in January 2021, 2.5 years after the diagnosis, there were no changes in the patient’s height, an important clinical parameter that changes over time in a more aggressive evolution.
Nonetheless, the last MRI in February 2021 revealed definitive progression of the findings, particularly on the STIR-WI and T2WI, represented by an increase in the vertebral body areas of hyperintensity. Additionally, there was also a slight increase in the paravertebral soft tissue component .
The clinical appointment following the MRI in March 2021 occurred through remote telephone consultation, due to SarS-CoV-2 pandemic. The patient, who, until then, was under satisfactory control of the lumbar pain with simple analgesic medications, reported that the lumbar pain has worsened in the past few weeks and was no longer being controlled with medicines, symptoms compatible with the MRI findings of progression.
A new neurosurgical consultation is planned to define a complete treatment, including physiotherapy sessions, in consideration of the current limitations due to the SarS-CoV-2 pandemic.
Besides the medical conduct regarding SNA, the patient is under endocrinological follow-up for type 1 diabetes aiming for appropriate glycaemic and metabolic control.