A 17-year-old Black male presented to the ED with weakness. Prior to arrival to the ED, the patient was involved in a helmet-to-helmet collision while participating in a football game. Physicians from both teams were called onto the field by the athletic trainer after the patient reported paralysis of bilateral upper and lower extremities as well as loss of sensation from the neck down. The cervical spine was manually stabilized and emergency medical services (EMS) were alerted. While the patient’s cervical spine was stabilized, his helmet and shoulder pads were removed. Over the course of 10 minutes as EMS was pending arrival, he regained sensation and movement of his extremities. After regaining movement and sensation, on-site examination demonstrated sixth cervical (C6) vertebral tenderness to palpation, but no other abnormalities. The patient’s cervical spine was manually held and he was placed onto a backboard. He was then transferred to the ED.
Ancillary information was provided indicating the patient had a similar episode two weeks prior. That episode involved a similar helmet-to-helmet collision that resulted in a sensation of “shock” in which he could not move for several seconds but was ultimately able to stand on his own. On-site physical exam was negative and without any acute physical findings. A concussion screen was performed, which was normal.
Upon ED arrival, the patient denied having a headache, change in vision, tinnitus, loss of consciousness, nausea, vomiting, confusion, chest pain, shortness of breath, back pain, or abdominal pain. He remembered the entire event and had no history of concussions. His vital signs included a blood pressure of 119/53 millimeters of mercury, pulse of 84 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 25 respirations per minute, a temperature of 100.1° Fahrenheit (37.8° Celsius), and an oxygen saturation of 100% on room air. He was oriented, well appearing, and in no acute distress. Head and cervical spine computed tomography (CT) were unremarkable, and he had no fractures.
Cervical spine lateral flexion-extension radiographs did not show any cervical instability ( and ). He ambulated normally following removal of the cervical collar and was alert with normal mood and affect. His physical exam and neurological exam were unremarkable. He had no cranial nerve deficits, and he had full strength and sensation in upper and lower extremities bilaterally. The ED determined the patient likely sustained brachial plexus neuropraxia, known in the sports medicine world as a “stinger.” He was discharged with return precautions and a follow-up appointment with sports medicine.
The patient followed up with sports medicine three days following the injury and was asymptomatic. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was ordered, which showed congenital cervical spinal canal narrowing at C4 with a canal width of 11 millimeters (mm) (normal range 15–27 mm) . He also had C3–C4 bilateral spinal cord contusions and a C6 bone contusion. He was referred to a spine surgeon who recommended permanent disqualification from participation in contact sports.