A 38-year-old female with a four-week history of left level II cervical lymph node enlargement was referred to the Ear Nose and Throat (ENT) team for open neck biopsy. She had a history of multiple myeloma treated with chemotherapy and autologous bone marrow transplant two years prior to referral. The referring hematology team were concerned with a secondary malignancy.
Complete head and neck examination revealed a palpable level 2 lymph node but was otherwise normal. A computer tomography of the neck was performed and showed an isolated two centimeter cervical lymph node correlating to clinical examination with no other significant findings. An ultrasound guided fine needle aspiration was performed on the node. Unfortunately, the cytology was reported as non-diagnostic and the patient was scheduled for open biopsy.
Pre operative platelet infusion was required as the patient had chronic thrombocytopenia. The anaesthetic team commenced general anaesthetic induction after the post infusion platelet count was confirmed to be 45 x 103/mL. Although higher platelet levels would have been preferred, this was not possible even with repeated platelet infusions. The ENT team anticipated a possible concern with hemostasis, but opted to proceed with the procedure due to the potential malignant underlying pathology. The expected duration of the procedure was confirmed to be thirty minutes by the operating ENT team.
A two-centimeter incision was made followed by a deeper dissection. The anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle (SCM) was retracted and a compressible mass was palpable medial to the muscle. Fascia over the palpable mass was skeletonized off to reveal a thin-walled air filled mass that was initially thought to be a possible laryngocoele. No other abnormal lymph nodes were palpable. At this stage, the operating surgeon realized that the “air filled mass” was actually the LMA and the pharyngeal wall had been dissected, resulting in a one centimeter iatrogenic pharyngeal tear. Prior to continuing with the procedure, the surgeon requested that the LMA be replaced with an ETT. The one centimeter pharyngeal tear was repaired and exploration showed no further damage. The patient was placed on total parenteral nutrition (TPN) and on intravenous broad spectrum antibiotics. A gastro-graffin swallow test done on day 10 post-operation showed no leakage and the patient was commenced on an oral diet without any issues. Post-operative imaging revealed that the original enlarged lymph node now measured less than 1cm. Intra operative events were discussed with the patient in full disclosure. The patient was subsequently referred back to the hematology team who opted to follow up the patient with serial imaging.