The patient was an 18-month-old boy who was a product of a first-degree consanguineous marriage with an uneventful pregnancy and an uncomplicated elective cesarean section at full term. He had a normal neonatal period. His developmental milestones, mainly motor and speech, were mildly delayed; he sat at age 7 months, crawled at 10 months, and stood with support at 1 year. Currently, he can stand with support and can vocalize only two words. There was no family history of spontaneous abortion or neurogenetic disorders. His father had multiple sclerosis.
He presented with insidious-onset progressive stridor (obvious during crying and feeding) and difficulty swallowing for 2 months, preceded by fever and upper respiratory tract infection (URTI) for 5 days. Afterward, he was noted to have impaired sucking, drooling of saliva, frequent choking, changes in his facial expressions, drooping of the right eyelid and less interaction with episodes of retrocollis and weight loss. He was inattentive most of the time, with a gradual decrease in verbal output and the use of nonverbal communication to indicate needs. No alteration of sensorium was observed.
At 16 months, he was evaluated by an ear, nose and throat (ENT) specialist who observed evidence of tracheal tag, subcostal retraction and biphasic stridor; however, nasopharyngeal scope, direct laryngoscopy and bronchoscopy (DLB), were unremarkable, ruling out the possibility of foreign body inhalation. Esophagoscopy was also normal.
Examination revealed an active, alert, and thriving child with normal vital signs. Intermittent soft stridor with no grunting was observed at rest. The ENT exam results were normal with no lymphadenopathy. Cranial nerve examination showed no ptosis of the left eye with normal pupils, fundus, and extraocular movements. He had bilateral lower motor neuron (LMN) facial (VII) nerve palsy, which was more pronounced on the right side; weak palatal and gag reflexes with excessive drooling; no uvular deviation; and normal tongue movements. He had a reduced response to loud sounds by simple distraction test. He had decreased strength and tone in both the upper and lower limbs and depressed deep tendon reflexes (DTRs) in the lower limbs. The plantar reflex was bilaterally flexor. His gait was unsteady with obvious hand tremors. No paradoxical abdominal movements when breathing was noted. The remainder of his systemic examination results were unremarkable .
Based on the findings of subacute-onset multiple cranial neuropathies, specifically pontobulbar palsy and impaired hearing preceded by viral illness, the diagnoses listed in were considered after ruling out the possibility of posterior fossa/cerebellopontine angle mass lesion.
The patient's basic hemogram, peripheral smear, and biochemistry lab results were normal. His throat swab and nasopharyngeal aspirate for common viruses were negative. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with contrast revealed bilateral smooth enhancement of the oculomotor and glossopharyngeal nerves, with a possible bilateral enhancement of the cisternal and intracanalicular segments of the facial nerves . A whole-spine MRI with contrast showed cauda equina enhancement suggestive of chronic inflammatory demyelinating disorder . Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis was unremarkable with a slightly elevated protein level. The metabolic panel, including venous blood gas (VBG), serum ammonia, lactate, tandem amino acids, and urinary organic acids, was unremarkable. His thyroid panel and vitamin B12 level were normal. Anti-streptolysin O titer (ASO), mycoplasma, brucella titers, and vasculitis workup were negative. Bone marrow aspiration results were unremarkable. The findings of the electromyogram (EMG) and nerve conduction study (NCS) of the right upper and lower extremities were suggestive of a non-length dependent, predominantly axonal, sensorimotor polyneuropathy with features of ongoing denervation in the distal right upper extremity muscles (, ). Brain Auditory Evoked Potential (BAEP) later showed bilateral sensorineural hearing loss, while ophthalmological evaluation and visual evoked potential (VEP) were unremarkable.
The patient was started on intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) 2 g/kg over two consecutive days with no obvious improvement, and empirical mega-multivitamins were added, including riboflavin 200 mg/day (20 mg/kg). During his admission, he suffered arrest twice secondary to recurrent lung aspiration, received different modalities of ventilatory support and was kept in the intensive care unit (ICU) for close observation. He had a complex clinical course in the ICU for more than two months with fluctuations in his respiratory status and a need for oxygen before finalizing his diagnosis. A trial of atropine drops was administered for excessive drooling, and botulinum toxin was injected into the salivary glands. Paradoxical breathing and tachypnea were observed in the ICU. x-ray of the chest showed an eventration of the left diaphragm, and fluoroscopy confirmed diaphragmatic paralysis, probably secondary to phrenic nerve involvement, which was managed conservatively. Finally, a gastrostomy tube was inserted to minimize choking episodes. His carnitine profile showed normal levels of total carnitine, very low levels of free carnitine (7.88 μmol/L; normal range, 24.7–66.6 μmol/L) and a normal acylcarnitine profile. The possibility of motor neuron disease was considered, and the diagnosis of BVVL1 was confirmed by rapid clinical whole-exome sequencing (WES), which identified a previously reported homozygous missense mutation, NM_033409.3: c.211G>A: p. Glu71Lys, in the SLC52A3 gene , which resulted in the amino acid substitution of glutamic acid with lysine. No mutations were found in the SLC52A1 and SLC52A2 genes. The patient's parents were heterozygous carriers and were asymptomatic. The genetic result was published previously as a part of the mass screen by Rapid WES for critically sick patients admitted to the intensive care unit. Accordingly, coenzyme Q10 supplementation was initiated, and riboflavin was increased to 400 mg (80 mg/kg/d) in two divided doses with obvious clinical improvement in facial weakness and palatal movement.
After 3 months of follow-up on riboflavin, the child had a normal gag reflex, accepted sips of water orally, and had mild facial weakness. He has started vocalizing, and subjectively, there is some response to high-frequency sounds.
A follow-up brain MRI at 22 months showed no further enhancement of the cranial nerves or cauda equina and no evidence of acute hypoxic-ischemic insult secondary to repeated arrest, only mild cerebral atrophy . Clinically, he showed impressive improvement in interaction with and awareness of surroundings, facial expression, eye closure during the night, response to painful stimuli, and retention of a spontaneous cough and gag reflex. He was planned for a cochlear implant after further assessment by an ENT specialist. represents the timeline course for this patient.