We report a case of a 37-year-old previously healthy expatriate male, who presented to the emergency department with scalp swelling since four months.
He was referred to surgery out-patient clinic for assessment of the scalp swelling. He presented to Surgery outpatient clinic after a lapse of four months due to unspecified reasons.
The swelling was gradually increasing in size, associated with mild pain. The patient had no history of trauma, fever, weight loss or any other associated symptoms. Past medical, surgical and family history were negative for any malignancy. He was a nonsmoker, nonalcoholic who worked as a laborer.
On examination, there was a solitary scalp swelling measuring 7 × 7 cm in size, with a crusted surface. It was a spherical, smooth, subcutaneous lesion on the scalp at the back of the head, 6 cm posterior to left mastoid process. The lesion was tense, freely mobile. It was non-pulsatile, non-compressible, non-reducible and was not trans-illuminating. There was no clinically evident lymphadenopathy. Neck and throat examination was unremarkable. No other abnormal findings were identified.
The provisional diagnosis of sebaceous cyst was made with differentiation diagnoses of dermoid cyst or scalp lipoma.
Urgent CT scan head was done to rule out any intracranial extension as seen in cases of dermoid cysts, which showed 7 × 3.6 × 7.7 cm subcutaneous extracranial cystic lesion with no intracranial extension .
The swelling was increasing in size with passage of time of almost eight months from the initial detection by the patient. The possibility of primary malignant lesion or malignant transformation of a benign cyst would have been one of the differentials. The patient’s delayed presentation first to ED and then to surgery OPD prompted the surgery team as crucial factor in posting the patient for urgent excision. Nevertheless, the possibility of malignant lesion was kept in mind during the operation.
Intraoperatively, the patient was found to have a left parietooccipital extracranial scalp lesion with both cystic and soft tissue components, infiltrating the galea aponeurotica and surrounding muscles. Efforts were made for complete excision of the mass, and primary closure was done.
The entire specimen was sent for histopathological examination. The specimen comprised of several fragments of tissue and pieces of skin. The sections showed fragments of cyst wall lined by malignant squamous epithelium with no benign epithelial component identified (A–C). Foci of dermal invasion with desmoplastic stroma reaction were seen. The histopathological differential diagnosis included a CPDSCC, malignant PTT and trichilemmal carcinoma. Given the poorly differentiated nature of the epithelium and lack of a benign cyst component, the diagnosis of cystic poorly differentiated squamous carcinoma was favored.
The patient was discussed in skin multidisciplinary team (MDT) meeting. PET scan and neck ultrasound were performed to examine for disease extent.
Re-excision and reconstruction were performed after a negative PET scan and ultrasound of the neck. The histopathology showed no residual tumor. Post-op, the patient did well .
Long-term follow-up was not possible, as the patient left for his native country.