A 3-year-old boy was brought to our emergency department due to a change in consciousness following a seizure attack. A physical examination revealed a short stature, low body weight, spinal dysraphism, and intellectual disability. He was admitted for acute and chronic subdural haemorrhage, pneumothorax and multiple rib fractures. The boy was claimed to have suffered head trauma at home, and his mother stated that he had longstanding poor vision. An ophthalmologist was consulted for the possibility of injury to the eyes.
The child had peculiar facial features with a depressed nasal tip, low-set deformed ears, and micrognathia. The external ophthalmic examination revealed arched eyebrows, epicanthus, ptosis, prominent eyelashes, long palpebral fissures, and eversion of the lateral portion of the lower eyelids in both eyes. In addition, microphthalmia in the right eye was noted (Figure A). The child had bilateral horizontal nystagmus and esotropia with limitation of abduction of 30 to 40% in the left eye. The visual acuity was no light perception in the right eye and counting finger(s) in the left eye. An examination under anaesthesia revealed a normal cornea in the left eye but a microcornea in the right eye. The anterior chamber and lens were normal in both eyes. Iris and optic disc coloboma were discovered in the right eye (Figure B). In addition, retinal and choroidal coloboma in both eyes and an elevated optic disc without central cupping in the left eye were found (Figure C). There was no evidence of retinal or vitreous haemorrhage. Computed tomography of the orbit showed isodense retrobulbar bulging cystic masses in both eyes, which were likely related to the colobomatous defect. In addition, colobomatous microphthalmia in the right eye was discovered. No orbital fracture or intraorbital haemorrhage was found (Figure D). A diagnosis of shaken baby syndrome was excluded based on these findings.
A detailed review of the literature illustrates that various ophthalmic abnormalities have been associated with Kabuki syndrome. In the present case, there was neither a history of consanguinity in the parents nor peculiar faces in other family members. Further genetic study revealed that the patient had a normal 46XY chromosome pattern but an MLL2 gene mutation.