A 3-month-old female infant was admitted to our outpatient clinic on April 8, 2014 with parents’ complaints of bilateral white cloudiness at the pupillary zone perceivedd 1 month after birth. Preoperative ophthalmic examinations revealed complete bilateral lens opacification with clear corneas and anterior chambers. Since the infant did not cooperate with further examination of the posterior segment, we conducted B-scan ultrasonography of both eyes to screen abnormalities other than lens opacification, which showed negative results. Hence, she was diagnosed with bilateral congenital cataracts and underwent bilateral lensectomy, posterior capsulectomy and anterior vitrectomy under general anesthesia on April 9, 2014. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was OU 12 mmHg with bilateral corneal diameter of 10 mm measured before the corneal incision was made. Intraoperative examination and postoperative B-scan ultrasonography showed negative results of posterior segment stuctures. Therefore, the patient was discharged after an uneventful postoperative course.
However, 6 months later, the infant was suspected to have bilateral developmental glaucoma with a mild enlargement of the corneal diameter, by a local hospital. She was then referred to our hospital again. The outpatient fundus examination revealed enlarged bilateral cupping with a cup-to-disc (C/D) ratio of 0.8 OU. IOP measured by schiotz tonometer was OD 19 mmHg and OS 26 mmHg on October 17, 2014, and OD 27 mmHg and OS 19 mmHg on October 21, 2014. The patient was then admitted to our inpatient department with the tentative diagnosis of bilateral developmental glaucoma. Ophthalmic examination showed IOP OD 52 mmHg and OS 20 mmHg (October 30, 2014; schiotz tonometer), mild opacification of the superior cornea in the right eye, clear cornea of the left eye, clear bilateral anterior chamber and visual axis zone. No retinal detachment was found with B-scan ultrasonography, and A scan showed axial lengths of OD 23.43 mm and OS 20.75 mm. The patient was scheduled to receive bilateral trabeculotomy on October 31, 2014. Her intraoperative examination under general anesthesia showed IOP OD 35.8 mmHg and OS 20.6 mmHg (schiotz tonometer), superior opacification of the cornea in the right eye with a diameter of 11 mm and a clear cornea in the left eye with a diameter of 10.5 mm, clear bilateral anterior chambers, and increased C/D ratio of OD 0.9-1.0 and OS 0.8-0.9. Gonioscopy examination showed almost overall angle closure and no detection of trabecular meshwork in both eyes, except that the superior section in the right eye was vague due to the cornea opacification. Intraoperative ultrasound biomicroscopy detected bilateral shallow anterior chambers of OD 1.75 mm and OS 1.95 mm in depth with the pupil diameter of OD 2.15 mm and OS 2.07 mm, absence of the lens with a small amount of residual cortex out of the pupillary zone, and iris bombé with pupillary obstruction by vitreous herniation in both eyes (right eye in Fig. - and left eye in Fig. -). Middle-anterior positioned iris insertion, mildly extensive and anteriorly rotated ciliary process, and 360° of peripheral anterior synechiae (PAS) and iris-trabecular meshwork contact were also observed in both eyes with UBM. Therefore, we altered the surgical plan to anterior vitrectomy and goniosynechialysis. The postoperative IOP was OU 16 mmHg. The infant was administered TobraDex Eye Drops (Alcon Laboratories, Inc., Fort Worth, TX, USA) TID OU and 1 % pilocarpine (Bausch & Lomb Freda, Shandong, China) BID OU. One week after the surgery, her IOP was OD 15 mmHg and OS 16 mmHg. The whole changes of bilateral intraocular pressures in this case was shown Fig. .
During the one-year follow-up in our medical centre after surgery, the infant showed no recurrent hypertension in the right eye. The intraocular pressure in the right eye maintained between 14 to 16 mmHg using TonoPen XL tonometer (Medtronic Ophthalmics, MN, USA) after oral administration of chloralhydrate.