A 31 yr-old woman with complaints of massive abdominal distention and respiratory distress was referred to the gynecology and oncology department of an academic hospital, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences in Aug 2017. In past medical history, she mentioned a secondary infertility for four yrs and had one child aged eight yrs. The patient was candidate for In Vitro Fertilization (IVF) protocol due to tubal factors. In the first cycle of ovarian stimulation, metformin and Gonal-f 75 IU for six days were prescribed and then continued for two days. The cycle was cancelled due to poor response after the second month from this protocol. She suffered from gradual abdominal distention.
Despite the failure of IVF, she was under the outpatient care and supportive treatment with possible diagnosis of hyperstimulation syndrome. Therefore, antagonist GnRH was prescribed for two days. At the next delayed month visit, because of persistent symptoms with the probability of hyperthyroidism, she received gonadotropin hormone agonist (Decapeptyl). She was re-evaluated due to unresponsive to treatment within this period.
Trans-abdominal and transvaginal ultrasonography were performed that showed multiple multiloculated cystic masses with predominantly solid components in both adnexa. The results of cross-sectional CT-scan and magnetic resonance imaging suggested the ovarian neoplasm. Also, massive peritoneal and pleural effusion was detected . In this time, 4 months after management of hyperstimulation syndrome, due to persistent large ovarian mass and increased tumor marker inhibin more than 3000 pg/mL, she was referred to our oncology department. Physical examination demonstrated enlarged masses extended up to hypogastric region which resembled 36 wks of pregnancy.
Exploratory laparotomy was performed that showed massive ascites fluid and multi solid cystic masses in both ovaries extended up to the Xiphoid. Complete resection of the tumor was done. Pathology report of frozen section was unable to confirm the malignancy. But, permanent histology indicated the tumor cells with round-to-ovoid nuclei and eosinophilic or vacuolated cytoplasm or microfollicular and trabecular. Moreover, Call-Exner bodies were observed in most areas which were compatible with juvenile granulosa cell tumors. A positive immunohistochemical staining for inhibin was the key point of this diagnostic feature .
So, surgical staging surgery and optimal cytoreductive surgery without fertility preserving were done. At this stage, although pelvic and abdominal cavity appeared normal without any residual disease in the first surgery, one month later in the second surgery, we unpredictably encountered malignant tumor even in the omentum (stage IIIc of disease); so complete cytoreductive surgery was again performed. Then, three cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy with bleomycin, etoposide, and cisplatin (BEP) were prescribed. Unfortunately, she experienced metastatic diseases in pelvic and abdomen in less than six months, and currently is receiving the second line chemotherapy. Now the patient is under follow-up.
An informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images.