A 49-year-old Saudi man consulted for an abnormal sensation of fullness in the left ear and progressive hearing loss without discharge. The patient had a history of hearing loss in the same left ear more than 20 years ago and was diagnosed as otitis media with effusion (OME). The patient had undergone left ear myringotomy and insertion of ventilating tubes twice for the treatment of OME. Four years ago this patient also received radiotherapy for the treatment of basal cell carcinoma of the cheek.
The otologic examination of left ear showed polypoidal mass in the posterior wall of the left external auditory canal that occluded the tympanic membrane . The facial nerve function was normal. Audiometric evaluation showed moderate conductive hearing loss. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the temporal bones revealed an irregular soft tissue lesion in the inner part of the left external auditory canal just lateral to the tympanic membrane. No bony erosive changes were detected in the external auditory canal. The left mastoid air cells were opacified. A soft tissue density mass occupied the left middle ear cavity implicating the Prussak’s space, epitympanum, mesotympanum and hypotympanum. The mastoid ad antrum and mastoid antrum were also opacified by the soft tissue lesion. However, no evidence of erosive changes was found in the scutum or ossicular chain. The patient underwent excision of the left middle ear mass including the radical mastoidectomy due to extensive nature of tumor and to avoid future recurrence.
Microscopic examination of excised tumor revealed the presence of cuboidal and plasmacytoid cells arranged in solid sheets and in a trabecular patterns . Focal areas showed infiltrative pattern. The immunocytochemistry was positive for immunostains pancytokeratin (CKAE1/3), neuroendocrine markers including synaptophysin and chromogranin . However, they were negative for other tumor marker immunostains such as desmin, S100 Proteins, cytokeratin 20 (CK20), cytokeratin 7 (CK7), thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1) and tumor protein (P63) without any atypical cells . Based on histological and immunohistochemical findings diagnosis of neuroendocrine adenoma of the middle ear was confirmed. The post-operative period of 10 months was uneventful with no sign of recurrence.