A 63-year-old female patient developed bronchial asthma at approximately 5 years of age. Her asthma did not spontaneously resolve and she subsequently suffered from regular asthma attacks. Specific IgE testing was positive for house dust, Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus, Chironomid midges, and negative for Aspergillus fumigatus, Candida albicans, Penicillium notatum and other common allergens. Despite the treatment with the combination of budesonide 1280 μg and formoterol 36 μg per day, a leukotriene receptor antagonist, and low-dose theophylline, she experienced exacerbations several times. The asthma control test (ACT) score was 18, and %FVC 86.7%, FEV1.0 0.88 mL, %FEV1 46.1% at 2 month before omalizumab therapy which initiated the year at in September 2013. Table presents the term-course of her clinical data. She has a height of 157 cm and a weight of 66 kg, and her serum total IgE level was 580 IU/mL. Based on the omalizumab dose table, she was started on a biweekly administration of 375 mg omalizumab. At week 16, we conducted an evaluation to assess whether the drug should be continued. We observed an improvement in the patient’s subjective symptoms and morning peak expiratory flow levels. The level of airway obstruction had improved according to the respiratory function tests, and because there were no exacerbations within 16 weeks, we decided to continue omalizumab administration. Because there were no clear aggravations, we continued treatment with omalizumab at the same dose for 36 months. We measured her serum free IgE levels at 2, 4, 8, and 26 weeks after initiating omalizumab and found that the serum free IgE levels were extremely low at 72.8, 40.50, 18.1, and 11.3 ng/dL, respectively . Because her symptoms had stabilized after initiating omalizumab with no exacerbations, she inquired whether it was possible to reduce the frequency of administration from once every 2 weeks to once every 4 weeks. Her ACT scores in the past 6 months were 23–25, her morning peak expiratory flow was stable, and there were no exacerbations in the past year; hence, we accepted her request and reduced the frequency of administration from biweekly to monthly without changing the dose of 375 mg omalizumab per administration beginning from August 2016. Therefore, the dosage was reduced by half. The serum free IgE trough level transiently increased to 129.3 ng/mL at 4 weeks after reducing the dosage; however, thereafter, the serum free IgE level decreased to 93.6 ng/mL within 4 weeks and gradually to 20.6 ng/mL, which is well below the desired level, 30 ng/mL . She experienced no exacerbations during this period, and her ACT score remained at 25. FEV1 measured via pulmonary function testing almost unchanged after reduction of omalizumab . Moreover, her asthma was controlled over the 9-month period since the dosage was reduced.