The patient was a 63-year-old man who had neither microscopic nor macroscopic hematuria at his previous medical checkup. There was no apparent family history of kidney disease. His leukocyte and platelet counts had begun to decrease 6 years ago, and he was diagnosed with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) by bone marrow aspiration. He started treatment for anemia with blood transfusion 2 years ago. He was not on any antiplatelet or anticoagulant medications and his serum creatinine (Cr) level was 0.74 mg/dL 9 months previously. He started taking the oral iron chelator Deferasirox at 125 mg due to post-transfusion iron overload 6 months ago. The dosage was then increased to 1000 mg 3 months ago. When the serum Cr level increased, the Deferasirox dosage was reduced to 500 mg 3 weeks before hospitalization. Although the serum Cr level decreased once, he developed a fever and macroscopic hematuria 1 week before hospitalization. The serum Cr level increased again, and Deferasirox was stopped 4 days before hospitalization. He was admitted urgently to our hospital for the evaluation of acute kidney injury and macroscopic hematuria.
On admission, his body temperature was 36.7 °C, and his heart rate was 81 per minute. His blood pressure was 125/64 mmHg. A physical examination revealed no abnormalities except for anemic palpebral conjunctiva. The laboratory values at the time of hospitalization are shown in Table . Pancytopenia was noted, and the coagulation values were within the respective normal ranges. The blood urea nitrogen and serum Cr levels were 42.0 and 3.97 mg/dL, respectively. The serum ferritin level was high at 14230 ng/mL. A urinalysis showed proteinuria and hematuria, and a urinary sediment analysis revealed more than 100 dysmorphic red blood cells (RBCs) per high-power field with epithelial casts, granular casts, and RBC casts. The urinary protein-to-creatinine ratio was 1.20 g/gCr. Urinary N-acetyl-β-D-glucosaminidase and β2 microglobulin values were 18.4 g/gCr and 2757 μg/L, respectively. The myeloperoxidase-antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (MPO-ANCA), proteinase-3-ANCA, anti-glomerular basement membrane (GBM) antibody, antinuclear antibody, and anti-streptolysin O were all negative.
After hospitalization, the patient was treated with intravenous administration of 500 mg of methylprednisolone for 3 consecutive days, followed by 30 mg of prednisolone per day orally. Hemodialysis therapy was initiated due to oliguria and discontinued after 10 days because his urine volume recovered. A kidney biopsy was performed on the eighth day of admission.
One of 11 glomeruli was globally sclerotic. None of glomeruli showed crescentic formation or adhesion. Although there were no major abnormalities in the glomeruli (left-upper panel, Fig. a), the leakage of RBCs into the Bowman’s space was observed (inset of left-upper panel, Fig. a). An electron micrograph showed leakage of red blood cells, two of which were dysmorphic, into Bowman’s space (right-upper panel, Fig. a). Interstitial fibrosis with acute tubular necrosis were observed in approximately 40% of the total area (lower panel, Fig. a). Erythrocyte cast formation was observed in the tubular lumen, which was associated with tubular simplification . There were positive blue signals both in glomerular cells and Bowman’s capsular epithelial cells on Berlin blue staining, which was reflected glomerular hemorrhaging (left-upper panel, Fig. a). The positive blue signals were prominent in the tubular cells (right-upper panel, Fig. a). There were no apparent positive blue signals in the normal human kidney sections, which were purchased from Zyagen (HP-901, CA, USA) (lower panels, Fig. a). There was no significant staining for immunoglobulin G (IgG), IgA, IgM, complement 3 (C3), C1q, or fibrinogen.
Since there were no signs of rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis on a kidney biopsy, the amount of prednisolone after the second round of the intravenous administration of 500 mg of methylprednisolone for 3 consecutive days was decreased. Although the macroscopic hematuria disappeared at 2 weeks after admission, the serum Cr level was 1.92 mg/dL at the time of discharge and was unchanged after 2 months. The results of the electron microscopic study revealed thinning of the GBM without any immune complexes . The thickness of the average GBM was 199 ± 47 nm, which was consistent with TBMD. Therefore, a genomic sequence analysis of the COL4A3 and COL4A4 genes was performed by Sanger sequencing method after purifying the polymerase chain reaction products of exons, and five and six missense mutations were found in COL4A3 and COL4A4, respectively .