A 54-year old male, brain dead donor was evaluated and assigned to our centre for organ donation by the North Italian Transplant program (NITp), our network for organ sharing. The donor was recovering in our hospital post-LVAD implantation (HeartWare®, HeartWare International, Inc., USA) as a bridge to heart transplantation for dilated ischemic cardiomyopathy .
Cardiac catheterization, performed before the VAD implantation, showed pulmonary hypertension with a mean pulmonary arterial pressure of 42 mmHg, a wedge pressure of 38 mmHg, and normal arteriolar resistance (1.2 HRU).
The cardiac procedure was performed through left anterior thoracotomy with insertion of outflow cannula in the left axillary artery. The post-operative course was uneventful for 16 days when a subarachnoid haemorrhage occurred causing brain death.
The donor was intubated 3 days prior the retrieval and the PaO2/FiO2 ratio (FiO2 100%) at the moment of the call was 511 mmHg. The chest x-ray showed reduced bilateral lung expansion, bronchoscopy was normal, without signs of current infection or aspiration. Eurotransplant donor score was 10.
After a median sternotomy, we proceeded with special care to the inspection of thoracic organs. At the opening of the left pleura, we observed the presence of strong adhesions between the left lung and the outflow cannula. Gentle and careful preparation was required to avoid lung injuries and bleeding complication. At the inspection, the donor lungs did not present signs of infiltrations with a slight degree of edema in the lower lobes, the PaO2/FiO2 ratio was 583 mmHg (FiO2100%, PEEP: 5 cm H20, Tidal Volume: 6 ml/Kg/min) and, therefore, we start to prepare the operative room for transplantation.
Abdominal procedures for liver and kidneys retrieval started but during these manoeuvres, several episodes of severe hypotension occurred, poorly responsive to drugs with risk of sudden right ventricular failure. During a new inspection, lung appeared heavier in comparison to before, mainly due to a small increase of lung edema. In addition, the anesthesiologist was in doubt about the risks of new hypotensive episodes in the donor.
Therefore, considering the risk of organ hypoperfusion and potential lung deterioration from RV failure, we decided to proceed immediately to retrieval with using the OCS lung to perform ex-vivo assessment of these lung and also to minimize donor lung ischemia since the patient was not yet in the operative room.
The OCS was prepped and primed simultaneously with the surgical procurement of the donor lungs in around 20 min. Following injection of heparin, pulmonary cannulation and aortic cross-clamping, the LVAD was deactivated by cutting the driveline. Perfusion with 5 l of Celsior® (4 l anterogradely supplemented with 50 mg nytroglicerine and 1 l retrogradely) and explantation of the double lung block followed standard protocols. After 53 min of instrumentation time, the lungs were connected to OCS Lung starting normothermic perfusion. Concurrently recipient preparation was interrupted waiting for a more extensive evaluation of lungs function through OCS device.
After 340 min of OCS Lung running time, arterial blood gas (PaO2/FiO2 from 476 mmHg to 525 mmHg) analysis, visual and bronchoscopic evaluation, arterial pulmonary pressure (mean value 11 mmHg), pulmonary and airway resistance improved and were satisfactory. In addition, a lung-x-ray on the device was performed, excluding any abnormalities .
At this point, the anaesthesiological preparation of recipient restarted and lungs were prepared for implantation. The recipient was a 61 year-old male affected by idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis without pulmonary hypertension.
Bilateral lung transplantation was performed via clamshell incision for the presence of pleural adhesions; no extra corporeal membrane oxygenation was needed. Total cold ischemic time was 183 min for the right lung and 292 min for the left side.
In Intensive Care Unit, the severity of primary graft dysfunction (PGD) was calculated according to International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation (ISHLT) recommendations and resulted respectively 3,2,2,0 at T-0, T24, T48 and T72.
The patient was extubated on day 3 and discharged on postoperative day 33 with an uneventful post-operative course.
Scheduled trans-bronchial biopsy performed before discharge resulted positive for mild acute cellular rejection without bronchiolar involvement (grade A2B0) . The patient was treated with high-dose intravenous steroid and discharged from the hospital with a satisfactory chest X-ray and arterial blood gas exchange.
To date, after 12 months follow-up, the patient is alive with satisfactory condition, without sign of acute rejection at the trans-bronchial biopsies.