A 53-year-old male with a past history of vague pain along his left mandible was referred to the department of Maxillofacial and Plastic Surgery at Charles Nicolle Hospital.
Six months previously he had undergone the extraction of the sixth lower left tooth.
He then began noting pain in the vicinity of the previous extraction site and left lower lip numbness developed.
The panoramic radiograph showed a large radiolucent lesion with irregular margins in the left part of the mandible .
This was thought to be “osteomyelitis” or an”abscess” and he was treated with a course of antibiotics.
Then, the patient presented a gradually swelling on the left mandibular in molar area, with paresthesia of the ipsilateral lower lip.
Extraoral examination showed a left mandibular body swelling, that measured 3*3 cm, expanding both laterally and inferiorly with no lymphadenopathy.
The intraoral examination showed the presence of an expansive lesion of the mandible with normal appearing overlying mucosa. It was tender and painful.
At the time of presentation, the patient did not report any systemic symptoms and had no fever, weight loss, or dysphagia.
Computed tomography (CT) of the head and neck performed with i.v. ioded medium showed a wide osteolytic area in the left part of the mandible (, ); no presence of latero-cervical lymph node lesions was noted.
Incisional biopsy was done and showed dense infiltration of cells with small round hyper chromatic nucleolus and scant cytoplasm resembled lymphocyte .
Immunohistochemical (IHC) examination revealed CD20 and PanB positive cells . This finding confirmed a B-Cell origin for this monomorphic proliferation.
The total body CT scan with i.v.ioded medium and bone marrow aspiration biopsy confirmed the mandible as the only localisation of the pathology. He therefore was categorized as stage IAE, primary mandibular NHL.
The patient refuses all treatment by radio and chemotherapy. He has remained free of disease 10 months after surgery. A follow-up panoramic radiograph showed new bone formation after successful treatment.