A 53-year-old woman, with a history of hypertension and depression, was transferred from a referring hospital with a presentation of sudden headache and loss of consciousness with an initial Glasgow Coma Scale (GSW) score between 4 and 6, requiring urgent intubation. The initial cerebral computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a Modified Fisher scale grade 4 SAH with moderate intraventricular hemorrhage and early signs suggestive of hydrocephalus. Upon arrival, a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) diversion with an external ventricular drain was performed due to the initial altered level of consciousness with new-onset hydrocephalus. Later the same day, she successfully underwent balloon-assisted coil embolization of a ruptured 6 mm posterior communicating artery aneurysm, with no immediate angiographic evidence of complications. Prophylactic nimodipine was initiated and the patient underwent serial transcranial doppler ultrasonography every 48 h as recommended for the prevention of DCI. Two days later, following a rapid improvement of her neurological status, the patient was successfully extubated.
On the third day of ICU admission, the urine output started to progressively increase reaching 4 L in a 24-h period, and was initially compensated with administration of 0.9% NaCl IV fluid. Later that day, she presented with a sudden decrease in consciousness, new-onset left ptosis, and lip drooping. An urgent CT scan and CT angiogram showed moderate vasospasm at the level of the anterior cerebral arteries and the posterior right cerebral artery. The patient’s DCI was therefore managed by IV crystalloid fluids to compensate for the increased urine output (see Day #3 and #4, Fig. ). In the face of diagnostic uncertainty, a trial of 2 g of IV desmopressin to rule out central diabetes insipidus only showed mitigated results. The urine osmolality effectively increased from 180 to 419 mmol/L (following desmopressin and concomitant crystalloid administration) suggesting initially a central diabetes insipidus (two times increase in osmolality and > 300 mmol/L). However, despite desmopressin, polyuria persisted reaching up to 2L in the next 3 h of administration, making the clinical presentation in favor of a mixed component of partial central diabetes insipidus and an ongoing cerebral salt wasting. No hypotension episode was reported but the patient had a low central venous pressure (CVP) at that time and a fluctuating neurologic status partially responding to IV fluid administration. Then, despite the absence of associated hyponatremia or clear hypovolemia, the polyuria was attributed to an ongoing cerebral salt wasting phenomenon and was therefore compensated with large volume of isotonic fluid replacement. To maintain the desired cerebral perfusion pressure to treat the active DCI, a slightly positive fluid balance was achieved and aminergic support was initiated to reach a mean arterial pressure of ~ 115 mm Hg. Despite this treatment, her neurologic status fluctuated greatly over the next 48 h. A cerebral angiography showed ongoing severe distal vasospasm. Intra-arterial milrinone was locally injected, and an intravenous perfusion of milrinone was subsequently initiated.
On the following days, as shown in Fig. , the patient’s polyuria worsened progressively, reaching up to 40 L on day 13. To keep up with the excessive urinary losses, the patient’s fluid replacement therapy had to be adjusted every hour, reaching up to 1.3 L of crystalloid per hour, using Ringer ‘s lactate and 0.9% NaCl in combination to minimize hyperchloremia and electrolyte abnormalities. The patient demonstrated fluctuating neurological deteriorations in the form of diplopia and altered mental status when she was in negative fluid balance, limiting the capacity to reduce the cerebral perfusion pressure targeted. Additionally, her serum urea concentration progressively decreased to nearly indetectable levels on day 9. At that time, renal medullary washout induced by severe polyuria was hypothesized.
As shown in Fig. , various interventions were progressively initiated: 1) to reduce the glomerular filtration rate with high doses of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID)(naproxen up to 500 mg thrice daily followed by indomethacin 100 mg thrice daily); 2) to increase the distal sodium reabsorption with fludrocortisone (0.4 mg twice daily) and 3) aiming to re-normalize the renal medulla gradient with oral urea administration (30 g four times a day) and supra-physiologic protein intake (high-protein meals with oral beneprotein). Eventually, as the medullary concentration gradient was reconstituted and the targeted arterial pressure reduced, the urine output gradually decreased to the physiological range at day 16. Medications were progressively weaned on the following days until no intravenous fluid was required to maintain euvolemia (day 18). The patient was successfully discharged from the ICU at day 21 with no signs of DCI or cerebral infarction on a later MRI and was discharged at home with physical rehabilitation services.