A 48-year-old otherwise apparently healthy Caucasian woman presented to our clinic complaining of headache, nausea and vomiting for 5 days. Physical examination and laboratory tests were within normal limits. She was diagnosed with tension headache and sinusitis and discharged on trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. The patient returned to the clinic 3 days later with resolution of her headache but continued vomiting, approximately twice per day. She was treated with an over-the-counter proton pump inhibitor for suspected gastroesophageal reflux.
Over the following week, she developed ataxia, diplopia and recurrence of her headache. She presented to the emergency department, at which time a T2-weighted magnetic resonance image (MRI) scan of the head showed increased signaling of the left temporal lobe, bilateral pontine areas, left peridentate nucleus and cervical spinal cord. These findings were thought to represent an acute demyelinating process. At this point, clinical suspicion for myasthenia gravis was high, and she was administered a trial of pyridostigmine without improvement.
During her hospitalization, she developed a blood pressure of 190/90 mmHg, a serum sodium level of 123 mEq/l, a glucose level of 176 mg/dl, and a white blood cell count of 12,800 cells/ml. Clinical examination during her stay showed progression of neurological symptoms with decreased sensorium, hallucinations, decreased attention span, and gait disturbance. A lumbar puncture showed increased opening pressure. Based on the radiographic, laboratory and clinical findings, a diagnosis of acute demyelinating encephalopathy was made; suspicions of infectious encephalitis, collagen vascular disease, and toxic encephalitis were high. She received plasmapheresis without improvement.
A follow-up T2-weighted MRI was performed, which showed increasing enlargement of the bilateral pontine regions with hydrocephalus and mass effect on the fourth ventricle. Because of the absence of pathological enhancement of the pons, this was felt to be an aggressive demyelinating process or a low-grade glioma. The patient continued to deteriorate neurologically, became comatose and died approximately 4 weeks after admission.
At autopsy, the brain was edematous with a weight of 1375 g. The pons and medulla showed an infiltrative mass with extension into the cerebellum. Histological examination revealed a poorly differentiated infiltrative astrocytoma with nuclear pleomorphism, increased mitotic activity and focal necrosis . Staining for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and MIB-1 were diffusely positive. The tumor microscopically extended into the middle cerebellar peduncles and the upper cervical spinal cord.