A 27-year-old Greek man, with an unremarkable past medical history except a reported penicillin allergy, was admitted to our department, referred from a regional hospital, for investigation of fever of three months’ duration associated with mesenteric lymphadenopathy, leukocytosis (25.000/mm3 with polymorphonuclear predominance) and increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) over 100mm/h. The patient, who reported no close animal contact, had been previously hospitalized twice in the referral hospital complaining of fever associated with rigors and right lower guardant abdominal pain. The performed diagnostic investigation had only shown mesenteric lymphadenopathy and the patient was conservatively treated with intravenous antibiotic therapy consisting of ciprofloxacin and metronidazole with temporal improvement, followed by relapse after a short time.
On admission, the patient’s temperature was 39°C, heart rate was 90bpm, respiratory rate was 16 breaths per minute, blood pressure was 120/80mmHg and oxygen saturation in room air was 97%. His physical examination was unremarkable except for abdominal tenderness in his right lower guardant without rebound tenderness. No hepatomegaly, splenomegaly or peripheral lymphadenopathy was detected.
An initial laboratory evaluation showed a white blood cell count of 22.3 × 109/L, with predominant neutrophils (80%), hematocrit 35%, hemoglobin 11.6g/dL (mean corpuscular volume = 82 and mean corpuscular hemoglobin = 26) and platelet count 51 × 109/L. Prothrombin and partial thromboplastin times were normal and d-dimers were slightly increased at 0.72μg/ml. The blood biochemistries, including serum angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) and protein electrophoresis were all normal. Serum C-reactive protein was increased at 17.3mg/dL, ESR at 80mm/h, fibrinogen at 851mg/dL and ferritin at 663mg/dL. Thyroid function tests were normal. Urine analysis and 24-hour urinary calcium and protein excretion were normal. Electrocardiogram, chest X-ray, echocardiogram and arterial blood gas were also normal. A detailed ophthalmologic examination including slit-lamp eye examination, fundoscopy, Rose Bengal test and Schirmer’s test was unrevealing.
An abdominal ultrasonography revealed enlarged mesenteric lymph nodes of 2.5cm diameter. Consequent thoracic and abdominal computed tomography (CT) scans confirmed the presence of mesenteric lymphadenopathy of 2.7cm maximum diameter with an hypodense center , without evidence of bowel inflammation or hepatosplenomegaly, with normal vascular perfusion of abdominal organs, absence of mediastinal lymphadenopathy, ascites, pleural or pericardial effusions.
All sets of blood cultures (at least six), urine and stool cultures and examination for ova and parasites were negative. Antibodies for hepatitis A, B, C, coxsackie, Enteric Cytopathic Human Orphan virus, herpes simplex virus, Epstein–Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, human immunodeficiency virus, human T-lymphotropic virus-1 and virus-2, Yersinia enterocolitica and Entamoeba histolytica, Bartonella henselae, Francisella tularensis, Leishmania donovani, Coxiella burnetii and Rickettsia conorii were negative. Wright and rapid plasma reagin tests were also negative, whereas the tuberculin skin test was positive (15mm).
The patient underwent upper and lower gastrointestinal tract endoscopies, enteroclysis and capsule endoscopy without evidence of inflammatory bowel disease, infective colitis or celiac disease. Examination of gastric fluid with Ziehl–Neelsen stain detected no acid-fast bacteria; a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) as well as culture for mycobacterium TB were negative. Small bowel (jejunal and ileal) and colonic biopsies presented findings of non-specific inflammatory reaction, the architecture of intestinal villi was preserved and mucosal periodic acid-Schiff stain for detection of Tropheryma whipplei was negative.
A full immunologic screening with rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibodies, antibodies to double-stranded DNA, anti-Sm, anti-Ro/SSA, anti-La/SSB, anti-RNP, anti-Jo-1, anti-Scl-70, anti-histones, anti-mitochondrial antibodies, anti-smooth muscle antibodies, cytoplasmic-antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA), perinuclear-ANCA, anti-transglutaminase, anti-cardiolipin, and lupus anticoagulant was negative. Serum complement and levels of immunoglobulins (Igs, IgA, IgG, IgM, IgE, IgD) were normal. The results of genetic testing for mutation of the familial Mediterranean fever gene (Μ694V, V726A, M694I, M680I, and E148Q) were negative. In addition, the results of a full tumor marker profile were also normal.
The patient underwent laparotomy with mesenteric lymph node excision for microbiological and histological examination. Histology revealed a granulomatous lymphadenitis with central suppurative necrosis . Gram, Giemsa, Ziehl–Neelsen and Grocott methenamine silver stains for detection of common bacteria, mycobacteria and fungi were all negative. Immunohistochemical studies for lymphoproliferative disease were unrevealing. In addition, the patient’s lymph node was examined with a PCR and cultures for mycobacterium TB, atypical mycobacteria (Mycobacterium africanum I and/or II, M. microti, M. carnetti, M. bovis, and M. avium complex), fungi and Tropheryma whipplei without detection of any pathogen. A gastrocnemius muscle biopsy was also performed without identification of sarcoid granulomata.
The hematological work-up in the investigation of the patient included microscopic examination of peripheral blood film which showed no evidence of lymphoproliferative disorders. A bone marrow biopsy and immunophenotypic analysis revealed no pathologic findings. A peripheral blood immunophenotypic analysis revealed lymphopenia due to simultaneous decrease of B-, T- and NK-cells. Serum beta-2-microglobulin levels were within normal limits.
After an extensive diagnostic work-up no definite diagnosis was available for our patient. During hospitalization the patient was empirically treated with combined antimicrobial therapy that consisted of ciprofloxacin and metronidazole without response, while episodic disease flares characterized by a systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) and spikes of increased markers of inflammation were recorded. Sporadically, fever spikes were associated with a transient maculopapular skin rash in his upper extremities. Of note, the patient experienced a dramatic clinical improvement after administration of corticosteroids for a short time; the corticosteroids were administered due to his history of allergy in order to administer intravenous contrast media for CT performance. This temporal improvement was shortly followed by disease relapse. Based on the therapeutic criterion of response to corticosteroids and taking into consideration the significantly positive tuberculin skin test in conjunction with the histology of the mesenteric lymph node, which showed a granulomatous necrotizing lymphadenitis with central suppuration, we decided to administer a combination empiric therapy. The therapy consisted of corticosteroids (methylprednisolone 16mg) and anti-TB drugs (isoniazide 150mg/d, pyrazinamide 30mg/kg, ethambutol 20mg/kg and moxifloxacin 400mg/d). Rifampicin 300mg/d, which was included in our initial scheme, was later discontinued due to induction of rifampicin-associated pancreatitis. He received the anti-TB therapy for one year and discontinued corticosteroids after a very slow tapering at 11 months. During this period the patient was asymptomatic with normal values of inflammatory markers and he had a total resolution of mesenteric lymphadenopathy at abdominal CT re-examination on completion of the anti-TB therapy. Unfortunately, 20 days after stopping the corticosteroids the disease relapsed, and the patient had fever, abdominal pain, increased markers of inflammation and reappearance of mesenteric lymphadenopathy on abdominal MRI. The patient’s symptoms were controlled with 16mg methylprednisolone; however, while attempting to taper the methylprednisolone to 12mg after about two months of treatment, his symptoms relapsed forcing us to reinstitute a higher corticosteroid dose. Our second effort to gradually reduce the corticosteroid dose, after control of the patient’s symptoms and total remission of mesenteric lymphadenopathy on abdominal MRI, led to disease relapse when the dose of methylprednisolone was reduced to 12mg/day. Disease relapse was controlled by increasing methylprednisolone dose to 16mg, while additional immunomodulatory drugs (anakinra and methotrexate) were added in order to prevent disease relapse during methylprednisolone tapering. The patient is currently treated with 4mg of methylprednisolone, 100mg of anakinra daily and methotrexate 7.5mg for two consecutive days per week and has experienced full disease remission for six months.