A 39-year-old woman presented with a 3-mo history of a mass located in the right submandibular area.
The mass in the right submandibular lymph node had rapidly grown over the past 2 wk. Furthermore, it was accompanied by radiating pain in the right maxillary sinus region. The symptoms of the patient were not relieved despite taking anti-inflammatory drugs for 10 d. The results of previous examinations were as follows: Ultrasound examination revealed an enlarged lymph node at level II of the right-side lymph node; nasal endoscopy results were unremarkable; and fine needle aspiration cytology of the metastatic lymph node demonstrated malignant cells with infection but with no obvious structure to determine the tissue source.
She had a history of chronic hepatitis for 12 years.
The patient’s medical history and family history were unremarkable.
Physical examination revealed a 2.5 cm × 3 cm-sized lymphadenopathy of the right submandibular lymph nodes, and the mass was tender, hard, and had poor mobility.
Laboratory tests showed the following results: Urine analysis of blood: BLD (+-); Percentage of monocytes: 10.8%; liver and kidney function normal; hepatitis B surface antigen and hepatitis B core antibody were positive.
Contrast-enhanced CT revealed an enhancing ill-defined soft tissue mass in the right infratemporal region . Positron emission tomography/CT revealed an increased uptake of fluorodeoxyglucose in the right infratemporal fossa and at level II of the right-side lymph node .
Hematoxylin-eosin staining of the specimen revealed that the tumor majorly comprised two types of lesional cells: Epidermoid and intermediate cells . In the tumor stroma, nests of squamous cell infiltration, cell heteromorphism, and mitotic figures were obvious, and focal necrosis was also observed, which was indicative of a high-grade MEC. Immunohistochemistry was performed for further pathological diagnosis, and the result revealed cytokeratin 7 (+), cytokeratin 5/6 (partial, +), cytokeratin 18 (partial, +), P40 (partial, +), and negative for estrogen and androgen receptors and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2/neu protein .