In October 1983, a 16 year old male basketball player presented to another hospital with a 1 month history of paresthesiae of the index and long finger of the right hand. The patient was diagnosed with tendinopathy of the wrist extensor tendons, and managed for 2 months with physiotherapy, anti-inflammatory drugs and rest. In January 1984, the young athlete presented to the emergency room of our hospital with persistent neck pain after twisting his neck during a basketball game. His initial examination showed contracture of the cervical paravertebral muscles. Neurological examination was unrewarding. Radiographs showed an osteolytic area of the sixth vertebra of the cervical spine (C6) . Myelograms showed compression of the cord. A CT scan showed a mass involving the right side of the vertebra including the body, the lamina, and the lateral mass with its joint. The patient was immobilized in a halo cast, and referred to the senior author (V.D.), who performed a surgical resection of the mass through a staged anterior and posterior approach.
The first stage was performed with a posterior approach with the patient prone. At surgery, the tumour was removed posteriorly. The tumour involved the right side of the vertebra including the body, the lamina, and the lateral mass of C6. An intra-operative biopsy was performed, and a histopathological diagnosis of osteosarcoma was formulated.
A wide resection of the mass was performed. A Roy Camille plate was used on the left side, which was free of tumour. A non-instrumented fusion was obtained on the right side with a bony bar harvested from the ipsilateral iliac crest. The bar was secured by screws onto the lateral articular masses of C4 and T1.
Two weeks after the first procedure, the patient underwent a further operation through an anterior approach for complete removal of the neoplasm and fusion. A complete excision of the anterior portion of the vertebral body was performed. After wide resection, the body was reconstructed anteriorly with an iliac crest autograft and a plate with screws .
The patient was immobilized in a Halo cast for 4 months, followed by a SOMI (Sternal Occipital Mandibular Immobilizer) brace for 1 year. After surgery, the patient underwent radiotherapy (40 applications). Recovery was uneventful, and the patient returned to his activities of daily living, and qualified as a surveyor. He returned to play competitive basketball in 1989 for 2 seasons.
In 1993, the patient started to complain of mild dysphagia, but all the physicians attributed this to post-surgery and post-irradiation adherences.
In July 1998, the patient underwent fluoroscopy for the diagnosis of the dysphagia, showing the second screw of the anterior plate being partially extruded . One month later, in August 1998, the patient complained of complete inability to swallow. Radiographs showed the absence of the mobilized screw in the anterior plate , and the screw migrated in the colon . The patient underwent a colonoscopy, but the endoscopist was not able to remove the screw. Two days after the colonoscopy, the patient eliminated spontaneously the screw through the intestinal tract.
The patient underwent a first operation for removal of metal work through the same right pre-sternocleidomatoid approach in another hospital. During the operation, removal of the plate was not possible for the presence of much post-surgery and post-irradiation fibrosis.
In February 2001, the patient underwent a second operation for surgical removal of metal work through a wide U approach with an ear, nose, and throat surgeon in the same hospital, but it was only possible to remove 1 screw . During surgery, a tracheostomy was performed, and closed after 2 weeks.
The patient continued to complain of dysphagia for 1 year, and he lost 15 Kg. In January 2001, the patient returned to the senior author, weighing 45 Kg. The patient underwent total parenteral nutrition for 5 months, and returned to his normal weight of 60 Kg.
On July 1st 2001, the patient underwent a third operation, this time performed by the senior author, with another ear, nose, and throat surgeon to tackle any intra-operative oesophageal injury. During the operation, no signs of oesophageal perforation became evident. At surgery, much fibrosis was found. To reach the vertebral plane, MESNA (sodium 2-mercaptoethanesulfonate) (Uromitexan, Bristol) was intra-operatively applied on the fibrous tissue to ease tissue dissection. A modified dissector was used to release the drug locally . Duration of local application was about 20–30 s; repeated applications were performed during surgery. Average volume of agent used was about 10cm3.
Removal of the plate proceeded uneventfully, and a suction drain was left in situ after the procedure. The patient was immobilized in a Philadelphia collar for 2 months. Post-operative recovery was uncomplicated.
At 24 year from the first operation, the patient is symptom free. When last reviewed in October 2008 , he had no disability, scoring 0 on the Neck Disability Index .