A 27-year-old woman with no significant medical history, presented with progressive exertional dyspnoea related to congestive cardiac failure. On cardiovascular examination, a pansystolic murmur and diastolic cardiac murmur with a point maximal impulse at 5th left intercostal space in midclavicular line were noted. Chest radiography showed cardiomegaly and pulmonary congestion with a cardiothoracic ratio of 53%. An electrocardiogram demonstrated a sinus rhythm. Transthoracic and transoesophageal echocardiography revealed severe mitral stenosis and regurgitation, with typical rheumatic changes, such as doming of the anterior leaflet , shortening of the posterior leaflet, thickening of the bileaflets , fusion of the lateral and particularly the medial commissures, and an enlarged annulus. Mitral regurgitation was mainly caused by bileaflet coaptation error . The MV area and mean transmitral pressure gradient were 1.18 cm2 (normal range > 2 cm2) and 17.1 mmHg (normal range < 5 mmHg), respectively, assessed using the pressure half-time method . The size of the anterior and posterior leaflets at the lateral, middle, and medial positions were 24.6/17.5 mm, 25.6/15.2 mm, and 25.0/17.1 mm, respectively. The annulus diameter at the middle portion was 40 mm. The left atrium was severely dilated with an index of left atrial volume of 150 mL/m2 (normal range < 34 mL/m2), without thrombus. The left ventricular diastolic/systolic dimension and ejection fraction were 37/30 mm and 63%, respectively. The tricuspid regurgitation was trivial, with a pressure gradient of 44 mmHg (normal range < 25 mmHg).
The patient requested a minimally invasive approach without sternotomy for cosmetic reasons, and valve repair without the need for warfarin for fertility reasons. We therefore opted for robot-assisted MV repair using the da Vinci surgical system (Intuitive Surgical Inc., Sunnyvale, CA, USA), as she was eligible to undergo the minimally invasive approach in view of having normal healthy great arteries and adequate anterior mediastinal space, as assessed using systemic enhanced computed tomography.
The MV showed typical chronic rheumatic disease features, such as well-thickened and shortened valve leaflet tissue and commissural fusion , but fibrosis or fusion of the subvalvular apparatus was non-substantial. Moreover, calcium deposits were absent in the leaflets or commissures. Both leaflets were pliable. Fusions of the bilateral commissures were released, extending to the annulus . The incision was then extended along the annulus to detach the anterior leaflet from the annulus. The posterior leaflet was also detached from the annulus, keeping the commissural connection intact . An oval-shaped 0.6% of the glutaraldehyde-treated autologous pericardial patch (2 × 4 cm) was sutured to the native anterior annulus, and then to the native anterior leaflet approximately 7–8 mm apart from the commissure edge to obtain a generous mitral orifice. Another oval-shaped glutaraldehyde-treated autologous pericardial patch (1.5 × 3 cm) was sutured to the native posterior leaflet and the posterior annulus sequentially to fill the defect . Subsequently, a Tailor band (St. Jude Medical, St Paul, MN, USA) sized to 29 mm, which was determined by reference to the inter-trigone distance, was fixed to the posterior annulus by running sutures . Since the water test showed a competent MV, the left atrial incision was approximated and the cross-clamp was released after a de-airing manoeuvre. All incision and suturing of the autologous patch and atrial closure were completed with the da Vinci system. The console, cardiac arrest, cardiopulmonary bypass, and operation times were 150, 161, 230, and 335 min, respectively. Blood products were not administered perioperatively.
Transoesophageal echocardiography prior to chest closure showed a competent MV with a sufficient mitral orifice, without systolic anterior motion. Transthoracic echocardiography at 5 days post-surgery showed absent regurgitation , extended mitral both leaflets , and a mean mitral gradient of 7 mmHg . The patient was discharged on post-operative day 7. Currently, although moderate mitral stenosis is present, her New York Heart Association class is currently grade I with administration of neither diuretics nor other medications; complete resolution of cardiac symptoms was seen in the 4th post-operative month.