A 21-year-old pregnant woman without a significant medical history, was admitted to the local community hospital with lower abdominal pain at 36 weeks gestation in Sichuan, China. Her axillary temperature was 37.7 °C. Physical examination found that her labium majus pudendi was red and swollen, with moderate pain. White blood cell (WBC) count was 13.1 × 109/L. A female afebrile baby was born prematurely by cesarean section because of intrauterine distress. After the cesarean, the mother was treated intravenously with cefoperazone/sulbactam sodium 3.0 g in 100 mL saline twice a day and was discharged from hospital after 10 days . The neonate showed signs of asphyxia and meconium aspiration syndrome after birth and was transferred to a higher tier city hospital. Considering that the mother presented with signs of infection prior to delivery, the neonate’s WBC count was 26.7 × 109/L and C-reactive protein was 60.8 mg/L, neonatal sepsis was strongly suspected. The neonate was empirically treated with sodium penicillin of 260,000 units (around 100,000 units/kg/dose) and ceftazidime 134 mg (50 mg/kg/dose), both of which were administered intravenously every 12 h. Blood culture was performed when the neonate entered the hospital and L. monocytogenes was isolated and identified 4 days later. Lumbar puncture and cerebrospinal fluid culture were not performed, therefore neonatal meningitis cannot be excluded. After 13 days’ treatment, the neonate’s C-reactive protein level returned normal and blood culture was negative for L. monocytogenes. The neonate was then discharged from the hospital .
This listeriosis case was reported to the local Center for Disease Control and Prevention, and the following investigations were carried out. Blood and milk samples, vaginal fornix and pudenda swabs from the mother were collected and cultured for L. monocytogenes in the community hospital . L. monocytogenes was isolated from the vaginal fornix and pudenda swabs while blood culture and breast milk culture were negative. Culture for L. monocytogenes from stool samples from the mother was not performed. The patient, who had been discharged home, was followed-up at home 13 days after the delivery. Vaginal fornix and pudenda swabs were again collected from the mother and were positive for L. monocytogenes. An extensive source tracing of the L. monocytogenes infection was performed. A face-to-face interview was conducted to determine the mother’s food exposure history during the previous 1 month prior to the premature delivery. The mother had a history of consuming ice cream, ready-to-eat (RTE) meat and salads. Food and environmental samples from her home (30 samples including the fridge food and fridge surface swabs, kitchen and bathroom environmental swabs), RTE meat, RTE salads, raw pork, beef and frozen chicken samples from the patient’s community market (52 samples), and ice cream in the local grocery store (3 samples) were collected . One RTE meat sample and one frozen chicken sample from the community market were positive for L. monocytogenes while all other samples were negative.
All clinical isolates (2 neonate isolates and 5 mother isolates) and two food isolates of L. monocytogenes were subjected to multi-locus sequence typing (MLST) . All human isolates and one RTE meat isolate belonged to sequence type 87 (ST87), one raw chicken isolate belonged to ST9. The chicken isolate was not closely related to the human cases as it belonged to a different ST while the RTE meat isolate had the same ST and may be related which required further assessment using a higher resolution method.
In order to confirm the vertical transmission of listeriosis and resolve the relationship between the RTE food isolate and the patient isolates, the genomes of all 8 ST87 isolates were sequenced by Illumina sequencing. Using the complete genome ICDC-LM188 (GenBank accession No. CP015593.1) as the reference, SNPs were called using Burrows-Wheeler Aligner (BWA-MEM) method . At least 10 reads and a coverage of 70% were required to call a SNP. All human isolates from the neonate and the mother were identical except for one isolate from the mother (LM7). LM7, isolated from the second pudenda swab (13 days after the caesarean), differed from the other clinical isolates by a single SNP . However, the RTE meat L. monocytogenes isolate showed 57 SNP differences (56 single base mutations and one single base deletion) from the main genome type of the clinical isolates. Among the 57 SNP differences, there were 11 located in the core genome of L. monocytogenes (Additional file : Table S1). Considering the mutation rate of 0.4 SNPs per core genome per year , the human isolates would have been separated from the food isolate around 27.5 years ago . By core-genome MLST (cgMLST) analysis, L. monocytogenes isolates from the baby and the mother (LM1 to LM7) all belonged to the same cgMLST type: L1-SL87-ST87-CT5541. Note that LM7 from the mother has one allele difference to the other isolates (LM1 to LM6) reflecting the single SNP difference observed, but both were assigned the cgMLST type as L. monocytogenes strains with no more than 7 alleles are considered to be epidemiologically linked and are assigned to the same cgMLST type , although this cutoff is debatable. The RTE meat strain belonged to L1-SL87-ST87-CT5542 (Additional file : Table S2). Therefore, the L. monocytogenes contaminated RTE meat from local market was not the source of the mother’s infection.
Analysis of virulence genes showed that the isolates from the patients and RTE food, all of which belonged to ST87, harbored the newly discovered Listeria pathogenicity island 4 (LIPI-4) , and intact InlA and inlB genes that encode the invasive proteins internalin A and internalin B respectively were present.
Additionally, the RTE meat isolate (LM8) carried a novel plasmid, named pLM1686. By assembling the raw Illumina reads of LM8 using SKESA v2.3, we identified pLM1686 as a circular plasmid . The plasmid was annotated using Prokka v1.12, and compared with reported plasmids of L. monocytogenes using Roary v3.11.2 with an identity of 70% at nucleotide level as cut-off [, ]. Plasmid pLM1686 was found to be most similar to the previously reported Listeria plasmid pLMR479a . Among the 91 annotated genes of pLM1686, 79 genes were present in pLMR479a, including the heavy metal resistance genes (Additional file : Table S3). The remaining 12 genes of pLM1686 that were absent in pLMR479a, were present in either plasmid pLM6179 or pLM5578 (Additional file : Table S3) [, ].