A 49-year-old female was diagnosed with left-half colon cancer who underwent surgical treatment in Oct 2020 in the Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University (Yuedong Hospital). Pathological results showed moderately differentiated colon adenocarcinoma with cancer tissue infiltrating the superficial muscle layer of the intestinal wall, while with no definite intravascular cancerous embolus or nerve invasion (pT2N0M0). No metastatic cancer was seen in the central group of lymph nodes and intermediate group of lymph nodes. IHC staining of the MMR protein revealed lack of expression of the hMSH2 protein, whereas hMSH6 was normally expressed (data not shown). The patient was treated with surgery and no drug therapy. In June 2022, the patient was diagnosed with endometrioid adenocarcinoma. Surgery pathological showed the endometrioid adenocarcinoma differentiated in the uterus (moderately differentiated, stage IA), invasion of the superficial muscle layer (< 1/2 muscle wall) without vascular and nerve invasion. No metastatic cancer was seen in the lymph nodes. According to the 2023 version of FIGO staging, this patient is classified as IA2. And immunohistochemistry staining in the uterine corpuscles tumor revealed MSH-2 (-), MSH-6 (+) , ER (++), PR (++), and P53 (+) (Supplementary Fig. ). The patient was treated with total hysterectomy and bilateral adnexectomy under laparoscopic, and no drug therapy. After morphological standard subtyping, the patient’s endometrioid tumor and peripheral blood samples were subjected to NGS using with a Lynch syndrome panel. On 2022-12-05, the patient went for a follow-up examination of CRC 2 years after surgery. CT scan for the pelvis, abdomen, and chest revealed that the anastomosis did not show any significant abnormality. On 2022-12-02, the patient went to Meizhou Maternal and Child Health Care Hospital for follow-up examination of endometrial cancer. Examinations showed normal vulvovaginal development, vaginal patency, little intravaginal discharge, and good healing of vaginal stumps. CEA, AFP, and CA125 were all negative.
A histopathological diagnosis of the tumor tissue was performed following the World Health Organization (WHO) standards. Hematoxylin and eosin-stained slides of biopsy or surgery specimens were reviewed by an experienced pathologist. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) assays were conducted to facilitate the histopathological classification. The main steps of IHC include antigen retrieval, primary antibody binding, secondary antibody binding and 3,3’ Diaminobenzidine (DAB) staining. The IHC staining for protein biomarkers was semi-quantitatively scored as “-” (negative, no, or < 5% positive cells), “+” (5-50% positive cells), and “++” (< 50% positive cells, considered as strongly positive).
A sequencing panel covering five genes that have been reported to be associated with Lynch syndrome (EPCAM, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PMS2) was designed and performed in the local medical laboratory. This assay uses a second-generation sequencing capture enrichment method and covers all coding regions and neighboring splice regions of these five genes and a certain length of upstream and downstream untranslated regions (UTRs). The assay detected substitutions, small insertions and deletions, and copy number variants in all coding exons and flanking regions in these five genes. DNA from both FFPE and peripheral whole blood samples were extracted with QIAamp DNA FFPE Kit and QIAamp DNA Blood Mini Kit (Qiagen, Dusseldorf, Germany) according to the standard operation procedures, respectively. DNA libraries were constructed via the KAPA Library Amplification Kit (KAPA Biosystems, Cape Town, South Africa). DNA sequencing was performed on a NovaSeq6000 platform using an XP kit (Illumina, San Diego, CA).
The generated raw data with bcl format were transferred to fastq format by base calling via bcl2fastq v2.17 while filtering the low-quality reads, removing adapters and primer sequence. Alignment to human genome reference via bwa v0.7.10 and generated the bam file, with the utilization of samtool v1.3.1 to generate index file of bam. Somatic mutations were called using the unmatched normal synthetic bam file with MuTect v2 while Annovar was utilized to perform the annotation of SNV and indel, which combined with several databases including PolyPhen2 and Mutation Toaster for further annotation with alteration frequencies, enzyme binding-site prediction, and protein functional alteration prediction.
Pathological results revealed moderately differentiated colon adenocarcinoma with cancer tissue infiltrating the superficial muscle layer of the intestinal wall, And the glandular cavity contains a large amount of mucus, with obvious cell atypia. Immunohistochemistry was performed to detect MMR protein expression and found MSH2(-), MSH6(+), MLH1(+), and PMS2(+) (data not shown). In the second cancer, endometrioid tumor showed significant cell heterogeneity . Immunohistochemistry staining in the uterine corpuscles tumor revealed MSH-2(-), MSH-6(+) , ER(++), PR(++), and P53(+) (Supplementary Fig. ). ER and PR expressions indicated that the tumor was of endometrial origin, metastatic colon carcinoma was excluded. Based on the clinicopathological characteristics, this case is a metachronous double primary carcinoma.
The proband’s mother died of esophageal cancer at 50, and her father died at 70 for undefined reasons. The patient’s peripheral blood and endometrial cancer samples underwent genetic testing.
Targeted sequencing revealed compound heterozygous variants of MMR genes in the patient endometrial specimen: germline c.133G > C (p.Gly45Arg) (allele rate, 49.9%) and somatic c.3261dupC (allele rate, 5.59%) in MSH6, and a novel somatic mutation c.445_448dup (allele rate, 42.89%) in MSH2. The MSH6 germline mutation, c.133G > C in exon 1, was also detected in the peripheral blood. The c.133G > C (p.Gly45Arg) variant was a very rare variant (only found 3 ClinVar submissions) and was predicted to be neutral, deleterious, and neutral in MutationTaster, FATHMM, and PROVEAN, respectively. ACMG classification and the evidence of pathogenicity were uncertain significance and PM2 + PP1, respectively. MSH6 c.3261dup was a rare variant and is present in the Exome Aggregation Consortium database at a minor allele frequency of 0.18%. ACMG classification and the evidence of pathogenicity were pathogenic, and PVS1 + PM2 + PP5, respectively. The mutation MSH2 c.445_448dup was novel with no record in any databases. ACMG classification and the evidence of pathogenicity were likely pathogenic, and PVS1 + PM2, respectively.