A 39-year-old Japanese male presented at our hospital due to an abnormal chest computed tomography (CT) scan showing a 35 × 25 × 25 mm tumor located in the right hilar region. This tumor was suspected to have invaded the right main bronchus and right main pulmonary artery . 18-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography/computed tomography showed moderate FDG uptake within the tumor . There was no significant distant metastasis. The patient had general fatigue and appetite loss and had a fever for about 3 weeks. He had no remarkable medical history. His tumor marker levels were not elevated. The findings from laboratory tests, including a panel of antibodies for autoimmune processes, and an immunohistochemical analysis for lymphoma were all negative. His serum IL-6 levels were markedly high (28.2 pg/ml [<2.41]), but his serum G-CSF levels were not.
We performed endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration (EBUS-TBNA). The tumor was found to be a carcinoma (suspected giant cell carcinoma; clinical-T2aN1M0 stage IIA), so we performed right upper sleeve lobectomy, because of the tumor invading the base of the right upper lobe bronchus.
The surgery was successful, with no major postoperative complications. The patient was discharged in a healthy condition 10 days after the surgery. He no longer had a fever, and his post-surgery 9-day serum IL-6 level was 10.9 pg/ml, which was lower than that before the operation.
Pathologically, the tumor showed proliferation of atypical epithelial cells having pleomorphic nuclei and prominent nucleoli arranged in a lepidic, acinar, or solid growth fashion (adenocarcinoma component), mixed with bi- and multinucleated cells with occasional emperipolesis (giant cell carcinoma component) and stroma, findings which were consistent with a pleomorphic carcinoma. Immunohistochemically, the carcinoma cells were faintly or focally (50 % tumor cells positive) positive for IL-6 but negative for G-CSF . Giant cell proportions were 30 % in this tumor. IL-6 positive carcinoma cells were 50 % in these tumor cells which include the adenocarcinoma component. There were no lung abscesses and inflammatory changes. Finally, this case’s pathological stage was T2aN1M0 stage IIA pleomorphic carcinoma. We performed adjuvant chemotherapy (three cycles of cisplatin and pemetrexed) after surgery. This patient is alive and recurrence-free 1 year after surgery.