A 42-year-old Caucasian man was admitted to the emergency department of a district hospital in a comatose condition (Glasgow Coma Scale Score 4 out of 15). His relatives reported that he initially complained of a sudden onset of headache and had several episodes of emesis. He was sedated, intubated and urgently transported to our teaching hospital. On arrival at our facility, he was unresponsive to verbal and painful stimuli, and his pupils were bilaterally dilated and non-reactive. An urgent computed tomography (CT) scan of his brain showed an extensive intraparenchymal hemorrhagic lesion, causing significant mass effect and tonsilar herniation .
An external ventricular drain was inserted into his left lateral ventricle, and an intraparenchymal ICP fiber optic monitor was inserted into the right frontal perilesional area. His ICP was elevated (>40mmHg), and extensive bilateral decompressive craniectomies were urgently performed. During the surgery, and after the evacuation of the hematoma, a cherry-like intraparenchymal lesion was found in his edematous right frontal lobe, which was resected . Decompressive duraplasties were performed bilaterally and after surgery he was transferred to the intensive care unit for observation and further management.
A head CT scan at the end of surgery showed diffuse areas of low-density in both brain hemispheres, suggesting severe ischemia . His condition continued to deteriorate, with ICP rising to 65mmHg despite the performed decompressive craniectomies and the aggressive medical management of his intracranial hypertension. He subsequently developed multi-organ failure, and died approximately 48 hours after his admission.
The surgical specimen was sent for microscopic and immunohistochemical pathological analysis. Permanent specimen sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin and were assessed via immunohistochemistry for vimentin, synaptophysin, glial-fibrillary acidic protein and Ki-67 to measure the proliferation index. Uniform neoplastic medium-sized cells, with round to oval hyperchromatic nuclei, were present and positive for vimentin, synaptophysin and cluster of differentiation 56, but were negative for glial-fibrillary acidic protein . The Ki-67 index was approximately 40%, indicating increased mitotic activity and a high-grade malignancy. The resected lesion was identified as a central nervous system PNET.