A 72-year-old male presented to our institution with T4aN2bM0 (stage IVA) SCC of the hypopharynx in April 2020. The expression of programmed death-ligand 1 had not been evaluated. The patient was treated at our institution with chemoradiotherapy, consisting of a total radiation dose of 70 Gy in 35 fractions using the volumetric modulated arc therapy technique with one daily irradiation 5 days a week and three cycles of high-dose cisplatin (100 mg/m2) every 3 weeks from May to July 2020. During the treatment course, the patient developed grade 2 diarrhoea (Cancer Institute Common Toxicity Criteria for Adverse Events, version 5.0) and febrile neutropenia, in response to which he received a reduced dose of cisplatin, for a total dose of 175 mg/m2. RT was completed without prolongation, and any acute adverse events were appropriately treated. Computed tomography (CT) imaging obtained 5 months after treatment completion revealed well-controlled neck lesions; however, several lung nodules had developed. Subsequent 18-fluoro-deoxyglucose positron emission tomography/CT showed significant accumulation in the nodules, and, therefore, he was diagnosed with multiple lung metastases (a). The patient received nivolumab 240 mg every 2 weeks. CT imaging findings obtained at 3 months after nivolumab initiation, showed that multiple lung metastases had almost completely regressed (data not shown); however, CT imaging obtained after 6 months of nivolumab treatment revealed the recurrence of two metastatic lesions in the upper lobe of the left lung. 18-fluoro-deoxyglucose positron emission tomography revealed significant accumulation in those two lesions, although no other metastases were detected (b). Based on these results, we decided to administer SBRT to the lung lesions. As the two lesions were relatively separated and it was considered unsafe to irradiate them simultaneously, we planned SBRT for the larger para mediastinal lesion first, which was to be followed by SBRT for the smaller lesion 6 months later. The patient underwent SBRT with 48 Gy in four fractions for the para mediastinal lesion , and while he maintained his course of nivolumab, it was not administered the week before and after, nor during, the SBRT treatment. The patient did not experience any acute adverse events associated with the SBRT treatment, and CT imaging performed at 2 months post-SBRT revealed the regression of the irradiated lesion (a). Additionally, the smaller, nonirradiated lesion had also shrunk (b). This lesion had completely regressed at 7 months after SBRT (c). A follow-up examination performed at 18 months after SBRT indicated that the patient had no local or distant site progression or toxicity, and continued the nivolumab treatment. The timeline from completion of chemoradiotherapy in this patient is summarised in .