A 60 years old diabetic man, presented to our emergency unit with an open wound of his left knee, resulting from a traffic accident three months ago causing an open left knee dislocation. At the time, a bone healer reduced the dislocation and applied traditional medicine to cover the wound. There was no history of psychiatric illness or drug use.
Physical examination revealed severe soft tissue loss of the anterior knee with exposed lateral femoral condyle, the extensor mechanism was damaged and the wound was contaminated with particles of traditional medicine. The patient was guarding the knee in an extension position due to severe pain. The distal neurovascular examination was normal.
Radiographic examination revealed a reduced knee with a high patella and quadriceps tendon retraction, but no bone injury. Doppler ultrasound of the lower limbs revealed no vascular damage, there was no evidence of deep venous thrombosis .
Under general anesthesia, the knee was unstable. Degenerative ruptures of the anterior cruciate and lateral collateral ligaments were noted. There were fatty degenerative remnants of the patellar tendon and joint capsule as well . The wound surfaces were washed with 3% hydrogen peroxide and irrigated with considerable amounts of saline. Wound margins were cut until fresh bleeding appeared. Daily normal saline and povidone wound dressing was done, parenteral antibiotic therapy was administered for two weeks.
Two weeks later wound culture yielded no bacterial growth but there was insufficient coverage of the knee and extensive erosion of the joint cartilages, decision was taken to perform medial gastrocnemius flap and knee arthrodesis. The entire lower limb was prepared and draped in a sterile fashion, the joint was debrided thoroughly to remove all necrotic and infected tissues, the joint surfaces were prepared using an oscillating saw to create flat surfaces and maximize bone contact for successful arthrodesis. A longitudinal incision was made along the medial belly of the gastrocnemius muscle, blunt dissection between the medial gastrocnemius belly and the soleus muscle was carried and the muscle belly was detached at its insertion at the Achilles tendon. A medial tunnel was created at the joint level to pass the gastrocnemius muscle belly so it can be laid over the anterior defect, interrupted absorbable 2-0 vicryl was used to secure the flap in place. Partial thickness skin graft harvested from the ipsilateral thigh was used to cover the muscle belly. The arthrodesis surfaces were fixed temporarily using two strong Kirschner-wires, preoperatively assembled hybrid external fixator was used to protect fixation with two pin rods in the femur and three pin rods into the tibia. Wounds were covered with furacin cream . Postoperatively the patient was instructed to avoid dressings for the first five days after surgery and to limit weight bearing for 45 days. After two weeks of antibiotics, analgesics, and regular wound care, the patient's wound healed with no signs of infection.
Three months of clinical and radiological follow-up demonstrated excellent healing of the flap and donor site, as well as promising arthrodesis union .
Operator: Dr. Hassan Salad, Orthopedic, and Trauma Senior Resident at Mogadishu Somali Turkish Training and Research Hospital, Dr. Huseyin Taskoparan, Orthopedic and Trauma consultant. Dr. Duran Hashi, Anesthesia and Reanimation consultant. The operation was done at Mogadishu Somali Turkish Training and Research Hospital in Mogadishu, Somalia.