A 60-year-old Chinese woman was admitted to our hospital on 26/08/2019 with colporrhagia for 2 days. In addition, the patient denied smoking, alcohol, or any other medical or family history. Pelvic CT showed an emerging mass in the vermiform appendix, surrounded by multiple abscesses . In addition, there was no occupation detected in the liver, lungs, or abdomen. Subsequently, the patient received radical appendectomy for tumors, histological findings of which suggested appendiceal mucinous adenocarcinoma, without invasion to the surrounding nerves or vessels . Immunohistochemistry findings were presented as the following: CDX2 (positive), CK7 (negative), CK (positive), CK20 (positive), CEA (positive), ER (negative), PR (negative), CA125 (negative), WT-1 (negative), and Ki-67 (60%). Based on those, a diagnosis of appendiceal mucinous adenocarcinoma was made and staged as pT3N0M0 according to the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) version 8th. Subsequent therapy with the regimen of CapeOX (oxaliplatin 130 mg/m2 on day 1 and oral capecitabine 1,000 mg/m2 twice a day, from days 1 to 14, every 21 days) has been scheduled as adjuvant treatment. However, the patient was admitted to our hospital again for colporrhagia and abdominal pain in July 2020, 4 months after the completion of adjuvant therapy. Repeated abdomen CT revealed an emerging occupation behind the uterus, along with multiple nodes on the omentum, suggesting recurrence . Palliative cytoreductive surgery was performed to remove the major lesion behind the uterus on 20/07/2020. Histological findings implied recurrence of appendiceal mucinous adenocarcinoma . In terms of the existence of multiple lesions on the omentum, a systematic regimen of FOLFIRI (irinotecan 180 mg/m2, on day 1, leucovorin 400 mg/m2, 5-fluorouracil 400 mg/m2 intravenous injection followed by 5-fluorouracil 2,400 mg/m2 pump injection for 46 h, every 14 days) was prescribed as palliative treatment. After three cycles’ exposure, emerging occupation behind the uterus as well as the emergence of thickened peritoneum was presented by repeated abdomen CT scans, which suggested progressive disease (PD). As salvage therapy, a subsequent regimen of BOL (bevacizumab 5 mg/kg on day 1, oxaliplatin 85 mg/m2 on day 1, and Letitrexed 3 mg/m2 on day 1, every 14 days) was arranged from October to December 2020. However, efficacy evaluation by regular CT scans still resulted in PD again . Beyond that, subsequent monotherapy with anlotinib, a multiple-target agent, failed to control the disease either . The characteristic of the recurrent appendiceal mucinous adenocarcinoma seems chemo-refractory. In order to screen potentially available targets, a whole-exome sequencing (WES) with next-generation sequencing (NGS) using tissue and plasma sample was performed. Results of the NGS revealed ATM exon 4 p.N81Tfs*20 by frequency as 11.59%, as well as ATM exon 60 p.R2912Efs*26 by frequency as 10.46%, and KRAS exon 2 p.G13D by frequency as 17.94%. However, homologous recombination deficiency (HRD) was not detected with the results of the NGS analysis. Based on the established efficacy of poly ADP-ribose polymerase inhibitor (PARPi) in castration-resistant prostate cancer harboring ATM mutations , a combination treatment of niraparib and anlotinib was administrated as salvage regimen. After 3 months’ exposure, the target lesion as well as the multiple nodes was suggested as stable disease (reduction by 15.8%, ) according to the CT scans in May 2021. In addition, tumor markers of CEA (normal range, 0 to 5 ng/ml) decreased significantly during the combination treatment . The combinational regimen, hence, has been continued as salvage treatment from then on. Regular abdomen CT scans suggested persistent stable disease for efficacy evaluation . The patient still receives the combinational regimen (niraparib at a dose of 200 mg Qd and anlotinib at a dose of 10 mg Qd, day 1 to day 14, every 21 days) as maintenance treatment now. There was no treatment-related adverse event observed during the combinational treatment. The variation of CEA during the whole treatment is presented in the . The variation of tumor size for target lesion is shown in .