A 32-year-old woman was found to be hypertensive at a routine medical check-up. She had a 10-year history of hypertension but had stopped taking medication a few years previously because she was asymptomatic and believed that the drug was not effective. A clinic physician noted a significant blood pressure gradient between the arms and leg and referred her to an adult cardiology centre. Computed tomography (CT) angiography of the chest suggested coarctation of the aorta, and she was referred to our hospital for surgery. On admission, the patient’s blood pressure was 154/88 mmHg in the right arm, 148/89 mmHg in the left arm, and 110/84 mmHg in the right leg, an arm–leg pressure gradient of 44 mmHg. She had a long 2/6 systolic ejection murmur best heard at the left subclavian area, her femoral pulse was delayed and was weaker than the radial pulse. Chest X-ray demonstrated bilateral rib notching . Echocardiography revealed flow velocity acceleration with diastolic runoff was observed in the distal 5th aortic arch . She had good biventricular systolic function, mild hypertrophy of the left ventricle, and no other cardiac anomalies. She had been scheduled for surgery; however, following review of the images of CT angiography by paediatric cardiologists, the diagnosis was persistent 5th aortic arch with coarctation and an interrupted 4th aortic arch, which might be amenable by stent implantation. Both surgical and catheter intervention options were subsequently offered, and the patient chose the catheter intervention option.
Cardiac catheterization was performed under general anaesthesia. A haemodynamic study revealed blood pressures of 80/45 mmHg in the ascending aorta and 63/48 mmHg in the descending aorta and a sluggish pressure waveform. Angiography showed a small 5th aortic arch of 11.7 mm diameter with discrete distal narrowing to 3.3 mm . A PALMAZ® Large stent P3008 (Cords, Miami Lakes, FL, USA) was mounted on a 12 mm × 3.5 cm BIB® stent placement catheter (NuMED, Hopkinton, NY, USA) and delivered through a 10-Fr long sheath. The stent was successfully deployed at the lesion and angiography showed an increase of the diameter of the distal arch . The pressure gradient across the stent was 5 mmHg. The patient experienced no complications and was discharged home in 2 days. On discharge, her blood pressure was 110/58 mmHg in the right arm and 112/64 mmHg in the leg. She remained normotensive with no arm–leg blood pressure gradient at 10-months follow-up without any antihypertensive medication.