A 23-year-old woman, G0, reports irregular menstrual cycles for 6 months. Her body mass index (BMI) was 22.5 Kg/M2 and she presented with appropriate sex characteristics; Tanner stages 5 in both pubic hair and breast development. The patient‘smenarche occurred at the age of 12 years old and had relatively regular menstrual cycle intervals of 28–30 days and duration of 3–5 days. No heavy menstrual blood flow or blood clots were noted. No dysmenorrhea or symptoms of endometriosis were noted either. The acute onset of irregularity in the patient’s menstrual cycle occurred six months prior her first gynecologic visit. Her menstrual period was initially delayed for two weeks, then the entire menstrual cycle interval prolonged to two months. The patient then visited a gynecology clinic for further examination. No signs of androgen and/orcortisol excess, thyroid abnormalities, and galactorrhea, all of which might have resulted in the irregularity of menstrual periods, were noted. She denied of previous sexual exposure. The initial hormone profile blood test taken showed elevated FSH and luteinizing hormone (LH) of 31.1 mIU/mL and 52.0 mIU/mL . An ultrasound scan was suggested, but the patient hesitated due to personal reasons. Blood test three months later showed FSH: 31.9 mIU/mL, LH: 17.22 mIU/mL, AMH: 6.05 ng/mL, and both estradiol and progesterone in ovulatory phase , other hormone tests as listed in Table were normal. The serum β-hCG level was not tested due to absence of sexual debut. Also, no intrauterine gestational sac or other symptoms and signs of ectopic pregnancy were noted. Tumor marker was within normal range; CA125: 9.51 U/ml. Karyotype analysis indicated normal 46, XX. No signs of polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) such as hirsutism, acne, buffalo hump and obesity were noted. Ultrasound examination showed uterine size of 6.10 × 4.18 × 3.19 cm with endometrium thickness of 12 mm. Left ovary measured 2.81 × 1.81 cm. No multiple, small antral follicles distributed peripherally or throughout the dense stroma characteristics of PCOS was noted on bilateral ovaries. A 10.4 × 7.87 × 6.7 cm simple cyst at the right adnexal area was noted . The cyst is anechoic and unilocular, with clear content and no internal blood flow. No septums,solid components, calcifications, papillary formations, and ascites were found under sonographic examination. A right ovarian cyst was highly suspected.
Laparoscopic evaluation was performed two weeks later. A right fallopian tube cyst was completely excised . During operation, the cyst occupied most of the right pelvic cavity. Though adjacent to the right ovary, there was no adhesion between the pelvic cyst and right ovary. Therefore, the removal of the pelvic cyst was performed smoothly and no ovarian tissue was resected during the operation. Bilateral ovaries were of normal size and were grossly normal under laparoscopic inspection. No characteristics of PCOS were noted, including thickened white capsule of the ovary. No other abnormal findings were noted over the pelvic region, including the uterus, left adnexa, cul-de-sac, and pelvic wall. The specimen removed consisted of one tissue fragment measuring 8.0 × 6.2 × 0.3 cm. Pathologic examination showed a cyst with smooth internal and external surface and eight polyps measuring up to 0.8 cm in maximal diameter connected to the inner wall . Microscopically, serous adenofibroma lined by simple flattened cuboidal epithelial cells with occasionally discernible apical cilia resting on fibrous wall was noted. Some areas showed broad and blunt papilla formation with attenuated epithelium and dense hypocellular fibrotic stroma . No atypia or invasion was observed. Based on the histopathological findings, a pathologic diagnosis of serous adenofibroma of the fallopian tube was given. Focal area of ovarian stroma with corpora lutea was also noted.
The patient’s hormone levels returned to normal reproductive ranges two weeks after removal of the fallopian tube cyst, except for a slightly elevated FSH of 17.22 mIU/mL 10 months after the operation . She has resumed normal menstrual cycles for over two years. Ultrasound scans were performed 10 and 18 months after the removal of the fallopian tube cyst: no ovarian or adnexal lesion was noted. The serum androgen levels were analyzed before and after the operation and no hyperandrogenism was noted . The serum inhibin A and B concentrations were also in the range of reproductive status.