A 27-year-old male patient with persistent lumbosacral pain for more than 10 yr had a recurrence 10 d before a hospital visit.
The patient, in his late twenties, reported experiencing lumbosacral pain for more than 10 years. The pain intensified while sitting or at rest but improved in the mornings. Throughout this period, there were no signs of heel pain, eye inflammation, symmetrical swelling, pain in small joints, psoriasis, sausage fingers/toes, facial erythema, photosensitivity, oral ulcer, alopecia, frequent urination, or urgency. Consequently, he was admitted to the Rheumatology Department at the Traditional Chinese Medicine Hospital of Dianjiang, Chongqing. Examinations conducted indicated a positive response to human leukocyte antigen B27, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans revealed localized edema around the bilateral sacroiliac joint bone marrow. Upon confirmation of AS, rheumatologists recommended a tailored treatment regimen. Subsequently, the patient managed his condition with subcutaneous administration of recombinant human tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α receptor II: Immunoglobulin G Fc fusion protein, leading to a reduction in lumbosacral pain. Lumbosacral pain recurred 10 d before the patient's hospital admission without a clear cause. Despite orally taking aceclofenac at a dosage of 100 mg twice daily, the pain persisted and was not alleviate.
He had no notable past medical history.
No significant medical findings were identified in the patient's personal history or family background.
The physical examination confirmed tenderness and percussive pain in the left sacroiliac joint. The Schober test recorded a value of 5 cm, with a finger-to-ground distance of 30 cm, a measured pillow wall distance of 0 cm, and a chest expansion of 4 cm. The physiological curvature of the spine was within the normal range, and no tenderness was detected within the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar spinous processes, vertebral bodies, and paravertebral bodies.
Elevated levels of erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) indicated inflammation, while blood routine tests, liver and kidney functions, blood coagulation functions, and a routine urinalysis showed values within the normal range. Subsequent T-SPOT.TB and tumor marker tests were conducted to detect tuberculosis infection and prepare for the use of biological agents. The T-SPOT.TB result was negative, but alpha-fetoprotein levels were slightly elevated. However, routine stool examination revealed the presence of C. sinensis eggs .
The MRI scan of the sacroiliac joint displayed bone marrow edema in the left sacroiliac joint . A subsequent colonoscopy indicated congestion in the descending colon, sigmoid colon, and rectum . No liver abnormalities were observed in the upper abdominal computed tomography.