An 83 year-old man presented with a pain in the right knee of 8 in VAS (visual analogue scale). The symptoms were worsening over the last few years. He had a history of arterial hypertension, glaucoma and cataract. Forty years ago he had right femur fracture, and underwent surgical intervention. Plate and screws after osteosynthesis were not removed, and no documentation on the details of the intervention were available. He also underwent prostatectomy, appendectomy and hemorrhoidectomy in the past. The patient signed an informed consent for publishing his case.
On admission the patient was stable, BP 125/85 mmHg, HR 72/min. Initial laboratory results were within normal values. Pre-procedurally the patient was administered ananticoagulant according to local standards (enoxaparin, 40 mg) and a prophylactic dose of antibiotic (cefazoline) along with his regular drug regime. Based on the radiological features of right lower limb joints the patient was qualified for total knee arthroplasty with a cemented knee prosthesis - NexGen (LPS-Flex) implant .
Due to long time interval between past surgery and current intervention and concomitant diseases, the patient was not found eligible for hardware removal. Extensive surgery including simultaneous hardware removal and TKA could put the patient at unacceptably high risk of complications (such as infection, perioperative fracture, and significant blood loss), because of his advanced age and comorbidities .
Placement of femoral guide intramedullary (which is preferred by most surgeons because, as it makes fitting of the prosthetic material easier, because the rod goes along anatomical axis of the limb) was not possible due to the presence of retained hardware. Its presence would not allow passage of intramedullary rod. Therefore, a decision to use an extramedullary guide was made preoperatively. Correct insertion of extramedullary guide is found challenging, because visual assessment of reference points used to determine the correct positioning is difficult intraoperatively. However, because confirmation of guide’s correct position is vital in order to achieve a good long-term outcome, ultrasound was chosen to inspect its position along the mechanical axis, being an accessible, inexpensive and a non-invasive imaging modality that could be performed intraoperatively by a trained member of the surgical team.
Several other imaging methods were considered. Fluoroscopy was not found to be optimal, because it requires a specific position of the limb (flexion in the hip and knee joint (of 90 degrees). It is also linked with an exposure to radiation, which forms its disadvantage in comparison with ultrasound. Using a patient specific instrument (PSI) was also not applicable to this case. It imposes performing an MRI of the limb, which was contraindicated. There was no available documentation of the previous surgery, therefore the metal alloy of the retained hardware was unknown.
TKA was performed in supine position. The right knee joint was approached with anterior incision. Numerous degenerative changes were present in both medial and lateral compartment, dominating in the medial compartment. Anterior compartment presented normally. Hardware retained after previous intervention, in the form of screws and an ostheosyntesis plate were present. After examining local conditions, a femoral guide was introduced extramedullary. Ultrasonography was used to pinpoint the center of the femur’s head. Distal cut in femur was performed. Tibial guide was than introduced intramedullary followed by a standard cut of the proximal part. The initial fit of implants was assessed. The patella’s osteophytes were removed. It was followed by ZIMMER NEXGEN prosthesis embedment on cement (vacuum mixed). Size of the tibial part was 5, femoral part F and polyethylene insertion – 9 mm. Layered closure was applied with the introduction of ATS reciprocal drainageto reduce oedema at the surgical site.
On the 2nd day after surgery the drainage was removed (it collected 200 ml of bloody excretion, which was within normal volumes expected after TKA). The postoperative period was uneventful. The correct position of the implants along the mechanical axis was confirmed on X-ray. On the 4th postoperative day the patient was able to walk using crutches and he was discharged from the hospital and he was advised to continue rehabilitation, use of analgesics (paracetamol 3x500mg, dexketoprofen 2x25mg taken as needed) and anticoagulant (enoxaparin 40 mg) administered daily in the first 6 weeks after discharge.
At a follow-up visit 6 months after surgery the patient was generally satisfied with the results of TKA, The patient recovered full range of motion (in comparison with the contralateral side). Pain decreased significantly to 1–2 in VAS (before surgery – up to 8 in VAS). On physical examination knee joint had normal appearance, with no signs of edema .