A 30-year-old Asian man suddenly experienced symptoms of marked fever up to 40 °C, rigors, and serious headache in June 2015. After being admitted to local hospital, the initial suspicion was intracranial infection; however, anti-infection therapy had no effect. He was admitted to our neurology ward 1 month after symptom onset, with fever of 39 °C and neck stiffness; However, he was conscious. Peripheral blood count revealed a white blood cell (WBC) count of 12 × 109/L and neutrophils accounted for 89.7% of cells. Lumbar puncture revealed a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) opening pressure of 180 mmH20, a WBC count of 205 × 106/L (61% neutrophils and 32% lymphocytes), and a protein level of 0.67 g/L, with normal glucose and chloride levels. Brain contrast-enhanced MRI revealed no abnormal findings. An intracranial infection of unknown etiology was suspected and empiric therapy with ceftriaxone and ganciclovir was subsequently administered for 5 days; however, the patient’s condition did not improve. The results of the Mycobacterium tuberculosis test and CSF smear were both negative. Vancomycin was added to the anti-infection therapy for 1 week; however, there were still no positive results. Except for elevated C-reactive protein levels (CRP, 30 μg/L) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR, 49 mm/h), extensive serological and microbiological examinations of the CSF, including examination for the presence of bacterial culture, brucella, syphilis, human immunodeficiency virus, as well as the virus nucleic acid and antibodies of herpes simplex virus I/II, cytomegalovirus, rubella virus, and toxoplasma, were all unremarkable. Repeated lumbar punctures showed little changes, whereas the glucose level in the CSF decreased (1.9 mmol/L). The diagnosis of tuberculous meningitis was considered taking into account the mixed cell reaction and decreased glucose level in the CSF, combined with the poor effect of anti-infection therapy. Accordingly, empiric antituberculosis treatment was initiated, alongside dexamethasone (10 mg/day × 1 week). Following this treatment, the patient’s symptoms improved. He was then discharged and continued to take antituberculosis drugs.
The patient felt no discomfort; however, 1 month after his discharge, the symptoms of dizziness, numbness on the left side, and weakness in both lower limbs successively appeared. At this time, lumbar puncture results revealed no evidence of disease, but the patient was readmitted to our hospital in August 2015. Neurological examination revealed pain disorder below the chest and muscle strength of grade four out of five in both lower limbs. He also suffered from frequent hiccups during hospitalization. MRI revealed abnormal T2-weighted fluid-attenuated inversion recovery signals in the dorsal pons adjacent to the fourth ventricle, left medial thalamus , dorsal medulla (area postrema), and gray matter of the spinal cord (C3–T6) . Immune damage secondary to intracranial infection was subsequently considered; therefore, a thorough immunological examination was performed. The results showed that autoimmune antibodies tests both with a tissue-based assay and a cell-based assay in CSF and serum, including tests for anti-AQP4 and anti- N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) antibodies, were all negative. The Oligoclonal bands and myelin basic protein in CSF were also negative. In addition, rheumatic-associated antibodies including anti-nuclear antibodies and anti-SSA/SSB antibodies, as well as the thyroid-related antibodies were all negative. Visual evoked potential was normal. Although all the immunological indicators were unremarkable, we still initiated high-dose methylprednisolone pulse treatment followed by an oral steroid with the dose tapered in 3 months, considering that all the pathogenic tests of the patients were negative, which eventually resulted in improvement in condition and subsequent discharge.
However, after 6 months, the patient experienced fever of up to 40 °C, rigors, and headache again in February 2016. He was then readmitted for the third time. Lumbar puncture revealed a WBC count of 22 × 106/L (74% lymphocytes and 24% neutrophils), with normal protein, glucose, and chloride levels. Laboratory tests including blood count, CRP level, ESR, and T-SPOT, were normal. Brain MRI revealed that the previous brain lesions disappeared. Unfortunately, we did not perform enhanced MRI at this time. Furthermore, autoimmune tests for AQP4, MOG, and NMDAR antibodies were also negative and the diagnosis remained unclear. However, the patient’s condition markedly improved after receiving intravenous dexamethasone (20 mg/day for 1 week). He was discharged followed by no medication without relapse for 2 years.
Unfortunately, he experienced a fourth admission in April of 2018 with symptoms of diplopia, hiccup, and numbness in the right hand. He presented with subjective diplopia and brisk reflex in both lower limbs. Lumbar puncture revealed normal results. Brain MRI revealed that the lesions in the left pons tegmental area and area postrema had reappeared, similar to the second attack. Spinal MRI revealed several segmental enhancements at the C4–C5, T1, and T5 levels. Serum and CSF samples collected for reassessment were negative for AQP4, MOG, and GFAP antibodies. The patient was subsequently started on immunoglobulin pulse treatment, considering bilateral femoral head necrosis. Following this treatment, he entered remission and was subsequently discharged. Azathioprine was stopped because of elevated liver enzyme levels, and the patient refused to be treated with mycophenolate mofetil due to financial problems. The patient returned with no obvious symptoms in November 2018. Lumbar puncture revealed normal results. AQP4, MOG, and GFAP antibodies in the serum and CSF were all negative. The patient returned to normal life and work. Clinical follow-up has continued with no indication of relapse to date.