For 7 months, a 63-year-old female complained of left-sided neck pain and left upper extremity radiculopathy accompanied by progressive numbness and weakness. She exhibited 4/5 strength proximally and distally in the left arm alone.
Electromyography (EMG) of the bilateral upper extremities demonstrated a left C6 and C7 radiculopathy. Magnetic resonance image (MRI) of the cervical spine revealed enhancing masses involving the left neural foramina at the C5-6, C6-7, and C7-T1 levels accompanied by nodular thickening of the left exiting nerve root at T1-2 level (T1 root) as revealed in . In addition, there was diffuse enhancement and thickening of the proximal left brachial plexus and upper trunk at the level of the left proximal pulmonary apex.
The patient underwent a C6-7-T1 hemilaminectomy and facetectomy with subtotal resection of the C7 and T1 intradural nerve root tumors; this was accompanied by an instrumented fusion from C4-T7 with intraoperative neuromonitoring. The frozen section was equivocal. Postoperatively, the patient noted residual proximal left upper extremity hyperesthesias, with proximal LUE strength of 4/5 but distal increased weakness to the 3/5 level. Motor function in the right upper extremity (RUE) was 4/5 and both lower extremities were neurologically intact.
The pathology confirmed B-cell lymphoma as shown in . Furthermore, cerebral spinal fluid sampling (lumbar puncture) showed no malignant cells.
The patient underwent chemotherapy consisting of 6 cycles of rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone (R-CHOP). In addition, she received two doses of systemic methotrexate and two doses of intrathecal methotrexate. Prior to beginning pharmacologic therapy, a postoperative MRI was obtained, which was of poor quality due to the presence of hardware. Six months after her diagnosis, repeat positron emission tomography–computed tomography was performed without evidence of residual mass or abnormal metabolic activity. Her neurological examination remained unchanged. She will undergo oncologic surveillance at 12 months and then will undergo follow-up yearly thereafter. At 6 months, the patient was considered to be in remission.