A 50-year-old right-handed Latino man presented with worsening of previously stable chronic motor symptoms. He had initially developed sudden weakness and difficulty using his right upper extremity at the age of 16 years. He eventually had to learn to write using his left hand because of the severity of his weakness. His symptoms progressed over several years, eventually developing into severe symmetrical upper extremity weakness and atrophy in his distal muscles. His lower extremities were spared. Our patient stated he was diagnosed with a type of muscular dystrophy in the US when he was 25 years old. After receiving this diagnosis, he subsequently had a muscle biopsy in Mexico that reportedly confirmed his diagnosis. He had no family members with muscular dystrophy or any other neuromuscular conditions. His symptoms reached their plateau at this time. Because of the stability of his symptoms and his understanding of the disease course, our patient did not seek any further medical care for over 20 years. Upon returning to the US, he was seen by a primary care physician and referred for neurological examination to establish care as well as evaluate the worsening of previously stable chronic symptoms.
On presentation, our patient reported a few months of clinical deterioration, particularly recent left upper arm intermittent mild pressure pain. Our patient grew concerned when he noticed increased difficulty performing fine motor tasks with his left hand. In addition, he was experiencing recurrent intermittent episodes of dysphagia while eating solid foods. Our patient denied ever having any previous bulbar symptoms prior to his recent clinical deterioration.
A clinical examination demonstrated that our patient was thin with significant bilateral upper extremity muscle atrophy and associated weakness. He had severe asymmetric focal segmental atrophy of his bilateral forearm flexor and extensor muscle groups, with preserved and prominent bilateral brachioradialis muscles . He had corresponding severe weakness in his upper extremities as measured using the Medical Research Council Scale, with 4-/5 to 5/5 proximal strength and as low as 1/5 strength in his distal muscles. He had bilateral radial deviation during wrist extension. Although his lower extremities demonstrated normal bulk, he had mild weakness on manual muscle testing as well. Our patient had 4/5 strength in his left hip extensors and flexors as well as 4/5 strength in bilateral knee extensors. He had no face weakness, no sensory deficits, no abnormal reflexes, no muscle fasciculations, and no upper motor neuron signs on examination.
Compound muscle action potentials (CMAP) of his left median, ulnar and radial nerves were absent. His upper extremity sensory nerve action potential (SNAP) responses were normal except for a slightly low amplitude of his ulnar and radial nerves. His lower extremity peroneal and tibial CMAPs and sural SNAPs were normal. Electromyography (EMG) of his upper extremities demonstrated evidence of diffuse chronic neurogenic changes in C5 to T1 innervated muscles as well as evidence of active denervation in his right triceps brachii. In his left lower extremity, chronic neurogenic changes were noted in the gastrocnemius medial head. His left cervical paraspinal muscles were normal on EMG.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) without contrast of his cervical, thoracic and lumbar spinal cord demonstrated Chiari malformation type I with associated syringohydromyelia extending from C1 to T11 . The maximal anterior-posterior diameter was 4mm and maximal lateral diameter 10mm. There was cord atrophy and mild atrophy of his paraspinal musculature . Once the syrinx was identified on MRI, our patient was referred to our neurosurgery team for evaluation. An MRI of his brain with and without contrast provided additional views of the Chiari malformation type I .