A previously healthy 22-year-old male Han Chinese presented in June 2019 with a 10-day history of epilepsy, gait instability, urinary incontinence. One year ago, the patient had suddenly blurring of vision, cognitive impairment, a rapid verbal reduction and psychiatric behaviors. Previously he was diagnosed with schizophrenia in Hangzhou Seventh People's Hospital (The Mental Health Center Affiliated Zhejiang University School of Medicine) and given some antipsychotic drugs and electroconvulsive therapy eight times. Unfortunately, his symptoms were not relieved; furthermore, they worsened. His neurological exam revealed abnormal higher mental function, mild visual impairment, mild ataxia, urinary incontinence. Motor and sensory examination was normal, and deep tendon reflex were+2 in all limbs.
Subsequently, brain MRI on fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) and diffusion images revealed hyper-intense lesions in right cerebellar hemisphere, temporal lobe, including corpus callosum, lesions in the right cerebellum were punctate enhancing with gadolinium contrast . Cervical and thoracic MRI was normal. FDG-PET/CT imaging showed that the FDG metabolism of bilateral frontal, temporal, midbrain and cerebellum was reduced; the temporal and cerebellum atrophy obviously (due to the FDG-PET/CT was done in other hospitals, unfortunately we only got a report). Conventional electroencephalography (EEG) showed there were several θ waves and sharp waves on both sides. Unfortunately, due to the patient's abnormal behavior, the visual evoked potential was not taken successfully. Regrettably, an orbital MRI was not done.
Following lumbar puncture examination, the pressure was 148 mmH2O, CSF analysis showed elevated protein of 856 mg/L (NR 120–600 mg/l) with normal glucose level and WBC count was 0 (NR 0–8 × 106/l). Oligoclonal bands were not detected in the CSF (A type I profile, IgG intrathecal synthesis rate, 8.49 mg/24 h, IgG index 0.7, NR < 0.680). Serum and CSF samples were sent to test for presence of both anti-NMDAR antibodies and NMOSD antibodies.
The results confirmed the diagnosis of both anti-NMDAR encephalitis and NMOSD. Anti-AQP4 IgG was detected in the serum samples at a titer of 69.65 U/ml (normal value ≦ 5U/ml), 3.67 U/ml in the CSF samples, using enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Moreover, anti-NMDAR antibodies were detected in the CSF at a titer of 1:10, using the cell-based indirect immunofluorescence assay (CBA). Serum was not examined for the presence of anti-NMDAR antibodies. The patient tested negative for anti-myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) antibodies, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), as well as other autoimmune encephalitis antibodies (anti-GABAB, anti-AMPAR1, anti-AMPAR2, anti-LGI1 and anti-CASPR2). The antinuclear antibodies (ANA), anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), anti-Sjögren syndrome A (SSA) antibody and anti-Sjögren syndrome B (SSB) antibodies were also negative.
The autoantibodies assay results supported the diagnosis of overlapped anti-NMDAR encephalitis and anti-AQP4 NMOSD for our patient. The differential diagnosis, at that time, was consistent with viral encephalitis, acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM). However, CSF study and MRI findings made viral encephalitis and ADEM unlikely.
The patient was treated with intravenous methylprednisolone at a dose of 1 g once daily for 5 days and subsequently received IVIG 0.4 g/kg/dose once daily for 5 days. After which, the corticoid dose was gradually reduced to 50 mg orally and started with azathioprine 50 mg bid daily to prevent further relapses. Following the immune therapy, life support, and symptomatic treatment, the patient's symptoms were recovered partly after 14 days. He was scheduled for regular follow-ups, and he is stable with no relapse so far. Now he has recovered well and back to his normal baseline daily activities, with a little memory disorder and mild visual impairment, no more epilepsy onset. The percentage of CD27+ memory B cells in peripheral blood was monitored several months, which prompt that the patient's condition was well controlled after immune therapy . The brain MRI has been taken after 2 years of follow-ups, which found no obvious abnormal signals in the brain, but the ventricles and cistern brain sulci were enlarged .