A 62-year-old male farmer was admitted to our hospital with a 2-month history of persistent headache and a 1-week history of ptosis. When the headache started, the patient received analgesic treatment, and the symptoms were relieved to some extent. One week prior to admission, the patient's headache worsened, and was accompanied by ptosis. Brain MRI at a local hospital indicated abnormal signals in the bilateral cavernous sinuses and adjacent meninges. Lumbar puncture showed normal opening pressure and slight leukocytosis (20×106/L reference range 0-8×106/L). Despite hormonal and symptomatic treatment, the patient's symptoms were not relieved. The patient was referred to our hospital for treatment. A previous medical history revealed diabetes for 2 months, with insulin prescribed. Physical examination on admission showed that the patient had paralysis of cranial nerves III, IV, and VI, which presented as bilateral ptosis and bilateral total ophthalmoplegia. He had bilateral exophthalmos and dilated pupils (5 mm) with sluggish pupillary reflexes. The bilateral near reflex and corneal reflex disappeared. The findings of other neurological examinations were normal. Laboratory tests revealed elevated C-reactive protein (60.95 mg/L reference range, 0-5 mg/L), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (37 mm/h reference range, 0-15 mm/h), and reduced luteinizing hormone (1.12mIU/mL reference range, 1.7-8.6 mIU/mL), prolactin (2 ng/mL reference range, 4.04-15.2 ng/mL), testosterone T (0.365 ng/mL reference range, 1.93-7.4 ng/mL), and thyrotropin (0.13 μIU/mL reference range, 0.56-5.91 μIU/mL). The serum myocardial enzyme levels; liver function results; renal function results; D-dimer and homocysteine levels; and autoimmunity markers including antinuclear antibody, anti-neutrophil, cytoplasmic, and rheumatoid factor were within the normal range, and the screening results for syphilis, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome were all negative. Contrast-enhanced MRI showed a mass lesion in the left cavernous sinus . Pituitary MRI revealed pituitary compression and a right shift of the pituitary stalk under compression . CTA showed a large aneurysm in the cavernous sinus segment of the left internal carotid artery (approximately 14.2 × 11.7 mm) and no thrombus in the aneurysm cavity . He was then referred to the Department of Interventional Neurology for endovascular coiling. The aneurysm was embolized using multiple detachable coils. Intraoperative cerebral angiography showed a strip aneurysm of the cavernous sinus segment of the left internal carotid artery with an irregular shape and a size of approximately 17.19 mm × 8.33 mm × 7.82 mm. . One week after surgery, headache improved significantly, but eye movement was still severely limited, manifested by inability to move in all directions. He still has left ptosis. Four months after the operation, the patient's headache and ptosis disappeared, and eye movements have completely returned to normal . Due to the limited cooperation of the patient, only part of the eye movement examination images are shown.