A 23-year-old Caucasian-American man presented to our medical center with type-B symptoms, including two months of fever, night sweats, and progressive weight loss. The patient had a negative HIV status and normal CD4 count. Additionally, he had left upper extremity weakness and paresthesias. The initial workup was initiated at an outside medical center where the patient presented with persistent left shoulder pain refractory to medical pain management. He then developed weakness of the bilateral upper extremities and decreased sensation to light touch. The symptoms worsened during his hospital course, and he became bed-bound from generalized weakness and fatigue. Low-volume lumbar puncture was undertaken after negative imaging of the head. This revealed a normal protein count and only 13 white blood cells. However, his peripheral white blood cell count was 15.5 × 109/L, and his alkaline phosphatase was significantly elevated. An MR was obtained which demonstrated cervical cord compression at the C7 level with near complete bilateral foraminal stenosis . There were striking changes on MR with virtually complete destruction, collapse and replacement of the C7 vertebra by a soft tissue mass with an associated epidural component and resultant narrowing of the spinal canal. In addition, numerous multicentric osseous lesions were also observed in the adjacent cervical levels that were hypointense on T1, hyperintense on T2, and bright on gadolinium-enhanced T1 sequences. A bone scan demonstrated multiple areas of increased radiotracer uptake in the lower cervical spine, centered at C7. A lymph node biopsy of a metachronous associated parasternal node yielded histopathological characteristics consistent with an anaplastic large T-cell lymphoma. However, CT scans of chest, abdomen, and pelvis, as well as full body PET and bone scans failed to show additional evidence of disease.
At time of transfer to our facility, the patient had near full strength of the right side, but he was weak against resistance on his left. On the third day after transfer it was noticed that his left side had acutely progressed to only a flicker of movement in the hands, and his right-sided strength had also significantly diminished. Rectal tone was found to be diminished. Given the known compression on MR imaging, urgent surgical decompression and fusion was elected to prevent progressive neurological decline.
The patient underwent a single-staged anterior and posterior procedure with anterior C7 corpectomy and decompression, cage placement, and C6-T1 anterior plate stabilization. This was followed by a posterior C5-T2 lateral mass screw-rod stabilization and posterolateral arthrodesis. At the time of operation, there was significant prevertebral swelling in the fascia anterior to C7 and a clear destructive and invasive process at this level. The bone was thoroughly invested with tumor, and the anatomy of the vertebral body was distorted by erosion from the malignancy. The dura of the cord was noted to be hemorrhagic and severely discolored in many areas where it had been encased and compressed by the tumoral mass that had both a lobular and en-plaque type growth pattern seen. Of prominent note, the C7 and T1 vertebral bone quality was significantly compromised and there was postural instability at bilateral C4/C5 and C5/C6 facets. The extent of bony destruction had exceeded pre-operative expectations and prompted both additional posterior fusion as well as hardware placement a level above and below anterior reconstruction.
Histological specimen analysis was consistent with a highly aggressive anaplastic large cell lymphoma. The tumor was CD30+ and CD5+ and negative for other markers, suggestive of a T-cell phenotype. Immunohistochemistry was positive for EMA and ALK-1. Microscopic examination demonstrated extensive infiltration of large atypical cells with bizarre nuclei, prominent nucleoli, and evidence abundant mitotic figures and apoptotic bodies. The histology demonstrated extensive infiltration of the bone from the C7 vertebral body, and the disease process at this site was significantly more involved than the adjacent soft-tissue.
Post-operatively, early mobilization while wearing a cervical collar was encouraged. Collar immobilization was continued in the weeks following surgery as he underwent chemotherapy. He had a near-complete return of strength in his extremities without residual post-operative sensory deficits. Post-operative imaging revealed proper alignment and stability of cage placement with excellent restoration of the spinal canal patency and subarachnoid space . Following a short period of post-operative recovery, the patient was started on an initial cycle of a CHOP chemotherapy regimen (Per cycle, Day 1: cyclophosphamide 750 mg/m2 IV, doxorubicin 50 mg/m2 IV, vincristine 1.4 mg/m2 IV; Day 1-5: prednisone 100 mg po) to treat his adjacent bony spinal lesions. Six cycles of 21-day length were planned. Repeat imaging of body with CT imaging as well as with nuclear imaging modalities (PET and MR-spectroscopy) failed to demonstrate extra-spinal disease at 14 weeks post-operative.
In the immediate months following surgery the patient regained near full strength. Three weeks post-op, he was discharged from the hospital with home physical therapy. At time of last follow-up, one year after the operation, the patient continued to have a stable functional status.