A 42-year-old Korean woman complained of conjunctival injection and a dull retro-orbital pain of 1-month duration in her left eye. Decreased visual acuity of the left eye developed 20-days thereafter, but she did not complain of diplopia. Furthermore, she had no history of head trauma, intracranial surgery, or intake of hormonal drugs. Essential hyper-tension had been detected 6-months previously, and she was taking antihypertensive medication, but her blood pressure was well controlled. Neither the patient nor her family members had any history of thromboembolic disease.
The patient's systolic and diastolic blood pressures were 118 and 76-mmHg, respectively. Exophthalmos, chemosis, and conjunctival injection were observed in her left eye. The visual acuities of her left and right eyes were 20/1,000 and 20/200, respectively, and the intraocular pressures were 25 and 12-mmHg. Light reflexes in both eyes were normal, and no relative afferent papillary defect was observed. Limitations of extraocular motion were not evident and the fundi of both eyes were normal. Ophthalmic bruit was heard on her left eye. Both motor and sensory functions were intact, and deep tendon reflexes were normal. Furthermore, there was no evidence of cerebellar dysfunction, and she did not have an abnormal gait.
Magnetic resonance and cerebral angiography images revealed a left CCF that was fed by the bilateral internal and external carotid arteries (dural CCF) . The CCF drain-ed into the left superior ophthalmic vein and the left sphenoparietal sinus. No thrombosis was observed in the cavernous sinus. Hematologic tests showed normal levels of protein C and antithrombin III. Factor V Leiden and antiphospholipid antibody were not detected. Her protein S level was low at 41% (normal range: 70-140%).
The cavernous sinus was embolized via a transvenous approach using 19 coils, and the fistula was completely obliterated. Chemosis, conjunctival injection, and orbital pain were relieved after embolization, and the patient's visual acuity improved from 20/1,000 to 20/100, and the intraocular pressure decreased from 25 to 17-mmHg.
Sixth-nerve palsy with orbital pain developed suddenly 4 days after the initial embolization; the intraocular pressures in the left and right eyes were 17 mmHg and 12 mmHg, respe-ctively. Follow-up angiography revealed a minimal shunt from the dural branch of the left middle meningeal artery. Thus, transarterial glue injection and second coil embolization were performed via a transfacial vein, which resulted in completely obliteration of the shunt. Anticoagulation therapy was then started to prevent additional venous thrombosis due to the protein S deficiency. Two days after the second embolization (6-days after the initial embolization) diplopia and orbital pain started diminishing, and at 1-month after embolization, only minimal diplopia in the extreme left lateral gaze remained.