A 34-year-old nulliparous woman was referred to our unit (Minimally Invasive-Pelvic-Surgery Unit-Woman and Children’s Health Department, University of Padua) with the following clinical presentation: hypermenorrhea, abdominal/pelvic pain, and progressively worsening anemia (past 6 months). The patient’s medical and surgical histories were unremarkable, as were previous Pap smears and pelvic examinations. Abdominal and gynecological examination revealed an enlarged uterus of irregular shape due to the presence of a nontender abdominal mass that could be referred to as a leiomyoma. No adnexal masses were detected. Transvaginal sonography (TVS) confirmed our diagnostic hypothesis and described a hypoechoic uterine mass (7.7×6.2×5.8 cm located in the anterior-left uterine wall extending to the endometrial surface without abnormal vascularization pattern) suggestive for leiomyoma.
Preoperative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed the presence of a voluminous uterine mass, with heterogeneous signal intensity and early intense enhancement after contrast injection, involving the endometrial cavity and an absence of a well-defined endometrial–myometrial junction. No evidence of retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy, intraperitoneal disease, or regional metastases was shown . Hysteroscopic investigation was negative for intrauterine benign or malignant lesions. We planned surgical laparoscopic myomectomy. At laparoscopic exploration, the pelvis appeared unremarkable, without signs of extrauterine disease. Adnexa appeared normal; the uterus presented irregularities in morphology, but no signs of serosal involvement were found .
We proceeded with enucleation of the uterine mass according to our previously described technique. Due to the intermediate soft-hard consistency of the leiomyoma, a frozen section histology was performed which showed benign-appearing smooth muscle proliferation with no cellular atypia or excessive mitotic activity. Given the age of the patient, the lack of pelvic and lymph–vascular disease involvement, and the negative frozen section histology, a conservative surgical approach was chosen. The complete enucleation of the intramural mass required the opening of the uterine cavity. Due to the persisting suspicion of an unusual uterine lesion, we performed an accurate minimal morcellation of the lesion and extraction of the specimen by endobag. The endometrial cavity was then repaired and the myometrium was reconstructed in three layers using Size 0 Polysorb™ Suture (Polysorb, USSC, Norwalk, CT, USA). Multiple abdomen/pelvis washing with warm sterile water was performed at the end of the surgical procedure. The subsequent hospital stay showed no signs of surgical complications, and 2 days later the patient was discharged.
The definitive histology reported a diagnosis of ESS with minimal nuclear pleomorphism, low mitotic index, and an infiltrative growth pattern within the myometrium. Immunohistochemical investigation found cells positive for the presence of CD10, muscle-specific actin, and vimentin, whereas it tested negative for desmin and h-caldesmon. There was strong nuclei antibody staining for estrogen and progesterone receptors .
Counseling with the patient regarding histological findings and the risk of recurrence was performed. We offered second-look surgery and oncological counseling in order to discuss the possibility of adjuvant therapy. Due to the patient’s strong desire for preserving fertility and the negativity of all oncological serum markers (CA125, CEA, CA19.9, CA15.3, HE4), we decided on a conservative approach, postponing surgical and adjuvant therapy until after the planned pregnancy.
Sequential clinical examination and diagnostic imaging was performed every 3 months in postoperative surveillance. TVS and MRI showed normal uterine size and vascularization pattern; no evidence of intraperitoneal disease or pelvic and para-aortic lymph node involvement was detected 6 months after surgery .
In order to exclude a possible misdiagnosed recurrence (linked to shorter progression free-survival described in literature associated with morcellation of the mass) we performed, 7 months after the first surgery, hysteroscopic evaluation and multiple endometrial biopsies (all negative for disease recurrence) and a diagnostic laparoscopic second-look which did not show any macroscopic evidence of malignancy, subsequently confirmed by cytological examination of pelvic peritoneal washing .
One year after conservative surgical treatment, the patient showed good clinical condition, return of regular menses, and no evidence of recurrences. Three months after the last oncological follow-up, the patient conceived spontaneously and, to date, is pregnant at 11 weeks of gestation without evidence of recurrent disease or obstetric complications.