A 53-year-old man was referred to our hospital to address complaints of bilateral acute eye pain, headache, and loss of vision that had lasted for 4 d.
Three days prior to presentation at our hospital, the patient visited a local hospital with the same complaints and was diagnosed with bilateral acute primary angle closure, bilateral refractive error, and amblyopia in his left eye. He was prescribed pilocarpine eye drops (4 times/daily), carteolol hydrochloride (2 times/daily), brinzolamide (3 times/daily), and oral acetazolamide tablets (2 times/daily). The doctors also recommended consideration of laser peripheral iridectomy. However, after 3 d of the drug regimen, the patient’s symptoms only continued to worsen.
At admission, the patient reported no history of systemic immunologic disease, hypertension, or diabetes mellitus. He denied a recent history of influenza infection and of any signs of neurological disorders. Excluding poor eyesight in the left eye, he denied any diagnoses of ocular disorders or refractive error.
The patient denied any diagnoses of personal and family history.
Physical examination showed cornea edema accompanied by a shallow anterior chamber in both eyes. Best corrected visual acuity was a reduction to 0.6 (corrected by -1.5 Ds) in the right eye and 0.2 (not correctable) in the left eye. Both pupils were round but with slight dilation, situated in front of a transparent lens. Both eyes showed hypertension, with intraocular pressure (IOP) of 32 mmHg for the right eye and 38mmHg for the left eye. Ultrasound biomicroscopic (UBM) examination showed that the anterior chamber depth of the right eye was 1.9 mm and of the left was 1.8mm; in addition, cyclodialysis, pronated ciliary process, and totally closed anterior chamber angle were observed. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) examination showed RPE folds in the right eye and optic disc edema and multiple serous retinal detachments in the left eye. Ultrasound examination showed bilateral thickening of the posterior wall (2.6 mm in the right eye and 2.7 mm in the left eye) and fluid under Tenon’s capsule.
Laboratory examinations included tests for complete blood count and sedimentation rate, levels of C-reactive protein, serum rheumatoid factor, and angiotensin converting enzyme, titer of anti-streptolysin O, and presence of serum anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody and antinuclear antibody (commonly referred to as ANA). All results were within normal ranges.
Anterior segment photography revealed a quite shallow anterior chamber accompanied by mild cornea edema in both eyes. The pupils were 5 mm and symmetrical to each other. Lenses were transparent without dislocation . Measurement of the anterior chamber depths by UBM also revealed cyclodialysis, pronated ciliary process, and total closure of the anterior chamber angle in both eyes . OCT showed RPE folds in the right eye and optic disc edema and multiple serous retinal detachments in the left eye . Ultrasound showed thickening of the posterior walls and presence of fluid under Tenon’s capsule in both eyes .