A forty-seven-year-old South Asian male patient with a previous history of hypertension, admitted to our hospital on the August 14, 2019 with severe epigastric pain for two days associated with bloody vomiting. On presentation; his blood pressure was 183/124 mmHg, heart rate was 93 bpm, respiratory rate was 22 bpm, and oxygen saturation was 93% on room air. His venous blood gas result showed pH 7.031, PCO2 36 mmHg, PaO2 50 mmHg, potassium 5.1 mEq/L, sodium 144 mEq/L and HCO3 9.6 mEq/L. Blood counts on the day of admission were as follows: white blood cells 16.4 × 103/μL, hemoglobin 13.2 g/dL, platelets 136 × 109/L. The patient was intubated in the emergency department due to tachypnea, tachycardia, and severe metabolic acidosis; then he was shifted to the medical intensive care unit (MICU). An urgent computed tomography image of the abdomen was ordered, which revealed features of ischemic changes involving the wall of the stomach, duodenal, and proximal jejunal loops, plus features of acute pancreatitis. Laboratory investigation showed an increase in amylase and lipase, 508 and 974 U/L, respectively. Due to the suspicion of bowel ischemia, intravenous infusion of unfractionated heparin was started on the first day of admission with a target of therapeutic activated partial thromboplastin time. On the 3rd day of MICU admission, the patient was extubated successfully, and proper history was taken from him. The patient gave a history of ingesting an unknown liquid substance, after which he started to have these symptoms. On day five, the patient had hemoglobin drop, and esophago-gastro-duodenoscopy was done and showed diffuse esophageal, gastric, and duodenal wall changes suggestive of ischemic necrosis, suspecting caustic substance ingestion. A biopsy was taken, which showed totally necrotic tissues. The patient was started on parenteral nutrition and decided for conservative treatment.
On day eleven of admission, the treating team decided that bowel ischemia is unlikely and changed the continuous intravenous infusion of unfractionated heparin to subcutaneous enoxaparin 40 mg once daily for venous thromboembolism (VTE) prophylaxis. Platelet count on the first day of enoxaparin was 748 × 109/L, which increased to 1213 × 109/L on day three of enoxaparin . All medications were reviewed for possible drug-induced thrombocytosis. Enoxaparin was stopped, and the patient was started on unfractionated heparin 5000 units subcutaneously every 12 hours as an alternative to enoxaparin for VTE prophylaxis. After two days from enoxaparin discontinuation, platelets dropped to 703 × 109/L. On day seven of enoxaparin discontinuation, the platelet count dropped to 385 × 109/L, and it reached 345 × 109/L on day ten of enoxaparin discontinuation. During the time of platelet count elevation, the patient was afebrile and receiving no oxygen support. All cultures sent were negative, the C-reactive protein was only 55 mg/L (decreasing from 208 mg/L upon admission), procalcitonin was 0.58 ng/mL (decreasing from 23 ng/ml upon admission), and no evidence of active infection during that time. The patient was transferred from the intensive care unit to the medical floor on day 17 of hospital admission for a continuation of care.