A 53-year-old man with alcoholic cirrhosis was admitted to Beijing Ditan Hospital of Capital Medical University for lower extremity weakness, slow movement, and stumbling gait that required walking assistance with a crutch in January 2015.
The patient was diagnosed with decompensated alcoholic cirrhosis with ascites in September 2011. In December 2011, he was admitted to the hospital due to gastroesophageal variceal bleeding and received splenectomy combined with a gastroesophageal devascularization surgery. In April 2013, he was hospitalized for comorbid acute hepatitis B and suffered from recurrent overt HE since then. Since January 2015, the patient gradually developed weakness in both lower limbs, slow movement, and hobbling gait.
The patient had no relevant medical history.
The patient had a history of heavy drinking for 25 years, with an average alcohol intake of 200 g per day.
Abdominal examination suggested hepatomegaly and positive shifting dullness. Neurological system examinations demonstrated slurring speech, normal cranial nerves, increased muscle tension and grade 4/5 power of lower limbs, exaggerated deep tendon reflexes, and no sensory deficit or sphincteric involvement.
Serial results of liver function and whole blood count are presented in Table . Blood ammonia concentration fluctuated between 50 and 87 μmol/L during the occurrence of overt HE. In January 2015, hospitalization, hepatitis B surface antigen, and anti-HCV tests were negative. Additionally, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), Syphilis, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), and cytomegalovirus tests were negative. Serum vitamin B-12 level was normal. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis was normal.
Contrast abdominal computed tomography revealed liver cirrhosis, esophageal and gastric varices, gastro-left renal shunt, and portal vein thrombosis . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain indicated hyperintensities in the bilateral globus pallidus . Moreover, whole spinal MRI and lumbosacral MRI were performed and revealed normal results. The electromyogram showed normal nerve conduction velocity in the bilateral tibial nerves. Somatosensory evoked potentials of the lower limbs were normal. Motor evoked potential was abnormal in both lower limbs.