In March 2021, an 82-year-old, Asian, non-smoker and no second-hand smoker woman was admitted to our hospital for chest pain and cough. Chest CT (computed tomography) scanning showed a 4.3*3.7 cm mass beside the mediastinum of the left lung and a small amount of fluid accumulated in the left thoracic cavity . A biopsy specimen taken by CT-guided fine-needle aspiration (FNA) showed lung adenocarcinoma with positive TTF-1 and Napsin A and negative P40 and CK5/6 . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed no obvious malignant metastases. In addition, abdominal ultrasound revealed no obvious abnormalities. On the basis of the results of FNA and chest CT, the patient was diagnosed with lung adenocarcinoma (cT2bNxM1a, stage IV, ECOG-PS 1). Due to pleural effusion and advanced age, the patient subsequently underwent mutational analysis. The PCR results identified two common EGFR mutations (Del19 and L858R) and METex14 (c.2888–192891del), which was verified by NGS analysis (forty-eight gene panel). To our knowledge, lung adenocarcinoma harboring three mutations has not been reported thus far. Considering the weak positive antinuclear antibody staining and advanced age of the patient, combination therapy might have induced severe treatment-related adverse events (AEs), especially increased risks of interstitial pneumonia and a cardiac event. Therefore, monotherapy with the EGFR inhibitor osimertinib was administered in April 2021. A chest CT scan was reexamined in the outpatient department one month later, and the result revealed a similar local lesion (4.8*4.3 cm) and a decrease in pleural effusion, which was confirmed as SD (Stable Disease) according to RECIST criteria . After 2 months, radiological progression was demonstrated with an increase in size (5.9*5.5 cm) and in pleural effusion. Rebiopsy or liquid biopsy was suggested to explore the resistance mechanism of osimertinib, but the patient refused because of advanced age and high price. Therefore, she received a combination of osimertinib 80 mg once daily and crizotinib 250 mg twice a day . Unfortunately, the patient died at home suddenly 17 days later. The cough and chest tightness were appeared after combination therapy but the cause of death remains unknown.