We present a 45-year-old Colombian hispanic female patient with no prior relevant family or medical history, who reported a 2-year history of conjunctival hyperemia, decreased visual acuity, blurred vision, photophobia, and bilateral pain, associated with bilateral mydriasis and pigment dispersion. She was treated with topical prednisolone 1% without improvement. After observing a severe intraocular pressure (IOP) peak (35/37 mmHg), she was diagnosed with severe bilateral hypertensive anterior uveitis. Viral origin was suspected, and treatment with acyclovir was established with no improvement and hypertension persistence. After three months with mean IOPs of 28 mmHg OD and 30 mmHg OS, uveitic glaucoma was diagnosed, requiring surgical management with Ahmed valve implantation.
Infectious and autoimmune diseases were ruled out with blood tests, and a diagnosis of idiopathic uveitis was made. She was first treated with deflazacort and methotrexate, but no improvement was evidenced. Thus, treatment with an anti-TNF-α was established without resolution of the intraocular inflammation.
She was referred to our ocular immunology and uveitis consultation for a second opinion. During the anamnesis and the previous charts and prescriptions review, we noticed that she was treated with systemic moxifloxacin due to acute bronchitis 15 days before the onset of the ocular symptoms.
On ophthalmological examination, best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/150 OD and 20/70 OS, and bilateral photophobia, anisocoria, and nonreactive right eye mydriasis were observed. On slit-lamp examination, positive findings were: OD—mild conjunctival hyperemia, Ahmed glaucoma valve , anterior chamber with no cells, mydriatic and nonreactive pupil, and iridian atrophy with extensive transillumination defects in 360° , OS—mild conjunctival hyperemia, Ahmed glaucoma valve, 3+ of pigment dispersion, mydriatic and nonreactive pupil, and iridian atrophy with extensive transillumination defects in 360° . Posterior subcapsular opacity was evidenced OU . IOP was 16/18 mmHg. A cup-to-disc ratio of 0.7 OD and 0.8 OS was observed, and the rest of the posterior segment examination was unremarkable OU.
Considering the patient presented common viral infection findings such as ocular hypertension, iridian atrophy defects, and anterior chamber inflammation, although viral uveitis is rarely bilateral, this diagnosis had to be discarded. Taking into account that blood laboratory tests were negative for infectious disease, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in aqueous humor was requested OU. Results for viral origin, including cytomegalovirus, Epstein–Barr virus, herpes simplex virus (HSV) type 1 and 2, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and toxoplasmosis, were negative.
Taking into account the mentioned history of acute bronchitis treated with oral moxifloxacin 15 days before the onset of ocular symptoms and the discard of an infectious and autoimmune etiology, moxifloxacin-induced BAIT syndrome was the final diagnosis. Permanent severe sequelae were found in this patient, including long-lasting eye pain, photophobia, and focus difficulty secondary to severe bilateral iridian atrophy and inability of synkinetic reflex. In the same way, Ahmed valve implantation was necessary for achieving intraocular pressure control.
The patient continued her treatment with topical antihypertensive drops (brinzolamide 1% + brimonidine tartrate 0.2% twice a day OD, and dorzolamide 2% + timolol 0.5% + brimonidine tartrate 0.2% twice a day OS) and topical lubricant drops. Treatment with anti-TNF-α was suspended after discarding autoimmune etiology. Resolution of pigment dispersion and stability of intraocular pressure were evidenced. Cataract surgery OU was performed. At the last follow-up, the patient was stable and presented a BCVA of 20/20 OD and 20/40 OS.