Left lower limb weakness for more than 5 h.
More than five hours prior, left lower limb weakness suddenly occurred in a 49-year-old female patient; the left upper limb could move autonomously, but the lower limb could only shift on the bed surface. She had slurred speech, no nausea or vomiting, limb twitching, and urinary incontinence. She was given thrombolytic therapy with alteplase (50 mg) at 11:50 am in another hospital, and her symptoms did not worsen after thrombolytic treatment.
The patient had no history of hypertension, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, heart disease, smoking, or drinking.
The patient denied any family history of malignant tumors.
The patient’s vital signs were: Body temperature, 37.1 °C; blood pressure, 122/82 mmHg; heart rate, 82 beats per min; and respiratory rate, 18 breaths per min. The cardiopulmonary examination was normal. Her cognition seemed normal; her speech was a little vague; the neck showed soft passivity; the Kernig sign was negative; the pupils were symmetrical and 3 mm in diameter; the light reflex was normal; eye movement was normal; there was no nystagmus; bilateral hearing was symmetrical; bilateral nasolabial folds were symmetrical; and the tongue could be stuck out on request in the center.
Her left lower limb muscle strength was level 1, left upper limb muscle strength was level 5, right lower and upper limb muscle strength was level 5, and the tendon reflexes of the extremities were normal; the muscle tone of the extremities was normal; Babinski sign was positive on the left, but negative on the right; and bilateral acupuncture sensations and deep sensations were symmetrical. The bilateral finger-nose touch, rotation, heel, knee, and tibia tests were stable and accurate, and the closed eyes sign could not be combined. Her initial National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score was 4, the modified Rankin Scale (mRS) score was 4, and her water swallow test grade was 2.
Laboratory results were normal except for the D-dimer level at 4410.0 μg/L. In addition, her thrombophilia genes were investigated, and the results suggested two risk factors: A 2 KB heterozygous mutation upstream of PAI-1 (NM_000602.5) and a homozygous missense mutation in MTHFR (NM_005957.5).
Computed tomography (CT) of the head showed no brain hemorrhage. CT angiography (CTA) revealed occlusion of the M3 segment of the right middle cerebral artery (MCA) .