A 27-year-old female of Lebanese descent presented at 36 weeks’ gestation with abdominal pain and per-vaginal (PV) bleeding. Despite previously unremarkable antenatal reviews, she had a FDIU with placental abruption. This was on a background of a single previous miscarriage at 6 weeks’ gestation with an otherwise unremarkable personal or family history for any other systemic illnesses. On admission she was normotensive, however investigations demonstrated mild kidney injury, anaemia, thrombocytopenia and mild transaminitis .
She underwent an emergency Caesarean section, was intubated and received multiple blood product transfusions in the setting of coagulopathy and blood loss. She had anuric renal failure and was commenced on haemodialysis. Renal ultrasonography and computed tomography (CT) revealed bilateral poor parenchymal perfusion with patent renal vasculature and mercaptoacetyltriglycine imaging (MAG3) imaging demonstrated evidence of a small degree of residual kidney function . A renal biopsy was not performed as the patient remained intubated and it was expected that the biopsy would show non-specific thrombotic microangiopathy and would be unlikely to change management. Post-operatively her coagulopathy rapidly resolved with blood product administration, however, her anuric renal failure and MAHA persisted. It remained unclear if she had thrombotic thrombocytopenia (TTP), however, empiric plasma exchange (PLEX) was not performed as her degree of renal injury was not in keeping with TTP and more likely to be related to an alternative cause. Her ADAMTS13 level was nonetheless sent for testing and her direct antigolbuin testing (DAT) was negative . Pre-eclampsia with HELLP syndrome was also being considered but felt to be less likely cause.
A presumptive diagnosis of P-aHUS was made 4 days after her presentation in the setting of worsening MAHA, resolved coagulopathy, normal blood pressure, negative Shiga-toxin testing and severe renal impairment. Her presentation, in association with FDIU, was in keeping with postpartum risk of P-aHUS and it was expected that HELLP syndrome would have shown signs of improvement by this point. As a result, she was given the quadrivalent and serogroup B Meningococcal vaccinations along with oral Amoxicillin and managed empirically with Eculizumab (900 mg) therapy while remaining dialysis dependent. Five days following her admission, her ADAMTS13 level returned with a normal result , effectively excluding TTP. In the days following, her transfusion support was ceased, and she began to produce small amounts of urine by day ten of admission. She was then transitioned to intermittent haemodialysis and a tunnelled internal jugular catheter was inserted. Immunological testing showed abnormally low CD46/MCP level, persistently low C3, and an elevated C9 level in keeping with alternative complement pathway dysregulation. The remainder of her autoimmune screening was negative .
Within 2 months of discharge from hospital, her renal function had improved and she became dialysis independent . Presently, she remains on fortnightly Eculizumab (1200 mg) and remains in disease remission with normal haematological parameters and stable renal function with a latest eGFR of 60 mL/min/1.73m2. In order to predict her risk of relapse and identify a disease mechanism, the patient has undergone flow-cytometric immunophenotyping and whole exome sequencing via the Westmead Hospitals clinical genetics service. Currently, we are awaiting the outcome of any risk-conferring mutations in this patient to stratify her relapse risk.