A 19-year-old white man presented to the emergency department (ED) for evaluation of weakness, nausea, and vomiting that began 2 days prior . The patient had a personal medical history of chronic hypokalemia and his father had been diagnosed with hypokalemic periodic paralysis; there was no other family history of renal or neurologic disease. Similar episodes had occurred since the onset of puberty at age 11 years. These episodes are presumed to be associated with exposure to cold weather, intense physical activity, or rest for prolonged periods, with the long-term history of hypokalemia. The patient reported occasional marijuana use and was previously counseled about the possibility of cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome causing symptoms. He denied illicit drug, alcohol, or tobacco use. Laboratory testing was conducted in the ED, with the only markedly abnormal result being a serum potassium level of 2.2 mmol/L, indicating hypokalemia. This electrolyte imbalance resulted in a nephrology consult. Serum magnesium, chloride, and glucose levels were elevated (1.7 mg/dL, 111 mmol/L, and 104 mg/dL, respectively). Cannabinoid testing was positive. Serum blood urea nitrogen (10 mg/dL) and serum creatinine levels (0.98 mg/dL) were normal. Physical examination was notable only for generalized muscle weakness.
The patient was previously prescribed oral potassium chloride 20 mEq/15 mL daily during acute attacks, which improved weakness within ~1–2 hours. The patient reported previous hospitalizations for intravenous potassium chloride administration for attacks of weakness due to severe nausea, which prevented oral potassium chloride ingestion, as was the case during this current visit. The frequency of hypokalemic attacks and hospitalizations related to these attacks have increased with the patient’s age. The patient reported numerous hypokalemic attacks, with ten resulting in ED visits in the previous year. The patient presented with a potassium level of 1.8 mmol/L at one of these visits.
For the current attack, the patient’s condition improved with potassium repletion (100 mEq) and several liters of intravenous fluid over several days during hospitalization. His condition improved in 2 days, and he was advised to follow a high-potassium diet. During follow-up in the nephrology outpatient clinic, the patient presented with a low potassium level . Since hospital discharge, he began taking dichlorphenamide tablets, which he received from his father, 50 mg once daily at bedtime for 2–3 weeks. He noted less frequent and severe symptoms. Although he reported improvement with dichlorphenamide, his insurance required an initial trial of acetazolamide 250 mg twice daily, which he received at discharge. At this time, the patient noted that his father had previously received acetazolamide but experienced no symptom improvement, warranting a switch to dichlorphenamide. A few weeks later, the patient stated that his condition was not well controlled with acetazolamide, and he was prescribed dichlorphenamide 50 mg daily, which improved the intensity and frequency of weakness. In his most recent nephrology follow-up, the patient reported continued symptom improvement. At follow-up, his serum potassium level was 3.2 mmol/L. Genetic testing is pending.