A 59-year-old, British Caucasian male was working in security and was coming off duty at 0100 hours on 01 March 1991. Five lads tried to ambush the patient and deliberately caused a head-on collision. This patient was wearing a seat belt. He sustained fracture of mandible, left 3 - 8 ribs, left scapula, left humerus, left radius and ulna, right 3 - 6 ribs, right femur, right distal fibula. He developed left haemothorax; chest tube drained 1300 ml of blood. He was ventilated with endotracheal tube. Internal fixation was performed of left humerus, left radius and ulna. External fixation was applied to right femoral shaft. After recovery, he was found to have paraplegia with sensory level at T-4. X-rays of spine and myelogram revealed no abnormality. It was presumed that paraplegia was due to hypotension. Tracheostomy was performed on 19 March 1991. He was weaned off ventilator on 22 April 1991. He developed pressure sore in sacrum. He was managing neuropathic bladder by indwelling urethral catheter.
On 10 May 1995, during a routine visit to spinal unit, blood sample was sent for Prostate-specific antigen (PSA). Prostate-specific antigen was 17.7 mg/ml. Examination under anaesthesia revealed large, firm prostate but not clinically malignant. Biopsies were taken on 12 September 1995. All cores of prostatic tissue were infiltrated by a moderately differentiated primary adenocarcinoma of prostate Gleason score 3+3. Focal perineural invasion was present. Bone scan was done on 18 September 1995, which showed no evidence of metastatic bone disease. Bilateral orchidectomy was performed on 19 September 1995. Microscopy revealed normal testes. MRI of pelvis, carried out on 23 October 1995, revealed no evidence of any spread of prostatic malignancy beyond the prostatic capsule. The prostate measured 3 cm in diameter and appeared well defined from rectum, levator ani muscles and seminal vesicle. There was no pelvic lymphadenopathy.
In February 1996, this patient sustained injury to right ankle while he was hoisted. X-ray showed fracture of distal tibia and fibula. In October 1996, he developed chest infection and was prescribed amoxicillin. In February 2001, this patient developed pneumonia. He received cefuroxime intravenously. He was experiencing repeated catheter blocks. Flexible cystoscopy showed several calculi in urinary bladder. In March 2001, cystoscopy and electrohydraulic lithotripsy of vesical calculi were carried out. Prostate-specific antigen levels during this patient's follow-up are given in Table . In August 2001, this patient was admitted to spinal unit for management of pressure sores. He expired on 28 June 2002 in local hospital. Cause of death was recorded as acute ventricular failure, congestive heart failure, chronic respiratory failure and spinal cord injury.