A 3-year-old boy who was previously healthy with no known allergies collapsed in a bathtub. When emergency medical service arrived to him 5 min after the collapse, he was in cardiac arrest (pulseless electrical activity). They immediately started basic life support and attempted to secure the airway by chin lift or jaw thrust but they could not obtain it due to the intraoral edema. He came to our emergency department approximately 20 min after the collapse. On admission, he was still in cardiac arrest (pulseless electrical activity) with obvious swelling of the lip, tongue, and lower jaw . Bag–valve–mask ventilation was attempted, but intraoral edema completely disturbed his ventilation. We immediately attempted intubation of his trachea by using a conventional laryngoscope and a video laryngoscope but failed. Consequently, we judged his situation to be CICO. At first, we considered percutaneous cannula cricothyroidotomy (PCC) with angiocatheter needle, but we were afraid of penetrating the posterior tracheal wall because we could not find enough working space or a proper angle to safely perform percutaneous needle insertion . Nonetheless, we started to perform cricothyroidotomy (SC) 2 min after the admission.
His neck was extended by pushing a pillow under his shoulders. Identifying the cricothyroid membrane and stabilizing the larynx with the left hand, we made a transverse skin incision through the skin and cricothyroid membrane. We used a cricothyroidotomy kit (Mini-Trach II – Non Seldinger Kit; Smiths Medical, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA), and the introducer in the kit was inserted through the incision in the cricothyroid membrane. Subsequently, we tried to insert the kit cannula into the trachea, but it would not insert because the space between the cricothyroid cartilages was smaller than the outer diameter of the cannula. Several attempts were made with the cannula for 2 min after we started SC . However, the cannula was kinked in the space between the cricothyroid cartilages, and we could not provide ventilation. Subsequently, we removed the cannula.
An approximate 2-cm vertical midline skin incision was made and followed by blunt dissection to identify the trachea. A transverse incision below the cricoid cartilage was made as a tracheostomy. After the introducer was inserted through the incision, the cannula was inserted into the trachea . We finally reached an open airway and provided ventilation 10 min after we began the surgical attempt to secure the airway. We gave 0.01-mg/kg adrenaline by intraosseous route 11 times based on the pediatric advanced life support, but the swelling did not resolve. We did not use other medications, such as steroids or local vasoconstrictions, to reduce the edema.
We continued resuscitation, but spontaneous circulation did not return and the patient died. The autopsy showed that the airway obstruction was caused by idiopathic anaphylaxis or acquired angioedema and that the diameter of the space between the thyroid cartilage and cricoid cartilage was approximately 3 mm.