A 31-year-old pregnant woman (gravida 5, para 4) was referred to the obstetrics department of a tertiary health-care center in Mogadishu, Somalia because of a suspected abdominal pregnancy and a 2-day history of severe lower abdominal pain. On the morning of presentation, she had visited a health-care clinic with a complaint of severe lower abdominal pain, where she had her first ultrasound examination during pregnancy. An initial diagnosis of abdominal pregnancy was made. At the current presentation, she did not remember her last menstrual bleeding and did not report any problems with her four prior full-term pregnancies, which ended up with normal vaginal deliveries in the first two and cesarean sections for the latter two. No information could be elicited from the patient concerning her previous cesarean sections.
Physical examination was unremarkable except for abdominal pain on palpation. Uterine contractions were present on a nonstress test. Pelvic examination showed a soft and 2 cm dilated cervix. Transabdominal ultrasonography revealed two adjacent uteri, one of which was empty (, arrow) and the other bearing a fetus of approximately 1100 g at 28 weeks and 1 day of gestational age, with cephalic presentation and severe oligohydramnios . Magnetic resonance imaging substantiated ultrasonographic findings of the two uteri, with a single fetus in the left one having cephalic presentation, findings consistent with intrauterine pregnancy (, arrow). A diagnosis of UD was made.
On the same day of presentation and after administration of betamethasone, due to the very severe lower abdominal pain of the patient and severe oligohydramnios of the fetus, the patient underwent emergency cesarean section under general anesthesia, and a 980 g male baby was delivered. His 1- and 5-min APGAR scores were 4 and 5, respectively. The newborn was transferred to the newborn intensive care unit for postnatal care. The mother had an uneventful postoperative course and was discharged home on the second postoperative day in very good condition. Given her background of poor health-seeking behavior and the three cesarean sections she had undergone, the patient was counseled about appropriate ways of contraception other than a uterine device.