The proband is a 15-years old girl with an unremarkable family history. At 18 months old she manifested no ambulation, and by 3 years old she had developed ataxia and epilepsy with normal neuroimaging. At 5 years old clinical examination showed axial hypotonia, truncal ataxia, limb dysmetria and hyperreflexia. Paroxysmal nystagmus, saccadization of visual pursuit and dysarthria were observed. The patient also exhibited intellectual disability (IQ = 54).
Biochemical analyses in blood disclosed elevated lactate in 3 separate occasions and elevated alanine in 12 determinations . Muscle and skin biopsies were analyzed at 8 years of age to search for mitochondrial disorders. CoQ deficiency was identified both in muscle and fibroblasts (see ). Because of this finding, CoQ supplementation (orally administered at 30 mg/Kg/day) was initiated. Ataxia improved dramatically after 6 months of therapy, and, upon reassessment after 4 years of CoQ treatment, ambulation remained essentially normal, with a mild residual reduction in velocity. Her nystagmus had also disappeared and her visual pursuit had normalized . However, mild dysmetria, dysarthria, myoclonic epilepsy and intellectual disability (perhaps refractory to CoQ), were present. During CoQ therapy, concomitant treatment with valproate and ethosuximide was given to control myoclonic epilepsy. No noticeable side-effects were observed when antiepileptic doses were raised to maintain therapeutic levels along the evolution of the disease due to the patient increasing weight. In order to further investigate these manifestations, a lumbar puncture was performed at 12 years of age, revealing diminished cerebrospinal glucose concentrations . Plasma glucose concentration was normal. Diagnosis of GLUT1 deficiency (G1D) was established and a ketogenic diet (4:1 ratio, containing medium chain triglyceride oil) was initiated (CoQ treatment was then discontinued).
Written informed consent was obtained from the parents. The study was approved by the Ethical Committee of our Hospital.
Muscle and skin biopsies were collected, stored and cultured following previously reported procedures . CoQ content was analyzed by HPLC with electrochemical detection, and MRC enzyme activities by spectrophotometry as reported .
Functional studies in fibroblasts: Human Dermal Fibroblasts (HDF) were grown in Dulbecco’s modified essential medium as previously reported . Cells were grown with 1 g/L of either glucose or galactose from plating and throughout the entire duration of the observation period. Mycoplasma testing was negative. Also normal and G1D fibroblasts were supplemented with 30 μmol/L CoQ. Growth rate was analyzed as indicated .
Molecular analysis of genomic DNA (gDNA) isolated from blood included Sanger sequencing of 12 genes involved in CoQ biosynthesis (ADCK3, ADCK4, PDSS1, PDSS2, COQ2, COQ3, COQ4, COQ5, COQ6, COQ9, CQ10A and COQ10B), in addition to the SLC2A1 gene, which encodes for GLUT1 transporter. In silico mutation analysis was done by the Mutation Taster software.
Total RNA was isolated from control and patient’s fibroblast cultures with RNeasy Fibrous Tissue mini kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). 1 μg of RNA was retro-transcribed with GoTaq® Probe 2-Step for RT-PCR (Promega, Wisconsin, USA) to obtain cDNA. SLC2A1 mRNA transcripts were studied on cDNA through PCR amplification with specific primers located in exon 1 (available on request), followed by direct sequencing.