A 16-year-old girl was admitted to our hospital complaining of a dry cough, fever, chills and fatigue for a period of 10 days. No other symptoms such as headaches, nausea, vomiting, or night sweats were noted. The patient was 165 cm in height and 67 kg in weight. She had a history of yolk sac tumour for which she had undergone uterus and bilateral adnexectomy and post-surgery antineoplastic chemotherapy. Further, she had a history of idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura which was treated with long-term corticosteroid therapy. She had received cefoperazone sulbactam sodium for presumed pneumonia for a week in a local community hospital prior to admission but failed to improve. Physical examination revealed obesity, moon face, and multiple dark red bruises on her entire skin. Auscultation of her chest revealed decreased breath sounds in both lungs but no dry or wet rales. Signs of meningeal irritation and pathological reflexes were negative. Haematologic and biochemical analyses were unremarkable, except for elevated hypersensitive C-reactive protein levels and a white blood cell count of 13.7 × 109/L (normal, 4.0–10.0 × 109/L). Dynamic monitoring of peripheral blood showed that lymphocytes gradually decreased from 1.0 × 109/L to 0.7 × 109/L (normal, 0.8–4.0 × 109/L). Serum tumour markers were also unremarkable and the HIV-antibody test was negative. Arterial blood gas pressures were: power of hydrogen, 7.466; pressure of oxygen, 70.1 mmHg (9.3 kPa); pressure of carbon dioxide, 35.3 mmHg (4.7 kPa); and arterial oxygen saturation, 95.0%. A chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed diffuse military pattern of pulmonary micronodules and small nodules with multiple cavities of different sizes throughout the lungs as well as a focal thick-wall cavitating lesion 2.5 × 3.5 cm in size on the right hilum . Small lymphadenopathies which were < 1.5 cm in diameter were observed in the mediastinum. Abdominal CT and abdominal ultrasound scans both revealed fatty liver and left kidney stones. An enhanced brain CT scan did not identify any abnormalities.
The primary diagnosis was indeterminate pulmonary nodules which could be malignant, such as primary pulmonary cancer or metastatic tumour, or benign lesions, such as disseminated pulmonary tuberculosis or a bacterial lung abscess. A bronchoscopy was then performed, but bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) was negative for bacteria, fungi, and mycobacteria. Results of a transbronchial lung biopsy (TBLB) were also unremarkable. We administered empirical treatment for haematogenous lung abscess with linezolid. However, the fever persisted and mainly manifested as an afternoon fever. Due to the clinical possibility of haematogenous disseminated pulmonary tuberculosis which is prone to be complicated by tuberculous meningitis, a lumbar puncture was later performed. The analysis of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) showed an intracranial pressure of 160 mm H2O (normal, 70–180 mm H2O), protein of 458.3 mg/L, glucose of 3.1 mmol/L, and chloride of 115.4 mmol/L. CSF detection was negative for bacteria and acid-fast bacilli, whereas CSF stained with India ink was positive for C. neoformans . Further results of blood, bone marrow and CSF cultures by sabouraud agar plate medium were also positive for C. neoformans. The patient was diagnosed with disseminated cryptococcal infection involving both lungs, the bone marrow, bloodstream and cerebral tissue and the aforementioned medication was discontinued. To reduce the adverse drug reactions (renal function, gastrointestinal reaction, etc.), the patient was initially treated with intravenous fluconazole (Diflucan) 400 mg qd (800 mg of starting dose) and 5-fluorocytosine 150 mg qid (100 mg·kg−1·d−1). After one week treatment, her temperature and fever duration gradually decreased. However, repeated CSF testing and blood culture were persistently positive for C. neoformans. Signs of meningeal irritation and pathological reflexes were also noted at that time. Repeated chest CT scan revealed cavitary lesions enlarged in both lungs. Due to the high bacterial load and wide dissemination, an dditional treatment with amphotericin B liposome (AmBisome) 60 mg qd (1 mg·kg−1·d−1) was adminitrated, and the fever eventually disappeared after 3 days. Although the highest recommended dose of AmBisome is 3 mg·kg−1·d− 1, the patient could not tolerate a higher dose of AmBisome due to several adverse drug effects including repeated severe hypokalaemia, palpitation, high blood pressure and gastrointestinal reactions. Despite this, after a 10-week treatment, the patient’s symptoms disappeared and a follow-up CT scan revealed significant lesion absorption in both lungs as well as a marked improvement of the cavitating right middle lobe lesion . Due to stabilization of her condition, the patient was transferred to the local community hospital for continued treatment. Five months after the hospital discharge, the relevant follow-up patient information was obtained by telephone. Data showed C. neoformans negative CSF specimens, and remarkable absorption of cryptococcal lesions and closure of cavities on the chest CT image after subsequent treatment with fluconazole.