Injured by firecracker on May 14th, 2008, a 37-year-old woman of Chinese Han individual sustained a 2 cm wound in the right anterior part of chest. She did not care about it and did not tell anybody because she felt ashamed. Then neck stiffness and muscle cramp in all extremities appeared gradually. Her husband sent her to the infectious hospital at first. The wound was cleaned and opened. She had been given tetanus antitoxin (1500 u) and a bolus of tetanus immune globulin (150 u/kg) in the following three days, but the symptoms developed with severe myoclonus, autonomic dysfunction and apnea. Diazepam (10 mg/30 min) was executed several times, but severe muscle spasms were still uncontrolled. The patient was in a coma, and the blood oxygen saturation was only 85%, then she was transferred to intensive care unit (ICU).
On admission of ICU, tracheal cannula and ventilator were given to help her breath. Risus sardonicus, trismus and opisthotonus could be observed. In a coma her heart rate was 171 per minute, blood pressure was 117/63 mmHg and SpO2 fell to 60%. Edema of bulbar conjunctiva was examined. With low respiratory sounds, crackles were heard, and the chest X-ray shows pneumonia of the left lung . Autonomic dysfunction with repetitive periods of tachycardia and profuse sweating developed. The elevated white blood cell count was 26.2 × 109/L, AST was 1454 u/L, LDH was 1127 u/L, CK was 23750 u/L, CK-MB was 163 u/L, pH 7.267 and the elevated lactic acid was 6.5 mmol/L. The diagnosis of the patient was severe tetanus, pneumonia, respiratory failure, myocardial damage. Propofol (300 mg/h), midazolam (5 mg/h), lytic cocktail (chlorpromazine 50 mg, pethidine 100 mg and promethazine 50 mg were dissolved in 50 ml physiological saline, 2 ml/h), morphine (2 mg/h) were intravenous administration continuously, and morphine (2-5 mg), diazepam (5-10 mg), phenobarbital (0.1 g) were used intravenously intermittently, but spasms and rigidity couldn’t be controlled. Then vecuronium bromide (8 mg/h) was administrated. Antibiotic, combination of glucose-insulin-potassium (GIK) were used to treat pneumonia and protect the cardiac. Sodium bicarbonate was also given to obviate acute renal failure which was caused by myoglobin.
Considering she needed ventilation a long time, we gave her tracheostomy the next day. To avoid the complications of tetanus, bronchofibroscope, prone ventilation and lung recruitment were performed, the concentration of myoglobin, ALT, CK and CK-MB were still elevated, and the triglyceride was not elevated obviously in the first week.
Although the patient was sedative deeply and the Ramsay scale was 6, the symptoms had not been controlled very well. Once the sedatives were stopped, spasms and rigidity would occur again, so we had to keep the patient sedated and observe her physical signs. However, the variability of blood pressure and heart rate was provoked by minor stimuli vigorously. Therefore she was given a bolus of propofol (30 mg) before any therapies.
After the second week in ICU, the hepatic function, the concentration of myoglobin, CK and CK-MB began to descend, but the triglyceride was elevated slightly. Propofol (50-100 mg/h), midazolam (20 mg/h), vecuronium bromide (4-6 mg/h) and morphine (2-4 mg/h) were infused continuously according to the reaction of the patient.
On 25th day in ICU, the pneumonia was controlled , spasticity and rigidity subsided, and no severe complications occurred, but sedatives were still needed [propofol (50 mg/h), midazolam (20 mg/h), vecuronium bromide (4 mg/h)]. In this condition, we decided to withdraw the sedatives gradually. At first midazolam was decreased to a rate of 10 mg/h, but diaphoresis occurred, and her heart rate increased to 150 per minute, BP increased to 180/100 mmHg. Luckily, there were no spasms. Considering the withdrawal syndrome, midazolam was increased to 20 mg/h. Then the symptoms disappeared. The vecuronium bromide infusions were stopped firstly on a regular basis to ensure optimal sedation levels and monitor the progression of disease. While monitoring the symptoms, fluctuations of blood pressure and heart rate, the dosage of propofol and midazolam were reduced gradually. Spasms subsided gradually both in frequency and severity which allowed the reduction of their infusion rates.
After 5 weeks of intensive care, the patient awakened. We stopped all of the sedatives gradually, except midazolam (2-4 mg/h). However, because of lying in bed for nearly one month her limbs couldn’t move and sometimes trembled. After stoping using midazolam on the 45th day, we decided to help the patient to wean from ventilator. On the 52th day in ICU, she weaned successfully, the concentration of myoglobin, hepatic function, CK and CK-MB were normal, and the elevated triglyceride was 1.9 mmol/L. On 57th day, she was decannulated, and with rehabilitation exercise she could stand and live as before. No complications were observed.