A 57-year-old woman visited our clinic complaining of blurred vision in both eyes that had started 4 months previously. She had been diagnosed with SLE and had been on HCQ therapy (200 mg/d) for the past 20 years. The cumulative dose of HCQ was approximately 2190 g. She did not report any history of systemic diseases that could be associated with ME, such as diabetes and hypertension. Her best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/50 in both eyes and fundus examination showed midperipheral pigmentary changes in both eyes . Visual field (VF) examination showed field constriction on the grayscale map at baseline . Fundus autofluorescence (FAF) showed bilateral pericentral hypo-autofluorescence . Optical coherence tomography (OCT) revealed photoreceptor defects (yellow arrowheads) in the pericentral area and cystoid spaces (red arrowhead) in the macula of both eyes . Based on her medical history, characteristic photoreceptor defects on OCT, and corresponding findings on FAF and VF examination, she was diagnosed with HCQ retinopathy associated with CMO. Accordingly, HCQ treatment was discontinued by the prescribing physician.
Oral acetazolamide (250 mg once a day) therapy was started. One month later, OCT revealed partial resolution of CMO in the right eye, as demonstrated by decrease in the size of cystoid spaces and in central foveal thickness (CFT) from 418 to 335 μm, and complete resolution of CMO in the left eye (CFT decreased from 338 to 255 μm). Her BCVA was 20/50 in the right eye and 20/30 in the left. However, her rheumatologist recommended discontinuation of oral acetazolamide due to the risk of aggravation of the patient’s underlying renal issue, lupus nephritis, as her renal function, as measured by glomerular filtration rate, had decreased from 70 to 56 mL/min/1.73 m2 during the one-month period. We discontinued systemic acetazolamide accordingly; topical dorzolamide 2%/timolol maleate 0.5% fixed combination (Cosopt; MSD Korea) twice daily was started in its stead.
Three months later, she complained of worsening of blurred vision. Her BCVA was 20/50 in both eyes, and OCT revealed aggravated CMO, as demonstrated by an increase in CFT, to 427 and 348 μm in the right and left eyes, respectively . After explaining to her the possible therapeutic options, we treated her with intravitreal injection of 0.7 mg dexamethasone implant (Ozurdex) and discontinued topical dorzolamide in the right eye.
One month after the therapy, the patient reported that her blurred vision had improved; her BCVA was 20/30 in the right eye and 20/40 in the left. Fluorescein angiography (FA) showed decreased leakage in the right eye in the late phase compared to the untreated, fellow eye . The OCT also revealed regression of CMO in the right eye. CFT in the right eye was decreased to 284 μm, whereas that in the left showed no remarkable change (from 348 to 347 μm). The resolution of CMO persisted up to the last visit, 2 months after the dexamethasone implant was placed. Her intraocular pressure was 15 and 11 mmHg in the right and left eye, respectively, and no other ocular complication was noted at the last visit.