A 41 year-old male with past medical history of pyoderma gangrenosum, type 2 diabetes mellites, hypertension, and cocaine abuse presented to the emergency department with worsening wound pain and ulceration involving upper back, left trunk, right arm (A), left shoulder and Left infraorbital maxilla and right temporal area extending behind the ear (B). The patient has a 20-year history of cocaine use. Family history was noncontributory. Psychosocial history is significant for depression. The patient report that he does not use medications. The physical exam revealed extensive cribriform ulcerations with irregular borders and extensive purulent drainage . Ulceration spanned approximately 30% of body surface area. The patient reported that the pain began to gradually worsen about 8 days before arrival to hospital. He denied fever, cough, sore throat, chest pain, shortness of breath, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. Patient has an established diagnosis of pyoderma gangrenosum and has been admitted in the past for the same complaints. He reported use of cocaine 10 days prior to admission after which his symptoms worsened. Patient tested positive for Covid-19. The results of a laboratory work-up were normal, including a complete blood count, general biochemistry tests, an autoimmune profile, an antinuclear antibody panel, a lupus anticoagulant, cryoglobulin, C-reactive protein test, complement levels and erythrocyte sedimentation rate. The patient tested negative for hepatitis B, hepatitis C and HIV. A spirochetes stain, C-ANCA, p-ANCA testing was negative. Biopsy of an ulcer done on a previous admission one month prior showed perivascular plasmacytosis with focal vasculitis, suggestive of PG. Wound culture grew Klebsiella pneumonia ESBL, Pseudomonas, Morganella Morgagni and coagulase-negative staph. The patient's hospital care was managed by the on-call hospitalist and the residents of the hospital's internal medicine program.
Based on the sensitivity testing, the patient was administered Vancomycin 15 mg/kg intravenously every 12 hours and Meropenem 500 mg every 8 hours. The PG was treated with IV methylprednisolone and topical clobetasol dipropionate 0.05% ointment, which is the recommended treatment for immune-related skin manifestations. The patient's ulceration flares did not remit with in-hospital therapy. Given his history of multiple readmissions with recurrence of similar clinical picture and admitted to cocaine relapse after discharges. Because of the severity of the condition and the extensiveness of the area affected, the recommendation was by the hospitalist and the plastic surgeon to refer the patient to a burn center. The consulting dermatologist outlined the possibility of starting a regimen of prednisone 50 mg daily and mycophenolate mofetil 1000 mg twice a day and eventual transition to infliximab for long-term treatment in addition to continued counseling regarding his cocaine use.