A 54-year-old woman presented to the emergency department with a two-day history of fluctuating right sensory-motor faciobrachial syndrome. The patient was an active smoker without further major cardiovascular risk factors. Specifically, she had a normal body mass index and no medical history of hypertension, dyslipidemia, diabetes, neurological or cardiovascular events. Additionally, she was not using estrogen-containing oral contraceptives and her family history was unremarkable for cerebrovascular events. Neurological examination on admission revealed a right inferior facial palsy (NIHSS = 2). Brain CT scan and blood tests were normal. A minor stroke was suspected, therefore, the patient initiated dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) and was admitted to our Stroke Unit. A brain MRI scan revealed multiple small recent asynchronous cortico-subcortical ischemic foci in the left middle cerebral artery and a subacute/chronic ischemic lesion in the left head of the caudate nucleus, a territory of the recurrent artery of Heubner . Continuous electrocardiography and cardiac ultrasound were unremarkable. However, carotid 2D Doppler ultrasound pointed out a possible CFFT originating from a non-stenotic hypoechoic plaque of the left internal carotid artery. CT angiography (CTA) confirmed the CFFT as a vertically elongated filling defect within the lumen of the carotid artery and detected a shelf-like projection indicative of CaW just below its origin . Taking together the very high risk of stroke recurrence and the young age of the patient, a left carotid artery stenting (CAS) was performed after one week of antithrombotic treatment as secondary prevention using a 7 × 40 CGuard stent (Inspire MD, Tel Aviv, Israel) covering both the CaW and the CFFT achieving complete recanalization . Intraoperative digital subtraction angiography (DSA) confirmed the presence of contrast agent stagnation during the venous phase at the CaW level . Conversely, the CFFT was partially resolved on DSA . No CFFT or CaW was observed in the contralateral carotid artery, and no additional filling defects were detected in the extracranial and intracranial vasculature on both CTA and DSA. The neurological status ameliorated progressively and the neurological examination on discharge was unremarkable (NIHSS = 0). Notably, a comprehensive thrombophilia screening including coagulation studies, antithrombin III, protein C, protein S, antiphospholipid antibodies (lupus anticoagulant, anti-cardiolipin, anti-beta-2-glycoprotein-I), homocysteine levels and methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene mutation was unrevealing. DAPT was maintained for three months and later switched to a single antiplatelet regimen. At the six-month follow-up, the patient was asymptomatic and no new ischemic lesion was detected on the brain MRI.