Black female patient, aged 4 years and 6 months, hospitalized for surgical correction
of a heart defect. She was the only daughter of a non-consanguineous couple, aged 27
(mother) and 23 (father). The mother had three other healthy children from two
previous marriages. There was no history of congenital heart disease in the family.
The mother reported occasional alcohol intake during pregnancy. Syphilis was
diagnosed in the 4th month of gestation and treated with Penicillin. The patient also
had loss of amniotic fluid during pregnancy. The child was born by caesarean section,
cephalic presentation, 30 weeks preterm, weighing 2,075g, measuring 42,5 cm, head
circumference of 31cm, and had Apgar scores at 1 and 5 minutes, of 8 and 9
respectively. The child cried immediately after birth and was not cyanotic. The
screening test was normal. Congenital heart disease was discovered at 4 months of
life. The neuropsychomotor development was normal and there were no behavior
problems.
On physical examination, at 4 years and 6 months old, the patient presented weight of
17,500g (50-75th percentile), height of 105cm (50-75th percentile), and head
circumference of 48.5cm (2-50th percentile) (anthropometric measures evaluated
according the CDC Growth Charts -
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/series/sr_11/sr11_246.pdf). The patient was not
syndromic but had dysmorphic features that included bilateral epicanthal folds, broad
nasal root with bulbous nose, high arcade palate, large mouth with thick lips,
pectus carinatum, cubitus valgus, and clinodactyly of fifth
fingers. On the skin, there were many (more than six) café-au-lait spots measuring
about 2-3cm in the trunk and limbs and freckles in the axillary and inguinal regions
. Family history revealed that the
father had similar skin findings (multiple café-au-lait spots and freckles in the
axillary/inguinal regions). This enabled the diagnosis of NF1, which was also
confirmed by dermatological evaluation. Ophthalmologic examination was normal.
Cardiac evaluation of the child by echocardiography revealed unroofed coronary sinus
atrial septal defect. There was no persistence of left superior vena cava. These
cardiac findings were confirmed at surgery. The procedure consisted of repair of
atrial septal defect with autologous pericardium. Abdominal ultrasonography and spine
radiography were normal. The high-resolution karyotype by GTG banding and
fluorescence in situ hybridization for 22q11 microdeletion (using the probe TelVysion
TM TUPLE 1, Abbott Molecular Inc.) were also normal.