The patient was a 60-year-old female who visited our hospital because of progressive apathy. She was previously diagnosed with pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis at 42 years of age and underwent a right lung transplant at 55 years of age. After transplantation, oral tacrolimus (1.9 mg), mycophenolate mofetil (MMF; 500 mg), and prednisolone (5 mg) were prescribed. She did not undergo post-operative home oxygen therapy and was able to perform housework without any problems. Three months before her hospitalization, the patient experienced dizziness, decreased motivation and activity, confabulations, and delusions. She received an influenza vaccination 6 weeks before her admission. Three weeks before her hospitalization, the patient began to make medication administration errors and experience urinary incontinence.
She was suspected by our hospital physician of having a neurological disorder and thus underwent brain MRI, and T2-weighted and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images revealed multiple, high-signal lesions in the white matter in the bilateral cerebral hemispheres. Based on these findings, the patient was admitted in our hospital.
Further examinations found that the patient was conscious but apathetic, with poor spontaneous speech. She had no cranial nerve abnormalities. Her tendon reflexes were generally exaggerated, and her Babinski reflex elicited plantar flexion without paralysis. The patient had no clear sensory impairments, cerebellar ataxia, autonomic nervous system disorders, or meningeal irritation. No abnormalities were noted in her physical examination.
Blood tests revealed leukopenia (2700/μL), anemia (9.0 g/dL), low CD4-positive lymphocytes (242/μL), hypo-γ-globulinemia (IgG 683 mg/dL), and mild renal dysfunction. Her thyroid function, glucose tolerance, and vitamin B1 and B12 levels were normal. The levels of tumor markers, including CA-19-9, CA 125, and CEA, were not elevated. No autoantibodies that could cause cerebrovasculitis were detected. Serum RPR, TPHA, anti-HBsAg, anti-HCV antibody, anti-HIV antibody, anti-HTLV-1 antibody, and interferon-gamma release assays such as the T-SPOT® were negative. CSF examinations, including cell counts, cell type, protein level, and glucose and chloride levels, were normal. β-D-glucan (< 6.0 pg/mL), sIL -2R (< 50 U/mL), myelin basic protein, and oligoclonal bands were all negative. In addition, CSF viral PCR and RT-PCR were negative for the varicella-zoster virus, herpes simplex virus types 1 and 2, human herpesviruses 6 and 7, cytomegalovirus, adenovirus DNA, and measles virus RNA. However, CSF PCR for JCV, performed at the National Institute of Infectious Diseases, was positive (0.32 million copies per mL).
Brain MRI on the patient’s eighth day of hospitalization revealed high-intensity lesions on both T2-weighted and FLAIR imaging in the cerebral white matter in the bilateral frontal lobes. These lesions were enlarged relative to those observed on the patient’s initial MRI at admission. These same lesions appeared on high-intensity diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) and low-intensity T1-weighted imaging . No abnormal accumulation was detected using brain thallium scintigraphy. The patient’s electroencephalogram was within the normal range, and no epileptiform discharge was noted.
Because the patient had a compromised immune system owing to use of several immunosuppressant drugs following her lung transplantation, differential diagnoses were considered, including PML, viral encephalopathy, delayed graft versus host disease vasculitis, tacrolimus encephalopathy, and lymphoproliferative disease. Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM) was also suspected due to the patient’s post-vaccination status.
As shown in Fig. , because the result of HSV-PCR of the CSF sample was negative, administration of acyclovir was discontinued 5 days after the patient’s admission. Brain MRI performed 25 days after the patient’s admission confirmed the enlargement of white matter lesions in the bilateral frontal lobes and revealed a faint gadolinium contrast effect in the left frontal lesion. At this time, the patient’s CSF was found to be positive for JCV-DNA. Given her brain MRI findings, she was diagnosed with probable PML.
The patient’s tacrolimus and MMF immunosuppressant dosages were respectively reduced from 1.9 to 0.5 mg and from 500 to 250 mg in 5 weeks. At the same time, mefloquine (275 mg/day) was administered for 3 days as a therapeutic agent according to the Japanese PML practice guidelines. Its use had been reported previously for PML after lung transplantation [, ] . Following immunosuppressant dosage reductions, the patient’s CD4-positive lymphocyte levels, an indicator of immunosuppression, gradually increased. However, brain MRI performed 50 days after the patient’s admission revealed that the patient’s lesions had expanded and swelled due to a mass effect . The enlarged lesion had a low central signal intensity on DWI but a high signal intensity along its periphery [, ]. Although the patient’s CD4-positive cell counts further recovered 81 days after the patient’s admission, CSF JCV levels increased to 0.38 million copies/mL. The patient regrettably died due to PML-related complications 91 days after her admission.