A 62-year-old male patient with HOCM visited our specialty outpatient department complaining of NYHA III symptoms despite having received medical therapy (bisoprolol 5 mg/day, diltiazem hydrochloride 100 mg/day). He had no leg oedema but a systolic murmur was detected. The apex of the heart was located at the fifth intercostal space on the anterior axillary line. The patient did not take any other drugs for HOCM, and he had no significant medical history other than HOCM. His BNP level was 1122 pg/mL (reference, <18.4 pg/mL). We could not use cibenzoline, which is known to prolong the QTc interval, because electrocardiography showed a prolonged QTc interval of 486 ms, narrow QRS, and regular sinus rhythm. The cardiothoracic ratio was 53% with no significant radiographic findings. Computed tomography showed mild emphysema, and pulmonary function tests revealed a 1 s expiratory rate of 63.8%.
Resting TTE revealed systolic anterior motion (SAM) due to LVOT obstruction and mild mitral regurgitation (MR). The LVOT PG was 45 mmHg, which was not an indication for treatment (, , Video S1). Therefore, exercise stress echocardiography was performed to confirm that HOCM was the cause for shortness of breath on exertion. The pre-loading LVOT PG of 78 mmHg increased immediately to 84 mm post loading (2 min, 5.4 metabolic equivalents), and MR worsened to a moderate grade (, , ). Furthermore, pulmonary hypertension was exacerbated, and patient developed shortness of breath, presumably due to HOCM. Transoesophageal echocardiography revealed an abnormal PM adhesion to the septal myocardium . Moderate-to-severe MR due to SAM has also been observed. Cardiac MRI showed two parts of the anterior PM, one of which was attached to the septal myocardium . The PM thickness was 7.3 mm, and the cross-sectional area was 98.7 mm2. We explained that surgical intervention was the first-line treatment in this case, but the patient refused. As per the patient’s request, we chose PTSMA despite a PM anomaly.
Patient was hospitalized and catheterization was performed, which confirmed that there was no significant stenosis in the coronary artery, and identified the septal branch as the target of PTSMA. After consultation with the department of cardiac surgery, it was concluded that PTSMA could be considered in this case.
PTSMA was performed as follows. A temporary pacemaker was placed because of the high risk of developing a new periprocedural atrioventricular block (AVB), and a catheter was placed in the LV to continuously monitor the LVOT gradient. On the simultaneous pressure measurement, a significant PG was observed between the LV inflow and outflow; the peak PG was 17 and 57 mmHg, respectively. We targeted the 1st and 2nd septal branches (S1 and S2, respectively; ). First, a balloon catheter was inserted into the selected septal branch. Contrast medium was injected through the lumen to confirm septal branch occlusion using a balloon. Next, agitated radiographic contrast was injected to identify the responsible septal myocardium on the echocardiogram. Finally, ethanol was infused until the myocardium turned completely white and an acoustic shadow appeared on the echocardiogram. The PM attached to the septum did not turn white in colour. The total ethanol usage was 9.5 mL (4.4 mL for S1, 5.1 mL for S2). After balloon catheter removal, angiography was repeated to determine whether the target septal branch was occluded and the left anterior descending coronary artery was patent. After PTSMA, the aorta–LV PG decreased from 103 to 20 mmHg at rest, 197 to 91 mmHg during the Valsalva manoeuver, 199 to 132 mmHg according to the Brockenbrough–Braunwald–Morrow sign, and 114–102 mmHg after nitroglycerin loading (see , ). The patient was discharged 8 days post procedure without complications (e.g. complete AVB).
TTE performed one month post-PTSMA showed that the SAM persisted, but regressed to a mild state (see , ). MR due to SAM also improved to a trivial grade (see , ). The interventricular septal thickness decreased from 21 to 18 mm . Although the PM adherent to the septum persisted and moved to the LVOT during systole, its gradient decreased from 84.0 to 24.2 mmHg due to the reduced septal myocardial thickness . The BNP level improved from 1122.3 to 332.7 pg/mL at 1 week post treatment and 58.0 pg/mL at 1 year post treatment. The patient’s symptoms improved to NYHA Class I.