A 26-year-old female presented with complaints of gradually increasing swelling over the dorsum of her right foot for the past 2 years . There was no history of trauma or associated symptoms of fever or weight loss. It was a small swelling to start with but gradually progressed over the course of time. Initially, she was evaluated with an X-ray and was treated with some medication and sclerosant injection into the swelling elsewhere but there was no improvement in her symptoms. She then presented to our hospital with swelling over the dorsum of her foot, pain, and no other systemic complaints. The pain was aggravated by walking and activity. Swelling was mostly over the dorsum of the foot without any local signs of inflammation. She was evaluated by sending her blood samples and radiologically with the help of X-rays and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). All the hematological parameters were within normal limits. The X-ray showed an expansile lytic destructive lesion involving the 3rd metatarsal with significant thinning of the cortex and septations without any calcification . An MRI revealed an expansile bone lesion with multiple septations in the diaphysis of the right third metatarsal bone. This lesion was hypointense in T1 and hyperintense in T2-weighted images, along with the cortical breach in the ventral aspect of the third metatarsus. A core-needle biopsy under C-arm guidance was performed as per protocol for confirmation of diagnosis and prognostication of disease, and the sample was sent for histopathological evaluation. Under microscopy, there were large areas of hemorrhage with fibro-collagenous tissue and many giant cells with scattered hemosiderin-laden macrophages, which were suggestive of ABC. Surgical excision with autogenous fibular bone grafting was planned for the patient. A 10 cm linear incision was given in line with the third metatarsal and with the biopsy site. Skin and subcutaneous tissue were incised until the periosteum was reached. The periosteum was also incised in the line of the metatarsal and everted to expose the tumor mass. The tumor mass was exposed from all sides, and en bloc resection of the metatarsal was done . The wound was debrided thoroughly. The size of the metatarsal was measured, and an ipsilateral fibular graft was harvested. The graft was interposed and fixed with the tarsal bone proximally with a 3.5 recon plate and distally to the proximal phalanx with K-wire. The excised mass was then sent for histopathological examination. On histological examination, the lesion displayed non-cancerous reactive tissue characterized by a fibrohistiocytic framework, numerous multi-nucleated giant cells, and reactive bone encircling blood-filled gaps. There were no indications of dividing cells or abnormal cell nuclei, and these findings strongly indicated the presence of an ABC . Hemostasis was maintained, and the wound was closed in layers. The foot was immobilized with plaster for 12 weeks. For the initial period of 3 weeks, slab support was applied. After suture removal, the slab was changed to a cast. Follow-up was done at 6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months, 1 year, and 2 years. The K-wire was removed at the end of 3 months, and she was allowed to bear partial weight. At the 2-year follow-up, the patient was completely pain-free and walking comfortably without any local swelling or wound complications. A 2-year follow-up X-ray showed that the graft was incorporated satisfactorily and with good consolidation. There were no signs of recurrence, either clinically or radiologically. The incorporation of a fibula graft filled the void left after the resection of the tumor mass, helped in the good cosmetic outcome, and also prevented a collapse of the third ray of her foot.