A female 37-year-old patient, with clinical history of papillary thyroid cancer (Follicular and onchocitic variation) entered the emergency room with 2 days of abdominal pain at mesogastrium, associated with diarrhea. No history of hypertension or tachycardia, also patient don't have history of drug use.
Physical exam with abdominal tenderness in mesogastrium and left iliac fossa irradiated to the back, with no peritoneal irritation. Arterial pressure 125/70 mmHg, heart rate 79 bpm. Normal blood count, CRP (C-Reactive-Protein) - 75 mg/L -; liver enzymes with alkaline phosphatase value of 150 UI/L; pregnancy test negative.
We perform an initial abdominal computed tomography (CT), with a 59 × 47 × 58 CMS mass adjacent to the second duodenal portion with calcifications . Abdominal magnetic resonance (MRI) was also performed; MRI showed a solid mass with necrotic-cystic central component; suspected differential diagnosis comprises a neuroendocrine tumor of the head of pancreas, duodenal gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST), or ganglionar conglomerate . Taking in count the localization near to biliary tract and duodenum, hepato-pancreato-billiary surgeon was requested in order to continue the management of the patient.
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy was performed to evaluate duodenal lumen, with any findings.
With a clinical suspected neuroendocrine tumor, biochemical markers such as chromogranin A and 5-Hydroxyindoleacetic acid were requested. Chromogranin A was positive (275 ng/dL), and 5HAA was negative in 24 h urine recollection (2.7 mg/24 h in a 3180 volume).
Anesthesia, and endocrine services were requested for preoperative assessment, no history of high values of arterial pressure was found, no paroxysmal tachycardia was found after 24 h of vigilance. Initially, metanephrine production was evaluated with negative results. (Normetanephrines 0.78; and free metanephrine <0.20). To confirm our results, we search for any confounder factor that could interfere with the analysis, such as beta-blockers medication, plasmatic concentrations of metanephrines was performed, as urine evaluation, was negative. With these findings the patient was considered a surgical candidate to resection, patient was notified, and accepts the medical decision.
We identify an important mass in contact with the second duodenal portion. Performing a Kocher maneuver, we start tumoral dissection, finding right adrenal compromise . During the manipulation of the mass, patients present a hypertensive crisis with Arterial pressure (AP) 189/94 with Mean arterial pressure (MAP) 125 mmHg. To perform and adequate control of arterial pressure, anesthesiologist start and initial dose of diuretics (Furosemide) with any change in the PA, for that reason, beta-blockers was needed, after two bolus administration of Labetalol, arterial pressure was normalized.
Identifying the renal hilum, we carefully dissect the tumor, and perform ligation of the vasculature.
After the removal of the mass, patients present a hemodynamic compromise due to hypotension, with PAM 40 mmHg, and anesthesiologists need to start vasopressors to control arterial pressure.
Surgical time was 95 min, with 100 mL of bleeding. Mean value of arterial pressure during the surgery was 180/90 mmHg, with a range between 50/30 mmHg and 189/94 mmHg.
In the immediate postoperative time, the patient needed a critical care unit due to the requirement of hemodynamic support with vasopressors (Noradrenaline). After 24 h patients do not tolerate suspension of the support, for that reason, the endocrinology department considers that could be explained by the neuroendocrine production (taking in count the positive value of Chromogranin A) and starts octreotide infusion for 24 h. (0.1 mg + 450 cm3 of saline solution: Initial bolus of 100 cm3 and continue 50 cm3/h until blend finish).
After the infusion of somatostatin agonist, patients tolerate the suspension of vasopressors obtaining mean value of PA of 60 mmHg, total ICU stay was 2 days. In-hospital total stay was 5 days.
No complications were observed after 90 postoperative days.
Tumor with solid nests of polygonal cells, separated by fibro-capillary septa, positive for chromogranin, sinaptofisin, CD 56, S100 in sustentacular cells. Ki-67 index 2–3%, these being compatible with the pathological anatomy of pheochromocytoma.
Taking in count the association with the previous surgical intervention for a papillary thyroid tumor, we suspect a possible genetic alteration, for that reason genomic analysis was performed; principal mutations such as EGLN1, FH, K1F1B, MEN1, NF1, RET, SDHC, SDHD, and TMEM127, was negative; any genetic mutations was detected.