A 16-year-old girl developed sudden diminution of vision in the left eye immediately after intralesional injection of a sclerosing agent into an extensive hemangioma of the forehead. The diagnosis of subcutaneous hemangioma was made by a vascular surgeon. She had undergone direct intralesional injection of 3 mL of sodium tetradecyl sulfate (Fibrovein; STD Pharmaceutical Products Ltd, UK) emulsion 1% (10 mg/mL) with a 23-gauge needle. Obscuration of vision progressed in the first hour after injection with total drooping of the left superior eyelid .
The patient denied any history of floaters, tinnitus, headache, nausea/vomiting, weakness of either side of the body, dysphagia, ataxia, loss of consciousness, arthralgia, fever, or photosensitivity.
On examination in the recovery room, the patient was conscious and oriented but agitated. Visual acuity in the right eye was normal but there was no light perception (NLP) in the left eye. There was a relative afferent pupillary defect on the left eye with a pupil that was dilated and poorly reactive to light. In addition, severe ptosis and eyelid swelling was evident on the left side. Extraocular movements were restricted in all directions in the left eye (indicating palsies of cranial nerves III, IV, and VI; ) and were normal in the right eye. Cranial nerves V and VII were intact. Intraocular pressure was within normal limits in both eyes.
Fundus examination revealed marked retinal pallor with a cherry-red spot on the left side, suggesting central retinal artery occlusion . The retina on the right side was normal .
In view of these findings, the patient was diagnosed to have central retinal artery occlusion with total ophthalmoplegia in the left eye. Anterior chamber paracentesis was performed urgently in the left eye with a 27-gauge needle and oral acetazolamide was prescribed. She also received intravenous methylprednisolone 1000 mg/day for 3 days. A complete blood count, kidney and liver function tests, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, and serum electrolytes were unremarkable. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging of the brain were normal. CT and magnetic resonance imaging of the left orbit showed thickening of the medial and lateral rectus muscles . Magnetic resonance venography of the brain was also normal with no evidence of central venous thrombosis.
The patient's blepharoptosis and ophthalmoplegia resolved within 3 months, but her visual acuity remained NLP . Fundus evaluation of the left eye revealed optic disc pallor with attenuation and sclerosis of the retinal vessels, presence of a fibrovascular tuft, diffuse preretinal gliosis, chorioretinal atrophy, and diffuse disturbance of the retinal pigment epithelium [Figure and ].