A 54-year-old Syrian female nonsmoker and nonalcoholic presented at our institution with complaints of severe dyspnea, mild dysphagia, cervical swelling, and loss of weight and appetite for 2 months. Medical and family histories were unremarkable, and no history of exposure to ionizing radiation was mentioned.
On presentation, physical examination revealed a palpable painless hard-in-consistency mass in the inferior part of the neck. Oxygen saturation was 88% in room air and respiratory rate was 24 breaths per minute. Other signs including body temperature, pulse rate, blood pressure, and full-body examination were normal. Laboratory examination revealed mild anemia with no other abnormalities.
Computerized tomography scan demonstrated a massive enlargement of the thyroid gland extending into the upper chest at the level of the aortic arch, narrowing the trachea, and compressing the esophagus .
Due to the compression symptoms, total thyroidectomy with lymph node dissection through sternumectomy was performed.
The macroscopic examination revealed an enlarged thyroid gland weighing 350 g. The right lobe measured 5×4×4 cm, and the left lobe measured 13×8×7 cm, the cut sections of both lobes demonstrated ill-defined nodules of yellow-tan coloration with foci of central necrosis .
Detailed morphological examination revealed an infiltrative growth pattern of insular, trabecular, and solid formations of neoplastic epithelial cells with scant eosinophilic cytoplasm, hyperchromatic convoluted nuclei, and bizarre mitotic figures (mitotic rate of ~20%) with areas of necrosis and hemorrhage .
Histopathological examination of the rest of the tissue of the enlarged thyroid gland revealed variable-sized follicles full of colloid and lined by a single layer of normal cuboidal cells, and the surrounding stroma was infiltrated by inflammatory cells. Subsequently, the final diagnosis was confirmed as a multifocal poorly differentiated thyroid carcinoma arising from a SG with capsular and vascular invasion as well as positive margins (Stage T4M0N0). Although immunohistochemistry was not available at our institution due to lack of resources, diagnosis was confirmed through detailed morphological examination by two pathologists. After surgical resection, the patient was put on adjuvant radiotherapy of 60 Gy in two fractions. Unfortunately, the patient died 1 year later due to the development of pulmonary metastases.