A 53-year-old man was admitted to our hospital for further evaluation of anemia (haemoglobin concentration 10,6 g/dl, RBC 2.970.000/mm3, HTC 31,4%) associated to positive fecal occult blood test. He had been treated for an autoimmune haemolytic anemia 4 years before, but immuno-haematological tests excluded signs of haemolysis. He also had an autoimmune thyroiditis. He had neither bleeding from rectum nor diarrhea or other gastrointestinal symptoms. Abdominal examination was negative. Rectal exploration did not reveal any pathological sign. A colonoscopy identified the presence of a spherical, sessile, lobulated polyp of the cecum, 4.2 cm in diameter, with a red and not bleeding but partially ulcerated surface . Because of the absence of a peduncle and its large size, the endoscopist decided to perform a biopsy of the polyp rather than a polypectomy. The histological examination of the specimen revealed the presence of inflammatory granulation tissue with lymphocytic and eosinophil infiltration associated to a fibrous stroma: it was diagnosed as inflammatory fibroid polyp . Considering the chronic anemia and the polyp's features (absence of a peduncle and size), we decided to perform an ileocecal resection with a latero-lateral ileocolic anastomosis . The histological examination of the polyp revealed inflammatory granulation tissue and engorged capillaries in the lamina propria, hyperplastic glands with cystic dilatations, proliferation of smooth muscle and multiple erosions on the polyp surface . There was not superficial fibrin exudation. According to these features it was finally diagnosed as inflammatory myoglandular polyp (IMGP). There was also another little polyp next to the ileocecal valve, not revealed at the colonoscopy, 0.8 cm in diameter, diagnosed as tubulovillous adenoma with low grade dysplasia. The patient was discharged from our hospital four days after the operation without any postoperative complications. After two months the patient has good health and anemia was resolved.