A 70-year-old, male patient had received a diagnosis of ALS 4 years previously and was recently referred to our hospital for a gastrostomy for progressive dysphagia. He had undergone an open distal gastrectomy and Billroth-I reconstruction for gastric ulcer perforation in his twenties. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy denied the transillumination sign and focal finger invagination. Computed tomography revealed the left lateral segment of the liver and transverse colon between the remnant stomach and abdominal wall . An endoscopic or radiologic gastrostomy was considered difficult to perform. The patient’s respiratory function demonstrated vital capacity (VC) 3.36 L, %VC 95.5%, forced vital capacity (FVC) 3.33 L, and %FVC 94.6%. He had a score of 28 on the amyotrophic lateral sclerosis functional rating scale-revised (ALSFRS-R). The patient denied respiratory complaints and had no history of pulmonary disease. Because the risk of respiratory complications caused by general anesthesia was not considered serious, the decision was made to perform a LAPEG, which is less invasive than a laparotomy with gastrostomy. Before tracheal intubation, propofol 100 mg and rocuronium 20 mg were administered. Anesthesia was maintained with sevoflurane in 50% oxygen with continuous infusion of remifentanil under careful neuromuscular monitoring. In total, 34 mg of rocuronium was used intraoperatively as a muscle relaxant. An epidural catheter was inserted, and an epidural infusion of ropivacaine 0.2% was given throughout the surgery for analgesia. The remnant stomach was located below the liver and adhered to the liver, omentum, and transverse mesocolon. Adhesiolysis was performed to increase mobility of the remnant stomach. Endoscopy was then performed, and the remnant stomach was insufflated. The gastrostomy site was confirmed via laparoscopy and endoscopy. The gastric wall and the abdominal wall were brought closer by lowering the abdominal pressure (10–5 mmHg) and were fixed in place using a gastropexy device. A gastrostomy tube (EndoViveTM Button II 20Fr 4.5 cm; Boston Scientific Japan, Tokyo, Japan) was inserted via the introducer method through the abdominal wall and into the remnant stomach, and the placement of the gastrostomy was confirmed laparoscopically and endoscopically . The total operative time was 129 min, and the blood loss was 2 mL. The patient was extubated in the operating theater, then moved to the intensive care unit (ICU) for observation of the vital signs and respiratory status. After ICU admission, his blood gas analysis (BGA) under 5 L/min of oxygen showed PaO2 182.0 mmHg and PaCO2 39.5 mmHg. His respiratory status was stable, and he had no respiratory fatigue. On postoperative day (POD) 1, he was moved to a recovery ward after his BGA under room air showed PaO2 85.0 mmHg and PaCO2 40.3 mmHg and his respiratory status had stabilized. Feeding via PEG tube was begun on POD 2. The patient was discharged home in stable condition on POD 3 without any respiratory complications.