A 63-year-old right-handed Chinese male of Han nationality, with a history of well-controlled type 2 diabetes mellitus for 1 year, hypertension for 15 years, and ascending aorta aneurysm for 6 years, presented with progressive and untreated gait disturbance since his 50s. His regular medication includes metformin, candesartan, aspirin and atorvastatin. He was admitted to hospital with an acute neurological episode, complaining of dizziness, vomiting, urinary incontinence, fever, and subsequent consciousness disturbance in the previous 6 h. He had experienced a similar attack one year ago, lasting for several days before the full-recovery. Upon admission, he was in light coma with Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score of 8/15. The physical examination revealed a temperature of 38.5 °C, a pulse of 95 beats/min, breath rate of 16 times/min, and a blood pressure of 136/81 mmHg. Neurological examination revealed no abnormalities in cranial nerve function except miosis, with bilateral pupil diameter of 1.5 mm. The bilateral knee reflex, Achilles tendon reflex, biceps reflexes, and triceps reflexes were diminished. The bilateral plantar responses were flexor. His limbs showed flexion response to pinprick stimulation. He had no meningeal irritation signs. Laboratory tests revealed normal random blood glucose (9.8 mmol/L) and normal blood lactate (2.09 mmol/L), excluding possibilities of hypoglycemia and lactic acidosis. Routine blood tests revealed the patient’s leukocyte count was 9.65 × 109/L (the normal range is 3.50–9.50 × 109/L), and his neutrophil percentage was 82.2% (the normal range is 40.0–75.0%). His C-reactive protein level was 50.2 mg/L (the normal range is 0.0–3.0 mg/L), and he had normal procalcitonin (0.48 ng/mL). Cardiac marker tests revealed slightly elevated level of seral NT-proBNP (644 pg/mL) but normal high-sensitive cardiac troponin T (0.017 ng/mL). Electrocardiography and blood tests including electrolytes, blood ammonia, hepatorenal function, thyroid hormones, ceruloplasmin, and autoantibodies showed no abnormalities. He had normal titer of antibodies against viruses such as HIV, herpes simplex virus, cytomegalovirus, and Epstein-Barr virus, as well as Treponema pallidum. Computed tomography (CT) revealed leukoaraiosis in the brain, chronic inflammation in both lungs, aneurysmal dilatation of the ascending aorta, coronary atherosclerosis, and cardiomegaly. Aortic dissection was excluded by computed tomography angiography (CTA). However, lumbar puncture was not conducted because of the unwillingness of the patient’s guardian.
On the 3rd day after admission, his consciousness gradually recovered, allowing us to perform further examinations. He showed limb ataxia but not tremor. His gait was wide-based and ataxic. Muscle weakness was not observed. Cognitive scales were assessed, with Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) score of 22/30. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed abnormal signals in the white matter region of the brain, especially in the middle cerebellar peduncle (MCP sign) and cerebral deep white matter , in addition to brain atrophy and diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) hyperintensities along the corticomedullary junction (subcortical lace sign) . T2 and DWI hyperintensities in the midbrain were also noted . Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) demonstrated decreased flow but no intracranial aortic stenosis or occlusion . On the 7th day after admission, he received bedside video electroencephalogram (EEG) for 15 h. EEG revealed generalized slow waves, with Medium-to-high amplitude (1.7–7.0 Hz, 30–100 µV) and scattered or paroxysmal distribution, in the awakening periods, whereas no epileptic waves were detected . Holter electrocardiography showed no abnormalities.
To identify the etiology of this case, we performed skin biopsy on the right leg. Hematoxylin-eosin staining revealed eosinophilic spherical inclusion bodies in the nuclei of some fibroblasts and adipocytes. Immunofluorescence staining showed these intranuclear inclusions were p62-positive . Observed by electron microscope, intranuclear inclusions which were membraneless and composed by disorderly-oriented and electron-dense fibrils . He denied a family history of neurological disease, but his 32-year-old daughter suffers from amenorrhea since her 20s and was diagnosed as premature ovarian failure . Genetic tests using repeat-primed PCR and GC-rich PCR revealed an expansion of 111 CGG repeats in FMR1 gene whereas negative results for NOTCH2NLC, LRP12, GIPC1, and RILPL1 genes.
During hospitalization, the patient was given symptomatic treatment such as anti-dizziness and anti-vomiting treatment as well as supportive treatment such as nutrition support therapy and vitamin B and C supplements. Antihypertensive treatment, Aspirin, and atorvastatin were also given by routine. His symptoms in the encephalitic attack, including dizziness, vomiting, urinary incontinence, fever, and clouding of consciousness, were completely relieved within one week. After discharge, follow-ups at 3 and 6 months revealed the patient still had gait disturbance, but no longer had encephalitis-like symptoms.