A 66-year-old retired married, male patient was seen in the pain clinic in mid-2014 complaining of classic episodic cluster headaches for the previous 10 years. During this time, he had pain-free periods lasting for about 6 months. Headaches occurred up to 8 times a day, starting as a short stabbing pain in the medial aspect of his right eye and gradually spreading to the entire right side of his face, vertex and upper back of the head. The pain attacks would last between 45 and 75 min; he was completely pain-free between attacks. The pain felt ‘like his head was going to explode’ and was unbearable. The pain was associated with rhinorrhea in the right nostril and obvious conjunctival injection in the right eye without oedema. The patient was extremely restless and absolutely nothing he could do would relieve the pain. He was treated with a greater occipital nerve block comprising 40 mg methylprednisolone and 20 mg bupivacaine. The nerve block afforded him complete pain relief within minutes and lasted for 12 months. The block was repeated on two occasions, each time providing relief for a further 6 months. Subsequently, the frequency and intensity of the headaches subsided and by mid-2016 he was free of any headache for the next 2.5 years. Apart from a past history of an abdominal aortic aneurysm which was operated on, he was otherwise healthy. His family history was unremarkable.
The patient presented to the pain clinic again in July 2019 after suffering for 6 months from a new constant stabbing pain radiating from the back of the right side of his head to the right side of both the vertex and forehead, right ear and towards the jaw. Numbness and paresthesias were also present in this distribution. He had no neck pain. In addition, the intermittent tearing and conjunctival injection of the right eye that he previously had with his cluster headaches had become continuous and the eyelid was also edematous. He had excessive rhinorrhea. He often felt restless, particularly at night. The basal Numerical Rating Scale Pain Score (NRS) was 6 out of 10. Pain exacerbations that reached an NRS score of 9 out of 10, occurred 2–3 times a day and lasted 20–30 min. They were occasionally exacerbated by neck movements.
On physical examination, his right eye was mildly teary, with conjunctival injection and slight oedema of the eyelid. He had hyperesthesia over the right vertex and right side of his forehead. The neurological examination was otherwise normal. Passive extension of the neck was extremely limited and reproduced the severe exacerbations of his pain. Palpation of the right SCM muscle not only elicited tenderness but exacerbated the referred pain. This raised the suspicion that the SCM muscle was a source of the headache. Therefore, 30 mg of 1% lidocaine was injected into the right SCM muscle. The intention was to perform a diagnostic injection with a short-acting local anaesthetic to determine if the pain arose from the SCM. No other muscles were injected. Within 4 min of the injection, the severity of his headache decreased from a pain score of 7 out of 10 to 0. The numbness across his forehead and vertex disappeared. Neck range of motion became painless and much improved. The right-sided tearing and conjunctival injection began to subside, followed later by the resolving eyelid oedema. Relief of symptoms was complete for 4 weeks and then partially relapsed.
He returned to the pain clinic in September 2019 and, as he requested, received another injection. The right SCM muscle was just as tender as it was in July and palpation of it exacerbated the pain. This time the muscle was injected with 20 mg lidocaine and 10 mg bupivacaine. His pain completely resolved for a further 2 months.
In mid-December, when the headache relapsed, a second specialist in both neurology and pain relief medicine recommended that the patient start on a low dose of indomethacin, 25 mg three times a day, and then increase the dose slowly. Co-interventions, including further injections, were withheld in order to determine the efficacy of the indomethacin and so as not to undermine the diagnosis of hemicrania continua. The pain was relieved within 24 h of the indomethacin trial, confirming the diagnosis of hemicrania continua. There was no need to increase the dose, as his headache was eliminated. It was decided to discontinue the indomethacin due to the onset of severe gastric side effects. Six days later, by which time the headaches had completely relapsed, the patient was then given another injection of 20 mg lidocaine and 10 mg bupivacaine into the right SCM muscle. Once again, his pain was eliminated. During visits to the pain clinic for unrelated low back pain in June and October 2020, and February 2021, he reported that both his continuous headache as well as his cluster headaches were still in complete remission.
Our patient much preferred to have periodic injections than suffer from indomethacin-related side effects. The injections he received had no side effects and afforded him lasting relief.