A 42-year-old diabetic man presented to our emergency room after a road traffic accident with an injury to his left knee and inability to weight bear. Examination of the left knee revealed diffuse swelling, tenderness over the popliteal fossa, and a painfully restricted range of movement. Further careful examination revealed a stable knee in the varus and valgus plane. The Lachman test revealed a hard anterior endpoint, but the posterior stop was soft. There was no neurological deficit, but the pulsation of dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial arteries was feeble. The plain radiograph of the knee revealed posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) bony avulsion . CT scan of the knee revealed comminuted displaced avulsion fracture of the PCL from the tibial side, undisplaced fracture of the lower pole of the patella, and chip fracture of lateral tibial plateau with tibiofibular subluxation and the tip of fibula avulsion (arcuate avulsion) . MRI of the knee revealed extensive edema around the joint along with posterior capsule injury, PCL bony avulsion, partial ACL tear, medial meniscus posterior root avulsion, and partial avulsion of the arcuate ligament from fibular head . Since peripheral pulses were feeble, a CT angiogram was ordered, which revealed poor contrast opacification of peripheral vessels in the arterial phase and normal contrast opacification in the delayed phase. Given multiple ligament injuries, capsular tear, several minimally displaced fractures, and a borderline vascular compromise almost akin to a near dislocation (three major ligament injuries; PCL, ACL, and arcuate), the knee was immobilized for 10 days to let capsule and other soft-tissues heal. After 11 days of injury, the patient underwent arthroscopy of the knee which confirmed partial ACL tear from the femoral end (<30–40% fibers torn), medial meniscus posterior root avulsion and PCL bony avulsion. However, arthroscopic fixation of the PCL avulsion was unsuccessful due to gross comminution and wide displacement of the fragments. Hence, the surgical team decided to fix the PCL avulsion fracture by the open method. Nevertheless, gross swelling around the knee following the arthroscopy prevented the open fixation at the same setting. Five days later, he underwent open reduction and internal fixation of the PCL avulsion fracture and medial meniscus root repair by Burks-Schaffer approach with suture anchors in a prone position. PCL avulsion was fixed with the suture bridge technique . The medial meniscus root was also fixed with anchor. Capsule was sutured. Following PCL avulsion and root fixation, the knee appeared stable in the varus plane in both 0° and 30°, and hence the arcuate ligament fixation was not performed. The wound was closed in layers over a drain. Postoperatively, the knee was immobilized in a PCL brace for a total of 3 weeks to let the inferior pole of patella, arcuate complex, and capsule heal. Straight leg raising and static quadriceps strengthening exercises were started and the patient was allowed non-weight bearing ambulation using bilateral axillary crutches. At 3 weeks post-operative, the patient was asked for admission and mobilization of the knee as he belonged to a rural area with no rehabilitation facility. However, he refused the same and decided to continue rehabilitation at home. Early HO was noted in the knee X-ray at 3 weeks , and he was started on indomethacin 75 mg once a day for 6 weeks. He admitted that he did a light massage for a brief duration on the advice of a local quack at the end of 2 weeks. At a 6-week follow-up, the patient achieved flexion range of motion (ROM) of 5°–60°, and plain X-ray noted uniting fracture along with increasing HO around the PCL in midline . At 3-month follow-up, the patient had a flexion ROM of 10°–70° and the radiograph revealed intense HO at the back of the knee . We advised him that he may require an intervention to excise HO. However, he decided to continue physiotherapy and refused any intervention. Eight-month follow-up revealed further reduced ROM to 10°–60°, and at a 10-month follow-up, the patient had a ROM of 15°–45°. Radiographs of the knee at 18-, 30-, and 53-months post-operative continued to show maturing HO . There is no change in ROM, at last, follow- up at 4 years and has remained as 15°–45° . His present Tegner-Lysholm score at 4 years follow-up is 42. The patient refused any intervention of HO excision at 18 months and afterward, too.