A 65-year-old woman with a medical history of hypertension, diabetes, gout, morbid obesity (body mass index: 41.8 kg/m2), multiple strokes, and coronary artery disease with prior stenting, presented with recurrent acute pulmonary oedema [New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional Class IV] despite optimal medical treatment, among which: metoprolol (1 × 200 mg), intravenous furosemide (2 × 80 mg), dapagliflozine (1 × 10 mg), and spironolactone (1 × 25 mg). Physical examination showed peripheral oedema and orthopnoea in a walking-aid dependent patient. Blood pressure was 138/79 mmHg with a heart rate of 56 b.p.m., a grade II/IV holodiastolic murmur was heard at the 3rd and 4th left intercostal space and bilateral rales were heard upon auscultation of the lungs.
Transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) revealed severe MAC (Wilkins score 14) and MS (mean gradient 10 mmHg) combined with secondary pulmonary hypertension (>60 mmHg). Basal septum wall thickness was 14 mm with a left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) mean gradient (MG) of 14 mmHg. The multidisciplinary heart team rejected the patient for surgery due to extensive comorbidities, habitus, poor mobility, and mitral anatomical features and agreed with TMVR. The Society of Thoracic Surgeons predicted risk of mortality score was 5.6%, but further increased by morbid obesity, frailty, and excessive MAC.
Double oblique MDCT analysis was used to appreciate the extent and distribution of calcifications in the mitral annulus and measure mitral orifice dimensions . Based on these manual measurements a 29 mm (outer diameter) Sapien3 (Edwards Lifesciences Ltd, Irvine, CA, USA) transcatheter heart valve (THV) seemed appropriate. A virtual 3D model was created using the Materialise Mimics™ Enlight medical software package (Materialise, Leuven, Belgium) . The assessment was derived from the mid-late diastolic phase. Based on the user’s input on the expected landing zone, a best fit plane was obtained to determine minimal and maximal diameters. Transcatheter heart valves of various sizes and at various implantation depths were projected in this plane to determine most suitable device size and estimate the neo-LVOT for each scenario. A 26 mm Sapien3 was deemed the best fit positioned 60% in the left atrium and 40% in the left ventricle .
An assessment in the late-systolic phase yielded an acceptable neo-LVOT area of 212 mm2 (30% of original LVOT blocked) which was notably higher than suggested cut-off values (>170 mm2). Of note, virtual assessment of a Sapien3 29 mm at 60/40 yielded a neo-LVOT of 150 mm2 (53% of original LVOT blocked). A 3D-printed model (By Materialise, Leuven, Belgium) complemented the virtual model and was used to implant an actual Sapien3 26 mm THV to confirm adequate valve apposition and expansion visually. In this printed model, no evident LVOT obstruction was observed.
The procedure was performed under general anaesthesia and TOE guidance and femoral access was obtained using a 16-Fr venous and 12-Fr arterial sheath. After transseptal puncture, septostomy was performed with a 12 mm Admiral Xtreme balloon (Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA). A kissing balloon technique was applied that included simultaneous inflation of an 18 mm True balloon (Bard Vascular Inc., Tempe, AZ, USA) in the LVOT while implanting the 26 mm Sapien3 in MAC, aiming for a 60/40 position. The aim of this technique was to preserve a minimum neo-LVOT dimension by pivoting the THV away from the LVOT . Transoesophageal echocardiography confirmed a trace residual paravalvular mitral regurgitation . The MG was 3 mmHg. However, the neo-LVOT MG increased from 14 mmHg before to 34 mmHg after TMVR . Balloon dilatation in the neo-LVOT only mildly mitigated the gradient to 28 mmHg . Percutaneous transluminal septal myocardial ablation (PTSMA) with 2 ml of alcohol to the 1st septal perforator reduced the LVOT gradient to 20 mmHg, measured by transthoracic echocardiogram at discharge . Femoral venous and arterial access were closed with suture based closure devices.
During the postoperative recovery, the patient developed a total atrioventricular block and required a permanent pacemaker implantation. The remainder of the hospital admission was uneventful and the patient was discharged to a rehabilitation centre on postoperative Day 5. Upon presentation at the outpatient clinic 1 month after discharge, moderate dyspnoea was present (NYHA Class III). No readmission had occurred. Outpatient clinic MDCT evaluation showed a systolic neo-LVOT of 120 mm2, with the THV implanted at a 45/55 position. Re-running the MDCT-derived 3D virtual model with a 26 mm Sapien3 at this implantation height revealed a projected neo-LVOT of 177 mm2.