The patient was a 3-year-old girl with a height of 107 cm and a weight of 14 kg. She developed ventricular fibrillation while she was running and received cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR). She received three times of electrical defibrillation during CPR, but did not receive epinephrine. Return of spontaneous circulation was achieved with 10 min of CPR. Afterward, premature ventricular contraction occurred frequently, and an oral β-blocker (Nadolol) was started. Long QT syndrome and Brugada syndrome were negated in the resting electrocardiogram. Additionally, there was no structural heart disease on the echocardiogram. Hence, insertion of an ICD using epicardial pacing under sternotomy was scheduled due to suspicion of CPVT. Her preoperative neurological condition was intact but nervous, and so premedication of rectal midazolam (0.5 mg/kg) was given. An intravenous catheter was placed preoperatively before the patient entered the operating room. Electrocardiography, percutaneous oxygen saturation, and noninvasive arterial blood pressure were used for monitoring, and electrode pads of a defibrillator were attached to the patient in the operating room. After preoxygenation with 6 L/min oxygen for 3 min, general anesthesia of 3 mg of midazolam, 50 μg of fentanyl, 14 mg of rocuronium intravenously was induced rapidly. She was intubated with a cuffed endotracheal tube (4.0 mm internal diameter). Anesthesia was maintained with a gas mixture of oxygen, air (fraction of inspired oxygen (FIO2), 0.3–0.6), and midazolam (0.2 mg/kg/h); additionally, remifentanil (0.15–0.5 μg/kg/min), rocuronium (7 μg/kg/min), and fentanyl (intermittent injection of total 250 μg) were administered. The operation was performed without any complications. The operation time was 3 h. The amount of bleeding was 72 ml. She remained intubated and was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU). Dexmedetomidine (0.6 μg/kg/h) and fentanyl (approximately 1 μg/kg/h) were administered in the ICU. Tracheal extubation was performed in the morning of postoperative day (POD) 1. Postoperative pain was controlled by suppositories of acetaminophen. Fatal arrhythmia due to CPVT did not occur in the perioperative period. She was discharged from the hospital on POD 21 with oral Nadolol. No fatal arrhythmia has occurred since discharge.