A patient (54-year-old Filipino woman) underwent surgery for left-sided breast cancer in February 2021. The patient had no history of autoimmune diseases. She took no regular medicine and was married to a Japanese man. She had one daughter (one pregnancy and one gravidity). Currently, she is a middle-class housewife. She stopped smoking 2 years ago (five cigarettes per day) and does not consume alcohol. Postoperative chemotherapy was then initiated, including peripheral 91.2 mg (60 mg/m2) of doxorubicin (Adriamycin) and 912 mg (600 mg/m2) of cyclophosphamide (AC) therapy intravenously. The patient claimed to have not experienced diabetes in the past but developed anorexia after the third cycle of AC therapy, which was administered on 7 May. She manifested polydipsia, polyuria, and weight loss. She had no recent infection or vaccination. On 11 May, the patient was brought to our hospital by ambulance after disturbance of consciousness and was hospitalized. Findings on admission included a body height of 148 cm, weight of 55.2 kg, body mass index of 25.2 kg/m2, Glasgow Coma Scale score of 8 (E2V2M4), body temperature of 36.3 °C, blood pressure of 80/56 mmHg, and a pulse rate of 108 beats per minute.
Physical examination revealed the following: the bulbar conjunctiva was slightly pale but not icteric; there was no goiter, the skin was dry, and the skin turgor was reduced. There was no abnormality on lung and heart auscultation; the abdomen was soft and flat, and there was no lower leg edema. Neurological examination revealed that the tendon reflexes were normal, and no pathological reflex was observed. Light and radial reflection was normal. Mental status, motor function, and sensory assessments could not be performed due to her low consciousness on admission.
Laboratory findings included increased urinary glucose and urinary ketone as well as increased blood ketone body levels. Her casual blood glucose and hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) levels were 1661 mg/dL and 11.9%, respectively. Arterial blood gas analysis revealed a blood pH of 7.120, and the patient was diagnosed with diabetic ketoacidosis. Her insulin secretion was impaired and anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase (anti-GAD) antibody test result was significantly positive (> 2000 IU/ml).
After the onset of type 1 diabetes, we examined the anti-thyroglobulin and antiperoxidase antibodies, considering that this type of diabetes is sometimes complicated with an autoimmune thyroid disease. Nonetheless, these antibodies were negative in our patient. Upon admission (day 1), 60 mL per hour of Ringer’s lactate solution and 60 mL per hour of a solution containing 35 mEq/L of Na, 20 mEq/L of K, 35 mEq/L of Cl, and 20 mEq/L of lactate, and one ampule of multivitamin, were administered intravenously. A continuous insulin infusion (3.5 U per hour) was started, and the amount of insulin delivered was adjusted according to the blood glucose levels every 2 hours during her intensive care unit (ICU) stay. To avoid stress-induced gastric ulcers and secondary infections, intravenous famotidine (20 mg) was administered once daily, and 2.25 mg of tazobactam piperacillin hydrate was administered every 8 hours. Her consciousness was gradually restored. She was moved to the general hospital beds from the ICU 4 days after the onset of diabetes ketoacidosis. The continuous insulin infusion and drip infusion therapy were stopped on day 4, and insulin aspart was administered at a dose of 12 units before breakfast, 4 units before lunch, and 6 units before dinner. Additionally, 18 units of insulin degludec were used before going to bed. The patient was finally discharged 18 days after hospitalization.
After hospitalization, she continued to undergo treatment with intensive insulin therapy. Six months after hospitalization, insulin aspart was administered at a dose of 6 units before breakfast, 6 units before lunch, and 4 units before dinner. Additionally, 16 units of insulin degludec were used before going to bed. Her HbA1c and body weight improved to 6.6% and 57 kg, respectively .