A 57-year-old female had been evaluated in two other departments 4 months before admission to our hospital. She initially complained of weakness of the right hand and weakness in both legs. At the initial examination, she presented a palsy of the left abducens nerve as well as dysarthria and right-sided hemiparesis with dysmetria, ataxia, and loss of epicritic sensibility. She demonstrated intermittent tremor of unknown etiology of the right thumb and index. There was mild and reproducible lymphopenia of 0.860 G/L (normal values: 1.500-4.000 G/L), but the hematological work-up was normal. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) serology was negative. PCR screening in the CSF for Herpes simplex virus, tropherymawhippelii, and PML was negative. The initial MRI (Flair and T2-weighted sequences) showed a hyperintense lesion extending from the postero-lateral left portion of mesencephalon. Most characteristic sequences are shown in .
The patient received a 3-day-trial of high dosage steroids, without any benefit. Brain biopsy was considered too risky to be performed. This decision was reversed 4 months later, as there was further rapid deterioration. Therefore, the patient was admitted to our neurosurgical department. She had noted further progressive weakness and, in particular, constant “shaking” of the right hand. She complained of intractable pain in the right leg and constant diplopia. The neurological examination demonstrated divergent strabismus due to possible left-sided paresis of 3rd and 6th cranial nerve. At the paretic right arm, there was constant, spontaneous, rapid, mostly arrhythmic tremor both at rest and when the patient tried to move the extremity. Tremor abatement was only observed during sleep.
Mild lymphocytopenia was confirmed. Electroencephalography did not reveal focal epileptic discharges. MRI of the brain revealed further local brainstem extension; as for the initial MRI there was no detectable cortical lesion. After informed consent stereotactic brain biopsy of the left brainstem was performed. The tremor syndrome remained refractory to various therapeutic approaches. The patient died 6 months after the onset of the disease. The results of the histological examination (see below) were not yet known at the time of death. The biopsy specimen showed brain tissue with reactive astrocytosis, a few lipid-filled macrophages, a venule with some perivascular lymphocytes, and dark nuclei of glial cells. Within these dark nuclei JCV antigen was detected by immunohistochemistry (test performed in the laboratory of the Center for Neuropathology and Prion Research, University of Munich, Director: Prof. Dr. med H. Kretzschmar, MD).