A 75-year-old woman was admitted in our hospital after a right upper lobectomy and right S6b wedge resection for synchronous double lung cancer 5 years previously. The preoperative computed tomography (CT) images showed a right S2 tumor and a right S6b peripheral tumor . Metachronous double lung tumors in the right lower lobe (S6a and S9) and left diaphragmatic eventration were detected with CT and chest X-ray . The S6a tumor was a pure ground-glass nodule with a diameter of 27 mm; there was a distance from the basal segment. The S9 tumor diameter was 21 mm, and it was solid and near a bulla in the CT image. The two tumors were suspected to be double primary carcinomas and were located in resectable sites. The patient had mild dyspnea on exertion. The modified Medical Research Council (mMRC) dyspnea score was grade 2. In addition, the result of her pulmonary function test (PFT) was poor; her forced vital capacity (FVC), %FVC, forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1), FEV1/FVC, and %FEV1 were 1.54 L, 70.0%, 0.92 L, 59.7%, and 58.6%, respectively . We first concluded that her pulmonary function was too low to undergo pulmonary resection. There was a possibility that her poor pulmonary function was partly due to the left diaphragmatic eventration and that it could be improved with diaphragm plication.
We first performed VATS diaphragm plication with CO2 insufflation. During the operation, the patient was positioned in a full lateral decubitus position. Four air-locking trocars were placed; the 12-mm trocars were inserted through the fifth intercostal space at the midaxillary line, the seventh intercostal space at the posterior axillary line, and the sixth intercostal space at the anterior axillary line. The 5-mm trocars were placed at the eighth intercostal space at the midaxillary line. CO2 gas was insufflated at 8 mmHg pressure through the trocar under thoracoscopic guidance. The diaphragm was sutured from the posterolateral portion to the anteromedial portion using 90-cm-long, #2-0 Ethibond® (Ethicon, USA) threads with interrupted sutures .
Two months after the procedure, she reported a very good improvement in her symptoms, and her PFT showed improvement; her FVC improved to 2.09 L, %FVC to 90.1%, FEV1 to 1.31 L, FEV1/FVC% to 62.7%, and %FEV1 to 73.2% . A chest X-ray revealed the expansion of the left lower lung and a flattened left hemidiaphragm . The result of the arterial blood gas analysis was improved; the preoperative (PaO2) was 79.3 mmHg and the postoperative PaO2 was 93.7 mmHg .
Encouraged by the results, we decided to proceed with lung cancer surgery on the contralateral side and performed a right S6 wedge resection and right S9 segmentectomy for the double lung tumors. The tumors were diagnosed as double primary carcinomas. The surgical margins of the two tumors were both negative for malignancy. Three months following the last operation, her PFT values were acceptable . She was discharged and her respiratory symptoms have not deteriorated to date. The mMRC dyspnea score was grade 1.