Our patient was a 10-year-old girl of Caucasian ethnicity. She had an advanced stage of cystic fibrosis with liver cirrhosis, portal hypertension and hepatosplenomegaly. She needed supplementary tube feeding because of weight loss due to external compression from her enlarged liver and spleen on the stomach. It was not possible to place a gastrostomy by gastroscopy because of esophageal varices. For this reason, a surgical approach was mandatory. Because of the enormous hepatosplenomegaly it would have been difficult to find the stomach under the left liver lobe by median laparotomy. For that reason we decided to use the SILS procedure. She also had an umbilical hernia with incarcerated fat, which was repaired during the same procedure.
The operation was carried out under general anesthesia via endotracheal intubation with our patient in dorsal decubitus, tilted to a 30° anti-Trendelenburg position. After appropriate skin preparation and application of sterile drapes, a 2cm incision was made at the upper half of the umbilical ring, at the place of the hernia . The incision was deepened to the fascia. The hernial sac was dissected and opened so we could enter the abdomen.
Under vision, the SILS® port (Covidien, Mansfield, MA, USA), a specially designed single port with three inserts, was placed into the peritoneal cavity . A pneumoperitoneum of 12mmHg was developed. A 5mm laparoscope was used for visualization and two 5mm working instruments were inserted. The three ports formed an inverted triangular configuration, with the two working ports being farthest away and the laparoscope being at the inferior position. The extracorporeal lengths of the ports were kept different, with the laparoscopic port being the longest so as to minimize collisions at the back ends. A standard 30° laparoscope was used for the procedure .
During abdominal exploration with standard straight instruments we could see a very large heterogeneous left liver lobe and an enormous spleen. It was difficult to see the stomach. With the help of the instruments the stomach could be identified under the left liver lobe. We grasped the stomach along the great curvature with an instrument and brought it outside the abdomen by extracting the single port . The gastrostomy passed the skin and abdominal wall in the left upper quadrant and was then grasped and brought outside through the incision of the single port at the umbilicus. Outside the abdomen we made a purse-string suture on the stomach. The gastrostomy was placed in the stomach and the purse-string was closed. We filled the balloon of the gastrostomy with 5cm3 of saline solution. Once the gastrostomy was placed in the stomach, the stomach was returned into the abdomen. The fascial defect, and thus also the hernia, was repaired with a Vicryl 2–0 suture (Ethicon, Johnson & Johnson) and the 2cm umbilical incision was closed with endocutaneous sutures.
The total operative time was 25 minutes. There was no blood loss. Our patient’s post-operative course was uneventful, and she required minimal analgesia.
Our patient was able to use the feeding tube on the first post-operative day with good intestinal function.
Our patient was discharged on the third post-operative day with no oral analgesics. Our patient and her parents were very pleased with the cosmetic result. Early follow-up at two weeks showed no evidence of complications, and the umbilical wound had healed .