A 66-year-old woman presented to her plastic surgeon a few days after she awoke one morning and noticed that her left breast had turned completely blue and almost black . There was no associated pain. There was no history of an accident or impact on the breast.
Two years earlier, she underwent breast conserving surgery with sentinel lymph node biopsy (sn) for invasive ductal cancer located in the upper external quadrant of the left breast, stage pT1cN0 (sn). Estrogen and progesterone receptor status was positive. There was no distant metastasis. Surgery was performed uncomplicatedly, and her wounds healed well. Hormonal treatment with 20 milligrams (mg) of tamoxifen per day was started. She received postoperative RT to 50 Gy (Gy) in 25 fractions to the whole left breast with a simultaneous integrated boost of 0.4 Gy to the operated area to a total dose of 60 Gy, as was the standard dose prescription at that time. No unexpected acute side effects occurred. A localized moist desquamation of the skin at the boost area was present shortly after terminating RT and resolved quickly by applying hydrating crème. In the long term, she developed gross telangiectasia in the boost area.
According to her relevant previous history, she was diagnosed with sarcoidosis in 1978, during which she received corticosteroids for more than two years. In 1984, she needed corticosteroids again for skin sarcoidosis, and in 1989, she needed corticosteroids for liver sarcoidosis. She developed erythema nodosum in 1990. Corticosteroids were stopped in 1991. She had smoked cigarettes until 1990. She was treated for hypertension with 100 mg of atenolol per day and for hypertriglyceridemia with 10 mg of atorvastatin per day.
At the time of her breast cancer treatment, the patient had a large breasts, and the bra-size was the G-cup. One year after her breast cancer diagnosis, she underwent bilateral breast reduction. Four months later, she presented with a nodule in the left breast, which appeared to be a seroma. This was resected, and remodeling of the left breast was performed. Three months later, a new seroma had developed in the left breast that needed to be resected. Again, there was remodeling of the breast. At both times, the drain was left for several days.
The described episode occurred 4 months after this last intervention. The distinct bluish color was distributed throughout the whole breast and clearly delineated. The surgeon suspected a possible relationship with the delivered RT. Ibuprofen and a gel containing aescine and salicylate were prescribed. Blood analysis was also performed. Hematology, including leucocyte formula, revealed elevated reticulocytes (27/1000, reference 5–20/1000) and no other abnormalities. Coagulation factor levels, glycemia, iron status, renal function, inflammatory factor levels, pancreatic enzyme levels, and thyroid function were normal. Her liver enzymes revealed a slightly elevated γGT (42 U/L, reference 5–36 U/L), and the other liver enzymes were within the normal range. A high level of triglycerides (218 mg/dL, reference < 150 mg/dL) was present, with normal cholesterol. A full-thickness skin biopsy showed ectatic venules at the derm with intraluminal fibrin thrombi, as is observed in vasculopathy. There was a slight perivascular lymphocytic infiltrate. The epidermis and hypoderm were normal.
One week later, the blue color had largely changed to yellow . Red macula were visible. Gross telangiectasia was present around the boost area and in the inframammary fold. Their presence was known prior to this event. New full-thickness skin biopsies were performed, revealing a normal epidermis but dilated vessels and extravasation of red blood cells in the derm . This led to the diagnosis of purpura. There were no signs of vasculitis. No tumor cells were observed. Manual lymphatic drainage of the breast was added to the treatment.
During the second week, a magnetic resonance imaging scan of the breasts was performed, excluding breast cancer relapse but revealing the remnant of a known seroma. At this time, the hematoma had almost completely vanished . The patient mentioned that lymphatic drainage offered relief.
One month after onset, the ecchymosis had completely resolved. The skin color no longer differed from that of the contralateral breast.