A 40-year-old man was brought to the ED by emergency medical services after he was found outdoors displaying an altered mental status, right-sided facial droop, headache, and unsteady gait. On initial evaluation, the patient was drowsy, following commands poorly, and could not answer questions appropriately. His initial Glasgow Coma Scale score was 13 (eye - 3, motor - 4, verbal - 6). Provocative testing revealed inconsistent right-sided ptosis with an otherwise non-focal neurologic exam.
Given this presentation, there was a concern for stroke. The patient underwent computed tomography and computed tomography angiography of the head and neck; both were negative for any evidence of ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke or other abnormalities. During his continued evaluation, he reported a headache, which he described as left temporal pressure with associated dental pain. He reported exacerbation of the headache with light and sound but reported not having had any nausea or vomiting. He conveyed that his headache was consistent with previous migraines, just more severe. He did not report any neck stiffness, fever, or sweats. Medical records showed that the patient had been in the ED five other times in the past 30 days with either headache or dental pain. On one visit the patient reported dental pain, was noted to have poor dentition, and pain was improved after dental block. On another visit the patient reported chronic headaches that were relieved by anti-inflammatory medications. Each of these previous assessments did not reveal any fever, neck stiffness, or altered mental status and thus did not trigger concern for intracranial pathology or meningitis requiring further workup. Each time, after symptomatic improvement with medications given in the ED, the patient was discharged and instructed to follow up with his family medical doctor.
Later in the patient’s ED course, a family member arrived and reported that the patient had been mentally decompensating over the previous two weeks. The family member stated that the patient had been acting abnormally, including urinating, and defecating in his bedroom and walking around the house naked. The family member was not aware of the patient having had any recent illness, recent travel, exposure to birds, or having pets at home. The family member reported that the patient worked as a sandblaster and had a sporadic history of marijuana and alcohol use. Given the patient’s behavioral change, a lumbar puncture was performed for further investigation.
The procedure was performed in the standard fashion, positioned in the left lateral decubitus position. The initial opening pressure was 42 centimeters of water (cmH2O) (reference range: 5–25 cmH2O). Analysis of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from tube four revealed a red blood cell count of 5 millimeters cubed (mm3) (reference value: 0 mm3), white blood cell count of 178 mm3 (reference range: 0–5 mm3), neutrophils 40% (reference value: 0%), lymphocytes 35% (reference range: 60%–70%), eosinophils 4% (reference value: 0%), protein 100 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) (reference range: 15–55 mg/dL), glucose 20 mg/dL (reference range: 40–80 mg/dL) and lactic acid 5.4 millimoles per liter (mmol/L) (reference range: 1.2–2.4 mmol/L). Given the concern for meningitis, the treatment team started the patient on empiric antibiotics (vancomycin 2 grams, ceftriaxone 2 grams, and acyclovir 710mg given parenterally) while the patient was in the ED.
The patient was admitted to the hospital where he was followed by infectious disease specialists and given continued empiric medications as described above. Two days after the initial lumbar puncture, the cryptococcal CSF antigen test returned positive. The patient was then started on amphotericin 450mg parenterally and flucytosine 1750mg orally. Cerebrospinal fluid and blood cultures tested positive for C. neoformans on day three. The patient received six therapeutic lumbar punctures during his admission for increased intracranial pressure, as well as eventual placement of a ventriculoperitoneal shunt for persistently elevated intracranial pressure after two months of therapy. A fourth-generation antigen/antibody HIV enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) test during admission was negative. Investigation and workup for other disease processes causing immunosuppression (including cirrhosis, autoimmune disorders, hematologic malignancy, sarcoidosis, previous steroid use, immunosuppressive therapy) were all negative. Further exploration into his alcohol use noted that it was “sporadic” and was thought to be non-contributory. Magnetic resonance imaging done during his hospitalization revealed increased T2/weighted-fluid-attenuated inversion recovery signal representing ventriculitis consistent with cryptococcal meningitis . Hallucinations and odd behaviors were continually noted during the patient’s admission, although these symptoms improved gradually. Upon discharge from the hospital, the patient was placed on 1600mg of oral fluconazole daily for three months and then continued maintenance therapy of fluconazole 400mg for 12 months. One year from the patient’s initial diagnosis of cryptococcal meningitis, he had some improvement in his cognition and was able to live independently, though he continued to struggle with symptoms of headache despite having a ventriculoperitoneal shunt and was unable to work. He continues to follow with infectious disease to ensure continued remission from cryptococcal meningitis.