A 32-year-old man was referred to the otolaryngology department in Farmanieh Hospital (Tehran, Iran), complaining of an asymmetrical protrusion at the supraorbital region. According to the patient, he first noticed the prominence of the frontal area at the age of 20, which continued to expand slowly until he was 25. The patient reported recurrent headaches localized to the forehead area, characterized by episodes lasting several hours (up to a day) and irresponsive to painkillers. These headaches occurred 2 to 4 times per week without specific triggering factors identified. Despite thorough examinations and investigations conducted by specialists to ascertain a diagnosis for migraine or other neurological disorders, an accurate and definitive diagnosis remained elusive. The patient's medical history did not include any instances of surgery or severe trauma to the craniofacial region, and there were no evident indicators of sinus infection, rhinitis, or allergies upon examination.
Physical examinations revealed asymmetrical and more severe right-sided excessive protrusion of the frontal sinuses. The form and position of the brows were asymmetrical, and the right brow was depressed owing to the abnormal protrusion of the inferior sinus wall (A, B). The lower right orbital roof was responsible for the asymmetries seen in the eye shape. Both frontalis muscles were functional, although the right frontalis was somewhat weaker than the left when the eyebrows were raised. No soft tissue mass in the region of the forehead was felt. A nasal examination revealed no evidence of sinusitis or sinus discharge. There was no evidence of diplopia or blurred vision, and each eyesight was normal. The cause of the protrusion was unknown, and there were no functional problems. Laboratory results were within normal limits.
A computed tomography (CT) of the frontal sinuses showed a large pneumatized frontal sinus with no evidence of bony erosion or thinning of the sinus's walls (C). There was no evidence of sinus mucoceles or any mass in the surrounding area. Mild mucosal swelling was observed bilaterally at the opening of the frontal sinus, with the right side being more prominent than the other side.
Surgery was performed using a bi-coronal approach regarding the patient's aesthetic appearance. To do this, a coronal skin incision was made, and the forehead subgaleal flap was lifted. Through a transverse incision made approximately 1.5 cm above the superior orbital rim, the superiorly based peri-cranial flap and inferiorly based subperiosteal flap were elevated. Then, supraorbital nerve was identified and in order to preserve, the nerve was released from its canal at the superior rim of the orbit using an osteotome.
The periosteum was excised 1 cm above the orbital rim, and the superior-based pericranial flap was elevated. The periosteum was raised from the orbital rim and detached from the bone to a depth of 1.5 cm inside the orbit.
The anterior wall of the frontal sinus was then removed using a sagittal saw, with the blade positioned toward the center of the sinus to avoid damaging the sinus's surrounding walls. Mucosal thickening was observed on both sides of the frontal sinus floor. The narrow sinus ostium was widened bilaterally using a Curette and by mucosal preserving from the internal aspect toward the external. A small part of the septum between the two frontal sinuses was removed to provide easy access between the sinuses. The right superior orbital rim was released by osteotomy and fixed in a new higher position. Then, the anterior wall of the frontal sinus was shaved and contoured using a surgical burr; it was divided into two segments and then fixed in a new position using 0.1 Vicryl sutures. The pericranium was returned back and repaired. To overcome the asymmetry of the eyebrows, an asymmetric eyebrow lift was performed (more lifting on the right side) using 0.1 Vicryl sutures and fixed to bone tunnels. Subsequently, the coronal incision was repaired in two layers. No drainage was used .
The patient was discharged immediately after regaining consciousness and stable vital signs (6 h after surgery). Cephalexin, topical ointment (Gentamicin), and acetaminophen were prescribed. In addition, the nasal wash serum was prescribed for daily application and was started the day after surgery. He was told to avoid blowing through his nose for two months.
After 6 months of follow-ups, good results were obtained; the patient had no complaints or sinus symptoms and was satisfied with his appearance (D). From his perspective, he did not anticipate the eyebrows to be more identical, and the outcome exceeded his expectations. In periodic examinations after the surgery, it was found that his headaches had fully subsided. There was some numbness in the upper part of the forehead after surgery that significantly reduced until six months after surgery. However, there was still some loss of feeling in that region, which the patient did not find annoying.
The three-dimensional reconstruction of the bones taken three months following surgery demonstrated the healing (E), and the CT scan revealed that the mucosal swelling of the sinus aperture had diminished (F).