A 37-year-old female who was 28 weeks pregnant, was referred to our clinic due to a conjunctival injection and eye pain. The patient was admitted to the obstetrics and gynecology department with a perineal ulcer. Vesicular rashes occurred on her tongue and labial mucosa. She was diagnosed with Behcet’s disease and treated conservatively. One week before the onset of her symptoms, she visited a swimming pool. The patient was healthy, with no history of immunosuppression. On admission, the patient had a body temperature of 36.6 ◦C, a pulse of 78 beats per minute, and blood pressure of 111/63 mmHg.
On initial ophthalmological examination, a bilateral bulbar and palpebral conjunctival injection was observed . A pseudomembrane and follicle were not observed. The patient’s intraocular pressures and anterior segment examination findings were normal in both eyes. Behcet’s disease with ocular involvement was diagnosed. Topical steroids (prednisolone acetate 1 %) and antibiotics (tobramycin 0.3 %) were administered four times a day. Additionally, ophthalmic ointments (Maxitrol, Alcon) were used before bedtime.
Two days later, a maculopapular eruption began to develop on her palms. HFMD was diagnosed based on the clinical findings and distribution being typical of HFMD . In order to identify the causative virus of HFMD, serum viral titer tests of Coxsackievirus type A16 and Enterovirus type 71 were performed using neutralizing antibody assays. Serum sample analysis was conducted by an external organization (Green Cross Corporation, Youngin, Korea). As per the results, blood test for Enterovirus type 71 antibody titers were positive (titer 1:64, ≥ 1:8) and coxsackievirus A16 antibody titers were negative (titers 1:4, < 1:8). Other viral tests such as Epstein–Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, and human immunodeficiency viruses showed positive results for IgG and negative results for IgM. In addition, the rapid plasma reagin tests displayed negative results. Therefore, we excluded the possibility of other viral and bacterial infections. Furthermore, autoimmune tests such as antinuclear antibody, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide also showed negative results.
One week after her presentation, a severe pseudomembrane occurred in the bulbar and palpebral conjunctiva, and a defect of the corneal epithelium was observed . After administering topical anesthetic drops, most of the pseudomembrane in both eyes was removed using a cotton swab and round-tipped forceps . Then, topical steroids (prednisolone acetate 1 %) were administered every 3 h. The pseudomembrane was removed every 2 to 3 days for 10 days during a slit-lamp examination.
After 3 weeks, the patient’s conjunctival injection had improved, and a pseudomembrane was not observed. However, punctate corneal erosion was seen in both eyes . The topical steroids were changed to fluorometholone and were administered every 6 h. Artificial tears and ophthalmic ointment were continuously used. After 2 months, the punctate corneal erosion had improved, and after 3 months, had completely resolved .