A formerly healthy 29-year-old Chinese male was admitted to our hospital (Affiliated Hospital of Guangdong Medical University, Zhanjiang, China) with isolated seizures, presenting with flexion of the left upper extremity and extension of both lower extremities, foaming at the mouth, rolling of the eyes, unconsciousness, without fever, headache, diplopia, blurred vision, or unsteady gait. The whole episode lasted about 5 min, not progressing to status epilepticus, with a total of 2 episodes. To control seizures, oxcarbazepine is given on the day of admission. On day 6 of the course of the disease, his brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) showed lesions in the right thalamus, along with soft meningeal enhancement in the bilateral top frontal and right occipital areas , and the results considered meningoencephalitis as a high possibility (more inclined to viral infection). The patient is positive for CMV abs IgG, Rubella virus antibody (ab) IgG positive, and Toxoplasma ab IgG positive. However, he denied a history of antecedent infections. The initial diagnosis was viral meningoencephalitis, followed by empiric treatment with acyclovir 0.5 g Q8h. However, according to the patient's clinical symptoms and brain MRI results, there is no exclusionary autoimmune encephalitis, central nervous system (CNS) demyelinating disease, or other diseases. To determine the cause, we performed a lumbar puncture. The opening pressure of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was normal, and CSF analysis showed leukocytosis of 20 × 10^6/L, 75% monocytes, normal protein, glucose, and chlorine, suggesting mild inflammation. There are no bacteria, fungi, acid-fast bacilli, cryptococcus, or viruses in the CSF. EEG results are normal. No tumor was detected on CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis. In addition, the report showed that autoantibodies against AE and demyelinating diseases were positive in CSF and serum , the anti-NMDAR abs titers were (1:10) and (1:10) in CSF and serum, MOG-ab in CSF and serum were (1:3.2) and (1:32), respectively. AQP4 ab, anti-MBP ab, anti-GABA B receptor ab, anti-mGLUR5 ab, and anti-CASPR2 ab were all negative. We finally diagnosed the patient with MOGAD and NMDARE overlap syndrome (MNOS). He responded well to immunomodulatory therapy (methylprednisolone, 1000 mg, × 3 d; later reduced to 500 mg, × 2 d, 240 mg × 3 d, 120 mg × 3 d intravenously), and did not have seizures during the hospital. He continued to take oral prednisone acetate tablets in discharge (55 mg, qd, minus 1 tablet every 2 weeks) and oxcarbazepine (0.3 g bid) outside the hospital. The patient was admitted to the hospital for re-examination, He had a good prognosis, no recurrence of seizures, no neurological sequelae, and no impact on his daily living activities. Surprisingly, on day 168 of the course of the disease, his brain MRI showed that the right thalamus lesion was a flaky abnormal signal shadow, which was significantly absorbed and reduced compared with before . The degree of pia mater strengthening of the top of the bilateral frontal and right occipital is significantly reduced compared with the previous one. The results of autoantibodies against AE and demyelinating diseases in CSF and serum showed that anti-MOG abs were negative in CSF and serum (1:10), CSF and serum anti-NMDAR abs were (1:1) and (1:10), respectively . Residual CSF analysis and EEG were normal. So far, there has been no recurrence at follow-up. A graphical summary shows the entire course of the disease, diagnosis, and treatment.