A 55-year-old man with a history of paroxysmal AF was admitted to our hospital for PVI. No relevant comorbidities were present. Clinical examination was unremarkable. The patient underwent transoesophageal echocardiography and cardiac computed tomography prior to the procedure, in order to rule out thrombi in the left atrial appendage and to obtain a detailed three-dimensional anatomical picture of the left atrium (LA). Deep conscious sedation was induced by midazolam, fentanyl, and propofol in an operator-directed, nurse-administered fashion. The procedure was performed with the new multi-electrode 12F over-the-wire PFA catheter (FARAWAVE™; Boston Scientific; catheter size: 31 mm), which has 5 splines, each containing 4 electrodes (yielding a total of 20 ablative electrodes). Each spline navigated the wire via a 13F steerable sheath (FARADRIVE™; Boston Scientific) and was deployed in the desired shape and advanced into position at the antrum of each pulmonary vein (PV). Pulmonary vein isolation was performed by means of four applications in a basket configuration and four applications in a flower configuration per PV, as described previously (see , ). Between pairs of PFA applications, the catheter was rotated by ∼30°/45° after the first two applications in each configuration, in order to cover the entire circumference. Ablation was performed by using an amplitude setting of 2.0 kV for each of the four PVs. Before energy delivery, a high-density map of the LA was constructed with the Rhythmia™ system and the Orion™ catheter (Boston Scientific), while the IntellaNAV Mifi™ OI catheter was used to assess the baseline LI values of the four PVs. As previously reported, each vein was divided into four segments (anterior, roof, inferior, and posterior) and a manual tag was used to record the exact position where the IntellaNAV™ catheter measured the LI values for each segment of the vein . About 20 min after PVI, entrance and exit blocks were assessed by means of the multipolar PFA catheter for each PV, and then the LA was remapped (a total of 6620 points acquired) with the Rhythmia™ system and Orion™ catheter, using the same anatomical map acquired before PFA ablation had started. The manual tags previously placed at the four segments of each vein were used to guide the exact positioning of the IntellaNAV Mifi™ catheter at the same spots where baseline LI had been recorded, in order to record how these values changed after PFA. The map confirmed the electrical disconnection of the PVs . The LI values displayed a significant variation after PFA delivery (124.3 ± 5 Ω for baseline LI vs. 96.8 ± 6 Ω after PFA, P < 0.0001; ) with a mean absolute LI variation of 27.5 ± 7 Ω and a mean percentage LI variation of 25.8 ± 8%. The differences between the average LI values pre- and post-PFA were 28.0 ± 5, 26.5 ± 9, 26.8 ± 3, and 28.8 ± 10 Ω for the superior, anterior, posterior, and inferior portions of the PV, respectively . After a follow-up of 9 months, no AF recurrence was documented by post-ablation ECG or reported by the patient.