A 19-year-old male was scheduled for elective modified Ravitch procedure for severe pectus excavatum in a large teaching hospital that functions as a tertiary referral centre for chest wall and pectus surgery. His medical history reported right-sided video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery bullectomy and pleurectomy for spontaneous pneumothorax. The preoperative ECG showed a sinus rhythm 76 b.p.m., with subtle RBBB with a small r’ in the anterior chest leads, which is consistent with earlier descriptions of ECG appearances in pectus excavatum. Epidural catheter placement for perioperative analgesia is a standard procedure in our hospital. While in sitting position and bending forward, the patient became hypotensive and announced feeling lightheaded and nauseous (heart rate 80 b.p.m., mean arterial pressure 85 mmHg). This was initially considered as a vasovagal response. Ephedrine (2× 5 mg) was administered while continuing epidural placement. Blood pressure recovered after administration of ephedrine, with a sinus rhythm of 100/min. Nevertheless, the patient’s symptoms were progressive, and he collapsed. Epidural placement was discontinued, and phenylephrine (0.2 mg), atropine (0.5 mg), dexamethasone (4 mg), and ondansetrone (4 mg) were administered intravenously. Despite this, the patient deteriorated, developed progressive tachycardia, haemodynamic and respiratory failure, and eventually went into VF. Advanced life support was initiated. After eight cycles of cardiopulmonary resuscitation (including defibrillation) spontaneous circulation occurred. The ECG directly after return of spontaneous circulation demonstrated a sinus tachycardia with broadening of the QRS-complex and ST-elevations most pronounced in the inferior leads that resolved within the next minutes . Cardiac ultrasound in the acute setting showed global hypokinesia without local wall motion abnormalities and no pericardial effusion or other abnormalities. Ionized electrolytes in the arterial blood gas were normal. A coronary angiography showed normal coronaries. There were no signs of anaphylaxis. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit. He recovered quickly without any neurological sequelae.
An additional history regarding postural symptoms and syncope was taken. The patient reported experiencing lightheadedness and dyspnoea when bending over, for example when tying shoelaces. He always considered this unremarkable.
In addition to the treating thoracic surgeon, cardiologist and anaesthesiologist, a cardiologist specialized in electrophysiology and a cardiothoracic surgeon from a university hospital were involved. Several investigations were performed to evaluate conduction and structural cardiac causes of the arrhythmia. Cine cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (, Video 1) and chest CT showed a severe pectus excavatum (Haller index 4.72: 274/58) and an extensive compression of the heart (in particular of the left atrium, and to a lesser degree of the right atrium and ventricle) between the depressed sternum and the thoracic spine. Cardiac MRI further showed optically normal right and left ventricle contractility and a normal right outflow tract. There were no signs of arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy and no delayed enhancement. Ajmaline challenge was negative for Brugada syndrome.
We concluded that in this case of severe pectus excavatum, compression of both atria and the right ventricle between sternum and spine was usually well tolerated. However, bending forward increased cardiac compression and caused cardiac inflow obstruction resulting in symptomatic hypotension. This likely occurred during epidural placement as well. It was potentially exacerbated by relative hypovolaemia due to preoperative fasting and vasovagal reaction to epidural placement. These circumstances combined decreased cardiac preload and output to such an extent that it caused prolonged hypotension, resulting in haemodynamic instability and respiratory insufficiency which most likely caused myocardial ischaemia and VF.
Thus, in the absence of other abnormalities, cardiac compression resulting from severe pectus excavatum was considered as the underlying cause of the arrhythmia. As VF was considered secondary to pectus excavatum, the cause would be reversible by pectus correcting surgery. Therefore, an ICD was not placed and a modified Ravitch procedure was scheduled. The patient was under continuous rhythm monitoring in the weeks between event and surgery, no further cardiac events or symptoms occurred. As a precaution, surgery was performed in a university hospital with a full cardiothoracic and cardioanaesthesiologic team present and extracorporeal circulation at hand. Both the procedure and perioperative period were uneventful. The patient made a full recovery. Follow-up consisted of 6 monthly outpatient checkups by his cardiologist (including ergometry and ECG, ) and thoracic surgeon. Eighteen months after surgery, he remains well. His postural symptoms have decreased.