A 49-year-old woman visited a doctor, because she had noticed a lump in her right breast. There were no abnormal findings in either breast at that time. She was referred to our hospital 5 months later, because screening mammography revealed a focal asymmetric density (FAD) in her right breast. She had neither a history of breast surgery nor of radiation therapy. She had a family history of cancer: her aunt had breast cancer, and her brother renal cancer.
Physical examination revealed a soft, mobile, 5-cm-diameter mass in her right breast, and a 2.5-cm-diameter mass in her left breast. Mammography showed a FAD in the inferior part of the right breast (Additional file : Fig S1). Ultrasonography showed ill-defined hyper- and hypo-echoic lesions in the inner and outer lower quadrants of the right breast and in the inner and outer upper quadrants of the left breast (Additional file : Fig S2). Computed tomography (CT) revealed 8- and 3-cm-diameter heterogeneously enhanced masses in the inner and outer lower quadrants of the right breast and several enhanced masses in the left breast (Additional file : Fig S3). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed five heterogeneously enhanced masses (5.8 cm in maximum diameter) in the right breast and six enhanced masses (approximately 1–3 cm in diameter) in the left breast . These masses showed high intensity on fat-suppressed T2-weighted images . Contrast-enhanced images exhibited heterogeneous enhancement in the early phase and progressive and concentric enhancement in the delayed phase . The dynamic enhancement curves showed a persistently enhancing or plateau pattern. Some of the tumors were enhanced in a non-mass-like form and had no well-defined margins. Histological examination of core needle biopsies (CNBs) revealed proliferation of irregularly shaped vascular channels lined by atypical endothelial cells throughout the adipose tissue and lobules of the breasts, leading to a diagnosis of well-differentiated angiosarcoma (Additional file : Fig S4). CT scans and bone scintigraphy revealed no metastases. Positron emission tomography–CT showed no 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose uptake in the tumors in either breast, which was considered suggestive of benign mammary lipomas (Additional file : Fig S5).
The patient underwent bilateral mastectomy 27 days after her initial visit. We did not perform a sentinel lymph node (LN) biopsy, because there were no clinical findings suggestive of LN metastasis. Macroscopically, five masses were observed in the right breast and six were observed in the left breast . The tumors were dark red and hemorrhagic and had diameters of up to 7.5 × 6 cm in the right breast and 5 × 3.5 cm in the left. Histological examination revealed multiple lesions composed of irregularly shaped vascular channels lined by endothelial cells with hyperchromatic nuclei proliferating in the parenchyma and adipose tissue of both breasts, , which expressed membranous CD31 immunoreactivity . The tumors were diagnosed as well-differentiated angiosarcomas of both breasts.
Postoperative irradiation (60 Gy/30 Fr) was administered to the bilateral chest wall. Before adjuvant chemotherapy, 11 weeks after the surgery, CT revealed multiple subcutaneous small nodules on the chest wall outside the irradiation field. These were suspected of being angiosarcoma metastases; however, they were not examined pathologically . Chemotherapy (weekly paclitaxel 80 mg/m2) was started soon thereafter. The nodules shrank within 2 months; further intensive chemotherapy will be administered. Comprehensive genome profiling (FoundationOne®CDx; Foundation Medicine, Cambridge, MA, USA) of the resected specimen detected no reportable alterations with companion diagnostic claims. The microsatellite status was stable, and the tumor mutational burden was 1 mutation/Mb. Other alterations identified were K147E in the KRAS gene and V344M-subclonal in the PIK3CA gene. These findings yielded no potential targets for targeted therapy.