A 13-year-old boy presented to our hospital for further evaluation and treatment.
The patient was diagnosed as having DS with CHD. A patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) closure was successfully performed, but atrial septal defect (ASD) closure was withheld due to the patient’s complicated pulmonary arterial hypertension. After treatment, the patient’s activity tolerance improved. On July 29, 2020, the patient sought medical care at the Yan’an Hospital of Kunming City, where cardiac catheterization revealed a pulmonary artery pressure of 95/41/66 mmHg and a right ventricular pressure of 97/-10/38 mmHg. He was diagnosed with ASD complicated with severe pulmonary arterial hypertension, and continuation of oral Bosentan and Sildenafil for the management of pulmonary arterial hypertension was recommended.
The patient’s medical history revealed that at 2 mo of age, he was diagnosed at another hospital with CHD characterized by ASD and PDA. However, no treatment was provided. In 2018, the patient developed “cyanosis of the lips and shortness of breath after exercise” and was admitted to Fuwai Hospital, where he was diagnosed with ASD and PDA, along with an enlarged heart, severe pulmonary hypertension (PH), and cardiac function Grade II.
Physical examination revealed a pulse rate of 95 bpm, blood pressure of 113/55 mmHg, and pale purplish lips. Cardiac percussion examination revealed leftward expansion of the heart border. Auscultation revealed regular heart rhythm with mild hyperactivity of P2, but no discernible noise.
Frontal and lateral chest digital radiography (DR) revealed the presence of reticular shadows in the mediastinal area indicative of postoperative changes . A conventional 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) was conducted during the outpatient visit, which revealed sinus rhythm and right chamber hypertrophy. An echocardiogram was also performed, which showed an ASD (central secondary foramen) with an interrupted middle echo in the atrial septum measuring 0.813 cm. The position and functionality of the PDA interventional closing device were normal, the right atrium and ventricle show enlarged diameters and increased wall thickness in the right ventricle . According to subsequent reports, the patient exhibits blood flow signals indicating left-to-right shunting that can be visualized in the atrium. Additionally, a small regurgitant jet can be observed at the tricuspid valve during atrial contraction, with peak flow velocity of 398cm/s and a peak pressure gradient of 63mmHg. Following these assessments, the patient was referred to our department for the management of “ASD and associated PH”.