A 68-year-old male patient presented with slight fatigue and intermittent polyuria. His family history was positive for osteoporosis, negative for fractures and nefrolitiasis. In childhood he was subjected to a jaw cementoma asportation. He underwent several surgical procedures because of recurrent nefrolitiasis since 25 years. He has also been on hypertension treatment since 30 years. At presentation we observed arterial pressure of 120/70 mmHg and pulse rate of 70 beats/min with his habitual antihypertensive therapy (Losartan 50 mg/day). Physical examination was unremarkable: weight 75 Kg, height 173 cm, body mass index 25.1 Kg/m2. Total serum calcium level at first evaluation was 11.6 mg/dl, with a PTH improperly normal (25.7 pg/ml). Low values of serum 25-hydroxy-Vitamin D3 was also observed (16 ng/ml). During the following visits we found hypercalciuria (from 300 to 600 mg/24 h in different evaluations) and a Ca/Cr ratio of 0.031. Glycemia, TSH, prolactin, IGF-1, urine metanephrines levels were in normal range. We found higher values of serum Anti-Parietal-Cells-Antibodies (APCA), suggestive for chronic autoimmune gastritis. Laboratory results are shown in Table .
Neck echography, NMR and 99mTc-sesta MIBI tomoscintigraphy were negative for parathyroids glands images. Abdomen echography and CT showed bilateral polycystic kidney (maximum diameter 8.5 cm). Bone density scan (DXA) showed normal bone mineral density (Femur T-score 1.07, Lumbar T score 1.3). Recent orthopantomography was negative for jaw lesions.
The patient was treated for 7 months with Cinacalcet 90 mg/day, since at that time we ignored the existence of the CaSR mutation. However, although Cinacalcet is not indicated for FHH treatment, we obtained a slight decrease of calcemia, but the therapy was stopped because of side effects appearance (hypotension, nausea). Subsequently, he refused other specific therapies. During a 4 years follow-up period hypercalcemia, hypercalciuria and normal levels of PTH persisted. A heterozygous mutation in exon 7 of the CaSR gene was found, predicting a p.T972M amino acid substitution in cytoplasmic tail of CaSR . The same mutation we found in one of his three screened sons, a 41-year-old men , who is currently asymptomatic and shows serum ionized calcium level of 1.30 mmol/L, close to the upper normal limit (n.v. 1.12-1.31), normal calciuria (195 mg/24 h) and PTH, but also a 25 hydroxy-Vitamin D3 deficiency (12.3 ng/ml) .
We also tested the mutation by either qualitative assay in order to investigate the protein conformation effect or by quantitative assay to verify in addition the alteration of protein function. In our functional assays on WT and mutant CaSR proteins, we showed that, with respect the WT, the 972 M variant is slightly underexpressed as far as the 160 kDa glycosylated form . The signaling activity of the 972 M mutant receptor, compared to the WT, resulted strongly impaired even at higher Ca++ concentration (10 mM), showing a pattern similar to the inactivating mutant control .