We report the case of a 52-year-old female, otherwise healthy. For the 9 months preceding the visit, she complained of polyarthralgia and erythematous rash on her hands, fingers, chest, and face. In her hands, she also reported painful ulcers. Additionally, she lost 7 Kg and was experiencing dysphagia, despite denying limb muscle weakness.
The physical examination during the first visit depicted an underweight and apparently ill patient. There were erythematous and lightly scaly plaques covering the hands, torso, and eyelids, suggesting Gottron’s papules, heliotrope rash, shawl’s sign, and V-sign . The hands and feet exhibited Reynaud’s phenomenon, with various painful ulcers . The reported joints were tender and swollen, and muscle strength was preserved in all limbs.
Laboratory workup revealed elevated inflammatory markers, normal creatine phosphokinase, and no other organic failure. Antinuclear antibody (ANA) was positive with a nuclear dense fine speckled pattern, titre 1:320. Regarding antibodies, Anti-Ro52, Anti-PM/Scl, Anti-Ku, Anti-SAE, Anti-TIF1γ, Anti-NXP2, Anti-MDA5 and all Anti-synthetase were negative. Antibodies for systemic lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis were also negative. Finally, thorax computed tomography showed nonspecific interstitial pneumonia, and skin biopsy showed interface dermatitis with hyperparakeratosis and mucin deposits, suggesting CADM. Of note, the patient fulfilled the most recent classification criteria of IM as definite IM, subgroup amyopathic DM.
Initially, she was treated with prednisone (up to 40 mg, ~0.7 mg/kg/day) and hydroxychloroquine for ~3 months, with no response. At this moment, MITAX score was 24/54 and MYOACT was 12/60, with prominent skin manifestations. The possibility of cancer-associated myositis was considered, but our screening was negative. The decision was made to introduce pulse therapy with methylprednisolone at a daily dose of 1 g for 3 days. Oral prednisone was tapered to 10 mg/day, and methotrexate at a weekly dose of 10 mg was initiated. One month later, skin lesions showed only slightly improvement, and the patient complained of dry cough and no weight gain. IMACS total improvement score (TIS) summed to 17.5, not even reaching minimal improvement. Therefore, a decision was made to undergo new pulse therapy with methylprednisolone (3 g total). The methotrexate dose was also increased to 15 mg per week, and the oral glucocorticoid was reduced to 5 mg per day. One month later, TIS showed moderate improvement, MITAX was 4/54 and MYOACT 2/60. Because slight erythema of the chest remained 4 months later, in order to completely taper the prednisone, methotrexate was raised to the maximum dose (20 mg/week). The patient was seen recently, 1 year from the beginning of the treatment, without signs of disease activity.