Our patient was a 23-year-old unmarried, unemployed woman graduate from a middle socioeconomic status and urban Asian background. She had a six-year history of patchy hair loss from her scalp. She had earlier consulted a dermatologist who referred her to a psychiatrist.
She walked into our consultation room with her head covered with a scarf. She had a short haircut and there were many bald patches, 5 cm to 10 cm in area, on her scalp. The hair, particularly in the parietal region of both sides of the head, was very thin, brittle and uneven.
Our patient had an uncontrollable, irresistible, repetitive urge to pull out her scalp hair. The hair-pulling behavior had first appeared when she was 17 years of age, had completed school and was entering college. There was no evidence of any significant stressors in her life. The hair pulling had become particularly distressing and problematic over the past six months and she described her present condition as 'tremendously out of control'. There was a significant deterioration in her academic performance and social functioning.
The hair pulling spells occurred on a daily basis, just before bedtime, when she was alone in her room listening to the radio, or watching television. The hair pulling used to be more severe when she was stressed. She reported a feeling of mounting tension before the act of hair pulling, with an accompanied sensation of itching. The tension was alleviated when she pulled the hair out. Pulling of hair involved twisting each hair around a finger, mostly from the sides of her head near her ears. She reported a sense of satisfaction in hearing the sound of the hair being pulled out, accompanied by pleasurable sensations. She would pull out countless hairs over few hours, resulting in a bald patch on the scalp. After the hair was pulled, she would examine the root of the hair. Later, she would secretly dispose of the plucked out hair after neatly packing them in a cover.
She felt guilty and embarrassed by her hair-pulling behavior and often wore her hair tied back. She was more self-conscious about the bald patches behind the ears. She used scarves to camouflage her disfigured scalp while going out. She had good insight into her illness, and recognized that her mental state was contributing to her symptoms.
Our patient was pre-morbidly well adjusted with no significant medical or family history. There was also no history of substance use or suicide attempts. She was diagnosed to have TTM (impulse control disorder not otherwise specified) as per DSM-IV criteria . There was no comorbid Axis I psychiatric disorders, including mood disorder. OCD was ruled out in our patient as the hair pulling (i) used to occur in leisure time only, (ii) was not in response to obsessive thoughts, but rather because of irresistible urges, (iii) was followed by a sense of satisfaction, (iv) was not associated with any other OCD symptoms, and (v) was not associated with depression.
At various time points, different instruments were applied to measure her treatment response . TTM behavior was measured with The Massachusetts General Hospital Hair Pulling Scale (MGHHPS) and National Institute of Mental Health Trichotillomania Symptom Severity and Impairment Scale (NIMH-TSS and NIMH-TIS) [,]. MGHHPS is a self-report measure of the severity of hair pulling urges and behavior, efforts to resist urges, control over the problem, and associated distress . Higher scores reflect greater severity. The NIMH-TSS and NIMH-TIS are clinician rating scales . The NIMH-TSS is a five-item measure assessing average hair-pulling episode duration during the past week and on the previous day, thoughts preceding the pulling episode, resistance to urges, distress, and interference. The NIMH-TIS is an 11-point scale assessing overall impairment in a patient's life due to TTM. Clinical Global Impression - Severity and Improvement scales (CGI-S and CGI- I) are clinician-rated instruments to assess the baseline severity and improvement in a psychiatric disorder . Presence of depression was assessed with the Hospital Anxiety Depression Rating Scale - Depression subscale (HADS-D) .
Our patient was initially started on fluoxetine 20 mg/day (gradually increasing the dose up to 80 mg/day by week eight), clonazepam 0.5 mg/day (tapered off by week three) and continuous cognitive behavior therapy (CBT). By week eight, despite the reasonably adequate dose and treatment duration, there was minimal improvement in hair-pulling behavior. Hence, at week eight, bupropion sustained release (bupropion-SR) was initiated at 150 mg/day, and increased to 300 mg/day at week 10. Fluoxetine was tapered off by week 11. By week 12, there was a mild improvement in our patient's hair pulling behavior, and the dose of bupropion-SR was increased to 450 mg/day, in divided doses. At this dose, at week 13, our patient experienced significant clinical improvement in TTM. She continued to show sustained improvement during the 6 and 12-month follow-ups . CBT was started at the beginning of treatment, and was continued throughout the one-year follow-up period. Bupropion-SR was well tolerated, except for few mild adverse effects such as nausea and nervousness during the initial two weeks, which resolved without any intervention.