The patient was a 15-month-old Japanese boy (height 73 cm, weight 9 kg) with a history of vertebral defects, anal atresia, and cardiac defects (VATER association) but no significant family medical history. Preoperative development was good, with age-appropriate mental function [Pediatric Cerebral Performance Category Scale (PCPC) = 1]. The patient underwent Rastelli surgery to correct a double-outlet right ventricle (DORV) and pulmonary atresia. Sevoflurane, midazolam, fentanyl, and rocuronium were used as anesthetics during surgery. Sevoflurane was used for approximately 3 hours from induction of anesthesia to the start of cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB). Preoperative blood gases were normal, but metabolic acidosis developed (pH 7.26; base excess, −7.1; PaCO2, 43.5 mmHg; HCO3−, 19.2 mmol/L; anion gap, 10.8; and lactate concentration, 0.7 mmol/L) after the start of surgery. In addition, end-tidal CO2 was elevated, requiring adjustment of the ventilation of the anesthesia machine. The core body temperature before the start of CPB was 36 °C. Cooling was started with cannulation, and the lowest body temperature reached was 28 °C. At the end of the intracardiac surgery, heating was started, and body temperature was allowed to reach 37 °C, over a 20 minute period. After withdrawal from CPB, his body temperature rose at a rate of 0.1 ℃/minute, and when he was taken out of the operating room, his core body temperature was 42 ℃. The total operative time was 316 minutes, and CPB time was 162 minutes. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) with intubation.
Vital signs on ICU admission were as follows: heart rate, 200 beats per minute (bpm), sinus tachycardia; blood pressure, 105/68 mmHg (adrenaline at 0.05 μg/kg/minute and olprinone at 0.2 μg/kg/minute were administered); Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS), 3 (E1VTM1); pupil diameter, 5/5 mm; SpO2, 100% [already intubated, ventilator set to synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation (SIMV); FIO2, 0.6; positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP), 4; peak inspiratory pressure (PIP), 24; ventilation frequency, 30]; and rectal temperature, 40.1 ℃. Arterial blood gas analysis showed metabolic acidosis with pH 7.25; base excess, -9.9 mEq/L; PaCO2, 37.9 mmHg; PaO2, 250 mmHg; HCO3−, 16.3 mmol/L; anion gap, 20.7; Na+, 148 mmol/L; K+, 4.9 mmol/L; Cl−, 111 mmol/L; and lactate concentration, 10.5 mmol/L. In about 1 hour, end-tidal CO2 gradually rose to 56 mmHg and PaCO2 rose to 129 mmHg. Respiratory settings were raised to a driving pressure of 27, but a further increase in PaCO2 to 138 mmHg occurred, resulting in hypercapnia. The core body temperature also rose to 41 °C and did not decrease despite multiple ice packs, cooling with a circulating water mattress, gastric lavage with cold saline solution, and rapid administration of cold isotonic crystalloid. Blood tests showed elevated creatinine kinase (2202 U/L), myoglobin (45,840 ng/mL), and interleukin-6 (IL-6) (79.5 pg/mL). The patient had refractory tachycardia, hyperthermia, elevated PaCO2, progressive metabolic acidosis, and a MH clinical grading scale score of 63 (MH rank 6), which indicated fulminant MH. Therefore, the first dose of dantrolene was administered approximately 4 hours after the patient became hyperthermic, according to the dosage recommended by the Japanese Society of Anesthesiologists. Dantrolene was administered at an initial dose of 2 mg/kg, followed by additional doses of 1 mg/kg each. A total of 5 mg/kg were administered, and a decrease in PaCO2 was observed. In addition, continuous hemodiafiltration was started due to uncontrolled hyperthermia and metabolic acidosis. Sedation with midazolam, fentanyl, dexmedetomidine, and vecuronium was administered to prevent a further increase in body temperature due to body movement and to avoid circulatory failure due to arousal. Body temperature dropped to 38 °C within 30 minutes of starting continuous hemodiafiltration (approximately 5 hours after the patient became hyperthermic) and was controllable at 36 °C thereafter. Tachycardia improved with a decrease in body temperature, but cardiac arrhythmia (accelerated junctional rhythm) appeared 2 hours later, and circulatory failure occurred. Therefore, temporary epicardial pacing leads were inserted on the second day. Sevoflurane was not used during this surgery, which was performed without complications. Genetic testing for MH could not be performed due to lack of consent from the parents.
After admission to the ICU concurrent with treatment for MH, we noticed that the patient’s pupils were dilated. Sedative agents and muscle relaxants were administered, and no abnormal muscle contractions were observed. A bedside EEG showed persistent generalized continuous multifocal spikes . Midazolam (0.1 mg/kg/hour), levetiracetam (30 mg/kg), and fosphenytoin (22.5 mg/kg) were administered, but without improvement. Thiamylal (5 mg/kg/hour) and ketamine (2 mg/kg/hour) were infused continuously. The EEG then changed to burst suppression with repeated high-amplitude multifocal spikes and flat waves . From the second day, the frequency of bursts gradually decreased, and the duration of the bursts gradually shortened . Continuous thiamylal administration was terminated on day 7. Ketamine was also terminated on day 10, and the patient was switched to oral phenobarbital. On day 12, a focal seizure in the left occipital region was observed, which resolved with increased phenobarbital dosage. On day 14, the EEG was generally of low amplitude .
Rhabdomyolysis and acute kidney injury were also observed as complications of MH. Creatinine kinase was found to be elevated on the first day, reached a maximum (203,000 IU/L) on day 4, then gradually decreased. Oliguria of 0.3 mL/kg/hour continued, showing impaired renal function, but urine output gradually increased from day 7, and the patient was weaned off continuous hemodiafiltration on day 13. The patient’s accelerated junctional rhythm improved with improvement in his general condition, and the temporary epicardial pacing leads were removed on day 18. .
Head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed on day 19, after the patient’s hemodynamic status had stabilized. Diffusion-weighted and T2-weighted images showed diffuse hyperintensity predominantly in the cerebral cortex, and T1-weighted images also showed pale hyperintensity in the occipitoparietal cortex , suggesting diffuse cortical damage.
Spontaneous respiration and cough reflex were confirmed, and the patient was extubated on day 34. The patient was discharged from the ICU on day 40 with impaired consciousness (PCPC 4), generalized muscle stiffness, and residual muscle contractures. Six months after onset, the patient continued rehabilitation, and his level of consciousness had improved (PCPC 3) but with residual severe mental retardation, hypertonia of the extremities, and quadriplegia.