A 63-year-old female patient with left colon cancer and synchronous bilateral colorectal liver metastases underwent a totally laparoscopic ALTPS and simultaneous left hemicolectomy.
The total liver volume (TLV) was 1188 mL, and the volume of the left lateral section, the future liver remnant volume (FLRV), was 376 mL . To achieve sufficient hypertrophy of the left lateral section, the first step of ALTPS plus left hemicolectomy was performed. Informed consent was obtained from the patient and her parents. The West China Hospital administration and the ethics committee authorized the surgery.
The operation was started with laparoscopic left hemicolectomy. After step 1, laparoscopic resection of partial segment III was followed by identification of the portal structures, and the right portal vein was ligated. The hepatic artery and common bile duct were marked with loops. After it was confirmed that the tumor had not spread and that R0 resection could be achieved at the second stage of the ALTPS by laparoscopic ultrasound, the tourniquet was passed between the middle and left hepatic veins and continued around the base of the left lobe to the left portal vein pedicle. The blood loss in stage 1 was 250 mL. Postoperative pathology showed ulcerative adenocarcinoma of the colon and a low-grade adenocarcinoma of the liver.
Reevaluation of the patient after 13 days showed that the left liver had regenerated. Volumetry of the FLRV was 550 mL and the TLV was 1410 mL . Considering that the weight of the patient is only 44 kg (standard liver volume [SLV] = 1029 mL), the second step of the laparoscopic ALTPS was performed the following day. Small adhesions were found at laparoscopy. The right hepatic artery and the right bile duct were sectioned, and the right trisectionectomy was performed at the level of the tourniquet. There were no intraoperative complications, and the blood loss was 300 mL. The postoperative pathology revealed a low-grade adenocarcinoma of the liver which is in compliance with colorectal liver metastasis.
The operative times were 460 minutes for the first stage and 240 minutes for the second stage. The recoveries after the first and the second operations were uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 11 of the second stage operation with no 90-day postoperative mortality.