A 63-year-old Japanese male patient presented with gross hematuria and RPGN following SARS-CoV-2 vaccination. The patient had a history of alcoholic cirrhosis of the liver, and a health checkup 2 years earlier indicated proteinuria (1 +) and microscopic hematuria (3 +) when his serum creatinine (Cr) and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) levels were 0.99 mg/dL and 9.4 mg/dL, respectively. He also had a history of habitual tonsillitis, for which he underwent a bilateral tonsillectomy when he was 12. He had no other relevant medical history and no family history of IgA nephropathy or other forms of kidney disease.
The patient manifested gross hematuria and general malaise a day after receiving his second dose of the SARS-CoV-2 vaccine manufactured by Pfizer. Urinalysis performed 15 days after vaccination revealed proteinuria (3 +) and occult blood (3 +); his serum Cr level was 4.07 mg/dL. Following examination at the Department of Nephrology 25 days after vaccination, he was admitted to the hospital because of RPGN. Although the patient had bilateral pitting pedal edema, no periorbital edema was observed. There was no cervical lymphadenopathy, pharyngeal erythema, or purpura on his legs. He was afebrile (with a body temperature of 36.4°C), and his blood pressure was 154/73 mmHg. Abdominal computed tomography revealed dull liver edges, irregular surface, and mild liver enlargement. The left and right kidneys were enlarged, measuring 127 mm and 120 mm in length, respectively.
Initial testing on admission revealed anemia and thrombocytopenia (hemoglobin, 10.9 g/dL; packed cell volume, 32.4%; and platelet count, 111,000/µL) and a white blood cell count of 4600/µL. The coagulation test (prothrombin time, 14.9 s; activated partial thromboplastin time, 36.0 s) and inflammation marker levels (C-reactive protein = 0.14 mg/dL) were normal. However, liver function tests revealed abnormal results (total protein, 7.7 g/dL; albumin, 3.2 g/dL; aspartate transaminase, 47 IU/L; alanine transaminase, 30 IU/L; lactate dehydrogenase, 351 IU/L; alkaline phosphatase, 94 IU/L; and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, 224 IU/L); renal function tests also revealed abnormal results (urea nitrogen, 29.3 mg/dL; Cr, 4.5 mg/dL), and the serum levels of IgG (2058 mg/dL) and IgA (1074 mg/dL) were high. Antibody test results (antinuclear antibodies, myeloperoxidase–antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody [ANCA], PR3-ANCA, and anti-glomerular basement membrane antibodies) were all negative. The patient’s serum complements C3 (104 mg/dL) and C4 (11/5 mg/dL) levels were normal. However, tests for hepatitis B, hepatitis C, and human immunodeficiency viruses were negative. Urinalysis revealed abnormalities (proteins, 3 + ; occult blood, 3 + ; sediment red blood cells > 100 high-power field [HPF]; glomerular red blood cells, 50 − 99/HPF; hyaline casts > 100/whole field; urinary protein, 319 mg/dL; urinary Cr, 126.2 mg/dL; and urinary β2-MG, 3278 ug/L). The results of SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid amplification testing using loop-mediated isothermal amplification were negative.
On day 6 of hospitalization, a renal biopsy was performed, and the resected specimen included 13–17 glomeruli.
Glomeruli showed inflammatory cell infiltration and cellular crescent formation. Renal proximal tubule epithelial cells showed vacuolar degeneration and dysfunction. Inflammatory cell infiltration was also observed in the cortical interstitium. Findings that are consistent with glomerular capillaritis were also observed. Additionally, cortical inflammatory cell infiltration and medullary capillaritis were observed, suggesting an enhanced cortical and medullary inflammatory response in addition to an enhanced glomerular inflammatory response . Mesangial cell proliferation was detected in 35% of the cases, and no evidence of endocapillary hypercellularity, global glomerulosclerosis, segmental glomerulosclerosis, and tubular atrophy/interstitial fibrosis was observed. The examination revealed 2/17 cellular and 1/17 fibrocystic crescents. MEST-C scores were M0, E0, S0, T0, and C1. Medullary angiitis, which is usually present in ANCA, was absent.
Immunofluorescence revealed a mesangial pattern primarily comprising IgA( +) and C3( +). IgM( ±) segmental mesangial findings were also observed. The IgA subclass IgA1 was dominant, and mesangial granular findings were also observed in IgA on paraffin immunofluorescence. Although findings suggestive of galactose-deficient IgA1 were present, these were weak compared to IgA. These findings were consistent with those of secondary IgA .
The patient was diagnosed with IgA nephropathy and began receiving pulse steroid therapy (methylprednisolone, 500 mg/day for 3 days) on day 7 of hospitalization. On day 10, he began receiving oral prednisolone (PSL) at 40 mg/day. On day 15, he received two courses of pulse steroid therapy, and from day 19 onward, the dose of PSL was reduced to 35 mg/day. Before admission, the patient took olmesartan medoxomil but discontinued upon admission because of worsening renal function. Subsequently, we managed the patient’s blood pressure using a calcium channel blocker. We resumed losartan potassium on day 27 as the patient’s renal dysfunction peaked. The third course of pulse steroid therapy was initiated on day 28, and on day 34, his level of consciousness began to decline, and he became delirious. The serum levels of BUN, Cr, total bilirubin, and ammonia had increased to 102.9 mg/dL, 4.88 mg/dL, 4.1 mg/dL, and 181 µg/dL, respectively, suggesting acute liver failure associated with pulse steroid therapy. He was commenced on hemodiafiltration and plasma exchange on days 35 and 36, respectively. Hemodiafiltration was performed to remove inflammatory cytokines and small- to medium-molecular toxic substances and to promote awakening from hepatic encephalopathy. In toal, 4.8 L of plasma was exchanged for the same volume of normal fresh frozen plasma. The plasma exchange, which occurred over 4 h, was aimed at replenishing coagulation factors whose synthesis has been compromised by liver failure and preventing secondary multiorgan failures, such as edema, ascites, and bleeding. After undergoing both therapies two times, his consciousness level improved. Although proteinuria resolved during therapy, hematuria did not; therefore, on day 52, he was also started on oral mizoribine at 100 mg/day. Once the patient’s blood level of mizoribine was confirmed to be normal, he was discharged on day 67. Although urine occult blood (3 +) persisted at discharge, proteinuria decreased to 0.41 g/gCr, and BUN and serum Cr levels decreased to 45.4 mg/dL and 2.22 mg/dL, respectively. Therefore, he was scheduled for fortnightly follow-up visits .