A 62-year-old woman, who was negative for the BRCA1/2 germline mutation, presented to our institution with abdominal pain in October 2011. She was referred from another institution, where she had undergone a primary suboptimal cytoreduction. Pathologic analysis revealed a carcinosarcoma with a high-grade serous adenocarcinoma component associated with high-grade endometrial sarcoma in the right ovary and fallopian tube, with angiolymphatic embolization. There were also peritoneal implants in the upper abdomen and pelvis. The uterus, left fallopian tube and ovary, and lymph nodes had no evidence of disease; however, peritoneal cytologic analysis was positive for malignancy. Immunohistochemistry of the right ovary demonstrated that the tumor was positive for estrogen and progesterone receptor but HER2/neu-negative.
From April through June 2012, the patient received adjuvant carboplatin (AUC 6) and paclitaxel (175 mg/m2) every 3 weeks for four cycles. In July 2012, she underwent an interval cytoreduction (optimal) followed by treatment with intraperitoneal cisplatin (75 mg/m2) and intravenous (135 mg/m2) and intraperitoneal paclitaxel (60 mg/m2) for six additional cycles. After the end of chemotherapy, she received tamoxifen as maintenance treatment for 4 months. She was observed off treatment for 6 months. In May 2013, retroperitoneal adenopathy was discovered following a serial rise in CA125, which prompted radiographic assessment. She received carboplatin (AUC 5), pegylated liposomal doxorubicin (30 mg/m2), and bevacizumab (10 mg/kg) for four cycles and had a partial response. Paclitaxel was not used again owing to residual neuropathy. In light of localized recurrence and response, she underwent a tertiary debulking procedure with complete macroscopic gross resection. Unfortunately, 6 months later a positron emission tomography/computed tomography study (PET-CT) revealed disease progression in a right retropectoral lymph node, as well as in paraesophageal lymph nodes. She then received cisplatin (35 mg/m2), gemcitabine (800 mg/m2), and bevacizumab (10 mg/kg), but had disease progression.
From April 2014 through December 2015, the patient received various treatments for platinum-resistant disease: pemetrexed, nab-paclitaxel, megestrol, capecitabine, and vinorelbine. The metastatic sites were predominantly lymphatic and peritoneal. Despite the extensive pretreatment, she remained largely asymptomatic and had a good performance status. However, owing to disease progression, in January 2016 she initiated treatment with pembrolizumab (200 mg every 3 weeks). Unfortunately, there was not enough material to test the status of microsatellite instability, mutational load, or PD-L1 expression in the tumor. Also, the tumor was not analyzed for druggable mutations due to lack of insurance coverage. After the third cycle, she developed thyroiditis grade 1 but no other adverse events. After the fourth cycle, PET/CT showed objective partial response in the left external iliac lymph nodes , as well as in the right-posterior pectoral lymph node conglomerate . Another major site of metastatic disease was the right retropulmonary lymph nodes. With the goal of increasing local control and potentially causing an abscopal effect, she underwent radiotherapy (24 Gy in three fractions of 8 Gy). She then received an additional four cycles of pembrolizumab. Unfortunately, disease progression was discovered in the liver shortly thereafter. She received olaparib (400 mg twice per day) for 2 months but without response, and she died in October 2016.