A 60-year-old male patient visited the department of plastic and reconstructive surgery with a palpable mass in the right subscapular area. The mass was about 6 cm in size, round and rubbery, and was assumed to be located in the deep layer. An intramuscular or a submuscular lipoma was suspected.
Magnetic resonance (MR) image showed an encapsulated fatty mass between the right serratus anterior muscle and the right rib cage. The size of the mass was estimated to be 5.5 × 2.3 × 5.2 cm. The mass was insulated in the right 6th–7th intercostal space resulting in herniation into the pleural cavity. Thin internal septations were also observed . The assessment from MR imaging was that it was either an intermuscular lipoma or a well-differentiated liposarcoma.
It was thought that both direct and thoracoscopic approaches were necessary to remove the tumor without rupturing or damaging the capsule. Therefore, co-operation with the thoracic surgeon was planned.
The patient was laid in the lateral decubitus position. The mass was exposed under the serratus anterior muscle and separated from the surrounding tissue preventing damage to the capsule . After full separation until the chest wall, the thoracoscopic approach was started. The tumor was encapsulated by parietal pleura and herniated into the pleural cavity . Under combined direct and thoracoscopic views, the tumor was dissected from the rib bone. To avoid capsular injury due to the narrow intercostal space, en bloc resection of the tumor and the intercostal muscle was performed without sacrifying the intercostal vessels and nerve. Finally, the tumor was excised .
On the first postoperative day, the chest tube was removed and the patient was discharged on the 4th postoperative day without any specific complications. The pathologic report was consistent with that of a lipoma with focal fat necrosis. For further evaluation of whether the cause of fat necrosis was inflammation or sarcomatous in origin, immunohistochemical staining was performed. CD68, which is a macrophage marker was positive . The patient did not complain of intercostal neuralgia at the outpatient clinic follow-up.