A 16-year-old male patient presented with a 5-year history of progressive scoliosis.
At the age of 11, the patient was diagnosed with scoliosis and was treated with a brace for more than 12 h daily and had regular check-ups. However, his scoliosis continued to deteriorate.
The patient experienced difficulty walking and had challenges with physical activities since the age of 1 year. His growth and development were delayed compared to those of his peers. Radiography of the hip joints revealed bilateral hip dysplasia.
The patient denied any family history of similar diseases or malignant tumors.
Physical examination revealed that the patient was 128 cm in height, weighed 46 kg, and was unable to ambulate steadily. There was a right-sided thoracic spine curvature, resulting in a "razorback" deformity. The patient exhibited decreased proximal muscle strength in both lower limbs (grade IV), and bilateral Hoffman signs and Babinski signs were positive.
Ventilation function, electrocardiogram, echocardiogram, and other preoperative examination results were normal. Blood calcium, phosphorus, vitamin D, and alkaline phosphatase levels were normal for bone metabolism.
During the initial outpatient examination, the spine X-ray indicated a leftward proximal thoracic curve of 32° and a rightward main thoracic curve of 65° . Three months following atlantoaxial decompression and fixation surgery, and prior to scoliosis correction, the spine X-rays revealed the proximal thoracic curve was 36°, the main thoracic curve was 65°, the thoracic kyphosis was 7°, and the sagittal vertical axis (SVA) was 12.5 cm . On the bending X-rays, the Cobb angle of the proximal thoracic curve was 33°and the main thoracic curve was 46° . Computed tomography (CT) three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction of the spine showed flattening of the vertebral body and widespread narrowing of the intervertebral space . 3D CT of the cervical spine showed dysplasia of the odontoid process of the axis and the anterior and posterior arches of the atlas . Spinal CT showed shorter pedicle screw lengths in the thoracic and lumbar vertebrae (2.94–5.17 cm), but the cancellous bone of the pedicles was well developed. A hip X-ray revealed dysplasia of bilateral hip joints and severe damage to the femoral heads. No obvious abnormality was found on the X-ray of bilateral knee joints and the full-length of both lower limbs . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spine indicated stenosis of the cervical spinal canal in the atlantoaxial region and myelopathy of the cervical spine . The spinal MRI did not reveal other intraspinal abnormalities. The appearance of the patient before scoliosis surgery is shown in Figure and .