A 56-year-old-male patient was admitted with sudden onset of resting chest pain. Upon arrival, he had ongoing chest pain and his ECG showed signs of anterior, inferior, and right ventricular STEMI . The patient was a former smoker, obese male, with dyslipidaemia with a 5-year history of effort-related angina. Upon arrival, he was haemodynamically stable, ECG showed an ST-segment elevation in L2, L3, aVF, V3–V6, and V3R–V4R leads . He was given morphine and nitroglycerine while directly transferred to the catheterization laboratory for primary emergent percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). Via right trans-radial artery access, we began with the finding of a surprising anatomic pattern. There were significant stenoses at the left main and the circumflex but, most importantly, there was a seemingly thrombotic occlusion at the proximal segment of the LAD , while no RCA was observed at the right sinus of Valsalva. After cannulating the left coronary ostium with a JL 4 guide , we were able to cross to the distal LAD with a Balance Middleweight Universal II® (Abbott, Chicago, IL, USA) guidewire. Once the lesion was crossed antegrade flow was recovered and the dominant RCA became apparent in the mid-LAD [Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) 1, . Just after balloon dilation of the proximal LAD, TIMI 3 antegrade flow was recovered into both RCA and LAD: the proximal course of the RCA was epicardial and pre-pulmonic . Angiographic evidence of thrombus was suggested at the mid-segment of the RCA ( and Video 1). Shortly after, sudden loss of flow from the proximal LAD appeared, compromising the RCA/LAD bifurcation . A 3.0 mm × 23 mm drug-eluting stent was deployed to the proximal mid-segments of the LAD , jailing but not obstructing the ostium/flow of the ectopic RCA, and achieving good angiographic results in both coronary arteries ( and Video 1). Patient was discharged home after 6 days. During his hospital stay, the transthoracic echocardiogram showed an left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 40% (Video 2), the coronary computed tomography angiography ( and B) showed an SCAO congenital anomaly with a patent stent in the LAD accompanied by diffuse coronary artery disease causing a 50% stenosis of the distal left main, proximal, and distal circumflex and severe stenosis of diagonal and marginal branches. The anomalous RCA had a patent ostium with a 25–49% stenotic non-calcified plaque in its mid-segment not suggestive of clot. A few days after the pPCI, a SPECT (201-Thallium) with Stress-Redistribution was performed which showed non-transmural infarctions in the LAD and the RCA territories, an LVEF of 38% and viability of myocardial tissue in both coronary territories. With these results, the patient was planned for coronary artery bypass surgery. The patient was awaiting surgery at last follow-up.