A 49-year-old female presented with a 7 year history of severe headache. She was diagnosed with cluster headache at another hospital and began steroid therapy one-half year prior to presentation at our institution. Physical examination at the time of initial presentation revealed only severe headache without any neurological deficits. Laboratory examinations showed a C-reactive protein level of 0.07 mg/dl, white blood cell count of 6800/μl, erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 12 mm/hr, rheumatoid factor ≤5 IU/ml, ds DNA ≤1.2 IU/ml, PR3-ANCA ≤1.0 IU/ml and MPO-ANCA ≤1.0 IU/ml, SS-A ≤1.0 U/ml, SS-B ≤1.0 U/ml, and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody ≤0.5 U/ml. Serum IgG4 was within the normal range (10 mg/dl).
Head computed tomography showed a round lesion, 2.5 cm in diameter, originating primarily from the right frontal dura mater. The lesion showed isodensity without apparent calcification and hyperostosis . Intravenous administration of contrast media resulted in strong enhancement of the tumor and revealed an apparent feeding artery [Figure and ]. On head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the lesion appeared as a mass without peritumoral edema. The lesion appeared with low signal intensity on T1-weighted imaging (T1WI), high signal intensity on T2WI, and fluid attenuated IR (FLAIR). Contrast-enhanced MRI revealed a homogeneously enhanced extra-axial mass lesion and enhanced extensive dural thickening around the tumor [Figure and ]. From these radiologic findings, a preoperative diagnosis of meningioma with extensive dural tail was made, and surgical treatment of the lesion was planned.
By frontal craniotomy, the feeding artery was identified on the attached dura mater and coagulated. The tumor was soft and grayish , and the attached arachnoid was yellowish . The tumor was not partially easy to exfoliate from the brain parenchyma, but total removal was achieved . However, the dural tail could not be completely eliminated because the dura mater around the tumor was extensively thickened [Figure and ].
Histopathologically, the tumor was diagnosed as meningioma. In most parts of the tumor, oval-shaped arachnoid-like cells were proliferating like sheets . Intranuclear inclusions and psammoma bodies were not identified. Necrosis and mitosis were also not observed. Numerous eosinophils and IgG4-positive plasma cells were diffusely observed in the tumor with IgG and CD138 expressions [Figure and –]. However, the lymphocyte density was less than typically observed in LPM. The adherent dura mater was strongly thickened and capillary blood vessels were dilated, both of which were typically seen in the dural tail of a meningioma . Eosinophils and IgG4-positive plasma cells were not observed in this thickened dura mater. Inflammatory signs were observed in the arachnoid, specifically a small number of eosinophils and scattered nuclear debris .
Total resection of the tumor mass was confirmed by postoperative MRI . After the operation, the patient's headache dramatically improved. She was discharged from our hospital 11 days after the operation with no additional neurological sequelae. Resolution of her headache was confirmed during follow-up at 120 days after the operation.