A 65-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital with generalized bone pain and a progressive painless mass in her jaw since 6 months ago. She had a history of two times parathyroidectomy, first being in 2008 (10 years ago). The patient was evaluated for weakness and elevated serum level of Ca and PTH in laboratory data, the parathyroid scintigraphy with 99mTc-MIBI revealed a left parathyroid adenoma. Then, she underwent surgery and the pathological findings was in favor of left parathyroid adenoma.
During the follow up in 2010 (8 years ago) she had been hospitalized due to the elevated serum level of Ca and PTH again. The neck ultrasonography revealed a multi nodular thyroid goiter. The parathyroid scintigraphy was performed which showed bilateral parathyroid hyperplasia. The patient subsequently underwent a second neck operation with removal of right parathyroid glands and exploration of left side of neck. However, the left parathyroid glands were not found. The pathology report was a thyroid nodule, parathyroid tissue with hyperplastic changes.
In her recent hospitalization, she presented with complaint of weakness, bone pain and a progressive swelling in her jaw . On examination a well-circumscribed firm and non-tender swelling in the mandile measuring about 50 mm × 50 mm was revealed. The surface skin over it was shiny but there was no ulcer or discharge. Laboratory analysis showed a hypercalcemia: 13.4 mg/dl (normal range: 8.6–10.4) and plasma PTH was 398 pg/ml (normal range: 8–76 pg/ml), 24-hour urinary calcium was at 328 mg/24 h (N < 300). The vitamin D level was subnormal at 35 nmol/lit (normal range: 45–144 nmol/lit) and dual energy X-ray (DXA) showed osteoporosis with a T-score of -3.8 at the neck of hip and -3.7 at lumbar spine.
She had a pathology report of the mandible tumor biopsy that had been done recently in another center via oral cavity which was suggestive of a central giant cell granuloma.
The initial management with rehydration, parentral bisphosphonate and diuretics was done and then preoperative localization investigations were performed.
The SPECT-CT scintigraphy with 99mTc-MIBI was suggestive of bilateral parathyroid adenomas and/or parathyroid hyperplasia and showed a MIBI- avid lytic lesion in the mandible .
In the spiral mandible CT scan without contrast there was a 53 × 43 × 39 mm expansile lytic mass lesion at mandibular symphysis and left side of mandibular body, which showed well defined nonsclerotic margin without cortical disruption. No periosteal reaction was evident and bony trabecular remnant was sited in central part. Mandibular cortex has been involves by mentioned mass at both sides and extension of mass posteriorly to oral cavity at sublingual space and anteriorly to subcutaneous region was depicted .
Surgical management consisted of total thyroidectomy and total parathyroidectomy with autotransplantation of about 50 miligrams of excised parathyroid tissue was performed. After removing the adenoma, the PTH marked a decrease from initial (398 pg/ml) value to 57 pg/ml.
The histological examination revealed the thyroid tissue with MNG and a left parathyroid adenoma. Follow-up after surgery revealed normal serum calcium and urine calcium levels with no increase. PTH levels also did not increase. The patient was treated with calcium and vitamin D supplements and the jaw mass gradually decreased.