On late March 2020, a 56-year-old gentleman presented to the emergency department with a 10-day history of fatigue, fever, and dry cough. He was febrile and had a respiratory rate of 32 breaths per minute and an oxygen saturation (SaO) of 89% while breathing ambient air. Physical examination proved coarse crackles in the bilateral lower lung fields. Continuous positive airway pressure was started with clinical benefit. Intravenous crystalloid fluid and low weight molecular heparin (Enoxaparin 4000 UI) were administered. Few hours later, he developed sudden haemodynamic instability (blood pressure 74/46 mmHg, heart beats 136 per minute) and deoxygenation (SaO 78%) that required invasive ventilation.
Two years before, the patient had developed low-risk PE following an orthopaedic elective surgery. He had started oral anticoagulation, discontinued after 6 months from the index event due to the absence of other risk factors for VTE.
Laboratory investigations are reported in , leukopenia, increased C-reactive protein, and d-dimer were detected. The electrocardiogram was unremarkable . Chest computed tomography scan performed in the first hour after the admission in emergency department revealed bilateral interstitial densities consistent with a viral infectious process . The patient was tested for COVID-19 and on the following day the diagnosis was confirmed by real-time reverse transcriptase–polymerase chain reaction analysis. Soon after orotracheal intubation, bedside transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed right ventricle (RV) dilation [RV/left ventricle (LV) ratio >1 (abnormality threshold > 1), RV basal diameter 53 mm (normal range 25–41 mm)] with reduced systolic function [tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE) 10 mm (abnormality threshold < 16 mm), S′ 6 cm/s (abnormality threshold < 9.5 cm/s)] and pulmonary hypertension [systolic pulmonary arterial pressure 71 mmHg (abnormality threshold > 36 mmHg)]. Moreover, direct visualization of a large free-floating thrombus in the right atrium protruding through the tricuspid valve confirmed the PE diagnosis and no further imaging was considered necessary.
Due to haemodynamic instability, norepinephrine and intravenous recombinant tissue plasminogen activator 100 mg was administered over the following 2 h. Fibrinolytic and vasopressor therapy promptly alleviated the haemodynamic instability and 12 h later, norepinephrine was gradually withdrawn. After the rtPA infusion, unfractionated heparin infusion was used as a bridge to oral anticoagulation. The follow-up TTE after 48 h showed complete dissolution of the thrombus in right heart chambers, an improvement of RV dimensions [RV/LV ratio < 1, RV basal diameter 39 mm, RV end-diastolic area indexed to body surface area (BSA) 11 cm2/m2 (normal range 5–12.6 cm2/m2)], systolic function [TAPSE 26 mm, S′ 16 cm/s, RV fractional area change 57% (abnormality threshold < 35%)], and pulmonary arterial pressure (35 mmHg), compared to the acute phase.
The patient was haemodynamically stable during his 5 days stay in the intensive care unit. After invasive ventilation weaning, the patient was transferred to the sub-intensive unit to complete the in-hospital course. No bleeding complication related to fibrinolysis occurred.