In our case report, a 73-year-old female patient was admitted to the Emergency Department for complaints in the right inguinal area, which had started one day earlier. The patient complained of cramp-like abdominal pain and nausea. Bowel movements were normal, and the patient had no fever. From the patient's medical history we should highlight that a right inguinal hernia had been diagnosed years before. At that time surgical consultation had also been involved. However, due to the patient’s severe cardiovascular co-morbidities (aortic, mitral and tricuspid valve insufficiency, right heart failure and low ejection fraction of 22%), the cardiology and preanesthesia consultations determined elective surgical intervention to be very high-risk and the elective operation was therefore contraindicated. In addition the patient had hysterectomy, appendectomy, Alzheimer’s disease and cholelithiasis in her medical history.
The physical examination confirmed an apple-sized, irreducible hernia with tenderness to abdominal palpation in the right inguinal region. Skin redness was not detected. Scars from the midline laparotomy and McBurney’s incision were observed. Abdominal ultrasound confirmed an oedematous intestinal loop in a 70-mm-long hernial sac protruding via a 30-mm hernial orifice in the projection of the palpated lesion . Fluid was seen in the intestinal loop, with no circulation detected there. Neither free abdominal fluid nor a dilated biliary duct was found. An abdominal X-ray showed no signs of intestinal obstruction. White blood cell count was 13.62 G/l, C-reactive protein was 26.6 mg/l, and hepatic enzymes were normal in the patient’s laboratory findings. The physical and ultrasound examinations unequivocally confirmed an incarcerated right inguinal hernia, which was sufficient for a vital indication of acute surgical intervention considering the very high cardiovascular risks.
Exploration was performed via an inguinal incision on the right side. In contrast to the abdominal ultrasound finding, an uncertain cystic structure was found in the hernial sac and several small, solid, abnormal masses were palpated in this structure . The lesion seemed to be a gynaecological lesion, not an intestinal loop. As regards the uncertain, bizarre finding, the abdominal cavity was explored from the middle midline laparotomy. During the exploration, the content of the hernial sac was found to be the fundus of the significantly ptotic, large gallbladder containing cube-shaped stones palpated earlier during the inguinal exploration. An intramural haemorrhage was observed in this region of the gallbladder, but no clear necrosis was detected . There were no signs of inflammation in the hilum of the gallbladder during the surgery. Therefore, a retrograde cholecystectomy and Bassini’s repair of the inguinal hernia were performed safely, and according to our Department protocol a fine silicone drain was left in the omental foramen of Winslow.
Cephalosporin and metronidazole antibiotic therapy and prophylaxis of thrombosis with low molecular weight heparin were administered during the perioperative period. Temporary confusion developed during the postoperative period due to the patient’s Alzheimer’s disease and the stress of the acute surgery; however, no surgical or other organic lesion was found in the background. The drain was removed on the first postoperative day, and oral nutrition was started gradually. Follow-up laboratory findings showed no significant abnormalities. The patient was discharged on the fourth postoperative day, with no signs of inflammation in the wounds, normal passage and no complaints. During the nine-month-long follow-up visits, the sutures were removed and the patient had no significant complaints. Recurrent hernia was not detected. Histology of the gallbladder showed acute cholecystitis with incipient haemorrhagic necrosis in the 210-mm-long sample .