A 23-year-old Caucasian woman who suffers from WS was evaluated in the emergency room after being injured in a fall. She had left her home during the night without being noticed by her family. She fell next to a highway near her house and fractured her leg; a driver found her, took her to the nearest hospital and contacted her relatives. She was evaluated by orthopedics and then sent home with her family with orders to be medicated with acetaminophen 1000mg three times a day (t.i.d.) alternated with ibuprofen 600mg t.i.d. At home, she presented with psychomotor agitation; her family decided to take her back to the hospital only a few hours after she was discharged. She was presenting with persecutory delusions, auditory and verbal hallucinations, soliloquies, and psychic and motor agitation, and was hospitalized.
Apart from the WS, she had no known medical illness and was not taking any medication before being admitted to the hospital. Nevertheless, she was submitted to extensive medical investigation in order to exclude possible organic causes for the symptoms. A cerebral computed tomography scan did not reveal any lesions. Abdominal ultrasonography showed a slight increase of diffuse liver echogenicity, with no other changes. Her total and direct bilirubin levels were higher than normal (1.8mg/dL and 0.6mg/dL, respectively). No abnormalities were found in her renal function (creatinine, urea and glomerular filtration rate), electrolytes, liver function tests and C-reactive protein. A full blood count showed normal values, as did thyroid-stimulating hormone, free thyroxine and haptoglobin. Viral markers for human immunodeficiency virus 1 and 2, hepatitis C virus and hepatitis C virus were negative. Her toxicology screening was negative as well. Meanwhile, haloperidol 6mg daily was introduced. Liaison psychiatry later confirmed the presence of these symptoms and haloperidol was therefore maintained. As no acute organic cause for her symptoms was found, she was transferred to our psychiatric unit 2 days after being hospitalized. A mental examination was difficult to execute due to the patient’s intellectual disability, but family members provided considerable valuable information. She was still presenting with persecutory delusions and auditory-verbal hallucinations at this time.
On the third day of receiving haloperidol 6mg daily, she developed medication-specific side effects: sialorrhea, excessive somnolence and cogwheel rigidity, primarily on her upper left limb. The haloperidol was replaced with risperidone 2mg daily. The side effects improved, but as she was still presenting with excessive somnolence, the risperidone dosage was decreased to 1.5mg daily.
Approximately 1 year before this episode, she had been expelled from a geriatric care unit after she began to exhibit inappropriate behavior. Her family also reported that she quite frequently had tried to leave home until 2 months before being hospitalized, when her behavior changed. She began to be more suspicious and afraid of being alone. She would look behind doors and to the ceiling as if she expected to find something there. Her mother said in an interview, “She spoke very often to herself, but in a manner that looked like there was someone else there with her.” Her mother associated these changes in her behavior with specific events. Namely, she said this behavior began when the patient’s younger brother (who had looked after her during the past year) resumed school and when another brother and her stepfather fought, resulting in the latter being hospitalized with injuries. The patient had presented with learning difficulties since early age and was referred to a school for children with intellectual disabilities. The diagnosis of WS was made when she was 15-years old. She demonstrates an “elf-like” face, supravalvar aortic stenosis (evaluated in the past by cardiology) and growth retardation, which are present in up to 80% of individuals with WS . She has also mental retardation, with learning deficits, social disinhibition and an unusual aptitude for music.
There is no evidence of prior psychiatric illness or symptoms. There is also no case of mental or neurologic disease in her family.
The psychotic symptoms improved gradually, and on day 7 at our unit they were no longer present. She was discharged 21 days after her admission to our unit.