The case we discuss is that of Mr. H, a 90-year-old patient with end-stage kidney disease, diagnosed as nephroangiosclerosis. This clinical diagnosis was based on a long-standing history of hypertension, the presence of diffuse signs of vascular disease, the absence of severe proteinuria, relevant haematuria or systemic symptoms suggesting a different cause of chronic kidney disease (CKD). Furthermore, up to the last CKD phase, the progression trajectory had been relatively slow, after which a relatively rapid increase in creatinine was observed in the course of 1 year (creatinine 1.52 mg/dl in February 2007, 2.5 mg/dl in November 2015, 2.7 mg/dl in January 2016, 3.1 mg/dl in March 2016).
In June 2016 Mr. H was hospitalised for a further reduction in kidney function, probably after an oligo-symptomatic infection (C-reactive protein 71 mg/l, fibrinogen: 7.44 g/l). At hospitalisation, serum creatinine had reached 7.5 mg/dl, with severe acidosis (bicarbonate 15 mEq/l) and anaemia (haemoglobin 7.9 g/dl). The possibility of a cholesterol emboli syndrome was also considered, on account of the diffuse vascular disease observed, but no eosinophilia, livedo reticularis or skin lesions were present.
At hospitalisation, the patient’s weight was 80.7 kg, for a body mass index of 30.7 Kg/m2 (height 1.62 m), with no clinical signs of malnutrition; severe arthrosis and diffuse leg hyperkeratosis were also part of the clinical picture. During hospitalisation his general metabolic balance improved, but his serum creatinine stabilised between 6.0 and 7.0 mg/dL.
At 90 years of age, Mr. H lived alone, with help from the social services for home management; he received a hot meal at noon from a retirement home (in line with the usual organization of French home support). The meal served as a basis for lunch and supper, supplemented with bread, potatoes, or cheese. He kept a garden and claimed to grow the best potatoes in the area.
While the usual prognostic indexes may not be of great help in patients in advanced old age, his Charlson index was 9 (high comorbidity, two-year survival probability of 30%), i.e. a comorbidity mainly linked to age and end-stage kidney disease. Perhaps more importantly, given the close link between nutritional status and survival, his SGA (subjective global assessment) score was A (well nourished) and his MIS (malnutrition inflammation score) index was 3 (optimal).
With this background, the decision on whether or not to start dialysis was discussed, including the options of peritoneal dialysis, haemodialysis and a low-protein diet. Since Mr. H suffered from severe arthrosis, which would have prevented self-performance, and did not receive nursing care, it was decided that peritoneal dialysis should not be undertaken. Haemodialysis was considered as a potential option that could be undertaken if absolutely necessary, and a low-protein diet was chosen as the best initial option. His diet was adapted to make up a 0.6–0.8 g/Kg/day moderately restricted, plant-based, but not fully vegan, low-protein diet that was supplemented with amino and ketoacids (1 Ketosteril pill for each 10 Kg of body weight), to avoid malnutrition. Given the low probability of creating a functioning arteriovenous fistula, the placement of a tunnelled catheter was decided on in case dialysis became necessary.
Close follow-up was started, with monthly or twice monthly controls; however, acidosis was very difficult to control and rapid unpredictable weight gain was observed, requiring frequent hospitalisation, in spite of good nutritional compliance, and good blood pressure control.
From a theoretical point of view, treatment should maximize survival and improve quality of life while the negative effects produced should be minimal. This was not fully clear in our patient and the medical and nursing staff was concerned about the clinical implications of dialysis start in a patient of Mr. H’s age; therefore there were further extensive discussions of treatment options, presented by the nurses and a psychologist. After this step, Mr. H, who had initially agreed to start dialysis was reported to refuse treatment, considering it incompatible with his daily routine. Subsequent conversations revealed that the underlying problem was missing his mid-day meal: “If I come to dialysis, I won’t be home at noon; and if I’m not home at noon, the people who deliver my meals will not find me, and if they do not deliver my meals, I won’t have anything to eat. I’m 90, I have severe arthrosis, and I’m no longer able to cook my meals myself. And I want to eat.”
Identification of the communication problem (presentation of a standard haemodialysis technique of 4 hours three times per week, instead of a tailored incremental approach) led to an empiric “narrative” compromise, with a prescription of 2.30–3.0 h of dialysis, one session per week, combined with a 30-min change in the delivery time of his meals. Mr. H felt that this arrangement was compatible with his needs.
At the time of the present report, Mr. H is alive and in good clinical condition. He is still on a once-daily schedule. Some relevant biochemical data are reported in Table . They show good overall clinical and biochemical stability, which would probably have been difficult to achieve without treatment: even if the formulae for e-GFR calculation are not precise in advanced old age, 9 mg/dL of serum creatinine corresponds to 5–6 mL/min of GFR according to the formulae employed, and the pre-dialysis level remains quite stable, thus suggesting that we were not dealing with an acute and reversible kidney injury on the basis of a chronic renal disease .
The main electrolytes are normal in the predialysis phase, except for mild acidosis (Bicarbonate between 17 and 20 mEq/L); parathyroid hormone is in the 100–300 ng/mL range and brain natriuretic peptide is between 80 and 120 pg/ml, in line with the absence of fluid overload (little need for weight loss in dialysis, on furosemide 120 mg/day). Haemoglobin has been kept on target (10–11 g/l) with recombinant erythropoietin; blood pressure has been controlled with Lercanidipine 20 mg, Nebivolol 5 mg and Urapidil 120 mg. Serum albumin is well preserved, and the patient’s “dry weight” increased after the start of dialysis. Mr. H is still on a 0.8 g of protein/Kg/day diet, supplemented with Ketosteril (1 each 10 Kg of BW).
Meanwhile, he has celebrated his ninety-first birthday. His good clinical and psychological adaptation to dialysis treatment have made the medical and nursing group confident that it will be possible to extend this option to a twice weekly schedule, with limited dialysis time (2.5–3 h) if necessary in the future.