A 57-year-old Chinese woman who was a carrier of the hepatitis B and C viruses and who had a 2-year history of MG was receiving treatment with oral Mestinon (pyridostigmine 120 mg daily), which controlled her symptoms well (minimal bilateral ptosis, especially in the morning, and proximal muscle power of 4/5). The diagnosis of MG was verified by the presence of high levels of immunoglobulin G antibodies directed against acetylcholine receptors (54.23 nmol/L). The stimulation single fiber electromyography recorded from orbicularis oculi muscle showed abnormal results (MCD: 180 s), and repetitive nerve stimulation showed no decremental response. A chest computed-tomography (CT) scan showed a thymoma of about 3.2 cm.
She presented with a 7-day history of poor appetite and progressive muscular weakness. Acute exacerbation of MG was initially considered by the neurologist but the muscle weakness did not improve in spite of an increased Mestinon dose to 360 mg daily. She was referred to the nephrology department for further assessment because the laboratory data showed an electrolyte imbalance. Such symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, tarry stool, and lower extremity numbness were absent. There was no history of recent strenuous exercise or diuretic use.
On admission, physical examination revealed clear consciousness and symmetrical weakness of the lower extremities. The following laboratory findings were recorded: blood pressure, 116/64 mmHg; heart rate, 82 beats/min; respiratory rate, 22 breaths/min; and body temperature, 36.8 °C. Moreover, a generalized skin pigmentation without long-term exposure to sunlight was noted. The remainder of the physical examination was unremarkable.
The results of the biochemical analyses are shown in Table . The most prominent initial findings were mild hyperkalemia (5.6 mEq/L) and mild hyponatremia (128 mEq/L). Serial urinalysis during admission indicated a decreased K+ excretion rate (transtubular potassium gradient [TTKG] = 2.64; urinary K+–creatinine ratio = 6.4 mmol/mmol). Based on the findings of hyperkalemia with low urine potassium secretion, low aldosterone action was highly suspected. Subsequent hormone profiling revealed normal thyroid-stimulating hormone levels (2.99 μg/dL), an elevated renin concentration (74.5 pg/mL), and low aldosterone (22.24 pg/mL), and cortisol levels (4.65 μg/dL) . Accordingly, adrenal insufficiency was diagnosed using the flow chart of hyperkalemia differentiation . Moreover, the patient’s elevated adrenocorticotropic hormone level (84.4 pg/mL) supported the diagnosis of primary adrenal insufficiency. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed bilateral shrinkage of the adrenal glands, confirming our diagnosis . Because of the underlying disease of MG, autoimmune adrenalitis was highly suspected, and this was proven by 21-hydroxylase antibody positivity. Thereafter, the final diagnosis was primary adrenal insufficiency due to autoimmune adrenalitis.
Fludrocortisone (0.2 mg daily) was prescribed as mineralocorticoid supplementation. The patient’s serum electrolyte levels normalized, and her general weakness improved. Therefore, she was discharged with oral fludrocortisone (0.2 mg daily) treatment. At the 2-month follow-up, her serum K+ concentration was 3.68 mEq/L.