A 39-year-old HIV infected caucasian man was admitted because of progressive heart failure beginning 9 months earlier after an episode of upper respiratory tract infection. His clinical history was marked by a serious compromise of lymphocyte count (CD4+ lymphocytes 95/cmm) and high blood viral load (1.3 × 106 copies/ml) at the time of HIV infection recognition at the age of 29 years. He experienced several infectious events including gastroenteritis, pneumonia and toxoplasma encephalitis before the introduction of anti- retroviral therapy seven years before. Since then he was under antiretroviral treatment (ritonavir, darunavir and emtricitabine/tenofovir) registering a recovery of lymphocyte count (CD4+ up to 500/cmm) and an undetectable viral load in the peripheral blood. The time course of heart failure symptoms and laboratory/instrumental changes from antiretroviral therapy was about seven years. His heart failure was characterized by progressive dyspnea, absence of fever and chest pain but mild and constant increase of troponin T (between 0.1 and 0.8 μg/L, normal values < 0.014). The electrocardiogram documented a sinus tachycardia (125 bts/min) with low QRS voltages while 2D-echocardiogram showed normal valvular pattern but a progressive bi-ventricular dilatation (right and left ventricular end diastolic diameter was 36 and 68 mm respectively) and dysfunction (RV and LV ejection fraction 35 and 25%) despite an optimized dose of carvedilol (50 mg bid), digoxin (0.125 mg/daily), enalapril (20 mg bid) and furosemide (up to 250 mg/daily). Cardiac magnetic resonance showed a left ventricular (LV) end-diastolic volume of 231.6 ml , a LV end-systolic volume of 184.2 ml and an ejection fraction of 20% with remarkable edema and delayed gadolinium enhancement of the lateral LV free wall , with minimal pericardial effusion.
Due to the presence of chronic, severe (NYHA class IV), drug-resistant heart failure the patient underwent an invasive cardiac study including coronary with LV angiography and a LV endomyocardial biopsy with histology and polymerase chain reaction for a large panel (HIV, Hepatitis C virus, Human Herpes Virus 6, Human Herpes Virus 8, Herpes Simples virus ½, Epstein Barr virus, Adenovirus, Cytomegolovirus, Enterovirus, Influenza A/B, Parvovirus B19) of cardiotropic viruses on 6 samples. Coronary network was normal while at histology a severe active lymphocytic myocarditis was observed characterized by intense cell necrosis , marked expression of HLA-DR on cardiomyocyte membrane and absence of detectable viral genomes, including HCV. Serology for anti-DNA, anti-cardiolipin and ANCA antibodies was negative while it was positive for ANA (++/+++). Cardiac specific autoantibodies were searched for by means of indirect immunofluorescence as previously described and showed a strong positivity in heart muscle while were negative in skeletal muscle . Supportive treatment was, then, implemented by high dose steroid administration (methylprednisolone 1 gr IV/daily for 3 days followed by prednisolone 40 mg IV/bid for 1 week and then prednisone 1 mg/kg/daily orally) with rapid improvement of general and cardiac conditions: in one week sinus tachycardia reduced from 125 to 78 bts/min, gallop rhythm was no more appreciable and LVEF rose to 28%; after 4 months the patient reached a NYHA class I regaining a normal social life, electrocardiogram registered a heart rate of 62 bts/min with increase of QRS voltages and improvement of ventricular repolarization while a new 2D-echocardiogram showed remarkable reduction of LV volumes with nearly normal LVEF. At control cardiac magnetic resonance, LV end-diastolic volume reduced to 140.6 ml (from 231.6) , LV end-systolic volume declined to 77.7 ml (from 184.2) and LVEF increased to 45% (from 20%) while myocardial edema as well as delayed enhancement and pericardial effusion were no more appreciable.
Control histology showed a resolution of the inflammatory process with interstitial and replacement fibrosis .