An 81-year-old man was admitted to our hospital following the appearance of diplopia and facial nerve palsy on the right side. He had noted a mild unsteadiness of gait for 3 months, which he assumed was due to advancing age. There were no extraordinary findings in his medical and familial history. The patient was in good physical condition and without lymphadenopathy. On neurological examination, he had double vision, despite no obvious limitation of extraocular muscles, peripheral facial nerve palsy on the right side, slurred speech, and truncal ataxia. He had no weakness or ataxia of extremities, and his sensation was intact. He had a difficulty in micturition. He had no headache, papilloedema, and consciousness disturbance indicating hydrocephalus. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed expansion of the fourth ventricle and a mass lesion in the trigone of the left lateral ventricle, which was enhanced but with some distortion . This mass had been noted by chance over 6 months prior to admission when he had medical check-up of the brain and had not changed in size. Laboratory studies revealed that the patients’ blood cell counts and chemistry were almost normal. Soluble interleukin 2-receptor (sIL2-R), angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), antinuclear antibody, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA), and tumor markers were all within normal limits. In addition, no anti-ganglioside antibodies or anti-aquaporin-4 (AQP-4) antibodies were present. CSF examination revealed an elevated protein concentration (125.5 mg/dl) and cell count (white blood cell 20 cells/μl; monocyte count, 16 cells/μl) with normal pressure (80 mmH2O), but cytology was negative. Because the patient initially developed peripheral facial nerve palsy and a mild unsteadiness of gait, and neuroimaging and laboratory findings were nonspecific or unremarkable, we suspected that he might have an immune-mediated disease such as brainstem encephalitis. Thus, we initiated immunological treatments; these included intravenous methylprednisolone (1000 mg/day, 3 days) and intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIg, 0.4 g/kg, 5 days). Despite these treatments, the brainstem symptoms progressively worsened; 1 week after admission the patient developed persistent hiccups and hyperventilation, followed by lethargy. Fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) at 17 days after admission revealed a slightly hyperintense lesion in the exit of the left trigeminal nerve and the left cerebellar hemisphere . Diffusion-weighted image (DWI) of brain MRI revealed a hyperintense lesion in the left cerebellar hemisphere . MRI of the cervical and lumbar spinal cord did not reveal any abnormalities (not shown). Although oral administration of predonisolone (60 mg/day) was continued, the patient’s level of consciousness progressively deteriorated with ataxic respiration and enhanced startle reflex. Simultaneously, his deep tendon reflexes were lost. CSF examination was performed repeatedly, showing mild pleocytosis (white blood cell count 52 cells/μl; monocyte count 51 cells/μl), but the cytology results were negative. FLAIR MRI of the brain, at 40 days after admission, revealed slightly diffuse hyperintense lesions in the left cerebellum and pons with an expansion of the inferior horn of the lateral ventricles . However, no obvious mass lesions in the cerebral parenchyma or enlargement of the tumor mass in the trigone of the left ventricle was demonstrated. DWI showed multiple infarctions in the left cerebellar hemisphere, pons, occipital lobe, and bilateral corona radiata . Fifty-three days after admission, the patient died of respiratory failure, and an autopsy was performed.
At post-mortem the major organs showed no pathological changes. In the brain, the tumor in the lateral ventricle was solid and well-demarcated, but the surface of the tumor partly collapsed . Histopathological analysis of the intraventricular tumor revealed aggregations of spindle cells including rich collagen deposition and psammoma bodies in the central lesion . Additionally, dense cells with a malignant appearance (high nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio, prominent nucleoli, and multinuclear) and increased frequent mitoses were observed at the marginal part of the tumor. The mitotic index was more than 20 mitoses per ten high-power fields on hematoxylin & eosin (HE) and Ki-67 immunostaining . The cells in both benign and malignant parts were positive for vimentin and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), partially positive for S-100, but negative for cytokeratin, Schwann/2E, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and Olig2, suggesting that the tumor cells originated from a meningioma . Thus, the pathological diagnosis of the intraventricular tumor was a mix of fibrous meningioma (WHO grade I) and anaplastic meningioma (WHO grade III).
The malignant cells disseminated and invaded the parenchyma and small vessels of the brain – preferentially invading the surface regions of the midbrain, pons and medulla oblongata. Invasion of small vessels resulted in ischemic damage around them. These ischemic changes, including the brain malacia, were found in the cerebellar white matter, pons and lower part of cerebral parenchyma . Cranial nerves, such as the facial nerve, trigeminal nerve, and oculomotor nerve, were packed with tumor cells . Furthermore, tumor cells were diffusely found adhered to the thoracic to lumbar spinal cord and multiple nerve roots, as well as the cauda equina, which were similarly filled with tumor cells . Because all the observed tumor cells shared the same immunohistochemical characteristics , it is possible that the copious malignant cells originated from the anaplastic meningioma in the left ventricle of the present patient and disseminated extensively through the CSF, resulting in progressive dysfunction of brainstem and cerebellum.
We also performed molecular analysis for two regions of the tumor, the fibrous cell part and the malignant cell part. Our chromosome analysis revealed more than 500 differences of gene expressions between two regions. Interestingly, only in the tumor from the malignant region, the deletion of chromosome 9p21 was detected where the genes CDKN2A and CDKN2B were located . It has been well known that the homozygous deletions of CDKN2A/B are found in most anaplastic meninigomas and these genes have been studied for abnormalities in advanced meningioma . Then, we considered that the malignant region was an anaplastic meningioma transformed from the benign cells, also in molecular aspect. Tumor samples were collected from the autopsy of this patient. Written informed parental consents were obtained prior to sample collection. The study was approved by the institutional review boards of Juntendo University. Genome DNA was extracted from Paraffin tissue blocks using GeneRead DNA FFPE Kit (Cat. No.180134,QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany). The DNA was amplified by REPLI-g FFPE Kit (Cat. No.150243), and was investigated for genomic alteration using the Genome-Wide Human CytoScan HD Array (Affymetrix, CA, USA) according to the manufacture’s protocol. Scanned data was analyzed with Chromosome Analysis Suire v2.1 ((Affymetrix, CA, USA). SNP oligonucleotide microarray analysis was perfoemed using Affymetrix GnenChip Human Mapping 6.0 SNP array. Sample preparation, hybridization, and scanning were performed according to manufacture’s specifications (Affymetrix, CA, USA). Analyses were performed using the Genotyping Console v2.0 (Affymetrix) and Ingenuity Pathway Analysisv7.5 (Ingenuity Systems, CA, USA).