A 71-year-old male patient was admitted on February 6, 2023, due to swelling of both lower limbs and abdominal distension for more than 20 days . The patient was hospitalized for liver preservation and symptomatic treatment with a diagnosis of hepatitis C cirrhosis in 2017. In May 2022, the patient rehospitalized for spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. During hospitalization, no pathogenic bacteria were found in ascites culture, and the patient relieved after ceftriaxone treatment. With a history of hypertension up to 160/80 mmHg for 8 years, he took antihypertensive drugs regularly, and the blood pressure could be controlled within a normal range. The patient had suffered diarrhea in the past 8 months without significant weight loss. The results of the physical examination after admission displayed as follows: body temperature 36.5°C, pulse 75 beats/min, respiratory rate 18 beats/min, blood pressure 123/67 mmHg. The patient revealed clear consciousness, dark complexion, facial telangiectasia, and no yellowing of sclera and skin. Liver palm and spider nevus were clearly discernible. The patient exhibited abdominal distention, scattered light tenderness, and rebound pain in the whole abdomen. There was no muscle tension, no touch under the ribs of the liver and spleen and no percussion pain in the liver area of the patient. The patient presented with edema in both lower limbs, positive shifting dullness, and negative Murphy’s sign.
Full abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) indicated liver cirrhosis, splenomegaly, ascites and esophageal gastric varices. Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance (MR) revealed nodule in the right lobe of the liver, which was unable to rule out malignancy. Ultrasonography indicated bilateral renal cysts. The main laboratory examination results were presented as below: total protein 54.5 g/L, albumin 24.7 g/L, alanine aminotransferase 40 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase 59 U/L, total bilirubin 24.1 μmol/L, indirect bilirubin 17.3 μmol/L, direct bilirubin 6.8 μmol/L, C-reactive protein (CRP) 14.4 mg/L, D-dimer 2760 μg/L, platelet count 66×109/L, alpha fetoprotein 15.08 ng/mL, carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA199) 49.30 U/mL, hepatitis C virus antibody 13.95 S/CO. Routine urinalysis results showed elevated red cell and white cell counts, and 24-hour proteinuria was 3.63 g. 600 mL of light yellow and slightly turbid ascites was extracted through peritoneocentesis. Routine examination of ascites presented yellow and translucent appearance, positive Rivalta test, white blood cell 276×106/L, polymorphonuclear cell 143 ×106/L. The ascites samples were delivered to the clinical laboratory for bacterial culture.
The ascites was injected into aerobic and anaerobic bottles (BD, USA), which were matched with BACTEC ™ FX40 automatic blood culture instrument (BD, USA). No suspicious bacteria were found in the direct smear of ascites sample after Gram staining. The aerobic bottle reported positive alarm prompt after 64 hours cultivation. The culture fluid was inoculated to Columbia blood agar and MacConkey agar plate (Yancheng, China), and placed the plates into a 35°C, 5% CO2 incubator. Meanwhile, smear staining and microscopic examination were conducted, and the results showed gram-positive coccobacillus , negative for acid fast staining , and partially positive for modified Ziehl-Neelsen staining . Wright-Giemsa staining was conducted for a better observation . Scattered pinpoint-shaped colonies emerged on the blood agar plate after 24 hours of cultivation , and small white colonies appeared after 48 hours . After 72 hours, dry, wrinkled, and protruding colonies were formed, which were light brown with irregular edges . After 120 hours, the colonies gradually turned dark brown . No bacterial growth was observed on MacConkey agar plate. MALDI-TOF MS was applied to the bacterial identification. The detections were carried out twice by Clin -ToF II MALDI (BIOYONG, China) according to reference version (version 3.6.2) of the bacteria bank. The twice results suggested the strain pertained to the G. terrae (confidence value: 48%) and G. rubripertinota (confidence value: 46%). The sample was also sent to Beijing Genomics institution (BGI) (Wuhan) for 16S rRNA gene sequencing analysis, and the primers sequence were as follows: 27 F (5′-AGAGTTTGATCCTGGCTCAG-3′) and 1492R (5′-TACGGCTACCTTGTTACGACTT-3′). The coverage length was 1369 bp. After Blast alignment, the sequencing comparison results indicated that the strain had the highest homology (100%) with the G. terrae RL-JC02 (GenBank: CP049836.1).
Considering the liver cirrhosis history accompanied by the symptoms of peritonitis, ascites testing results and elevated CRP supported the preliminary clinical diagnosis of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. After ascites extraction on the second day of admission, ceftazidime was given for empirical therapy. Ceftazidime was given with a dose of 2g with an interval of 12h, along with intravenous administration of albumin and diuretic treatment with furosemide spironolactone. Based on the staining results, it was suggested to select antibiotics against gram-positive bacteria such as vancomycin. However, considering the history of chronic kidney disease and the relief of peritonitis symptoms, the physician preferred to use ceftazidime continuously. The therapy period of ceftazidime lasted for 9 days. After treatment, abdominal tenderness and distension were relieved, ascites decreased, and lower limb edema alleviated. According to the contrast-enhanced MR results, it was recommended to accept surgical and interventional treatment for focal space-occupying hepatic lesions. Unfortunately, the patient refused further treatment and requested discharge. One month after discharge, we conducted the first telephone follow-up, and he represented that he underwent radiofrequency ablation of liver malignancies in another hospital on March 8th, 2023. Through the second telephone follow-up on April 19th, 2023, we learned that the patient rehospitalized in our hospital and sought for liver preservation treatment.