A 64-year-old woman with a history of Crohn’s disease (CD) was referred to Siriraj Hospital located in Bangkok, Thailand in June 2017 due to worsening of abdominal pain and watery diarrhea for 2 weeks. She was diagnosed with CD in 2010 after she presented with abdominal pain and palpable mass at the right lower quadrant (RLQ) of her abdomen. She was treated successfully with prednisolone 40 mg/day, azathioprine 50 mg/day, and mesalazine 2400 mg/day. Her disease was then controlled with prednisolone 5 mg/day and the same dose of azathioprine and mesalazine. One year after her CD diagnosis, she developed severe abdominal pain and diarrhea. A colonoscopy was performed, which showed inflamed mucosa and a clean-based ulcer at the cecum. Biopsy revealed an intracytoplasmic inclusion body, which is consistent with cytomegalovirus (CMV) colitis. Her symptoms gradually subsided after 3 weeks treatment of intravenous ganciclovir 5 mg/kg twice daily. Two years after her CD diagnosis, she began experiencing recurrent abdominal pain. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) and colonoscopic findings revealed a large polypoid mass at the ascending colon with partial colonic obstruction that was suspected to be caused by active CD. She was managed conservatively and was discharged home with prednisolone 30 mg/day, azathioprine 150 mg/day, and mesalazine 2400 mg/day after making substantial improvement. Even though she remained stable for about 4 years after her most recent discharge, she still required prednisolone 5 mg/day, azathioprine 150 mg/day, and mesalazine 2400 mg/day to control her disease activity. Her last colonoscopy with biopsy, which was performed 6 months earlier to monitor her disease activity, revealed a shallow 1 cm2 ulcer that was covered with white exudate at the cecum, and multiple polypoid masses at the ileocecal (IC) valve. The histopathologic findings revealed a chronic ulcer with marked active inflammation, a hyperplastic polyp with chronic ileitis, and no viral inclusion, dysplasia, or malignancy. Eight weeks ago, she started complaining of intermittent cramping at the RLQ of her abdomen. The dose of azathioprine was increased to 175 mg/day for presumed exacerbation of CD; however, her pain worsened, and she eventually developed a low-grade fever and watery diarrhea for 2 weeks before admission. She denied having any pulmonary symptoms. On examination, her body temperature was 38.6 °C and she had abdominal tenderness and a palpable mass at the RLQ of her abdomen. All other examination findings were unremarkable.
Laboratory investigations revealed a white blood cell (WBC) count of 2010 cells/mm3 with 90.5% neutrophils and 8.5% lymphocytes, and a hemoglobin level of 8.2 g/dl. Chest X-ray showed an oval-shaped cavitary lesion at the right lower lung . A CT scan of the chest revealed a large cavitary lesion (5.4 × 3.2 cm) with irregular wall thickening at the right lower lobe, and an adjacent focal centrilobular nodule with tree-in-bud pattern. A CT scan of the abdomen revealed chronic wall thickening at the cecum, IC valve, and terminal ilium, with submucosal edema and pericolic fat stranding. The patient underwent colonoscopy and biopsy, and a polypoid mass was observed at the IC valve with multiple clean-based ulcers at the cecum . Since the initial diagnosis was active CD, the tissue was sent only for histopathology. No fresh tissue was submitted for fungal culture. Pathologic examination of the tissue biopsy revealed active ileitis and colitis with multiple round shape organisms. The capsules of the observed organisms could be visualized by hematoxylin and eosin (H&E), periodic acid-Schiff (PAS), Grocott-Gomori’s methenamine silver (GMS) staining, and mucicarmine stain, which is compatible with Cryptococcus spp. . Even though serum cryptococcal antigen was positive with a titer of 1:128, blood, bone marrow, and cerebrospinal fluid cultures for fungus were all negative.
The final diagnosis was disseminated cryptococcosis due to gastrointestinal and presumed pulmonary involvement. Initial induction therapy with amphotericin B deoxycholate (AmBD) 0.7 mg/kg per day was given for 6 weeks, followed by consolidation therapy with fluconazole 800 mg/day for 8 weeks. After consolidation, maintenance treatment with fluconazole 200 mg/day was prescribed for up to 1 year. After diagnosis of disseminated cryptococcosis, the immunosuppressive agents were adjusted as follow: discontinued azathioprine, decreased the dose of prednisolone to 15 mg/day, and maintained mesalazine at 2400 mg/day. Her clinical status was gradually improved, and the colonoscopy that was performed at 10 weeks after the start of treatment showing marked improvement in the polypoid mass-like lesion at the cecum . Even though the diagnosis of pulmonary cryptococcosis was not confirmed by pathology or microbiology, her chest X-ray the 3-month follow-up showed marked improvement .