A 14-year-old boy presented with a 2-week history of decreased visual acuity in the right eye.
The boy suffered from atopic dermatitis (AD) with facial and scalp involvement and had been treated by a dermatologist since he was 5 years old. The disease had been well controlled for several years by skin hydration with soaking baths and use of topical ointments.
However, skin lesions had worsened in the past 2 years and the patient was prescribed Betamethasone Valerate 0.1% topical ointment 3 times a day. Although the patient was instructed to stop the therapy after 5 weeks, he continued using the ointment 3 times a day for about 6 months, after noticing significant improvement.
He presented at our attention complaining decreased visual acuity in the right eye. On ocular examination, his best corrected visual acuity measured 20/25 in his right eye and 20/20 in his left eye. Intraocular pressure was normal and anterior segment examination in each eye was unremarkable. Posterior segment examination of the right eye showed a large serous retinal detachment involving the posterior pole. Posterior segment examination of the left eye was normal.
Therefore, we decided to perform a macular optical coherence tomography (OCT) examination (Spectralis HRA; Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany). OCT examination in the right eye revealed the presence of a detachment of the neurosensory retina in macular region, associated with elongated photoreceptor segments and irregular RPE. Multiple associated pigment epithelial detachments were located inferonasally and inferotemporally to the fovea. In the left eye OCT examination showed normal finds.
Lastly, the blood pressure values were within normal ranges and the patient claimed to have a peaceful mind.
Structural retinal findings associated to clinical signs and history addressed the diagnosis to the CSC, probably linked to the persistent topical steroid treatment.
We decided to treat the patients with Bromfenac 0.9 mg/ml eye drops 3 times a day and to discontinue Betamethasone Valerate ointment. The therapy was well-tolerated by the patient and no side effects were reported.
At 2 weeks follow-up, OCT examination showed a complete resolution of neuroepithelium detachment , associated to a restoration of normal visual acuity.