A 4-year-old, right-hand dominant girl presents to the accident and emergency department with pain and swelling in the left elbow after falling from a swing. She fell from a height of approximately 2 m, landing on to her left elbow. The patient was supporting the left elbow and forearm with her right hand at presentation. Clinical examination revealed swelling and bruising over the entire left elbow, with tenderness over the left olecranon and lateral epicondyle. Elbow movements were very painful. There was no neurological or vascular compromise of the left upper limb. Radiographic examination of the left elbow region revealed a fracture of the proximal ulna with lateral dislocation of the radial head (type III Monteggia equivalent lesion) associated with an ipsilateral fracture of the lateral condyle of the humerus . The patient’s left elbow was immobilized in an above elbow plaster of Paris back slab. Adequate analgesia was given, and the patient was admitted to hospital. Surgery was performed the following morning under general anesthesia. The patient was placed in the supine position with a pneumatic tourniquet over the left upper arm. Under fluoroscopic control, closed reduction of the radial head and the olecranon was performed. Fixation of the olecranon fracture was achieved using two percutaneous 1.25 mm Kirschner wires. Using the lateral Kocher approach to the left elbow, open reduction of the lateral humeral condyle was performed, and fixation achieved using two percutaneous 1.6 mm Kirschner wires. The radiocapitellar and proximal ulnar alignment and stability were assessed intraoperative under fluoroscopic control . The surgical wound was closed, and an above elbow plaster of Paris cast was applied with the elbow in 90° of flexion and forearm in neutral position . Postoperatively, the patient developed swelling and blistering in the left arm at the site of the pneumatic tourniquet due to an adverse reaction of the skin preparation solution and the tourniquet. The cast was split and arm elevated in view of swelling. The patient was discharged on the 2nd day after surgery. The skin changes resolved completely after a week. 3 weeks postoperatively, radiographs were taken . The Kirschner wires and the plaster cast were removed 5 weeks postoperatively. She was then referred for physical therapy. She achieved a full range of movements in her left elbow and forearm after 3 weeks of starting physical therapy .