A 54-year-old Caucasian male farmer was seen in our department following a referral from his general practitioner for a non-traumatic bilateral anterior knee pain. Plain radiographs revealed a phase II chronic tendinopathy of the superior pole of patella on both sides of his knee. This was attributed to his frequent squatting and kneeling on the farm. He was managed with physiotherapy and he improved symptomatically. Neither his general practitioner nor our department gave him steroid injections.
Two years later, he presented to our Accident and Emergency Department with sudden bilateral knee pain following a tumble on the farm. He was unable to get up and stand on his feet and was brought in by an ambulance. Further enquiry revealed that the injury happened when both his feet got stuck in the mud on a wet day and both his knees buckled under his weight.
Clinically active knee flexion was possible without any ability to extend. Moderate hemarthrosis on both of his knees was present. Initial X-rays revealed only the bilateral patellar spurs with calcific shadows in the quadriceps tendon . A definitive gap was not palpable in the suprapatellar region but he was tender over the area. A magnetic resonance imaging scan done immediately on both his knees revealed a complete tear of the quadriceps at approximately the same level (1.5 cm from the insertion) of the tendon (midsubstance) rather than the osteotendinous junction. The transverse sections of the patella bore significant lateral tilt on either side, with the left side showing a more pronounced tilt, indicating bilateral torn retinaculae. He was investigated for any underlying predisposing causes. His bone profile, renal profile, blood glucose, serum uric acid and lipid profile were normal. He was HLA B27 negative and his body mass index was 29.
He was operated upon and underwent a tendon-to-bone repair of the quadriceps on both sides because the distal stump of his tendon appeared degenerate. It was also discovered that the retinaculae on both of his knees were torn. Apart from moderate degeneration of the tendon no striking abnormalities were detected intraoperatively. Postoperatively, both knees were splinted in extension for three weeks and he later started on a range of movement exercises of up to 90 degrees of flexion. He was allowed to fully bear weight six weeks after his surgery. Three years after the surgery, he had an excellent result with full active extension and a full range of knee movement. His Tegner-Lysholm score three years after the operation was 99, which is categorised as "excellent".