A 25-year-old woman with homozygous (SS) sickle-cell disease was referred to our tertiary center at 32 weeks of gestation, presenting weakness, fever and worsening anemia. The patient consented to our reporting of the case.
Her obstetric history included a previous pregnancy two years earlier, which had been complicated by mild preeclampsia, and in which cesarean delivery had been performed at term. In the first pregnancy, there were no reports of any complication caused by her sickle-cell disease, such as occurrences of painful crises, splenic sequestration or need for blood transfusion. During the patient’s childhood, her sickle-cell disease had always been relatively mild, with some occasionally painful vaso-occlusive crises and rare admissions to hospital. Hemoglobin electrophoresis performed before the current pregnancy revealed hemoglobin S of 82.2%, hemoglobin F of 15.1% and hemoglobin A2 of 2.7%.
On arrival at our center, she reported experiencing left upper abdominal pain. Her temperature was 38 ºC, heart rate 115 bpm, blood pressure 120/80 mmHg and fetal heart rate 150 bpm. Her spleen was enlarged (palpable 4 cm below the left costal margin), and was tender. The laboratory test results showed hemoglobin level of 2.4 g/dl, hematocrit 7.8%, reticulocyte count 7.43%, white blood cell count 17.8 x 109/l (neutrophils 83%), platelet count 84 x 109/l, alanine aminotransferase 57 U/l, aspartate aminotransferase 94 U/l, total bilirubin 3.63 mg/dl, urea 32 mg/dl, creatinine 1.34 mg/dl and lactic dehydrogenase 1,661 U/l.
Fetal monitoring performed for 60 minutes showed a baseline fetal heart rate of 150 bpm, absence of variability and absence of accelerations. A prolonged deceleration lasting for 4 minutes (80 bpm) was noted at the beginning of the record. The volume of amniotic fluid was normal and the fetal biophysical profile was 6. No fetal Doppler evaluation was performed.
Two packs of red blood cells were immediately transfused. The fetal heart rate pattern progressively returned to normal and the fetal biophysical profile was normal. Twelve hours after the first blood transfusion, the woman’s hemoglobin level was low (4.3 g/dl), and two additional packs of red blood cells were transfused. One day after transfusion, her hemoglobin level was 5.9 g/dl, and one more pack of red blood cells was transfused, thereby increasing her hemoglobin level to 7.4 g/dl.
The patient was kept in hospital. An ultrasound scan showed that fetal growth was normal, and antenatal fetal surveillance examinations were normal. Cesarean delivery was performed at 37 weeks of gestation. The newborn weighed 3,030 grams at birth, and the Apgar scores were 9, 10 and 10 at 1, 5 and 10 minutes. The patient was transfused with two more packs of red blood cells postpartum. Both mother and baby were discharged on the fifth day postpartum, alive and well.