A 44-year-old male constructor worker fell down from a 3-storey high building and presented to our Emergency Department. An open fracture of the left talus Gustilo type 3b was visible with an external submalleolar wound of 7 centimetres. Peripheral pulses were present, and the neurological status was intact. Plain film radiographs showed a posterior dislocated distal fibula fracture, a comminuted vertical shear fracture of the medial distal tibia and a talus fracture . In order to obtain a precise diagnosis and plan surgery, a computed tomography (CT) scan of the ankle was performed, showing a dislocated distal fibula in contact with the posterior medial part of the talus, a multifragmentary talus fracture with a sagittal split and a separation between the body and neck and an AO 43-B2 distal tibia fracture .
Considering an open fracture with an irreducible external malleolus, immediate surgery was performed. We used the open wound that extended from the proximal part of the external malleolus fracture to the cuboid bone to approach the fractures from the lateral side. First, the distal lateral malleolus was extricated as it was located between the distal tibia and posterior talus and fixed with two axial 2.2 Kirschner wires. The Chaput fragment was also stabilized with a single 1.2 Kirschner wire. These three wires were cut to the desired length, bent, and impacted into the bone. We then approached the medial aspect of the ankle, through an incision extending from 5 cm above the tip of the medial malleolus to the medial tuberosity of the navicular bone. Reduction and fixation of the talus with two K-wires and two partially threaded screws were accomplished. The quality of reduction was controlled on both medial and lateral approaches. Osteosynthesis of the pilon fracture was performed with a reconstruction plate. Intraoperative testing did not reveal syndesmotic instability.
Postoperatively, a short leg cast was applied for a period of 12 weeks. Rehabilitation protocol consisted in 6 weeks of nonweight-bearing and a progressive weight-bearing starting from week 7. No acute complication was observed. At 6 months of follow-up, the fractures were consolidated. The X-rays showed an anatomical reconstruction, with no sign of talar necrosis . Passive flexion/extension of the ankle was limited to 20/0/0. The patient was able to walk for limited periods and distance only with adapted shoes and needed a daily pain medication intake. He was unable to regain his previous working status. Resuming sport activities was not possible.
At one year postoperative, the patient developed an invalidating partial necrosis of the talus and pilon that eventually required an ankle-hindfoot arthrodesis 14 months after the accident.