The patient is a 37 year old female with a past medical history significant for morbid obesity, gastroesophageal reflux disease, and asthma. Her past surgical history is significant for a previous tubal ligation and laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Her preoperative BMI was 47.6. She chose to undergo a LSG after her previous attempts at weight loss were unsuccessful. The patient was taken into operating room and we initiated our procedure with a 5 mm incision in the left upper midclavicular line and inserted a trochar under direct vision with a 5 mm 0° camera. We placed four working ports total, as well as a Nathanson liver retractor. The sleeve technique involves freeing the greater curvature starting 5 cm proximal to the pylorus, with complete dissection to the left crus to avoid leaving any retained fundus behind. This patient also had a small 1 cm hiatal hernia which was dissected and then closed with an anterior figure of eight stitch. The sleeve was constructed over a 34 French Ewald tube with a reinforced staple line (SEMGUARD, Gore Arizona), though we often use a blunt tip bougie. Special attention is paid to avoid tightness at the incisura and angle of His. After creation of the sleeve, which was uneventful, the patient had her routine post-operative endoscopy, in which a blood clot was noticed in the lower esophagus. This was an unusual finding during our endoscopies. There was not a significant amount of esophagitis noted on the EGD. Once in the stomach, the staple line was found to be straight and there was no bubbling on our leak test and no blood in the stomach or staple line. The patient was then extubated after the specimen was removed and brought to the post-anesthesia care unit (PACU).
In the PACU, about 15 min after extubation, the patient started to develop hematemesis, about 10 cc every 2–3 min of fresh blood. We remembered our unusual finding of blood in the lower esophagus and reintubated the patient to bring her back into the operating room for an endoscopy. The findings are demonstrated in Fig. . There was a small tear in the lower esophagus that was bleeding. This area was injected with 7 ml of 1:10,000 epinephrine. The bleeding ceased at this point. The staple line was in tact. The abdominal cavity was not entered in the operating room as we felt that there were no areas of concern in the stomach during our initial endoscopy and this remained the case upon second inspection. Under direct vision, an orogastric tube was placed. The patient was kept intubated for 6 h post-operatively and then extubated without difficulty. She was monitored in the intensive care unit for the first night. She remained hemodynamically stable with stable hemoglobins of 11.0–13.0 g/dl. The remainder of her post-operative course was unremarkable. We routinely perform an upper GI on post operative day 1 to assess for leak or obstruction. Hers is shown in Fig. . Her postoperative visits have all gone well and she has had no long term sequelae of this event. She followed up with us at 6 months and she has had 53 % excess weight loss with no dysphagia or reflux symptoms.