A 28-year-old female patient was admitted to the Neurosurgery Unit of the Hospital da Restauração (Recife, PE, Brazil) with a recent history of intense headache that was not responsive to any kind of medical therapy. She complained of continuous headache almost every morning for the last 2 months. At the time of presentation, despite the mentioned symptoms, she was neurologically intact. She showed neither any evidence of peripheral lymphadenopathy nor any pigmented lesions at the physical examination. Of note, she had a prosthetic eye on the right side. The medical history revealed that she had been operated on for a CM 10 years ago. The surgical procedure involved enucleation of the right eye. The histopathologic study was consistent with a malignant CM. During the follow-up, no skeletal scintigraphy or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) tests were performed.
All laboratory tests revealed nothing abnormal. Computed tomography (CT) and MRI scans were performed at day 2 and a left frontal lobe lesion was illustrated. This lesion appeared hyperdense on CT scan , a finding that drew the attention to a possible recent intratumoral bleeding. However, it did not behave as blood on MRI study. It was hyperintense on T1-weighted images and isointense on T2-weighted images. But when analyzing the gradient echo sequence (GRE), the lesion was isointense to the brain . Since blood usually appears hypointense on GRE, the possibility of a late single brain metastatic melanoma became the most prominent diagnosis.
On the fourth day of hospitalization, the patient experienced worsening of the headache and became drowsy. New emergency CT scan showed increase of the midline shift, subfalcine and uncus herniation. The patient was taken to the operating room for a total resection of the tumor. The surgical procedure consisted of a left frontotemporal craniotomy and standard microsurgical techniques were employed to achieve an “en bloc” resection of the tumor. The histology of the lesion confirmed a metastatic melanoma of the brain . Typical hyperchromatic and pleomorphic cells were recognized and special melanin stains [S100, Melan-A, homatropine methylbromide (HMB) 45] confirmed the diagnosis.
The patient received WBRT for 3 months with a total dose of 54 Gy combined with chemotherapy, consisting of increasing doses of temozolamide (Temodal®, Merck and Co., Inc., Whitehouse Station, NJ, USA) up to 150 mg/m2/day. Thereafter, she had been closely followed up in the Ambulatory Department with no recurrence on serial MRI scans. She was asymptomatic for 24 months, when she was admitted to the hospital with shortness of breath and eventually died from pulmonary embolism. No autopsy was conducted due to her family's religious beliefs.