A 16-year-old female presented with a three-week history of a progressively enlarging and painful mass in her left breast, accompanied by low-grade fevers that responded to paracetamol. The patient tested negative for Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) and exhibited normal vital signs and oxygen saturation levels. The left breast was grossly swollen with shiny skin, non-tender, and was of normal temperature. There were vaguely nodular soft masses with ill-defined margins and no ipsilateral lymph node swelling. Ultrasonography revealed multiple regular hypoechoic masses with no speculated edges commonly seen in breast carcinoma and no calcifications (see ). Consent was sought from her and the mother for a trucut biopsy to be done.
Touch imprints of the cores were suggestive of BL (see ). H&E stained histology sections revealed a monomorphic population of moderately sized lymphoid cells with a high N:C ratio, frequent apoptotic bodies, frequent mitoses, and occasional tingible body macrophages giving it a starry sky appearance (see ). A diagnosis of Burkitt lymphoma was suggested and confirmed by immunohistochemistry. On IHC, the tumor was positive for CD45, and c-MYC. The proliferative index (ki67) was 100%. Tdt, BCL2, and CD3 were dead negative (see ). Diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) was a differential. Other tests that could have been done like EBV staining, and cytogenetics to determine the presence of characteristic translocations were not available in our setting.
She was admitted to the pediatric oncology ward where a chest x-ray, abdominal ultrasound scan, CBC, bone marrow, and CSF examination were all unremarkable. A diagnosis of stage 1 primary breast BL was confirmed according to the International Pediatric Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma Staging system (IPNHLSS). Chemotherapy was initiated; methotrexate 1400mg, vincristine 2mg, doxorubicin 74.5mg, cyclophosphamide 1788mg, prednisolone 22mg, intrathecal methotrexate 15mg, intrathecal hydrocortisone 15mg, intrathecal cytarabine 70mg. The next day, she complained of vomiting. She was put on ondansetron, intravenous fluids, and allopurinol for tumor lysis syndrome prevention.
A week later, she was reviewed and was showing a good response to chemotherapy. The tumor had significantly shrunk, the skin was no longer shiny (see ) and she was much happier. She was discharged home and was to be reviewed every month at the oncology clinic and also have her monthly cycle of chemotherapy to a total of 6 cycles. Due to the side effects of chemotherapy like hair loss, vomiting, and body weakness, the girl declined chemotherapy after the third cycle. However, with repeated engagements with the counselor and the nurse in charge of the Oncology clinic, she was convinced and is on course to completion timeline for these events is summarized in the timeline figure attached.