The proband was a 53-year-old Han male who sought treatment at the outpatient clinic of Peking University First Hospital for progressive hearing loss in both ears, manifested for more than 10 years.
The patient presented with bilateral hearing loss that began around the age of 40 and gradually affected daily listening and communication. There were no vestibular disorders such as vertigo or unsteady walking.
The patient had no history of past illness.
The patient had no history of noise exposure, otitis media, or ototoxic drug use. However, it was understood that several of the patient’s family members had similar symptoms, with slowly progressive bilateral hearing loss, also beginning around the age of 40. Therefore, we contacted 11 additional members of the patient’s family (including four members experiencing hearing loss) and obtained their consent to participate in our study . The first member of the third generation (III:1) had a history of noise exposure for about 20 years because of his work. The remaining 11 family members had no history of noise exposure, otitis media, or ototoxic drug use.
No abnormality was found in the ear examination of the 12 family members.
The proband’s routine blood, liver function, renal function, and coagulation function tests showed no obvious abnormalities.
Five family members with deafness were examined by high-resolution computed tomography of the temporal bone, and no obvious abnormality was found.
We found that all five affected members had bilateral symmetrical moderate to profound sensorineural hearing loss . The audiograms of the affected family members were flat or slightly sloping, and high-frequency hearing loss was particularly severe. And none of them had vestibular dysfunction or visual impairment.
After written informed consent was obtained from all participants or their guardians, peripheral blood samples were collected for genetic analysis. High-throughput sequencing was used for the proband, including the exons of 415 genes, and partial deep intron regions of 147 genes reported by the Human Gene Mutation Database were also detected. The coverage density of the probe (GenCap deafness gene capture probe V4.0, ) was increased in 29 common deafness pathogenic genes, among which GJB2, SLC26A4, and POU3F4 were covered in full length. Deafness-related genes in the mitochondrial circular DNA were also detected using GenCap Mitochondrial Loop Gene Capture Probe V1.0 (MyGenostics, Beijing, China). Then five candidate variants were identified in the proband: MYO7A (c.1531G>A), TRIOBP (c.3689C>T), WHRN (c.2090C>T), USH1C (1534G>A), and PDZD7 (c.1529G>A). These variants were annotated using ANNOVAR (v20200607) and compared with the Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC, v0.3.1, Broad Institute, United States), 1000 Genomes , and Genome Aggregation Database (gnomAD, ) databases. The pathogenicity of the variants was predicted using Rare Exome Variant Ensemble Learner (REVEL, ), Mutation Taster , and PolyPhen2 programs. At the same time, we obtained the spatial structure of the MYO7A protein with AlphaFold2 , and then used PyMOL (v2.5.4, Schrodinge, United States) to map and analyze the effect of the mutation on the structure of MYO7A protein. Finally, Sanger sequencing of the remaining 11 family members showed that only MYO7A (c.1531G>A) co-segregated with the deafness phenotype. This variant resulted in the conversion of Asp to Asn at position 511 of the MYO7A protein , an amino acid highly conserved among species . This variant was not detected in the control group consisting of 200 Chinese Han individuals with normal hearing, or in the ExAC, 1000 Genomes, or gnomAD database. The pathogenicity of this variant was predicted to be “probably damaging” (0.994) by PolyPhen-2, “damaging” (0.853) by REVEL, and “disease-causing” (1.000) by Mutation Taster. As shown in Figure , the Asp at position 511 of wild-type MYO7A protein is located in the motor domain, has three hydrogen bonds with surrounding amino acids, and has electrostatic interaction with Lys at position 515. However, the p.Asp511Asn variant loses one hydrogen bond and the only electrostatic interaction.