A 14-year-old female patient presented with an 8-month history of new-onset murmur, progressively worsening palpitations, orthopnea, chest pain, and syncope. She was 158 cm tall, weighed 37 kg, and was cachectic with a BMI at the first centile for age and sex (14.8 kg/m2). Apart from tachycardia, vital signs were normal for age and sex (blood pressure 110/70 mm Hg; temperature 36.5°C; heart rate 110 beats/min). Tanner stage was 2 (downy pubic hair and palpable breast tissue without areola enlargement).
Physical examination findings were as follows: 4/6 MR murmur (, ) and regular tachycardia at 110/min; bilateral pulmonary crackles with dullness to percussion in the lower lobes; jugular venous distention and tender hepatomegaly with a liver span of 18 cm; and ascites and mild bilateral lower extremity edema classified as grade 2 + .
Antistreptolysin O (ASO) titers were elevated. Chest radiography and electrocardiography revealed a cardiothoracic ratio of 0.6 and left atrial enlargement with a cardiac axis of 30°.
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed a mitral valve annulus diameter of 27 mm, severe MR due to leaflet restriction and loss of central coaptation, proximal isovelocity surface area (PISA) radius measuring 10 mmHg, and a mean gradient of 100 mmHg, an anatomically normal tricuspid valve with a hiatus measuring approximately 3 mm and an axial leak reaching the bottom of the right atrium (RA), and elevated pulmonary artery systolic pressure (PASP) at 55 mmHg. These clinical and TTE findings classified our patient as stage D for both mitral and TR .
The case was addressed to the cardiac surgery team of the Hôpital Européen George Pompidou in France through the non-governmental organization named chaîne de l’Espoir.
The patient received captopril, digoxin, furosemide, aspirin, spironolactone, and benzathine penicillin while awaiting surgery.
She underwent open cardiac surgery on 2 April 2010 at the Hôpital Européen George Pompidou, Paris, France.
Intraoperative findings during cardiac surgery were as follows: posterior mitral leaflet retraction and dilatation of the tricuspid annulus; mitral leaflets were enlarged using an autologous pericardial patch for the posterior and an oval pericardial patch for the anterior leaflets; mitral and tricuspid annuli were remodeled using Carpentier-Edwards Physio annuloplasty ring numbers 34 and 30, respectively.
There were no perioperative complications, and the immediate POD period was uneventful.
Clinical and paraclinical assessments were performed, which revealed tachycardia and decreased bilateral lower lung vesicular murmur. Chest radiography confirmed mild bilateral pleural effusion. Type 1 atrioventricular block was observed .
A serial TMPG measured in the immediate POD period revealed the following: 9 mmHg on the 4th postoperative (POD) day which was related to the tachycardia at 120 beats/min because the MVA was at 3.6 cm2; 2.7 mmHg on the 11th POD; and 4 mmHg on the 33rd POD.
A TTE was performed on the 33rd POD, which revealed a residual MR type A with an MVA of 4 cm2 , the pressure half-time (PHT) of the mitral valve at 49.51 ms with a TMPG of 4 mmHg and the left auricle at 29 cm2; and a residual TR type A with a PASP at 40 mmHg. None of the POD TTE (immediate, midterm, or long-term follow-up) revealed pannus formation on fibrous tissue growth of the mitral valve.
The patient was advised to follow up at the ambulatory care setting every month with a trained general practitioner to manage POD cardiac patients. At this visit, functional signs and complaints of the patient are collected, and a physical examination is performed after taking the patient’s vitals (weight, height, blood pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate, and temperature). During POD surgery, she was administered daily oral medications (furosemide, spironolactone, and acetylsalicylic acid) and monthly intramuscular penicillin benzathine. The patient has an appointment every 3–4 months with the cardiologist. At that visit, an electrocardiogram and an echocardiogram are performed as well as laboratory tests (complete blood counts, comprehensive metabolic panels, and isolated potassium). The patient was counseled about strict compliance with the medical follow-up and to come to the emergency room if any other concerns. She gradually gained weight and increased in height. Menarche occurred 17 months (October 2011) after the procedure. POD development of MS was observed by TTE, with worsening clinical findings during follow-up .