We describe the case of a 12-year-old male Caucasian patient in the permanent dentition period. An extraoral examination did not reveal any serious facial asymmetry. An intraoral examination revealed the presence of his deciduous upper right canine in the arch, the absence of the corresponding canine, and microdontia of his upper lateral incisors. His left lateral incisor showed a crossbite relationship with his lower left canine. A class I molar interocclusal relationship was present on his right and left sides, with minimal crowding in the front section of his lower arch . No notable events were evident from our patient’s or his family’s medical history that could be correlated with the altered tooth eruption or position.
To determine an adequate treatment plan, our patient underwent orthopantomography of his arches and latero-lateral cranium teleradiography for cephalometric evaluation. The orthopantomography highlighted the retention of his right upper canine and its transposition with his first premolar .
One possible treatment approach for this patient was to align his teeth into the transposed position. Although this approach would probably have required less time overall, it had some disadvantages in terms of aesthetics and occlusion. Therefore, a combined surgical-orthodontic treatment was selected, with the aim of correcting the transposition and aligning the teeth into their correct positions. The selected approach involved a surgical incision in the mucosa proximal to the retained and transposed canine, traction of the tooth in the dental arch into its physiological position using an anchorage device, and banding of the dental arches to obtain alignment and leveling. The proposed treatment was interceptive and was chosen to prevent further impaction of the canine into the first molar.
During the first session, a dental technician used a band to take an impression of our patient’s upper teeth, creating a splint with two eyelets in zones 12 and 13 to ensure traction of the canine in the arch. The splint was cemented and, one week later, surgery was performed. The oral surgeon made an incision in the mucosa to expose the crown and created a trapezoidal paramarginal flap . A button was placed at the crown level and tied with an elastic wire to the more distal eyelet of the splint to start the traction. The deciduous canine was preserved to maintain the necessary space for repositioning the permanent tooth. The elastic wire was replaced approximately every 15 days to ensure a slow and constant traction, in such a way as to avoid damage to the periodontal tissue and the canine.
About two months after surgery, his tooth was visible in the arch . Traction was continued by tying an elastic wire to the mesial eyelet of the splint in zone 13. The more distal eyelet was removed. Four months after surgery, the tooth was sufficiently visible to allow for removal of the splint, extraction of the deciduous canine, replacement of the button with an orthodontic brace, and banding of the arches.
Bonding was performed with pre-torqued and pre-angled brackets with a 0.022-inch slot. The first arch used was a 0.014-inch nickel-titanium round arch, to which the canine was directly tied . About two months after the start of treatment, a 0.018-inch nickel-titanium arch was applied. Once the crowding was resolved, the intermediate stage was begun, and a 0.016×0.022-inch nickel-titanium arch was applied. For the final stage, a 0.019×0.025-inch steel arch was used.
As soon as the canine reached its correct position in the arch, the lower arch was banded. The same procedure used for the upper arch was applied, using the same braces and the same sequence of wires . Banding was removed after the established objectives were met, that is, the transposition was corrected and his arches were aligned and leveled .
Our patient’s treatment lasted for two years. At the end of the treatment, he had a good aesthetic outcome. The median lines of occlusion were centered, his molars were in a class I relationship, and his right upper canine showed a slight gingival recession. The microdontic lateral incisors will be aesthetically reconstructed at a later stage, and a decision will be made then as to whether the reconstruction will be direct or indirect.