A 42-year-old Japanese woman was admitted to our hospital for the treatment of a left renal tumor that had been detected by a medical checkup. She was neither a habitual drinker nor a smoker. She had no remarkable medical or family history. The physical examination on admission was unremarkable. Laboratory hematologic, serological, and coagulation tests on admission revealed no abnormalities. Abdominal computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging revealed a well-circumscribed solid tumor measuring 5 × 4 cm in diameter at the left kidney. The tumor was hypovascular and protruded toward the renal pelvis. Radiologically, papillary RCC or chromophobe RCC were considered as differential diagnoses. A needle biopsy was performed, and the pathological report of biopsy specimens was "unclassified mucin-producing renal cell carcinoma."
The patient underwent a laparoscopic left nephrectomy. Intraoperatively, one enlarged lymph node was identified at the hilum of the left kidney, and it was surgically dissected. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged from the hospital on the sixth postoperative day. The final stage based on TNM staging system was Stage III (pT1bN1M0). She was periodically followed without adjuvant therapy, and no sign of recurrence had been detected at the time of this writing (24 months after the surgery).
The cut section of the tumor revealed a well-circumscribed tan-white to tan-pink and homogeneous solid tumor showing expansile growth at upper pole to interpolar region of the left kidney. Histologically, tubular or focally papillary structures compose3d of tumor cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm and small-round nuclei were observed, and a small amount of spindle-shaped tumor cells and its transition figures were intermingled . The WHO/ISUP grade was Grade 2. Prominent extracellular mucin deposition highlighted by alcian blue staining was observed .
Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for cytokeratin (CK) 7 (clone OV-TL 12/30, ready to use; Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) , paired box gene (PAX) 8 (clone MRQ-50, ready to use; Roche, Mannheim, Germany), and vimentin but negative for alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase (AMACR) (clone 13H4, ready to use; Agilent Technologies) and CD10 (clone SP67, ready to use; Roche). Lymph node metastasis was observed in one of the dissected lymph nodes. Although the lymph node metastasis and the negativity of AMACR are not typical findings of MTSCC, we initially diagnosed this tumor as MTSCC based on its morphological characteristics with mucin deposition.
We presented this case as an MTSCC at the 380th Kyushu-Okinawa slide conference (March 2021) held by the Kyushu-Okinawa Division of Japanese Society of Pathology. At that conference, some participants pointed out the possibility of the tumor being ALK-RCC. Following their comments, we performed an additional immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis of the tumor by using ALK (D5F3) (clone D5F3, ready to use; Roche), and the tumor showed diffuse cytoplasmic and diffuse strong membranous positivity . In addition, TPM3 exon 8 – ALK exon 20 fusion gene was detected by RNA sequencing. We thus finally reached the correct diagnosis of ALK-RCC.