A 58-year-old male patient presented with complaints of bilateral neck swelling which was not associated with any pain, difficulty in swallowing, or hoarseness. Physical examination revealed a 2×2 cm firm lump on the lower pole of both lobes of the thyroid gland. No palpable cervical lymphadenopathy was present. The patient was a non-smoker and non-alcoholic. His medical history was unremarkable. Routine blood values were within normal limits. Fine needle aspiration is performed and was undetermined. Ultrasonography of the neck demonstrated multiple hypoechoic nodules in located both thyroid lobes associated with thyroid enlargement. The largest nodule measured 31×10 mm in the right lobe and 13.5×14 mm in the left lobe and 9×5 mm in the isthmus. The patient was diagnosed with nodular goitre and he underwent a total thyroidectomy. The specimen was sent to the pathology department. The resected thyroid gland weighed 67.5 g. The right thyroid and left thyroid measured 7.5×5×3 cm and 7×4×3 cm, respectively. The cut surface of both thyroid lobes had multiple nodules, the largest one with a size of 1.5 cm. Hematoxylin and eosin-stained sections of the specimen revealed thyroid follicles with sheets composed of polygonal cells with pleomorphic nuclei, prominent nucleoli, and a moderate amount of eosinophilic cytoplasm. Keratin pearls were present [Fig. ]. Our first diagnosis was SCC in the thyroid gland. A laryngoscopy was done and no abnormal findings were noted. Referring to the medical records, it was found that the patient had a history of SCC in the left lung, 1 year ago [Fig. ]. The final diagnosis was metastatic SCC to the thyroid gland. The patient was discharged 5 days later and referred to the oncology department for appropriate treatment. After consultation with an oncologist, our patient received three cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy with carboplatin and paclitaxel. Clinical evaluation showed no signs of recurrence or regional metastases after 6 months of follow-up.