A 39-year-old female (right hand dominant) presented with the left elbow pain for the past 1 year. There was no history of any associated injury to the elbow. Local examination revealed tenderness over the lateral epicondyle of humerus and Cozen’s test was positive, suggesting the clinical diagnosis of lateral epicondylitis of the elbow. The plain radiograph showed heterotopic bone formation, in the region of lateral humeral epicondyle . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed hypointense signal at the region of common extensor tendon origin, on T1/STIR images . Non-contrast computed tomography (NCCT) showed a well-corticated calcified density at the common extensor tendon origin in the proximity to the lateral humeral epicondyle common extensor tendon origin , suggestive of calcific common extensor tendinosis. Since there was a bony mass noted around the lateral epicondylar region of the elbow, the CT and MRI scans were done to rule out the extent and characteristic of this lesion and to rule out any sinister pathology like malignancy.
The patient had a trial conservative treatment, for almost 1 year. His visual analog score (VAS) before surgery was 7/10.Her pain did not respond to conservative treatment of analgesics, physiotherapy, and elbow support. Hence, she had a local steroid injection of triamcinolone 20mgwhich was given in the lateral epicondylar area. It helped her for about 3 months, but then pain recurred more intensely, to the extent that she could not use her left upper limb to do the activities of daily living and her night sleep was also disturbed. She, therefore, underwent surgical exploration of the elbow, under general anesthesia. There was white-colored paste like a collection within the common extensor tendon origin, with dystrophic calcification of the tendon . Decompression of the involved tendons was done, and dystrophic calcification was debrided, thoroughly. The split tendon was then repaired using 3-0 Vicryl sutures. The elbow was kept in a broad arm sling for 2 weeks, followed by active physical therapy. The Gram stain of the collected material was negative, and there was no microorganism grown on aerobic culture. The histology of the excised tissue revealed focal nodular aggregates of plump fibroblasts and osteoclastic giant cells around microcalcific foci. Large areas of fibrosis and calcific nodular deposits seen. The post-operative plain radiograph showed complete abolition of the heterotopic bony growth from the lateral epicondylar region .
The patient had complete abolition of the elbow pain (VAS score 0/10) and at the follow-up of 12 months, had no pain and full function of the elbow. The radiographs also did not show any recurrence of heterotopic bone formation around the elbow joint.