In January 1999, a 54-year-old female was treated by anterior resection of the rectum with anastomosis for a moderately differentiated rectal adenocarcinoma sited 12 cm above the anocutaneous line. In histopathological examination, a 7 × 4 × 0.9 cm tumour and resection margins free of tumour cells were described. The disease stage was pT3pN0M0, Dukes B. The patient was given a course of 50.4 Gy (in 1.8 Gy daily fractions) of postoperative irradiation using 10 MeV linear accelerator photon beams and the four-field box technique until April 1999.
Adhesiolysis, resection of terminal ileum and end-to-end anastomosis were performed in May 2000 and sigmostomy in December 2003 with no signs of local or regional recurrence.
One week after the third surgery, the patient complained of severe hoarseness but was not examined by an otorhinolaryngologist at that time.
In January 2005, multiple pulmonary metastases were diagnosed and the patient was directed to chemotherapy. By October 2005, she had had seven cycles of FOLFIRI regimen (irinotecan, leucovorin, 5-fluorouracil) resulting in a partial remission. At the time of progression in March 2006, a XELOX regimen (capecitabine, oxaliplatin) was introduced. Due to its ineffectiveness, it was replaced with a FOLFIRI-cetuximab combination after the third cycle in June 2006. By March 2007, the patient had received six applications, also without any clinical benefit. As the patient was still in good performance status, the XELOX chemotherapy was re-started, but was terminated after the forth application in July 2007 due to side effects (allergic reaction with dyspnoea during administration of oxaliplatin).
In August 2007, the patient was admitted to the otolaryngology department with a clinical picture of an acute respiratory distress. During the clinical examination, subglottic stenosis was observed. It was of a concentric type and the mucosa covering it was smooth and showed no sign of malignancy, which was confirmed with direct pharyngolaryngoscopy with rigid tracheoscopy. The stenosis was attributed to an orotracheal intubation injury during the last abdominal surgery. An urgent tracheostomy was performed; after the surgical wound healed and the patency of tracheostoma stabilised, the patient was discharged from the hospital with appropriate knowledge on basic care of her tracheostoma.
In February 2008, difficulties with cannula replacements associated with unusual changes around the tracheostoma prompted the patient to visit the ENT office again. After the removal of the cannula, the clinical examination revealed exophytic pink tissue masses, 1.5 × 1.5 cm in size, growing around the left and inferior rim of the tracheostoma in the area of skin transition into tracheal mucosa , mimicking hypertrophic granulations that are usually found in neglected tracheostomas. Due to extent of these changes, a biopsy was performed.
The biopsy sample measured 7 × 5 × 2 mm and consisted of a tumour with abundant necrosis. Histologically, the tumour was composed of atypical glandular tubular structures and islands of tumour cells exhibiting moderate cellular and nuclear pleomorphism, and numerous mitotic figures . Immunohistochemical analyses showed a diffusely positive reaction for cytokeratin 20 , and a negative reaction for cytokeratin 7. Morphologic characteristics and the immunophenotypes of the tumour samples from the tracheostoma and the colon were similar, confirming the diagnosis of colon adenocarcinoma metastatic to tracheostoma.
The patient was offered palliative radiotherapy with 10 fractions of 3 Gy/day and an appositional 12 MeV electron beam, covering only the macroscopic disease with margin . At the end of the irradiation course, there was no change in the clinical appearance of the metastasis in the tracheostoma. In May 2008, a CT scan revealed solitary brain metastasis in the left parietal region of 6 cm in diameter with surrounding oedema. She was treated with corticosteroids in addition to whole brain radiotherapy of 20 Gy (4 Gy/day).
The patient died of systemic progression of her malignant disease in June 2008.