A 30-year-old right-handed man was admitted to our hospital due to mild sensory disturbance in his left limbs. He had histories of sigmoid colon rupture and pneumothorax and underwent surgical therapies. Three years before, he was admitted with transient amaurosis due to left ICA dissection, and a gene mutation analysis revealed the presence of vascular EDS with a missense mutation of COL3A1 cDNA (c.1196 G > A). On current admission, he only had slight sensory disturbance and a National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale score of 1. There were no other neurological deficits including his cranial nerves. In brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), diffusion-weighted imaging showed multiple acute cerebral infarcts in the right middle cerebral artery territory . Intracranial magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) showed no occlusion or stenosis in the major arteries other than the known left ICA dissection . Cervical computed tomography angiography (CTA) depicted stenosis in the right extracranial ICA and left extracranial to intracranial ICA narrowing , accompanied by elongated styloid processes (right 3.5 cm, left 3.6 cm) spatially close to each side of the ICA . Cervical MRI revealed intramural hematoma and double-lumen in the right ICA . Transoral ultrasonography (TOCU) (LOGIQ E10, GE Healthcare) revealed severe stenosis with flow elevation due to a thrombosed pseudolumen and an elongated styloid process near the thrombosed pseudolumen . He was diagnosed with right ICA dissection due to vascular Eagle syndrome, which resulted in embolic stroke in the right hemisphere. Since his left ICA was narrowing from near the elongated styloid process, the left ICA dissection 3 y before was also caused by vascular Eagle syndrome. Considering his vascular vulnerability due to vascular EDS, surgical interventions were not performed. Instead, we performed secondary stroke prevention with aspirin and close follow-up with TOCU. In 4 months after the admission, his right ICA dissection improved without recurrence or deterioration of dissection and aspirin was discontinued.