A 69-year-old Chinese woman had intermittent lower back and leg pain for 6 months without obvious causes, and no significant improvement was observed after 1 month of treatment with traditional Chinese medicine. She experienced nausea and vomiting and presented to the local hospital. Laboratory studies revealed hemoglobin levels of 112 g/L (reference, 115–150 g/L), platelet of 90 × 109/L (reference, 125–350 × 109/L), serum creatinine of 11.10 mg/dL (reference, 0.51–0.95 mg/dL), potassium of 3.05 mmol/L (reference, 3.50–5.30 mmol/L), and bicarbonate 10.4 mmol/L (reference, 22.0–29.0 mmol/L). Levels of blood glucose, uric acid, and phosphorus were normal. After hemodialysis, the patient was referred to our hospital. She had no history of chronic disease, and her renal function was normal three years ago.
After admission, the patient’s serum creatinine level pre-dialysis fell to 5.63 mg/dL (normal, 0.51–0.95 mg/dL) without any specific treatment. The serum calcium level was 2.21 mmol/L (reference, 2.20–2.65 mmol/L). A morning urinalysis revealed 2+ protein, 2+ glucose, urine specific gravity of 1.006, and normal blood glucose. Renal glycosuria, with normal serum phosphorus, normal serum uric acid, low serum bicarbonate levels, and continuous hypokalemia under severe renal insufficiency raised clinical suspicion of Fanconi syndrome. The protein level in a 24-h urine sample was elevated to 2.66 g/day (normal, 0.03–0.14 g/day). Urine protein electrophoresis revealed mixed overflow proteinuria, tubular proteinuria, and glomerular proteinuria. Serum protein electrophoresis revealed monoclonal gamma paraprotein (8.4 g/L). Both serum and urine immunofixation electrophoresis revealed restricted immunoglobulin G kappa (IgGkappa) and kappa light chain. Serum free light chain results were κ > 4850 mg/L (normal, 3.30–19.40 mg/L), free λ 61.8 mg/L (normal, 5.71–26.3 mg/L), and κ/λ > 78.48 (normal, 0.26–1.65). Ultrasound showed bilateral renal atrophy (right kidney, 8.7 cm in length; left kidney, 8.8 cm in length). Although the patient did not suffer any trauma, an X-ray of the lumbar spine revealed a pathological fracture of L1, which was not seen three weeks ago. MM was suspected due to the presence of monoclonal gamma paraprotein, a pathological fracture, anemia, and renal impairment. Kidney and bone marrow biopsies were performed.
Bone marrow aspirate showed plasma cells accounting for approximately 15% (including immature plasma cells account for 5%) of total marrow cellularity, with cytoplasmic granular inclusions and needle-shaped crystals . Flow cytometry analysis performed on a bone marrow aspirate sample identified a monotypic, cytoplasmic kappa light chain-restricted CD38+, CD138+ plasma cell population. Cytogenetic analysis revealed 46, XX. IGH/CCND1 translocation was confirmed by fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis, while IGH/MAF and IGH/FGFR3 translocations were not found. The above findings led to a diagnosis of MM, staged as Durie-Salmon IIB and Revised Multiple Myeloma International Staging System (R-ISS) III .
Renal biopsy revealed a total of 31 glomeruli, of which nine were globally sclerosed. Proximal tubular lesions were seen with focal atrophy and brush border disappearance. Eosinophilic needle-shaped crystals in the cytoplasm of the proximal tubular epithelial cells and podocytes were also observed. The same crystals were also noted in tubular cells shedded into tubular lumens and in some interstitial histiocytes and mesangial cells . Proximal tubular lumen was engorged by abundant small periodic acid–Schiff (PAS)-positive casts, which were granular rather than regularly fractured and homogeneous as seen in CN . The renal interstitium exhibited interstitial fibrosis. Diffuse lymphocytes, mononuclear cells, and histiocytes could be seen in the renal interstitium, without eosinophils. Congo red staining for amyloid deposition was negative. On immunohistochemistry, the histiocytes were positive for CD68 and kappa, and were negative for lambda ( and ). Direct immunofluorescence on frozen tissue was initially negative, but ultimately kappa positivity was confirmed with pronase digestion on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue . Electron microscopy showed irregular effacement of the podocyte foot processes. The number of lysosomes in the cytoplasm of the proximal tubular epithelial cells was significantly increased, and rods and needlelike crystalline materials composed of 20–40 nm fibrous materials were arranged in parallel and longitudinally. Granular and needle-shaped crystals could also be seen in the podocytes, mesangial cells, and histiocytes . To further distinguish the crystalline composition, immunoelectron microscopy was performed. This showed particulate kappa staining of the crystals and no staining for lambda . Kappa light chain-restricted CSH, LCPT, and LCCP was diagnosed. Although crystals also presented in the mesangial cells, no existing nomenclature was able to describe it.
A final diagnosis was assigned as MM with CSH involving both the bone marrow and kidney, with complications of LCPT and LCCP.