A 36 year-old pre-menopausal Asian woman previously in excellent health, presented with a three-month history of a progressively worsening tender right breast lump, with associated ulceration, induration, and erythema, draining serosanguinous fluid. She denied systemic symptoms, as well as any known recent fungal or tuberculosis exposure. The patient is a G2 P2002 who nursed her children without difficulty. She has had no history of breast disease, and her past medical and surgical histories are otherwise unremarkable. She denied tobacco use, any family history of breast diseases, use of any medications including oral contraceptives, or any known drug allergies. Physical examination was otherwise unremarkable with no palpable lymphadenopathy.
During initial presentation to an outside hospital, mammography and breast ultrasound revealed an increased density and ductal dilatation of the right breast with associated edematous changes. All laboratory and other radiological studies were otherwise normal. Although malignancy had not been excluded, the patient received a presumptive diagnosis of mastitis and was treated with a 7-day course of amoxicillin and cefadroxil without improvement. This was followed by a course of cefdinir and gatifloxacin, which was complicated by an antibiotic-induced erythema nodosum. As a result, antibiotics were discontinued and the patient was scheduled for an open breast biopsy. Interestingly, the patient's symptoms spontaneously resolved before tissue sampling was performed.
Two months after her initial presentation, a second similar lump appeared in the right breast . A repeat ultrasound of this area again demonstrated dilated ducts and debris. Bilateral breast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed regionally dilated ducts with prominent regional ductal and parenchymal plateau enhancement. Given these findings were not typical for mastitis, and clinical and radiological data could not exclude breast carcinoma, tissue sampling was performed. Microscopic examination revealed chronic inflammation and macrophage, giant histiocyte and epithelioid-like cellular infiltration, with cytologic features suggestive of a granulomatous process . Further histopathological analysis showed no evidence of carcinoma or abscess formation, and all cultures and stains for infectious organisms remained negative. Secondary to exclusion of malignancy, infection, and other causes, the patient was given the presumptive diagnosis of idiopathic granulomatous mastitis (IGM). She was treated with a 6-month tapered course of prednisone with an excellent response, and has since remained free from recurrence.