We report the case of a 29-year-old female patient who presented with deterioration of the upper visual field in the left eye.
The patient was diagnosed with SLE at the age of 22 years and was undergoing oral administration of immunosuppressants such as dexamethasone, tacrolimus, and mycophenolate mofetil for treatment. Family history included rheumatoid arthritis in the patient's grandmother.
Due to prolonged and worsening diarrhea, the patient was admitted to the Department of Internal Medicine and Connective Tissue Disorders at Osaka Medical College Hospital, Takatsuki City, Japan, in mid-July 2010 to undergo further tests. A blood sample obtained from the patient tested positive on a CMV pp65 antigen test (hereafter referred to as ‘C7-HRP’), and she was diagnosed with CMV colitis. Subsequently, the patient was administered intravenous ganciclovir in parallel with the immunosuppressant and steroid treatment for SLE. The patient's C7-HRP eventually tested negative and the intravenous ganciclovir was temporarily stopped; however, she later occasionally tested positive for C7-HRP and was administered intravenous ganciclovir each time for treatment. While still hospitalized in late August 2010, the patient suddenly became aware of a deterioration of the upper visual field in her left eye and was sent to the Department of Ophthalmology for examination.
Upon initial examination, the patient's visual acuity (VA) was 0.05 (1.2 × S-5.0D = C-2.75DA × 5°) OD and 0.04 (1.2 × S-5.5D = C-1.75 DA × 180°) OS. Intraocular pressure was 13 mm Hg in both eyes. Mild iritis in the anterior segment was observed in her left eye. Rhegmatogenous retinal detachment was found in the lower second quadrant of her left eye with obstructions of the blood vessels in the lower area of that eye, thus resulting in retinal thinning and necrosis . Yellowish-white granular exudate was also found in the retina around an area of necrosis. Yellowish-white granular exudate was also found in the retinal area of the right eye, yet with no retinal detachment . The patient was diagnosed with bilateral CMV retinitis based on the observations of her overall condition and ocular fundus findings.
Although the retinal detachment in the patient's left eye was encroaching on the macular area, internal medical treatment took priority, and we planned to perform a vitrectomy after the patient's overall condition had improved. Pars plana lensectomy and pars plana vitrectomy were performed on the patient's left eye on September 14, 2010, as the retinal detachment had already reached the macular area. The posterior vitreous had not yet detached and the vitreoretinal adhesion in the lower CMV retinitis area was robust. We therefore created an artificial posterior vitreous detachment using bimanual techniques . Pneumatic retinal reattachment surgery, intraocular laser photocoagulation, a peripheral encircling procedure, and a silicone oil tamponade were later performed to complete the operation. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing of the vitreous fluid obtained during surgery revealed CMV DNA.
In July 2011, the patient experienced rhegmatogenous retinal detachment in her right eye, and as with that for the left eye, pars plana lensectomy and pars plana vitrectomy, along with a silicone oil tamponade, were performed for treatment. A macular pucker formed in the patient's left eye, and in September 2011, she underwent silicone oil removal and secondary insertion of an intraocular lens (IOL), removing the macular pucker at the same time. However, the retinal detachment reoccurred after surgery, and in October 2011, the IOL was removed and silicone oil was once again injected. Silicone oil removal and secondary insertion of an IOL were performed on the patient's right eye in January 2012, and her postoperative progress has been favorable. As of March 2015, the patient's corrected VA was 0.8 OD and 0.15 OS.