A 58-year-old male was referred to the primary care because of pleurodynia. He was an obese smoker with a heavy medical history of hypertension, chronic kidney disease stage III, obstructive pulmonary disease, heart failure and atrial fibrillation. He reported a two-year history of hyperthyroidism treated with methimazole. The patient underwent a thorax CT, which revealed an extended goiter and extra pulmonary masses infiltrating the thoracic cage and the ribs . The masses were considered metastatic in origin, and the patient was referred to the oncology department of the hospital for additional imaging and staging. Bone scintigraphy indicated increased uptake in left scapula, ribs, left ileum and tibia. However, no primary tumor was identified from thorax, abdomen and brain CT. Biochemistry at the time revealed a correction for albumin calcium of 9.2 mg/dl (8.4–10.1), phosphorus at 2.38 mg/dl (2.5–4.5) and alkaline phosphatase 580 IU/L (30–120). The patient was then referred for an endocrine assessment. He was found to be clinically and biochemically euthyroid. Additional blood tests showed high PTH levels at 1184 pg/mL (15–65) and a mild vitamin D3 deficiency (17.3 ng/mL). The renal function was impaired (eGFR 50 – Stage 3A). Patient’s characteristics are presented in .
Taking into consideration the laboratory results, the diagnosis of secondary HP was made. Since imaging was inconclusive about the nature of bony lesions, it was decided to undergo a bone biopsy. The examined specimen revealed a morphologically bland fibroblastic spindle cell proliferation admixed with numerous osteoclastic giant cells. According to pathology, despite the absence of evident hemorrhage, in context, the appearance of the lesion was suggestive of bone changes due to HP. Therefore, the diagnosis of brown tumors was confirmed by histological examination .
The patient received supplementation with calcium, vitamin D, vitamin D analogues and cinacalcet. There was a significant improvement in the laboratory tests with a striking reduction of PTH levels at 103 pg/mL. Moreover, 18 months after the initiation of the treatment, a thorax CT was repeated and revealed a regression of the tumors in the thoracic cage (4.7x3.9 to 4.3 × 2.8 cm) and the ribs. The lesions appeared well defined and ossification had started .