The patient (JCAP) was a 43-year-old white male who had been a chronic abuser of alcohol for 25 years (two liters of distilled liquor/day), with an antecedent of acute pancreatitis five years before the present case report. He had been complaining of strong typical pain for three days, along with melena.
At admission to hospital, the following test results were noted: leukogram = 15,000 u/l, hemoglobin = 16 g/dl and amylase = 99 IU/l. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed signs of chronic pancreatitis and a bulky submucosal duodenal hematoma from the bulb to the third portion of the duodenum with intramural active bleeding in the region of the gastroduodenal artery . Upper digestive tract endoscopy revealed a large submucosal hematoma in the duodenum, without any active bleeding into the lumen .
On the following day, the hemoglobin level decreased to 12 g/dl and selective angioembolization was indicated. During angiography, active bleeding was detected . After embolization, no more signs of active bleeding were observed .
One day after this procedure, there was worsening of the pain. A CT scan showed signs of visceral perforation . Emergency laparotomy was warranted and revealed the following: an ischemic duodenum with a bulky wall hematoma and a 6-cm duodenal rupture from the bulb to the second portion of the duodenum, along with signs of acute pancreatitis. The duodenal rupture was closed, along with exclusion of the pylorus, and Roux-en-Y gastroenteroanastomosis was carried out.
The patient then progressed with a high-output duodenal fistula. Treatment consisting of parenteral nutrition, octreotide and antibiotic therapy was started, and this led to regression over a nine-day period. A control CT scan demonstrated regression of the hematoma, while the signs of chronic pancreatitis continued to be present, but without evidence of exacerbation . A contrasted upper gastrointestinal radiographic series showed exclusion of the pylorus and patent gastroenteroanastomosis. The patient was then followed up for six months, with uneventful evolution.