A 33-year-old man presented with a 1-month coughing illness and fever that lasted for 5 days. Before admission, the patient experienced expectoration of yellow sputum and antibiotic therapy for 2 weeks. There was no history of fever, rash or respiratory distress, and there was no family history of autoimmune or connective tissue disorders. Respiratory examinations revealed fine crackles in both lungs. Examination of other systems was unremarkable.
The laboratory investigation showed hemoglobin 140 g/L, leukocytes 3.9 × 109/L with a normal differential count, platelets 142 × 109/L, C-reactive protein 1.2 mg/L, and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 14 mm/h. Heterophil agglutination trial was negative. Serum biochemistry findings including liver and renal function were within normal limits. The results of cellular immunity assay showed a decrease in the CD4/CD8 ratio (0.63). Test results were negative for toxoplasma, cytomegalovirus (CMV), rubella, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), human herpes virus type 1 and human immunoddficiency virus (HIV). Also rheumatological and immunological tests were normal. These tests included antinuclear antibody, rheumatoid factor, antistreptolysin O, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody and the levels of serum C3 and C4 as well as IgG, IgA, IgE and IgM.
Bacteriological analysis of blood, sputum and urine did not reveal any pathogenic agents. Pulmonary function presented restrictive ventilatory functional disturbance. In addition, chest computed tomography (CT) demonstrated diffuse infiltrating lesions in both lungs, predominantly in the lower lobes .
With an initial diagnosis of bilateral pneumonia, moxifloxacin and cefepime were initiated. Eleven days after admission, a solitary lymph node was first found in the right anterior cervical chain. The lymph node was tender and measured 3 cm in diameter. At this point, the patients had leucopenia (4.3 × 109/L) and lymphopenia (0.8 × 109/L). The ESR was slightly accelerated to 40 mm/h. The serum C-reactive protein level was normal. The serum galactomannan enzyme immunoassay and 1, 3 β-glucan assays for diagnosis of invasive fungal infection were negative. Findings were negative for an intradermal tuberculin test, as well as for sputum and urine tests for the Mycobacterium tuberculosis. The serological test for coxsackie B virus suggested infection in the recent past.
A cervical lymph node biopsy showed normal lymph node architecture in some areas, but a few irregular necrotic areas with intense karyorrhexis. Around the necrotic areas, macrophages, plasma cells, histiocytes and lymphocytes were noted. No neutrophils were detected . No tuberculoid granuloma, caseating necrosis, or evidence of malignancy was found. Immunohistochemistry studies showed that the lymphoid cells adjacent to the necrotic foci were positive for CD3, LCA and CD45RO, but negative for CD20. CD79-positive cells were seen farther away from the necrotic foci. Histiocytic cells at the periphery of the necrotic foci were strongly positive for CD68. This histological pattern was suggestive of KFD .
Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid showed no increase in eosinophil or lymphocyte counts, but a decrease in the CD4/CD8 ratio (0.52). Lung biopsy by video-assisted thoracoscopy was performed 12 days post-admission and revealed granulation tissue in the alveolar spaces, with associated marked alveolar wall thickening and frequent metaplasia of bronchiolar and alveolar cells . The staining of reticular fiber, PAS and hexamethylenetetramine silver were negative. These findings of BAL and lung biopsy were compatible with COP [,].
After the diagnosis of KFD associated with COP, 45 mg/day prednisone was administered, with a gradual improvement in symptoms. A second HRCT was done, which showed marked resolution of the alveolar exudates , and cervical lymphadenopathy had resolved 8 days post-treatment. At 12 weeks follow-up, the patient remained well, with no other symptoms or lymph node enlargement.