A 61-year-old male was assessed by cardiac surgery in consideration for mitral valve surgery following a congestive heart failure presentation. Transthoracic echocardiography showed significant mitral valve calcification resulting in severe mitral regurgitation and moderate mitral stenosis. The right and left ventricle had mild dysfunctions with an ejection fraction of 46%. Further evaluation with transesophageal echocardiography revealed moderate aortic cusp calcification with moderate stenosis. Moderate tricuspid regurgitation was also noted. Coronary angiography revealed the presence of significant coronary artery disease with second diagonal ostial stenosis.
The patient’s medical history includes end-stage renal disease requiring intermittent hemodialysis, autoimmune cytopenia (severe thrombocytopenia, neutropenia) with mild responsiveness to preoperative steroids, New York Heart Association class III heart failure, hypertension, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, severe untreated sleep apnea, previous Grave’s disease diagnosis and atrial fibrillation. The patients’ preoperative blood work included a platelet count of 74 × 109/L, hemoglobin of 91 g/L and hematocrit of 29%. Preoperative creatinine was 598 umol/L and glomerular filtration rate (GFR) was 8 mL/min/1.73 m2.
The patient had mitral valve replacement, aortic valve replacement, tricuspid valve repair, single coronary artery bypass grafting and left atrial appendage clip. Given the complexity of the surgery, the anticipated prolonged length of cardiopulmonary bypass, the associated risk of significant vasoplegia and the preoperative kidney dysfunction, a decision was made to integrate the CytoSorb® cartridge into the cardiopulmonary bypass circuit. The device was inserted between the recirculation line (high-pressure line) and the venous reservoir of the CPB circuit. The cartridge was placed in a parallel fashion with the hemoconcentrator . The cartridge was primed and flushed with one liter of Ringer’s Lactate.
Following induction of anesthesia and prior to commencement of bypass, the patient required norepinephrine at 2 mcg/min for vasoactive support. Cardiopulmonary bypass was initiated and flow through the CytoSorb® began shortly after. Blood flow through the CytoSorb® was maintained from initiation of bypass until weaning, at which point the flow was stopped. Blood flow rates through the CytoSorb® were estimated to be between 200 and 230 mL/min. Anticoagulation was achieved using heparin with target activated clotting times (ACT) greater than 400 s, monitored every 20 to 30 min. Roughly 10 min into the bypass run, the patient required further vasoactive support and the norepinephrine infusion was increased to 5 mcg/min. The cross-clamp was applied and cardioplegia was administered using the Quest Myocardial Protection System™ 3 via retrograde and antegrade cardioplegia catheters. Myocardial quiescence was achieved in 62 s, with a total initial cardioplegia dose of 1480 mL. Cardioplegia was re-dosed every 10 to 15 min thereafter. Mean arterial blood pressures (MAP) were sustained around 45–50 mmHg with 5 mcg/min of norepinephrine for the first half hour of the bypass run. At the 40 min mark, MAP increased to a mean of 65–70 mmHg and the norepinephrine dose was reduced to 2 mcg/min. After one hour on bypass, MAP increased to 70–75 mmHg and norepinephrine was discontinued. Pressures above 60 mmHg were sustained for the remainder of the bypass run. Phenylephrine was bolused as required throughout the duration of bypass; however, additional need for vasoactive support was not required. Zero balance ultrafiltration was performed during bypass, with a total of 2.2 L of PrismaSol ‘0’ dialysate solution administered and 5.2 L of fluid removed via the hemoconcentrator. A total of 12.7 L of microplegia was delivered to ensure adequate myocardial protection.
The left atrial appendage was clipped first, using a #40 Gillinov-Cosgrove clip. A saphenous vein graft was then used to anastomose the second diagonal, after which the left atrium was opened to expose the mitral valve with a Cosgrove retractor. A cord-sparing technique was used to replace the mitral valve with a #29 Mosaic bioprosthesis. The left atrium was closed and the ascending aorta opened. A #25 Intuity valve was inflated in the standard fashion to replace the aortic valve. The ascending aorta was closed and the tricuspid valve was repaired with a #30 contour 3D ring under beating heart. The left atrium was then closed. Two ventricular and two atrial wires were inserted for epicardial pacing. In preparation for weaning from cardiopulmonary bypass, dobutamine and epinephrine drips were started at 7.5 mcg/kg/min and 5 mcg/min, respectively. Termination of bypass was uneventful. In an effort not to overload the right ventricle, leftover blood from the cardiopulmonary bypass circuit, including that of the CytoSorb®, was processed in a cell salvage device to be later transfused. Total bypass time was 154 min, with a cross-clamp time of 115 min. The patient required dobutamine 5 mcg/kg/min, norepinephrine 4 mcg/min, epinephrine 5 mcg/min and vasopressin 0.04 units/min for support 10 min post-bypass. Rotational thromboelastometry was performed to guide transfusion requirements. A total of 3 units of packed red blood cells (pRBC), 2 units of platelets and 1 unit of prothrombin complex concentrate were administered to treat perioperative anemia and coagulopathy. The patient was transferred to the cardiac intensive care unit on 5mcg/kg/min of dobutamine, 6 mcg/min of norepinephrine, 5mcg/min of epinephrine and 0.04 units/min of vasopressin. No adverse or any device-related side effects were documented during or after CytoSorb® treatment.
Dobutamine was discontinued within the first postoperative hour. Vasopressin was stopped 24 h postoperatively. By the end of the second postoperative day, norepinephrine drips had also been discontinued; however, the patient still required epinephrine at 4 mcg/min for vasoactive support . Epinephrine was weaned and eventually discontinued 48 h postoperatively. Early postoperative blood work showed somewhat improved kidney function, with a creatinine of 394 umol/L and a GFR of 13 mL/min/1.73 m2 . Lactate levels peaked at 3.4 mmol/L on the 6th postoperative hour and quickly normalized over the next 24 h. Following the first postoperative day, the patient had received an additional 3 units of pRBC, 2 units of plasma and 1 unit of platelets. Total chest tube drainage was measured to be 1080 mL and surgical drains were removed on the second postoperative day. The patient was extubated 48 h post-surgery. Hemodialysis treatments were resumed on the third postoperative day. The patient was transferred to the ward on the 6th postoperative day and discharged on the 11th postoperative day.