A 21-year-old woman was referred due to secondary amenorrhea. Her past medical history was significant for persistent ductus arteriosus (PDA), she underwent surgery when she was 11 months old, and she was diagnosed with type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM), which was incidentally detected at the age of 18 years. At that time, the physical examination findings were as follows: height of 155 cm, body weight of 80 kg, body mass index (BMI) of 33.3 kg/m2, and BP of 108/76 mmHg. After being diagnosed with type 2 DM, the patient took metformin for a few months, and she tried to lose weight through exercise and diet control. Recently, although she had not taken metformin for several months, her blood glucose was within normal ranges. At this visit, a physical examination showed a height of 155.3 cm and a weight of 53.7 kg, with a BMI of 22.3 kg/m2. Her BP was 130/80 mmHg, with a regular heart rate of 80 beats/min, and her body temperature was 36.5 °C. The development of her breasts and her pubic hair were Tanner stage 2 and stage 3, respectively. The female internal genitalia were infantile. However, there was no webbed neck or skeletal deformities.
Laboratory tests revealed a fasting glucose level of 88 mg/dL, HbA1C 4.8%, C-peptide 6.34 ng /mL(reference range, 0.4–4 ng/mL), and anti-glutamate decarboxylase (GAD) antibody < 0.5 U/mL(reference range, 0–1.0 U/mL). Hormonal tests showed a thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level of 2.45 μIU/mL (reference range, 0.3–5.0 μIU/mL), a T3 level of 169.8 ng/dL (reference range, 80–200 ng/dL), a free T4 level of 1.15 ng/dL (reference range, 0.75–2.0 ng/dL), a prolactin level of 8.18 ng/mL (reference range, 1.9–19.7 ng/mL), a luteinizing hormone (LH) level of 20.2 mIU/mL, a follicular stimulating hormone (FSH) level of 100 mIU/mL, a testosterone level of 0.01 ng/mL (reference range, 0–0.77 ng/mL), an oestradiol level of 1.06 μg/dL(reference range, 30–333 μg/dL). A small uterus was detected, and both ovaries could not be identified on pelvis ultrasonography and computed tomography (CT) . However, there was no renal abnormality . A chromosome study finally showed a karyotype of 46,X,i (X)(q10) Turner syndrome. Transthoracic echography (TTE) revealed no residual PDA shunt flow and bicuspid valve. Bone mineral density (BMD) using dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry showed an age-matched Z score of − 0.7 at the lumbar spine. She was regularly followed up for type 2 DM and took ethinyl oestradiol/drospirenone for regular menstruation.
Three years after the diagnosis of Turner syndrome, the patient complained of mild headache, intermittent palpitation, and dizziness without neurological deficit. Her measured BP was 166/100 mmHg at the doctor’s office and 145/90 mmHg at home. Her BP at the time of the Turner syndrome diagnosis (3 years ago) was within normal ranges. There was no radio-femoral delay which meant delay between the radial pulse and femoral pulse suggesting coarctation of aorta. Recent TTE showed no residual PDA shunt flow and cardiac valve abnormality. There was no family history of hypertension. A thyroid function test and chemistry were within normal ranges. We consider other important secondary causes of hypertension like a pheochromocytoma. Thus, hormonal studies were performed and the results showed increased serum norepinephrine, serum normetanephrine, and 24 h urine norepinephrine . We performed an abdominal computed tomography (CT) to confirm the location of pheochromocytoma. Abdominal CT showed a 1.9 cm right adrenal mass, measuring 42 Hounsfield units pre-contrast, heterogenous contrast enhancement with a contrast wash-out ratio of 65% . According to her clinical manifestations, biochemical results and atypical CT phenotype, I-131 meta-iodo-benzylguanidine (MIBG) scintigraphy was performed to detect of extra-adrenal pheochromocytoma. The results showed MIBG uptake on the right adrenal gland . She had no family history of pheochromocytoma. After pre-operatively administering phenoxybenzamine, laparoscopic adrenalectomy was performed. Final pathology revealed that the pheochromocytoma extended to the adrenal cortex but was well-circumscribed. The cut surface of the tumour was tan and darkened with focal haemorrhage. The tumour showed characteristic “Zellballen” architecture. The tumour cells were larger than normal chromaffin cells, and their cytoplasm was granular. Immunostaining for S-100 protein demonstrates the sustentacular framework surrounding the tumour cells and positive for chromogranin . Postoperative blood pressure was recorded as 120/70 mmHg without any anti-hypertensive drugs. Postoperative hormonal tests revealed decreased catecholamine levels . The postoperative course was uneventful, and no recurrence developed via biochemical tests and abdominal CT until 24 months.