We present a 70-year-old Caucasian woman with a rapidly growing tumor on her right forearm , which had appeared 2 months earlier, allegedly after an unidentified insect bite. A few weeks later, she noticed a small red nodule in that area. During the next few weeks, the nodule started growing rapidly so she was referred to our hospital. She had no other complaints. Physical examination revealed a solitary, firm, non-ulcerated, livid-red nodule 3 cm in diameter. The regional lymph nodes were not enlarged. Routine hematology tests revealed an elevated white blood cell (WBC) count (17 × 109/L) with 75% lymphocytes, suggesting a lymphoproliferative disorder.
Fine needle aspiration (FNA) was performed in two separate areas of the nodule and smears were stained in accordance with the May-Gruenwald-Giemsa method. Both specimens showed an abundance of relatively monomorphic, atypical, epithelial-appearing cells without visible nucleoli, lying alone and in clusters. Occasional mitoses were evident. There were a few lymphoid cells in the background, very scant fibrous stroma and some peripheral blood. Nuclear molding was prominent in these cells and the cytoplasm was scant and rarely preserved . Malignant cells showed strong staining with epithelial antigen (Ber-Ep4) , while leukocyte common antigen (LCA) was used for leukocytes. Malignant cells showed strong positivity for epithelial marker, while LCA marked only a few scattered lymphoid cells in the background. Diagnosis of epithelial malignant tumor with neuroendocrine morphologic features indicated Merkel cell carcinoma.
Simultaneously with the FNA of the cutaneous tumor, a peripheral blood smear was analyzed. This showed a lymphocytosis (75% of lymphocytes). Bone marrow aspiration and flow cytometric analyses confirmed the diagnosis of a low-grade B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Right axillary region ultrasound indicated two enlarged lymph nodes which showed reactive changes on histopathological examinations. Further diagnostic tests did not reveal lymphadenopathy, hepatomegaly or splenomegaly. Whole body skeletal scintigraphy imaging did not indicate any irregularities. In our patient, CLL was in Rai stage 0, so there was no need for active treatment.
During 3 weeks of hospital treatment, we noticed the spontaneous regression of the tumor to half of its original size . Surgical excision and sentinel lymph node biopsy were then carried out. Radical excision with 2 cm of tumor-free margins was performed under general anesthesia. The sentinel lymph nodes did not contain MCC.
Histopathological analysis of the regressed tumor, stained with hematoxylin and eosin, revealed that the tumor cells were completely replaced by mononuclear cells. An immunohistochemical study was performed with formalin-fixed and paraffin embedded material, using the avidin-biotin peroxidase method (all antibodies from Dako Japan, Co. Ltd, Kyoto). Immunolabeling of infiltrating lymphocytes was positive for CD3+ T cells , while there were a few B cells. Infiltrating macrophages were positive for CD68+ . Electronic microscopy of the excised tumor showed histiocytic infiltration, with no trace of epithelial cells .
The patient was discharged from hospital 7 days after the surgery and was referred to local radiotherapy. She was re-admitted to our hospital for an evaluation 6 months after the initial presentation. Her CLL was stable. Results of an FNA around the excision site showed no recurrence of the tumor and no lymph node involvement was noticed.