A 69-year-old male was admitted to the emergency department for oppressive chest pain with wheezing and sweating. His past medical history was significant for smoking and arterial hypertension. Two days earlier, the patient was diagnosed with hyperthyroidism linked to Graves’s disease. Before then, he reported occasional episodes of palpitations associated with sweating. Ultrasound analysis of the thyroid gland documented intense vascularization. Thyroid hormones and antibodies to TSH receptors were increased. His medical therapy included bisoprolol 1.25 mg, olmesartan 20 mg, and for 2 days methimazole 5 mg t.i.d. On admission, his blood pressure was 250/130 mmHg. The electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia at 130 b.p.m., first degree atrio-ventricular block, signs of left ventricular hypertrophy with inverted T wave in V4–V6. The echocardiogram revealed left ventricular apical and para-apical akinesia with an estimated left ventricular ejection fraction (EF) of 23% and a global longitudinal strain (GLS) of −8.1%. Initial serum hs-troponin I level was 1211 ng/dL (n.v. < 34). Urapidil, nitrate, and diuretic therapy were commenced. As oppressive chest pain associated with diaphoresis and elevated blood pressure values persisted, coronary angiography and computed tomography (CT) angiogram were performed in order to rule out an obstructive coronary artery disease and aortic dissection, respectively. Both exams resulted in negative. Interestingly, a CT scan incidentally demonstrated a left adrenal mass which was compatible with a pheochromocytoma (non-contrast density greater than 10 HU and absolute washout less than 60%; , see arrow) and an enlarged thyroid gland with an uneven appearance. The patient was transferred to the cardiac intensive care unit. Burch–Wartofsky score was highly suggestive of thyroid storm (65 points). Urapidil and esmolol infusion and high doses of oral methimazole prompted symptomatic improvement and normalization of blood pressure and heart rate. Partial recovery of EF (41%) and GLS (−11.2%) of the left ventricle was documented at 2D echocardiography after 24 h of alpha and beta-blocker therapy. The use of illicit drugs has been excluded. A panel of blood and urinary tests was performed to better evaluate the adrenal and thyroid function: normetanephrine 5.30 mg/24 h (n.v. 0.08–0.45), metanephrine 15.80 mg/24 h (n.v. 0.05–0.34), TSH <0.01 μUI/mL (n.v. 0.35–4), fT4 2.00 ng/dL (n.v. 0.7–1.48), fT3 3.60 pg/mL (n.v. 1.71–3.71), free urinary cortisol 150 ug/24 h (n.v. 4.30–176), and normal plasma aldosterone levels, spot and 24 h sodiuria and potassiuria. Calcium, phosphorus, alkaline phosphatase, vitamin D3, parathyroid hormone, calcitonin, were found within normal limits, therefore excluding a type 2 multiple endocrine neoplasia. The patient continued his hospitalization to better monitor symptoms and vital parameters. After 20 days of anti-thyroid and alpha and beta-blocker therapy, the patient has achieved complete haemodynamic stability and he underwent left adrenalectomy. The histological examination of the specimen confirmed the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma. Hyperthyroidism was well controlled with medical therapy and radioactive iodine and surgery were excluded. After 2 days, the patient was discharged with the following therapy: methimazole 5 mg t.i.d., ramipril 5 mg, and bisoprolol 5 mg.
Further improvement of left ventricular contractility occurred 3 months later with an EF of 50.5% and a GLS of −16.4% .
A cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) performed after 6 months detected normal EF and mild meso-subepicardial late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) in inferolateral segments. No oedema was found .
After 9 months the patient is asymptomatic, with good control of thyroid and heart disease and is continuing the discharge therapy. An annual follow-up has been scheduled.