A 17-year-old Sri Lankan girl, recently diagnosed with SLE and class IV lupus nephritis was treated with intravenous (IV) methylprednisolone and cyclophosphamide according to the EuroLupus regime. Four days after the 1st dose of cyclophosphamide, she developed a febrile illness associated with vomiting and worsening of generalized edema.
The patient presented to hospital on the 6th day of fever. Examination at this time revealed gross ascites and bilateral pleural effusions. Her blood pressure was 140/100 mmHg consistent with her baseline blood pressure, and there was no skin rash on presentation. The working diagnosis on initial presentation was a relapse of nephrotic syndrome.
Initial laboratory investigations showed a white blood cell (WBC) count of 9.28 × 103/uL (lymphocyte count-1.92), hemoglobin of 7.7 g/dL and a platelet count of 119. The bicytopenia was similar to her baseline hematologic parameters from 3 weeks back when SLE was diagnosed. The ESR was 35 mm in the 1st hour and C-reactive protein was 0.2 mg/L. Urine protein creatinine ratio at this time was 8.94 mg/g, serum albumin was 1.5 g/dL and serum creatinine was 3.44 mg/dL.
SLE Disease Activity Index was calculated to be 5, which was consistent with active disease. Management was commenced for a relapse of nephrotic syndrome and acute kidney injury (AKI) with increased steroid dosing and administration of intravenous diuretics and albumin.
Fever persisted for 8 days. On days 6 and 7 of fever, the platelet count remained static above 100. However, on day 8 of fever, her platelet count started demonstrating a downward trend with counts below 100, along with a new-onset lymphopenia. Hemoglobin remained static. The blood picture showed evidence of a viral infection. Due to the persistently dropping platelet counts and lymphopenia, despite escalation of immunosuppressive therapy, an alternate cause for thrombocytopenia apart from lupus was sought. NS1 antigen was done on day 9 of fever to test for DF. It was reported positive.
Despite the presence of 9 days of fever, the day of DF/DHF was taken as day 3–4 at the time of NS1 Ag positivity, considering the maximum duration NS1 remains in circulation. The initial fever was attributed to the SLE flare and DF was concluded to have developed as an unrelated subsequent event due to NS1 positivity.
The presence of already significant ascites and pleural effusions with hypoalbuminemia as part of nephrotic syndrome, confounded the identification of the onset of the critical phase. The onset of leakage was timed to be at the point of settling of fever with a drop in the platelet count to less than 100. The leakage was therefore, timed to be on the 3rd day of DF and the baseline PCV was 24%.
The total fluid quota of 4600 ml in 48 h was theoretically allowed for this patient after consultation with the nephrology team. But a more restrictive input was given so as not to worsen the extravascular fluid retention, while going through a nephrotic flare and AKI. Therefore, the allowed hourly input was 80 ml/h. The intravenous loop diuretic (furosemide) previously prescribed for the nephrotic syndrome was continued during the critical phase, due to the significant extravascular fluid accumulation with hypertension. Intravenous albumin was given additionally for maintenance of oncotic stability. The patient was closely monitored for impending shock in DHF due to the restrictive fluid approach and use of diuretics.
Significant events in the ascending limb were the development of intermenstrual bleeding associated with a PCV drop to 18.8% and a hemoglobin drop from 7.7 g/dL to 6.3 g/dL which required the transfusion of 1 unit of blood at the 23rd hour. She remained hemodynamically stable during this period and her routine antihypertensive medications were continued. A blood picture done at this time due to dropping hemoglobin and platelets, excluded microangiopathic hemolytic anemia (MAHA).
A venous blood gas was done to look for acidosis, as acidosis could potentially worsen hemodynamic instability in DHF. This revealed a high anion gap metabolic acidosis compatible with the ongoing AKI, and was corrected with intravenous sodium bicarbonate.
In the descending limb, at the 35th hour, there was a bedside PCV rise of > 20% (from 18.8 to 32%) without hemodynamic instability. Assuming a miscalculation of the onset of leakage and the actual timing presumed to be close to the peak of DHF, fluid bolus of 250 ml was given with gradual tailing off. Three hours following this, the patient developed desaturation and started coughing up pink frothy sputum indicating fluid overload secondary to the fluid bolus. Further supporting this, a bed side ultrasound scan revealed a distended inferior vena cava and B-lines in the lungs suggestive of pulmonary edema. Due to the pulmonary edema and consequent type 1 respiratory failure, she was intubated and ventilated. During these events, the patient remained hemodynamically stable and urine output was maintained at 1 ml/kg/h.
Intravenous diuretics were continued for the pulmonary edema. But, as the serum creatinine was noted to be rising during the critical phase from 3.45 mg/dL to 5.28 mg/dL, the patient was initiated on continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) to treat nephrogenic pulmonary edema.
The total amount of fluid used for the critical phase was 3150 cc.
During the course of the critical phase, her investigations were as follows :
WBC showed an upward trend, despite a few fluctuations. The lymphopenia recovered. Platelets too showed an initial downward trend, then started rising during the descending limb. Hemoglobin dropped close to the peak and rose with the transfusion of one pint of blood.
During the convalescence, the patient remained intubated for 36 h post- critical phase. She remained hemodynamically stable and was continued on continuous renal replacement therapy till extubation.
Figure outlines the sequence of clinical events.