A 58-year-old man first presented with pain in the left upper jaw. Medical history included polyarthrosis with secondary arthritis treated with hydroxychloroquine. After 2 weeks, the upper left second molar was extracted by his dentist. Three days later, routine blood examination by the rheumatologist showed a highly increased C-reactive protein (CRP) level, which was interpreted as a maxillary infection and treated with clindamycin for 5 days.
Six weeks later he experienced sudden diplopia and progressive pain in the left temporal/frontal region and behind the left eye. On Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of the brain and jaw region only a small uncomplicated lipoma near the parotid gland was found. He was admitted to the rheumatology department on suspicion of giant cell arthritis. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was normal, CRP was only mildly elevated and biopsy of the temporal artery was negative. Nonetheless, the pain and diplopia responded well to a three-day course of high dose intravenous steroids (1000 mg/day).
Within a week after cessation of steroids he experienced an increase in pain and diplopia and was admitted to the neurology department for further evaluation. On neurologic examination, there was an abduction deficit but no signs of meningitis. Cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) was normal and MR Venography (MRV) showed no pathology of the dural venous sinuses. Serologic tests were negative for Borrelia burgdorferi and Treponema pallidum (Venereal Disease Research Laboratory test and Rapid Plasma Reagin test). Ophthalmic examination was unremarkable but orthoptic evaluation confirmed the abduction deficit with over-elevation in adduction of the left eye, suggestive of a mechanical component . Computed Tomography (CT) imaging of the orbit showed a defect in the left lamina papyracea, closely related to the left medial rectus muscle, with prolapse of orbital fat into the ethmoid sinus. Also, the medial rectus muscle was slightly enlarged . The findings were interpreted to be either an occult trauma to the medial orbital wall with reactive myositis, or an auto-immune orbital myositis. Oral steroids (60 mg initially) were prescribed and he was referred to the department of oral and maxillofacial surgery for evaluation. On examination, the extraction site of the upper left second molar was unremarkable and there were no complaints in that region. During surgical exploration of the left medial wall region there were no signs of infection or abnormal tissue for biopsy. The appearance of the bony defect corresponded well to the suspected traumatic cause and the medial wall was uneventfully reconstructed using a polydioxanone (PDS) sheet. Postoperatively the ocular motility improved and prisms were prescribed. The headaches, however, returned and he was referred back to the neurologist for further evaluation.
After 2 weeks the diplopia worsened as the steroids were tapered to 20 mg. In addition to the slight residual abduction deficit of the left eye, orthoptic evaluation now demonstrated impaired abduction and elevation of the right eye . Neurological examination was otherwise unremarkable. ESR and white blood cell (WBC) count were increased (58 mm/h and 23.7 × 109/L respectively), while anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA) and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) were negative. New MRI and CT scans were performed which showed enlargement of the inferior rectus muscle of the right eye, surrounded by an inflammatory fat infiltration . These findings fitted the previous suspected diagnosis of (auto-immune) orbital myositis. Steroid dosage was initially increased to 60 mg and then tapered.
Seven months after the initial presentation, he presented with a transient right hemiparesis and dysarthria. On a CT scan a slightly increased density in the suprasellar cistern was found but no signs of cerebral ischemia or hemorrhage. A Fludeoxyglucose Positron Emmision Tomography (FDG-PET) scan showed increased cerebral activity and at the skull base, but no evident vasculitis. One out of six blood cultures showed Staphylococcus aureus growth, which was considered to be a contamination.
After being transferred to the university hospital, further evaluation was initiated. Protein levels in the CSF were elevated 25 times the normal value and cytology showed signs of an acute inflammation with increased neutrophil levels, but no microorganisms could be identified through Gram stain and culture. On a new MRI scan, abnormalities at the skull base, cerebrum and brainstem were found, indicating basal meningitis, together with bilateral thalamic infarcts. Also it now showed a lesion in the right orbit, suggestive of an abscess . The imaging results and the highly increased protein levels in the CSF suggested tuberculous meningitis. However, as he had recently travelled to Indonesia, other viral/bacterial aetiologies were considered and broad-spectrum antibiotics (amoxicillin and ceftriaxone) and aciclovir together with antimycobacterial therapy (isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide and ethambutol) and dexamethasone was commenced. The orbital abscess fitted the presumed diagnosis of tuberculosis but, more importantly, his poor clinical condition did not permit biopsy of the lesion for confirmation. Further evaluation for tuberculous meningitis was initiated. For both CSF and sputum, Auramine staining and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for Mycobacterium tuberculosis were negative. Interferon-gamma release assay was uninterpretable. Bacterial, mycobacterial and fungal cultures were obtained from blood, CSF and sputum. Serologic testing for toxoplasmosis showed increased IgG-, but normal IgM-levels, together with negative PCR for Toxoplasma gondii in CSF, indicating an earlier exposure but no current infection. To rule out lymphoma, CSF samples showed no monoclonal B-cell or abnormal T-cell populations. Despite treatment the patient deteriorated. After 2 weeks there was an acute clinical deterioration and CT showed an extensive intracranial hemorrhage. All treatment was discontinued and he deceased shortly after (Additional file ).
Post-mortem the mycobacterial cultures of CSF, sputum and blood were negative.16S rRNA PCR returned positive for the CSF samples, but further sequencing was uninterpretable. During autopsy there were no signs of mycobacterial infection. There were, however, signs of meningoencephalitis with vasculitis and septic thromboembolism based on gram-positive filamentous microbes such as Actinomyces or Nocardia . Further distinction between the two could not be made histologically and the paraffin embedded specimens allowed no further genetic determination by sequencing. Unfortunately, the autopsy application lacked information on the orbital lesions and as such this region was not explored during the autopsy.
All imaging studies were reexamined. In two of the MRI scans (performed 2 months after the initial presentation) a soft tissue mass was now identified in the left infratemporal fossa, together with subtle abnormal signal intensities at the left skull base and the left cavernous sinus . In an MRI scan performed at a later stage, the abnormal intensity at the infratemporal fossa and skull base was less evident, but there was bilateral enlargement of the cavernous sinus and involvement of the pituitary gland . We concluded that the intracranial and intraorbital actinomycotic infection appeared to have originated from an odontogenic maxillary infection.