A 27-year-old male was involved in a traffic accident that resulted in a left-sided brachial plexus injury resulting in avulsion of the C6, C7, and C8 nerve roots. He sustained a full paralysis of the left arm accompanied by a loss of pain and temperature sensation on the right side of the body. He underwent reconstructive surgery without any functional improvement. After 6 to 7 years he developed progressive worsening myelopathy (e.g., increased stiffness/gait difficulty, atrophy) in the left leg.
Neurological examination revealed a complete, paralysis of the C6-, C7- and C8-innervated muscle groups of the left arm with areflexia and sensory loss. In the left leg, there was new atrophy of the quadriceps and gastrocnemius muscle with hyperreflexia and a diffuse mild paresis with a foot drop. There was additional sensory loss on the right side of the body starting at the T4-dermatome. The gait was spastic on the left side.
T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (1.5 T) revealed left-sided SCH at the C7 root level; this was characterized by anterior left-sided displacement of the spinal cord towards the C8 root foramen with stretching and flattening of the cord . MR myelography demonstrated left-sided displacement of the spinal cord due to SCH as well as a prominent myelocoele at level C6-C7, the site of the prior traumatic root avulsion .
The patient underwent a C6-C7 laminectomy which revealed a pseudomeningocele at the C6-C7 on the left side. Upon opening the dura in the midline, the spinal cord was covered with a thickened arachnoid. It was herniated into the pseudomeningocele at the C7 root level and there were accompanying adhesions. The herniated spinal cord was reduced intradurally , and was covered with a Neuropatch membrane wrapped around the spinal cord (between the spinal cord and the dura, e.g. according to the Batzdorf technique) [Figures -]. The dura was then closed using 4-0 monofilament sutures.
The postoperative course was uneventful and the neurological symptoms improved clearly; there was an increase in strength in the left leg and he was able to walk more normally at 6 and 12 weeks of follow-up.