A 37-year-old male patient was diagnosed with recurrent atypical clear cell meningioma of the foramen magnum, cervical spine (C1-C2 level), and lumbar spine, confirmed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The preoperative MRI also revealed hydrocephalus decurrent of the tumor compression of the fourth ventricle. The first surgery procedure was performed in late 2014 to allocate a VPS system. After 1 month, in early 2015, resection surgery of the meningioma in the foramen magnum and in the cervical spine was executed. The patient had no neurologic complications in the immediate postoperative time in any of the two occasions.
However, he returned to outpatient clinic with dizziness and headache 20 days after the last surgery. A new brain MRI was performed and exhibited the ventricular catheter outside the ventricular space. Therefore, surgery was needed to relocate another catheter. Only the intracranial catheter was replaced and reconnected with the rest of the former system, which was still functional. The symptoms resolved after the procedure and the patient was discharged without further complications. Between 2015 and 2020, he maintained in observational follow-up with MRI.
In early 2020, as the cervical intradural extramedullary tumor portion revealed relapse in the MRI, a fourth surgical procedure was required. The same occurred with no obstacles in the postoperative time. At the end of the same year, the patient developed dermal-epidermal atrophy at the thoracic-abdominal level leading to an externalization of the distal catheter, resolved only with antibiotic therapy.
About 2 months after this incident, there was an alteration in the catheter’s trajectory, with the formation of an abscess in the left flank , which later fistulized to the external environment . The patient arrived at the outpatient clinic reporting that a family member visualized a tubular structure manifesting itself through the orifice of the lesion. At the time, examinations were performed, among which an abdominal CT scan revealed hyperdensity in subcutaneous cellular tissue and muscles of the left flank, as well as an anomalous distal catheter path in the retroperitoneal region [-]. A soft-tissue ultrasound was also performed identifying, in the upper lumbar trigone, a muscle herniation (Grynfeltt hernia) .
Urgent surgery was indicated to remove the catheter and exchange it. During surgery, an attempt was made to find the tip of the catheter in the region of the left flank together with the general surgery team. The fistulous pathway was dissected, but it was not possible to identify the distal catheter. Thus, it was decided to section the catheter in the anterior thoracic region and pull the distal catheter to remove it. After removal, the proximal portion was tested with negative pressure to verify the functioning of the ventricular shunt system, however, there was no CSF drainage. Therefore, the proximal tip was closed and covered in the subcutaneous region of the anterior thorax. The abdominal region was left with a Penrose drain and the tip of the distal catheter was sent to culture as well as the fluid collected in the thoracic part of the catheter.
The decision of leaving the thoracic and cranial part of the VPS system was owning to an elevate risk of bleed in the entire system removal and the absence of the systemic and neurologic infectious signs. The aerobic and anaerobic cultures were negative which led to neurosurgical team to maintain the conservative conduct. The patient was kept under neurological and infectious surveillance, showing no signs of meningism. He was discharged after 5 days of hospitalization, with only a few scars in the thoracic-abdominal level .