Here, the authors present the case of a 18-year-old male German pupil who developed a severe catatonic syndrome over 2.5 years. The catatonic syndrome presented with symptoms of mutism (the patient did not speak at all during the course of the disease), catalepsy and rigor, echo phenomena, and intermittent states of psychomotor agitation (the patient would run up and down the hallway in an excited manner). Further, he developed fecal and urinary incontinence, displayed impaired perception and formal thought disorder, exhibited severe concentration and attention deficits, and reported delusions (e.g., he thought he was telepathically controlled) and auditory hallucinations hearing commenting voices (e.g., he heard songs and the voice of a classmate that would tell him funny things). The symptoms initially began with cognitive deficits and seizure-like states with laughing. An epileptic examination by telemetry did not reveal any evidence of gelastic seizures. Auditory hallucinations probably existed for about 1.5 years. In addition, the patient developed an increased muscle tone and cramps of the tongue for half a year. These were interpreted as tardive dyskinesias after risperidone intake. At that time, due to severe abulia and akinetic mutism he had to be fed via stomach tube and in retrospect probably also suffered from headache.
The diagnostic examinations were carried out at first presentation in our tertiary care hospital, approximately 2.5 years after symptom onset. The structural brain MRI was normal . There were no white matter or contrast-enhanced lesions. A routine EEG depicted intermittent, generalized, but frontally accentuated slowing. The independent component analyses (ICA) revealed sharp waves (component 4) and intermittent rhythmic delta activity (IRDA, component 5 + 6, ). In the serum, increased ANA titers (1:800) without specificity against a defined cluster of extractable nuclear antigens (ENA) including double-stranded (ds)-DNA were found. The patient’s basic CSF analytic results (white blood cell count, albumin quotient, IgG-index, and oligoclonal bands) were normal. No antibodies against the intracellular (synaptic) antigens Yo, Hu, CV2/CRMP5, Ri, Ma1/2, Tr, Zic4, GAD65, and amphiphysin were found. Initially, anti-Sox1 autoantibodies were once weakly positive, in the course no more. Antibodies against various well-characterized neuronal cell surface antigens (NMDA-R, LGI1, CASPR2, AMPA1/2-R, GABA-B-R, DPPX) were also negative. However, in his serum and CSF, autoantibody binding to granule cells in the granule cell layer of the cerebellum and to neurites of hippocampal interneurons with a somatodendritic staining pattern against an unknown neuronal epitope were found in addition to an ANA pattern . An FDG PET examination of his brain showed no relevant regional hypermetabolism (suggestive of active inflammation) or hypometabolism (as a possible sequel of inflammation or degeneration) aside from mild relative striatal hypermetabolism, compatible with ongoing neuroleptic medication . A whole-body FDG PET/computer tomography (CT) detected no metabolic or structural pathologies suggestive of malignancy or inflammation. All diagnostic investigations and findings are summarized in .
Past medical history was negative for in-utero or birth complications, febrile convulsions or epileptic seizures, inflammatory brain diseases, relevant systemic infections, or craniocerebral traumata with unconsciousness. Since the first decade, he suffered from autism spectrum disorder with difficulties in social cognition, communication and interaction with peers like playing with other kids, ritualized repetition of everyday situations/dialogues, and special interests for automatic machines and trains. He had no history of autoimmune disease, infection, cancer, or other relevant somatic disorders. His family history (for parents and grandparents, he has no siblings) was devoid of any diagnosed psychiatric disorders. His mother suffers from psoriasis. The paternal grandfather died of a glioblastoma, the maternal grandfather had an unclear tumor disease of the eye.
The classical neuroleptic treatment with risperidone, olanzapine, and amisulpride, as well as treatment with lorazepam, did not lead to relevant improvement. An increase in extrapyramidal motor symptoms was observed with both risperidone and amisulpride application in a dose-related extent. Under valproate treatment, the mutism improved slightly (so that basic communication became possible). Of the three different IRDA components visible before valproate , only one single left frontal component was still visible in the ICA after valproate. Due to an increase in weight as a probable side effect of valproate, the medication was changed to lamotrigine. Because of the refractory disease course and the suspected autoimmune origin, the diagnosis of a probable autoimmune psychosis was made, and immunosuppressive treatment was initiated. Treatment consisted of high-dose glucocorticoid pulse therapy (1,000 mg methylprednisolone daily for five days), followed by oral treatment and stepwise glucocorticoid tapering. Plasma exchange (eight cycles) was used to rapidly decrease autoantibody concentrations. For maintenance treatment the B-cell depleting anti-CD20 antibody rituximab was given intravenously in a dose of 2x1,000 mg within 14 days and subsequently 1,000 mg every six months. The treatment steps were carried out in succession. Following high-dose glucocorticoid treatment and plasma exchange, slight improvements were observed. His incontinence improved and he made considerable progress in his ability to communicate. At the first six-month follow-up (the admission was made for the third rituximab treatment), the patient had gone back to school to gain structure in his daily routine (initially 3 h, later the whole day). A complete neuropsychological testing was possible for the first-time half a year after initiation of immunosuppressive treatment, showing ongoing deficits in alertness and working memory and particularly in divided attention and set shifting (, t2). His formal thinking and cognitive functions were still compromised; intermittently there were long response latencies. Auditory hallucinations remained, however, on a reduced level, delusions did not occur any more. In summary, there was a relevant clinical improvement, but the patient was still significantly limited in his ability to function in everyday life. The follow-up MRI was unchanged, and CSF autoantibody testing showed reduced titers of the anti-neuronal autoantibody, although still clearly detectable. illustrates the course of the EEG slowing (IRDAs) under treatment and after a 6-months follow-up period.