A 61-year-old man with a history of PE fibrillation requiring warfarin anticoagulation and hypertension presented to an outside hospital with 8 months of progressive neck pain and right upper extremity pain, which had worsened to the point of awakening him at night. Multiple attempts at physical therapy, chiropractic manipulation, and other nonoperative modalities had failed to relieve this patient's pain. His neurologic examination demonstrated 3/5 strength in the right triceps and pectoralis major, with obvious muscle atrophy; there were no signs of myelopathy, hyperreflexia, pathologic reflexes, or gait disturbance. Records from this community practice—including but not limited to preoperative assessment, imaging studies, and operative report—were reviewed extensively following his ultimate transfer to our facility and are presented here in a retrospective review.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the cervical spine demonstrated a moderate near-midline left herniation of the C5-C6 intervertebral disk compressing the cervical cord, as well as a large right paramedian herniation of the C6-C7 intervertebral disk compressing the right C7 nerve root [Figure and ]. Review of records from the outside institution revealed the following preoperative thought process: Although the C6-C7 paramedian disk herniation could potentially have been decompressed from either an anterior or posterior approach, large central disk components were noted at both levels, and an anterior approach would be required to access the C5-C6 midline disk herniation. Correspondingly, the patient was scheduled for an elective two-level ACDF at the outside hospital; no further preoperative assessment was conducted at that time.
Warfarin anticoagulation was held for 10 days preoperatively. Surgery included a routine right-sided exposure to perform a two-level ACDF at C5-C6 and C6-C7, which was completed using the Smith–Robinson technique. Notably, a self-retaining radiolucent retractor system was placed without difficulty and was periodically relaxed throughout the case; a monitored endotracheal tube was also used as surveillance for recurrent laryngeal nerve injury, and no abnormalities were noted.
There were no intraoperative complications, and careful inspection of the carotid artery, jugular vein, and surrounding structures prior to closure revealed no abnormalities. The wound was closed in the normal anatomic layers, and the patient awoke from general anesthesia without neurologic deficit and recovered uneventfully. Postoperative radiographs demonstrated normal alignment of the cervical spine with appropriate positioning of the fusion construct . At discharge, the patient's right upper extremity pain was completely resolved, and he reported no dysphagia, new weakness, numbness, or pain. The patient was instructed to continue holding warfarin until postoperative day 7.
Three days after the discharge, the patient experienced multiple episodes of acute-onset large-volume diarrhea and vomiting overnight. The following morning, he had difficulty using his left arm and leg, with associated slurring of his speech. He was urgently transported to a local emergency department, where computed tomography (CT) of the head demonstrated subtle early ischemic changes involving the right hemisphere, including the insula and deep white matter of the frontal lobe (not shown). CT angiogram (CTA) of the head and neck revealed near-complete occlusion of the right internal carotid artery and greater than 50% stenosis of the left internal carotid artery, with otherwise normal arterial anatomy without evidence of dissection . The patient was not deemed a candidate for lytic therapy, and he was transported to our facility in stable condition for intensive care.
On arrival, National Institute of Health Stroke Scale score was 14 with right gaze preference and left homonymous hemianopsia, lower facial droop, left hemiplegia, sensory loss, and hemineglect. The surgical site was clean, dry, and intact, with no signs concerning for hematoma, infection, mass, or other compressive process. MRI/MRA of the head and neck showed greater than 50% occlusion of the left internal carotid artery without evidence of dissection, complete occlusion of the right internal carotid artery at its origin with slow reconstitution at the petrous level, slow intracranial flow distally indicating insufficient collateral flow, and extensive diffusion restriction and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery changes in a typical watershed distribution throughout the right hemisphere [Figures and ].
Electrocardiogram was noteworthy for new-onset atrial fibrillation, with ventricular rate to 130, which was medically managed using diltiazem and metoprolol. Echocardiogram showed no evidence of cardiac thrombus or patent foramen ovale. Ultrasound of the lower extremities revealed an acute-on-chronic deep venous thrombosis of the right popliteal vein. Follow-up imaging with CTA of the chest showed multiple acute emboli, with early pulmonary infarction in the periphery of the right mid-lung, without evidence of right heart strain. Given the contraindication to therapeutic anticoagulation, an inferior vena cava filter was placed. Hematology and coagulation studies showed a normal international normalized ratio, partial thromboplastin time, and bleeding time, with no evidence of an underlying heritable coagulopathy.
The patient was observed overnight in the neurosciences intensive care unit, where he remained clinically and neurologically stable. Warfarin was restarted on day 2. The patient was ultimately transferred to the stroke neurology service, followed by acute inpatient rehabilitation. At the time of discharge, the patient had persistent left facial droop, left arm paresis with minimal activation, and left hip flexion antigravity without distal activation.