A 59-year-old man was admitted to the hospital on March 15, 2021, for chest tightness and shortness of breath of 7 days’ duration. An untreated acute myocardial infarction had occurred 12 years previously. The patient had a history of hypertension and chronic kidney disease, both stable under management. Physical examination revealed the following: an alert mental state; heart rate, 80 beats/min; regular rhythm; and no audible murmurs. Auscultatory lung sounds were unremarkable. No edema was present in the lower limbs. Examination for myocardial infarction after admission revealed the following: cardiac troponin T, 0.691 ng/mL; creatine kinase-MB isoenzyme, 5.25 ng/mL; pro-brain natriuretic peptide, 1822 ng/L; serum creatinine, 161.2 µmol/L; and serum uric acid, 638.2 µmol/L. Electrocardiography revealed sinus rhythm, ST segment abnormalities (0.5–2.0-mm depression in leads I, II, V3, V4, V5, and V6), and T wave alterations. The preliminary diagnoses were coronary heart disease, acute non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction, old myocardial infarction, Killip class I cardiac function, high-risk stage 3 hypertension, and chronic kidney disease.
Elective coronary angiography showed a right-dominant pattern and no obvious stenosis in the left coronary artery. A woven coronary artery anomaly, 10–15 mm in length, was present in the middle segment of the left anterior descending (LAD) branch. The distal segment of the LAD had 30–40% localized stenosis and Thrombolysis In Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) flow grade 3 . The origin of the first diagonal branch had 90% localized stenosis and TIMI flow grade 3 . The circumflex artery had no obvious stenosis and TIMI flow grade 3. The middle segment of the right coronary artery (RCA) exhibited 99% occlusion distal to the acute marginal branch, with visible thrombosis and distal TIMI flow grade 2 . Considering the patient’s symptoms and the results of coronary angiography, the RCA was considered to be the artery related to the infarction. A 3.5 × 26 mm drug-eluting stent with 99% occlusion (Resolute Integrity) was implanted in the middle segment of the RCA .
Coronary angiography was repeated one week later. The LAD anomaly was unchanged , and the RCA stent was unobstructed. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) was planned for the LAD anomaly, with percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) if necessary. The intervention was then performed as follows : A 6 F EBU 3.5 guiding catheter (Medtronic Inc., Dublin, Ireland) was placed in the LAD opening, and a Fielder-XT hydrophilic-coated guide wire (Asahi Intecc USA, Inc., Irvine, CA, USA) was smoothly passed through the anomaly, entering the distal LAD. OCT showed that the guide wire was positioned within the lumen, and the intima, media, and adventitia were visible. There were honeycomb-like changes in the anomaly, and part of the false cavity was covered by the intima. Considering the patient’s medical history and OCT results, the cause was believed to be recanalization of the organized thrombus after the previous myocardial infarction . PCI was performed using a pre-expanded 2.0 × 15 mm Firefighter balloon catheter inserted into the proximal segment of the anterior descending branch. The catheter was expanded at 10 atm for 5 s, and a 2.7 × 38 mm drug-eluting stent (Helios) was inserted into the proximal anterior descending branch, expanded at 10 atm for 5 s, and released. The pre-expanded 2.0 × 15 mm balloon catheter was then inserted into the D1 opening and expanded at 10 atm for 5 s; then noncompliant 2.75 × 10 mm and 3.0 × 10 mm balloons were inserted into the stent and expanded at 12–14-16 atm for 5 s. There was no residual stenosis in the stent . Re-examination indicated that the stent was well attached to the wall, there was no dissection at the edge of the stent , and TIMI flow grade was 3.
The patient did not experience discomfort after the operation. Subsequent monitoring of myocardial enzyme levels showed dynamic changes consistent with myocardial infarction. There were no changes in renal function, and the patient was discharged on March 25, 2021, after which combined antiplatelet therapy and statin-based plaque stabilization were continued. No obvious abnormality was found during the follow-up one year later.