The patient was a 68-year-old male with squamous cell lung cancer (cT2aN3M0, stage IIIb). Since a rapid exacerbation was observed, ICI treatment with pembrolizumab 200 mg was changed from 28 days after the one cycle of previous treatment with carboplatin AUC6 and nab-paclitaxel 100 mg/m2. On Day 21 of the therapy, the patient discontinued the treatment because of the onset of SJS with dermatological symptoms such as diffuse cutaneous erythema and hyperkeratotic scales, painful stomatitis and lip erythema scales, mucosal ocular symptoms and glans swelling, without any infection. The case of SJS was successfully treated with steroid therapy with prednisolone 60 mg po, dexamethasone oral ointment and fluorometholone instillation, starting from Day 21 and slowly tapering off until on Day 77. After the remission of dermatological symptoms, a clinical diagnostic CT scan revealed that the cancer in the upper right lobe and mediastinum had disappeared. Although only a single dose of pembrolizumab induced SJS (successfully treated with steroids), this therapy resulted in complete remission of stage IIIb lung cancer, which was maintained for over a year.
Laboratory tests showed negative results for hepatotoxicity, endocrine toxicity and pancreatitis during the treatment. As immune responsive indices, those involved in the differentiation and activation of cytotoxic CD8+ T cells, CD4+ Treg and Th17, were selected . During hospitalization and after discharge, 9 points of blood samples were evaluated. As shown below, cytokines such as interferon-γ (IFN-γ), transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), IL-6, IL-10, IL-17, IL-23, and IL-27 were screened for the indices, while IL-2 and IL-4 were undetected. Transcription factors such as Nr4a1, Nr4a2, forkhead box protein P 3 (Foxp3), retinoic acid receptor-related orphan receptor-γt (RORγt), lymphocyte activation gene 3 (Lag3), Runx3, and receptor of IL-23 (IL-23R), which specifically expresses activated Th17 involved with Nr4a2 , were selected as mRNAs. Assessment of the protein levels of transcription factors involves more ethical and technical challenges and has not been performed in current cases posing difficulties. Plasma concentrations of cytokines were measured by a Legend Max human ELISA kit (BioLegend, San Diego, CA). The plasma concentration of unbound pembrolizumab was evaluated with pharmacokinetic ELISA (MBS, San Diego, CA). Total RNA was extracted from PMBCs with a Paxgene Blood RNA kit (QIAGEN, Hilden Germany). The expression of target mRNA was analyzed by quantitative real-time RT‒PCR using a 7500 Fast Real-Time PCR system (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) and a One-Step TB Green PrimeScript PLUS RT‒PCR kit (Takara Bio, Shiga, Japan). Relative mRNA expression was normalized to hypoxanthine–guanine phosphoribosyl transferase (HPRT) using the 2−△△CT method. The primer sequences used in this study are described in Supplementary Table .
Plasma unbound pembrolizumab concentrations remained above the limit of quantification, 1.25 μg/mL, until Day 77, when prednisolone was tapered off . The pretreatment basal values for NLR, PLR, eosinophil and lymphocyte counts were 3.3, 150, 138/µL and 1.4 × 103/µL, respectively. During these periods, NLR decreased gradually, and PLR increased slightly on Day 7, decreased until Day 42, and then increased .
As shown in the relative levels of cytokines , IL-17 increased from Day 7, peaked on Day 21, and then decreased; IL-10 decreased from Day 7, peaked on Day 21, and then increased further on Day 77; IFN-γ increased rapidly on Day 7 and then decreased; IL-23, IL-27 and TGF-β increased in a bimodal manner, peaking on Days 21 and 175; and IL-6 remained low, near the basal levels.
As shown in the relative expression of mRNAs , Nr4a1 mRNAs decreased on Day 7 and remained below basal levels until Day 77. Nr4a2 mRNAs increased from Day 7, peaked on Day 21 and remained above basal levels throughout the entire period. Runx3 mRNAs increased on Day 7, and then were ameliorated. Foxp3 mRNA and IL-23R increased on Day 21 and then were ameliorated. RORγt mRNA increased from Day 28. Lag3 mRNA increased from Day 7 and peaked on Day 175, and unbound plasma pembrolizumab concentrations were detected until Day 77.
Each immune responsiveness index was statistically examined by simple regression analysis based on the individual significant analysis of variance of less than 0.05 and with a coefficient of determination greater than 0.5 (JMP Pro 16, SAS institution, Inc., Cary, NC). As shown in Table , IL-10 was an inhibitory independent variable, while IFN-γ and IL-23R mRNA were promotive independent variables, showing a significantly stronger effect on the induction of IL-17 as the dependent variable; IL-17 was an inhibitory independent variable, and Lag3 mRNA was a promotive independent variable showing a significantly stronger effect individually on the induction of IL-10 as a dependent variable; IL-27 was a promotive independent variable showing a stronger effect on the induction of Lag3 mRNA as a dependent variable; Runx3 mRNA was a promotive independent variable, showing a significantly stronger effect on the induction of IFN-γ as a dependent variable. IL-10 was an inhibitory independent variable showing a significantly stronger effect on the increase in NLR; RORγt mRNA was an inhibitory independent variable showing a significantly stronger effect on the increase in PLR; no statistical relationship was found between IFN-γ, IL-17 and IL-10 and upstream regulators such as IL-23 and Il-27.
As shown in Table , the plasma concentration of pembrolizumab as an independent variable had a very strong promotive effect on the dependent variables, such as IL-17, IFN-γ and Runx3 mRNA.
As shown in Table , Nr4a1 mRNA was an inhibitory independent variable, with a very strong effect on the induction of IL-17 as a dependent variable and a strong effect on the induction of IFN-γ as a dependent variable. Nr4a1 mRNA was a promotive independent variable, with a strong effect on the induction of IL-10 as a dependent variable; Nr4a2 mRNA was a promotive independent variable, with individually strong effects on the induction of Foxp3 mRNA and IL-23R mRNA as dependent variables. Nr4a2 mRNA was a promotive independent variable and represented a strong effect on the induction of Foxp3 mRNA and IL-23R mRNA separately as dependent variables. The plasma concentration of pembrolizumab and dose of prednisolone, as independent variables, had a very strong inhibitory effect on the induction of Nr4a1 mRNA. For NLR and PLR, no separate statistical relationship was found between Nr4a1 and 2 mRNA.
Nr4a1 mRNA levels during the observation period in the current SJS case were compared with those in two types of single non-SJS controls without prednisolone administration with the same carcinoma background. Nonparametric comparisons among the three groups were performed using the Steel–Dwass test. One was a nonresponding case of pembrolizumab progressive disease: 70 years old, male, cT1bN2M1b, stage IV; treatment was discontinued after the third course due to tumor growth on Day 63, with 6 points of blood collections. Another was a responding case: 69 years old, male, cT2aN3M0, stage IIIb; continued treatment every 21 days over Day 378, with 17 points of blood collections until Day 378. Plasma concentrations of pembrolizumab on Day 63 for the responding case and nonresponding case were 8.4 and 8.7 µg/mL, respectively. As shown in Fig. , Nr4a1 mRNA levels in the SJS case and the responding non-SJS case were significantly lower than those in the nonresponding non-SJS case (p = 0.011 and p = 0.001). No significant difference in levels was observed between the SJS case and responding non-SJS case.