The patient, a 70-year-old woman was referred to our hospital in June 2020 because of sudden headache, fever and unconsciousness for 7 h. She had no history of treatment or nose picking before admission. She was a farmer who raised poultry and had a history of renal calculi but was without clinical attacks. Physical examination showed signs of meningeal irritation. On the day of admission, cranial CT showed no abnormality. Routine blood testing showed increased white blood cell count of 14.28 × 109/L (normal range 3.5 to 9.5 × 109/L), with 85.6% neutrophils, and an elevated C-reactive protein of 32.87 mg/L (normal range < 10 mg/L). Together with clinical presentation and physical examination, a clinical diagnosis of meningitis was made and a lumbar puncture done, and CSF samples sent for ‘routine analysis’ and mNGS. The sample for the latter was sent to IngeniGen XunMinKang Biotechnology Inc. A blood culture was also done.
Analysis of the CSF confirmed the diagnosis of meningitis, but CSF staining, including staining for fungi, Gram staining and staining for acid fast bacilli, was negative.
On the second day following admission, magnetic resonance imaging of the head revealed extensive enhancement of the meninges and sphenoid sinus effusion . The procalcitonin level was elevated to 1.52 ng/mL (normal range < 0.5 ng/mL). Coagulation function, hepatitis B surface antigen, syphilis antibody, HIV antibody, and hepatitis C antibody were in normal range. Detection of tuberculosis antibody, tumor markers of serum, and virus-related antibodies were also negative.
On the third day following admission, repeated CSF examination showed persistence of the meningitis, but routine culture of CSF and CSF stain once again showed negative findings. However, by the fourth day after admission, the results of mNGS analysis of the CSF taken on admission showed the presence of E. faecalis . No other pathogens were detected. Treatment with latamoxef sodium from the day of admission resulted in a gradual resolution of fever and improvement in the level of consciousness.
Five days after the onset of the disease, when she was now fully conscious, she gave a history of persistent rhinorrhea of four months before admission, and a 3-dimensional cranial CT imaging confirmed sphenoid sinus effusion for which a neurosurgeon was consulted for further evaluation and management.
On the 8 day after admission, the patient was transferred to the Neurosurgery Ward and underwent repair of sphenoidal bone defect.
Another lumbar puncture on the 13th day following admission revealed that the CSF indicators were significantly improved . She was released from the hospital after approximately 4 weeks of admission without any complications.
We followed up the patient for 6 months, but she refused to come back for further review as her physical condition was good without meningitis symptoms and CSF rhinorrhoea.