A 36-year old pregnant Ghanaian woman, with Body Mass Index (BMI) = 32 kg/m2, gravida 1 para 0 who conceived following an autologous IVF cycle at the Lister Hospital and Fertility Centre in Accra, Ghana, reported at the emergency room with complaints of sudden onset severe lower abdominal pain and an episode of vomiting. The onset of symptoms was 6 h prior to presentation at the emergency room. Her ultrasound-guided (two blastocysts) embryo transfer was done 6 weeks prior to onset of symptoms with a transvaginal ultrasound scan done 2 weeks before presentation, confirming a singleton intrauterine gestational sac. There was no documented features of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. Prior to this index pregnancy, she has been trying to conceive for the past 5 years with one unsuccessful intrauterine insemination performed 5 years earlier and another one failed IVF cycle a year earlier. She had vaginal repair for a coital tear 6 years earlier. She also had a history of polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) but no history of smoking, previous history of ectopic gestation, pelvic inflammatory diseases or use of intrauterine devices. Her previous hysterosalpingogram revealed normal uterine cavity with bilateral tubal patency. She had undergone a long gonadotropin release hormone (GnRH) agonist IVF protocol, during which she received 12 days of daily gonadotropin (300iu); human chorionic gonadotropic (hCG) 5000iu trigger and transvaginal ultrasound-guided oocyte retrieval 36 h following the trigger. She had two blastocysts transferred smoothly under ultrasound guidance and continued on progesterone 400 mg twice daily pessaries.
At the emergency room, she appeared in painful distress, moderately pale, with pulse of 96 beats per minute, and blood pressure of 103/73 mmHg. Her respiratory system findings were unremarkable. The abdomen looked full, with left-sided lower abdominal tenderness, guarding in the left iliac fossa region and normal bowel sounds. An initial clinical suspicion of a possible left ovarian torsion was made. A peripheral venous line was secured and blood samples drawn for a full blood count and serum beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (b-HCG), and intravenous crystalloid infusion commenced. An urgent bedside abdominopelvic ultrasound scan however revealed a slightly bulky uterus with a singleton empty intrauterine gestational sac with a diameter of 15.6 mm (less than 6 weeks gestation) and no foetal pole, about 130 mL of organised haematoma in the pouch of Douglas and about 190 mL of free fluid in the right paracolic gutter. .
The patient’s condition rapidly worsened within the ensuing 10 min with lethargy, tachycardia (pulse of 108 bpm) and an unrecordable blood pressure. Her full blood count report showed haemoglobin concentration of 7 g/dL, platelet count of 89 × 109/L and a serum beta-HCG of 58,121.31 mIU/L.
Resuscitation was continued with crystalloids and colloids followed by haemotransfusion with 2 units of whole blood, and emergency laparotomy was arranged after informed consent, due to the lack of readily available laparoscopic surgery and its associated very high costs where available in Ghana. The intra-operative findings were: massive haemoperitoneum of approximately about 2 L, ruptured left ampullary gestation with foetus visualised, slightly bulky uterus with normal right tube and ovary. A left salpingectomy was done, haemoperitoneum suctioned, abdomen was lavaged with saline and closed in layers without uterine handling. She was transfused three more units of whole blood post-operatively, administered intramuscular progesterone 100 mg daily, rectal progesterone 400 mg twice daily, intravenous antibiotics and she made a satisfactory recovery. The total duration of surgery was about 1 h 30 min.
On the third day post-surgery, the repeat serum beta-HCG level was 1878.21 mIU/L and a transvaginal ultrasound scan done showed a large irregular gestational sac of diameter 39 mm (8 weeks’ gestation) with absent foetal pole or cardiac activity . A subsequent diagnosis of an anembryonic intrauterine gestation was made. The patient was counselled appropriately and had a manual vacuum aspiration done to evacuate the retained products of conception. On the post-operative days 4 and 5, the patient experienced repeated episodes of anxiety, palpitation with startling attacks which were effectively managed with the involvement of the Clinical Psychologist. She made a smooth recovery and was discharged home on the fifth day following surgery on oral iron supplementation (Oral Tot’hema 1 vial daily) due to a low haemoglobin level of 8 g/dL and oral antibiotics after completion of 48 h of intravenous antibiotics. Histological examination of specimens confirmed a ruptured tubal pregnancy.