A 58-year-old Arab man was referred to our electrophysiology clinic with monthly episodes of presyncope for the last 3 months. Despite two episodes of presyncope per year for 3 years, he had not sought medical advice. He had multiple comorbidities including coronary artery disease status post coronary artery bypass surgery (CABG), type 2 diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, and class III obesity (body mass index 41) with a neck circumference of 45cm and modified Mallampati score of 4.
After his CABG, aspirin, atorvastatin, and metformin were restarted, with the addition of metoprolol tartrate 25mg twice daily. More frequent episodes of presyncope occurred. An electrocardiogram revealed normal sinus rhythm with normal PR, QRS and QTc intervals. Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated a normal left ventricular systolic function and 24-hour ambulatory Holter monitoring recorded multiple sinus pauses occurring from 11:22 p.m. until 11:46 a.m. with a maximum pause of 22 seconds occurring at 11:45:33 a.m. (see Figure ). During this observation, there were no episodes of presyncope.
He was admitted to our hospital for further workup. Despite discontinuation of metoprolol for 1 week, his telemetry revealed multiple episodes of sinus pause, observed during daytime sleepiness or snoring episodes. Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) was suspected and a sleep study demonstrated both central and OSA: Epworth score 7, sleep latency of 17 minutes, Apnea–Hypopnea Index (AHI) of 98/hour, arousal index of 49/hour and lowest oxygen saturation at 78% on room air .
Overnight CPAP was started and the telemetry showed sinus bradycardia with a minimum heart rate of 30 beats per minute with infrequent pauses of less than 3 seconds. However he refused to continue to use the CPAP upon discharge. In addition, he was offered a pacemaker and he refused. A trial of theophylline 200mg twice daily was initiated and he was discharged from our hospital and encouraged to initiate a weight reduction program.
At follow up, he had no further episode of presyncope with infrequent short or no pauses at therapeutic theophylline levels . A follow-up sleep study revealed improvement in the central element of his sleep apnea, however, his AHI did not significantly improve; such results are expected with theophylline therapy .