A 65-year-old Caucasian female with history of psoriasis, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and recent diagnosis of COVID-19 infection two months prior, presented with progressive generalized weakness, weight loss, skin rash, and shortness of breath of three months duration. She described a progressive intolerance not only to climbing stairs, but also rising from a seated position. Associated symptoms included arthralgia of the bilateral wrists and new rashes of the bilateral hands, chest, back, and around the eyes. She experienced progressively worsening shortness of breath, without evidence of lower extremity edema, orthopnea, or paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea. Her home medications included Amlodipine, Atorvastatin, Buspirone, and Pantoprazole. There were no recent changes in her home medications. No recent travel, sick contacts, or additional exposures were reported. Family history was unremarkable.
On presentation, the patient was tachycardic (118 beats per min), tachypneic (30 breaths per minute), normotensive (112/60 mmHg), and saturating 93–98% on room air. Clinical examination was remarkable for a heliotrope rash, erythematous rash on of the upper back (Shawl sign) and chest (V sign), Gottron’s papules on the hands and elbows, periungual erythema, and right wrist swelling. She exhibited symmetric bilateral deltoid and iliopsoas weakness. Laboratory diagnostics revealed leukopenia, an elevated aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), and a normal bilirubin. Creatine kinase (CK), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), C-reactive protein (CRP) were elevated with a notably normal erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) .
Given the classic skin manifestations, proximal muscle weakness, and notably elevated CK, a tentative diagnosis of dermatomyositis was made. Immunological screening was positive for anti-nuclear antibody (ANA), melanoma differentiation-associated protein 5 (MDA5), SSA-52 (Ro), and a low C3 complement . Diagnostic imaging included an MRI of the right femur that demonstrated multiple scattered areas of proximal muscle edema , which while nonspecific, was felt to be consistent with an inflammatory myositis. Skin biopsy of the anterior chest was subsequently performed which demonstrated vacuolar interface dermatitis with an increase in dermal mucin . Computed Tomography (CT) of the chest with contrast demonstrated mild bilateral patchy infiltrates . It was not clear as to whether the pulmonary findings were secondary to an infectious etiology such as COVID-19, alternate virus, a bacterium, or other etiologies such as Interstitial Lung Disease or dermatomyositis. For further evaluation an infectious work-up including blood cultures, sputum culture, legionella urinary antigen, and interferon-gamma release assay were performed and all studies were negative. Echocardiogram failed to demonstrate any evidence of vegetations, systolic or diastolic dysfunction, or pulmonary hypertension. She was initiated on oral prednisone 60 mg daily and demonstrated symptomatic improvement in her breathing within 10 days and was tapered to 40 mg after 14 days. She was discharged to a rehabilitation center with plans to continue steroid therapy with adjunctive trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole for pneumocystis pneumonia prophylaxis. The labs at the time of discharge are mentioned in Table .
Unfortunately, two weeks after discharge she presented to our facility in the context of recurrent fever and progressive shortness of breath. She was febrile (38.3 °C), tachypneic (22 breaths per min), with mild hypotension (94/55 mmHg), but an otherwise preserved heart rate (79 beats per minute) and oxygen saturation of 96% on room air. Physical examination was notable only for a persistent, albeit improved V and shawl signs, stable generalized weakness, stable Gottron’s rash and a resolved heliotrope rash. Laboratory diagnostics demonstrated leukopenia with lymphopenia and anemia. Metabolic panel demonstrated a marked acute kidney injury, worsening transaminitis, and an elevated CK and LDH. Given concern for MAS, additional workup was done which revealed marked ferritin and triglyceride elevation. Interleukin 2 receptor (CD25) was within normal limits . Diagnostic imaging included a Computed Tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen and pelvis that demonstrated bilateral patchy ground glass densities and diffuse hepatic steatosis . No splenomegaly was noted on the CT scan.
She was initiated on broad spectrum antibiotics given her fever and immunosuppressed status. Antibiotics were subsequently discontinued due to negative blood cultures. For further evaluation of infectious and non-infectious etiologies, a bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) was performed and demonstrated no evidence of alveolar hemorrhage, negative antigens/ cultures for cytomegalovirus, adenovirus, galactomannan, legionella, acid-fast bacillus, or histoplasmosis. Cell count and gram stain were equally unremarkable. Intriguingly, however, (1,3)-BD-glucan was noted to be positive and cultures demonstrated positivity for aspergillum, for which she was initiated on Voriconazole. Given her worsening clinical status despite antibiotic therapy and concern for MAS, she was initiated on high-dose methylprednisolone (1 g daily) for three days followed by 80 mg IV daily. She was also initiated on intravenous immunoglobulin 400 mg/kg/ day for a five-day course. Despite such therapy the patient developed worsening hypoxemic respiratory failure necessitating mechanical ventilation. Bone marrow biopsy was deferred. Repeat imaging (CT) demonstrated a new, marked consolidative processes within the bilateral lower lobes in a peripheral distribution with pleural sparing . Given the patients deteriorating clinical condition with adjunctive worsening of the inflammatory markers and worsening CT findings despite treatment of aspergillus, she underwent repeat bronchoscopy that demonstrated Pseudomonas for which she was initiated on Piperacillin-Tazobactam therapy. Unfortunately, her hospital course was complicated by worsening renal function necessitating continuous renal replacement therapy, worsening cytopenia with marked anemia, atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular response, and hypotension requiring pressor support. Her respiratory status demonstrated continued decline despite ventilator support and she ultimately passed in the setting of pulseless electrical activity arrest due to hypoxemic respiratory failure.