A 58-year-old right-handed woman was a sterilization worker in a capsule production factory with nearly 10 years of service length. She suffered from nausea and vomiting after unprotected acute EO inhalation of leaked sterilization gas containing 75% EO and 25% carbon dioxide in an air-locked room for an hour. The indoor concentrations of EO were uncertain. She had severe paroxysmal headaches, which were relieved when she came back home. The brain MRI of our hospital scan showed no abnormality 5 days after inhalation . Nine days after inhalation, the patient developed recurrent thunderclap headache (striking suddenly like a clap of thunder and the severe headaches peaks within 60 s) and partially lost bilateral eyesight in the whole field, which progressed to complete blindness and no light perception over the next 24 h. A brain MRI scan performed again after admission, 12 days after inhalation, demonstrated extensive cytotoxic edema in the bilateral parietal lobe, occipital lobe, and left frontal lobe . Fifteen days and 21 days after inhalation, Head MRA and CTA showed multiple areas of stenosis and partial occlusions involving the anterior, medial and posterior cerebral arteries bilaterally, respectively . Laboratory tests: 12 days after inhalation, D-Dimer 880 μg/L(FEU)↑, GLB - 31.6 g/L↑, TG - 3.12 mmol/L↑. Subsequently, D-Dimer was continuously tested, this index through the process from rising to falling. 17, 32, 41, 51, 54 days after EO inhalation, D-Dimer value was 2920, 2500, 4960, 1630, and 760 μg/L(FEU)↑, respectively. Pupillary light reflex was normal. The patient was alert and oriented to person, place, time, situation but slow to respond to questions. The patient had no history of high blood pressure, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, cerebrovascular disease. She did not drink alcohol or smoke and was without a family history of the inheritable disease. Currently, no consensus on the cut-off point for acute and chronic EO exposure. According to most definitions of intoxication, acute exposure is usually within 24 or 72 h of poisoning. Thus, the patient admitted with a presumptive diagnosis of “encephalopathy caused by EO acute exposure” because the patient developed clinical symptoms about 1 h after EO exposure.
During the hospitalization, the patient presented with left-sided hemiparesis and cortical blindness. After more than 2 months of symptomatic and rehabilitation therapy, the patient was sensitive to light but still blind after the therapy. Subsequently, the cerebral arterial stenosis markedly improved on a follow-up head MRA 59 days after inhalation . Moreover, the DWI and ADC showed the lesions turned into softening lesions .