A 66-year-old man with acute postoperative intracranial hemorrhage was referred to our hospital owing to coagulation dysfunction. His Glasgow Coma Scale score was E1VTM2. Laboratory examination revealed a significantly isolated prolonged prothrombin time (PT) (33.6 s) and low FVII coagulation activity (1.8%); the activated partial thromboplastin time and thrombin time were normal. The patient did not take anticoagulants or antiplatelet drugs and had no history of bleeding diseases. We collected and collated the relevant examination reports of this patient, and the results are shown in Figure and Table .
Because FVII deficiency is rare, we initially considered the following as potential causes of our patient's coagulation disorder. First, most clotting factors (except for factor III) are synthesized in the liver, and our patient had a history of hepatitis B. However, examination of transaminase levels indicated normal liver function (alanine transaminase, 10.2 U/L and aspartate transaminase, 18.6 U/L). Second, activation of the clotting factors (factors II, VII, IX, and X) is vitamin K-dependent. Our patient had received vitamin K supplements at another hospital and thus was not vitamin K-deficient. Third, although platelets are required for coagulation, routine blood tests revealed no abnormalities in platelet number or size (platelets, 184 × 109/L; mean platelet volume, 10.10 fL; and platelet count ×mean platelet volume, 0.19). Finally, the activities of other plasma coagulation factors were normal or above normal (fibrinogen and factors V, VIII, IX, and factor XI) but the activities of coagulation factor VII were low (1.8%). Therefore, by process of elimination, our diagnosis was FVII deficiency.
To determine whether our patient's FVII deficiency was acquired or congenital, we used samples of his peripheral blood for second-generation sequencing: 86 genes related to thrombosis and hemostasis (Supplementary file: Table ) were sequenced on an Illumina Miseq Next-Generation Sequencer, including hot spot mutations (CNV and InDel), variable splicing sites and large fragment deletion mutations in gene coding regions and intron sequences of 20bp regions upstream and downstream of exon. The average sequencing depth was 500-folds, and the genome coverage rate was 99.47% (Supplementary file: Table ). Indicative of a congenital origin, two heterozygous mutations in the F7 gene, which encodes FVII, were identified: c. 681+1 G>T in intron 7 and c. C1286T (p. Ala429Val) in exon 9.
As treatment, we administered fresh frozen plasma (about 800 ml/day on average) for 11 days after admission, resulting in a relatively good PT (19.8–24.4 s). He also twice received fresh frozen plasma in combination with rFVIIa, and on the 19th day of admission, rFVIIa alone. The total dose of rFVIIa was 15 mg; for economic reasons, rFVIIa was only administered three times. The PT was maintained at 22.3–24.8 s during the combined treatment. After 2 months of therapy, he was discharged uneventfully.