A 45-year-old man was admitted to our unit for dyspnoea associated with an atypical atrial flutter with positive p waves in the inferior and precordial leads. He was already being treated with Disopyramide LP 125 mg and Bisoprolol 2.5 mg per day . He had undergone an AF ablation procedure 7 months previously, during which a micro-reentry was ablated on the roof of the left atrium (LA) near the right superior pulmonary vein (PV). The procedure was then completed with antral PV isolation, and a complete roofline block was done in order to restore sinus rhythm.
Transthoracic echocardiography revealed predominantly septal and posterior hypertrophic cardiopathy with intraventricular obstruction of flow (basic gradient at 45 mmHg up to 60 mmHg after Valsalva manoeuvres). The LA was found to be dilated, with a measured surface of 53 mL/m2. Computed tomography scan imaging showed a moderately dilated LA (42 cm2) with normal PV anatomy and no thrombus in the left atrial appendage (LAA).
After informed consent was obtained, the patient underwent a new endocardial electrophysiology procedure. We used the same 3D navigation system as for the first procedure (CARTO 3D, Biosense Webster Inc., Johnson & Johnson, Irvine, CA, USA). At the beginning of the procedure, the rhythm was a stable atrial flutter with a cycle length of 320 ms. We observed a proximal to distal activation on the coronary sinus (CS) with activation time at 41 ms. A Pentaray catheter inserted through a transseptal puncture helped to identify low voltage areas (scar tissue < 0.2 mV) on the roof and in the right superior pulmonary vein (RSPV). The three other veins were connected and active. The LA activation map showed a peri-mitral counter-clockwise circuit, while the roofline was blocked. A radiofrequency (RF) ablation catheter, Thermocool Smart Touch SF (Biosense Webster, Diamond Bar, CA, USA), was used endocardially with a set-up power at 40 W and a saline irrigation rate of 17 mL/min and an ablation index goal of 450 at the anterior wall and roof and 370 at the posterior wall. We first re-isolated the three active PVs which did not change the cycle length. The atrial flutter cycle length went up to 345 ms once an endocardial and epicardial point-by-point ablation of the mitral line was completed.
At this stage, a new activation map showed that the mitral line was still permeable with an epicardial conduction bridge through the VOM . We then decided to use an ethanol infusion for the ablation of the VOM. The coronary sinus could not be thoroughly catheterized with femoral approach due to a winding and angular shape neither with a deflectable decapolar catheter Xtrem (Microport, Shangai, China) nor with two different sheaths (SL0 Abbott, Saint Paul, Minnesota, USA and Agilis™ NxT Steerable Introducer, Abbott, Saint Paul, MN, USA). So, we decided to try a right jugular vein approach with echo-guided puncture using an Agilis™ NxT Steerable Introducer (Abbott, Saint Paul, MN, USA). We had no problem finding the VOM ostium using a 5 Fr angiography catheter (5 Fr left internal mammary artery; Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) that was inserted into the CS via the steerable sheath. We then performed a selective venogram of the vein using a 1.5 mm balloon (1.5–2.5 mm diameter and 6–15 mm length, Abbott) that was progressively inflated (from 2 to 6 atm) inside the vein over an angioplasty wire (Whisper 0.014, Abbott). After we confirmed the complete occlusion of the VOM by injecting 1 mL of contrast medium, 3 mL of ethanol (96% ethanol 10 mL) was slowly injected over a period of 1 minute, and venography of the VOM was repeated. Following the initial injection and using the same technique, a complementary injection was performed with 3 mL of ethanol inside another branch of the VOM. A total of 9 mL of ethanol was used as a maximum dose. A final venogram showed the diffusion of ethanol around the VOM . Sinus rhythm was restored during the last ethanol infusion . A new voltage map confirmed the completion of the mitral line . Activation maps sequentially paced in the distal CS and in the LAA confirmed a bidirectional atrial block .
At 1-month post-ablation, the patient was asymptomatic without recurrence of arrhythmia.