A 54-year-old Sri Lankan woman who had recently been diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis presented to our hospital with worsening bilatateral leg swelling and facial puffiness of 1 month’s duration, accompanied by oliguria. She had no frothy urine or hematuria. She did not have exertional breathlessness or orthopnea, and she had no history suggestive of a cardiac or hepatic cause of edema. She was not diabetic or hypertensive. Her rheumatoid arthritis had been diagnosed 8 months earlier, when she presented with bilateral symmetrical polyarthritis involving the small joints of her hands with significant morning stiffness of 2 hours’ duration. Her rheumatoid factor was positive at a high titer. She was commenced on methotrexate 10 mg weekly and infrequent nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, with good symptom control achieved.
Her physical examination revealed that she had bilateral pitting leg edema and periorbital edema. She was not pale or icteric. No malar rash, vasculitic rash, or distal gangrene was seen. She had evidence of mild synovitis of the small joints of the hands bilaterally with no deformities. No generalized lymphadenopathy or hepatosplenomegaly was noted. Her pulse rate was 90 beats per minute; her blood pressure was 170/100 mmHg; and her jugular venous pressure was elevated to 7 cm with an undisplaced cardiac apex and normal heart sounds. A fundus examination did not reveal papilledema. Her lungs were clear with equal breath sounds bilaterally. The results of the rest of the examination were normal. Her laboratory investigation results are provided in Table .
A diagnosis of crescentic glomerular nephritis was made. The patient was started on atorvastatin, enalapril, and diuretics. Intravenous methylprednisolone 1 g was given for 3 consecutive days, followed by 1 mg/kg oral prednisolone. She was started on intravenous cyclophosphamide 500 mg every 2 weeks for a total of six doses. She gradually had increasing urine output and was symptomatically better, with improving renal function. Her serum creatinine level was 110 μmol/L at her last clinic visit after 3 months of treatment.