A 32-year-old man presented to the local hospital for health check-up and the computed tomography (CT) scan pitched upon osteolytic lesions in his thoracolumbar spine. Three days later, he was referred to our hospital for further management. Throughout the course, he had no pain or fever, with negative neuroradiological manifestation in his lower limbs. His past medical history was unremarkable. He had no history of keeping bird or travelling to the epidemic area in the past few years. Risk factors for tuberculosis and HIV exposure were not found. Physical examination showed no tenderness or obvious mass in the thoracolumbar level. No neurological dysfunction or lymphadenopathy was noted. The X-ray film observed a radiolucent lesion at T12 vertebra and enlargement of the right pedicle of L1 . The CT scan showed aggressive and destructive lesions at T12 and L1 vertebrae, with the facet joint not affected . The magnetic resonance (MR) image revealed lesions with T1-weighted heterogeneous iso- and hypo-intensities, and T2-weighted mixed signal of high and low intensities at T12 and L1 vertebrae . Contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image showed strong ring-enhancement of the peripheral lesion and low enhancement of the lesion body . Bone scintigraphy revealed no lesion with elevated radioactive signal in the whole skeleton. Routine laboratory examinations, including biochemistry and hemogram, were all within normal limits. The tumor marker chip test, galactomannan (GM) test, G-test for mycotic infection, immunoprotein electrophoresis for multiple myeloma (MM), T-SPOT test for tuberculosis, HIV and rapid plasma reagin (RPR) test showed all negative results. The lesions were even undiagnosed with routine incisional biopsy, thereby necessitating complete excision of the lesions for both diagnosis and treatment. Under general anesthesia in prone position, surgical resection involving posterior partial corpectomy of the T12 and L1 vertebrae was done. Intraoperative specimens were sent for pathological examination. Hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining revealed infiltration of inflammatory cells, consisted of cells with eccentrically placed nuclei in cartwheel-shaped chromatin and lymphocytes. Eosinophil leukocytes and Russell bodies were also observed to form eosinophilic globules . The immunohistochemical analysis revealed cytoplasmic staining for CD38, CD138, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), kappa and lambda light chains , CD163, CD68, CD19, and leukocyte common antigen (LCA). The maximum labeling index of Ki-67 was less than 1%. Postoperative period was uneventful. At two-year follow-up, the patient reported no residual symptom or sign of recurrence.