A 67-year-old female presented with progressively worsening vision in her right eye for approximately 6 months. On ophthalmological examination, she had mild bilateral peripheral visual field defects, which was severer in right eye. The visual acuity was 0.4 in right eye and 0.8 in left eye. The extraocular muscles were intact and no other neurological deficit was found. Routine laboratory investigations, including endocrinological studies, were normal. No specific past, medical, family and psycho-social history was reported.
Computed tomography (CT) scans revealed a hyperdense lesion on the right side of suprasellar region. The mass grew into the ambient cistern, lying medially close to the medial temporal lobe and displacing the midbrain posteriorly . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examinations showed a homogeneously enhancing tumor centering over the PCP . On CT angiography, the tumor was displacing the ICA anteriorly and encasing the right P1 segment of posterior cerebral artery posteriorly . Owing to the mass effect, the right-sided optic chiasma was up-elevated and the pituitary stalk (PS) was slightly displaced to the contralateral side . Based on these clinico-radiological features, PCM was proposed as the most likely diagnosis, and the EF-SCITA approach was attempted for tumor resection .
Surgery was performed in left lateral position after placement of a continuous lumbar CSF drainage system. The head was placed in upper flexion and backward rotation to allow gravity retraction of the cerebellum. As described before, a C-shaped retroauricular incision was performed to obtain adequate exposure of the suboccipital region and the mastoid bone. Then, the entire transverse sinus, the transverse-sigmoid junction, and the proximal part of the sigmoid sinus were revealed through suboccipital craniotomy . The surgical position, together with intraoperative drainage, facilitated endoscopic explorations in the lateral superior cerebellar space .
After opening the tentorium cerebelli, the tumor could be identified in the ambient cistern. Anatomically, it was located in front of the midbrain and was divided by the tentorial incisura into the supratentorial and infratentorial parts. The tumor was found to encase and compress the CN IV towards the tentorial incisura . Then, the infratentorial part was excised in a piecemeal fashion. After stepwise tumor reduction, the CN III and the P1 segment located medially to the lesion were identified and the tumor capsule was gently dissected away. In addition, the supratentorial part descended to the surgery field owing to gravity as well as surgical retraction . During resection of the supratentorial tumor, we observed that the tumor had dense adhesions to the ICA and the initial part of the basal vein (BV) in front, which were carefully dissected from the tumor . Intraoperatively, the tumor was grayish, soft, and moderately vascular. Total tumor removal was achieved, with all neighboring blood vessels and cranial nerves preserved. Finally, its dural attachment could be detected at the right PCP and adjacent petrous apex, which was coagulated under direct vision .
The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on 7th postoperative day. Postoperative MRI demonstrated complete excision of the lesion . Histopathological examinations demonstrated findings consistent with a meningioma of meningothelial type . The patient on follow-up at 1 month had improvement in visual acuity (0.8) in right eye, with no restriction of extra-ocular movements observed .