A 16-year-old previously healthy girl presented with high-grade, intermittent fever of 13 days duration. The symptoms had started as an episode of sore throat and fever. A few days later, the patient developed pain and swelling around the right eye accompanied by diplopia. She also had dry cough of 1 day duration. There was no history of dyspnoea, neck pain, headache, vomiting, photophobia, or convulsions. On examination, the patient was febrile, alert, and was in no apparent respiratory distress. Oral cavity and oropharynx were unremarkable. A right periorbital swelling with minimal ipsilateral proptosis and dysconjugate gaze was evident. Movement of the right eye was restricted in all directions and was painful, suggesting orbital cellulitis. Visual acuity was 6/6 in both eyes. The right pupil was slightly dilated (6 mm); however, reaction to light was normal. Funduscopy revealed blurring of optic disc margins bilaterally.
On careful examination, prominent superficial veins were apparent over the neck . Jugular venous waves were not discernible; instead, firm, cord-like structures were palpable bilaterally running alongside the sternomastoid muscles. Bronchial breath sounds and coarse crackles were present over the right lower lung field. Investigations revealed haemoglobin 7.0 g/dL, total leucocyte count 20,800 cells/μL, neutrophils 85%, lymphocytes 15%, and platelets 131,000/μL; blood chemistry was creatinine 0.8 mg/dL, bilirubin 0.7 mg/dL, albumin 2.4 g/dL, aspartate aminotransferase 32 IU/L, alanine aminotransferase 11 IU/L, and alkaline phosphatase 98 IU/L. A chest radiograph showed bilateral patchy air-space infiltrates. A diagnosis of Lemierre's syndrome was considered; after drawing blood cultures, intravenous co-amoxiclav and metronidazole were initiated.
A contrast-enhanced computed tomogram (CECT) of head and neck showed an enhancing hypoattenuating collection superonasal to the right globe. The lumen of the right internal jugular vein was completely replaced by a thrombus, and the contralateral jugular vein also had incomplete obliteration by thrombus. On serial sections, the thrombus was found extending up to the level of the superior vena cava . A CECT of chest and abdomen showed multiple bilateral peripherally placed wedge-shaped pulmonary infiltrates, some of them forming cavities , suggestive of septic pulmonary embolism. No intra-abdominal abscess was noted. There was a moderate right-sided pleural effusion which was aspirated. The pleural fluid was clear looking and was exudative in nature; Gram's stain revealed no organisms, and cultures were sterile. An orbital ultrasonogram revealed a hypoechoic collection (16 × 9 mm) superonasal to the right globe . Magnetic resonance venography ruled out a cavernous sinus thrombosis. Antiphospholipid, antineutrophil cytoplasmic, and human immunodeficiency virus antibodies were negative. An echocardiography was not performed; however, no murmur or rub was apparent on careful clinical examination.
On the third hospital day, the patient had a bout of massive haemoptysis and pulmonary aspiration. She was intubated and mechanically ventilated. By this time, the blood cultures drawn at admission were growing meticillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) susceptible to vancomycin, teicoplanin, and clindamycin; no anaerobe was isolated.
Subsequently, the antibiotics were changed to vancomycin, metronidazole, and cefoperazone-sulbactam. With continued antibiotic therapy and assisted ventilation, the patient made an uneventful recovery and was successfully extubated on day 7. On retrospective questioning, the patient denied a history of visit or admission to any health care facility or invasive medical procedure in the recent past. Repeat blood cultures were sterile; pulmonary infiltrates and pleural effusion showed resolution. The patient was discharged home on oral linezolid and metronidazole for 4 weeks. A month later, she was doing well without any functional limitations.