A 63-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital in November 2016 due to pedal edema lasting four months, abdominal distension and abdominal pain for one month, and hematochezia for one week. She had no nausea, vomiting, fever or weight loss.
The patient had no history of malignancy.
This patient had no history of smoking or drinking, and no familial history of genetic diseases.
On physical examination, her tongue was swollen with teeth prints and skin purpura was present in the right neck and periumbilical region . There was mild edema in both lower extremities.
Laboratory investigations revealed normocytic anemia, hypoalbuminemia, and increased D-dimer. Stool occult blood was positive. Urinary kappa chain and lambda chain were elevated . Serum protein electrophoresis and immunofixation were negative.
The electrocardiogram was normal. Echocardiography revealed normal left ventricular ejection fraction (61%) and slightly decreased left ventricular diastolic function. Computed tomography (CT) found marked thickening of the stomach and whole colon mild ascites, and pleural effusion. Doppler ultrasound revealed left lower limb venous thrombosis. Gastroscopy showed gastric retention, mucosal coarseness, hyperemia, and mild oozing of blood from the incisura angularis . Colonoscopy showed mucosal hyperemia, edema with multiple round and irregular ulcers, ecchymosis and hematoma in the distal descending and sigmoid colon . Histologic staining with Congo red stain revealed positively staining deposits in the lamina propria of the gastric and colonic mucosa without plasmacytic infiltration. A bone marrow aspiration smear was hypocellular with reduced numbers of granulocytic and erythroid precursors in each stage. No gene mutation was tested. Bone marrow biopsy showed the presence of neoplastic plasma cells in small clusters accounting for 15%-20% of the marrow elements. Immunohistochemistry revealed lambda light chains in the neoplastic cells establishing the diagnosis of MM. X-rays of the head, lumbar spine, pelvis, and chest did not reveal any lytic lesions.