A 36-year-old Japanese male patient was born at 36 weeks’ gestation via vaginal breech delivery. He had newborn asphyxia and an Apgar score of 4. Because of hypotonia, his height could not be measured and his weight was 2150 g. At the age of 10 years he was diagnosed with PWS on the basis of typical clinical findings including being a floppy infant and having almond shaped eyes, scoliosis, obesity (weight more than 20% of standard), mental retardation (IQ of 61), and hypogonadism with bilateral cryptorchidism. At age 12 years, he was referred to a pediatric endocrinologist for assessment of his pituitary function and glucose tolerance. Oral glucose and insulin tolerance test showed impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) and little reaction of growth hormone. GH therapy was not done because of the IGT level and severe obesity. At age 16 years, he was diagnosed with diabetes and began to take several kinds of oral hypoglycemic agents.
At age 28 years, he was referred to our department of diabetes and endocrinology for diabetes and obesity treatment. At that time, he was obese with body weight of 90.6 kg, height of 152.2 cm, and BMI of 39.1 kg/m2. He showed no sign of diabetic retinopathy but he had microalbuminuria (13.6 mg/gCr). Despite having been treated with glibenclamide (1.25 mg/day), metformin (1000 mg/day), and pioglitazone (15 mg/day), his HbA1c was 11.2% (99 mmol/mol). He has never had a neuroleptic drug prescribed. After written informed consent was obtained from him and his parents, genetic testing was performed. Abnormal DNA methylation was detected by pyrosequencing in the DMR (differentially methylated region) upstream of the SNRPN (small nuclear ribonucleoprotein polypeptide N) gene. Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array analysis was then performed using the SurePrint G3 ISCA CGH + SNP Microarray Kit (catalog number G4890A, Agilent Technologies); however copy number variants were not found. Finally, microsatellite analysis for chromosome 15 was performed, revealing that abnormal DNA methylation of the patient is due to uniparental (maternal) disomy (UPD) (Supplemental Fig. S1). Pharmacological treatment with metformin (2.25 g/day), NPH insulin at bedtime of 28 U to lower fasting glucose level, and miglitol (150 mg/day) were then administered in addition to a diet of 1600 kcal/day with exercise therapy. Afterward, he lost 12 kg of fat rather than muscle in 7 months but his HbA1c level deteriorated to 12.2% (110 mmol/mol). The fat mass and free fat mass were measured by bioimpedance analysis using Body Composition Analyzer MC-190 (standing-posture 8-electrode multi-frequency bioelectrical impedance analysis) (Tanita Corp., Tokyo, Japan). We then replaced NPH insulin with exenatide (20 μg/day) in expectation of a reduction of the increased appetite. However, his HbA1c fluctuated despite continuing to lose 15 kg body weight comprising 6 kg loss of fat and 9 kg loss of muscle. The massive loss of muscle mass during this period might be due to sustained hyperglycemia with relatively insufficient insulin. At the age of 33, his body weight reached 62.5 kg. Apprehensive of further loss of muscle mass, basal insulin of insulin glargine (6 U/day) and lixisenatide were administered in place of exenatide. Lixisenatide was anticipated to have improved usability with insulin glargine, both of which are once-daily injected drugs. After initiation of insulin glargine, his body weight was stabilized but his HbA1c did not improve. At the age of 35, tofogliflozin (20 mg/day) was added and lixisenatide was switched to dulaglutide (0.75 mg/week). Just after the initiation of tofogliflozin, his HbA1c began to decrease. After 9 months, his body weight was maintained at 62.8 kg and HbA1c improved to 8.5% (69 mmol/mol) with a total ketone body level of 781 µM, which is within the range of physiological ketosis . His C-peptide induced by glucagon did not differ significantly after the use of tofogliflozin (Supplementary Table S1). He then received an abdominal computer tomography (CT) scan. Compared with the findings at 28 years of age, his subcutaneous fat area (SFA) was decreased from 263.6 to 116.0 cm2 but his visceral fat area was hardly changed . Abdominal CT images at 28 years of age showed severe fatty infiltration of the whole pancreas, but this disappeared in the CT images performed at 35 years of age. The mean Hounsfield unit (HU) of the regions of interest (ROIs) with areas of 1.0 cm2 was measured at pancreatic head (P) and spleen (S) on CT images avoiding the metallic artifact from artificial rods for spinal fusion. Splenic attenuation was used for normalization of pancreatic attenuation. At 28 and 35 years of age, P was − 41.9 and − 2.6 HU, and S was 48.9 and 60.0 HU, respectively. Accordingly, P/S value improved drastically from − 0.857 to − 0.043. Lipid deposition in the pancreas was extremely improved, while that in the liver did not differ significantly . We continue to follow this patient at present and the effect has lasted at least 1 year. All procedures performed in the study were in accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional and/or national research committee and with the 1964 Helsinki declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards. Written informed consent was obtained from all individual participants included in the study.