A 22-year-old gentleman presented with a one-year history of gradual worsening of horizontal binocular diplopia. The diplopia was worst on his right lateral gaze. He denied any symptoms of raised intracranial pressure or any head trauma. There was no blurring of vision and no visual field loss. He appeared fit and healthy otherwise. No family history of malignancy and no significant psycho-social history.
Neurological examination revealed a right abducens nerve and right hypoglossal nerve palsy, sparing the other cranial nerves. There was no long tract sign or cerebellar sign. Visual acuity was 6/6 in both eyes, and a normal visual field test.
Neuroimaging showed a lesion located at the right spheno-occipital region with epicentre at clivus causing destruction to adjacent bone. He then underwent a right supraorbital craniotomy and debulking of the tumour. Histopathological examination revealed low-grade chondrosarcoma (immunochemical staining profile: S100 positive, D2–40 positive).
Eight months post-operatively, Magnetic Resonant Imaging (MRI) of the brain showed residual mass extending to the cavernous sinus. His right abducens nerve and hypoglossal nerve remains impaired after the surgery. The patient was not keen on any radiotherapy offered by the oncologist and subsequently defaulted for 5 years.
When he returned for his follow up, he reported no new symptoms, with his clinical condition status quo. There was no sign of raised intracranial pressure. An MRI revealed that the lesion over the right clivus has enlarged causing the right internal carotid artery displacement and right cavernous sinus compression . He then underwent a right orbitozygomatic craniotomy with excision of the tumour. However, parts of tumour that had invaded the clivus were left behind. Histopathological examination showed central chondrosarcoma (Grade 2) which is strongly and diffusely immunoreactive to S100 .
He has completed radiotherapy of 33 cycles over a period of 6 months after the surgery. On the latest Ophthalmology clinic visit, the VI and XII palsies still persist . Other neurological examination was normal and he has no new complaints. During the latest visit, neurosurgical team has no active surgical intervention. He is now under neurosurgical and ophthalmology follow up regularly.