The patient was a 65-year-old Caucasian woman, with a history of cutaneous mastocytosis. She was divorced, with two children, and was a retired teacher. The patient did not smoke or drink alcohol. She had no major medical history except the presence of lumbar and femoral osteopenia. A detailed medical examination was performed on admission and revealed very good general condition, weight 54 kg, height 163 cm, blood pressure 120/85 mmHg, pulse 52 beats per minute, body temperature 37.3°C, supple abdomen, without hepatosplenomegaly, and normal cardiovascular, pulmonary, and neurological examinations. She had exhibited symptoms of mastocytosis for 36 years with pruritus and was diagnosed by skin biopsy. Dermatological examination revealed small brown-red maculopapules on the thorax, back, and arms . A positive Darier’s sign was elicited 5 minutes after skin scratching (the skin becomes swollen, itchy, and red). Additional laboratory analyses were performed. Complete blood count, blood ionogram, and glycemia were normal. No abnormal liver or renal functions were detected. Moderate proteinuria (0,18 g/24 hours) was diagnosed and had to be monitored,. The serum tryptase level was slightly higher than normal (23.3 ng/ml) during crisis. Magnetic resonance imaging showed no evidence of skeletal involvement, and paraclinical examination had concluded the absence of extracutaneous manifestations. The systemic form of the disease had thus been excluded, and the diagnosis of cutaneous mastocytosis had been confirmed. A dermatological treatment was prescribed to the patient: application of a dermocorticoid cream once or twice a day with a maximum of two tubes of creams per month (clobetasol propionate at 0.05%, at the time of skin lesions with prurit). It was supplemented by oral administration of an antiallergic antihistamine drug (levocetirizine dihydrochloride 5 mg, two tablets per day). These local and oral treatments have been ineffective in the long term. Finally, photochemotherapy was also proposed to the patient. Photochemotherapy combines treatment with psoralen and exposure of the skin to long-wave ultraviolet radiation (PUVA). At the time of the assessment, PUVA therapy (30 sessions, 1500 J) had been given each year for 4 years. The sessions had achieved reduction of pruritus with persistence of a moderate Darier’s sign, but very unaesthetic skin lesions had persisted with profuse thrusts. These cutaneous symptoms significantly decreased the quality of life of the patient.
During the medical consultation, the patient was informed of the objectives and procedures of the psychobehavioral assessment of the Millon Behavioral Medicine Diagnostic (MBMD) tool [–]. MBMD is a self-report inventory containing 165 true–false items. It provides scales to assess psychobehavioral factors, such as negative health habits, psychiatric indications, coping styles, stress moderators, treatment prognostics, and management guides. The scale aimed to identify attitudes that may affect health of the patient.
At the next visit, after giving consent, the patient told her life history during a structured interview. The Holmes and Rahe Social Readjustment Rating Scale was used to score each stressful life event in “Life Change Units” (LCU). The life events and LCU were collected in an Excel file and classified chronologically. LCU applied to life events for 1 year were summed to assess the annual stress score. In parallel, the medical data of the electronic health records were chronologically integrated in the Excel file to establish a comprehensive dermatological history of the mastocytosis. An automatized graph integrating annual stress scores and cutaneous symptoms was generated.
Analysis of life history and cutaneous symptoms indicated that stressful events could have exacerbated the symptoms of cutaneous mastocytosis . We observed that, if annual stress score of life events exceeded 50 LCU on the Holmes and Rahe scale, skin manifestations in relation to mastocytosis were induced subsequently. An annual score of 50 LCU could thus be considered as the threshold for stress tolerance of this patient.
The MBMD results detailed the psychobehavioral profile of the patient . This scale identifies attitudes and relationships that may affect health (with significant prevalence score >75) . The psychiatric indicators (anxiety–tension, depression, cognitive dysfunction, emotional lability, guardedness) did not evidence significant psychiatric comorbidities at the time of assessment . The MBMD results detailed the stress moderators of the patient . For the patient, social isolation and the absence of spiritual support reinforced the stressful effect of life events, which could exacerbate the dermatologic symptoms of mastocytosis. Coping styles are shown in Fig c. They reflect ways of dealing with life stress and illness. The significant prevalence scores revealed denigrated coping style. This personality trait would predispose the patient to somatic manifestations. In Fig d, the significant prevalence score of treatment prognostics indicates the patient’s characteristics that should be considered by the clinicians because they influence treatment outcome. We noticed a low compliance with treatment as well as periods of medication abuse, which did not help care. Regarding everyday behavior, the MBMD test did not reveal negative health habits at that time (alcohol, drugs, eating, caffeine, inactivity, smoking, data not shown.