A 57-year-old indigenous Australian diabetic female presented with decreased visual acuity, pain and redness in the right eye 3 days after intravitreal aflibercept injection (Eylea®—Regeneron, USA). The patient was a bilateral pseudophakic and had long-standing, high-risk proliferative diabetic retinopathy treated previously with bilateral intravitreal aflibercept and panretinal photocoagulation, as well as a vitrectomy for left tractional retinal detachment. No intraocular procedures had been performed in the affected eye 6 months prior to the most recent injection. The patient suffered with ischaemic heart disease, chronic kidney disease and refractory hypertension and was edentulous.
The indication for anti-VEGF therapy was right vitreous haemorrhage with suspicion of diabetic maculopathy, responsible for a pre-injection best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of count fingers at 1 m. Routine right inferotemporal intravitreal injection was performed following preparation with povidone-iodine drops, application of topical chlorhexidine and facial draping. The injector wore a mask, and the procedure was followed by chloramphenicol drops QID, intended for 5 days.
Three days post-injection, the patient represented with right globe tenderness and declined BCVA—to hand movements. Intraocular pressure was 34 mmHg, and there was marked conjunctival injection, corneal oedema and anterior chamber inflammation with a 3.2-mm hypopyon. BCVA in the unaffected left eye was 6/24 with pinhole testing.
Systemic antibiotics were commenced with oral ciprofloxacin and intravenous vancomycin, and anterior chamber (AC) and vitreous sampling performed. Intracameral cephazolin 1 mg/0.1 mL, and intravitreal vancomycin 2 mg/0.1 mL and ceftazidime 2.25 mg/0.1 mL were administered following AC and vitreous taps. Post-operatively, ongoing therapy of oral ciprofloxacin 500 mg BD (adjusted for renal dysfunction, total of 14 doses), hourly ciprofloxacin 0.3% drops and hourly gentamicin 1.5% drops were implemented. Four days after the commencement of this regimen, topical prednisolone 1% was introduced second hourly. Rothia dentocariosa was isolated from the vitreous sample, while the anterior chamber sample demonstrated gram-positive cocci which could not be cultured. Antimicrobial sensitivities were not available due to the lack of qualifying data; however, discussion with a medical microbiologist recommended continuation of ciprofloxacin only—prompting cessation of gentamicin drops. Over the course of 4 weeks, the initial hypopyon transitioned into a layered hypopyon with a light pink pigmentation—similar to the appearance described in endophthalmitis caused by other organisms termed ‘pink hypopyon’ . At 4 weeks, BCVA had improved to hand movements, the hypopyon had resolved and repeat AC and vitreous taps were performed showing no growth. Reinjections with intracameral cephazolin 1 mg/0.1 mL, and intravitreal vancomycin 2 mg/0.1 mL and ceftazidime 2.25 mg/0.1 mL were given. Seven weeks after the onset of endophthalmitis, right vitrectomy with intraocular lens explant, endolaser and epiretinal membrane peel was performed. Findings, intraoperatively at that time, demonstrated a widespread retinal ischaemia with necrosis superiorly and nasally, and she was left aphakic. At 9 weeks post-onset of endophthalmitis, she remained aphakic and her BCVA had improved to 6/36.