A 16-year-old male presented at our hospital with postprandial abdominal pain that had been occurring for about 3 years. The patient was refusing to attend high school because of the abdominal pain, and he had symptoms of depression. Enhanced three-dimensional computed tomographic angiography of the abdomen showed stenosis of the celiac trunk . An abdominal echogram showed translocation and deformity of the celiac artery between inspiration and expiration (A), and an abdominal Doppler ultrasonic echogram showed that the blood flow of the celiac trunk varied between inspiration and expiration (b). Hence, the patient was diagnosed with MALS. Informed consent was obtained from the patient and his parents, and laparoscopic ligament dissection was performed.
General anesthesia was induced, and the patient was placed in the supine position with a 30° degree both legs opened. An open method was used to insert a 12-mm umbilical camera port, two 5-mm ports in the left upper abdomen, and a 10-mm and a 5-mm port in the right upper abdomen. Laparoscopy was performed with a 30° laparoscope (KARL STORZ Endoskope, Tokyo, Japan). After liver retraction, a Harmonic Scalpel® (ETHICON, Tokyo, Japan) was used to open the minor omentum and dissect between the right diaphragmatic crus and the gastric ligament. The left gastric vein and artery were identified and taped . The median arcuate ligament (MAL) and nervous plexus around the celiac artery were identified, and the thickened diaphragmatic crura were exposed . The MAL and the nervous plexus were then dissected, and the dissection line was continued to the front of the abdominal aorta. The diaphragmatic fibers anterior to the aorta were dissected for approximately 5 cm in the cephalad direction, exposing about 4 cm of the abdominal aorta (, ). Intraoperative Doppler ultrasonography confirmed that the celiac arterial blood flow no longer varied between expiration and inspiration . After surgery, the patient’s symptoms were relieved, and decompression of the celiac artery was confirmed using three-dimensional computed tomographic angiography . The patient was discharged from hospital on postoperative day 7, and has no recurrent symptoms at 12 months postoperatively.