A 46-year-old hypertensive man presented to our outpatient clinic with a dry cough that had been bothering him for 3 weeks, as well as periodic shortness of breath with chest heaviness when exerted. He has no prior history of chest pain, hemoptysis, or weight loss, nor does he have any relevant medical history. His blood pressure is controlled with medication. He was a cook, non-alcoholic, non-smoker, and having a body weight of 65 kg for his 166 cm height.
Physical examination of the patient revealed absent breath sounds along with dullness on percussion over both the middle and lower chest. Routine blood workup was within the standard limit except for mild anemia and raised ESR.
A routine chest X-ray revealed a massive homogenous mass that occupied the lower two-thirds of both chests . CECT revealed a substantial fat density area (24 cm transverse, 16 cm cranio-caudal, 17 cm AP dimension) at the mid and lower parts of both chests, involving the mediastinal fat plane compressing and shifting both lungs upwards . A CT-guided FNAC was performed, and the smear showed polymorph, lymphocytes, and fatty tissue fragments on a blood background, indicating lipoma. Spirometry revealed an obstructive pattern with a forced expiratory volume in first second (FEV1) of 1.2 L (42% predicted), forced vital capacity (FVC) 1.7 L (49% predicted) and FEV1/FVC ratio of 70%. Preoperative echocardiography showed no evidence of cardiac compression with an ejection fraction of 61%.
The chest cavity was explored through a standard median sternotomy to provide complete access to both the pleural cavities and the mediastinum in order to remove the massive intrathoracic lipoma. The gross appearance was a thinly encapsulated, lobulated, dull mass with a pale yellow color that had a smooth surface and was soft to the touch . Mass was continuous with the fat plane of the anterior mediastinum and supra cardiac blood vessel. The right-sided part of the mass was much larger than the left side. There were few adhesions with both lungs, and the lungs were compressed by the tumor. By blunt and sharp dissection and manipulation, tumor from both chest cavity and mediastinum were completely separated and removed. We did not find any obvious vascular pedicle for the tumor during mobilisation except few tiny vessels from mediastinum.
The resected tumor weighed around 5400 g. It contains four lobulated parts, the largest of which is approximately 24*10*8 cm in size. The cut section comprises yellow lobulated fatty tissue . Final histologic analysis of the tumor revealed an encapsulated tumor with abundant mature adipose tissue, a few scattered strands of fibroconnective tissue, and multiple foci of fat necrosis . There was no evidence of abnormal mitosis or invasive cancer.
The postoperative period went smoothly, and on the sixth postoperative day, the patient was discharged home after removing the chest and mediastinal drain with a normal chest X-ray. His physical capacity and respiratory health both improved considerably after he was discharged. After 1 month of removal of the mass, we performed a spirometry to see the improvement of lung function. We observed FVC improved to 2.6 L form 1.7 L and FEV1 improved to 2.0 L from preoperative 1.2 L.
At 6 months of follow-up, there was no evidence of recurrence, and the CXR was normal .