A 46-year-old Japanese woman (height 166 cm, weight 193.2 kg; body mass index 70.1 kg/m2) was scheduled to undergo laparotomy for a giant ovarian tumor. Abdominal computed tomography showed a tensed 35-cm cystic mass that arose from the left ovary and occupied the entire abdomen . Preoperative pulmonary function tests indicated a restrictive impairment. The patient had no obstructive sleep apnea; therefore, bilevel positive airway pressure was not required. However, she was assessed as bedridden and had a below 2 metabolic equivalent of tasks because she could manage to eat and use the toilet in a sitting position. We predicted difficulty in airway management due to Mallampati III, severe obesity, limited thyromental distance, age (46 years), and thickness of the neck . Acid reduction prophylaxis was not administered the night prior to induction of general anesthesia.
During the induction of anesthesia, in consideration of her discomfort, the patient was placed in the ramp position and preoxygenated with a high-flow nasal cannula (HFNC) at 30 L/minute at an inspired oxygen fraction (FiO2) of 1.0. After spraying about 4 ml 2% lidocaine into the pharyngolarynx of the patient, a videolaryngoscope (McGRATH MAC®, Aircraft Medical, UK) was inserted while the patient was conscious. Topical airway block was not selected. The patient did not complain of pain, and the glottis could be observed visually. A tracheal tube with inner diameter of 7.0 mm was subsequently intubated. In addition to peripheral insertion of a central venous catheter before surgery, the invasive arterial pressure measurement and peripheral venous path were secured under ultrasonic guidance. Intraoperative anesthesia was maintained by continuous infusion of desflurane using the bispectral index (BIS) target (MAC 1.0); rocuronium bromide was added intermittently to obtain a clinically adequate depth of anesthesia, and remifentanil was administered continuously at 0.1–0.3 μg/kg/minute (ideal body weight 60 kg). After induction of anesthesia, the FiO2 was 0.4. The tidal volume (TV) was set at 8 ml/kg predicted body weight and positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 8–10 mmH2O. After an abdominal incision, a total of 15,750 ml of tumor content was carefully aspirated at under 1 L/minute. With aspiration, airway pressure and central venous pressure decreased markedly, and blood pressure stabilized without catecholamine in the infusion load . Various drugs have been terminated with the completion of surgery, the patient awoke 15 min after discontinuing inhaled agents. After surgery, the patient was extubated with HFNC at 30 L/minute and FiO2 of 1.0. The patient’s respiratory condition after extubation was stable, and she was returned to the intensive care unit (ICU) under administration of 6 L/minute of oxygen. Wound infiltration anesthesia was performed in the operative field with 60 ml levobupivacaine (0.25%) because postoperative pain control, epidural anesthesia, and abdominal trunk nerve block were judged to be difficult to perform by prescan using ultrasonic equipment. The operation time was 266 minutes, and the anesthesia time was 404 minutes. The patient lost a small amount of blood, and fluid volume was 1550 ml. The patient was discharged from the ICU on postoperative day 38. Her discharge from the hospital was delayed due to catheter-related infections, diet, weight control, adjustment of antihypertensive and diuretic medications, rehabilitation, and pressure ulcers.