A 60-year-old man presented to our hospital with a fever of 38.9°C and worsening back pain over the last 7 days. His medical history included hypertension and arrhythmia (details unknown). He had never undergone transthoracic echocardiography (TTE). His regular medication included amlodipine, telmisartan, and hydrochlorothiazide. His blood pressure was 105/71 mmHg, pulse rate was 107 b.p.m., respiratory rate was 20 breaths/min, and oxygen saturation was 97%. Cardiac auscultation detected a holosystolic murmur over the mitral area. Blood examination demonstrated elevated C-reactive protein level (10.91 mg/dL, normal range 0–0.5 mg/dL, ) and slightly elevated liver enzymes [alanine aminotransferase 47 U/L (normal range 8–40 U/L) and aspartate aminotransferase 37 U/L (normal range 7–38 IU/L)] but normal creatinine level (1.00 mg/dL, normal range 0.61–1.04 mg/dL). His blood count showed mild thrombocytopenia [leucocytes 66 × 109/L (normal range 40–100 × 109/L), haemoglobin 15.9 g/dL (normal range 13.2–17.2 g/dL), and platelet 140 × 109/L (normal range 150–400 × 109/L)]. His chest radiograph was normal. Transthoracic echocardiography ( and Videos 1 and 2) and transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE, and Video 3; , ) showed moderate-to-severe mitral regurgitation (MR; regurgitant volume: 30 mL/beat; regurgitant fraction: 50%; a wall-impinging jet that refluxes into nearly half of the left atrium) due to a rupture of the chordae tendineae attached to the left atrial aspect of the P2 segment (middle scallop) with an oscillating mass, indicating a vegetation (up to 16 mm on TOE). Four sets of blood cultures showed growth of gram-positive cocci within 24 h. The patient satisfied two major criteria as per the modified Duke criteria: four sets of positive blood cultures and an echocardiogram with oscillating intracardiac mass, which classified him as having definite IE. He did not claim any symptom of heart failure (New York Heart Association Class I). Upon admission to our hospital with a diagnosis of IE, he was empirically treated with sulbactam/ampicillin (12 g/day) and ceftriaxone (2 g/day), which were deescalated to penicillin G (2400 million units/day) and gentamicin (160 mg/day) on Day 6 after the identification of Streptococcus sanguinis in the blood cultures. He was haemodynamically stable without any signs of heart failure, and the infection was well controlled. Therefore, antibiotic therapy was continued under careful observation with valvular surgery on hold.
To examine the cause of his back pain, a lumbar spine MRI was performed on Day 1, but no remarkable findings of vertebral infection were detected . The fever and C-reactive protein level subsided on Day 4 , and repeated blood cultures performed 3 days after starting antimicrobials were negative, suggesting effectiveness of the antimicrobial therapy. Nevertheless, the patient’s back pain persisted and gradually worsened. A repeat lumbar spine MRI performed on Day 8 revealed high signal intensity within the margins of the L4 and L5 vertebral bodies and the intervertebral disk on T2-weighted images, accompanied by a nodal mass at the dorsal aspect of the L5 vertebral body . The patient was diagnosed with VO at the L4–L5 level accompanied with an epidural abscess. He was recommended bed rest wearing a customized corset for prevention of bone degradation. The patient was treated with penicillin G and gentamicin for the first 2 weeks and then with penicillin G alone for the next 4 weeks. His lumbar pain gradually subsided, and on Day 36, a lumbar spine MRI revealed resolution of the lumbar spine abscess, although the area of high signal intensity persisted . The patient was discharged on Day 47. Since the patient had an epidural abscess (which is a risk factor for recurrent VO), a further 8-week treatment with oral antibiotics was recommended, after which his inflammatory markers returned to normal on Day 95 . Follow-up TTE (; , and ) and TOE also showed the prolapsing P2 segment with a vegetation (up to 7 mm on TOE), severe MR (regurgitant volume: 70 mL/beat; regurgitant fraction: 62%), and a rupture of the chordae tendineae of the mitral valve. Although surgical treatment was considered plausible, the patient did not consent to the surgery and has been visiting an outpatient clinic periodically for follow-up.