A 14-year-old lady was referred to our Neurology services from a tertiary mental health hospital with concerns of persistently very high-grade fevers, altered mental status and convulsions for a week.
Prior to admission in the mental health hospital, she presented with a 2-week history of aggressive behaviour, wandering away from home and over talkativeness. She was otherwise previously well with no known personal or family history of mental illness. A diagnosis of a first-episode acute mania was made and she was started on intramuscular zuclopenthixol acetate (as Clopixol-Acuphase®) 25mg stat.
Forty-eight hours after administration of zuclopenthixol, she developed high-grade fevers with temperatures between 38°c to 42°c over several days. This was associated with multiple generalised tonic-clonic convulsions each lasting about 5 minutes. These were associated with alteration in mental state, frothing from the mouth, post-ictal sleepiness, and loss of bowel and bladder control. She had no post-ictal paralysis. These seizures lasted for over a week. There were no features suggestive of primary catatonia, such as extreme negativism and an unusual movement. However, she reported no history of headache, vomiting, blurring of vision or yellowing of eyes. She did not have a flu-like syndrome, joint swellings, bleeding under the skin or skin rash. Review of other systems was essentially normal. She was not on any chronic medication and had no history of physical trauma. She was initiated on Paracetamol 1g three times a day with no response in temperature reduction. A work up for infective causes was non-yielding. A provisional diagnosis of malignant hyperthermia was made and prompted an urgent referral for specialised neurology care.
On admission to the Neurology unit, examination revealed a sick looking young lady, drooling saliva and tremulous. Her Glasgow coma scale (GCS) was 8/15 (E4, V1, M3), temperature 39.4°c, blood pressure 107/66 mmHg, pulse rate 107 beats per minutes, random blood sugar 9.6 mmol/L, respiratory rate 22 breaths per minute. Her oxygen saturation was at 97% on ambient air. She had generalised lead-pipe rigidity with appreciable nuchal rigidity but negative Kerning’s sign. She had a reduced muscle power in all limbs (3/5), normal deep tendon reflexes and a negative Babinski’s reflex. Her pupils were equal, accommodative and reactive to light. The remainder of the physical examination was unremarkable.
Her complete blood count revealed a haemoglobin concentration 9.5g/dl, a raised total white cell count of 21.26x109 cells/L predominantly neutrophils (20.66x109cells/L), and a platelet count 122x109/L. Her urea, creatinine and electrolytes were within normal limits. Her alanine aminotransferase and aspartate aminotransferase were 219 units (x5.5 upper limit of normal (ULN)) and 106 units (x2.65 ULN), respectively. There was no myoglobinuria on urinalysis other urine parameters were within normal limits. Total bilirubin level was 5.4 (reference range: <3.4) micromoles per litre. A lumbar puncture was done to exclude an on-going CNS infection and had a normal opening CSF pressure, revealing normal CSF chemistry and no organisms were demonstrated on a gram staining and India ink preparations. Chest x-ray and computed tomography of the brain were normal. We were unable to obtain serum creatinine phosphokinase levels to rule out rhabdomyolysis.
Based on the above findings, a diagnosis of neuroleptic malignant syndrome was made. We stopped Clopixol-Acuphase. Phenytoin 200mg twice daily, dantrolene 25mg three times a day and bromocriptine 5mg once a day were commenced via nasogastric tube. Supportively, nasogastric tube and urinary catheter were inserted, cold intravenous crystalloid fluid administered; cold tepid sponging and axillary ice packs were commenced. We monitored GCS, vitals and urine output four hourly. She received daily physical therapy during hospitalisation through our physiotherapy services.
She was afebrile within a week and her GCS improved to 15/15 over a period of 3 weeks without being admitted in the intensive care or high dependency units. In addition to the complete neurological and physical recovery at the neurology unit, she also remained calmed and free of psychiatric symptoms and she was eventually discharged through the mental health unit.