A 7-year old girl presented to the local hospital with mild swelling in her left shank that had persisted for one week. A radiograph of the tibiofibular showed no abnormalities , and a herbal remedy for external use was applied. One week later, the shank swelling aggravated, and she presented to our hospital. On examination, apart from the swollen shank, we also observed multiple port-wine stains and limb overgrowth (longer extremity and larger foot). Ultrasonography revealed great/lesser saphenous vein thrombosis in the lower left leg and an ill-defined hypoechoic mass containing flaky hyperechoic foci near the left tibia. Based on the aforementioned findings, a clinical diagnosis of KTS was established. The use of low-molecular weight heparin and mucopolysaccharide polysulfate cream was initiated.
The patient re-admitted 6 weeks later, reporting a palpable hard mass in the anterolateral left shank and complete resolution of the swelling. Radiological examination revealed a 17-cm periosteal new bone formation along the left tibia and multiple dilated vascular structures in the left shank . Coagulation status was normal. No fever, allergies, severe pain, or a recent history of trauma were presented.
Bone neoplasm was first suspected but subsequently ruled out due to the regular pattern of periosteal new bone formation without soft tissue mass, bone destruction, and symptoms. However, concerning the fast-growing lesion in KTS, we performed a core needle biopsy, which revealed a possible parosteal hemangioma. Consequently, an excisional biopsy of the lesion was performed and intraoperatively, only regularly thickened eggshell-like hard tissues and blood clots in the cavity of the lesion were found, Pathological analysis revealed hyperplasia of the bone tissues with cystic wall-like structures, old hemorrhage with hemosiderin deposition, and no tumor cells. Thereafter, an elastic stocking treatment was prescribed. During the first two-year follow-up, recurrence of the mass or sign of progression of KTS was not observed.