A 65-year-old Japanese female with a history of hyperlipidemia experienced palpitations and uncertain chest discomfort while eating, before developing left upper and lower limb paralysis. During emergency transport, her blood pressure dropped to 62 mmHg, and right joint paralysis developed. She was transported to our hospital 35 minutes after onset with an additional presentation of right back pain. Neurological severity was rated as National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) 2 (left upper limb paralysis and right conjugate deviation). There was no heart murmur. Left–right difference in blood pressure at the emergency department was less than 20 mmHg (right upper limb 77/54 mmHg, left upper limb 87/45 mmHg, right lower limb 102/92 mmHg, left lower limb 94/51 mmHg). No elevation in white blood cells or C-reactive protein was noted, and there were no findings suggestive of acidosis. d-dimer was mildly elevated at 6.3 μg/mL. Serum creatinine and estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) were 1.11 mg/dL and 38.6 mL/minute/1.73 m2, respectively, and renal function was not impaired to the extent that contrast media could not be used. An echocardiogram was not performed. Rehydration was started, and there was no hemodynamic deterioration. A chest radiograph taken 110 minutes after onset showed no enlargement of the aorta or mediastinum . A plain head CT scan did not suggest acute infarction or bleeding . However, on CT perfusion (CTP), the right middle cerebral artery region showed an elongation of delay (DLY) and increases in time to peak (TTP) and mean transit time (MTT). Cerebral blood flow (CBF) was decreased, but cerebral blood volume (CBV) was preserved . Due to the absence of early CT signs in the plain head CT, we determined that the patient had ischemic penumbra. On the CT angiography (CTA) reconstructed from the arterial phase of the CTP scan, the right middle cerebral artery was poorly depicted . However, the four-dimensional maximum-intensity projection (4D MIP) image reconstructed from CTP showed a delayed enhancement of both the right internal carotid artery and the right middle cerebral artery. In the late phase, the distal portion of the right middle cerebral artery was well depicted, and no stenosis or obstruction was observed at the intracranial artery, suggesting a proximal vascular lesion . A contrasted helical CT scan from the neck to abdomen was performed using contrast medium residue soon after CTP imaging. This revealed an acute aortic dissection of Stanford type A with false lumen patency, from the base of the aorta to the level of the renal artery bifurcation. The dissection extended to the proximal right common carotid artery, and the true lumen of the right internal carotid artery was narrowed. The left renal artery was supplied by the false lumen . The brain tissue status on CTP was reversible ischemia, not irreversible infarction, and the patient was deemed to be eligible for emergency surgery, which included total arch replacement and open stent graft insertion approximately 3.5 hours after the onset of illness. The left upper limb paralysis had recovered to a manual muscle test (MMT) grade of about 4–5 after the surgery. The patient was ambulatory upon discharge from the hospital 23 days after the onset.