A 5-year-old boy of Hispanic background with no significant past medical history presented to the emergency department with a headache and three-month history of a painful, rapidly growing bump on the left side of the head. There was no history of trauma. Two weeks prior to presentation, the patient started feeling sporadic left eye pain without erythema, discharge, or vision changes. The patient’s parents also reported a recent bump on the right temple that self-resolved within three days. Physical examination revealed an immobile, spongy lesion on the left side of the head just superior to the pterion. The lesion was tender to palpation but there were no overlying skin changes or warmth. He had normal vital signs and a normal appearance other than an obvious skull deformity at the site of the lesion.
An initial ultrasound showed a non-compressible fluid collection involving soft tissues of the left cranium. A subsequent cranial X-ray was unremarkable. A computed tomography (CT) scan without contrast revealed an expansile, lytic lesion of the left parietal bone, located just posterior to the coronal suture. Heterogeneous attenuation was observed throughout the lesion . On T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the lesion demonstrated fluid-fluid levels and was centered in the subgaleal space with scalloping of the outertable and suspected breach of the underlying diploic space and inner table . T1-weighted MRI demonstrated further epidural enhancement without evidence of dural invasion . The lesion measured 3.5 × 1.7 × 2.8 cm and demonstrated mild adjacent sulcal effacement. The radiographic findings favored an aneurysmal bone cyst, and less likely Langerhans cell histiocytosis, dermoid cyst, and epidermoid cyst.
Given the patient’s significant pain and rapidly growing mass, the lesion was excised by craniectomy, and the skull repaired by titanium mesh cranioplasty . On microscopic examination, the lesion was composed of an inflammatory lymphohistiocytic infiltrate with Langerhans cells, multinucleate giant cells, and abundant eosinophils . By immunohistochemistry, the histiocytes expressed CD1a, CD207 (Langerin), CD68, and S-100, consistent with Langerhans cells . In addition to the Langerhans cell histiocytosis features, the lesion had large blood-filled cystic spaces consistent with aneurysmal bone cyst changes . The patient recovered without any complications and showed no evidence of recurrence six weeks post-operation.