A 63-year-old Miao (southwestern China) man was initially diagnosed with CKS in April 2010, with a history of limb lesions for 37 years and left eyelid and binaural lesions for 9 years. The patient was a farmer who had been living in Zhijin County of Guizhou Province for many years. He had been abstaining from alcohol for 10 years and continued smoking. His test for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was negative, with no associated immunodeficiency and no special family or psychosocial history. He denied having sexual contact with men. Routine laboratory tests were all normal. The vital signs were found to be stable. Examination of the skin showed multiple blue and purplish red patches and nodules varying in size from 1 to 4 cm, affecting the upper left eyelid, the bilateral auricle, limbs, hands and forefoot . Pathological biopsy of the right foot skin tissue suggested proliferation of fusiform cells and endothelial cells, with extravasation of red blood cells and intervening slit-like spaces .
Several months later, he presented with lumbago and fever, and spinal tuberculosis in the lumbar vertebra was highly suspected after computed tomography scan (CT) in December 2010. Bone destruction at the upper and lower edges of the lumbar vertebra and the superior border of the sacrum was reported . Physical examination showed stiffness in the physiological curvature of the spine and limited movement, along with decreased pain in both lower extremities, positive straight leg raising test, positive strength test of both lower extremities, positive for bilateral Thomas sign, positive for strong reflexes in both knees, negative for reflexes in left and right ankle joints, and positive for Babinski sign. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 96 mm/hour (normal range 0–15 mm/hour), and C-reactive protein (CRP) was 209.40 mg/L (normal range 0.00–8.00 mg/L). Diagnostic treatment with isoniazid (300 mg/day) and rifampicin (450 mg/day) for 4 weeks showed poor efficacy, and skin lesions increased with fever . He refused to continue taking antituberculosis drugs and returned home to recuperate. The patient's systemic symptoms resolved spontaneously after 3 months.
The patient was followed up again in July 2016, when a new CT was performed, and the image showed a partial response despite the absence of any medical treatment . The rash was recovering as the systemic symptoms improved . Laboratory investigations showed no abnormality with the exception of a slight elevation of the blood immunoglobulin G (IgG) to 17.6 g/L (normal range 11.51–14.22 g/L). The pathological examination of the skin lesions on the right foot again showed that the fissure-like blood vessels, erythrocyte extravasation and spindle cells were reduced, and the deposition of hemosiderin was increased . Immunohistochemistry test results were positive for CD31, CD34 and D2-40(+); Ki67 was 20% positive . A serology test for HHV-8 was negative. The open reading frame (ORF)-K1 of KSHV from skin tissue of the foot was amplified and sequenced . The sequence of our sample (JYP 2016) was compared to the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) GenBank database. Phylogenetic analysis was performed to confirm its identity and to infer its relationship with related species using the Randomized Axelerated Maximum Likelihood (RAxML) program and MrBayes version 3.1.2 Bayesian inference (BI) analysis, respectively . Based on the data analysis, the sequence was inferred as belonging to subtype A, and may represent an unknown genotype .
The patient was followed up by telephone in December 2020, and the general situation was fine. The rash was slightly smaller in scope and lighter in color than before, accompanied by occasional itching, but no special discomfort was reported and no treatment was given. The patient is still being followed up. The timeline of his disease progression is show in Fig. .