An 87-year-old male presented with a history of hypertension for over 50 years. He had type 2 diabetes for more than ten years, coronary heart disease for more than ten years, and "right lobectomy" for "right lung cancer" 16 years ago. The patient had a history of chronic renal insufficiency with basal serum creatinine around 187 μmol/L. In November 2020, he came to our outpatient department due to anorexia and nausea for half a month. His biochemical test results suggested that serum creatinine(Scr) was 428 μmol/L, urea nitrogen(BUN) was 20.9 mmol/L, the complement C3 was 0.53 g/L, C4 was standard, the IgG was 25.65 g/L, the blood eosinophil was 0.73 × 109/L, the total IgE was 453.3 IU/ mL, and the 24-h urinary protein quantification was 2.38 g. Urinary CT examination revealed a mass in the right lower ureter with the right renal and ureter hydronephrosis. Ultrasonography showed generalized superficial lymph node enlargement throughout the body. Due to the patient's previous history of lung cancer resection, the right ureteral mass was suspected to be a ureteral malignant tumor. We performed a urine examination three times to find abnormal cells, which were all negative. Cystoscopy and right ureteroscopy were performed by the urology department, which showed local bulging of the right ureteral orifice, ranging from about 2.5 × 1.0 cm, and stenosis of the right ureteral orifice, and an F6 double-J tube was indwelled in the lower segment of the right ureter. A biopsy was taken on a right ureteral orifice bulge, and a histopathological examination revealed the extruded and deformed fibrous tissue . Immunohistochemistry showed small IgG-positive and IgG4-positive plasma cells .
Traced serum IgG4 1890 mg/dL was significantly increased, and IgG4-RD was speculated. Renal biopsy revealed proliferation of mesangial cells and matrix proliferation, diffuse homogeneous thickening of the basement membrane, and diffuse fusion of foot processes. Abundant IgG4-positive plasma cells were seen in the renal interstitial, and several fields were more significant than 25 lenses per high power, the IgG4 + : IgG ratio is = 35%, and visible storiform pattern fibrosis . The diagnosis was consistent with diabetic nephropathy with IgG4-TIN. Therefore, it was considered that the patient's ureteral mass was IgG4-RD.
After implantation of the double-J tube of the right ureter, the patient's serum creatinine decreased to 279 μmol/L. Half a month later, treated with 32 mg/ day methylprednisolone tablets, and we reduced to 16 mg/ day five weeks later. After two months of treatment, the serum creatinine was 196 μmol/L and IgG4 171 mg/dL. Then decrease methylprednisolone to one tablet every 12 weeks. The patient has been followed up for one year, the dose of methylprednisolone tablets has been reduced to 4 mg/day, the serum creatinine is stable at around 200 μmol/L, and the IgG4 is 59 mg/dL. On reexamination, the systemic, superficial lymph nodes had been significantly reduced, the right ureteral mass and hydrops had disappeared , and removed the double-J tube after one year. Therefore, we considered that the patient's underlying chronic kidney disease was diabetic nephropathy, and the main factors of acute exacerbation of renal insufficiency were IgG4-related ureteral obstruction and IgG4-TIN.
According to the 2019 American College of Rheumatology (ACR) and European League Against Rheumatism (EULAR) classification criteria for IgG4-related disease , this case was scored as follows: Histopathology: Dense lymphocytic infiltration(+ 4); Kidney immunostaining: the IgG4 + : IgG ratio is < 40%, but IgG4 + cells/hpf is > 10(+ 7); Serum IgG4 concentration: > 5 × upper limit of normal(+ 11); Hypocomplementemia(+ 6). Total points are 28 > 20, and the diagnosis of IgG4-RD is precise. Combined with his ureteral mass, which was fibrous tissue that was slightly positive for IgG and IgG4, and the sound effect of hormone therapy, we comprehensively considered that this patient was a rare case of IgG4-RD involving both renal interstitium and ureter.