A 4-year-old boy presented to the pediatric emergency department with symptoms of cerebellar ataxia and gait disturbances. Sixteen days prior to that, his parents had consulted a primary care physician due to left earache and fever. No purulent discharge from the ear was evident at the time. Then, the patient was diagnosed with otitis media and was prescribed oral amoxicillin-clavulanic acid. Due to symptoms persistence, treatment was subsequently switched to oral cefuroxime.
Upon presentation to our emergency department, a complete blood count showed leukocytosis and neutrophilia. The prominence of cerebellar symptoms raised suspicion for an intracranial pathology and thus an emergency contrast-enhanced CT scan was performed. The scan revealed a multilobular cystic lesion with peripheral contrast enhancement, located in the subdural space of the posterior fossa, in contact with the tentorium cerebelli superiorly . The lesion was compressing the left cerebellar hemisphere, which appeared edematous and the cerebellar midline was displaced by 9 mm. Moreover, the left middle ear cavity, ipsilateral mastoid air cells, and partially the left ethmoid air cells were occupied by fluid. The left transverse sinus could not be recognized in the scan. Subsequently, in order to evaluate more accurately the extent of the posterior fossa collection and to address the CT findings suggesting left transverse sinus thrombosis, a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan and a magnetic resonance venography (MRV) were conducted. MRI confirmed the presence of extensive infratentorial subdural empyema over the left cerebellar hemisphere, accompanied by displacement and edema of the left cerebellum. MRV revealed diminished flow through the left transverse sinus and no flow through the left sigmoidal sinus , and these findings were consistent with sinus thrombosis. Consecutively, an emergency operation was scheduled. A left suboccipital craniotomy was performed. The transverse sinus was recognized and the dura was incised. Following traction of the cerebellum, the subdural space was expanded and the purulent collection was encountered. Cultures from the purulent fluid were obtained and the empyema was evacuated.
Intravenous antibiotic treatment with piperacillin-tazobactam and teicoplanin was initiated. After 4 days the patient had no fever, no neurological deficits, and was ambulatory. Follow-up MRI scan documented the successful evacuation of the empyema and subsiding inflammation . Three weeks into the treatment, a morbilliform skin rash was developed on the patient's trunk, face, and limbs consistent with drug allergic reaction. The antibiotic treatment was then switched to oral clarithromycin, which was administered for 3 more weeks, for a total of 6 weeks of antibiotic treatment. The patient was discharged from the hospital 4 weeks after the operation.