A 74 year old man was admitted to the Neurological Unit of Desio Hospital in September 2004 for sudden onset of a speech disorder and left side weakness. Over the past ten years he developed a progressive bilateral ptosis, hearing loss and difficulties in swallowing. For these symptoms he was hospitalized in 1996 elsewhere. The neurological examination performed at that time revealed bilateral ptosis, bilateral hearing loss and mild dysphagia. The neurophysiological examination, performed in 1996, revealed a myopathic pattern. However, at that time the patient refused any further investigation including muscle biopsy. The remaining patient’s past history was unremarkable. In particular, except for a mild increase in cholesterol levels, cerebrovascular risk factors were absent. Family history was negative for muscular disorders, stroke, hearing loss, diabetes, short stature, headache, mental retardation or dementia. Neurological examination, performed on admission in 2004, revealed bilateral ptosis and severe ophthalmoparesis, hearing loss, dysarthria, left facial nerve palsy and mild left side hemiparesis. Acute phase NIHSS score was 4. Fatigability and myotonic phenomena were absent. Acute phase cerebral CT scan was negative for acute ischemic lesions. Cerebral MRI, performed two days later, showed a right pre-rolandic hyperintensity on T2-weighted sequence, not confined to a specific vascular territory, with a slight enhancement after gadolinium, consistent with an acute ischaemic lesion. Other bilateral focal hyperintensities, mostly in the posterior circulation territory (cerebellar bilateral, left temporo-occipital and frontal) consistent with stabilized ischaemic lesions, were also found . Biochemistry was normal except for increased level of serum creatine kinase (189→643, n.v 38–174 U/l). Inflammatory and autoimmune markers were normal as well as lactate serum level (1,7; n.v 0.5-1.8 mmol/l). Electrocardiogram, echocardiography and abdominal ultrasonography were negative. Audiometry revealed a moderate sensorimotor bilateral hypoacusia. Ophthalmological examination, including fluoroangiography, excluded a pigmentary retinopathy. Electroencephalography was normal too. Neurophysiological examination demonstrated myopathic signs in frontal, masseters, orbicularis oculi and mouth muscles without denervation and normal findings in the other examined muscles (right biceps, triceps, interosseous and left and right quadriceps, tibialis anterior, medial gemellus). No signs of polyneuropathy were detected. Ticlopidine 250 mg twice daily was started. Left hemiparesis resolved completely within 7 days. During the following years a progressive worsening of ptosis, ophthalmoparesis, hearing loss and dysphagia was observed. Cognitive impairment was not detected at MMSE. Headache and seizures were not referred too. In November 2008 the patient was hospitalized again for a sudden onset of aphasia. No other new-onset neurological symptoms were referred. The neurological examination performed at that time showed global aphasia and a right hemiparesis with right Babinski sign. The NIHSS score was 4. Residual signs such as severe bilateral ptosis, bilateral opthalmoparesis, bilateral hearing loss, dysarthria, solid food dysphagia were unchanged. Fatigability, cerebellar ataxia or sensitive deficits were absent. Biochemistry, echocardiography, epiaortic vessel Doppler ultrasound were normal. Cerebral CT scan performed in the acute phase was unmodified in comparison to the previous ones. Cerebral MRI at day 3 demonstrated a small cortical-subcortical left temporo-occipital lesion with DWI restriction . The strength deficit resolved in a few days whereas a language rehabilitation was necessary. Aphasia progressively recovered and was not present at the three months follow-up. The patient continued to assume ticlopidine.
Total DNA was extracted from peripheral blood and muscle. PCR-RFLP analysis did not reveal m.3243A>G mutation. Southern blot analysis of muscle mtDNA revealed the presence of several bands compatible with mtDNA multiple deletions . A specific PCR assay identified mtDNA multiple deletions using two primers (forward 7440–7465 and reverse complement 16135–16110) and the following amplification protocol: an initial denaturation at 94°C for 2 min, followed by 25 cycles (94°C for 30 s, 55°C for 30 s, and 68°C for 90 s) and a final extension for 2 min at 72°C (Platinum HiFi Taq Polymerase by Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). The entire coding sequence of POLG1 gene (NM_002693.1) was PCR-amplified and directly sequenced disclosing the presence of three heterozygous variants: the c.752C>T (exon 3, p.T251I), c.1760C>T (exon 10, p.P587L) and c.3556G>C (exon 22, p.D1186H). We did not test any other family member for POLG mutations since parents are not alive and siblings are not available. Both the mutations p.T251I and p.P587L were reported several times in subjects showing multiple clinical phenotypes, according to the Human DNA Polymerase Gamma Mutation Database . The missense mutation c.3556G>C was not listed in the dbSNP database as well as in the POLG mutation database and it was not found in more than 200 Italian healthy controls. The affected residue (position 1186) is evolutionarily conserved across species. Three software programs were used to predict the overall severity of this variant. According PolyPhen-2 , SIFT (Sorting Intolerant From Tolerant, ) and PMut , the p.D1186H change is predicted to be highly deleterious.
In 2004 the patient underwent a left biceps skeletal muscle biopsy. Cryostatic cross sections were processed according to standard histological and histochemical techniques including Haematoxylin & Eosin (H&E), Gomori Trichrome (GT), Cytochrome c Oxidase (COX), Succinate Dehydrogenase (SDH) and double reaction for COX and SDH . Electron microscopy studies were performed as described .
Histological examination of muscle specimen showed slight fiber size variability, some nuclear centralizations and several fiber splittings along with a consistent number (n=10) of ragged red fibers (RRF). Necrosis was observed in a few fibers. Histochemically, several fibers were Cytochrome c Oxidase (COX)-negative, many of these fibers were also intensely SDH-positive .
DNA sample and muscle biopsy were collected after obtaining patient informed consent according to the local ethics and privacy and human subjects’ protection regulations and were taken as part of standard patient care.