We describe a 3-year-old Moroccan boy with no past medical, social, environmental, or family history who was referred to our department with dyspnea on moderate exertion for 3 months. His parents were not related. He was not on any medication at the time of presentation.
On physical examination, he appeared to be a well-grown and healthy appearing boy with a weight of 15 kg, height of 80 cm, and body mass index of 23.4 kg/m2. His blood pressure was 100/60 mmHg and his pulse rate was 100 beats per minute (bpm). His oxygen saturation was 99% on room air. Peripheral pulses were palpable. He had a parasternal lift, systolic thrill, and a 4/6 ejection systolic murmur, best heard over the left second intercostal space, and a pansystolic murmur of grade 3/6 intensity, best heard over the left lower sternal border. There was no hepatomegaly or peripheral edema. A neurological examination and a general physical examination were normal.
His chest X-ray showed a cardiothoracic index at 0.55 with clearly decreased pulmonary vascular markings. An electrocardiogram showed a sinus rhythm with a rate of 100 bpm, no axis deviation, right atrial enlargement, negative T waves in DI and aVL, and normal PR and QT intervals. An echocardiographic examination showed normal abdominal and atrial situs, normal position of the heart in the left side of his chest, and normal venoatrial, atrioventricular, and ventriculoarterial relationships. The right ventricle looked markedly dilated and hypertrophied, and right ventricular systolic function appeared grossly reduced on visual inspection and tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE). The left ventricle was not dilated or hypertrophic; its systolic function was preserved. The mitral and aortic valves were structurally normal. The interventricular and interatrial septum appeared intact. The RA was dilated with a membrane partitioning it largely perforated at 18 mm without gradient through it at continuous wave Doppler interrogation . The tricuspid annulus was hypoplastic (diameter at 14 mm) with a 5 mmHg of mean gradient on continuous wave Doppler interrogation. There was a discrete circumferential membrane 18 mm below the pulmonic valve and continuous wave Doppler interrogation across the membrane showed a peak systolic pressure gradient at 85 mmHg . The pulmonic valve was thin, had normal pressure gradients, and pulmonary annulus at 14 mm. Right and left pulmonary arteries were confluent and good sized. Coronary sinus was dilated without a seen left superior vena cava or abnormal pulmonary venous return or a stenosis of its foramen. The left aortic arch had no coarctation and no patent ductus arteriosus. There was no pericardial effusion. His inferior vena cava was dilated at 16 mm.
A complete blood count showed hemoglobin at 13 g/dl, white blood cells at 7100 cells/mcl, and platelets at 310,000 cells/mcl. Liver function tests were normal with an alanine aminotransferase (ALT) of 17 IU/L and an aspartate aminotransferase (AST) of 21 IU/L. Renal function tests were also normal with a serum creatinine level at 0.5 mg/dl and a blood urea nitrogen level at 7 mg/dl.
Balloon valvuloplasty of subpulmonic membrane was performed, using Tyshak II® balloon PDC501 5.0 mm, leading to symptoms improvement and regression of maximal gradient through the membrane from 85 to 50 mmHg . No medication was used. Surgical resection of right atrial and subpulmonic membranes was planned but our patient died 1 year after the intervention because of an extracardiac disease (appendicular peritonitis). An autopsy was not performed.