A 65-year-old female patient of Caucasian origin was admitted to our hospital with a three-week history of fever, shortness of breath and dry cough. She did not complain of hemoptysis or loss of weight, she was not a smoker and she had no history of underlying lung disorders. On examination her temperature was 37.9°C. Her respiratory rate was 20 breaths per minute with an oxygen saturation of 88% on air. An examination of her respiratory system revealed decreased breath sounds and dullness to percussion in the base of her right lung. Examination of her cardiovascular system, abdomen and central nervous system were normal. Investigations showed a white cell count of 28.2 × 109/L (normal range 4-11 × 109/L) with neutrophilia, and her C-reactive protein level was 429 mg/L (normal range up to 5 mg/L).
A chest X-ray on admission showed opacification of her right middle and lower zone and moderate right-sided pleural effusion (Additional file and Figure ). She was started on intravenous amoxicillin with clavulanic acid and clarithromycin as per hospital protocol for severe community-acquired pneumonia. A wide bore chest drain was inserted and a sample of pus was inoculated into aerobic and anaerobic blood culture bottles. On day two of incubation in the BacT/ALERT automated blood culture system (bioMérieux, Basingstoke, UK) both bottles signaled positive but no organisms were seen on Gram stain. After overnight incubation at 37°C there was poor growth on blood agar, but the chocolate blood agar plate incubated in 5% CO2 showed a profuse growth of small, round, glistening colonies (Additional file and Figure ) which were identified as Gram-negative coccobacilli. Biochemical panel testing on our isolate using API NH (bioMérieux, Basingstoke, UK) was inconclusive but A. aphrophilus was suspected because it was oxidase-negative, catalase-negative and × and V factor independent. Identification of our isolate was confirmed by the reference laboratory using RapID NH (Oxoid, Basingstoke, UK). Our patient responded to intravenous amoxicillin with clavulanic acid and clarithromycin followed by oral doxycycline (two weeks total antibiotic course). However she was readmitted twice over the next three months with recurrent empyema and the same organism was isolated. Each episode was managed with chest drainage and a six-week course of antibiotics; doxycycline for the second episode and amoxicillin for the third, after which she has remained well.