The patient was a 62-year-old, right-handed Japanese man. His pedigree chart is depicted in Fig. a. Written informed consent for genetic analysis and publication of this report was obtained from the patient’s wife. His past medical history was unremarkable and no similar disease was noted in his family. He graduated from university at the age of 22 years and worked as a civil servant employed by prefectural governments thereafter. He presented with depressive mood due to a heavy burden of work and visited a psychiatric clinic at 37 years of age. He was diagnosed with depression and was administered antidepressant medication. Since then, he repeatedly requested temporary leaves of absence and lacked the motivation to work and to perform household chores, however, his motivation for entertainment and hobbies did not diminish. This led to the consideration of atypical depression rather than typical depression, which is characterized by a persistent decrease in motivation. At the age of 45 years, he tended to indulge in self-centered behaviors, such as visiting a movie theater or playing a Japanese gambling machine without permission, while pretending to go to work. From around the age of 50 years, self-centered behaviors such as absenteeism and returning home from work without permission worsened, followed by executive dysfunction associated with planning and doing work. He was absent from work due to these behaviors and was referred to our hospital at the age of 52 years.
At the initial visit, the patient maintained good manners, although he was not lively and lacked seriousness for his situation and improvement of his condition. His Mini-Mental State Examination score was 25, failing in the domains of orientation to place, attention/ calculations, recall, and repetition. Moreover, his frontal lobe dysfunction was revealed by Frontal Assessment Battery [, ], a short bedside cognitive and behavioral battery to assess frontal lobe functions (score was 12/18). The results of other neurological examinations were normal. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed bilateral frontal lobe atrophy . Technetium-99 m ethyl cysteinate dimer ([99mTc]ECD) single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) revealed bilateral frontal lobe hypoperfusion . The patient was diagnosed with a behavioral variant of FTD based on Rascovsky et al.’s diagnostic criteria and had to leave work. He was admitted to a psychiatric hospital at the age of 54 due to prominent self-centered behavior, overeating, irritability, and disinhibition.
The FTD progressed over the years, and by the age of 62 years, he had almost no speech and had a remarkable decrease in spontaneity. He needed help to perform activities of daily living but was able to eat and walk by himself. Muscle weakness and atrophy of the extremities were not observed. MRI revealed substantial atrophy in the frontal and temporal lobes and periventricular leukoaraiosis . [99mTc]ECD SPECT revealed bilateral frontal and parietal lobe hypoperfusion . [11C]Pittsburgh compound B-positron emission tomography was negative for the presence of amyloid. His laboratory data, including the creatine kinase level, were normal. The concentrations of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) total tau and phosphorylated tau proteins were 389 pg/mL and 53.2 pg/mL (cut-off: 50 pg/mL), respectively.
There were no signs of bone involvement (e.g., elevated serum alkaline phosphatase levels). Computed tomography of the trunk and limbs did not reveal muscle atrophy. Bone scintigraphy did not identify prominent bone lesions. There were no myopathic features or inclusion bodies on the right rectus femoris muscle biopsy .
Whole-exome sequencing analysis was performed for the proband (II-4 in Fig. a) as described in a previous study and revealed a heterozygous variant (c.1184A > G), p.Asp395Gly, in VCP (NM_007126.5), followed by confirmation by Sanger sequencing . Expanded repeats in C9ORF72 were not detected by repeat-primed PCR analysis . Non-synonymous or splice-site variants in other genes relevant to FTD (MAPT, GRN, TARDBP, FUS, TBK1, CHMP2B, and SQSTM1) as well as those relevant to AD (APP, PSEN1, and PSEN2) which were either rare (< 1% minor allele frequency) or absent in population databases were not detected on the basis of the whole-exome sequencing data . The VCP variant c.1184A > G, p.Asp395Gly, which has been reported as pathogenic in ClinVar and Human Gene Mutation Database, was also predicted to be pathogenic according to the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics guidelines (PS1 + PS3) (described in ).