A five years old boy, second child of non-consanguineous marriage, born at term with no significant perinatal and past history, presented to our out patient’s department with the complaints of swelling of the whole body. The swelling started insidiously over a course of few days and involved the entire body, including the face, trunk as well as the extremities. There was no associated rash. The child had no preceding symptoms. The swelling was initially progressive but remained static after a few days of onset. The child had no other associated systemic symptoms.
On examination, the anthropometry of the child was appropriate for his age. His vital signs, including BP were also within normal limits. Systemic examination was essentially normal. The skin over the face, upper torso, upper and lower limbs excluding the fingers were markedly taut, with non-pitting oedema, woody induration and loss of normal elasticity . There were reduction in mouth opening and the temporomandibular joint mobility . The sensations were intact and there were no other positive findings. Raynaud’s phenomenon was negative. Routine blood investigations, including urinary examination, renal and liver function tests, electrolytes, ASO titers, chest X-ray, ECG, echocardiography and abdominal ultrasonography were normal.
The child was admitted for further investigations. Over the days, the swelling remained constant and no other symptoms or signs developed. The common causes including renal, hepatic and cardiac were ruled out. There were no supportive findings to suspect underlying connective tissue disorders. Considering the cutaneous swelling, the possibility of scleredema was kept in mind. In our patient, the fingers were spared and there was no systemic involvement. The findings in our case were suggestive of scleredema. A skin biopsy was undertaken which revealed normal collagen pattern with smoky bubbly greyish materials histologically consistent with mucin deposition between eccrine ducts and collagen bundles . The findings were characteristic of scleredema. Our case was consistent with type I scleredema which was more common in paediatric population. Considering the benign nature of the disease, the parents were counselled about the good prognosis of the disease. The child was discharged after 7 days and has been on regular follow up since then. Over the span of six months, the skin has been gaining its normal elasticity and the child has improved symptomatically.