We report a case report of a 29 years old male who presented an occasional and asymptomatic mediastinal mass, discovered during investigations for an orthopaedic disease.
Computer Tomography (CT) scan showed a 6.8 × 4.5 cm mass in the anterior mediastino, located below the left brachio-cephalic vein, next to aortic arch and left pulmonary artery. The neoplasia was poly-lobulated with internal hypodense septa, inhomogeneous content and little capsular calcifications .
Synchronized CT with 18-fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (18FDG-PET/CT) scanning showed a focal hyper-uptake at the anterior-inferior part of the mass with Maximum Standardized Uptake value (SUVmax) of 5.9. A small area behind the sternum body showed a weak hyper-uptake. The remaining part of the mass didn't show an increase glycolic activity .
The patient was positioned in right lateral decubitus position. Uni-VATS was performed through a left lateral thoracotomy of 3 cm at 4th intercostal space between middle and anterior axillary line. The surgical procedure was performed under general anaesthesia. The patient was intubated with double lumen endotracheal tube to allow a selective ventilation of the right lung. This kind of intubation is used for airway management and also to separate the left lung from the surgical field.
The mass appeared have infiltrate the mediastinal pleura and left phrenic nerve. The latter couldn't be dissociated by the mass so it was dissected above and below the mass.
Complete excision of the mass “en block” with anterior mediastinal adipose tissue was achieved.
We didn't use CO2. A 24 fr chest tube was placed in the pleural space. The operative time was about 90 min without relevant blood loss.
The macroscopic analyse described 8.5 × 5 × 3 cm mass in which could be found solid yellow-white areas, cystic milky areas and hair.
Histology revealed a mature teratoma without atypical cells. The surrounding tissues presented multilocular thymic cyst and chronic granulomatous inflammations with giant cells.
The postoperative course was regular, without air leak or other pulmonary complication. The Chest tube has been removed in the second postoperative day .
The hospital stay lasted 2 days. Patient had dysphonia and weak voice, cough for liquids. After discharge the patient has been prescribed a phoniatric visit, that found left vocal cords paralysis in paramedian position and left arytenoid asymmetry.
We visited the patient 10 and 30 days after discharge to check the wound and the patient’s general condition. The RX imagine showed no complications. Speech therapy rehabilitation was prescribed, and his condition improved in a month. The voice got better, and the mobility of the vocal cord returned almost normal.