The patient, a 67-years-old woman, who came to the first clinical consultation with a history of hypothyroidism and allergy to aspirin and penicillin, with painful symptoms in the submental and mental right side of mandibular bone region, with a duration of 3 months. The patient was attended by professionals of the Department of Dentistry, who proposed a procedure of surgical extraction of the mandibular teeth involved in the anterior section. Orthopantomography was performed, in which a large radiolucent area was observed in the chin region, so for this reason, she was referred to the Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery Department .
After medical and dental details described above, an intraoral clinical assessment of the area was made, in which an increase in volume of the vestibular bone table//plate?/ was observed, tooth mobility between grade 1–2 found on inspection of 4.1–4.2. On the other hand, teeth 3.3 and 4.3 showed no pathological mobility. In addition, the surrounding mucosa was erythematous, especially in the region of teeth 3.1 and 3.3, in which the tissue was fluctuating due to possible perforation of the cortical vestibular bone as seen in .
Computed tomography (CT) assessment showed the presence of a delimited, unilocular, hypodense zone along its entire perimeter, limited by a thin bone cortex on the one hand, from the mesial-apical region of teeth 33–46, below the mandibular basilar edge. There was a short conservation of the basilar border, especially in the midline with greater resorption on both sides, so that greater involvement was shown in the upper part of the alveolar ridge, involving the teeth present, in the mesial and apical regions of tooth 33, and teeth 41, 42, 43.
In the region itself of these teeth, an accentuated loss of bone support was found, at the level of the middle and apical third, only the cervical third of the roots was preserved. On the other hand, a smaller amount of resorption of the lingual bone and greater resorption of the vestibular cortical bone were observed throughout the extent of the lesion, measuring a thickness of only 1–1.5 mm, as shown in .
As the clinical and radiographic examination of the lesion was performed and having made an initial diagnosis compatible with odontogenic keratocyst, it was decided to perform a fine needle aspiration puncture of the content for subsequent pathological analysis. Thereby, a milky-yellow liquid content of approximately 10cc was obtained. In addition, the lesion showed a thick cystic capsule of intense red wine color, which showed some degree of resistance to surgical excision. Both surgical pieces were analyzed histopathologically confirming the initial diagnosis of moderate-grade unilocular Parakeratinized Odontogenic Keratocyst (former classification of odontogenic keratocyst that was reclassified as a keratocyst odontogenic tumor) as shown in .
After 30 days of initial decompression of the lesion, surgical resection of the lesion was performed under general anesthesia. A supracrestal incision was made in the mandibular residual edentulous alveolar ridge, covering the teeth present and extending bilaterally to the first molar regions. After this, the mucoperiosteal flap was lifted, exposing the vestibular cortical bone to obtain a complete and improved direct view of the lesion.
Subsequently, a peripheral osteotomy was performed to enable direct visualization of the odontogenic keratocyst, using tungsten carbide surgical drills and a gouge clamp. In addition to the surgical procedure of excision of the lesion, enucleation and vigorous curettage were performed. The remaining teeth were removed and Carnoy’s solution was applied as an agent for chelating the remaining bone tissue, embedded in a gauze for 3 min. Finally, a reconstruction plate of the unlock 2.0 system was positioned to cover the middle portion of the mandibular body and extending from the region of the right first right molar to the left first molar. This was stabilized with 7 mm long mono-cortical screws to prevent a possible inter- or postsurgical mandibular fracture. The anatomical layers were repositioned using simple stitches with Vicryl 4.0 .
Furthermore, post-surgical control was performed for the removal of the stitches, observing adequate healing of the postoperative wound, without signs of dehiscence and surgical bed infection. In addition, plans were made for follow-up consultations a month later, at three months, and at one year, with control panoramic radiography, in which satisfactory functional results were observed and without signs of recurrence, as shown in .
Clinical and radiographic control was performed after 6 months of follow-up, and a favorable healing process was observed without signs of recurrence of the lesion, as may be seen in .
After two years of follow-up; a satisfactory bone remodeling of the region that underwent surgery was found, showing bone characteristics similar to those of the surrounding normal bone tissue. Correct positioning of the osteosynthesis material was also verified, with the absence of resorption areas around it .
In an accurate CT assessment after the two year follow-up, isolated radiolucent areas, approximately 1 cm in diameter were identified in the region of teeth 4.1 and 4.2, which was compatible with recurrence of lesion, and therefore it was decided to undertake a second surgical procedure in order to obtain the diagnosis of recurrence. The osteosynthesis material was removed, as shown in .
Therefore, the histopathological assessment performed the second time confirmed a recurrence of the initial odontogenic keratocyst - parakeratotic subtype as shown in . A new conservative surgical approach was performed to remove the recurrent lesion and patient continues with control follow-up to ensure absence of new local recurrence. In the last Orthopantomography performed, a local area with new bone formation was noted instead of a local lesion appearance as may be visualized in .