A 76-year-old woman was referred to our tertiary unit (Heart and Lung Center, Helsinki University Hospital, Finland) for treatment of tricuspid regurgitation trans-catheter in March 2020. The patient had severe exercise dyspnoea with a walking distance of 10 m (NYHA Class 3). Patient had enlarged and pulsating liver, elevated vena jugularis pressure along with severe pitting oedema and ascites as clinical sings of severe tricuspid regurgitation. The atrial functional tricuspid regurgitation was considered massive with an antero-septal location . The patient’s other comorbidities included permanent atrial fibrillation, previous cerebral infarction, pleural fibrosis, and asthma. Other aetiologies for the patient’s symptoms were excluded with multiple testing.
Hospital’s Heart Team concluded that the patient was at an increased surgical risk. The TriClip procedure was the treatment of choice as intensive medical therapy had not alleviated the symptoms. The TriClip procedure was performed in January 2021 with one clip positioned antero-septally. There was good anatomical and symptomatic relief with reduction of the tricuspid regurgitation from massive to mild and NYHA class improved from Class 3 to Class 2 and Class 1 after discharge and 1- and 3-month post-procedure, respectively . The results of the 6-min walking test (6MWT) improved from 210 to 402 m during the follow-up. However, at the 12 months of visit, the patient complained of recurrence of exercise dyspnoea with NYHA Class 3. Since the anatomical result of the TriClip procedure was adequate with an ERO of 0.15 cm2 and mean gradient of 2 mmHg, other aetiologies for symptoms were sought.
Holter monitoring revealed rapid atrial fibrillation, which did not respond to medical treatment. As the next treatment option, CIED implantation combined with atrioventricular (AV) node ablation was considered. As the TriClip was located in the middle of the tricuspid valve, the planned RV lead would either run antero-superior or infero-posterior to the implanted clip. The antero-superior course would be unfavourable because of the planned ablation near the antero-septal commissure. Therefore, it was important to secure the posterior course of the RV lead. As the left ventricular (LV) function was borderline (LV ejection fraction 45–50%), there was a concern of causing RV pacing-induced LV dyssynchrony and further decline of LV function. Therefore, implantation of a biventricular pacemaker with both RV and LV leads was chosen as the optimal treatment.
Pacemaker implantation was performed under general anaesthesia with trans-oesophageal echocardiography (TEE) guidance in June 2022. The key TEE views were trans-gastric 40 degree en face and 3D views. During the implantation, the RV lead initially took an antero-superior course in relation to the implanted clip. The course was corrected to a postero-inferior course with the aid of TEE . After RV lead implantation, the LV lead was implanted via the coronary sinus to a lateral coronary vein. Near the tricuspid valve orifice, the LV lead’s course was positioned anterior to the RV lead . The procedure was completed uneventfully, and at the follow-up visits, the pacemaker functioned flawlessly.
In August 2022, ablation of the AV node was performed successfully via the right femoral vein using an irrigated radiofrequency catheter . Tachycardia-related symptoms were resolved with the procedure. Echocardiography showed a good, unchanged TriClip result.