The proband is a 13-year-old boy who presented to the emergency unit with bilateral carpopedal spasm along with an acute febrile illness. He had a history of similar events since the age of 7 months, presumably triggered by febrile conditions due to respiratory tract infections. He had recurrent muscle cramps and lethargy associated with acute febrile illnesses, and in-between these episodes, he was apparently well. He is the third child of a non-consanguineous couple and was delivered by normal-vaginal delivery, with a birth weight of 2.5 kg. His developmental milestones were age-appropriate and immunization schedule was up-to-date. He has two elder siblings who are apparently healthy.
On admission to the emergency unit, he was alert, conscious and febrile with stable vital signs. He had carpopedal spasm involving mainly the upper limbs , which was reproducible by inflating a blood-pressure cuff placed on the patient’s arms. Chvostek’s sign was negative. He had diminished deep tendon reflexes in both upper and lower extremities with flexor plantar response. There was no papilledema, mental slowness or seizures. No facial dysmorphism was observed and other systemic examinations were unremarkable.
Blood samples were taken for basic investigations including full blood count and inflammatory markers, which were all normal. He had persistent low serum corrected calcium levels with hyperphosphatemia, mild hypomagnesaemia, and low parathyroid hormone levels. His renal functions, urine full report, arterial blood gas analysis and renal tract imaging were unremarkable. Other hormonal assays including Thyroid stimulating hormone (2.27 mIU/ L), free thyroxine (1.37 ng/dL), follicle stimulating hormone (2.5 mIU/L), luteinizing hormone (1.01 mIU/L), 9 am cortisol (312 nmol/L), prolactin (138.7 mIU/L) and testosterone (0.6 nmol/L) were within the normal range.
During the clinical interview, it was noticed that the mother of the child had some hearing impairment. Family screening was done in the parents and siblings with measurements of serum calcium, phosphate, magnesium and 24-h urinary calcium levels. The results showed that the mother of the boy also had similar biochemical findings. Laboratory investigations in the child and the mother are summarized in Table . Despite the hypocalcaemia, the mother was asymptomatic up to the age of 47 years. Interestingly, she was found to have chronic renal parenchymal disease and no renal dysplasia on imaging studies. Audiometry showed bilateral moderate sensorineural hearing impairment in the child and profound sensorineural hearing impairment in the mother, as shown in Fig. .
Because of the clinical findings, calcium-sensing receptor gene (CASR)-associated hypocalcemia (OMIM#601198) was initially suspected in the family. Sanger sequencing (exons 2–7 and flanking intronic sequences; NM_000388.3) and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA; CASR P177-B2, MRC Holland) was performed but yielded normal results for the CASR gene. Unexpectedly, MLPA showed a reduced gene dosage for one single reference probe in the 10p14 genomic region specific for exon 6 of the GATA3 gene. Therefore, further testing with MLPA kit P234-A3 (GATA3/4; MRC Holland; contains probes for exons 1 and 3–6 of GATA3) was performed and showed a reduced gene dosage for all GATA3-specific probes. The results of this MLPA analysis were consistent with a heterozygous whole gene deletion of GATA3 (minimum size of the deletion 19 kb) in both the proband and his mother . As the probe for the CELF2 gene (approximately 2433 kb downstream of GATA3) showed a normal gene dosage, the downstream breakpoint of the deletion is localized between GATA3 and CELF2. The deletion breakpoint upstream of GATA3 could not be determined with the analyses performed.
After hospitalization, the child was administrated 10 mg of 10% calcium gluconate, intravenously over 10 min, 8-hourly. The child’s symptoms improved and the serum total calcium rose to 2.1 mmol/L. From the second day of hospitalization, the patient was started on oral calcium supplements 50 mg/kg/day and 1, 25-hydroxyvitamin D 0.5 μg/day. He was subsequently discharged on outpatient follow-up. His mother was treated similarly and maintained near normal levels of serum calcium and phosphorus. Both the child and his mother were referred for otolaryngology follow-up with a long-term plan for providing hearing aids. Additionally, the mother was referred to the nephrology team for follow-up of the renal impairment. Regular clinic follow-up with serum calcium levels and annual renal sonography was arranged for the proband.