A 35-year-old man underwent left laparoscopic partial adrenalectomy in 2003 and right laparoscopic transperitoneal adrenalectomy in 2008, with metachronous bilateral pheochromocytoma. After bilateral adrenalectomy, urinary MN levels decreased to below the measurement sensitivity. In 2010, the patient underwent total thyroidectomy for medullary thyroid carcinoma. After surgery, hydrocortisone and levothyroxine were administrated, without any other history of drug administration. He was diagnosed with MEN2A (RET codon Cys634Arg mutation) by genetic testing. In 2016, he was referred to our hospital because of elevated urinary MNs measured by spot urine samples. The levels of urinary MNs were serially elevated from 51 to 187 ng/mg Cr between 2016 and 2019 with no apparent symptoms . The levels of urinary NMN remained almost unchanged . In 2017, CT showed a mass of 14 × 9 mm in diameter in the aortocaval area cranially to the renal vessels . In 2019, CT revealed that the aortocaval mass grew to 25 × 18 mm in diameter . 123I-MIBG SPECT revealed abnormal accumulation of the mass . A decision was made to perform a laparoscopic resection of the tumor based on the diagnosis of an extra-adrenal paraganglioma. Doxazosin was administered, and the dose was gradually increased to 16 mg.
The patient was placed in the left lateral decubitus position. A small paraumbilical incision and two additional incisions were made to place the transperitoneal laparoscopic ports . After mobilization of the ascending colon and duodenum, the tumor was located in the aortocaval space superior to the left renal vein . The tumor was completely resected, without severe adhesions. The intraoperative blood pressure transiently increased to 165/67 mmHg, but this was not sustained. The operation time was 121 min, and the blood loss was 20 mL. No perioperative complications occurred.
Pathological findings of the tumors are shown in Figure␣. The aortocaval tumor existed adjacent to the ganglion, with positive immunohistochemical staining for synaptophysin and chromogranin A. The tumor showed a Ki-67 labeling index of 5%. No ectopic adrenal tissue was observed around the tumor. After surgery, urine MN decreased to 17 ng/mg Cr and remained stable. No recurrence was observed 15 months postoperatively.