A 22-year-old COVID-19 positive female presented to the emergency department via an ambulance with fever, weight loss (20 kg), shortness of breath, loose stools, and multiple skin lesions present for the previous eight months. The fever was mild, intermittent, and alleviated by antipyretics. This was accompanied by frequent bowel movements (4–5 times per day) and progressive shortness of breath at rest and during exertion. However, there were no reports of orthopnea or paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea. She also complained of polyuria and hematuria for the last two days. Her past medical history was insignificant, and other aspects of her health, including menstrual health, were unremarkable. There is no history of chronic disease in her family.
Upon presentation to the emergency department, she was a-febrile, tachypneic but hemodynamically stable, and well oriented to time and place. On inspection, there was a noticeable pallor, indicating a positive anemic state. Dehydration, bilateral pitting edema up to the shin, and periorbital swelling were also seen. Posterior cervical lymph nodes (less than 0.4cm) and a lymph node (1 cm) in the right axilla were palpable. Painful, itchy, indurated, and hyperpigmented lesions were observed in various places of her body, as well as a history of hair loss, mouth ulcers, and mouth dryness.
Abdominal examinations revealed striae over the lower abdomen, a palpable spleen, and a liver with a 17-cm span. Furthermore, several cystic lesions were noticeable on breast examination, with the largest one measuring 1.4 × 0.9 cm in the right breast and 1.4 × 0.6 cm in the left breast. The lesions had a firmness and smooth edges.
Extensive investigations were carried out to rule out any potential diagnoses . A Complete Blood Count (CBC) profile revealed that the patient had low hemoglobin levels. An in-depth analysis of anemia resulted in the reporting of an increased reticulocyte count. Other cell lines were also deranged, with a high leukocyte count and thrombocytopenia. Based on the findings, further screening of inflammatory markers, such as erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP), revealed unusually increased serum levels for both.
Furthermore, the urine report was positive for protein, red blood cells, pus cells, granular casts, and urate but harmful for any infectious organism. The protein creatinine ratio was excessively high, indicating severe proteinuria. A comprehensive stool culture was also performed, which revealed the presence of mucus, red blood cells, pus cells, and yeast cells. Further investigation included viral markers, which were shown to be negative.
On suspicion of autoimmune disorders , antinuclear antibodies (ANA) titers were carried which were found to be elevated. Along with this, Extractable Nuclear Antigen (ENA) profile revealed an increase in antibody titers to the anti-smith (Sm) and U1 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (U1-RNP). Moreover, she was tested positive for Rheumatoid factor, while C3 and C4 complement levels were within range (see ).
Ultrasonography was performed to thoroughly assess breast tissue, which revealed several cystic regions in the right breast, primarily in the upper quadrant. One measured 16.2 × 9.4 mm and extended into the retro-areolar area, displaying diffuse internal echoes. Multiple large lymph nodes measuring 16.0 × 9.4 mm were seen in the right axilla, along with hilar thinning. Multiple cystic regions were found dispersed throughout the parenchyma of the left breast, one of them being next to the areolar edge and measuring 15.8 × 6.8 mm. The discovered cysts were most likely complicated cysts. The left axilla showed a few swollen lymph nodes measuring 22.0 × 10.0 mm, as well as thinning of the hilum.
Echocardiography was performed to rule out cardiac involvement, which was expected. Along with an endoscopy, a color Doppler of the lower limbs was performed. Endoscopy revealed minor pangastritis, and a biopsy was performed (results are awaited). A Doppler examination of the lower limbs revealed no indications of stenosis, occlusion, or thrombosis. However, it did indicate bilateral soft tissue edema and a benign-looking inguinal lymph node on the right side.
The on-call nephrologist ordered a renal biopsy for further confirmation, and the results are still pending. Based on the clinical findings and laboratory investigations, the patient was diagnosed with MCTD associated with a flare of LN.
Despite the initial concerns regarding the commencement of steroids in an active COVID-19 infection, the management team decided to control her lupus flare with a lower steroid dose (intravenous methylprednisolone 50mg once daily) throughout hospitalization, in addition to oral hydroxychloroquine 200mg once daily. The patient was also given 1g intravenous cyclophosphamide once a month. Her condition steadily improved, and she was stable on the 7th day of her hospitalization. She was discharged on oral steroid maintenance medication with a follow-up appointment. At the follow-up appointment, the patient continues to do well with no evidence of recent flare-up and a complete resolution of her acute symptoms.
The present paper has been reported in accordance with the SCARE guidelines .