A 48-year-old woman, P2A0, presented with brown-yellowish bloody vaginal discharge three months before admission. She complained of abdominal enlargement for the past 15 years and became much more prominent in the last five years, with fluctuating abdominal pain and fever for three months. There were also complaints of difficulty defecating and voiding. She has already had menopause for five years. There was a history of previous surgery due to uterine myoma, but the myoma could not be taken out due to severe adhesions. The patient had no prior drug or family history related to the disease.
Rectovaginal examination revealed a pelvic mass extended until two fingers below the umbilicus. The mass was with a smooth surface and limited mobilization. The cervix was hard to identify due to the expansion of the mass. Uterine sondage could not be performed due to the inability to expose the cervix. An increase in Cancer Antigen 125 (CA-125) level to 115.6 g/dL was found in the laboratory examination.
Abdominal ultrasound showed a 269 × 529 mm hypoechoic mass in the uterine cavity, suspected of infected hematometra. On the left adnexa, a homogeneous solid mass sized 126 × 106 mm with a clear border separated from the uterus and left ovary was found. The mass was suspected to originate from intraligamentery myoma with cystic degeneration, with a differential diagnosis of left ovarian fibroid .
Abdominal and pelvic computed tomography (CT) showed a multilocular cystic mass with thick septa and solid component inside the lesion with enhancement, size 145 × 110 × 146 mm, clear border from uterus and bladder. Uterus pushed to the right superior lateral side, with the enlarged uterine cavity filled with fluid and air forming air-fluid level. There was no enlargement of para-iliac, para-obturator, and abdominal para-aortic lymph node .
The patient underwent a laparotomy by a team of experienced obstetricians/gynecologist with a subspecialty in reproductive endocrinology and infertility and oncology gynecology. After the peritoneum was opened, intraligamentary mass was found adhered to the rectosigmoid compartment, with uterine corpus, both tubes, and ovaries within normal limits. Upon further exploration, a mass size of 150 × 130 × 120 mm was adhered to the bladder and pelvic side wall. We performed a total hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, followed by enucleation of the pelvic mass .
Histopathological examination by an anatomical pathologist showed mesenchymal tumor tissue with hypocellular and hypercellular components. Tumor cells have oval, spindle, some cigar-shaped nuclei, fine chromatin, and eosinophilic cytoplasm. No mitosis was found, while hyalinized blood vessels were observed surrounded by tumor cells. The stroma was generally loose myxoid, and there was no lymph vascular invasion. The specimen was referred for immunohistochemical examination, which revealed a positive result for S100, a specific immunohistochemical staining for schwannoma .
No significant complaints were reported in the postoperative period. Lower abdominal pain and vaginal discharge have been resolved. At the time of discharge, the pain had subsided significantly. Six months follow-up examination showed no recurrence and the patient is doing well.