A 60-year-old man who is a smoker with a medical history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and diabetic mellitus was transferred to our hospital with a diagnosis of acute ischemic stroke secondary to a left cervical internal carotid artery occlusion. One of his pertinent medical histories was a left-sided depressed fracture in which he underwent reduction surgery during childhood. Three days before admission, he complained of mild aphasia, dysarthria, and right hemiparesis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT) angiography showed occlusion of the proximal left cervical carotid artery and ipsilateral ischemic stroke [-]. Dual antiplatelet therapy (aspirin 100 mg and clopidogrel 75 mg) was administered, and rehabilitation was started. Three weeks after the onset of symptoms, he had a modified Rankin Scale of 1, indicating recovery. Cerebral angiography was performed to examine the cerebral blood flow in the left hemisphere [Figures 2ac]. Thereafter, hemodynamic impairment was assessed using 123I-iodoamphetamine single-photon emission CT (123I-IMP SPECT), and the results showed a reduced cerebral blood flow at rest and cerebral vascular reserve in response to acetazolamide in the left hemisphere [-]. At 1 month after the onset, he underwent STA–MCA bypass to prevent stroke recurrence, and prophylactic anti-seizure medication was administered for 3 days. On the first postoperative day, clopidogrel 75 mg per day was taken to prevent ischemic complications. A day and 7 days after the surgery, magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) showed good patency of the donor artery [ and ], and the patient had an absence of new lesions or neurological deficits [ and d]. Rest 123I-IMP SPECT showed no region of hyperperfusion 9 days after the operation . However, 2 weeks thereafter, he suddenly presented an adversive seizure with a groan, neck rotation to the right and tonic elevation of the right arm lasting for <5 min which occurred at night time. He received intravenous administration of diazepam (5 mg). MRI was immediately performed and showed no new lesions. Furthermore, MRA revealed a diminished signal intensity of the donor artery [-]. Several hours after the onset of a seizure, blood flow of the donor artery was confirmed using a pulse Doppler at the bedside; however, the blood flow of the donor artery decreased during mouth opening. Therefore, ultrasonography was performed to evaluate the donor artery during the opening and closing of the mouth. Opening of the mouth caused a 32% reduction in the peak systolic velocity than that of mouth closing, which showed good donor artery patency on CT angiography [-]. The end-diastolic velocity (ED) ratio of STA, calculated from the ED during closing of the mouth divided by the ED of mouth opening, was 3.2. An encephalogram was conducted and revealed a focal epilepsy which was compatible with stroke on MRI and semiology of a seizure.