The patient, a 65-year-old male, was admitted to the hospital for the first time on November 6, 2020, with “cough, chest tightness and chest and back pain for 1 month”. He had a history of smoking for 40 years, with about 5 cigarettes per day. Computed tomography (CT) of the lungs suggested occupancy of the upper lobe of the left lung, about 9.4x5.4cm in size, and invasion of the adjacent left rib pleura, mediastinal and left hilar lymph node enlargement, multiple nodules of 0.3-0.8cm in both lungs . Abdominal CT suggested occupancy in the lower pole of the left kidney with 5.0cm in size . Bone scan suggested metastasis to the 3rd thoracic vertebra , while ultrasound and head CT of the remaining cervical lymph nodes showed no abnormality. The lung puncture biopsy revealed adenocarcinoma, and immunohistological staining results showed positive for cytokeratin 7 (CK7+), cell proliferation antigen Ki-67(50%+), thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1+), Napsin A+, negative for cytokeratin 20 (CK20-), cytokeratin 5/6 (CK5/6-), tumor suppressor gene P40- . Renal puncture biopsy suggested RCCC, and immunohistochemistry showed pan cytokeratin (CK-pan+), cytokeratin 7 (CK7+), anticytokeratin (CAM5.2+), Vimentin+, alpha-methylacyl CoA racemase (P504S+), paired box protein-8 (PAX-8+), cluster of differentiation 10 (CD10+), cluster of differentiation 117 (CD117-), cytokeratin 20 (CK20-), transcription factor E3 (TFE3-) . Genetic testing of lung tissues showed point mutations in exon 2 of KRAS gene, and programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) protein expression tests in both lung and kidney tissues were negative .
Combined with symptoms, imaging examination and pathological findings, the patient was clinically diagnosed as left lung adenocarcinoma (cT4N2M1c, stage IVb, KRAS+, EGFR-, ALK-, ROS1-, PD-L1-), multiple metastases in both lungs, bone metastases, and clear cell carcinoma of the left kidney (cT1bN0M0 stage I, PD-L1-). Among them, lung cancer and RCCC staging were defined according to the TNM staging system, Edition 8 of the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC). He was treated with albumin-bound paclitaxel and cisplatin in combination with sintilimab in one cycle every 21 days (the treatment flow chart was shown in ). After 2 cycles, the patient self-reported symptoms of cough and chest tightness were significantly relieved. According to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors 1.1 (RECIST 1.1), chest CT scan confirmed a stable disease (SD, ), and the left kidney lesion was assessed as SD . Continuing the treatments of albumin-bound paclitaxel and cisplatin combined with sintilimab, the efficacy of pulmonary lesions and renal lesions were still evaluated as SD after 6 cycles of treatment (, ). Subsequently, the follow-up examination on June 20, 2021, found that after 2 cycles of immune monotherapy maintenance therapy, there were no significant changes in the primary lesion of the left lung , but new lung metastases occurred ( vs. ). While the left renal lesion was similar to the previous lesion . Overall, the disease was evaluated as progress.