Presentation: This patient is a 49-year-old woman who had received treatment with main complaint of right limb weakness and headache in hospital for the first time on August 16, 2017. The patient’s right limb weakness continued to worsen one month before admission, and her headache occurred a week before admission.
Physical examination, auxiliary examination, diagnosis, and treatment: Neurological examination presented right Hemiplegia (Muscle strength: level 3), and no another abnormal neurological sign. The MRI of pre-operation was shown in Figure . T2 and T2 flair presented left intracranial space-occupying lesion in frontal lobe, parietal lobe, and thalamus. And the MRI presented midline displacement of cerebral hemispheres and subfalcine hernia. This patient received the treatment of tumor resection in left frontal parietal lobe and thalamus. Due to the tumor lesion in brain functional region, complete tumor resection would cause significant damage to the patient so that this patient finally received partial tumor resection. The surgical biopsy was shown in Figure . Tumor cells were large round or polytonality which was arranged in honeycomb or lumpy form. The nuclei are round, center, and hyperchromatic. Immunohistochemistry presented positive isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 in this tissue. The surgical biopsy of intracranial space-occupying lesion was in accord with astrocytoma (WHO grade II, isocitrate dehydrogenase 1). The patient received radiotherapy and chemotherapy of temozolomide after surgery. After treatment, the patient was left with right limb weakness while another symptom was improved.
Presentation: This patient developed dizziness, vomiting, and vision loss before one month of this admission (November 6, 2021). The physical examination outcomes are similar to that of the first-time treatment except vision loss.
Auxiliary examination, diagnosis, and treatment: The MRI of post-operation and this admission were shown in Figure . Compared with post-operation, the brain stem and cerebellum developed diffuse hyperintensity at this admission. The clinical symptoms and MRI are unable to provide sufficient evidence for us to differentiate astrocytoma recurrence from MOG-EM. Therefore, it is necessary for further examination. Due to the financial situation and the patient’s willingness, the patient and his family refused to undergo lumbar puncture and other traumatic operations except blood sampling. The serum antibody of MOG-EM was detected by the cell-based assay (CBA). The MOG-IgG was detected, and the titer ratio is 1 to 30. The outcome of serum antibody was presented in Figure . VEP was presented in Figure which displayed incubation period of bilateral P100 Prolonging. As the above, we considered that the diagnosis of this patient was MOG-EM. With the consent of the patient and his family, the patients were given high-dose methylprednisolone intravenous injection (1000 mg/day × 3 days → 500 mg/day × 3 days → 240 mg/day × 3 days→120 mg/day × 3 days). The dizziness, vomiting, and vision loss were in remission after treatment of high-dose methylprednisolone. The patient received treatment of oral prednisone (60 mg/day) on discharge from hospital. Then 10 mg of prednisone was reduced every 7 days.
The patient was followed up to 7 months after discharge (June 29, 2022), and the patient did not experience any recurrence of symptoms. The brain MRI and serum antibody were used as items of reexamination. But MRI of reexamination displayed that the brain stem and cerebellum developed more diffuse hyperintensity than before . The T1 of MRI was presented in Figure S1, Supplemental Digital Content, . The mass effect of brain stem and cerebellar lesions was more obvious during follow-up. And the titer of MOG-IgG was higher than before . The titer ratio was 1 to 320 which went up more than 10 times. The outcomes of these examinations had finally confirmed the diagnosis of MOG-EM. The patient’s symptoms were relieved by oral prednisone after discharge until June 29, 2022, which has now been reduced to 10 mg orally per day. However, this did not stop the progression of the disease, and further treatment with azathioprine will follow, and the patient is still being followed up in the outpatient clinic. Figure summarizes the patient’s disease progression.