A 32-years-old man was admitted with the complaints of severe and diffuse abdominal pain associated with mild fever for last 8 h. He had no bowel movement within last 24 h and respiratory discomfort for one and half an hour. He was hemodynamically stable with optimum oxygen saturation and temperature was recorded 99 °F with some signs of dehydration. His abdomen was not distended but it was tender all over and rigid and digital rectal examination revealed normal. Treatment started with intravenous crystalloid infusion with antibiotics (cefoperazone + metronidazole) and analgesics.
Plain chest and abdominal radiograph with abdominal ultrasound appeared normal. Hematological and biochemical parameters revealed neutrophilia, mildly raised serum lipase, normal liver and renal function, and no electrolyte imbalance . Urine analysis showed insignificant pyuria. On the 2nd day he had no significant improvement. So, abdominal CT was done that showed a significant amount of collection in the right sub-phrenic, sub diaphragmatic, and pelvic area .
Diagnostic laparoscopy proceeded with modified direct initial trocar access through umbilicus as our routine practice and other ports were placed as needed . Huge amount of purulent and turbid collection was noted in all potential spaces (; A–D) with extensive fibrinous exudates over the liver, loops of intestine, and in the pelvic cavity. There was no organized lump in the abdomen and small bowel loops were mildly distended. The appendix was found swollen but no perforation (; E). Peritoneal fluids were sucked out and fibrinous exudates were swept out with gauze piece as much as possible. Peritoneal fluid was sent for culture and sensitivity test. Gastro-duodenal area, gallbladder (; F), and ileum were carefully inspected. The gastro-duodenal area was covered with dens exudates, but no bile leak was noted in closed magnified view. Appendicectomy was performed (; E, G) followed by thorough peritoneal irrigation with 2 L of warm normal saline and finally, a drain tube (DT) was placed in pelvis. Operative time was 90 min (; QR for video link to the ). Anesthetic recovery was uneventful. The patient had symptomatic improvement on first post-operative day (POD) and DT collection was noted 150 mL, which gradually declined. Bowel sound appeared on 3rd POD and oral feeding resumed. Peritoneal fluid culture revealed no growth. Histopathology of the appendix revealed acute appendicitis. He was discharged with DT on 4th POD and did not develop any further complications like recurrent abdominal pain, intestinal obstruction, or any abdominal sepsis within 1 year of post-operative follow-up.