The patient was an 87-year-old woman with a history of venous stasis dermatitis in both lower legs. She had no history of either diagnosis of or treatment for diabetes, but hemoglobin (Hb)A1c had been recorded as 6.8% about 1 year before this presentation. She had been admitted to a psychiatric hospital for about 1 year, due to exacerbations of both depression and Alzheimer-type dementia that had developed 10 years earlier and 12 years earlier, respectively. About 2 months before presentation, her dietary intake decreased and infusion of glucose, electrolytes and water was started. She had been in a bedridden state with no speech and almost no appetite from about 1 month before presentation. At that point, hyperglycemia and hypernatremia were inferred to have already been present for a long time. Two days before presentation, sudden high fever (38 °C) and involuntary movements of the trunk and upper limbs appeared. One day later, she entered a coma. A blood glucose level (BG) of 1000 mg/dL and a serum sodium (Na) level of 179 mmol/L (glucose-corrected Na level: 194 mmol/L) were confirmed, and the patient was referred to our department for emergency hospitalization.
Glasgow coma scale score was 3 (eye opening, 1; best verbal response, 1; best motor response, 1), the pupils were 3 mm on both sides, and light reflex was rather dull, accompanied by involuntary movements of the whole body. Body temperature was 37.6 °C, blood pressure was 57/40 mmHg, heart rate was 114 beats/min, and peripheral oxygen saturation was maintained at 95% under mask administration of oxygen at 10 L/min. The tongue was very dry, and turgor of the skin was low. No abnormalities were observed in other physical findings except for the presence of moist rales at the end of inspiration in bilateral lower lung fields. Drugs being administered were limaprost alfadex at 5 mg/day, furosemide at 10 mg/day, and paroxetine at 5 mg/day.
Results of blood and biochemical examinations and blood gas analysis are shown in Table . Negative results were obtained for anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase antibodies (< 5.0 U/mL) . Computed tomography of the chest showed infiltrative shadows in both lower lung fields (image not shown). This patient with hyperglycemia, dehydration, malnutrition, and potential thrombus formation during long-term bed rest was suspected to have developed into HHS and ketosis due to progression of hyperglycemia and dehydration caused by pneumonia. Furthermore, ketoacidosis had developed from ketosis and prerenal renal failure associated with circulating hypovolemia shock, which was also associated with disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC).
Treatment was started with intravenous infusion of fast-acting insulin (Humalin R; Eli Lilly, Kobe, Japan) (starting at 4 units/h and gradually decreasing) and low-sodium replacement fluid . In the first 24 h, 6000 mL of replacement fluid (95.8 g of glucose, 0.3% Na) was added, and 2000 mL of replacement fluid (20.8 g of glucose, 0.2% Na) was administered within the period of 24–48 h. At 48–72 h, 1000 mL of replacement solution (75 g of glucose, 0.1% Na) was administered, and combined use of tube feeding was started . Correction of K was performed appropriately. Although BG was ≥ 1000 mg/dL at 8 h after starting treatment, Na improved to 149.5 mmol/L (glucose-corrected Na level: 164.4 mmol/L). After 24 h, although BG, Na and sOsm had decreased to 716 mg/dL, 154.0 mmol/L and 402.3 mOsm/kg H2O, respectively, glucose-corrected Na level remained almost unchanged (164.2 mmol/L). At 48 h later, BG had improved to 110 mg/dL, Na to 154 mmol/L, and sOsm to 370.0 mOsm/kg H2O. However, glucose-corrected Na level (166.0 mmol/L) was not showing improvement. At 72 h later, BG had improved to 283 mg/dL, Na to 150 mmol/L (glucose-corrected Na level: 152.5 mmol/L), and sOsm to 345.5 mOsm/kg H2O . In addition, ceftriaxone sodium hydrate at 1 g/day, heparin sodium at 8000 units/day, thrombomodulin α at 6400 units/day, total human serum albumin at 62.5 g, and dopamine hydrochloride at 3 μg/kg were administered. General condition, including vital signs, infection/inflammatory findings, and DIC improved promptly . After 72 h, the patient opened her eyes. However, because the state of no response to the stimulus and involuntary movements continued for 7 days, ODS was suspected and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain was performed. No clear abnormalities were evident on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) , and no definitive diagnosis was reached. The patient was subsequently able to move in response to instructions, but we could not exclude the possibility of pseudobulbar paralysis associated with ODS, as she could barely speak and showed no improvement of dysphagia. A high-intensity signal in the pons was identified on DWI of the brain at 30 days after starting treatment , leading to definitive diagnosis of CPM. After the life-threatening state was averted and general condition improved, she was transferred to a long-term care facility. As of about 1 year after onset, we obtained information that the patient had recovered to the point that she could speak spontaneously and responded to conversation in a manner reflective of a good condition.