In 2017, a 64-year-old man complaining of lower urinary tract irritation was referred to the urology department of West China Hospital.
The patient went to the urology department 9 mo prior for lower urinary tract irritation. The papillary neoplasm was found in the trigone with 0.5 cm diameter (cT1) and eminence lesion in the posterior wall of the bladder. Then he underwent the first TUR-BT; the postoperative pathological examination revealed prostatic MC. After the operation, the symptoms were relieved, and the patient was discharged from the hospital. However, he again suffered from lower urinary tract irritation for 5 d.
In 2015, the patient was referred to Mei Shan city hospital complaining of dysuria, increased urinary frequency, and urinary urgency for more than 1 year. The total serum PSA value was 3.600 ng/mL. The patient was diagnosed with benign prostatic hyperplasia and underwent transurethral resection of the prostate in December 2015. The patient was postoperatively diagnosed with prostatic MC. Postoperative positron emission tomography indicated that there was no evidence of metastatic malignancy except for the residual prostate.
The patient was transferred to the Department of Urology at the West China Hospital of Sichuan University where he was thoroughly examined. A computed tomography scan of his abdomen and pelvic cavity showed no local metastasis. Additionally, the patient’s total and free serum PSA values were 0.186 ng/mL and 0.048 ng/mL, respectively. The patient then underwent RARP, and the pathological diagnosis of prostatic MC (pT2cN0M0) was made. Additionally, the surgical margin was negative. Immunohistochemical staining analyses of the specimen were positive for cell keratin 20 (CK20) and focally positive for PSA and prostatic serum acid phosphatase but negative for cell keratin 7 (CK7) and caudal-type homeobox transcription factor 2 (CDX-2) . The patient received regular clinical follow-up (once a month for 3 mo following RARP, and every 3 mo for 3-12 mo thereafter). Over those periods, the total serum PSA level was maintained at < 0.003 ng/mL without the need for adjuvant therapy.
The patient did not smoke or drink and had a free family history.
Physical examination was insignificant.
Urinalysis revealed a mild increase of 10/haptoglobin in urine red blood cells, with normal urine white blood cells. Blood analysis, prothrombin, and partial thromboplastin times as well as biochemistries were normal. Electrocardiogram and X-ray were also normal.
An initial imaging evaluation with Doppler ultrasound detected hypoechoic masses in the bladder and the blood flow signals in the masses. Then cystourethroscopy revealed rounded infiltrative neoplasms in the trigone and posterior wall of the urinary bladder (cT1), 0.5 cm and 0.8 cm in size, respectively.