A 7-year-old boy with HI (homozygous mutation c.541 C > T in ABCA12 gene) presented to our pediatric rheumatology clinic due to pain, swelling and joint stiffness. In the first years of life, he suffered from recurrent sepsis requiring intravenous antimicrobial treatment, caused by different bacteria such as Staphylococcus aureus and Stenotrophomonas maltophilia. His development was characterized by a severe psychomotor delay and required an intensive multidisciplinary follow-up. The child was on treatment with systemic retinoids from birth.
The mother reported a 3 year-history of chronic polyarthritis. At disease onset, both knees showed swelling and the child developed inability to walk. He was then unsuccessfully treated with antimicrobial therapy in suspicion of septic arthritis. Subsequently all the large joints were involved, causing severe limitation on motion, particularly of both ankles. At the time of the examination, he had flexion contractures of fingers and of all large joints of the lower limbs . Ultrasonographic (US) evaluation showed marked synovial effusion in both knees, synovial hypertrophy with increased Doppler signal in both ankles and wrists and no evidence of tenosinovitys. X-rays of the affected joints was unremarkable, except for decresed bone density. Laboratory investigations were normal except for the presence of microcytic anemia and a mild increase in C-reactive protein (CRP). ANA, anti-extractable nuclear antigen (ENA), anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (CCP) antibodies and rheumatoid factor (RF) were negative. An ophthalmology examination did not show uveitis. According to the International League of Associations for Rheumatology (ILAR) classification , the clinical features were consistent with polyarticular RF negative JIA. The boy underwent multiple IACI (triamcinolone hexacetonide, for large joints and methylprednisolone acetate for small joints). Synovial fluid was turbid, whit a white cell count of a 750/mm3 count. A second line treatment with oral methotrexate (15 mg/m2 weekly) was also started. .
Three months later, owing to the presence of persistently active disease in the ankles, IACI were repeated. Despite this treatment, a complete remission of arthritis was not achieved. Therefore, 8 months after the beginning of methotrexate, a third IACI was performed and a Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha (TNFα) antagonist was started (etanercept 0,8 mg/kg weekly). In 2 months a status of minimal disease activity (absence swollen joint, and a parent and physician global assessment of disease activity of 3 and 2 cm on a VAS scale, respectively) was reached . Appropriate physical therapy was started, and articular functional ability improved in the following months, allowing the child to walk again. Improvement of skin erythema was observed as well.
Eighteen months after beginning etanercept treatment, the patient was stable in minimal disease activity with a further improvement in motor functional abilities and no medication side effects were reported . Methotrexate has been recently tapered to every other week administration.