A 27-year-old Chinese gentleman presented to our colorectal surgery clinic with a one year history of progressively worsening rectal prolapse. He reported a history of Hirschsprung’s disease with an unknown operation performed at 2 years of age. He had a laparotomy and adhesiolysis for intestinal obstruction at age 13. No other significant past medical or mental illness was reported.
The patient complained of a full thickness, completely reducible rectal prolapse occurring after defecation . He had daily bowel opening and no fecal incontinence. There was no associated abdominal pain, proctalgia or rectal bleeding. Physical examination of the abdomen revealed right transverse and midline abdominal scars. Anal tone was normal on digital rectal examination. There was no descent of the perineum on straining.
Initial workup consisted of a colonoscopy and contrast defaecography. At colonoscopy, a blind end was encountered at 25 cm. A suspected end-to-side ileocolic anastomosis was seen at 2–3 cm distal to the blind end. The scope failed to pass through this suspected anastomosis. Defaecography showed a 5 cm antero-posterior diameter rectal prolapse. It measured 2.5 cm in the cephalo-caudal dimension. There was no intra-rectal intussusception or anterior rectocele. The anorectal angle was 2 cm below the pubococcygeal line .
Abdominal rectopexy was offered after workup but the patient opted for observation at the time as he worried about the possible surgical complications, like sexual dysfunction. After 11-year regular follow up, he finally agreed for operation due to difficulty in reducing the prolapse completely. Initially, laparoscopic rectopexy was attempted but failed due to dense intraabdominal adhesions. After conversion into laparotomy and adhesiolysis, an isoperistaltic ascending colorectal anastomosis was found at the peritoneal reflection. The right colon was rotated and freely mobile with a long mesentery and minimal retroperitoneal attachment . The patient’s rectal prolapse was diagnosed to be an anal protrusion of this colorectal anastomotic intussusception, compatible with having had a Deloyers procedure in his youth. Therefore, the caecum was fixed to the parietal peritoneum of right upper quadrant with nonabsorbable polypropylene sutures . The patient was then discharged after three weeks of postoperative ileus. No recurrence of prolapse was reported on more than two years of follow up.