A 48-year-old Caucasian man with a known history of hypertension and factor V Leiden deficiency was admitted to our hospital after suffering from sudden cardiac arrest while at home sitting on the couch after THC vapourization. He initially developed tingling and numbness in his hands followed by a syncopal episode with agonal respiration which was witnessed by his wife. Paramedics arrived six minutes later and noted his cardiac rhythm to be in polymorphic ventricular tachycardia . Defibrillation was delivered with 200 Joules, and a single dose of IV lidocaine was given at the scene by emergency medical services. Return of spontaneous circulation was achieved. He regained consciousness and was able to maintain his airway without intubation. His rhythm was noted to be back in normal sinus, but there was evidence of Type-1 Brugada pattern .
On admission to our hospital, physical examination was unremarkable, and vital signs were blood pressure of 150/130 mmHg, heart rate of 120 bpm, and respiratory rate of 23 breaths per minute with an oxygen saturation of 95% at room air. Labs were significant for mild hypokalaemia (K = 3.3 mmol/L) and urine test positive for THC (60 ng/mL, normal ≤ 3 ng/mL). High-sensitive troponin-T and complete blood count were unremarkable. Initial ECG showed sinus tachycardia with Type-1 Brugada pattern in right precordial leads . Transthoracic echocardiogram was noted to be normal with an ejection fraction of 62% without any wall motion abnormalities. Computed tomography (CT) of the head ruled out any intracranial abnormality. CT angiogram of the chest was negative for pulmonary embolism. A coronary angiogram showed no evidence of significant coronary artery disease. Exercise stress test for atypical chest pain and shortness of breath on exertion a month before hospitalization was negative for ischaemia. A repeat ECG after correction of his hypokalaemia (K = 4.5 mmol/L), on following day at 15 h after initial presentation, continued to show type-1 Brugada pattern .
His past medical history was significant for a syncopal episode after playing basketball 20 years prior to his current presentation. At that time, he was noted to have agonal respiration as well. Family history includes sudden cardiac death in his maternal uncle at age of 55 years old. Twelve-lead ECG was performed in his mother, maternal half-brother, and maternal half-sister which all negative for Brugada pattern. The patient is not in-contact with biological father. Patient had been using THC vapourization for his back pain of musculoskeletal origin for the past 8 years. He had been taking hydrochlorothiazide for hypertension and takes no other medication.
Given the history of cardiac syncope, sudden cardiac arrest, and type-1 Brugada pattern on the ECG, Brugada syndrome was diagnosed, and the implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) was implanted before hospital discharge for secondary prevention. A comprehensive genetic panel analysis of 67 genes associated with inherited arrhythmic and cardiomyopathy diseases was performed and subsequently revealed no associated mutation. Given a long half-life of THC (67 days), a repeat ECG was performed at 3 months after abstention of THC which showed normal sinus rhythm without Brugada pattern . After 18 months of follow-up, he has been abstinent from THC and has reported no arrhythmic events.