A 29-year-old man was admitted to our hospital on September 22, 2007 with left maxillary sinus pain and a 1-month history of general malaise and fever. His past medical history did not disclose any evidence of specific diseases, including renal diseases. So he had not taken any drugs before this admission. Family history revealed that his father died of cerebral hemorrhage at the age of 45 and his mother had no cardiovascular or renal disease. He has no sibling. At admission, the patient’s height was 174 cm, body weight was 79 kg, and his body temperature was 38.2°C. Left maxillary sinus tenderness was observed on physical examination, but no chest murmur or neurological findings were noted. A panel of laboratory studies revealed the following results: serum creatinine (Cr) 0.9 mg/dl, sodium 136.1 mEq/l, potassium 3.9 mEq/l, hemoglobin 15.1 g/dl, white blood cell count 17,600/μl, platelet count 180,000/μl, total serum proteins 6.7 g/dl, albumin 3.1 g/dl, and C-reactive protein (CRP) 16.5 mg/dl. Although most of these findings are unremarkable, the white blood cell count was marginally high, the albumin level was marginally low, and the CRP level was substantially elevated. Antinuclear antibody or myeloperoxidase-antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) was not detected, but proteinase 3 (PR3)-ANCA was detected at a low titer (24 enzyme-linked immunosorbant assay unit). Results of negative serum test were obtained for Hepatitis C virus, Hepatitis B surface, and core antigens. HLA-typing was not done. Urinalysis revealed hematuria (51–100 red blood cells per high-power field) and proteinuria (0.58 g/day). Whole body computed tomography (CT) revealed left maxillary sinusitis and multiple lung nodules (Figure ). Two-dimensional transthoracic echocardiography did not reveal signs of left ventricular hypertrophy, with an interventricular septal thickness of 10 mm and left ventricular posterior wall thickness of 10 mm. Left ventricular systolic function was preserved (ejection fraction 58.9%). A CT-guided needle biopsy of the lung showed a multinucleated giant cells and inflammatory cell infiltrate in necrotizing lesions (Figure a), and a renal biopsy showed focal segmental necrotizing and crescentic glomerulonephritis with interstitial granulomas. We could not find any multinucleated giant cells in renal tissue (Figure b–d). The glomerular podocytes were swollen and vacuolated. A semi-thin section stained with toluidine blue or electron microscopy showed numerous inclusion bodies in the podocytes (Figure e). Immunofluorescence revealed no IgG, IgA, IgM, C3, or C1q deposition along the capillary wall. Electron microscopy revealed lamellated inclusion bodies ("myeloid bodies") in the podocytes (Figure f). Analysis of the leukocytes demonstrated an αGL-A activity level of 11.8 nmol/h/mg (normal range: 49.6–116 nmol/h/mg). After careful consideration of the findings, although this patient lacked any other pathognomonic signs of Fabry’s disease, such as acroparesthesias, dyshidrosis, or cutaneous angiokeratomas, a diagnosis of Fabry’s disease associated with GPA was made.
Treatment with prednisolone (PSL, 60 mg/day) and oral cyclophosphamide (100 mg/day) was initiated on October 6, 2007. The patient received enzyme replacement therapy in the form of agalsidase alfa at 0.2 mg/kg every other week starting July 14, 2008. Complete resolution of the proteinuria, lung nodules, and maxillary sinusitis was seen within 2 months of initiation of this therapy. Oral cyclophosphamide was discontinued January 27, 2009, and azathioprine (50 mg/day) was started for maintenance therapy. The PSL dosage was gradually tapered to 9 mg/day by August 2009. At last follow-up on October 16, 2013, the patient’s Cr was 1.3 mg/dl.