A 68-year-old female without significant medical history aside from arterial hypertension was admitted to our hospital for treatment of a pleural epithelioid angiosarcoma (Stage IV). Due to inoperability and severe encephalopathy complicating therapy with ifosfamide, an initial neoadjuvant regimen with doxorubicin/ifosfamide was altered into a palliative regimen of doxorubicin alone for a total of seven cycles (cumulative dose: 420 mg/m²). Dexrazoxane was administered for cardioprotective reasons during the last two cycles. Initial transthoracic echocardiographic examination documented a LVEF of 65% (see , ) as well as a normal global longitudinal strain (GLS; −19.8%). However, 4 months later, a significant decline of LVEF from 65 to 40%, as well as a decline of GLS to −10.4% was documented in an outpatient clinic. Additionally, elevated serum levels of BNP (reference value <100 pg/mL) and hs-TNI (reference value <24 mg/mL) were detected. Symptoms of heart failure were not reliably distinguishable from symptoms of the underlying tumour disease accompanied by a hyporegenerative macrocytic anaemia necessitating transfusion of blood substituents. However, at this point, no heart failure medication was initiated. Six weeks after first diagnosis of heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF), the patient was admitted to our cardio-oncological department for the first time. At presentation, the patient solely complained about a slightly decreased exercise capacity. Neither shortness of breath nor angina pectoris. Cardiovascular examination and assessment of vital signs were unremarkable. Moreover, electrocardiography (ECG) showed no relevant abnormalities aside from a first-degree atrioventricular block. For further evaluation of the underlying aetiology of HFrEF, we performed cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (cMRI) which revealed a progressive deterioration of LVEF to 17%, most likely attributable to cardiotoxicity (, ). Subsequent echocardiographic examination confirmed this finding (see , ). Late gadolinium enhancement imaging was unremarkable. A GDMT in accordance with the then valid international guidelines and expert recommendations was immediately initiated, including torasemide (5 mg QD), ramipril (2.5 mg QD), carvedilol (6.25 mg BD), and spironolactone (12.5 mg QD); later ivabradine (2.5 mg BD) was added. At the same time, progressive cancer disease led to a severe pain exacerbation. The patient received radiation therapy of the pleura as well as a palliative regimen of paclitaxel for a total of eight cycles over the next 10 months. Unfortunately, it proved difficult to execute a complete GDMT due to repeated symptomatic hypotension and two cardiac decompensations within 4 weeks after radiation and initiation of paclitaxel. Four months after implementation of GDMT, no improvement of LVEF and serum biomarkers was found. Therefore, we stopped ramipril therapy and initiated treatment with sacubitril/valsartan. However, due to currently low blood pressure values, an increase in the dosage was not possible and the patient continuously received a low-dose regimen (i.e. 26/24 mg BD). Thereafter, a decrease in serum BNP and hs-TNI levels could be observed within 3 months’ time, and a significant improvement of LVEF to approximately 50% (see , ) as well as an improved GLS (−17.3%) could be assessed another 3 months later. On the basis of considerable progressive disease after 10 months of paclitaxel treatment, after careful consideration, and without a reasonable alternative, a low-dose therapeutic attempt with pazopanib was undertaken. However, the patient suffered a rapid deterioration of her general condition a week later. She deceased on the same day under palliative home care, and the cause of death remaining uncertain.