A 7-year-old boy sustained a hyperextension-hyper pronation injury to his right elbow due to a fall on outstretched hand while playing. The traumatic elbow was treated primarily by an indigenous bonesetter, with the child presenting to our referral hospital 8 weeks after his injury. Clinical examination revealed persistent elbow swelling with warm – shiny overlying skin. There was a restricted flexion-extension (20°-70°) and pronosupination (±40°) arc of movement . Serum alkaline phosphatase was thrice the reference range confirming the clinical diagnosis of active heterotrophic ossification (HO). X-ray revealed persistent isolated anterior radial head dislocation with features of HO in the anterior joint capsule . Computed tomography scan confirmed the anteromedial direction of the radial head with heterotrophic bone anteriorly .
The child was finally taken up for open reduction 4 months following the injury post-resolution of the active HO. Under anesthesia, there was a soft restriction of the passive elbow flexion and extension with no restriction in the pronosupination. Boyd’s interval was utilized for the exposure of the radiocapitellar joint with the patient positioned in the lateral decubitus. The anconeus was elevated from the ulna and the lateral ulnar collateral ligament was detached from the supinator crest. The radial head appeared dislocated anteriorly with an entrapped posteriorly subluxated annular ligament. Repositioning of the annular ligament failed to reduce the radial head spontaneously. However, the radial head could be forcefully reduced in position with elbow hyperflexion only to redislocate with the slightest extension.
Distal extension of the approach elevating the supinator from the proximal radius revealed a musculotendinous sling posterolaterally, just distal to the cartilage-covered radial head . The tendon appeared to have subluxated behind the radial head with no direct attachment over the radial neck. As tested using blunt artery forceps, its tautness worsened with elbow extension and was unaffected with pronosupination. Further, dissection confirmed the tendon’s brachialis origin, which was repositioned anteriorly using a blunt freer elevator. The repositioning of the tendon spontaneously reduced the radiocapitellar joint which was clinically stable in the position of supination. Due to its instability in pronation, a radiocapitellar wire was inserted keeping the elbow in 90° of flexion and complete supination. The wire was removed after 4 weeks with a gradual resumption in the elbow range of movement. At 18 months following surgery, the elbow showed excellent functional outcome with a Mayo Elbow score of 95 with a restricted flexion of up to 110° and pronation of up to 50° . Radiographs showed maintained radiocapitellar joint reduction .