Our Caucasian female patient was a 28-year-old G2P1000 who presented to the maternal fetal medicine clinic for consultation with diagnosed CPVT.
She had a history of an uncomplicated first pregnancy and vaginal delivery without notable cardiac events. Two years later, she suffered a cardiac arrest during a car accident in her early twenties. During the workup following this event she was found to have a de novo RyR2 receptor mutation diagnostic of CPVT. A single-chamber, single-coil Boston Scientific Energen™ ICD was placed. Her ICD was set to pace at less than 35 beats per minute (bpm) and discharge at greater than 240 bpm. While undergoing her evaluation, her 2-year-old child died of a sudden cardiac arrest and was presumed to carry the same mutation. Our patient’s medical history was also notable for 0.5 pack per day tobacco use. She had no known family history of cardiac disease.
During this second pregnancy she was managed by maternal fetal medicine with consults to anesthesiology, electrophysiology, cardiology, and pediatric cardiology for planning and preparation for delivery. Her second pregnancy was also complicated by a marginal cord insertion. She had no ICD discharges. During this pregnancy she was noted to have had at least nine events of non-sustained ventricular tachycardia on device interrogation, however no symptomatic episodes or syncopal events. Her cardiologist continued her prior to pregnancy flecainide, metoprolol, and verapamil during the entire pregnancy. She tolerated light exercise including walking and yoga without complication.
She presented to labor and delivery at 39 weeks for scheduled labor induction. Her vital signs were within normal limits. Her physical exam was unremarkable with regular cardiac rate and rhythm noted on auscultation and no lower extremity edema. Admission laboratory test results were notable for a hemglobin level of 12.2 g/dL, platelet count of 140 × 109, and potassium, magnesium, and ionized calcium within normal limits. Her cervix was noted to be 2 cm/50% effaced/−3 station. She was placed on continuous telemetry and her ICD was interrogated. Magnesium was replaced to maintain a serum level greater than 2.0 mg/dL. A cervical balloon and intravenous administration of oxytocin were used to start the labor induction. A dexmedetomidine drip was slowly titrated for an hour preceding epidural placement, to minimize norepinephrine release. An epidural catheter was placed early in labor to minimize a stress response to labor pain. Bupivacaine without epinephrine was used in the epidural to minimize arrhythmias. Under the supervision of an electrophysiologist an esmolol drip was initiated during labor induction, given an increased frequency of premature ventricular contractions (PVCs). The electrophysiologist was on the floor or immediately available at all times during her labor induction to manage her cardiac medications and her ICD settings at all times. Her ICD pacing rate was increased from 35 to 80 bpm to decrease the frequency of PVCs. She subsequently underwent artificial rupture of membranes at 4 cm of cervical dilation. Her labor progressed quickly, and she was completely dilated less than 2 hours later. She pushed effectively over less than 15 minutes and delivered a liveborn female infant weighing 2630 g and with Apgar of 8 and 9 at 1 and 5 minutes, respectively. Quantitative blood loss was 321 mL. A discharge hemoglobin level was 9.2 g/dL. Her epidural was discontinued at 2 hours after delivery.
Early on postpartum day 1 she was noted to have larger than expected blood loss likely secondary to uterine atony. Intravenous oxytocin infusion was continued. A spinal block was placed as her epidural had been removed in the immediate postpartum period. Once adequate pain coverage was achieved, a manual uterine sweep was performed for an additional 1900 mL quantitative blood loss, in order to improve uterine tone and prevent further blood loss. Her vital signs remained stable and her hemoglobin nadir was 9.2. She received antibiotic prophylaxis. Later on postpartum day 1 she was transitioned back to orally administered flecainide, orally administered metoprolol, and her ICD settings were adjusted with the pacing rate returned to 35 bpm. Her esmolol drip was slowly weaned, and telemetry was continued for 24 hours postpartum without incident. The following 6-month postpartum period was uncomplicated and she continued on flecainide, verapamil, and metoprolol under the supervision of her cardiologist. She opted to use condoms for contraception. Her infant underwent genetic testing for her RyR2 mutation and was found to be negative.