A 26-year-old woman with no history of smoking presented to the Respiratory Department of our hospital due to intermittent wheezing that lasted for 8 mo.
The patient had developed recurrent spontaneous pneumothorax more than four times during the past 8 mo, but had no fever, chest pain, or hemoptysis. The patient occasionally experienced cough, mild panting, and suffocation. In January 2018, the patient experienced mild panting and developed dyspnoea for the first time. Chest X-ray showed left pneumothorax, after which left closed thoracic drainage was performed. In May 2018, the patient presented with mild panting and suffocation. Chest X-ray showed left pulmonary pneumothora and mild left lower lung atelectasis. Pulmonary bulla resection was performed under thoracoscopy and general anaesthesia. After surgery, the pathological findings showed blood stasis of the lung tissues, alveolar ectasia and fusion, bullous formation, proliferation of fibrous tissue of the blister wall, and chronic inflammatory cell infiltration. In July and August 2018, the patient suffered from pneumothorax in the left lung.
According to the patient, she was diagnosed with allergic purpura at the age of 14 and had proteinuria for 8 years.
Physical examination revealed no abnormalities. The lung sounds were clear bilateral.
After admission to our hospital, routine urinary microscopy showed occult blood 2+. Respiratory-associated tumour marker was confirmed to be squamous-cell carcinoma 3.30 µg/L. Arterial blood gases, complete blood count, comprehensive metabolic panel, C-reactive protein, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate were all within normal limits.
The patient’s lung computed tomography (CT) examination showed low-density cystic changes in the right lung, left lung, and interlobular fissure . After admission, the patient suffered from left pneumothorax again without a clear reason. The bedside chest radiograph indicated that the left lung tissue was compressed by 30% . Abdominal ultrasound and abdominal and pelvic enhanced CT showed no renal tumour but a high-density shadow on the right liver (the right abdomen) .
The patient underwent pulmonary bulla resection under video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery and pleurodesis under the guidance of general anaesthesia. The postoperative pathological reports displayed pulmonary emphysema-like changes with pulmonary bullae formation and small interlobular septa in the partially enlarged cystic cavity. Normal lung tissue had partial interstitial congestion .
In addition, the patient had a family history of spontaneous pneumothorax. The patient’s mother and her second maternal aunt had suffered from recurrent spontaneous pneumothorax in the past. The mother had the worst condition, which manifested as lung-free marking and pleural line shadow in the right lung, the right lung being compressed into the hilar region by about 70%, compression into a strip-like solid shadow of the right lung, multiple thin-walled cavities of varied sizes in the whole lung (with the maximal length of about 79 mm at diameter), and a small amount of effusion in the right pleural cavity .
Her second maternal aunt developed right pneumothorax at the age of 40. To review the common features, the patient, her mother, and her second maternal aunt underwent chest CT. The results revealed pulmonary alveolar or cystic changes in all of the subjects. In addition, the chest and abdominal CT of her first maternal aunt indicated a saccular shadow of the right lower lobe and a possible left renal hamartoma. Her uncle (mother’s brother) had no pulmonary bulla or cystic changes or lesions in the kidney.
Multiple white dome-shaped papules with a diameter of < 0.5 mm were found on the anterior and posterior neck and the posterior side of the ears of the patient . Meanwhile, multiple white dome-shaped papules were found on the mother’s and her second maternal aunt’s necks, cheeks, and posterior ears . The dermatologist considered that the patient’s papules conformed to the appearance of fibrofolliculomas but required pathological confirmation. Mild infiltration of lymphocytes around the vessels in the superficial dermis with melanophage showed dominant findings in the pathological specimens of the patient’s skin .
Due to the patient’s history of recurrent spontaneous pneumothorax, multiple skin papules, cystic lesions in the lungs, and a family history of pneumothorax, we suspected a congenital disease, particularly BHD. The family tree is shown in Figure .
After obtaining written informed consent from the patient and her family, we accomplished the family genetic test for BHD. Seven of the family members underwent genetic analysis, which included extracting the genomic DNA from peripheral blood leukocytes. The results showed that the patient’s FLCN gene was located on chromosome 17. The nomenclature of the variant was c.1285dup. The heterozygous nucleotide variation of c.1285_1286insC (interpolation of C at 1285_1286 nucleotides of the coding region) was found in the FLCN gene of the subject. This mutation occurred due to a change in amino acid synthesis starting from amino acid His, No. 429, and terminating at 27th amino acid after the change p. (His429Profs*27) as a frameshift variant, which we believe affected the protein function. The American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics rating suggested PVS1 and PM2 by taking into consideration the suspected diseases . The genetic test of the patient’s mother also showed mutations in this site, considering that the variation of the patient’s FLCN gene was derived from her mother. The pathogenicity of this mutation has been reported in the literature and is associated with BHD syndrome.