A 37 year-old female with recurrent metastatic cervical squamous cell carcinoma previously treated with chemotherapy and radiotherapy, presented to her oncology team with increasing watery discharge per vagina. The patient was known well known and under the care of oncology in the Irish tertiary academic centre. The patient had recently had a left ureteric stent placed for new left hydronephrosis. The patient had no prior medical history, and lived locally with her partner.
Clinical examination demonstrated some mild abdominal and pelvic tenderness. Fluid was noted to be discharging per the vagina.
The patient had noted foul smelling watery discharge per vagina over a period of three months, which was increasing in frequency with associated reduced urinary output.
Given the known encasement and involvement of the left ureter by the cervical mass and hydronephrosis, a ureterovaginal fistula was felt the most likely diagnosis. A vesicovaginal fistula was another differential diagnosis.
An MRI pelvis demonstrated interval disease progression with the large left side predominant parametrial mass invading the posterior bladder wall, rectum and vagina, and encasing the distal ureter and stent with a direct ureterovaginal fistulation .
An initial decision was made to insert bilateral nephrostomies with the aim of urinary diversion from the uretero-vaginal fistula, however this had a limited effect, and the patient continued to experienced leaking urine from the vagina.
The patient's case was re-discussed with interventional radiology, and the decision made to perform ureteric embolization of the left ureter, which was the main site of fistulation, in order to stop urine leaking. This warrants permanent urinary diversion via nephrostomy following the procedure. As the patient had a pre-existing left ureteric stent, a novel fluoroscopic-guided transurethral retrograde stent removal and ureteric embolization was planned. This allowed the patient to remain supine for the entire procedure, avoiding the inconvenience of transferring from prone to supine, which would be necessary for conventional stent removal and antegrade ureteric embolisation. Furthermore, given the patient's advanced disease, prone position caused significant discomfort.
Under fluoroscopic guidance, the bladder was accessed with a guidewire via a urinary catheter, which was subsequently removed. A catheter was placed over the wire and a snare was used via the catheter to partially withdraw the distal pigtail of the stent to the level of the urethra. A guidewire was advanced through the stent to secure access of the ureter and the stent fully removed. Coils were placed via a Bernstein catheter in the mid ureter and within the distal ureter at the site of fistulisation. Cessation of flow through the ureter was demonstrated by performing a left nephrostogram .
Antegrade embolization of the right ureter was performed the following day via the right nephrostomy. This was the only option for access as there was no right ureteric stent. An Amplatz plug was placed in the mid-ureter via a 7F sheath. Multiple coils were then deployed via a Bernstein catheter above the plug. A right nephrostogram demonstrated minimal flow within the right ureter post embolisation .
The patient experienced a significant decrease in the volume of vaginal discharge and discomfort post embolisation and was discharged from hospital shortly after. The patient was followed up by her primary oncology team in the oncology day ward clinic and through her local community palliative care team. No further intervention was required by radiology.