A 44-year-old male patient presented to the emergency department of our hospital ten years ago with crushing chest pain persisting for 4 h after heavy labor. Hehad 5 years history of hypertension and no history of diabetes, smoking, and substance abuse. Physical examination revealed normal blood pressure in arms and legs with no evidence of an arm-leg gradient. Initial electrocardiography (ECG) showed elevated ST-segment (1-4 mm) at the anterior leads V1 to V6 . Blood test showed elevated myocardial troponin I levels of 0.5 ng/ml (normal range 0.00–0.04 ng/ml), creatine kinase-MB of 11.9 ng/ml (normal range 0.3–4.3 ng/ml). The patient was diagnosed as acute anterior ST-elevation myocardial infarction and then underwent emergency catheterization. The initial findings of the CAG showed approximately 10 mm in length, with 50% vascular stenosis during the systolic period in the middle part of theLAD and normal during the diastolic period . The antegrade blood flow in the LAD distal to the MB segment was normal (TIMI III) without any evidence of thrombus or spontaneous coronary artery dissections. All the other coronary vessels appeared normal. The patient’s symptoms were stable, and was discharged after 1 week of hospitalisation. However, merely three days post-discharge, the patient suffered from another episode of chest pain despite the use of β-blocker (metoprolol 47.5 mg once a day) and calcium channel blockers (dihiazem 90 mg twice a day). He had an elevated myocardial troponin I level of 30 ng/ml. ECG showed elevated ST-segment at the precordial leads V1-V6, echocardiogram reported abnormal segmental wall motion with an ejection fraction of 45%. The patient was diagnosed as a recurrent of STEMI.Supra-arterial myotomy, and CABG management were the treatment choice, which was successfully performed through a median sternotomy. Post-discharge medications was prescribed taking cardiovascular risk factors into consideration. Thereafter, no special discomfort was reported.
Thirty-two months after the surgery, the patient experienced another attack of chest pain in the morning along with a loss of consciousness on his way to the hospital in an ambulance. Cardiac monitoring showed VF . Cardiopulmonary resuscitation followed by electrical cardioversion restored normal sinus rhythm. He had two further episodes of VF at the hospital which was electrically cardioverted to a borderline ventricular autonomous rhythm and eventually sinus rhythm. A prompt CAG followed by coronary CTA was performed which confirmed an occlusion at the end of the LIMA . The time of occlusion was not clear. Based on these findings, we considered ischemia-induced arrhythmia precipitated by coronary vasospasm as the most likely cause. According to the most current recommendation guidelines , an ICD was implanted to prevent SCD as a consequence of malignant ventricular arrhythmia. The patient was discharged on aspirin, statin, beta-blockers, and calcium channel blocker.
During ten years of follow-up, the patient has never experienced any angina or myocardial infarction. The ICD readings demonstrated no ventricular arrhythmias . He is still under close and long-term follow-up.