A 31-year-old woman, gravida 3, para 1, abortus 2, with a 2 years history of secondary infertility due to disseminated TB resorted to IVF for the therapy of her infertility. According to her past medical records, she was once diagnosed with the hematogenous disseminated TB and had a preterm birth and twice laparoscopic salpingectomy owing to fallopian tube pregnancy.
In March of 2012, at her 28th gestational week, vaginal spotting occurred, and influenza-like symptoms appeared with intermittent low-grade fever. She was hospitalized due to uterine contractions followed by spontaneous rupture of the membranes, then she gave birth to a male infant by spontaneous vaginal delivery. The preterm neonate had congenital TB and died of “pulmonary tuberculosis” after 3 months. After the preterm delivery, her fever did not resolve. Her fever was persistent despite intravenous antibiotics administered for 1 month. The patient had a close family exposure tuberculosis contact history in the past, her father was infected by TB and her brother was diagnosed with tuberculosis meningitis. A chest X-ray was suggestive of TB , prompting a computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest confirming the hematogenous disseminated TB with miliary nodular shadows throughout the bilateral lung parenchyma and left pleural effusions . After the preterm delivery, she complained of nausea, vomit and severe headache. Her brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed bilateral centrum semiovale and multiple small plaques in the frontal lobe, consistent with an atypical infection such as TB . A tuberculin skin test with purified protein derivative (PPD) was markedly positive at 9 × 11 mm.Then the patient continued the regular treatment of anti-tuberculosis for 2 years.
In July of 2015, the patient was sent to the emergency department and a laparoscopic salpingostomy was performed due to “left ampullary fallopian tube pregnancy”. During surgery, multiple punctate caseous lesions were pertinaciously adherent to the abdominopelvic cavity which could not be detached, and they could also be seen on the surface of the left tubal ampullary region. She underwent pelvic adhesiolysis. Biopsies of endometrium and the ampulla of left fallopian tube were performed. The pathology specimens of scraping content of uterine cavity showed interstitial decidua-like changes in endometrial hypersecretory response, A-S sign of gland is positive . The left fallopian tube showed coagulation and villi tissue were approximately 1 cm in diameter, and micro-embryonic tissue can be seen. After the operation, the patient was diagnosed with “pelvic tuberculosis” without anti-tubeculosis treatment.
In November of 2016, the patient was hospitalized and an emergent laparoscopic salpingostomy was performed due to “right fallopian tube pregnancy”. Biopsy of fimbria of right fallopian tube was also performed showing 0.5 cm villi tissue .
Upon presentation to our clinic, the patient’s hormonal level was normal and B-mode ultrasonography recordings indicated regular ovulations. Her husband’s semen analysis was normal. The patient’s menarche occurred when she was 12 years old, and her menses recurred every one month, lasting for 5 to 6 days. Recruitment of follicles was achieved by using the GnRH-antagonist protocol. She was stimulated by 150 IU/day unit of Gonal-F from the menstrual day 3 to day 4, and the dose was adjusted according to the follicular response. The amount of Gonal-F was increased to 225 IU/day from the menstrual day 5 to day 11, 0.25 mg/day unit of cetrotide was used from day 8 to day 12, and 75 IU/day unit of human menopausal gonadotropin (HMG) was added to improve follicular growth from day 10 to day 11. Trilaminar endometrium has been detected to be 10 mm thick and two dominant follicles greater than 17–18 mm diameter on hCG day. The patient had an outstanding estradiol response, and 22 oocytes were retrieved 36 h after the hCG injection by ultrasonically guided transvaginal approach and were inseminated with the husband’s semen. After 6 days, 8 blastocysts were frozen in order to avoid ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS). Two months later, 2 embryos were transferred into the uterus after ovulation from natural menstrual cycle. Following embryo transfer, the patient received progesterone luteal support, which included oral progesterone capsules and vaginal administration of progesterone sustained-release vaginal gel. Then the patient conceived and ultrasonography revealed a single pregnancy by the presence of one gestational sac with living embryo. During the pregnancy, the patient did not have symptoms of TB recurrence. Ultimately, in January of 2020, the patient gave birth to a healthy baby girl through the natural childbirth after 36 weeks of pregnancy.