A 48-year-old man with chronic hepatitis B had a history of self-limited idiopathic intermediate uveitis in the left eye and high myopia in both eyes. He visited our clinic due to rhegmatogenous retinal detachment in the left eye and underwent segmental scleral buckling. His vision recovered to 20/25 after the operation, with good reattachment of the retina.
Six months later, he presented to our clinic with progressive visual field defects in the left eye. Best-corrected visual acuity was 20/25 in the left eye, and observations under slit-lamp biomicroscopy were unremarkable. Dilated fundus examination revealed a redetachment of the retina and a reopening of the previous retinal break. Recurrent rhegmatogenous retinal detachment was diagnosed, and the patient underwent standard three-port 23-gauge pars plana vitrectomy to reattach the retina. During the operation, triamcinolone acetonide (Tai Yu Chemical & Pharmaceutical Co., Hsinchu, Taiwan) was used to assist in the visualization of the vitreous and was washed out during the surgery. The operation went smoothly, and 10% C3F8 was injected for vitreous tamponade. Postoperatively, the patient was asked to maintain prone positioning for 2 weeks and was prescribed 1% prednisolone eyedrops (Alcon Research., Texas, USA) four times per day, along with 1% atropine and dexamethasone + tobramycin ointment (Tobradex, Alcon, Puurs, Belgium) twice per day.
On postoperative day 2, whitish deposits and membrane-like exudate over the posterior lens surface were noted. The patient had no discomfort. Hourly 0.5% levofloxacin eyedrops (Cravit, Santen Pharmaceutical Co., Osaka, Japan) were prescribed. On postoperative day 3, the patient began to complain of tenderness over the periorbital area, and visual acuity dropped to hand movement. The patient’s intraocular pressure was 14 mmHg. Slit-lamp examination showed congested conjunctiva, corneal edema and 1 + cell and flare in the anterior chamber with a 2 mm hypopyon . The fundus was obscured. Ocular ultrasonography showed intravitreal gas without obvious vitreous opacity. Postoperative endophthalmitis was suspected based on the clinical presentation. Intravitreal empirical antibiotics with ceftazidime 2 mg/0.05 ml (China Chemical & Pharmaceutical Co., Tainan, Taiwan) and vancomycin 1 mg/0.05 ml (Sandoz, Gentle Pharma Co., Yunlin, Taiwan) were injected, and vitreous fluid samples were sent for microorganism culture. In addition, the results of laboratory work-ups, including complete blood and biochemistry panels; a lipid profile; urinalysis; glycohemoglobin, human leukocyte antigen-B27, antinuclear antibody, angiotensin converting enzyme, human immunodeficiency virus antigen and antibody level tests; and syphilis tests, were all unremarkable.
On postoperative day 4, there was no clear resolution of the symptoms, and a prominent anterior chamber reaction and vitreous opacity persisted. On postoperative day 5, vitreous fluid culture yielded moderate growth of Morganella morganii, leading to a decision to perform vitrectomy on the same day. During surgery, a dense retrolental membrane was noted, and we were able to remove the membrane with a vitrectomy probe without damaging the lens . The fundus was then examined in detail, which revealed diffuse patchy intraretinal hemorrhages that spared the macula . There was no retinal redetachment or retinal necrosis. Intravitreal ceftazidime 1 mg/0.05 ml and triamcinolone 0.1 mg/0.1 ml were administered, and silicone oil was injected as an inert medium to prevent pathogen growth. A subsequent drug sensitivity test showed that the pathogen was resistant to cefazolin and cefuroxime but was sensitive to 3rd- and 4th-generation cephalosporins and ciprofloxacin.
After vitrectomy, the ocular infection gradually subsided over 1 week. Silicone oil was removed 5 months later, and the retina remained attached. Despite the formation of posterior subcapsular cataracts, the patient’s vision recovered to 20/63.