The tumor was diagnosed in a 64 year old, male Caucasian patient during a routine check-up.
Medical history: Besides atrial fibrillation, arterial hypertension and a hypothyroidism there is no relevant medical history especially no history of cancer.
During a routine check-up the patients physician performed a sonography when he detected an unclassified tumor of the pancreatic tail (see also Additional file ). The lab showed no pathologies. Tumor markers were negative for CA 19–9, CA 72–4 and CEA. Alpha-fetoprotein and NSE were both elevated (AFP 97kU/l, (< 5,8kU/l) and NSE 30.0 μg/l (16.4 μg/l)). A CT scan showed no metastases . A core needle biopsy was performed to define the tumor entity. The histology of the core needle biopsy extracted from the pancreatic tail area showed fibrotic fat with atypical adipocytes. The fluorescence-in-situ-hybridization (FISH) revealed MDM2-cluster amplification. Thus the diagnosis of a de-differentiated liposarcoma (DDL) was made.
With this histological diagnosis the solid tumor at the pancreatic tail was considered to be a dedifferentiated part of the liposarcoma. A primary surgical resection was recommended by the interdisciplinary tumor board.
A systematic left sided retroperitoneal compartment resection including en-bloc-left sided pancreatectomy, splenectomy, nephrectomy, hemicolectomy, adrenalectomy, partial gastrectomy and partial resection of the diaphragm were performed .
Having recovered from surgery and an anastomosis leak of the colon, the patient is now well. So far there were no signs of tumor recurrence.
The resected multivisceral specimen measured 35 × 19 × 12 cm and weighed 2520 g. The macroscopic examination showed a firm, inhomogeneous, yellowish gray, 7.6 cm diameter tumor between the pancreatic tail and spleen. The further investigation of the bordering retroperitoneal fat tissue revealed a 5.6 cm large area slightly solidified, marginally lobulated, yellow, lipomatous tumor without discrete margins.
Microscopic examination of the tumor mass in the pancreatic tail showed an epithelial tumor with glandular structure, associated with a desmoplastic stroma reaction, continuously infiltrating the fat tissue and lymph nodes. The tumor cells with increased mitotic activity, nuclear pleomorphism and prominent cell nucleoli showed a cribriform and haphazard growth pattern. Furthermore there were necrotic areas and perineural as well as lymphatic vessel invasion definable . A tumor infiltration in spleen, kidney or colon was not detectable. In the directly adjacent retroperitoneum atypical lipomatous mesenchymal cells and multinucleated as well as vacuolated lipoblasts were found . These cells had been known from the punch biopsy and were also MDM2-cluster amplified, representing a liposarcoma of the retroperitoneum . Parts of this tumor approximated < 0.1 cm to the surgical margins. Taken together there was a completely resected pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma and a well-differentiated liposarcoma with extended growth to the peritoneal margins. Additional molecular pathological investigation revealed a pathogenic category 5 mutation of pathogenic BRCA 2 of the adenocarcinoma. The pancreatic adenocarcinoma was classified as pT3, pN2 (11/33 ece+) L1 V0 Pn0, R0; G2 [UICC Stage III] with a drugable BRCA mutation and the liposarcoma as pT2, pN0 (0/33) L0 V0 Pn0, G1 [UICC Stage Ib]. Further treatment: The interdisciplinary tumor board recommended an adjuvant chemotherapy with the standard of treatment, being Gemcitabine and Capecitabine. The patient recovered well after surgery and is currently cancer free under frequent follow up for the last year. The latest follow-up examination revealed no evidence of tumor recurrence.