The patient had no complaints.
A 47-year-old Japanese woman underwent abdominal ultrasound for a medical check-up, which revealed a 12-mm hyperechoic hepatic mass in segment 4. Because the mass was suspected to be a hemangioma, the patient regularly underwent follow-up annual ultrasound examinations to assess its size. Ten years later, the mass had increased to 20 mm. The patient was then referred to our institute because the mass was suspected to be malignant.
The patient’s past medical history was not significant, except for uterine myomas.
The patient had no remarkable family history. She denied any specific personal history of other diseases.
At her first presentation to our clinic, physical examination revealed a soft, flat, and non-tender abdomen.
Her laboratory data indicated that her renal and liver functions were normal. The Child-Pugh score was categorized as class A, and the indocyanine green retention at 15 min was 11.3%. The patient was negative for hepatitis B or C infection. The serum tumor markers, carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen 19-9, alpha-fetoprotein, and protein induced by vitamin K antagonist-II, were all within their normal ranges. All electrolytes were within normal limits.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a 23-mm liver mass in segment 4, adjacent to the hepatic hilum. The mass exhibited a slight ring-like enhancement in the arterial phase. In the portal and delayed phases, the signal intensity of the mass was lower than that of the surrounding liver tissue . Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a low signal on T1-weighted images and an intermediate signal on T2-weighted images. In the early phase, peripheral enhancement with a low signal was observed inside the mass. Diffusion-weighted images showed a significantly high signal, and the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) map demonstrated a low signal. A decreased uptake of gadoxetate sodium was also observed. Positron emission tomography (PET)/CT showed significant accumulation, with a maximum standardized uptake value of 10.1 at the mass. No other abnormal accumulations were observed. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy and colonoscopy revealed no malignant lesions.