A 56-year-old man experienced sudden onset of a severe headache, and was brought to our hospital. His Glasgow Coma Scale score was 15, and he had a stiff neck and abducens nerve paralysis.
Computed tomography of the brain revealed an SAH localized mainly at the anterior surface of the brain stem. Left vertebral artery (VA) angiography demonstrated a DAVF and two PAVFs at the C2 level . One PAVF was fed by a branch of the anterior spinal artery . An aneurysm on the distal side of the feeding artery was observed in the second angiogram that was performed 28 days after the onset of the SAH . This aneurysm appeared to be the source of bleeding. Another PAVF was fed by the descending artery from the left VA , and the DAVF was fed by the C2 radicular artery . The PAVFs and DAVF shared the same drainage route into the anterior spinal vein. The patient became drowsy due to vasospasm and hyponatremia a few days after admission. We, therefore, made it a priority to treat the vasospasm and hyponatremia, and then performed the second angiography and surgery at the subacute stage.
Surgery was performed after transarterial embolization (TAE) of the DAVF with a coil . A C1 and C2 laminectomy with a suboccipital craniotomy revealed that the aneurysm was located under the C2 posterior nerve root, which was then cut. After gentle rotation of the spinal cord with the dentate ligament, the draining vein and an aneurysm on the distal side of the feeding artery could be observed [Figure and ]. Two fistulous points of the PAVFs were detected with indocyanine green (ICG) videoangiography . We then coagulated and dissected the feeding artery of the PAVFs and draining vein. The final ICG videoangiography showed complete occlusion of the DAVF and PAVFs.
The histopathological features of the aneurysm demonstrated a thickened wall that was composed of fibrous tissue [Figure and ]. These findings indicated that this was a true aneurysm.
Postoperative angiography showed complete obliteration of the DAVF and PAVFs. The patient was discharged without any neurological deficits after placement of a ventriculoperitoneal shunt for hydrocephalus.