A 50-year-old female complained of loss of vision in her right eye accompanied by ocular pain, headache, nausea and vomiting. The intraocular pressure (IOP) was 55 mmHg in the right eye and 11 mmHg in the left eye at the time of her visit to the local clinic. The fundus could not be seen clearly due to corneal edema. She denied any remarkable systemic, ocular disease history and was not taking any medication. She later underwent trabeculectomy in the right eye there and the IOP decreased to normal level and the cornea became clear. However, the visual acuity remained poor and she was referred to our glaucoma clinic for further evaluation and treatment.
At the time of current visit, visual acuity was 20/500 in the right eye and 20/20 in the left eye, with IOPs of 16.0 mmHg and 11.3 mmHg respectively. Slit lamp revealed the cornea was clear and the anterior chamber was free of cells or flare in right eye and the pupil diameter was 4 mm with extensive posterior synechia and no response to the light. A diffuse superior subconjunctival filtering bleb and a peripheral iridotomy at 9 o’clock were observed.
Ultrawide-field fundus photography showed grayish retinochoroidal atrophy and osteocyte-like pigment clumping lesions along the retinal veins and peripapillary preretinal hemorrhage in the right eye , without any signs of inflammatory responses of the retina and vitreous body. The fellow eye examination was within normal limits .
Early fluorescein fundus angiography (FFA) of the right eye revealed transmitted hyperfluorescence consistent with retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) atrophy with more extensive areas of choriocapillaris atrophy and late FFA showed weak fluorescence and delay in venous filling in the atrophic areas . Macular spectral domain optical coherence tomography showed outer retinal thinning and preretinal hemorrhage at the macula in the right eye . Electroretinogram and Electro-oculography (RETI-Port/Scan 21, ROLAND CONSULT Stasche & Finger GmbH, Germany) suggested generalized decrease in photopic and scotopic amplitude in B-wave and A-wave in the right eye. Retinal nerve fiber layer thickness of nasal quadrant was thinner than normal limits in the right eye showed by optical coherence tomography (Spectralis HRA + OCT, Heidelberg Engineering GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany). These examinations of the left eye were within normal limits . Ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) (Aviso, Quantel Medical, Inc., Bozeman, MT) showed shallow anterior chamber depth (ACD) (1.64 mm), complete circumferential closure of the anterior chamber angle and a peripheral iridotomy in the right eye . In addition, UBM in the left eye showed shallow ACD (1.86 mm), close and narrow anterior chamber angle .
Laboratory studies including complete blood count, serum electrolytes, serum protein electrophoresis, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and C-reactive protein were within normal limits. Antinuclear antibody test was negative. Toxoplasma, rubella virus, cytomegalo virus, Hepatitis B surface antigen, human immunodeficiency virus antigen/antibody, T. pallidum antibody and Hepatitis C virus tests were all negative. Chest X-ray ruled out tuberculosis and other active inflammatory process.
The patient had received no specific treatment for RPE or choriocapillaris atrophy and was followed up with IOP at a local clinic. Her IOP were within normal limits during 1-year follow-up period.