A 61-year-old male with a history of inferior wall myocardial infarction and non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) treated by percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) of the circumflex artery was seen in the outpatient clinic. The patient was recently discharged after a long hospital admission for recurrent acute myocardial infarction and cardiogenic shock due to early in-stent thrombosis after elective PCI of the left anterior descending (LAD) artery. The patient was in New York Heart Association (NYHA) Class IIIb with the main complaints being fatigue and exertional dyspnoea despite optimal doses of HF medication according to the 2016 ESC HF Guidelines. On physical examination, there were no signs of clinical congestion. The electrocardiogram showed a sinus rhythm of 68 beats per minute with a PR interval of 206 ms and moderate intraventricular conduction delay without any signs of a bundle branch block . Echocardiogram showed an impaired systolic left ventricular function with an ejection fraction of 28%, moderate aortic regurgitation, moderate mitral regurgitation, and an inferior vena cava of 15 mm with >50% collapse due to a high dose of diuretics in an euvolemic state. The laboratory results showed an estimated glomerular filtration rate of 38 mL/min, serum creatinine of 166 µmol/L, urea of 19.4 mmol/L, and N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide (NT-pro-BNP) of 557 pmol/L. The patient first had an internal cardioverter-defibrillator implanted for primary prevention of sudden cardiac death and then had a CardioMEMS implanted to allow for remote haemodynamic monitoring and optimization of HF care. At right heart catheterization during CardioMEMS implant, the patient had severe pulmonary hypertension (PH) with a systolic, diastolic, and mean PA pressure of respectively 84, 38, and 54 mmHg, a mean pulmonary capillary wedge pressure of 21 mmHg, and right atrial pressure of 7 mmHg. In the months following CardioMEMS implantation, the mean pulmonary artery pressure (mean PAP) remained elevated between 50 and 55 mmHg. Up titration of loop diuretics (bumetanide maximum tolerated daily dose of 7.5 mg), mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (eplerenone daily dose of 50 mg), sacubitril/valsartan (maximum tolerated daily dose of 96/104 mg), and sildenafil to a maximum tolerated daily dose of 60 mg did not improve PA pressures nor symptoms. The patient was referred to the pulmonologist for analysis of non-cardiac causes of PH. Interstitial lung disease, chronic thrombo-embolic pulmonary hypertension, and sleep apnoea were excluded and the PH was classified as WHO Type 2 after multidisciplinary consultation between the cardiologists and pulmonologists. In compassionate use we tried high dose sildenafil to lower right-sided pressures, unfortunately without effect. A new transthoracic echocardiogram showed a tricuspid aortic valve with severe regurgitation and a pressure half-time (PHT) of 310 ms, a left ventricular ejection fraction of 31%, moderate to severe mitral regurgitation, and an estimated systolic right ventricular pressure of 60 mmHg on echo. At this stage, it was unclear to what extent the aortic valve regurgitation or the mitral regurgitation contributed to the PH and symptoms and to which valve the intervention should be targeted. The Heart Team accepted the patient for TAVI to first reduce LV volume overload. MitraClip was not selected due to a potential clinical course towards LV assist device (LVAD) therapy. Surgical aortic valve replacement would have been a high-risk procedure because of severely impaired LV function. Furthermore, this could mean re-operation for the potential course towards LVAD implantation in the future. Besides, it was not fully clear to what extent AR contributed to symptoms and pulmonary hypertension because of concomitant severely impaired LV function. Surgery was thus deemed undesirable and TAVI was preferred. EuroSCORE II and Society of Thoracic Surgeons Score were 4.85% and 1.35%, respectively. On CT-scan, the annulus area was 496 mm2, annulus diameter was 25.1 mm and the Agatston score for the aortic valve was 326 indicating little calcification. Based on these findings, a 27 mm LOTUS Edge valve was implanted through the transfemoral way without any complications. Mean PAP (mPAP) was 56 mmHg on the day of TAVI. After successful implantation, both the aortic valve insufficiency and mitral regurgitation were reduced to a trace and the mPAP decreased to 42 mmHg 1 day post-procedural. Several echocardiographic parameters pre-TAVI and post-TAVI have been summarized in . In the following weeks, mPAP further decreased to 20 mmHg without any additional pharmacological interventions ( and ). After the mPAP had been stable around 20 mmHg for several weeks, sildenafil was completely stopped and the diuretics were decreased to less than 50% of the original daily dose. PA pressures remained stable after lowering the diuretics and the patient improved from NYHA Class IIIb to II. During the last contact in the outpatient clinic 7 months post-TAVI, the mean PA pressure had remained stable in the normal range around 20 mmHg. Furthermore, the heart failure-related complaints had decreased significantly and the patient improved further to NYHA Class I.