Our patient was a 47-year-old Caucasian man with a remote history of head injury and long-term PEG feeding in a nursing home who had developed increasing agitation and confusion. The patient had a closed head injury from a motor vehicle accident sustained 23 years previously. Since then he has had chronic but stable cognitive impairment and resides in an extended care facility. At baseline, he was able to talk and make simple decisions, but not complex ones such as those regarding his care. He is totally unable to perform his activities of daily living (ADLs) and is transferred using a ceiling lift and a two-person assist. He required tracheostomy for breathing and was fed via a PEG tube with Isosource® HN formula (Nestlé Nutrition™, Highland Park, MI, USA) without carnitine . He had been stable on tube feeds for many years. His calculated body mass index (BMI) was 24kg/m2, and his caloric intake via enteral feeds was 1800kcal/day. His other medical problems included a chronic foot ulcer without active infection and diabetes mellitus. He did not have any history of rhabdomyolysis, cardiac disease, liver disease, or renal insufficiency that would have suggested an underlying genetic defect in fatty acid oxidation. An unexplained acute change in his cognitive and/or psychological function and behavior occurred when he became increasingly confused and drowsy. As the patient had been on chronic phenytoin therapy for years, his phenytoin level was checked and found to be above the therapeutic range at 143μmol/L (therapeutic range 40 to 80μmol/L). His phenytoin dose was adjusted such that, days later, the level was 63μmol/L. Despite the achievement of therapeutic phenytoin concentration, his cognitive changes did not return to baseline. He continued to be delirious with a reversed sleep cycle. The phenytoin was further adjusted such that the level was subtherapeutic at 14μmol/L without improvement in his cognitive status. He did not return to his baseline level of function, being oriented only to person and unable to answer questions.
We evaluated him for other causes of confusion, which showed that his hematological profile, electrolytes, and renal function were normal. The glucometer reading was 6.6mmol/L at the time when he was first assessed for his confusion (hemoglobin A1C unknown). His liver biochemistry and International Normalized Ratio remained normal, and the serum total bilirubin was 8μmol/L (normal <18μmol/L ). The serum albumin level was low (29g/L) without any manifestation of hypoalbuminemia. Evidence of myopathy was difficult to assess clinically, given the neurologic compromise due to his remote accident. Creatine kinase and myoglobinuria were not measured at the time. His serum ammonia level, however, was high on multiple measurements taken under ideal conditions, ranging from 75 to 100μmol/L (normal <35μmol/L). The patient was not on any medication associated with hyperammonemia. His enteral feed, Isosource® HN, did not contain supplemental carnitine, and his serum carnitine and plasma amino acid concentrations were measured. His total carnitine was low at 20.5μmol/L (normal 30 to 63μmol/L), and his free carnitine was 17.2μmol/L (normal 22 to 59μmol/L). Acyl carnitine levels in urine were measured before and after carnitine supplementation, and they did not show findings suggestive of an underlying genetic defect of fatty acid oxidation. Plasma concentrations of ornithine (71μM), citrulline (34μM), and arginine (68μM) were normal, so there was no evidence of an undiagnosed urea cycle defect or other aminoacidopathy. Supplementation with carnitine 500mg twice daily via his PEG tube was initiated. His diet was otherwise the same without protein being removed from the diet. The patient’s confusion subsequently improved, and he was restored to his baseline neurological state, free of confusion, agitation, or behavioral disturbances within 1 month of the carnitine supplementation. Repeat serum ammonia concentration after carnitine supplementation decreased promptly to 53 to 60μmol/L.