A 70-year-old man complained of difficulty in swallowing food and was referred from another hospital. He was diagnosed with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma T3N1M0 in the median thoracic esophagus, according to the TNM classification, eighth edition. We therefore selected neoadjuvant chemotherapy (bi-weekly DCF: docetaxel 35 mg/m2, cisplatin 40 mg/m2, fluorouracil 400 mg/m2) as preoperative treatment [, ]. Preoperative contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) imaging revealed an aberrant branch of right posterior segmental vein (V2) passing behind the right main bronchus and merging with left atrium (LA) . We used a high-speed three-dimensional (3D) image analysis system (SYNAPSE VINCENT, Fuji Photo Film Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) to convert the Digital Imaging and Communication in Medicine (DICOM) data of contrast-enhanced CT images to 3D images, and the RTPV was clearly visualized as it appeared in the operative view in the supine position . Surgery was performed 4 weeks after the end of neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Thoracoscopic esophagectomy with three-field lymphadenectomy via the right thoracic approach was conducted in the prone position using 6 ports. We synchronized the surgical image and the 3D image on the monitor side-by-side for virtual navigation and the precise location of the RTPV was recognized during surgery.
SCLN dissection started from dissection of the posterior plane of the pericardium membrane. This plane continued to the anterior side of the SCLNs, reaching the cartilage of the tracheal bifurcation and the left main bronchus by recognizing the exact plane and expanding to the cranial and left side. Careful spreading of this released layer to the right revealed the rise of the RTPV embedded in the SCLNs . Next, the dissection plane was switched to the membranous region of the right main bronchus, exposing the RTPV slightly from the distal side, while preserving the right bronchial artery and the pulmonary branch of the vagus nerve . Finally, the fixation with the right main bronchus was dissected from the caudal side of the right main bronchus toward the direction of the inferior tracheal bifurcation to complete SCLN dissection for radical esophagectomy without damaging the RTPV . After the thoracoscopic procedure, we reconstructed the gastric tube via a retrosternal route and hand-sewn anastomosis was performed at the left neck . The operative time was 360 min, and the operative blood loss was approximately 30 mL. The patient recovered without complications and was discharged on the 21st day after surgery, although it took time for rehabilitation of muscle weakness.