A 88-year old woman was admitted to the emergency department of peripheral hospital with a 4 days history of mild exertional dyspnea, productive cough with purulent sputum, fever up to 37.8 °C and asthenia. Her past medical history consists of Chron’s disease (treated with hemicolectomy and pharmacological therapy with mesalamine) and osteoporosis, with left femoral arthroplasty occurred in the previous month. At admission the patient’s oxygen saturation was 96% and body temperature was 37.8 C. Patient’s blood pressure was 95/60 mmHg. Chest auscultation showed a marked reduction of lung sound in left hemithorax associated with bronchial breath. Chest X-ray revealed a complete left atelectasis, which was confirmed by Computed Tomography . Laboratory findings showed a normal leukocyte count (5.9 × 106/L), a high level of erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) [101 mm/h] and an elevated fibrinogen serum level (627 mg/dl). Due to clinical presentation, laboratory and imaging findings, the presence of mucus plug or foreign body was suspected at first; antibiotic treatment with ampicillin 1 g and sulbactam 2 g twice a day and methylprednisolone 20 mg twice a day was empirically started. The patient underwent flexible bronchoscopy under mild analgo-sedation (midazolam 3 mg i.v, fentanyl 50 mcg i.v) which revealed an endobronchial white necrotized lesion fully obstructing left main bronchus : multiple bronchoscopic biopsy specimens for histopathologic and microbiologic analysis were taken; mechanical and laser-assisted removal of the mass was performed by means of jumbo forceps with partial airway re-canalization. Histopathologic findings obtained by the examination of biopsy specimens showed fragments of the bronchial wall with signs of chronic exudative inflammation and dysplasia of the lining epithelium; furthermore, there were radiating filamentous colonies consistent with actinomyces growth. No extra-bronchial and pulmonary localization of actinmoycotic disease was detected by total body CT scan. The patient was discharged after 1 week and antibiotic treatment was switched to levofloxacin 500 mg once a day for another week with the indication to perform another bronchoscopy after 2 weeks. New bronchoscopic findings demonstrated the huge reduction in the size of the mass, which was present only in the third lower part of the left main bronchus without signs of obstruction. This residual mass was removed once again with laser-assisted technique. A third bronchoscopy was performed 20 days later and demonstrated the complete re-absorption of the lesion. Concomitantly, there was almost full improvement in symptoms.