A 59-year-old man with a history of smoking (10 pack-years) presented to the emergency department for a progressive and disabling New York Heart Association (NYHA) III stage dyspnea with no associated chest pain. He did also report a lipothymic discomfort episode on minimal exertion. He was then admitted to the cardiac care unit for further investigation.
Physical examination revealed severe bradycardia (30 beats per minute), blood pressure of 120/90, there was a 2/6 systolic murmur in aortic area and no murmur detected in the carotid artery, vesicular murmur with basal crackles on pulmonary auscultation, his jugular venous pressure was elevated with a right hypochondrial pain.
Electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed junctional bradycardia with 30bpm (A) that can be related to a sinus node dysfunction. Shortly after, another ECG showed a sinus bradycardia (45-50bpm), with a left axis due to left anterior fascicular block (LAFB), PR interval = 200 ms, low voltage QRS in the limb leads, T wave inversion in the lateral leads, and a sinus pause of 2s (B).
Laboratory tests revealed a slightly elevated potassium levels (5.7mmol/l), impaired renal function (eGFR = 18ml/mn/1,73m2) with increased levels of cardiac biomarkers [BNP = 3300pg/ml (reference value < 100pg/ml – Troponin: 143ng/l (reference value < 17ng/l)] which remained consistent in successive measurements.
Echocardiography showed marked concentric left ventricular hypertrophy (Interventricular septum = 13mm – Posterior wall = 13mm) with a speckled appearance of the interventricular septum, bi-atrial dilatation, left ventricular ejection fraction of 65%, a small circumferential pericardial effusion. Doppler flow showed evidence of diastolic dysfunction. Coronary angiography was performed excluding the presence of coronary artery disease.
Taking the whole clinical picture into account, a suspicion of cardiac amyloidosis was made. Cardiac MRI was performed showing concentric hypertrophy predominant on the septal wall, the ejection fraction was 64%, there was subendocardial late gadolinium enhancement predominant on the septal and anterior wall compatible with cardiac amyloidosis.
The holter ECG revealed the association of non-sustained ventricular tachycardia (VT) with a sinus node dysfunction requiring an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD).
During hospitalization, the patient presented an episode of sustained polymorphic ventricular tachycardia with hemodynamic instability which was successfully terminated with 200J biphasic cardioversion. The ECG performed after tachycardia termination showed junctional bradycardia with polymorphic ventricular extrasystole, for which he was managed medically, and transvenous right ventricular apical temporary pacing was done. The next day, the patient suddenly developed a second episode of polymorphic VT , it was managed with 200J biphasic cardioversion followed by intravenous amiodarone infusion. The decision to proceed with an ICD was made which was successfully done . The initial outcome was favorable, the patient was asymptomatic.
Since cardiac amyloidosis was highly suspected. Minor salivary gland biopsy confirmed the presence of amyloid deposits, exhibiting green birefringence after staining with Congo red. A serum protein electrophoresis was then conducted to investigate a potential underlying gammapathy, a monoclonal protein was detected and confirmed with immunofixation. The monoclonal protein was defined as IgA-Lambda with a concentration of 731mg/l (Ratio Kappa/Lambda <0.10). After discussion with the hematology department, bone marrow biopsy was performed, which showed 67% involvement by abnormal appearing plasma cells.
Based on the above findings, the diagnosis of cardiac amyloidosis secondary to multiple myeloma was made. Few days following placement, the ICD successfully intervened in one episode of ventricular fibrillation .
Unfortunately, after a few weeks, the patient died before initiating systemic chemotherapy.