A 62-year-old female had a past medical history of FIGO stage IIB cervical cancer (squamous cell carcinoma pT2bN0M0). In 1987, she underwent radical hysterectomy with bilateral iliac lymph node dissection, followed by adjuvant radiation therapy—70 Gy external beam pelvic irradiation followed by 30.5 Gy of brachytherapy. Thirty-two years later, she presented with signs of rectal bleeding.
Digital rectal examination revealed a solid exophytic tumor on 5 cm above the anal verge. During rigid proctosigmoidoscopy, a 3 cm anterior wall rectal tumor with irregular margins and swollen mucosa was observed. Additional flexible colonoscopy showed no signs of synchronous colorectal neoplasms. Snare biopsy result showed an undifferentiated malignant nonepithelial tumor of unidentified histological origin. An attempt of immunohistochemistry assay was undertaken unsuccessfully due to an insufficient amount of tissue.
Consecutively, a pelvic MRI with a 1.5 Tl Philips Intera machine had been performed for local staging. MERCURY protocol for high resolution imaging was applied.
On a series of sagittal and axial MR scans, a lower rectal tumor was observed on 4 cm above the anorectal junction with maximal extent of 30 mm in the greatest dimension. Mesorectal infiltration with maximal depth of 3 mm (mrT3b) was also identified. No radiological signs of either mesorectal fascia involvement or extramural vascular invasion (mrCRM− and mrEMVI−) had been observed (see Figures and ). Visible mesorectal lymph nodes had homogenous MR signal, smooth external margins, and a regular size, thus showing no radiologic signs of lymph node involvement (mrN0). It was noticeable that the stump of the vagina and rectovaginal sept had prominent signs of fibrosis regarding a highly intensive MR signal on T2-weighted images. Malignant tumor features were also observed on a series of diffusion-weighted images (see ).
A CT scan with intravenous enhancement showed no signs of neither distant metastases neither thoracic or intra-abdominal lymphadenopathy. Upper GI endoscopy and laboratory data of standard blood, serum, and urine counts revealed no signs of pathology.