A 4-year-2-month-old boy was referred to our Endocrinology Clinic to evaluate for Severe Short Stature. He was the offspring of consanguineous parents, born at term by normal vaginal delivery. The family medical history was only positive for a familial short stature.
His weight was 13 kg (1.74th) percentile his height was 85 cm (0.1) percentile and his head circumference was 47 cm (−3.3 SD)on CDC growth charts. The blood pressure was 100/60 mmHg, the heart rate of 85 bpm, and the respiratory rate of 20 bpm.
On physical Examination, he was conscious, and oriented, with no facial dysmorphia, subtle short upper and lower limbs, bowing of the lower limbs, waddling gait, and hyperlordosis.
The urogenital examination showed micropenis. The rest of his physical examination was normal.
The initial biochemical workup is shown in Table .
The results were unremarkable.
Hormonal workup is shown in Table :
Table showed an elevated thyroid stimulating hormone and positive anti-tissue transglutaminase immunoglobulin A.
The child had Duodenal Biopsies confirming CD (Marsh type 3b).
Due to the presence of mild microcephaly, he had a computed tomography-SCAN of the brain which was normal.
A complete skeletal scan showed changes in the bone structure at the terminal parts of the femoral bones and no changes in the pelvis . there were no remarkable changes in the bone structure of the vertebrae which lead to the diagnosis of Metaphyseal chondrodysplasia type SCHMID.
A treatment with levothyroxine 25 mcg per day was initiated, with a gluten-free diet.
Lost to follow up. At the age of 10 years and 4 months, his height was 117 cm (0.1 percentile), and his weight was 26 kg (0.4 percentile) rising concerns about the integrity of his pituitary gland.
His hormonal workup is shown in Table .
The dose of levothyroxine was adjusted to 50 mcg/kg per day.
A GH provocation test with insulin (0.01 unit/kg) showed low peaks.
To exclude any possibility of an autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome, parathyroid hormone and glycated haemoglobin were within normal limits .
MRI of the brain and pituitary gland was normal .
The estimation of his bone age based on the Greulich and Pyle atlas was 6 years.
A GH therapy with a dose of 0.24 mg/kg per week was initiated associated with free gluten diet.