A 9-year-old boy was admitted to a previous hospital with fever and systemic purpura due to parvovirus B19 infection. He noticed black pigmented spots on his lips, buccal mucosa, fingertips, and soles of his feet at the time . He was diagnosed with PJS in the same way as his mother, who had a bowel resection due to intussusception caused by a small-bowel polyp and was definitely diagnosed with PJS. The results of his laboratory tests were as follows: the white blood cell (WBC) count was 2,500/μl (normal range: 7,000–15,000), the hemoglobin level was 13.1 g/dl (normal range: 13.7–16.8), the platelet count was 184,000 cells/µl, the prothrombin time-international normalized ratio (PT-INR) was 1.13 (normal range: 0.85–1.15), the activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) was 42.3 s (normal range: 20–40), the Fbg level was 126 mg/dl (normal range: 150–350) and the Fbg/fibrin degradation products (FDP) level was 0.6 μg/ml (normal range: <5). Although the Fbg level was low, his other blood coagulation profile was normal. Furthermore, his laboratory test results for liver and renal function were normal. His symptoms (fever and leukopenia) were presumed to be due to parvovirus B19 infection because the results for parvovirus B19-immunoglobulin M antigen were positive.
Three months later, he was admitted to the hospital for esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) and total colonoscopy to assess PJS gastrointestinal polyps. The results of his laboratory tests at the time were as follows: The WBC count was 7,000/μl, the platelet count was 305,000 cells/µl, the PT-INR was 1.00, the APTT was 31.2 s, the Fbg level was 117 mg/dl and the FDP level was 0.6 μg/ml. Flat polyps of less than 10 mm in diameter were detected sporadically in the stomach and colon, and a 20 mm stalked polyp was found in the descending portion of the duodenum. Since no obvious bleeding symptoms were observed in daily life, EMR for duodenal polyps was performed , and hemostasis was performed at the excision site with two clips . Despite being continuously monitored for a month following the operation, no obvious postoperative bleeding was observed. The histopathological examination revealed dendritic growth and proliferation of the muscularis mucosae as well as hyperplasia of the small intestinal epithelium, all of which are consistent with PJS .
The small intestine was not assessed at the previous facility and was neglected for 3 years because evaluating the small intestine was difficult at that facility. Although the patient had no abdominal symptoms, he was referred to our hospital at the age of 11 years for the evaluation of small intestine. Small intestine fluoroscopy was conducted and revealed a polyp in the jejunum , and abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed two polyps and intussusception , but no gastrointestinal symptoms were experienced. Since no obvious bleeding symptoms in daily life and bleeding after EMR for duodenal polyps were observed, he proceeded to the next step without workup for low Fbg level at this time. On double-balloon enteroscopy, the resected polyps were hamartoma with diameters of 20 and 30 mm . Hemostasis was performed at the excision site with one clip following EMR for small intestinal polyps because the operability of the endoscope was poor. The pathological findings indicated a hamartoma . The Fbg level was 107 mg/dl, with a normal coagulation profile. He manifested with melena and black stools on the day after EMR (approximately 20 h after the EMR). The results of his laboratory tests were as follows: the hemoglobin level was 13.1 g/dl, the platelet count was 212,000 cells/µl, and the Fbg level was 74 mg/dl. Abdominal x-rays and enhanced abdominal CT scan at the time revealed that the position of the clips had not changed from the position immediately after EMR , and there were no signs of gastrointestinal perforation or arterial bleeding . As he had no history or family history of thrombosis and other thrombotic risk factors, such as pregnancy and/or immobilization , he was eventually diagnosed with post-EMR bleeding. He stopped eating, and hemostatic agents (carbazochrome sodium sulfonate hydrate for 75 mg/day and tranexamic acid for 750 mg/day) were administered for 5 days. The next day's stool was only black with no melena. His hemoglobin level dropped to 9.2 g/dl but recovered to 9.6 g/dl the next day with no need for blood transfusions. As the low Fbg level before EMR was thought to a cause of gastrointestinal bleeding, genetic analysis of peripheral blood for congenital Fbg deficiency was performed, and it revealed a heterozygous pathogenic variant in Exon 10 of the fibrinogen gamma chain (FGG) gene (OMIM: 202400) [c.769 G > T (p.Glu257Ter)]. However, mutations in the STK11/LKB gene (the causative gene of PJS) were not evaluated as the diagnosis of PJS was confirmed by the patient's clinical symptoms and family history.