A 7-year-old Indian-American boy was referred by his pediatric dentist for evaluation of an anterior dental crossbite caused by lingual eruption of the maxillary central incisors . The traumatic occlusion had caused mobility and early gingival recession to the opposing mandibular central incisors. The patient's chief symptom was moderate tooth pain during mastication. His medical history was normal and healthy, with no family history of prognathism.
Intraoral examination revealed a pseudo-Class III malocclusion in the early mixed dentition. Both maxillary central incisors were partially erupted and positioned in an anterior crossbite to the mandibular central and left lateral incisors. The patient displayed an end-to-end incisal relationship when the mandible was positioned into centric relation (CR). The mandibular central incisors displayed 3 mm of gingival recession compared to the mandibular right lateral incisor that was not in crossbite. These teeth also exhibited +2-degree mobility and were sensitive to palpation. The extraoral examination showed a slightly concave profile, with no apparent facial asymmetry.
Cephalometric analysis revealed a mild Class 3 skeletal relationship (ANB = 0°) in centric occlusion, with a short midface length (Co − A = 71.5 mm) and a normal mandibular length (Go − Gn = 67.1 mm) . The maxillary central incisors were retroclined (U1 − SN = 94°) while the mandibular central incisors displayed proper angulation (L1 − MP = 98°). Accordingly, the upper lip was set back too far (Upper Lip to E − Plane = −4 mm). The panoramic radiograph revealed a full complement of adult teeth.
The treatment objectives were to achieve positive overlapping of the anterior teeth and eliminate the traumatic occlusion to the mandibular incisors. The parents were informed that waiting to intervene until adolescence could result in further tooth mobility and gingival recession.
The family was presented the following 3 treatment options, ranging from the most comprehensive to conservative:
Upper and lower fixed partial braces on the permanent molars and incisors A removable orthodontic appliance, such as an upper Hawley bite plate with a finger spring or a mandibular inclined plane Bonding of a functional resin turbo in the absence of fixed or removable orthodontic appliances
The first option would enable space consolidation and detailing of the maxillary incisors, but it would have the disadvantages of increased cost and treatment duration. The family also was nervous about whether their child could cope with the discomfort of brackets and bands at his age. The second option would correct the crossbite without braces, but the treatment's success would depend on the patient's compliance in wearing the removable retainer. Therefore, the family chose the third option of bonding a functional resin turbo to provide a noncompliant alternative in the absence of braces.
The turbo material chosen was Triad® Gel, which is an acrylic resin liquid that is used traditionally to create bite plates and modify dental casts . It is composed primarily of methacrylate mixed with a small amount of silica glass (WT 1-10%). Triad® Gel is packaged in small tubes and comes in four assorted colors: clear colorless, clear pink, clear blue, and clear red.
The Triad® Gel was bonded to the teeth with a standard etch and prime technique . First, the mandibular central incisors were prepared by rubbing the facial and incisal surfaces with a self-etch adhesive L-Pop™. The Triad® Gel was then applied incrementally with a microbrush and light-cured. The material was built vertically, beginning from the facial surfaces, and extended lingually. Both incisors were bonded together to provide stabilization. A handpiece was then used to create the upward sloping lingual bevel .
The occlusion was tested to ensure the turbo was at the appropriate height and thickness. If the material was too high, the patient would be uncomfortable while eating. Most importantly, if the material did not extend far enough lingually, the patient could simply posture his mandible forward and close fully into an underbite in centric occlusion. The family was informed that it would take several days for the patient to become accustomed to having the turbo in his mouth.
The patient returned to the office for his first checkup after 3 months, and the crossbite had fully corrected . The disclusion caused by the functional turbo had also allowed the maxillary central incisors to further erupt. During this appointment, the Triad® Gel was removed with a handpiece. The mandibular central incisors were no longer pathologically mobile or sensitive to palpation. Successful interceptive orthodontic treatment was completed in 1 visit, in the absence of fixed or removable orthodontic appliances.
At the end of the treatment, the patient achieved positive overlapping of the anterior teeth (overjet = 4 mm), and his facial profile also was less concave . Cephalometric superimpositions showed that the maxillary central incisors had protruded and proclined 4 mm and 9°, respectively . The upper lip also moved forward 3 mm, into an ideal position . The family was pleased with the improved smile esthetics and bite closure. The patient was placed on a 6-month recall schedule to monitor the eruption of his remaining permanent teeth and the readiness for comprehensive orthodontic treatment.