A 71-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with complaints of persistent anorexia. Fifteen years ago, he had undergone distal gastrectomy with D2 lymphadenectomy, followed by Billroth-II type reconstruction for gastric cancer. Pathological examination of the gastric tumor revealed an AFP-GC, and the pathological stage was pT3 (SS) N2 M0, stage IIB (Japanese classification of gastric carcinoma: 3rd English edition) . The serum AFP level was 3720 ng/mL (normal range < 10 ng/mL) preoperatively and decreased to 8.0 ng/mL after gastrectomy performed 15 years ago. With the exceptions of the hemoglobin (7.8 g/dL) and serum AFP (17,447 ng/mL) levels, all serum levels tested were within the normal range. Hepatitis B and C were negative, and he did not have any elevated aminotransferases. The levels of carcinoembryonic antigen (normal range < 5.3 ng/mL) and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (normal range < 37 U/mL) were 4.1 ng/mL and 13.5 U/mL, respectively. Upper gastrointestinal series revealed a contrast medium in the ulcerative lesion from the afferent jejunum . Endoscopic examination demonstrated the presence of an ulcerative lesion located at 15 cm from the site of anastomosis of gastrojejunostomy at the afferent jejunum. Pathological examination of biopsy specimens revealed adenocarcinoma consistent with primary gastric cancer resected 15 years ago. An abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CE-CT) revealed the presence of a 70-mm-sized mass at the mesentery of the jejunum . Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) demonstrated the presence of an abnormal accumulation of FDG at the mass without any distant metastasis. Based on these findings, we suspected a metastatic tumor from gastric cancer at the mesentery of the jejunum and performed a laparotomy. Macroscopically, a 75 × 70-mm-sized mass, infiltrating all the layers of jejunum wall, was found at the mesentery of the jejunum , and partial resection of the jejunum was then performed. Pathological examination revealed tumor cells with an acidophilic cells with an alveolar growth pattern . Such observations were comparable with the primary gastric cancer’s pathological features. Immunohistochemical examination indicated that the tumor cells were positive for AFP and cytokeratin 18 and negative for cytokeratin 7 and 20. Consequently, we diagnosed the tumor to have metastasized from the AFP-GC resected 15 years previously. The preoperative serum AFP levels, which were postoperatively examined, were 17,447 ng/mL (normal range < 10 ng/mL). The patient was uneventfully discharged on the 15th postoperative day.
Two months after the second surgery, CE-CT scan revealed multiple liver metastases and serum AFP level increased to 94,838 ng/mL . Therefore, chemotherapy with S-1+CDDP was initiated. However, after two courses of therapy, the patient refused any further treatment owing to severe adverse effects (i.e., appetite loss and general fatigue). A CE-CT scan performed after two courses of chemotherapy revealed that all liver metastatic lesions disappeared. Additionally, serum AFP levels declined to normal range (1.0 ng/mL). Seven years after the second surgery, and without any chemotherapy, the patient is alive and well, without any recurrence.