A 34-year-old male patient returned to a rural region of Colombia on 17 December
2020, from Africa, where he lived for 10 months in the city of Gul, Uganda. He went
to the emergency room on 26 December 2020 due to 10-day history of fever,
holocranial headache, myalgia, arthralgia, and retroocular pain associated with
sudden onset epistaxis and choluria. Physical examination revealed blood pressure
110/80 mmHg, heart rate 89 beats/minute, respiratory rate 16 breaths/minute,
temperature 39°C, oxygen saturation 97% room air, cold and sweaty skin without
jaundice or skin lesions, with adequate ventilatory dynamics, with
hepatosplenomegaly 5 cm below the costal margin, and without any neurological
compromise.
Laboratory analysis showed anemia (hemoglobin 10 g/dl reference value 12-14 mg/dl),
thrombocytopenia (platelets 97 000/mm3 reference value
150 000-400 000/mm3) and abnormal serum transaminase. Various
laboratory investigations were conducted to exclude any other likely cause of the
fever and presence of an infection, including those for hepatitis B surface antigen
and hepatitis C antibody, both came out normal. Serologic tests for dengue performed
on the acute-phase serum (collected 10 days after onset of symptoms) showed the
presence of immunoglobulin (Ig) M (titers 1:800) and IgG (titers 1:400; ). Diagnosis of
dengue virus infection with warning signs (Group B) was made and admitted to
hospitalization for management with intravenous hydration, antipyretic, and total
abdominal ultrasound. Ultrasound scan shows pleural effusion in addition to moderate
free fluid in the peritoneal cavity surrounding urinary bladder and gallbladder wall
thickening, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, and pleural effusion. A 72 hours after
admission, the patient persisted with fever and presented a decrease in hematocrit
(34.4%) with an increase in hemoglobin 12 g/dL and platelets to
137 000/mm3 .
Although dengue virus infection had been diagnosed, parasitic tests were performed
because the patient had returned from an endemic country with persistent prolonged
febrile syndrome, a thick and thin blood smear stained with Giemsa was performed and
revealed the characteristic intraerythrocytic ring forms of Plasmodium
falciparum (trophozoites: a total of 215 000 parasites/μl, parasitemia
index of 2.3% and gametocytes), which confirmed the diagnosis of malaria as
uncomplicated. Antimalarial management was started with artemether-lumefantrine
20/120 mg twice a day for 3 days. To rule out false positives, the asexual parasites
load was performed on the peripheral blood smear and MAC-ELISA (considering more
than 5 days illness) was positive for dengue virus type 2 (DENV-2). The MAC-ELISA is
based on capturing human IgM antibodies on a microtiter plate using anti-human-IgM
antibody followed by the addition of dengue virus antigens. The antigens used for
this assay are derived from the envelope proteins of the 4 dengue virus serotypes
(DENV-1-4). Considering IgG detection by ELISA in a single serum sample is
not useful for diagnostic testing because it remains detectable for life after a
dengue virus infection, the patient was asked if he had had dengue infection before,
which he denied, and IgG was negative. Therefore, a diagnosis of concurrent malaria
and dengue infection was established.
The patient completed antimalarial treatment with clinical and paraclinical
improvement, afebrile, without new episodes of epistaxis or obvious bleeding,
without skin lesions or jaundice, normalization of platelets and transaminases with
normal total abdominal ultrasound. PCR (molecular test) was performed to confirm the
presence of dengue virus in the blood, being positive. After 7 days at hospital, he
was fully discharged.