The patient was a 23-year-old Japanese man who was a medical student and belonged to a boating club. Two days before admission, he developed back pain after performing several repetitions of lifting 30-kg weight in a semicrouched position during a training session with the club. The pain was initially mild. On the day before admission, although he had mild back pain, he participated in both morning and evening training sessions. After the evening session, the pain gradually intensified. He waited to see whether the pain would resolve, but he was transported to a nearby hospital by ambulance at midnight because the back pain had worsened, and he found it difficult to move.
Because of the combined symptoms of back pain at rest, hematuria, and a calculus detected in the ureter by computed tomography (CT), he was diagnosed with a urinary calculus and treated with fluids and rest. However, his pain persisted without relief. The following morning, because blood tests revealed elevated creatine kinase (CK) (46,190 U/L) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) (1815 U/L) levels, CS was suspected. He was then transferred to our hospital.
Upon admission to our hospital, his condition was as follows: blood pressure, 131/81 mmHg; pulse, 88 beats/minute; oxygen saturation, 100% in room air; respiratory rate, 22 breaths/minute; and consciousness level on the Glasgow Coma Scale, E4V5M6. His abdomen was flat and soft, and no tenderness was observed. The erector spinae muscles were tense, with especially severe spontaneous pain and tenderness in the lumbar region. The skin in the lumbar region was free from blistering or other superficial lesions. No neurological abnormalities, such as muscle weakness or impaired sensation, were observed in the lower limbs. There were no other findings suggestive of CS in the limbs.
Blood tests revealed increases in the serum levels of aspartate aminotransferase, 619 U/L; alanine aminotransferase, 157 U/L; LDH, 2050 U/L; creatine phosphokinase (CPK), 53,984 U/L; and myoglobin, 3756 mg/dl. Urinalysis revealed 3+ occult blood and an increased myoglobin level of 6500 mg/dl. Blood gas analysis revealed favorable oxygenation, and acidemia was not observed. Because the patient had a history of food allergy, plain CT was performed without contrast media. CT findings revealed swelling of the erector spinae muscles . Although magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed edematous lesions in the erector spinae muscles and low-intensity regions in the lumbar multifidus, there were no clear findings that indicated muscle necrosis . Because paravertebral CS was suspected, compartment pressure was measured in the erector spinae muscles at the fourth and fifth lumbar levels, where the pain was severe. The pressure in the erector spinae muscles, measured at 3, 7, and 12 cm from the iliac crest, was elevated to 105 mmHg on the right side and 64 mmHg on the left side at 3 cm, and 95 mmHg and 48 mmHg, respectively, at 7 cm . On the basis of these findings, paravertebral CS was diagnosed. A volume load of saline was administered, including 250 ml of 7% sodium bicarbonate, to alkalinize the urine and prevent progression to renal failure due to elevated urine myoglobin levels. After the infusion of sufficient external fluid, administration of D-mannitol was started. Although nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) were initially used for pain control, the pain could not be controlled, and continuous infusion of a fentanyl citrate injectable solution was initiated. Urine output was maintained at 1 ml/kg/hour with sufficient infusion ; no deterioration of renal function was observed, and pain was controlled by continuous infusion of a fentanyl citrate injectable solution. Thus, conservative management was selected.
The patient’s compartment pressure gradually decreased, and his CPK levels peaked on the first day of admission to the hospital . The infusion of fentanyl citrate was subsequently discontinued and replaced with oral NSAIDs. Infusion was performed only with external fluid. The patient was able to get out of bed on hospital day 3 and returned to attending classes on hospital day 7. MRI performed on hospital day 7 revealed muscle necrosis in the right multifidus muscle and a reduction in edema in the left multifidus muscle. The area of high-intensity change in the right multifidus decreased on T2-weighted images . On hospital day 10, the patient was able to perform activities of daily living without difficulty, despite discomfort in the right lumbar region, and was independently ambulatory. He was therefore discharged. MRI performed 12 weeks after onset revealed no signal intensity changes in the muscles . Mild discomfort persisted in the marked lumbar region, as shown in Fig. . The patient was allowed to resume light sport activities at 24 weeks after onset because he did not feel any pain during his daily activities. Twelve months later, he could play tennis without pain. He reported mild discomfort in the lower back, the area of which decreased over time. The patient was scheduled to report for a follow-up at 24 months after the surgery. He consented to the publication of this case report.