A 23-year-old Chinese woman presented with cough, expectoration, wheeze and dyspnea for 3 months. A physical examination indicated weakened respiratory sounds in her right lower lobe. A chest computed tomography (CT; Figure ) showed partial atelectasis of her right lower lobe. Her intermedial segment bronchus was in severe stenosis, with a diameter of approximately 3mm . Our final diagnosis was pulmonary TB combined with bronchial TB based on the detection of tubercle bacilli from her sputum. She took isoniazid (0.3g/day), rifampicin (0.45g/day), ethambutol (0.75g/day) and pyrazinamide (0.5 three times daily) for 2 months.After attaining her signed informed consent and the permission of the Ethics Committee of our hospital, we performed a high-pressure balloon dilation in her intermediate bronchus through videobronchoscope (BF-260, Olympus Corp., Tokyo, Japan), with the balloon produced by Johnson & Johnson Corporation of USA in China, 10mm diameter ×40mm length .The procedure for our high-handed videobronchoscopy balloon dilation was as follows: A) Insert the bronchoscope into her bronchus. B) Insert the guide wire along the working hole of the bronchoscope. C) Pull out the videobronchoscope from her bronchus and reinsert the bronchoscope into her bronchus. D) Insert the high-handed balloon along the guide wire into the narrowest part of her bronchus and inject physiologic saline through the balloon duct with a booster pump to increase the pressure of the balloon (from 0 to 14atm). E) Remove the bronchoscope from her bronchus. She was seated for 40 minutes with continual balloon dilation at high pressure (14atm) and without the videobronchoscope in her bronchus. F) Re-insert the bronchoscope into her bronchus and remove the balloon and the guide wire from her bronchus. G) Remove the bronchoscope from her bronchus after the operation is finished. One month after continuous anti-TB treatment, CT film showed that gradual expansion of her right lower lobe had occurred until it had completely opened , and her clinical symptoms had disappeared. An examination using an electronic bronchoscope showed the diameter of the intermediate bronchus was 9mm . Five weeks later, she was checked twice through the bronchoscope and there was no re-stenosis in her intermediate bronchus. She then took anti-TB drugs for 12 months and recovered completely and without re-stenosis. No re-stenosis was observed after continuous anti-TB treatment for 13 months. There were no side effects.