Informed consent was obtained from the couple for this case report.
A 36-year-old Hungarian woman and her 37-year-old Hungarian partner came to our department with secondary infertility. The investigation revealed tubal and male factors .
As a first step intrauterine insemination was performed. Pregnancy was not achieved and, on the basis of the reduced sperm parameters (total progressively motile sperm count 1.1 million), we planned IVF treatment for the next cycle.
Following ovarian stimulation based on the gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) antagonist protocol, 16 oocytes were retrieved using transvaginal ultrasound-guided follicular puncture.
The male partner received written information regarding abstinence and hygiene rules, and then semen was collected by masturbation in a sterile container. Laboratory procedures were carried out using the standard protocol . Semen was incubated at 37 °C. After liquefaction, the sample was homogenized and examined. The sample had a volume of 4.4 ml and a sperm concentration of 14.5 million/ml with progressive motility of 29%, without a significant number of round cells. Progressively motile spermatozoa were isolated by a combined method of density gradient centrifugation and swim-up technique. A two-layer SpermGrad (Vitrolife, Göteborg, Sweden) density gradient centrifugation was used according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Swim-up technique was applied following density gradient centrifugation to obtain a sample with high progressive motility.
After processing, the semen sample contained 1 million progressively motile spermatozoa, so we performed in vitro fertilization. Oocyte and embryo culture was performed in a culture media product line called “G-series” (Vitrolife) containing gentamicin.
Following 16 h of coincubation of oocytes and sperm, a proliferation of rods was observed in the culture media and all oocytes degenerated .
Samples were sent for microbiological culture. The control culture medium and cervical swab proved to be negative. The sperm suspension and the contaminated culture medium contained Escherichia coli (E. coli) and Staphylococcus hominis.
The patient was disappointed by the failed treatment, but had confidence in the department’s work.
On the basis of a thorough review of the literature, we planned ICSI treatment 3 months later. After ovarian stimulation using the antagonist protocol, 14 oocytes were retrieved by means of follicular aspiration. Semen was collected as discussed above. The volume of the semen sample was 1.8 ml and had a sperm concentration of 40.5 million/ml with progressive motility of 46%, without a significant amount of round cells. Progressively motile spermatozoa were isolated by density gradient centrifugation. After processing, the sample contained 0.3 million progressively motile spermatozoa. ICSI was performed for fertilization and embryo culture continued in an Embryoslide + group culture dish in an Embryoscope + time-lapse incubator (Vitrolife), which enables a precise evaluation of embryo morphology .
Out of 14 oocytes, 3 fertilized normally, 1 abnormally, and 10 were not fertilized. During pronucleus evaluation, bacterial proliferation was detected in one fertilized oocyte, which was recorded on a time-lapse video (Additional file 1. Intracellular proliferation of bacteria in a fertilized oocyte after ICSI). We did not observe any contamination in the other oocytes or culture medium. The fertilized but infected oocyte was removed from the culture plate, and its zona pellucida was opened under a microscope by using a microsurgical laser. A mass of bacteria emerged from the cell, which was captured on video (Additional file 2. Bacteria emerging from the infected oocyte after opening the zona pellucida). Microbiological analysis of the contaminated culture medium revealed E. coli in dominant germ counts and Cutibacterium acnes. The sperm culture also showed E. coli.
Because of the repeated positive semen cultures, the husband was referred to an andrologist, and 2 × 500 mg cefuroxime treatment was initiated.
Two of the fertilized oocytes were not contaminated and their further culture resulted in normal embryo development and good-quality blastocysts. Cervical culture proved to be negative for bacteria, fungi, and sexually transmitted diseases (Chamydia trachomatis, Neisseria gonorrheae, Trichomonas vaginalis, Mycoplasma genitalium, and Mycoplasma hominis by molecular testing). Given these points, one blastocyst-stage embryo was transferred on the fifth day after fertilization .
The other embryo was cryopreserved.
Progesterone (3 × 200 mg vaginal suppositories) was given to support the corpus luteum function.
After positive human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) tests, a viable singleton pregnancy was confirmed by vaginal ultrasound at 6 weeks of gestation. The woman’s gratitude was heightened by the challenging path to pregnancy. No complications occurred during routine prenatal care, and genetic testing of the fetus confirmed normal chromosomes. In February 2023, a healthy female newborn was delivered by cesarean section at 40 weeks of pregnancy. We intend to monitor the development of the child.