A 63-year-old male patient was admitted to the hospital due to repeated episodes of abdominal pain and rectal bleeding. Initial workup included colonoscopy, which revealed an ulcerated mass in the sigmoid colon. Results of the biopsy were consistent with an adenocarcinoma. Serum levels of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) (89 ng/mL) and cancer antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9) (326.7 U/mL) were elevated. Contrast-enhanced computerized tomography (CT) (Siemens Somatom Sensation 16, Munich, Germany) of the abdomen and pelvis showed presence of mesenteric lymphadenopathies and hypodense lesions in liver segments III, IV and V. The lesions in the liver were highly suggestive for metastases. According to the tumour board recommendation, a left hemicolectomy with regional lymph node removal was performed and the diagnosis of an invasive adenocarcinoma was confirmed [Dukes classification C; T3c N2 (6/9) L1 V1 R0]. The treatment was continued with four cycles of bevacizumab plus oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy, after which the patient underwent hepatic segmentectomy. Three months later, the chemotherapy was modified to FOLFOX regimen (Leucovorin Calcium, Fluorouracil, Oxaliplatin; 12 cycles) due to a CT-verified recurrence of the liver metastases. After a follow-up of 3 years, the chemotherapy regimen was changed to FOLFIRI (Leucovorin Calcium, Fluorouracil, Irinotecan Hydrochloride). Due to slow, continuous progression of the liver metastases, the chemotherapy protocol was changed to FOLFOX and XELOX (Capecitabine, Oxaliplatin) regimen. In this period, genetic analysis revealed a mutation of Gly12Asp in 12 codon of K-Ras gene.
After the administration of the last chemotherapy cycle, the patient started to complain of severe pain in the left gluteal region and right arm. The significant elevation of serum levels of CEA (60 ng/mL) and CA 19-9 (255.5 U/mL) were detected. Osteolytic lesions within the left half of the sacrum and adjacent part of the iliac bone observed during CT examination indicated the presence of skeletal metastases and the patient underwent a bone scintigraphy. In addition to the increased accumulation of Technetium-99m in the left iliac bone, sacrum and the right proximal humerus, the radiopharmaceutical also accumulated at two sites in the anterior neck . Physical examination of the neck revealed two small, painless, palpable masses located anteriorly at the level of the hyoid bone and superior to the left lobe of the thyroid gland. When asked, the patient reported no significant symptoms. Ultrasound examination revealed a heterogeneous solid mass, with multiple small hyperechoic foci showing acustic shadowing and increased vascularization on colour Doppler. There was no cervical lymphadenopathy and the thyroid gland appeared normal. CT of the neck demonstrated enlargement of the body of the hyoid bone with massive osteolysis and cortical destruction (, ). The mass from the hyoid bone showed slight soft tissue extension toward the region of the vallecula and the epiglottis. Enlargement and destruction of the thyroid cartilage, predominantly of its left lamina, was also noted (,,). The airway lumen was not affected. There were no pathological changes in the adjacent structures of the neck. At this stage the patient’s performance status (PS) was scored as PS3. The multidisciplinary tumour board (MTB) proposed fine needle aspiration of the mass in the hyoid bone. Even though the patient was fully informed about the suggested procedure, he still refused it. The MTB did not insist on performing the biopsy, bearing in mind that histopathological verification in this case would not influence the decision regarding choice of therapy. According to the MTB recommendation, the patient underwent palliative radiotherapy for the metastases in the sacrum.
An informed consent was obtained from the patient.