A 64-year-old Caucasian man fell in a bathtub approximately 9 months prior to presentation. At the time of the injury, he suffered multiple left-sided nonunion rib fractures (4th to 9th) and was treated with a chest tube and analgesia. He had developed chronic pain from the injury to the point in which he was unable to sleep at night and heard a clicking sound every time he took a deep breath. On the CT scan of the chest, the rib fractures were displaced and on exam, the ribs were mobile with reproducible pain and clicks on palpation. The patient was taken to the operating room for an open reduction and internal fixation with MatrixRIB fixation plates (DePuySynthes, West Chester, PA, USA).
The procedure was performed by a board certified thoracic surgeon (MPK). On the day of the operation, the patient had a dynamic CT scan, with one scan taken with maximal inspiration and one scan taken with maximal expiration in the right lateral decubitus position with the left side up. The CT scan was imported into the electromagnetic navigation system software (Veran Medical Technologies Inc, St. Louis, MO). We first marked the rib fractures on the planning software as a target. The software demonstrated 2.2 cm rib fracture displacement between inspiration and expiration (A). Next, we identified the skin that was directly superficial to the site of the fractured ribs using the SPiN Perc™ protocol (B). Intraoperatively, a bronchoscopy was performed for electromagnetic calibration (A). This allows the accurate matching of the patient’s anatomy to the virtual anatomy seen on the CT scan. Then, cutaneous sites of all fractures were identified and marked with image guidance (B-C). These markings served as a guide for the incision’s location. After incision, the dissection was continued to the chest wall sparing the latissimus dorsi and serratus anterior. The rib fractures were readily identified with accurate correlation with the cutaneous sites (D). The fractures were freed from the bony callus and were fixed with MatrixRIB plates (DePuySynthes, West Chester, PA, USA) in a conventional fashion (E). A closed suction drain was left in the operative field. The patient recovered well postoperatively and reported immediate improvement in chest wall pain. He was discharged on postoperative day 2 with non-narcotic analgesics.