An 83-year-old man had a two-year history of proteinuria (2+) that had become worse in the year before admission. He complained of progressive proximal lower limb muscle weakness for 10 months before admission. He was admitted to our hospital because of upper and lower limb, neck flexor and extensor, and flexor and extensor digitorum muscle weakness, and pitting edema of the legs. He had a medical history of atrial fibrillation and hypertension. He had smoked five cigarettes per day for the decade before he turned 30.
On admission, predominantly proximal symmetrical muscle weakness and leg pitting edema were observed. His manual muscle testing (MMT) scores were: neck flexion = 4; neck extension = 4; deltoids = 3; biceps brachii = 3; triceps brachii = 3; flexor and extensor muscles of the hand = 4; flexor and extensor digitorum muscle = 3; iliopsoas = 2; gluteus maximus = 2; quadriceps = 2; hamstring = 2; flexor and extensor muscles of the foot = 5. His blood pressure was 120/80 mmHg. Laboratory tests on admission showed serum creatinine and albumin levels of 0.7 mg/dL and 2.9 g/dL, respectively, and his urinary protein creatinine ratio was 7.3 g/gCr, suggesting nephrotic syndrome. Serum creatine kinase (820 U/L), aldolase (13.7 IU/L), and urinary myoglobin levels were initially elevated, but after admission they normalized and myoglobinuria disappeared. All autoantibodies (i.e., antinuclear antibodies [ANA], anti-double stranded DNA [anti-dsDNA] antibodies, anti-Ro/SS-A antibodies, anti-La/SS-B antibodies, anti-aminoacyl tRNA synthetase [anti-ARS] antibodies, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide [anti-CCP] antibodies, anti-mitochondrial M2 [AMA2] antibodies, acetylcholine receptor [AChR] antibodies, and anti-muscle-specific kinase [anti-MuSK] antibodies) were negative. Although serum immunoglobulin (Ig) G was decreased (705 mg/dL), IgA (159 mg/dL) and IgM (37 mg/dL) were within normal range. Bence Jones protein (BJP)-lambda was observed in both the blood and urine, the serum free light chain lambda was 533 mg/L, the serum kappa/lambda ratio was 0.046, and the M protein level was 0.575 g/dL. The plasma cell count in the bone marrow was 0.7%, indicating MGUS. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan showed proximal lower limb muscle atrophy and edema, including the quadriceps femoris, obturator, and gluteus maximus muscles . Needle electromyogram was performed in the first dorsal interosseous, deltoid, and iliopsoas muscles. Although it showed fibrillation potential and positive sharp waves, it also showed complex repetitive discharge, low amplitude, and early recruitment, suggestive of myogenic changes. Nerve conduction study of the median, ulnar, tibial, and sural nerves was normal . Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with myopathy as the cause of the predominantly proximal symmetrical muscle weakness.
A muscle biopsy of the right vastus lateralis muscle was performed on the 25th day of admission. Light microscopy showed a small cluster of atrophic angulated fibers in addition to mild fiber size variation on hematoxylin and eosin (HE)–stained sections. On nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide-tetrazolium reductase (NADH-TR), some fibers minimally lacked oxidative activity . On modified Gomori trichrome, one atrophic fiber was filled with fine cytoplasmic inclusions . Although we thought they were reminiscent of nemaline bodies, we could not confirm the nature of this structure as a sample for electron microscopic study was not available. Congo red positivity in the sarcolemma membrane and vascular walls was observed . Immunofluorescence staining of frozen muscle tissue showed that lambda and kappa light chains were negative . Considering the clinical course and histopathological findings, the patient was diagnosed with amyloid myopathy.
A percutaneous renal biopsy was performed on the 35th day of admission to determine the cause of nephrotic syndrome. Light microscopy showed an accumulation of eosinophilic, amorphous deposits in the mesangial region and part of the capillary walls in HE-stained sections , periodic acid–Schiff–stained sections , and periodic acid–methenamine-silver–stained sections , which were determined to be amyloid proteins as they were stained positive by direct fast scarlet staining . Amyloid proteins were also observed in the blood vessel walls. As these amyloid proteins were positive for p-component staining and negative for amyloid A staining, β2-microglobulin, and pre-albumin, we diagnosed the patient with AL amyloidosis. Approximately 40% interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy was observed. Immunofluorescence staining of frozen tissue showed that lambda light chains were positive in the mesangial region . Staining with IgG, IgA, IgM, complement component 3 (C3)c, C1q, and kappa light chains were negative . Electron microscopy showed amyloid fibrils in the mesangial region . Thus, the patient was diagnosed with AL amyloidosis caused by BJP-lambda.
Each examination was subsequently performed for systemic amyloidosis. Although echocardiography showed mild left ventricular diastolic dysfunction without characteristic findings for cardiac amyloidosis such as a classical granular sparkling appearance, we did not exclude cardiac amyloidosis because 1) both serum NT-pro brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) (369.7 pg/mL) and troponin T levels (0.166 ng/mL) were elevated and 2) the patient had a history of atrial fibrillation. Amyloid protein was negative in the colon biopsy. Finally, the patient was diagnosed with AL amyloidosis involving the kidneys, muscles, and possibly the heart.
The patient was treated with MD (melphalan, 8 mg and dexamethasone, 20 mg daily for 4 days) therapy for AL amyloidosis. Although his cardiac function and respiratory function did not decline, the muscle weakness grew worse, and the nephrotic syndrome, renal insufficiency, and serum free light chain level did not improve. Twenty-one months after therapy commenced, the serum creatinine level had increased to 1.2 mg/dL, and his MMT scores were: neck flexion = 3; neck extension = 3; deltoids = 2–3; biceps brachii = 2–3; triceps brachii = 2–3; flexor and extensor muscles of the hand = 2–3; flexor and extensor digitorum muscle = 2–3; iliopsoas = 1–2; gluteus maximus = 1–2; quadriceps = 1–2; hamstring = 1–2; flexor and extensor muscles of the foot = 2–3.