Our patient was a previously asymptomatic, apparently healthy 54-year-old man with no familial history of arrhythmias or heart disease or risk factors for coronary artery disease. He experienced several episodes of mild dizziness related to non-sustained, rapid (260/min) LBBB-VT that were unrelated to exercise (March 2007). Resting electrocardiogram (ECG), echocardiogram, coronary angiography, and CMR (June 2007) were normal. He was started with beta-blocker therapy and 2 years later (June 2009) underwent an exercise test without medication. During the test, he exhibited sustained VT (220/min) similar in morphology to that documented 2 years earlier . The VT morphology (LBBB + left QRS axis) was uncommon for idiopathic VT and raised a possible diagnosis of AC by 2010 Task Force Criteria (TFC). However, the ECG in sinus rhythm did not show any repolarization changes suggestive of arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC), including epsilon sign or T-wave inversions in the right precordial leads.
In addition, repeat CMR performed at another centre (December 2009) yielded normal results. The patient continued to suffer from short episodes of palpitations on beta-blocker therapy and thus was recommended to undergo an electrophysiologic study (EPS) (March 2010). Normal AH and HV intervals were recorded. Sustained VT (190/min) identical in morphology to the clinical LBBB-VT was reproducibly induced with rapid RV pacing during isoproterenol infusion. Ventricular tachycardia was well tolerated and could be mapped using standard mapping techniques. A very early endocardial activation was observed at the right ventricle close to the infero-lateral area of the tricuspid annulus (−49 ms). Ventricular tachycardia terminated at first application of radiofrequency pulse. An obvious late potential was found at areas close to the VT termination site. Radiofrequency pulses were applied at the same location of VT termination. No VT was inducible thereafter. Based on the clinical, ECG and EPS findings, the diagnosis of AC was highly suspected despite the lack of structural anomalies recognized on CMR. During the following 7 years (2010–2017), the patient was treated with sotalol due to a high degree of symptomatic multifocal ventricular activity. Fortunately, yearly exercise testing never exhibited VT.
On March 2017, at the age of 64 years, the patient was admitted for another episode of sustained VT (220/min), presumably attributed to discontinuation of sotalol treatment by the patient himself due to some bradycardia. The VT morphology (RBBB with a left QRS axis) was different from that recorded in the past and suggested an arrhythmia arising from the LV. The arrhythmia was treated with electrical cardioversion. Echocardiogram and CMR disclosed for the first-time akinesia/dyskinesia of the RV basal free wall accompanying RV dilatation consistent with the definite diagnosis of AC according to the 2010 TFC ; however, no obvious anomaly was found in the LV. Sotalol therapy was reinitiated. Genetic analysis (Comprehensive Genetic Arrhythmia Program at the University of San Francisco) included sequence analysis and deletion/duplication testing of 114 genes. No pathogenic sequence variants or deletions/duplications were identified. Two years later (May 2019), while on sotalol, the patient had a pre-syncopal episode followed by palpitations with documented sustained VT (178/min) displaying a morphology of RBBB and left axis deviation identical to that recorded 2 years earlier. The arrhythmia was treated with electrical cardioversion. Electrocardiogram during sinus rhythm showed sinus bradycardia (54/min), low-voltage, narrow QRS complexes, suspected epsilon wave, normal PR and QT intervals with negative T waves in leads III and aVF.
Repeat CMR confirmed the morphological changes consistent with ARVC found earlier. Late gadolinium enhancement associated with segmental wall abnormalities were also observed for the first time in the lateral wall of the LV . Ablation of the RBBB-VT could not be performed due to its non-inducibility with both RV and left ventricular stimulation; noteworthy was the lack of low-voltage area during mapping of the left ventricular endocardium and epicardium. However, sustained VT with an LBBB morphology (similar to that previously ablated) was again induced and consequently successfully ablated using a combined endo-epicardial approach. The patient received an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator.