A 61-year-old man with history of diabetes mellitus and coronary artery disease (CAD) presented to our hospital with a 3-h left-sided chest pain and dyspnea. He had lateral non-STEMI in 2017, stented 1 drug eluting stent (DES) circumflex (Cx) (culprit lesion), 1-DES—left anterior descending (LAD). Also, he had persistent atrial fibrillation, ischaemic stroke in 2010 and gout. He had right-sided pneumonia with a negative PCR COVID-19 test 1.5 month before admission. He was hospitalized with pneumonia in the internal medicine department. Nevertheless, he was discharged to his primary care physician the next day due to the pandemic and all hospitals were full of COVID-19 patients. He received amoxicillin/clavulanate 875/125 mg twice daily for 7 days. Symptoms of pneumonia were reduced on the third to fourth day of the disease. After discontinuation of antibiotics, low-grade fever continued, and patient noticed reversion of angina. But he did not seek medical attention until he felt continuous left-sided chest pain.
Medications at the time of admission are acetylsalicylic acid 100 mg once daily, valsartan 160 mg twice daily, amlodipine 10 mg once daily, and atorvastatin 60 mg once daily. At initial physical examination, blood pressure was 110/70 mmHg, bradycardia (48 per minute), SpO2 = 91%, respiratory rate = 21 per minute, temperature 37.3°C.
Electrocardiogram on presentation revealed third-degree atrioventricular (AV) block with 42 rate, complete left bundle branch block, 2-mm ST segment elevation in II, III, and aVF leads .
Transthoracic echocardiogram revealed hypokinesis of left ventricle inferior wall with ejection fraction of 58%, no evidence of vegetation and valve dysfunction were found.
Blood tests were unremarkable except leucocytosis—16.52 × 109/L (normal range 4.5–10 × 109/L), but we thought it was due to myocardial infarction. High sensitive troponin test was positive—527 ng/L (normal range <20 ng/L). C-reactive protein was 120 mg/L (normal range < 5 mg/L).
Considering the fact that patient had chest pain, ST elevation in related leads, high troponin level, previous CAD background, and complete heart block (occlusion of the right coronary artery (RCA) is common cause), coronary angiography was done. Left main, LAD, and Cx were without significant stenosis . shows the second diagonal branch with 60% stenosis, first obtuse marginal with 90% stenosis, diffuse disease of the RCA with acute occlusion of the posterolateral ventricular artery (PLA). Balloon angioplasty of PLA was done, and we received TIMI-3 bloodflow. No-stent strategy was chosen because diameter of PLA was about 2 mm.
Our team was surprised that culprit lesion had so small diameter. However, we thought that in this case, the main reason of third-degree AV block was occlusion of AV node branch, which supplies the AV septal area and the AV node.
Nevertheless, third-degree AV block was persisted, and heart rate was 36 per minute. It was decided to insert temporary transvenous pacemaker. In a few hours, monomorphic ventricular tachycardia was started, which then degenerates to ventricular fibrillation. Unfortunately, it was refractory to defibrillate and CPR and patient has died.
Post-mortem examination showed large myocardial abscesses in the inferior wall of the left ventricle ( and ).