A 19-year-old Caucasian female was referred to the Ocular Oncology Service, Department of Ophthalmology, Poznań, Poland in April 2009 with a suspicion of conjunctival lymphoma. The patient reported the appearance of painless reddish nodules on the right bulbar conjunctiva couple weeks previously. The patient didn’t have past ocular history of note. Her past medical history revealed history of purulent tonsillitis treated with systemic antibiotic therapy a year earlier. However, after this treatment the levels of antistreptolysin (ASO) were still elevated (up to 500 U/ml) and the patient had undergone tonsillectomy three months later. The working clinical diagnosis by her local ophthalmologist was of suspected lymphoma and the patient received no topical treatment. At presentation to our department, the ASO level was 482 U/ml (N: 10–200 U/ml) and other laboratory test results were within normal limits. The patient was otherwise healthy with no travelling history and reported no coincidence between the appearance of conjunctival lesions and tonsillitis.
On ocular examination, the best corrected visual acuity was 5/5 with the right eye and 5/5 with the left eye, which was healthy. On biomicroscopy there were numerous, pink and reddish nodules on the right bulbar conjunctiva nasally and temporally [Figure A and B]. Those lesions seemed to be tightly fixed to the sclera. There was a similar subconjunctival mass in the right lower fornix. Otherwise the anterior segment appeared normal, with no signs of uveitis or keratitis. The right fundus appeared normal. Orbital ultrasound revealed no pathology. No lymphadenopathy was noted. Because the observed lesions did not have the typical appearance of a conjunctival lymphoma and the diagnostic uncertainty, incisional biopsy was taken.
The histopathological assessment of the collected specimens revealed infiltration by plasma cells and lymphocytes. The immunohistochemistry enabled recognition of B cells (CD 20 +) and T cells (CD3 +), which showed enhanced expression of Ki-67. Expression of CD 10, CD 23, CD 43 and bcl2 was also detected [Figure ]. This might have corresponded to an inflammatory process, but also to a conjunctival infiltration in the course of multiple myeloma. As a part of further management, a bone marrow biopsy was performed. Flow cytometry revealed 25.5% lymphocytes without evidence of monoclonality, 4% monocytes, 69.5% neutrophils and 1% mieloblasts. Other systemic investigations (chest X-ray, abdomen ultrasound) revealed no pathology.
On the next follow-up visit, 2 months later, in June 2009, shrinking and pallor of the conjunctival lesions was noted. [Figure C and D]. The patient reported receiving treatment with benzyl penicillin (6×2.4 mln units every two weeks) 4 weeks earlier by the ENT specialist because of persistent elevation of the plasma concentration of ASO. At the next follow-up in 6 weeks time the conjunctival lesions had completely disappeared.