A 30-year-old pregnant woman came to our prenatal diagnosis center for consultation at 26 wk of pregnancy. During this pregnancy, the mother only accepted routine obstetric examination procedures. She came to our center for consultation because she had concerns and hoped to receive a detailed prenatal diagnosis through color Doppler ultrasound examination.
The patient had a free present medical history.
The patient was pregnant for the second time and gave birth to the first child, a boy, in the hospital 19 mo ago. No special circumstances occurred during delivery. More than 10 d later, the newborn was referred to a superior hospital because of severe choking on milk, crying, and restlessness. Further examination revealed that the boy had electrolyte disturbances (hyperkalemia and hyponatremia), multiple organ damage (renal insufficiency, myocardial damage and brain damage), metabolic acidosis, moderate dehydration, and undescended bilateral testicles. Diagnosis of CAH, newborn pneumonia or neonatal sepsis was then considered. Unfortunately, the child died after rescue failed.
The CYP21A2 gene of the patient’s first dead child and his parents was detected by multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA), polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and Sanger sequencing and found a heterozygous deletion of CYP21A2 gene exons 1-7 that was inherited from the mother. At the same time, there were multiple pathogenic point mutations in the CYP21A2 gene and these mutations did not come from the father. Based on the results of this genetic testing, the pregnant woman was told that these point mutations in the child were new. Although the mother is a carrier of CYP21A2 gene deletion, the father is not. Thus, the probability of having CAH offspring is very low.
No physical examination was done at the center in this study.
Because of the abnormal findings on color Doppler ultrasound examination, combined with the medical history of pregnant women who have had a child with CAH, we recommended amniocentesis for gender diagnosis and CYP21A2 genetic testing. After consultation with the pregnant woman and her family, the proposal for amniocentesis was rejected.
At 27+5 wk of pregnancy, the woman underwent color Doppler ultrasound examination that revealed enlarged fetal bilateral adrenal glands, abnormal genital morphology, and ambiguous gender . The patient asked for color Doppler ultrasound examination again at 32 wk of pregnancy. The 32 wk color Doppler ultrasound result still suggested that the shape of the external fetal genitalia was blurred and the bilateral adrenal glands were enlarged.