A 42-year-old woman with no significant medical history presented to an outside facility with progressive right eye proptosis and diplopia on the left gaze over 2 years. An MRI demonstrated a right sphenoid wing mass with extension into the temporalis muscle and orbit. She was found to have normal visual acuity, no evidence of optic neuropathy, restricted right ocular motility, and proptosis on the right of 5 mm compared to her left eye. She was fully oriented with intact cranial nerves, normal ocular alignment, motor, and sensory function throughout. Gait was normal. She underwent a right orbitocranial approach for resection of the mass, requiring complete removal of the greater wing of the sphenoid and the lesser wing lateral to the anterior clinoid process. Her postoperative course was unremarkable and she was discharged home on postoperative day 4. Postoperative MRI demonstrated gross total resection of the mass and a superior orbital wall defect ; pathology was consistent with a WHO Grade I meningioma. She followed up in clinic on postoperative day 8 complaining of diplopia when both eyes were open, which was treated with patching. On ophthalmologic evaluation, she was noted to have oscillopsia related to orbital pulsations synchronous with her cardiac cycle. She underwent magnetic resonance angiography, which was negative for carotid-cavernous fistula. At the last follow-up 21 months postoperatively, the patient continues to experience pulse synchronous oscillopsia.
A 42-year-old woman with hypothyroidism presented to our clinic with several months of lip and tongue tingling. MRI revealed an anterior skull base meningioma with extension into the left cavernous sinus. She did not undergo ophthalmologic evaluation preoperatively, as she did not have any visual complaints. She underwent a left one-piece orbitopterional craniotomy with complete removal of the sphenoid wing and lateral orbital wall and partial resection of the superior orbital wall and was brought thereafter to the Neuro ICU, where she was found to have a left trochlear nerve palsy, resulting in double vision, and hypoesthesia in CN V2-V3 distribution. Her postoperative course was complicated by seizures, requiring treatment with levetiracetam for 6 months. She was discharged home on postoperative day 4. At her initial postoperative visit, her diplopia had improved, and on ophthalmologic evaluation 4 months later, she was found to have oscillopsia related to orbital pulsations synchronous with her cardiac cycle . A CT scan of the orbits demonstrated postsurgical defects in the superior and lateral orbital walls . The patient was enrolled in school, and this prevented her from being able to read. At the last follow-up, 26 months after surgery, the patient’s oscillopsia had resolved and her residual diplopia was amenable to corrective lenses with prism.