A 39-year-old man visited the Department of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation of Yeungnam University Hospital (Daegu, South Korea) to evaluate the cause of his muscle weakness. About 5.8 years ago, the patient experienced a high-voltage electrical shock from power lines while working. He did not have any history of neurological, psychological, metabolic, or renal disorders prior to the accident. The electrical current entered through the left hand and exited through the occipital area of the head. Due to severe electrical injury of his upper limb, he received an amputation of his left upper limb above the elbow. Additionally, he received a skin transplant due to the electrical burn on the occipital area of the scalp (23 × 30 cm). Immediately after the accident, the patient presented with weakness of the bilateral upper and lower extremities (Medical Research Council [MRC] strength scale: 2–3/5). A brain and complete spine MRIs were normal at that time. He gradually recovered but still had weakness after about 5 years. In the physical examination, muscle weakness was MRC 3 for the shoulder abductors, hip flexors, and knee extensors bilaterally, and MRC 4 for the right elbow flexor, right wrist extensor, right finger flexors, and bilateral ankle dorsiflexors. Deep tendon reflexes of the bilateral upper and lower limbs were increased (3+/4) with bilateral Babinski signs. Muscle tone was mildly increased in all four limbs. He could walk independently, but appeared mildly spastic. In addition, during walking, stability was decreased. Therefore, he had difficulty going up and down stairs and was unable to run. A significant sensory deficit was not present. Signs of cerebellar or cranial nerve injuries were not observed. Additionally, pseudobulbar symptoms, such as dysphasia and dysarthria, were not shown. The Mini-Mental State Examination score was 30 points, indicating that cognitive status was within normal limits. On the nerve conduction test, no abnormal findings suggesting peripheral nerve lesion were observed. The central motor conduction times (CMCT) for the right biceps brachii (BB), abductor pollicis brevis (APB), and bilateral tibialis anterior (TA) muscles were delayed (Rt. BB 9.4 ms, Rt. APB 10.7 ms, Rt. TA 30.6 ms, Lt. TA 30.2 ms). An electrical study of the jaw and orbicularis oculi reflexes was normal. Brain, cervical, and thoracic spine MRIs taken 5.8 years after symptom onset showed no abnormal findings.
DTI data were acquired 5.8 years after the accident using a 1.5-T Philips GyroscanInteraSystem (Hoffman-LaRoche, Mijdrecht, Netherlands) equipped with a synergy-L Sensitivity Encoding (SENSE) head coil utilizing a single-shot, spin-echo planar imaging pulse sequence. For each of the 32 non-collinear and non-coplanar diffusion sensitizing gradients, we acquired 67 contiguous slices parallel to the anterior commissure–posterior commissure line. Imaging parameters were as follows: matrix = 128 × 128, field of view = 221 mm × 221 mm, TE = 76 ms, TR = 10.726 ms, SENSE factor = 2, EPI factor = 59 and b = 1000 s/mm2, NEX = 1, slice thickness = 2.3 mm, and acquisition voxel size = 2.3 mm × 2.3 mm × 2.3 mm.
Eddy current-induced image distortions were removed using Affine multi-scale two-dimensional registration with the Oxford Centre for Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging of Brain (FMRIB) Software Library (FSL; ). DTI-Studio software CMRM (Johns Hopkins Medical Institute, Baltimore, MD, USA) was used for the evaluation of neural tracts. Fiber tracking was based on the fiber assignment continuous tracking (FACT) algorithm and multiple regions of interest (ROIs) approach. Two ROIs for each CST and CRP were placed on the two-dimensional fractional anisotropy (FA) color maps (For CST: seed ROI – the CST area of the upper pons [blue color in the pontine basis on the axial image], target ROI – the CST area of the lower pons; for CRP: seed ROI – the CRP area of the reticular formation of the medulla, target ROI – the CRP area of the midbrain tegmentum).9 The termination criteria were FA < 0.2 and angle >60o. The DTT of the patient revealed thinning of the CSTs and CRPs in bilateral hemispheres when compared to those of a healthy control subject (39-year old man) (tract volume - patient: Rt. CST = 295, Lt. CST = 285, Rt. CRP = 301, Lt. CRP = 307; control: Rt. CST = 1302, Lt. CST = 1287, Rt. CRP = 1376, Lt. CRP = 1391) . The patient provided informed signed consent for participation in the study.