A 76-year-old female underwent ligation surgery for right lower leg varicose vein in another hospital. Ligation was performed at one site in the medial knee and two sites in the lower leg. Soon after the surgery, she noticed the squashy lesion in the medial side of the right knee, which located close to the horizontal scar of the varix surgery. As the lesion gradually got larger and swelled out, she consulted the surgeon and underwent puncture of the lesion. Lymph-like yellow fluid was drained and the lesion got plain, which swelled again in a few days. She consulted our clinic 3 years after the surgery for detailed investigation of the lesion. At the first consultation, we found a subcutaneous mass which was 5 cm in diameter . The mass was not accompanied by pain or redness, and did not have a history of inflammation. After 3 months, the mass got larger, and the skin above it thinned down, almost to be ulcerated. She had a history of diabetes mellitus and was under medical treatment. She was not allergic to any food or medicine.
At first, we performed ICG lymphography to detect the involvement of lymphatic system to her lesion. After cannulating 22G catheter to the subcutaneous mass, we injected 0.1 mL of ICG (0.5% diagnogreen; Daiichi Pharmaceutical, Tokyo, Japan) subcutaneously into the first interdigital space of the bilateral feet. Lymphatic function was evaluated using an infrared camera system (Photodynamic Eye; Hamamatsu Photonics, Hamamatsu, Japan). Although we observed normal linear pattern from dorsum of the foot to the middle of the lower leg, stardust pattern, a kind of dermal backflow, was found around the mass, which indicated lymphatic dysfunction . After injecting additional ICG around the knee, we drained the clear, yellow fluid from the mass and observed it with Photodynamic Eye system (PDE, Hamamatsu Photonics KK, Hamamatsu, Japan). The fluid was contrasted with ICG during the examination, and the involvement of the lymphatic system was proven . Dermal backflow was not observed in the proximal thigh area. The result of biochemical examination of the drained fluid is shown in . We diagnosed the mass as lymphocele based on the examinations. Although the site where the mass had located formed depression after puncture , it reoccurred in a few days. Although we planned lymphatic ligation and lymphaticovenous anastomosis (LVA) for this region, compression therapy after next puncture was effective, and the patient did not require surgical therapy.