A previously healthy 57-year-old Sri Lankan lady from Kandy, Sri Lanka presented with weakness of the left upper limb that was noticed on awakening form sleep 2 days prior to admission. Weakness was steadily progressing, and patient was unable to move the left upper limb on admission. She had generalized malaise since 3 days preceding the weakness with low-grade on-and-off fever with pain radiating to the left upper limb. The patient denied any weakness of the bilateral lower limbs or bladder and bowel incontinence. She has not noticed in speech difficulty, swallowing difficulty, or weakness of the face. She did not have any headache, double vision, vomiting, or visual changes with the onset of symptoms. There was no history of neck pain or trauma preceding the weakness.
On admission, the patient was in distress due to left upper limb pain. She was oriented in time, place, and person. She was not pale. Pulse rate was 88 beats per minute, which was regular. Her blood pressure was 130/90 mmHg with normal precordium examination. Respiratory system was unremarkable. Neurological examination revealed flaccid paralysis of the left upper limb with proximal weakness (0/5) more than the distal (2/5). Her left upper limb reflexes were diminished. She had hyperesthesia in the left upper limb during sensory examination without any objective sensory loss. The rest of the neurological examination was normal, including cranial nerves and lower limbs. Non-contrast computed tomography (CT) of the brain showed no territorial infarct or acute bleed to explain the monoparesis. On day 2 of admission, the patient complained of a painful rash involving the left upper limb. On examination, she had a vesicular rash on an erythematous base suggestive of varicella zoster Her white cell count was 8.7 × 106/dL (neutrophils 70%) with a platelet count of 234 × 103/dL and hemoglobin of 12.5 g/dL. C-reactive protein was less than 6 units, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 12 mm in the first hour. Her transaminases were normal with normal renal functions. Cervical spine X-ray revealed a straight spine suggestive of muscle spasm. Nerve conduction study showed normal median nerve conduction and electromyography (EMG) suggestive of active denervation in the left cervical 5, 6, and 7 myotomes suggestive of a lesion involving brachial plexus. Her cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis revealed a white count of 330 per high-power field with 80% lymphocytes and protein of 130 g/L. Her CSF sugar was 3.6 mmol/L, and random blood sugar was 8.6 mmol/L. Considering the clinical presentation, we carried out varicella polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing in CSF, which was positive.
Considering the clinical findings of a flaccid paralysis with a zoster rash with EMG evidence, a diagnosis of brachial plexopathy due to varicella infection was made. The patient was started on intravenous acyclovir and intravenous dexamethasone. Intravenous acyclovir was continued for 14 days, and on day 14, repeat CSF analysis was done, which showed negative varicella PCR. Gabapentin was prescribed for analgesia. The patient made a gradual recovery from weakness over the days with support from physiotherapy. She was reviewed in medical clinic 2 weeks from discharge, and complete neurological recovery was noted.