A 41-year-old female suddenly developed headache and nausea. She visited a local physician, and was referred to one of our hospitals. On admission, neither consciousness disturbance nor neurological deficit was observed. Her past history included scoliosis since birth; however, other diseases such as infection or connective tissue disease were not noted. A routine blood examination was not remarkable. Further, the examination of antigens and antibodies for infectious diseases also revealed no abnormality. Computed tomography (CT) demonstrated SAH , and three-dimensional CT angiography (3D-CTA) showed a dilated M2 portion of the right MCA accompanied by two small notches . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) performed 4 months prior to the episode had already revealed the irregular wall of the right M2 . MRI performed at admission showed the same findings as those of 3D-CTA . Cerebral angiography revealed the dilated M2 of the right MCA . The wall of the dilated portion was relatively smooth. Angiography neither showed a double lumen, pearl and string sign nor the retention of contrast medium. Based on these radiological findings, the lesion was diagnosed as a fusiform aneurysm, and delayed surgical intervention was planned. Repeated angiography was performed on the 23rd day after onset. The radiological findings showed no marked change of the lesion. The third MRI 33 days after the onset showed the same findings as those of the first and second MRI.
She underwent surgery on the 45th day after onset. Right fronto-temporal craniotomy and superficial temporal artery (STA)-MCA anastomosis were performed. Then, the lesion was trapped and resected. The lesion consisted of a dilated arterial trunk with a whitish, thickened wall and two protrusions with red walls on the main lesion . There was no organized thrombus around the aneurysm. Pathological examination of the resected lesion showed a disrupted internal elastic lamina and intimal thickening of the main trunk . The large protrusion on the main trunk had a dissected intima without smooth muscle cells stained with anti-α-smooth muscle actin antibody [Figure , ]. In contrast, the small protrusion had no intimal flap, and no internal elastic lamina was observed in the dome [Figure and ]. Postoperative angiography showed the disappearance of the aneurysm and patency of the bypass. Her postoperative course was uneventful. She was discharged without neurological deficit on the 62nd day after onset.