In September 2004, a 31-year-old female presented with vaginal bleeding. Her last menstruation had occurred 50 days earlier, when attempts to conceive had begun. During the prenatal investigation, the patient had been diagnosed with irregular menstrual periods and asymptomatic hypothyroidism. Thyroxine (50 µg/day) had been prescribed to regulate the levels of thyroid stimulating hormone. Because the bleeding persisted for longer than normal and was accompanied by abdominal pain, the patient sought medical assistance, at a private clinic in São Paulo, Brazil. Ultrasound revealed an echogenic image (probably a clot or dilated tube), measuring 25 mm × 21 mm × 21 mm, with a 8 mm anechoic image (probably a gestational sac) in the right paraovarian region, as well as an image suggestive of a large quantity of blood in the pouch of Douglas . The serum level of beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-HCG) was high (2,300 IU/l). The patient underwent right salpingectomy. The procedure was uneventful and the patient was discharged on the second postoperative day. Anatomopathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy.
In December 2004, the patient began new attempts to conceive. Because the attempts were unsuccessful and her menstrual periods were irregular, the patient was started on oral progesterone replacement therapy in June 2005. At this time, the couple was also examined to determine the cause of the infertility. Hysterosalpingography showed the presence of the right fallopian tube as far as its middle third and a patent left fallopian tube, with normal diameter and preserved mucosal folds. There was normal dispersion of the contrast medium within the peritoneal cavity .
After attempting to conceive for 16 months, the couple was referred to an infertility clinic. In vitro fertilization was scheduled for the following cycle. However, the couple conceived during that same cycle. The pregnancy was diagnosed through delayed menstruation and a β-HCG level of 7,312 IU/l. Because of the high risk of another ectopic pregnancy, an ultrasound examination was requested. Intrauterine pregnancy was confirmed, and the estimated gestational age was 6 weeks. The right ovary was enlarged and contained a cyst of 2 cm in diameter, which was probably the corpus luteum . The patient went into labor at gestational week 40. However, due to labor dystocia, a Cesarean section was performed. A healthy boy, weighing 3,775 g, was delivered.
The patient resumed menstruation at seven months after delivery. Two months after the return of menses, the couple again began attempts to conceive. Conception occurred four months later, while the patient was still breastfeeding. When the pregnancy was diagnosed, the serum level of β-HCG was 1,719 IU/l. For the same reasons as in the first pregnancy, an ultrasound examination was requested , and intrauterine pregnancy was again confirmed. The right ovary was larger than the left and was seen to contain a simple cyst, of 1.2 cm in diameter. At 39 weeks of gestation, a healthy boy, weighing 3,810 g, was born via vaginal delivery.