A 22-year-old male was referred to our department for further investigation of a mediastinal mass discovered incidentally during routine chest X-ray . The patient has denied symptoms including dyspnea, chest pain, cough, fever, dysphagia, hemoptysis, weight loss, and weakness. Interestingly, his past medical history was remarkable for orchitis 2 years before surgery, which was treated with antibiotics. Due to an inconclusive sonogram finding related to inhomogeneous parenchym, the patient underwent a bilateral testicular biopsy, which however did not show any signs of a germ cell tumor and was negative for the presence of a premalignant lesion such as testicular intraepithelial neoplasia (TIN). The patient had no history of sexual transmitted diseases, no history of maldescended testis, and had a 5-pack-year smoking history, currently smoking one pack per day. Finally, the patient had no history of a diagnosed Klinefelter syndrome (47XXY) or myasthenia Gravis.
Clinical examination was unremarkable and did not reveal a palpable mass on the chest wall, neither has demonstrated any signs of a vena cava occlusion syndrome, while it also did not show depletion of the muscle strength regarding all muscle groups.
Blood tests excluded relevant hematological disorders or signs of anemia, whereas chemistry tests revealed an elevated LDH one and a half time more than the reference rate. Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) and human chorionic gonadotropin (hHG) values were not elevated. Contrast-enhanced chest computed tomography revealed a lobulated and well-marginated cystic lesion in the anterior mediastinum . The differential diagnosis was mostly related to a multilocular thymic cyst. Speculation regarding a lymphoma, a seminoma, or a soft tissue tumor presence was highly unlikely due to their often “solid” appearance on CT. Therefore, the patient underwent a median sternotomy with an en bloc surgical excision of the tumor.
Surprisingly, the histopathological examination revealed a primary thymic seminoma with a predominate cystic appearance . Macroscopically there appeared a solid nodule of the thymus weighting 148 g, measuring 10 × 6 × 3 cm and showing a cream-colored to pale-yellow and lobular cut surface. The tumor appeared to be well circumscribed and did not grossly involve any adjacent structures. A complete excision was performed (R0-Status) and histology showed sheets of neoplastic polygonal cells interspersed with lymphocytes consistent with pure seminoma. Histology of the neoplastic cells in more details demonstrated that the nodule of the thymus showed a diffuse arrangement of pale cells that were interrupted by fibrovascular septa containing lymphocytes and a granulomatous reaction with small clusters of epithelioid cells and giant cells of the Langhans. The tumor cells had a pale to clear cytoplasm with distinct membranes. The cytoplasmic clarity was attributable to abundant glycogen particles that were demonstrable with the periodic acid-Schiff stain. The nuclei of the tumor cells were polygonal with finely granular chromatin and flattened edges. One or more large centrally located nucleoli were present. Immunohistochemistry of the neoplastic cells showed a cytoplasmic membrane positive stain for c-kit, D2-40, and PLAP, a nuclear positive stain for oct3/4 and SALL4, and a negative stain for SOX2, Pan-CK, and CD30.
The patient received adjuvant cisplatin-based chemotherapy and 38 months after surgery he is alive and remains disease-free.