A 38-year-old woman was referred to Kennedy Krieger Institute a year after being officially diagnosed with TSC at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) in October 2012. Before her diagnosis, the patient had several TSC-related manifestations that should have solidified diagnosis much earlier in her life. She had TSC-associated skin lesions, such as forehead plaques that were apparent as an infant and facial angiofibromas that developed later in her childhood. In her teenage years, she developed periungual fibromas on her foot that would only be removed by a podiatrist in 2003 when she was an adult.
In October 2009, at age 34, the patient had been put on hemodialysis; however, incomplete records received by our institute did not identify the indication for this. At least 1 large (3.8-cm) renal angiomyolipoma in the left kidney and multiple bilateral cysts were identified in 2011. These disease manifestations led the patient to undergo a bilateral nephrectomy later that year at age 36, and renal transplantation was considered as an option in the following year. She had also developed cardiac issues such as hypokinesis and low ejection fraction (40%), likely the result of renal complications. In addition to renal and cardiac issues, lung deterioration was observed as early as 2011. In October 2011, the patient presented with interstitial and alveolar infiltrates with bilateral pleural effusion. Diffuse lung cysts were observed in September 2012.
In October 2012, she was evaluated and diagnosed with TSC at the NIH. Her diagnosis was based on multiple manifestations of TSC identified during her evaluation. Numerous types of TSC-associated skin lesions were identified, including facial angiofibromas, cephalic plaques, oral fibromas, shagreen patches, ungual fibromas, and confetti skin lesions. Dental pitting was also observed. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed evidence of bilateral abnormal gray/white matter and bilateral subependymal nodules. Two retinal hamartomas were found in her left eye.
The patient’s lung function subsequently declined, and in 2013, while being treated at Johns Hopkins Hospital, she was indicated for lung transplantation. However, there was a decision to wait for further decline because of the possibility of recurrence. She was also switched from hemodialysis to peritoneal dialysis to lessen fatigue.
The patient’s first visit to our clinic occurred in September 2013, at which point she underwent an initial evaluation for comprehensive management of TSC. After examination and reviewing her past medical history, we found that there were no concerns regarding epilepsy or neurodevelopmental delay. Upon lung examination, decreased breath sounds were noted, and it was recommended to start everolimus 5 mg daily to slow the progression of LAM and potentially improve lung function; however, she elected not to initiate treatment at that time. She was listed for renal transplantation pending results of pulmonary testing. A full dental consultation with follow-ups every 6 months was also recommended, in particular for sealant of dental pits.
In a subsequent visit in February 2014, abdominal imaging was recommended to monitor a previously-detected liver angiomyolipoma. After pulmonary tests, follow-up with other disciplines was recommended, including nephrology, neurology, pulmonology, ophthalmology, dentistry, dermatology, and cardiology. At this time, everolimus was recommended at 10 mg daily for treating pulmonary LAM, and the patient agreed to initiate treatment after this visit.
After 1 day of taking everolimus 10 mg, the patient experienced dizziness and hypotension and self-discontinued treatment. Upon her visit in July 2014, it was decided to restart everolimus at 5 mg once daily, and midodrine was initiated for hypotension. The patient did not experience dizziness at the 5-mg dose.
The patient’s next visit at our clinic would not be until March 2015. However, before this visit, she was scheduled for renal transplantation surgery that was stopped because of difficulties with anesthesia. As a result of depressed mood after her canceled renal transplantation, she self-discontinued everolimus again. As a result, pulmonary nodules and cysts throughout the lungs were observed with computed tomography, accompanied with worsening pulmonary function, and were likely attributable to the interruption of everolimus. We recommended she restart everolimus 5 mg once daily, and at her next visit focus on counseling and medication for depressed mood. As of July 2015, her mood has improved, and she is continuing everolimus 5 mg, with amenorrhea reported as the only noticed side effect.