The patient was a 55-year-old man who presented to a nearby hospital with a symptom of frequent urination. He had no family medical history. His serum PSA level was 426.9 ng/mL. Pathological analysis revealed prostate adenocarcinoma with a Gleason score of 4 + 5. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed that the prostate cancer had grown outside of the prostate. Computed tomography and bone scans showed pelvic lymph node swelling and multiple bone metastases at the lumbar vertebra and ilium. Imaging examination revealed stage cT3aN1M1b prostate cancer. Subsequently, the patient underwent androgen deprivation therapy and denosumab. He was sequentially treated with therapeutic agents . During cabazitaxel treatment, his PSA level gradually increased, and imaging examination revealed new metastases in the pubic bone and right external iliac lymph nodes . Moreover, he then developed urinary retention due to local progression of prostate cancer. Subsequently, he was referred to our hospital for further treatment. First, he received transurethral resection of the prostate to relieve his urinary retention. The pathological diagnosis of the prostate specimens was adenocarcinoma with neuroendocrine differentiation . Immunohistochemical analysis showed positivity for synaptophysin, chromogranin A, and androgen receptor, although PSA was only partially positive. However, serum neuron-specific enolase level was within normal limits before the operation.
Therefore, the patient received chemotherapy using carboplatin (area under the curve = 5) with etoposide (100 mg/m2 intravenous infusion on days 1–3). He received five cycles of platinum-based chemotherapy in total. The patient was free from a urothelial catheter, and the prostate volume and lymph node sizes were reduced remarkably on radiography after the chemotherapy , and his PSA level gradually went down .
In addition, we performed targeted next-generation sequencing of the resected prostate specimen by applying certain algorithms and the list of 160 genes examined (Appendix and Table ). A BRCA2 frameshift mutation (p.N2346Qfs*20) with LOH was detected as a pathogenic variant in the tumor. The VAF% in this case was 55.4%; however, this patient did not have a family history, such as of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer or prostate cancer. MDM2 amplification (estimated CN: 4.6) and myc proto-oncogene, basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor amplification (estimated CN: 4.0) were observed. LOH was observed in RB1 and Fanconi anemia complementation group A. The tumor mutation burdens calculated from our pipeline were 5.4 single-nucleotide variants/Mbp in the samples. The CN variation box and VAF plots indicated a high LOH frequency and scattered allelic imbalance, which are often detected in homologous recombination-deficient tumors.