The patient was a 73-year-old man. He received docetaxel and prednisolone chemotherapy for prostate cancer and was administered pegfilgrastim after chemotherapy. His medication history included oral administration of rivaroxaban. Eight days before the onset of fatigue, he was traveling during chemotherapy and had been in a hot tub. Subsequently, he visited the hospital because he continued to experience fatigue over the next 5 days. The patient's physical findings were as follows: alert and oriented, fever (39.0 °C), dyspnea (oxygen saturation [SpO2] 90% with no oxygen; respiratory rate, 17 breaths/min), no hemoptysis, and no chest pain. The patient’s blood pressure was normal (111/81 mmHg); however, tachycardia and atrial fibrillation (132 beats/min) were present. The A-DROP score for assessing the severity of community-acquired pneumonia by the Japanese Respiratory Society was 3 points (age ≥ 70 years in men, dehydration, or blood urea nitrogen ≥ 21 mg/dL, SpO2 ≤ 90%). The patient was admitted to the hospital for severe pneumonia. On admission, the patient’s white blood cell count was 700/μL; serum sodium, 133 mEq/L; C-reactive protein (CRP), 28 mg/dL; serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) concentration, 335 U/L; urea nitrogen, 22.4 mg/dL; serum creatinine, 1.23 mg/dL; and D-dimer level, 1.8 μg/mL. Chest CT revealed an infiltrative shadow and pleural effusion in the upper and lower left lobes but did not show the appearance of a typical COVID-19 radiological pattern including ground-glass opacities (GGOs) in both inferior lobes.
The urine Legionella antigen test by immunochromatography and SARS-CoV-2 test by loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) of swabs from the nasal cavity were positive. The patient was immediately administered levofloxacin, tazobactam/piperacillin, vancomycin, remdesivir, ciclesonide, nafamostat mesilate, and dexamethasone. On day 2 of hospitalization, the patient’s dyspnea worsened, his respiratory rate increased to 30 breaths/min, and chest radiograph revealed worsening pneumonia. Therefore, tracheal intubation was performed. The partial pressure of oxygen/fraction of inspired oxygen ratio (P/F ratio) after intubation was 160, indicating acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Subsequently, the patient was provided with analgesia, sedation, and hemodynamic maintenance. After tracheal intubation, respiratory management, including a tidal volume of ≤ 6 mL/kg/ideal body weight, control of plateau pressure, and high positive end-expiratory pressure were provided according to the lung protection strategy of ARDS. One day after intubation, his P/F ratio improved to 390, but 2 days after intubation, his P/F ratio worsened to 220, so prone position therapy was started. On day 6 of hospitalization, his serum creatinine increased to 3.22 mg/dL, and continuous hemodiafiltration was started. On day 8 of hospitalization, his P/F ratio improved to 361, and he was extubated. His general condition also improved, and his serum creatinine decreased to 2.3 mg/dL. The electrolyte imbalance was not recognized, so the continuous hemodiafiltration was discontinued. He was moved to the general ward on the 14th day of hospitalization. On the day 20, oxygen administration was no longer necessary, and the patient was discharged on the 27th day of hospitalization .