A 50-year-old female presented with progressive, painless ptosis with limited upward gaze in both eyes. She had foreign body sensation OU very often, especially when she blinked. There was no personal or family history of systemic disease, including multiple myeloma or any neurologic or autoimmune diseases. The patient had never undergone dialysis.
On examination, her visual acuity was 20/20 bilaterally. Pupils, intraocular pressure, extraocular motility, and alignment were within normal limits. The margin reflex distance 1 (MRD1) was 1 mm OD and 3 mm OS. Her palpebral fissures were 6 mm OD and 8 mm OS. Levator function was normal and symmetrical bilaterally. Slit lamp examination revealed yellowish calcified plaques in her bilateral upper palpebral conjunctiva , which tended to bleed easily when we everted the upper eyelids. Eversion of the other 2 eyelids (lower eyelids) showed no abnormalities. The remainder of the ocular examination was unremarkable. We subsequently performed excisional biopsies for the yellowish masses in both eyes. Histopathological examination revealed eosinophilic, hyaline extracellular material which, when stained with Congo red produced apple-green birefringence under polarized light . Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue specimens were prepared for hematoxylin-eosin and Congo red staining. The microscopic pictures were captured using Olympus BX53 microscope and cellSens software. Olympus U-POT Polarizer and U-ANT analyzer were used for polarization. Photoshop software was applied to adjust the brightness of polarized pictures. To rule out systemic amyloidosis, we referred the patient to the hematology department for further evaluation. The hematologist checked her complete blood count (CBC), metabolic panel, serum protein electrophoresis (SPEP), immunoelectrophoresis-serum (IEP-S), spot urine, and urine protein electrophoresis (UPEP), which were all within normal limits. Chest X-ray was negative for mass-like lesions. Abdominal sonography was performed with no evidence of amyloid deposition in the liver, kidney or spleen. Brain and orbital magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was obtained which showed enhancing lesion isolated in the superior preseptal soft tissue at both eyes, in immediate proximity to our excision location. No intracranial deposits were observed in her image study. Finally, the patient was diagnosed as primary conjunctival amyloidosis without systemic involvement. Three months after the surgical removal the lesions of both eyes had not recurred. Her foreign body sensation improved dramatically, but her ptosis and upward gaze restriction did not improve after the operation. The post-operative MRD1 remained 1 mm OD and 3 mm OS. .