Here we report on a patient carrying a homozygous mutation in POLG and manifesting with a complex neurological phenotype fitting the clinical diagnosis of SANDO (sensory ataxic neuropathy, dysarthria, and cophthalmoparesis) syndrome including Dopamine-agonist responsive Parkinsonism.
A 48-year-old Italian woman, born to non-consanguineous parents, and with a negative family history, was healthy until age 26 when she developed bilateral PEO and ptosis. At that age, electromyography showed myopathic features and a limb skeletal muscle biopsy was said to be compatible with mitochondrial myopathy, but whole mtDNA analysis was negative. At age 36, the proposita developed proximal and distal weakness in lower limbs, and sensory ataxia. A diagnosis of demyelinating sensory-motor neuropathy was considered on the basis of nerve conduction studies and sural nerve biopsy . Anxiety-mood disorders became evident and treatment with SSRI was started (Fluoxetine 40 mg/day) with benefit. Histochemical and biochemical examination of a second muscle biopsy, using established methodologies for investigation of oxidative metabolism showed “ragged blue”, cytochrome c oxidase negative muscle fibers and a partial biochemical reduction of activities of complex I and IV. At 47 years, the patient was referred to our attention because of onset of resting and attitudinal hand tremor and worsening in gait and posture. Neurological examination showed PEO, bilateral ptosis, signs of sensorimotor neuropathy with ataxic gait and positive Romberg sign, head and limbs tremor plus rigidity. Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale-UPDRS motor score was 39. Cognition was mildly affected upon MMSE examination, and anxiety and obsessive disorder were evident. Creatine kinase levels were 217 U/L (normal < 168) and myoglobin was 360 U/L (normal <75). A brain MRI showed mild cortical atrophy. I-FP-CIT SPECT imaging of the dopamine transporter revealed reduced binding in both striata . Dopamine agonist treatment (Pramipexole R.P. 0.52 mg/day) was started with improvement in tremor and ambulation (UPDRS III = 29). After a 10-month follow up, the patient remains on treatment with Pramipexole R.P. (1.05 mg/day) and Duloxetine (60 mg/day) with a stable neurological condition.
The 82-year-old mother and two of the four living sisters, aged 57 and 45 years, had a normal neurological examination. The father of the proposita had died at the age of 72 because of myocardial infarction but he was referred to be free of neurological complaints.
Having obtained written informed consent, genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood of the patient and her living relatives using the MagNa Pure System (Roche) and the whole coding region and flanking intron-exon boundaries of POLG were directly sequenced using the BigDye 3.1 chemistry (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). In the proposita we identified a homozygous c.2665G > A/p.A889T change . The mutation was heterozygous in her mother and two sisters and led to a reduction of the protein in skeletal muscle homogenate . No mutations in other genes associated with multiple mtDNA deletions were detected . There was no mtDNA depletion in muscle.