An 18-year-old girl, without medical history, presented to our hospital with a painful mass of the anteromedial aspect of the left elbow . The pain worsened with exercise. The mass has been growing gradually over a year, without trauma history.
Physical examination found a painful fixed soft mass in the anteromedial aspect of the elbow with a regular surface. The mass size was approximately 30 × 10 mm without clear boundaries. No changes in the covering skin or pulsion were observed. No palpable axillary lymph nodes were found. The joint range of motion and neurological examination were normal.
Symptoms started 12 months before the first medical visit. X-ray was performed first, followed by ultrasonography and MRI. Once diagnosis was defined immediately surgery was performed within the following week. Histopathology results were released a few days later. The patient had regular follow-up visits. The latest follow-up was at 12-month postoperatively.
Plain radiograph of the left elbow revealed a small erosion of the medial cortex of the distal humerus. No calcification was found. Ultrasonography showed an ovalary well-margined hypoechoic intramuscular mass sized 26 × 21 × 10 mm. It was a heterogeneous low-flow vascular lesion including phlebolith calcification. MRI showed a fusiform well-margined intramuscular mass of 17 × 8 × 35 mm within the pronator teres muscle . The mass had an intermediated signal intensity with fat overgrowth on the T1-weighted and recovery images and high signal intensity on the T2-weighted images. T1-weighted gadolinium-enhanced axial and coronal MRI revealed heterogeneous signal intensity. MRI did not reveal any bone lesions. The bone erosion observed on the radiograph did not have any affiliation to the mass on MRI.
Benign vascular tumor was suspected and surgery was performed under general anesthesia. A pneumatic tourniquet was applied to the upper left arm. We used a 6 cm vertical incision centered on the pronator teres. The mass had a lobulated appearance surrounded by fat located within the humeral head of the pronator teres muscle .
Tumor limits were clear. It was dissected carefully and excised totally. An afferent vessel was found and ligated. No adherence to adjacent structures and the profound fascia was found. No contact with the ulnar nerve was observed. The mass size was approximately 30x20x10mm with firm consistency .
Histopathological examination of the excised mass revealed a proliferation of benign vascular channels within skeletal muscle, associated with a mature adipocytic component. The tumor is composed of mixed vessel types, including lymphatics, large thick-walled veins, and dilated vascular channels. Furthermore, there are cavernous-like spaces, an arteriovenous component, and some thick-walled veins in the tumor. Areas with the cavernous lymphatic component are predominant. These vascular spaces were filled with blood or lymphatic fluid. Some vessels display thrombosis, with occasional formation of phleboliths attested by the presence of calcification. There was no evidence of cytonuclear atypia or mitosis .
<H3>Follow-up and outcomes: A 3 monthly medical visit was carried out and consisted of a clinical examination. At 1-year follow-up, the patient reported no pain with excellent function of the elbow. Moreover, there was no recurrence.
A 6-year-old female, without medical history, presented with a mass of the proximal third of the left elbow . The mass has slowly grown over a year without pain.
The mass size was approximately 50 × 20 mm without clear boundaries. No changes in the covering skin or pulsion were observed. Joint range of motion and neurological examination was normal.
Symptoms started 12 months before the first medical visit. X-ray was performed first, followed by ultrasonography and MRI. Once diagnosis was defined immediately surgery was performed within the following week. Histopathology results were released a few days later. The patient had regular follow-up visits. The latest follow-up was at 12-month postoperatively.
Plain radiographs of the left elbow were normal. MRI showed a well-margined intramuscular mass of 30 mm within the pronator teres muscle .
The tumor was dissected carefully and excised using an 8 cm incision . Tumor limits were clear. No adherence to adjacent structures and the profound fascia was found. No contact with the ulnar nerve was observed. The mass size was approximately 30 × 30 × 10 mm with firm consistency . Histopathological examination found a cavernous hemangioma.
A 3 monthly medical visit was carried out and consisted only of a clinical examination. At 1-year follow-up, the patient reported no pain with excellent function of the elbow. Moreover, there was no recurrence.
A 6-year-old girl, without medical history, presented with a mass of the distal third of the left forearm. The mass has slowly grown over a year without pain .
Physical examination found a soft swelling ovalary sub-cutaneous mass. The mass was 5cmx3cm approximately with clear boundaries. The mass was located on the radial edge of the distal third of the left forearm, without pain or change in skin color. Joint mobility of the fingers, especially of the thumb, was normal.
Symptoms started 12 months before the first medical visit. X-ray was performed first, followed by ultrasonography and MRI. Once diagnosis was defined immediately, surgery was performed within the following week. Histopathology results were released a few days later. The patient had regular follow-up visits. The latest follow-up was at 12-month postoperatively.
Plain radiograph of the left forearm did not show any abnormalities. Ultrasonography showed an ovalary hypoechoic mass of 50 × 30 mm. MRI T2 imaging revealed a hypersignal mass within the pollicis brevis muscle.
We used an 8 cm vertical incision on the posterior aspect of the distal forearm . The mass had a lobulated appearance surrounded by fat located within the extensor pollicis brevis muscle in its musculotendinous junction. Tumor limits were clear . The extensor pollicis brevis muscle was excised partially with its tendon. The remaining tendon was sutured upstream and downstream to the extensor pollicis longus . The thumb was immobilized using a thumb spica splint. Histopathological examination of the excised mass revealed a cavernous hemangioma.
A 3 monthly medical visit was carried out and consisted of only a clinical examination. At 1-year follow-up, the patient reported no pain with excellent function of the thumb. Moreover, there was no recurrence.