A twenty-three year old male patient presented to our emergency department (ED) on two separate occasions in the same week complaining of a 5-day history of increasing central and lower abdominal pain with distension and three episodes of feculent vomiting. Although he also reported constipation, he maintained the passage of flatus. At first presentation he reported abdominal pain only without distension or vomiting and was admitted for a 24-hour period of observation after which his symptoms settled and he was discharged home relatively well. On the second attendance, he presented with recurrent abdominal pain with distension, nausea and vomiting. On examination he had generalized abdominal tenderness (without peritonitis), but remained hemodynamically well. Blood investigations showed a leukocytosis (16.5 × 103/μL) and elevated C-reactive protein (235 mg/L), consistent with an acute inflammatory response, but all other standard blood tests (hemoglobin, platelets, liver function tests, urea, creatinine, and electrolytes) were within normal range.
His past medical history included a multi-trauma two years previously, managed at a different institution. Injuries included: closed head injury (admission GCS 6/15), pelvic fracture, a grade 2 splenic injury (all successfully managed non-operatively) and left sided TDR (diagnosed on CT scanning). He remained hemodynamically well at that time and underwent a laparoscopic repair of the TDR using continuous 2/0 nylon suture. After a protracted ICU stay managing raised intracranial pressure he was eventually discharged home after 3 months with mild to moderate left sided weakness, which continued in the intervening period. On this admission, his chest X-ray (CXR) demonstrated a left sided pleural effusion with a loop of bowel within the left hemithorax, but with no free gas visible . Abdominal X-ray (AXR) demonstrated gross large and small bowel dilatation, consistent with large bowel obstruction with ileo-caecal valve incompetence (which may explain the intermittent nature of his symptoms and presentation).
Acute management included fluid resuscitation (intravenous crystalloid) and gastrointestinal decompression with a nasogastric tube (NG). The NG tube drained a large volume of feculent fluid (> 3L) over a 6hr period, but with little improvement in abdominal pain or distension. Due to the lack of progress during this time, the surgical team proceeded to laparotomy for the management of acute large bowel obstruction.
Findings at laparotomy included large bowel obstruction, dilated from the cecum to the splenic flexure with distal collapse. There was also a large visceral hernia containing large bowel (with omentum) through a defect in the left hemidiaphragm consistent with a recurrent yet chronic TDR. The hernia sac was thickened with evidence of long-standing incarceration and multiple chest adhesions, consistent with the chronic nature of the condition, necessitating careful dissection from the surrounding diaphragmatic muscle and left pleura. After successful mobilization the bowel and omentum were inspected (fully viable and without perforation) and were reduced back into the abdominal cavity. There was a 3cm x 2cm defect in the left hemidiaphragm .
The diaphragmatic defect was subsequently repaired with interrupted No. 1 nylon and the abdomen was lavaged with warm saline, drained and closed as standard. The patient went on to make an uneventful recovery and follow up CXR only showed a small left sided pleural effusion with no evidence of the diaphragmatic hernia .