A 47-year-old female with a 20-pack year smoking history presented to an outside hospital after she overdosed on acetaminophen for relief of her headache. She had been presenting to various hospitals with complaints of headache, nausea and intermittent episodes of vomiting for 18 months. She had previously been evaluated at our institution a year before for headache and had a computed tomography scan done, which was reported negative for any intracranial lesions. Her review of systems was positive for polyuria and polydipsia, which had started about 2 weeks prior to presentation. Her initial laboratory studies at the outside hospital revealed serum sodium of 157 Meq/L (Nl: 135-146 Meq/L) in addition to abnormal liver function studies; the latter attributed to acetaminophen overdose. She was treated with high dose desmopressin (DDAVP) for presumed DI and transferred to our facility, which is a tertiary level referral hospital. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) study of her brain done at the outside hospital had revealed a lesion, 2.5 × 1.5 cm in size, in-homogeneously enhancing in the sellar with some extension into the suprasellar cistern and erosion of the posterior wall of the sphenoid sinus. The optic chiasm was not noted to be compressed. No other brain lesions were noted on this scan.
On admission to our institute, she continued to have headache, polyuria and polydipsia. Her serum sodium on presentation was 166 Meq/L. Her CBC revealed anemia, with hemoglobin of 9.5 g (Nl: 11.7-15.5 g), normocytic and normochromic in nature. Based on her hormonal assay, namely low TSH of 0.3 mIU/L (Nl 0.45-4.5 mIU/L), low FSH of 0.5 mIU/L, LH <0.1 mIU/L, normal prolactin and cortisol levels, she was thought to have a non-functioning pituitary mass. She was presumed to have a diagnosis of central DI and was given a dose of DDAVP again. An MRI of her brain was repeated in our institution with contrast this time, which revealed a large, invasive suprasellar mass with heterogeneous enhancement and extension into the adjacent sphenoid sinus. The mass was associated with mild suprasellar extension and compression of the optic chiasm . Another ring-enhancing centrally cystic lesion was identified in the right superficial frontal lobe with mild surrounding edema . Although the sellar mass could represent an invasive pituitary macroadenoma with preferential inferior growth, given the relatively rapid growth of the sellar lesion and the concomitant presence of additional frontal lobe lesion, the possibility of a metastatic disease needed to be considered at this time.
She underwent a trans-sphenoidal pituitary biopsy subsequently and had to be transferred to the intensive care unit after the biopsy due to acute hypoxic respiratory failure.
The pathological examination of the mass in pituitary revealed the typical features of an adenocarcinoma: Solid nests and glands formed by tumor cells that have abundant cytoplasm containing intracellular mucin and pleomorphic nuclei . Immunophenotyping of the cells provided additional information regarding the origin of the adenocarcinoma. The cells were positive for thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) , which is a sensitive and specific marker of lung adenocarcinoma. The tumor cells demonstrated a cytokeratin profile typical of lung adenocarcinoma (CK-7 and CAM 5.2-positive, CK-20-negative) and were negative for the neuroendocrine markers (CD-56, chromogranin, and synaptophysin). An identical immunophenotype can be found in thyroid carcinomas, which have a distinctly different histologic appearance, and some primary adenocarcinomas of the head and neck, including sinonasal carcinoma, which can express TTF-1 in rare cases.
To evaluate further for a primary lesion, a CT scan of the chest was obtained which revealed multiple pulmonary emboli, mediastinal lymphadenopathy, and patchy ground-glass opacity within the lateral aspect of the right lower lobe with no distinctly visible mass.
Endobronchoscopy with ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration of the right hilar lymph nodes yielded malignant cells that had the cytological appearance of lung adenocarcinoma . A biopsy performed concomitantly revealed tumor cells that resembled those in the pituitary mass. With this evidence of a primary lung adenocarcinoma, the pathologist concluded that the pituitary mass most likely represented metastasis from a lung malignancy and not local spread of a sinonasal adenocarcinoma.
Thereafter the patient had a rapid decline in her performance status. She refused further treatment and was transferred to hospice care.