A previously healthy 30-year-old female security guard with no past surgical or medical history self-presented to the emergency department from work for evaluation of a two-day history of severe, cramping periumbilical abdominal pain and diarrhea. During this time, she had also had chills, nausea, and cough. The patient was in significant distress and discomfort due to her pain and her physical exam revealed tachycardia, hypertension, and diffuse abdominal tenderness to palpation with rebound. Complete blood count and liver function tests showed a white blood cell count of 18,800/mm3 with 92.9% segmented neutrophils and a total bilirubin of 2.5 mg/dL (direct 0.9 mg/dL), respectively. Urinalysis was unremarkable and urine β-hCG was negative. At this point, the differential diagnosis included appendicitis, acute colitis, and gastroenteritis. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis with intravenous contrast revealed perisigmoid fat-stranding and multiple air foci within the peritoneum. A linear density was also appreciated within the sigmoid colon . These findings likely represented colonic micro-perforation secondary to a foreign body.
The patient was immediately taken to the operating room for an exploratory laparoscopy under general anesthesia; however, this was not possible as liquid stool was present in the peritoneal cavity. She subsequently underwent an exploratory laparotomy with sigmoidectomy which was performed by two attending trauma surgeons and a physician assistant. The decision was made to perform an end-to-end anastomosis instead of a colostomy as the anterior abdominal wall was over four inches thick and some difficulty was encountered with mobilization of the descending colon. In addition, the patient had a low diverticular burden with a healthy and well-vascularized distal margin, supporting the decision for primary anastomosis. Intraoperative findings confirmed Hinchey class IV sigmoid diverticulitis. After placement of a 19 French Blake drain within the pelvis, the patient was extubated and transferred to the postanesthesia care unit without any intraoperative complications. Total operative time was approximately 5 h. She was then taken to the surgical floor where she received piperacillin/tazobactam, and pain and nausea management with morphine and ondansetron. Bowel function returned on postoperative day three and diet and activity were advanced as tolerated. After an uneventful six-day hospitalization, she was discharged with oral levofloxacin and metronidazole to be taken at home for three days. She was followed up on an outpatient basis for wound care and recovered satisfactorily. Pathologic examination of the resected colon showed two areas of perforation measuring approximately 0.5 cm and 1.1 cm, respectively, in diameter. A diverticulum was also seen within the specimen with inflammatory changes. Finally, a fragment of a yellow-tan, firm cortical bone measuring 3.9 × 2.1 × 0.2 cm was retrieved from the lumen. Histological findings are shown in .