A 37-year-old man was referred due to ongoing pain in his left ankle on weight-bearing. Eight months previously, he had suffered a complete rupture of the left Achilles tendon during a martial arts session. The initial injury was treated conservatively with a VACOped™ boot for 8 weeks and subsequent physiotherapy, following the non-operative Leicester Achilles Management Protocol functional rehabilitation regime. Physiotherapy (intrinsic muscle strengthening and range of movement exercises) was limited by significant pain. Following two physiotherapy sessions, he presented to his general practitioner with ongoing pain on the posterior aspect of the left ankle and shooting pains radiating up his calf after prolonged periods of standing.
The patient reported posterior left ankle pain when weight-bearing and walking. He also complained of nighttime rest pain and morning ankle stiffness. The patient was otherwise well with a medical history of mild asthma only and no history of coagulopathies, bleeding disorders, or steroid use.
On examination, a large fusiform swelling was noted on the posterior aspect of the left ankle within his Achilles tendon. This was thought to be an organized hematoma which allowed continuity between the two ends of the tendon; continuity was demonstrated with plantar flexion elicited by performing Simmonds’ test. On palpation, a slight increase in local temperature and tenderness was noted. Dorsiflexion of the left ankle was increased by 5°compared to the right side.
Urgent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was arranged due to the lack of a definitive diagnosis and to exclude infective or neoplastic causes of the swelling. The MRI scan showed a large fluid collection/hematoma intrasubstance in the Achilles tendon, located approximately 6 cm proximal from its insertion at the calcaneus, . The unusual appearance of the scan prompted discussion of the case at a multidisciplinary team (MDT) meeting to guide the choice of treatment.
The MDT suggested an organized hematoma or scar tissue as the most likely diagnosis; however, infection still had to be definitively excluded. The recommendation was to proceed with surgical exploration of the swelling with the aim of obtaining tissue samples for definitive diagnosis. Treatment options were discussed with the patient, including conservative treatment through to surgical intervention including synthetic options for tendon reconstruction. Following this, the decision was made to proceed with surgical arthroscopic debridement of the tendon.
Needle aspiration of the swelling was performed and did not reveal a fresh hematoma. Two portals, one proximal and one distal to the swelling, were created in the left Achilles tendon. Decompression of the swelling was achieved using an arthroscopic technique. Tissue biopsies were taken for histology and microbiology. A gel-like material with scar tissue and abnormal tissue architecture was seen in this affected area of the tendon. Normal tendon tissue was visualized adjacent to the abnormal area.
The histology report confirmed the specimen corresponded to tendon scar tissue with mild degenerate changes; fibro-fatty tissue was seen macroscopically. On microscopic examination, small fragments of connective tissue with mild degenerate myxoid change but no significant inflammation were noted.
Postoperatively, the patient was discharged home on the same day and was advised to mobilize touch weight-bearing with crutches for 2 weeks. No external immobilization was required. Post-operative MRI views are shown in with the intrasubstance hematoma now removed.
At the 2-week follow-up, he was pleased with the progress, the wound was healing well and sutures were removed. Physiotherapy was started at this stage without loading exercises.
At 7 weeks postoperatively, the patient was doing well with no pain, was talking no analgesia and the swelling was significantly reduced compared to preoperatively levels. He was pleased with the results of the surgery and was discharged from surgery and physiotherapy.