In June 2001, a 76 years old male was referred to our institution hospital with clinical signs and symptoms of acute urinary retention, complaining of voiding difficulties during the previous 2 months. On catheterisation, 600 ml of urine could be rescued. Physical examination was unremarkable, except from digital rectal examination which disclosed an uneven swollen and enlarged prostate gland, of stony-hard consistency, with an irregular capsule profile. The patient had been healthy until the time of our observation. No history of radiation and hormonal therapy could be highlighted. Hence, a complete diagnostic work-up was planned.
Serum PSA and PAP showed in-range values. Transrectal ultrasound demonstrated hypoechoic lesions in the left peripheral zone of the prostate gland. Excretion urogram, urine cytology and urethro-cystoscopy were negative for malignancy, while bladder neck was slightly elevated on cystoscopy.
An abdominal and pelvic computed tomography (CT) scan was then performed, disclosing an irregularly enlarged prostate with a peripheral hypodense mass within, compressing the base of the bladder and disrupting the prostatic anatomy. No enlarged lymphnodes could be detected at any abdominal site.
On magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the boundary between the transition zone and the peripheral zone of the prostate gland was unclear and the signal intensity had decreased in the left peripheral zone on T2-weighted images. Extra-capsular disease could be documented in at least 2 sites of the prostatic profile. No osseous spread could be observed at total body bone scan.
Sextant transrectal ultrasound-guided needle biopsy of the prostate was subsequently performed, with histological examination demonstrating nests and sheets of moderately differentiated squamous carcinomatous cells characterised by intercellular bridges. Focal areas presented with evidence of keratin pearl formation. No squamous metaplasia or transitional cell or adenocarcinomatous components could be observed.
Immunohistochemically, the PSCC component was non reactive for PSA, PAP and cytokeratin 7 and 20, but stained positive for high molecular weight cytokeratin . Considering all the data mentioned above, a diagnosis of AJCC-UICC Stage III (cT3aN0M0) prostate PSCC was then made.
The patient was given 3 courses of chemotherapy (CT) with cisplatin (CDDP) 75 mg/m2 on day 1 and continous infusion 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) 750 mg/m2 on day 1 to 5.
He subsequently underwent a full-course of radiation therapy (RT) using linear accelerator (18 MV photons), with a conventional four-field box technique up to 46 Gy to the whole pelvis followed by a boost dose to the prostate bed of 20 Gy and by an adjunctive dose of 6 Gy to the prostate gland (72 Gy in total). The patient was treated in supine position, with a six-field conformal field arrangement, delivered using three-dimensional conformal RT. Treatment was, generally, well tolerated, with no acute toxicity recorded.
After therapy had been completed, the patient was periodically examinated, with a clinical, radiological and serologic follow-up. He remained free from disease for 5 years, finally relapsing locally within the pelvis and subsequently dying of acute renal failure due to bilateral uretero-hydro-nephrosis in June 2006.