Rotational atherectomy was performed for an 82-year-old female with a severely calcified left anterior descending (LAD) artery lesion ( and ) presenting with increasing angina refractory to optimal medical therapy. The patient had a notable past medical history of hypertension, mild restrictive lung disease, and moderate 3A chronic kidney disease. She was on a maximally tolerated beta blocker, a long-acting nitrate, and multiple antihypertensives, including vasodilators. The patient had normal left and right ventricular size and systolic function and no significant valvular pathology. A 7 Fr Judkins Left 3.5 guide was used with a 1.25 mm burr. Five 15 s atherectomy runs with the 1.25 mm burr were performed. Despite poor guide support during atherectomy, the patient was successfully treated with two drug-eluting stents in the mid-LAD and was discharged on dual antiplatelets.
The patient presented one week later with progressive dyspnoea, culminating in her presentation to the Emergency Department with acute pulmonary oedema. Blood pressure was recorded at 160/40 mmHg and heart rate 90 beats per minute. Examination was consistent with pulmonary oedema. Bedside echocardiography demonstrated new severe AR with preserved LV systolic size and function (see , ). Upon review of the angioplasty procedure, AR had developed during the procedure following atherectomy, which was not immediately recognized ( and ). The poor guide support and redundancy in the coronary wire resulted in forceful atherectomy beginning in the aortic root (see , , and ), contributing to laceration of the aortic valve that was evident on echocardiography and CT, seen as hypoattenuation between the left and non-coronary commissure ( and ). Given her age, pre-existing co-morbidities, frailty, and her presentation with overt heart failure, she was deemed high operative risk, and the Heart Team decision was made to treat with a TAVR. CT analysis demonstrated no aortic valve calcification, an annular area of 350 mm2 and perimeter of 67 mm. In a typical patient with such an annular size and severe aortic stenosis requiring TAVR, a 23 mm valve would be selected. Given the degree of AR, the increased stroke volume, and the absence of annular calcification, a significantly oversized 29 mm Evolut R valve was selected and successfully implanted with no procedural complications.
A week later, she presented with expressive dysphasia, and bi-hemispheric punctate acute infarcts were seen on MRI brain. A transoesphageal echocardiogram ruled out vegetations on the prosthesis, and no arrhythmias were detected on prolonged cardiac monitoring. Post-TAVR cardiac CT demonstrated extensive HALT and thrombus in the aortic sinuses ( and ). She was anticoagulated with a non-vitamin-K-antagonist oral anticoagulant (NOAC) and clopidogrel and made full neurological recovery. Repeat cardiac imaging at 6 months demonstrated improvement with good TAVR function and complete resolution of leaflet thrombosis ( and ). The patient reported complete resolution of angina, and there were no symptoms of heart failure.