A 54-year-old, healthy male patient presented with a 6 month complaint of pain and swelling on the right side of the face associated with facial paralysis. He also noted intermittent right otalgia that had worsened in the last month and a rapid increase in the size of the lesion over the past 2 months. Physical examination showed right facial paralysis (House-Brackmann IV) and pain upon palpation of the posterior region of the right parotid gland. Normal saliva secretion was observed from both Stenon ducts.
A Magnetic Resonance Image (MRI), an Ultrasound-Guided Fine Needle Aspiration Biopsy (FNAB) and a neurophysiological examination was performed. The MRI revealed a heterogeneous enhancing soft tissue mass of 4×3×3 cm in size with irregular borders. It showed low intensity areas on T2-weighted images suggesting a malignant and infiltrative process located in the superficial and deep right parotid lobes. The FNAB showed a neoplastic proliferation of dark-staining epithelial cells with basophilic nuclei and scant cytoplasm enclosing circular cribiform pattern spaces and also solid and microcystic patterns which suggested an adenoid cystic carcinoma. The neurophysiological test indicated a peripheral neuropathy of the facial nerve predominantly of the temporo-facial branch.
A complete parotidectomy was carried out with an intraoperative biopsy of facial nerve infiltration until the stylomastoid foramen confirmed by histopathology results. Due to these findings and results from the first surgery a second intervention was scheduled for nerve and defect reconstruction. An open mastoidectomy was performed to remove skin from the external auditory canal. The Eustachian tube was shut down and the malleus and the incus were removed to have a better access to the Fallopian aqueduct leaving the stapes intact. The Fallopian aqueduct was carefully drilled, searching for a tumor-free facial nerve stump for an end-to-end nerve grafting. A free fasciocutaneous anterior lateral thigh (ALT) flap with a vascularized lateral femoral cutaneous nerve graft (3 distal ends and 1 proximal) was harvested and applied .
The vastus lateralis nerve was found to be intimately connected with the descending branch of the lateral circumflex femoral artery and its perforating vessels. It was elevated while left attached to the vascular pedicle adding consecutively the dissection of 3 to 4 distal branches and incorporating them to the flap harvest. The vascular end-to-end anastomoses were performed first and the placing of the nerve as an interpositional graft was performed right after. The selected vessels for the anastomoses were one artery, the superior thyroid artery, and two veins: the external jugular vein and a branch of the internal jugular vein. A neurorraphy of the vascularized nerve from the ALT was sutured to the proximal stump of the facial nerve and to both distal ipsilateral zygomatic and buccal branches .
The length of the graft used for reconstruction going from the proximal stump of the facial nerve to each peripheral branch of the facial nerve was approximately 6 cm. A 10 month follow-up period showed that partial facial movement was recovered reaching a House-Brackmann II and that the facial defect was mended. Partial recovery was observed in the zygomatic and buccal branches of the reconstructed facial nerve. The electromyography and neuronography studies (EMG/ENG), performed 8 months after the surgery, showed small polyphasic potentials with medium amplitude and active reinnervation characteristics, especially seen in the Orbicularis oculi muscle and with less intensity in the Orbicularis oris muscle. These potentials are suggestive of a regeneration phase in course. The donor site showed complete recovery with no complications nearby. Distant and local metastasis was assessed with negative outcomes.