We present the case of a 40 year old Caucasian male who was referred to our department for evaluation of NYHA II heart failure symptoms and a recent persistent episode of atrial fibrillation (AF). Clinical examination shows irregular heart rate and mild pansystolic apical murmur.
Laboratory tests identified high brain natriuretic peptide levels (BNP) (784 pg/ml) and slightly elevated muscular enzymes (CK 227.3 U/l). Serial electrocardiographic (ECG) tracings indicate both sinus rhythm and AF episodes, with left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy voltage criteria .
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed moderate biventricular thickening (maximal LV wall thickness 20 mm at inferoseptal level, 15 mm in most other segments with symmetrical disposition, right ventricular (RV) free wall 9 mm), biatrial dilatation, important longitudinal dysfunction with apical sparring, preserved LV ejection fraction (LVEF), but severe impairment of diastolic function with restrictive physiology. Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) confirmed biventricular hypertrophy with maximal wall thickness of 19 mm at inferoseptal level and found late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) with basal mid-myocardial disposition. It also described diffuse high T1 values (1074 ms precontrast administration) with extracellular volume expansion to 37% . Systemic amyloidosis was excluded by negative whole-body Tc99m Hydroxymethylene Diphosphonate (99Tc-HMDP) scintigraphy, absence of monoclonal gammapathy and multiple tissue biopsies.
Due to the constant increase in CK (in the absence of muscular symptoms), a neurologic examination was performed and revealed decreased facial expression, slight dysphonia, mild weakness involving shoulder and pelvic girdles and also peroneal muscles. We noticed slight wasting of deltoidus, supraspinatus, infraspinatus and calf muscles, diminished deep tendon reflexes and reduced mobility of the lumbar spine (rigid low spine) with no others joint contractures. Electromyography was performed with evidence of chronic myopathy. Left deltoid muscle biopsy showed non-specific myopatic findings, but, also, on reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide tetrazolium reductase (NADH-TR) and other oxidative enzyme stainings, unevenness of stain and multiple core-like areas devoid of enzyme activity in both fiber types, mainly in type I fibers, morphological signs of abnormal internal architecture with sarcomeric disorganization . No signs of necrosis, regeneration, mitochondrial abnormalities, fibrosis or amyloid deposits were noticed; no rimmed vacuoles or reducing bodies were identified. The diagnostic workup was completed by genetic testing by next-generation sequencing with a comprehensive cardiomyopathy panel, which found a likely pathogenic mutation in the FHL1 gene (c.157-1G > A, hemizygous, using the NM_001449.4 transcript) involved in the development of X-linked EDMD type 6. The mutation classification was based on the fact that this sequence change affects an acceptor splice site in intron 3 of the FHL1 gene, and therefore is expected to disrupt RNA splicing and likely results in an absent or disrupted protein product.
Analyzing the pedigree of the index case, we evaluated the 2 daughters who are obligate carriers (clinical examination, ECG, TTE) and found no cardiac or muscular abnormalities . The patient’s mother was hypertensive but no specific electrocardiographic, echocardiographic and neurological changes were found and she refused further testing, including genetic testing.