In January 2019, a 21 years old woman of Venezuelan origin with residence in Madrid, Spain, without any previous history of striking disease, attended the Hospital Universitario de la Princesa in Madrid with episodes of fever, headache, chills and cough for 1 week and diarrhoea for the previous 2 days. She referred to a trip to a coastal area in Venezuela (Higuerote) the previous month, coming back 10 days before she attended to the hospital. Plasmodium vivax malaria was diagnosed after blood thin smear and rapid diagnostic test (RDT) (BinaxNOW Malaria, Abbott) in the Microbiology and Parasitology Department of the hospital. The sample was sent to the Malaria and Parasitic Diseases Laboratory (MAPELab) of Instituto de Salud Carlos III, for further confirmation by molecular methods. Molecular species identification was performed by a nested multiplex PCR (NM-PCR) assay targeting the small sub-unit rDNA gene (SSU rDNA), which comprises two PCR steps: a first PCR assay identifying Plasmodium spp. and human DNA as the internal control; and a second PCR assay targeting P. falciparum, P. vivax, Plasmodium ovale, Plasmodium malariae and Plasmodium knowlesi . The NM-PCR confirmed a P. vivax infection.
The patient was firstly treated with oral chloroquine for 3 days and with 14 days of primaquine phosphate (Durbin LTD, United Kingdom) at the WHO recommended dosage (0.25 mg/kg/day) , after checking the normal glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase function. No other treatments were prescribed. The patient recovered totally and in the follow-up 1 month later she was asymptomatic and without anaemia or other analytical alterations. Two months after the first episode, the patient came back to the hospital with fever, headache and chills after returning from a trip of 12 days to Caracas (Venezuela). Microscopy, RDT and NM-PCR confirmed a P. vivax infection again. The prescribed treatment was the same to the previous episode, chloroquine plus primaquine for 14 days. The patient progressed favourably and the blood smear and the immunochromatography for malaria were negative 1 week later. In the follow-up 1 month later the malaria conventional diagnosis was negative again. However, 2 months later, and after a trip to Morocco, the patient returned to the hospital with fever, chills, fatigue and nausea. Once again, thin blood smear, RDT and NM-PCR were positive for P. vivax infection. Given this third consecutive malaria infection, and due to a high possibility of a therapeutic failure, the treatment was modified to 3 days of chloroquine with 28 days of primaquine. The clinical and parasitological follow-up 1 week and 1 month later were negative for the malaria diagnostic tests (microscopy and RDT). Six months later (February 2020) the patient was asymptomatic and the microscopy and RDT for malaria were negative.
In order to determine if the last two infections were due to recurrences or to re-infections, the P. vivax strains of the three malaria episodes of the patient were genotyped. The genotyping was carried out by analysis of three polymorphic regions (F1, F2 and F3) of the merozoite surface protein-1 gene of P. vivax (Pvmsp-1), by PCR and sequencing. The characterization of the amplified PCR products was performed by analysis of the fragment size, for the polymorphic region F3; and by comparison of the sequences, for polymorphic regions F1 and F2 of Pvmsp-1 gene .
The sequences, obtained from amplification of polymorphic F1 and F2 regions, were aligned using ClustalW multiple alignment of the Bioedit Sequence Alignment Editor, version 7.2.5 . They were compared with sequences of the same polymorphic areas of the Pvmsp-1 gene, extracted from GeneBank data base using the AF435639 accession number as the reference sequence. The three sequences corresponding to the patient were equal between themselves and different to most of the compared sequences . The analysis of PCR product sizes of the Pvmsp-1 PCR F3 showed that the patient’s three samples had the same size, meanwhile P. vivax control strains showed different sizes .
The results obtained support that the three malarial episodes were due to recurrences of an initial infection, as the three P. vivax strains isolated from the patient were genetically homologous or closely related, and not due to new infections acquired in her successive trips or in Spain. A possible cause of a recurrence is poor adherence to treatment. However, in this case, the patient ensured that she followed the treatment correctly and there were no reasons to think otherwise. Then, the appearance of recurrences, in the context of a correct treatment, led to analysis to establish if the therapeutic failure could be connected to impairment in the metabolism of the primaquine. In order to analyse the genotype of the CYP2D6 gene of the patient real-time PCR was performed. This technique is able to detect the single nucleotide variants (SNVs) defining the alleles *3 (rs35742686), *4 (rs3892097 and rs1065852), *6 (rs5030655), *9 (rs5030656), *10 (rs1065852), *17 (rs28371706), and *41 (rs28371725) of CYP2D6, using TaqMan® probes which detects the specific and wild-type alleles (TaqMan Genotyping Assay, ThermoFisher Scientific); as well as copy number variants (CNVs) and hybrid genes, using specific probes for intron 2 and exon 9 (TaqMan Copy Number Assay, ThermoFisher Scientific). Testing was performed following manufacturer’s instructions. The detection of *5 allele, a large gene deletion, was performed using conventional PCR , followed by automatic electrophoresis analysis (DNA High Resolution Gel Cartridge, QIAxcel, QIAGEN®). The results showed heterozygous positivity for allele *4 (rs3892097 and rs1065852 were detected). Neither other SNVs nor structural variant of CYP2D6 were found.