We present the case of a 43-year-old female with a history of difficult-to-manage bronchial asthma, hospitalized in the last 8 months on 10 occasions for acute exacerbations, asthmatic crisis. She presented with a 24-hour history of dry cough, progressive dyspnea, psychomotor agitation, and audible wheezing that did not improve with outpatient use of salbutamol and ipratropium bromide. She was admitted in critical condition, diaphoretic, tachycardic (heart rate 110 beats/minute), dyspneic with supraclavicular retractions (respiratory rate of 30 breaths/minute, ambient oxygen saturation 87%), auscultation with abolished vesicular murmur in both lung fields, Glasgow coma scale (GCS) 12/15. Arterial blood gases (ABG) analysis revealed respiratory acidosis and hypoxemia (pH: 7.21 PCO2: 66.5 PO2: 53.4, HCO3: 26.5 BE −2.8, SaO2 79.1% PaO2/FiO2: 178).
Given the imminence of ventilatory failure, invasive ventilatory support was provided, with midazolam (loading dose 0.2 mg/kg, maintenance dose 0.05 mg/kg/h) and propofol (loading dose 1 mg/kg, maintenance dose 1 mg/kg/h) for improved mechanical ventilator-patient synchrony, and she was transferred to the ICU. She was managed with hydrocortisone 100 mg IV every 8 hours, magnesium sulfate, and antibiotics (piperacillin tazobactam and clarithromycin), considering infection as the cause of the asthmatic crisis. At day 2 a short-term (48-hour) infusion of neuromuscular blocking agents (NMB) was associated (cisatracurium initial dose of 0.15 mg/kg and maintenance dose of intermittent 0.03 mg/kg IV bolus. Train of 4 used to monitor the paralysis maintaining a range of 1-2). On the fourth day, she presented improvement in ABG; Ventilatory weaning was indicated, suspending dual sedation and NMB. Light sedation with dexmedetomidine was started. On day 6, her GCS was 15/15, but she had weakness of the neck flexor muscles, facial paresis, she could not move all 4 limbs (muscular strength 1/5 in lower limbs, 2/5 in upper limbs), she had flaccid hyporeflexia, with preserved sensitivity. There was no alteration in cranial nerves.
She was assessed by neurology who requested brain and cervical MRI and a study of cerebrospinal fluid, which were found to be normal. The MRC score was 37 points.
Electromyography (EMG) was performed, revealing signs of denervation and irritability (myopathic pattern), polyneuropathic compromise with axonal pattern in conduction velocity, .
Thus, the diagnosis of ICUAW was confirmed, physiotherapy and comprehensive rehabilitation were started, the ventilator was withdrawn it was achieved on day 10. At hospital discharge, 30 days after admission, the patient had an MRC score of 55 points, normal ABG control with no acidosis neither hypoxemia; symptomatic resolution was achieved.