A previously healthy 15-year-old sexually active female came to the emergency room because of dyspnoea, fever and right thoracic pain. The physical examination was suggestive of right sided pneumonia and laboratory tests revealed a marked leukocytosis (39'800/mm3 WBC, 89% neutrophils; 74% segmented and 15% bands) and an elevated C-reactive protein level (>250 mg/L). The chest X-ray confirmed the clinical suspicion of right lobar pneumonia and an outpatient treatment of oral clarithromycin (500 mg bid) was started. The absence of clinical improvement and the onset of a pleural effusion on the fourth day of antibiotic therapy lead to admission to our hospital and the addition of i.v. ceftriaxone (2 g bid) to the macrolide regimen.
As the high fever persisted, a chest CT scan was done on the seventh day of antibiotic treatment, showing a bilateral necrotizing pneumonia as well as a bilateral pleural effusion. At this time, on the basis of a presumed polymicrobial infection including anaerobes, a treatment of i.v. amoxicillin/clavulanate (2.2 g tid) was substituted to the previous clarithromycin-ceftriaxone regimen.
Two days later the patient was transferred to the paediatric intensive care unit because of rapid worsening of her symptoms with the risk of respiratory failure. Amoxicillin/clavulanate therapy was switched to imipenem-cilastatin (500 mg i.v. qid) and vancomycin (750 mg i.v. tid). Cultures of pleural effusion for aerobic and anaerobic pathogens obtained by needle aspiration were negative. M. hominis was then detected by eubacterial PCR [DNA extracts were amplified using PCR targeting the 16S rRNA as follows: forward primer (Bak11wF): 5'-AGTTTGATCMTGGCTCAG-3', reverse Primer (Pc3 mod): 5'-GGACTACHAGGGTATCTAAT-3', sequencing primer: Bak11wf and Bak533 r: 5'-TTACCGCGGCTGCTGGCAC-] , and confirmed by a M. hominis specific Taqman PCR (98,500,000 copies/mL). The primers of the TaqMan PCR used were: Forward primer: 5'-TTTGGTCAAGTCCTGCAACGA-3', Reverse Primer: 5'-CCCCACCTTCCTCCCAGTTA-3' and probe: FAM-TTACTAACATTAAGTTGAGGACTCTA-MGB, targeting the M. hominis 16 rRNA gene sequence , and further confirmed by specific culture (Mycoplasma IST, bioMérieux, France).
The antibiotic susceptibility tests revealed resistance to macrolides and susceptibility to tetracyclines and quinolones, leading to the addition of doxycycline (100 mg bid) twelve days after the start of symptoms.
A new CT scan showed a larger amount of pleural fluid as well as a pericardial effusion .
Because of worsening respiratory and haemodynamic conditions, the pericardial and pleural effusions were evacuated by pericadiectomy with window and pleural drainage by chest tube insertion. Any respiratory support (other than oxygen supplementation) was needed thereafter. M. hominis DNA was also amplified in the pericardial fluid by specific PCR (85 copies/mL). Standard axenic cultures and specific PCR assays for Streptococcus pneumoniae and Staphylococcus aureus, as well as Legionella pneumophila urinary antigen test were negative in all specimens. Complement-fixing antibody to Mycoplasma pneumoniae showed no increase in titers.
Imipenem-cilastin and vancomycine were discontinued while doxycycline was administered for a total of 2 weeks. This treatment was associated with clinical and biological improvement and the patient could be discharged from the hospital on day 19. At this time, the CRP level was down to 16 mg/L. Finally the patient completely recovered without any sequel on the chest X-ray.