Persistent upper abdominal pain for 5 d.
A 51-year-old man was admitted to our Intensive Care Unit (ICU) after 5 d of persistent severe upper abdominal pain. On day 9 after admission to the hospital, diarrhea developed with a frequency of 4-10 times/d. We stopped all treatments (rhubarb, mirabilite, and mannitol, oral; glycerol enema) that could induce diarrhea and administered montmorillonite and probiotics (Medilac-s, Live Combined Bacillus Subtilis and Enterococcus Faecium Enteric-coated Capsules 500 mg, t.i.d). However, the amount and frequency of diarrhea remained unrelieved.
The patient had a history of chronic consumption of large amounts of alcohol (approximately 80 g/d), had no significant prior medical history, and denied any history of drug use or smoking.
The patient’s family history was unremarkable.
Upon admission, the physical examination showed a pulse rate of 90 beats per minute, blood pressure of 120/70 mmHg , body temperature of 36.5 °C, and respiration rate of 23 breaths per minute. Pulse oxygen saturation was normal (96%). Moderate tenderness pain in the upper abdomen was observed without rebound tenderness; the results of bilateral chest percussion revealed dullness, and the lower lung breathing sounds disappeared; and the bedside ultrasound showed bilateral pleural effusion. Heart auscultation did not find anything. No jaundice was observed in the skin and sclera. After diarrhea occurred, rectal palpation was negative. The macroscopic aspects of the stools were yellow water-like stool.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed the following findings: Necrotizing pancreatitis, CT Severity Index (CTSI) level D, and a pancreatic necrotic area < 30% .
The laboratory analysis of the blood tests showed that many inflammatory markers were elevated . The stool cultures were negative, and the fecal occult blood test scored 3+. An enzyme immunoassay (EIA) (GeneXpert, Cepheid, America) was performed to detect toxins, and the results were positive for toxin-producing C. difficile and toxin B and negative for C. difficile ribotype 027.