A male patient aged 57 years was admitted to the Beijing Haidian Hospital with a complaint of “right-limb weakness for 4 h”. Four hours before admission (8:00), the family had found that the patient had weakness in the right limb in the morning (which was absent at 22:00 the previous night)—he could not lift his upper and lower limbs off his bed and nor could he speak or understand what others spoke to him. Therefore, the patient was brought to our emergency department. This was considered to be a case of acute ischemic cerebrovascular disease. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) + computed tomography perfusion (CTP) of the patient’s head and neck revealed occlusion of the left internal carotid artery and a large hypoperfusion area in the left hemisphere, consistent with the indication of arterial thrombectomy with ultra-extended time window. Accordingly, following the diagnosis of “cerebral infarction”, the patient was admitted to the hospital for further emergency thrombectomy.
The patient had a history of hypertension and hyperlipidemia. In addition, four months prior to this event, it had been diagnosed that the patient had atrial fibrillation but he had not been prescribed anticoagulation medicines. The patient did not have a history of smoking or alcohol consumption.
The physical examination on admission showed a temperature of 36.5°C, heart rate of 110–130 beats/min, atrial fibrillation rhythm, blood pressure of 132/68 mmHg, and respiration rate of 18 breaths/min. Neurological examination showed that the patient had developed drowsiness and aphasia; his pupils were equal in size and round (2.5 mm in diameter), and he had a sensitive reflex to light, a leftward gaze of both eyes, and a shallow nasolabial sulcus. The right-limb muscle strength was grade 0. The left limb was visibly retracted when pain stimulation occurred, and the patient refused to cooperate during the sensory ataxia examination. Bilateral pathologic signs were positive. Atrial fibrillation rhythm was observed with absolute arrhythmia. Respiratory sounds in both lungs were clear, and no apparent rhonchi and moist rales were heard. The abdomen was soft, without tenderness, and the liver and spleen were not palpable below the costal margin. No edema was found in both lower limbs. The patient’s score on the National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale was calculated to be 18.
The laboratory test results were as follows. The examination of D-dimer and four blood coagulation indexes revealed an international normalized ratio of 1.34 ↑ and a D-dimer concentration of 1.063 μg/mL ↑. The examination of six tumor indexes showed 14.2 U/mL carbohydrate antigen 724 ↑. The examination of electrolytes and all biochemical indexes demonstrated 52.6 U/L alanine transferase ↑, 34.6 g/L albumin ↓, 2.05 mmol/L total cholesterol ↓, and 6.59 mmol/L triglyceride ↑. The glycosylated hemoglobin, whole blood cell, routine urine, and routine stool tests displayed no significant abnormalities.
Further, an electrocardiogram showed atrial fibrillation rhythm. Head and neck CTA + CTP on November 13, 2021, revealed left internal carotid artery occlusion, 20 mL core infarct volume, and 76.3 mL hypoperfusion area volume. The results of a cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) + magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) on November 24, 2021 were as follows: hematoma in the left basal ganglia region (early-stage and chronic), multiple old microhemorrhagic foci in the brain, and demyelinating changes in the cerebral white matter. No significant abnormalities were found in the MRA of the patient’s head.
The diagnosis and treatment were as follows. The patient was admitted to the hospital for acute ischemic stroke due to large vessel occlusion. Whole brain arteriography was performed under emergency general anesthesia to confirm the occlusion of the left internal carotid artery . Thrombectomy to clear the occlusion of this artery and the middle cerebral artery was performed simultaneously and was successful. The occlusion was present in the distal segment of the left anterior choroidal artery ( and ).
The immediate postoperative physical examination revealed that the left pupil was enlarged and response to light was sluggish, whereas the right pupil was responsive to light (ratio of left pupil diameter to right pupil diameter = 3:2 mm). The right limb showed avoidance of pain stimulation. A small patchy high-density shadow in the left basal ganglia was detected during an immediate CT re-examination, but there were no symptoms of brain herniation. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit after the operation. Another physical examination showed that the left pupil was dilated and response to light was now absent, whereas the right pupil was sensitive to light (ratio of left pupil diameter to right pupil diameter = 5:2 mm). The status of the right limb after pain stimulation was the same as that in the immediate postoperative period. Therefore, brain hemorrhage and herniation were not considered for the time being. The patient was treated for mannitol dehydration (for lowering cranial pressure), acid suppression, and lipid regulation and was given anti-inflammatory medicine. His systolic blood pressure was controlled at 90–100 mmHg. Four hours after the surgery, a CT scan was conducted to re-examine the head, which showed that the high-density sign in the left basal ganglia had reduced slightly. The remaining results were not different from those of the immediate postoperative CT. Considering the potential association between left mydriasis and oculomotor nerve injury, antithrombotic therapy through intravenous pumping of tirofiban at 0.2 mg/h was added. Twenty-four hours after the surgery, another head CT scan showed that the high-density sign in the left basal ganglia had disappeared. Meanwhile, the patient was found to be drowsy and with partially mixed aphasia as well as unequal bilateral pupils (ratio of left pupil diameter to right pupil diameter = 5:2.5 mm), sensitivity to light of the right eye, sluggish response of the left eye to light, and recovery of the muscle strength of the right limbs to grade. Aspirin (100 mg) was added for antiplatelet therapy, and tirofiban was discontinued after 2 h. Neurological symptoms gradually improved four days after the surgery, with consciousness, partially mixed aphasia, unequal bilateral pupils (ratio of left pupil diameter to right pupil diameter = 4:2 mm), sensitivity to light of the right eye, sluggish response of the left eye to light, left blepharoptosis, ratio of left eye fissure to right eye fissure = 2:7 mm, central facial-lingual palsy of the right eye, and recovery of muscle strength of the right limbs to grade 3. In addition, Babinski signs on the right side were positive. The patient was transferred to a general ward and given physical rehabilitation training. The patient’s right-limb muscle strength and speech gradually recovered and left mydriasis, response to light, and blepharoptosis gradually improved. At 10 days after surgery, a cranial MRI showed infarction in the left cerebral peduncle and left basal ganglia , but no stenosis of the bilateral posterior cerebral arteries .
The patient was discharged three weeks after surgery. The results of pre-discharge examinations were as follows: consciousness, partial motor aphasia, left blepharoptosis, correctable self-eye opening, ratio of left eye fissure to right eye fissure = 3:7 mm, round and equal-size bilateral pupils (ratio of left pupil diameter to right pupil diameter = 2:2 mm), sensitive reflex to light, abducent position of the left eye, 2 mm whiteness in the rightward gaze of the left eye, inadequate downward gaze of the left eye , right central facial palsy, 5-grade right-limb muscle strength, diminished acupuncture sensation in the right limbs, and positive right Babinski sign. The patient’s score on the National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale was 3. One month after the surgery, the anticoagulation treatment was changed to 20 mg rivaroxaban (qd). Six months after the surgery, the patient was contacted via telephone to assess his capacity for self-care, occasional poor expressions, the disappearance of blepharoptosis, and bilateral muscle strength symmetry.
The final diagnosis for the patient was cerebral infarction, paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, atherosclerosis, pulmonary infection, stress ulcer, and cardiac insufficiency. Intracerebral hemorrhage is a serious complication that all the performers are extremely concerned about after thrombectomy. But a dilated pupil on one side after anterior circulation endovascular thrombectomy does not merely indicate the occurrence of a massive intracerebral hemorrhage, which can also manifest as Weber syndrome.