An otherwise healthy 19-year-old female presented to an outlying emergency department
(ED) on the same day that she noted an acutely developed mass on the distal right
neck . The
patient’s past medical history was unremarkable, and she denied any
constitutional symptoms such as fever, chills, night sweats, weight loss, or
fatigue. There was no reported trauma. She denied difficulty swallowing but had
noted slight shortness of breath. She was treated for a possible allergic reaction
with diphenhydramine, but there was no response. An ultrasound was completed that
showed a fluid collection in the supraclavicular area but no definitive diagnosis.
The patient was instructed to follow up with her primary physician or return to the
ED for any worsening symptoms.
The patient presented to our ED the following day as concern grew for the lack of
definitive diagnosis, and she was evaluated again. Once again, she denied trauma,
constitutional symptoms, or difficulty swallowing. She noted the mass was new and
first discovered while showering the day prior. She had recently initiated a new
strength-training regimen for her upcoming athletic season, which focused on upper
body development 14 days prior to discovery of the neck mass. She was afebrile at
36.8° Celsius with blood pressure of 131/54 millimeters of mercury, pulse of
64 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 14 breaths a minute, and oxygen saturation
of 100% on room air.
Physical examination revealed a large, easily palpable, nonerythematous, slightly
tender mass that extended from eight centimeters (cm) proximal to the clavicle to
the supraclavicular region. There was no palpable associated lymphadenopathy.
Laboratory studies included complete blood count with white blood count of 10
thousand cells per cubic millimeter (K/uL) (reference range: 3.4–9.4 k/uL),
platelets of 175 K/uL (140–410 K/uL), hemoglobin of 13.5 grams per deciliter
(gm/dL) (12–16 gm/dL), erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 4 millimeters per
hour (mm/hr) (0–20 mm/hr); thyroid-stimulation hormone of 1.15
microinternational units per milliliter (μIU/ML) (0.45–5.33
μIU/ML); and mononucleosis test negative.
Computed tomography (CT) of the neck and soft tissue revealed a large cystic
collection along the right neck deep to the sternocleidomastoid muscle and extending
inferiorly into the supraclavicular region with two smaller, adjacent cystic
collections. No aerodigestive tract mass or cervical lymphadenopathy was noted. The
primary consideration was a large lymphatic malformation. Outpatient otolaryngology
follow-up was arranged after they reviewed the CT results and concurred with the
presumed lymphatic malformation diagnosis.
The patient subsequently underwent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) that was
consistent with a lymphatic malformation . Approximately three weeks after discovery, otolaryngology
removed the mass, and pathology revealed a 68-gram 10.5 × 5.5 × 3.5
cm mass that was diagnosed as a lymphangioma.
After recovering from the surgery, the patient began physical therapy for her
shoulder. At 10 weeks post-surgery, the patient was continuing with physical therapy
and able to return to her collegiate crew participation.