In November 2017, a 48-year-old man was admitted to our hospital in Shenzhen, China. He presented with a mass at the dorsum of his right hand without systemic symptoms. Four months prior to the presentation, the patient had noticed the development of subcutaneous mass at the dorsum of the right wrist following a routine cleaning of his tropical fish tank. He noted that during the cleaning he had injured his right wrist but did not notice any external wounds. In the course of the following 4 months the lesion gradually increased in size. The patient first presented to an outside hospital where Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) revealed a 7.0 cm × 6.0 cm cystic mass at the dorsum of the right hand. Subsequent aspiration and drainage of the cyst yielded pus, but bacterial culture was not performed. The patient was empirically treated with 1-month course of oral cephalosporin. However, despite drainage, the cystic mass recurred and the patient was referred to our hospital for further management.
Further history revealed a 10 kg weight gain in the preceding 5 years. He had no constitutional symptoms and no personal and contact history of pulmonary tuberculosis.
The patient had a 5-year history of poorly controlled hypertension requiring amlodipine, furosemide, and spironolactone. He also reported long-standing right ulnar nerve palsy following an accident in 1996. He was a non-smoker and non-drinker. He had no history of recreational drug use and no recent travel history. He denied other animal exposure besides fish tank cleaning. He denied the use of over-the-counter medications, including oral steroids or other immunosuppressive agents.
On presentation to our hospital, the mass over the dorsum of the right wrist was 7.0 cm × 6.0 cm in size . The mass was surgically debrided and tenosynovitis with extensive inflammatory granulation tissue and pus was noted at the time of the operation. Postoperative healing of the surgical wound was poor despite adequate debridement, and the possibility of atypical infection was considered.
Ten days after incision and debridement, physical examination of the patient revealed a moon-shaped face with facial plethora, prominent supraclavicular fat pads, truncal obesity, and wide purplish abdominal striae. The right hand was edematous with multiple ecchymoses and serous exudates , and without evidence of erythema, warmth, and tenderness. There was no palpable trochlear or axillary lymphadenopathy. His body mass index was 21.5 kg/m2.
Laboratory examination showed an elevated white blood cell count (11,870 cells/μL), neutrophil count (10,270 cells/μL), and lymphocyte count (740 cells/μL), but normal platelet count (342,000 cells/μL), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (32 mm/h), C-reactive protein (8.7 mg/L), fasting serum glucose level (6.4 mmol/L) and sodium level (143 mmol/L). The potassium level was low (2.44 mmol/L). Further laboratory testing revealed a high morning cortisol level (35.9 μg/dL) and low ACTH level (< 1.00 pg/mL). A computed tomography scan of the abdomen showed an enlarged right adrenal gland . The diagnosis of ACTH-independent Cushing’s syndrome secondary to a right adrenal adenoma was made.
Histology of the excised cystic mass showed non-caseating granulomas surrounding isolated foreign bodies with nonspecific chronic inflammation . Ziehl–Neelsen, Periodic Acid-Schiff, and methenamine silver stains were negative. The operative tissue was negative for AFB smear and TB DNA. The operative tissue was sent to the Tuberculosis Reference Center of Shenzhen, with M. szulgai grown from Löwenstein-Jensen medium following 14 days of incubation in BACTEC MGIT 960 system. Susceptibility testing of the strain was not performed according to protocol.
The diagnosis of cutaneous M. szulgai infection was based on a positive culture in combination with histopathology demonstrating granuloma formation surrounding foreign bodies without caseation. The right adrenal adenoma was excised and it was subsequently followed by replacement and tapering doses of steroid. Patient was concomitantly started on anti-mycobacterial treatment, with a combination of rifampin 600 mg once daily, clarithromycin 500 mg twice daily, levofloxacin 500 mg once daily and ethambutol 1 g once daily for 6 months. The patient tolerated anti-mycobacterial treatment well with no notable side-effects. There was significant improvement of clinical symptoms following the initiation of treatment. There were no signs of relapse one year after cessation of anti-mycobacterial treatment.