A 21 year-old man with a history of granulomatosis with polyangiitis on home haemodialysis presented to the emergency department with 12 h of fatigue, several episodes of watery diarrhea and nausea but no emesis. He reported chills, diaphoresis, light-headedness and fever as well as tenderness over his tunnelled catheter side. He suffered from chronic arthralgia in his knees. Otherwise he denied cough, sputum production or haemoptysis, sore throat, abdominal pain, headache or rashes. His tunnelled catheter had been replaced over a wire 3 days prior due to a small hole in one of the ports. The patient reported that the tenderness over the catheter site was usual after replacement.
His previous medical history included granulomatosis with polyangiitis causing end-stage renal disease, subglottic stenosis, pericarditis, central nervous system vasculitis, pulmonary haemorrhage, atrial thrombus and deep vein thrombosis. He also reported depression and low testosterone. He had undergone two previous renal transplants, the most recent 6 months prior to presentation for which he had received tocilizumab, alemtuzumab, mycofenolate mofetil, tacrolimus and prednisone. Both transplants were complicated by acute rejection and both native and graft nephrectomies had been performed. He was now established on nightly home hemodialysis five times weekly via a tunnelled left internal jugular catheter. He denied smoking, alcohol or drug use. Medications prior to admission included topical gentamicin ointment around the catheter entry site and he reported previously developing an itchy rash with penicillins.
The patient appeared chronically unwell with mild distress. His pulse was 135 beats per minute, blood pressure 82/39 mmHg, oxygen saturations via finger probe 95% on room air with a temperature of 103.2 F. Examination was notable for tenderness over the tunnelled catheter site without overlying erythema or purulent drainage. Jugular venous pressure was estimated at 6 cm of water.
Laboratory results on admission were notable for white cell count of 3400/mm3. Chest radiograph showed no evidence of acute cardiopulmonary disease and a tunnelled left internal jugular catheter terminating over the right atrium.
The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit and placed empirically on vancomycin and aztreonam due to his penicillin allergy. A single dose of gentamicin 3 mg/kg was administered after gram-negative rods were identified in the blood cultures and cautious fluid boluses were given. The patient declined central line or arterial line placement. His midodrine was increased to 10 mg three times daily and he was started on norepinephrine via peripheral intravenous catheter. His haemodynamic parameters, fever chart and antibiotics administered are shown in Fig. . After 12 h, the patient was alert and oriented, his hands and feet were warm and lactate 0.5 mmol/L. Norepinephrine was discontinued. Initial blood cultures drawn in the emergency department were reported as positive with gram-negative rods growing in the aerobic and anaerobic bottles with time to positivity of 15 h. Speciation was performed using matrix assisted laser desorption/ionization –time of flight (MALDI-TOF) revealing Pasteurella multocida sensitive to erythromycin (minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) 4mcg/mL), moxifloxacin (MIC 0.023 mcg/mL), penicillin G (MIC 0.064 mcg/mL) and tetracycline (0.75 mcg/mL). Peripheral and central venous catheter blood cultures drawn 12 h after admission were negative.
Further history from the patient revealed that the patient’s kittens played with his tunnelled catheter with a bite leading to the small puncture in one of the ports prior to admission. He was initially switched to intravenous moxifloxacin after susceptibilities were known then ultimately ceftazidime 1 g after dialysis 5 times weekly with gentamicin catheter locks. The choice of ceftazidime was based on ease of dosing with dialysis. He was discharged on day 4. He completed 2 weeks of antibiotics with surveillance blood cultures drawn 5 and 13 days after completion remaining negative.