The patient was a 55 year old male with iron deficiency anemia and no family history of colon cancer. His work up included an esophagogastroduodenoscopy and colonoscopy, which revealed a sigmoid adenocarcinoma and a questionable mass in the cecum. A computed tomography (CT) scan of his chest, abdomen and pelvis did not indicate additional disease. His carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level was 1.6 ng/mL. In early 2007, the patient underwent a sigmoid resection and right hemicolectomy with primary anastomosis. The final pathology confirmed a diagnosis of T3N0M0 adenocarcinoma with seven negative lymph nodes in the sigmoid colon and a benign polyp in the cecum.
After establishing the diagnosis of stage IIA sigmoid cancer, the patient was offered chemotherapy as part of a clinical trial, but declined. At three months he noticed right shoulder pain, and at five months he noticed a small, golf-ball sized mass. Eight months after his surgery, he presented to his primary care physician who immediately referred him to an orthopedic surgeon. His initial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a 10 × 10 cm mass originating from his right scapula. A core needle biopsy was performed, revealing adenocarcinoma consistent with a colorectal primary. His CEA level at this point was 1480 ng/mL. A hybrid CT/PET (positron emission tomography) scan as well as additional lab work did not identify any additional focus of metastasis.
The patient and his doctors elected to treat the metastasis with chemotherapy and radiation. He was started on radiotherapy with radiosensitization using Capecitabine followed by chemotherapy with FOLFOX (infusional 5-fluorouracil, leucovorin, and oxaliplatin) and Bevacizumab. After 12 cycles, the patient developed significant side effects, and the regimen was changed to FOLFIRI (infusional 5-fluorouracil, leucovorin, and irinotecan).
Serial CT and MRI scans during the chemotherapy demonstrated increasing size of the mass. Twenty months after his initial surgery, the patient noticed a decline in his arm function while his pain continued to increase. At this point, his MRI showed a 12 × 15 cm mass, his CEA level was 484 ng/mL and his alkaline phosphatase was 183 IU/L. Another hybrid CT/PET scan in late 2008 again demonstrated no additional focus of metastasis, but did show close proximity of the tumor to the chest wall.
The patient's oncologist referred him to our center, and forequarter amputation with possible chest wall reconstruction was recommended. A month after the CT/PET scan, the surgical oncologist removed the patient's right arm and scapula, but was able to avoid resecting the chest wall . A plastic surgeon provided reconstruction using a musculocutaneous flap. Final pathology demonstrated negative margins. The patient healed well without incident and is working with physical therapy. Six months following the surgery, his CEA level was 1.6 ng/mL and has remained low on subsequent follow-up visits. The most recent information is from mid-2011, where the CEA level was determined to be 1.5 ng/mL, and a CT was negative for any evidence of metastasis.