A 55-year-old Caucasian man presented to our facility with acute collapse against a background of memory difficulties over the previous six months. He was a smoker but had no chronic illness and was on no regular medications. Initial physical examination was normal. He scored 24 out of 30 on the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MOCA): he lost four points on delayed recall, and one point on each of language fluency and orientation domains. Although the collapse was not witnessed, our patient had no memory of the fall and a differential diagnosis of seizure versus syncope was made. The results of hematological, biochemical and cardiovascular investigations were normal. An electroencephalogram (EEG) showed non-specific irregular slowing without epileptiform features. An initial CT scan of the brain showed a right frontal gliosis, probably related to prior trauma. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan performed on the second day of his admission revealed high T2 signal intensity and atrophy within the right frontal area consistent with the gliosis, but there was also high T2 signal intensity in bilateral mesial temporal areas . A lumbar puncture was performed and the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) revealed 16 cells/μL for white blood cells (WBCs) (100 percent mononuclear cells) and elevated protein level (77mg/dl). The CSF glucose level was normal and the results of a Gram stain were negative.
In view of his burgeoning cognitive problems and MRI findings, the possibility of a paraneoplastic (PN) process was considered. A serological screen for PN antibodies was conducted and a CT scan of the thorax, abdomen and pelvis (CT TAP) as well as 18F-FDG PET/CT of the body and brain were obtained. A PET scan of the brain revealed a focus of intensely increased 18-FDG uptake limited to the head of the right hippocampus on a background of globally decreased 18-FDG uptake .
At this point, at insistence of his family, our patient revealed a history of homosexual contact. Both his blood and CSF were tested for syphilis: his serum serology gave positive results on enzyme immunoassay (EIA), treponemal IgM and Treponema pallidum particle agglutination assay (TPPA). His CSF also tested positive for TPPA. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and hepatitis serology results were negative. A diagnosis of neurosyphilis was made and treatment was initiated. He was treated with penicillin G procaine 2.4 million units intra-muscularly daily plus probenecid 500mg four times daily orally, both for 14 days.
Three months later our patient was evaluated at a follow up appointment and was found to have improved cognitive function (scoring 27 out of 30 on repeat MOCA testing). A repeat MRI scan of the brain, performed two months after completing the penicillin treatment course, showed marked improvement in the previously identified bilateral hyperintensities, which were replaced by atrophy and a repeat PET brain scan two days after the repeat MRI showed normal 18-FDG uptake in the right hippocampus .