A 16-year-old boy with a history of the right-sided Bell’s Palsy presented with complaints of a severe underbite and excessive drooling on the left side. These symptoms were progressive over several years to the point that the patient could not comfortably close his mouth. The patient had an unremarkable dental history with no previous oral trauma/procedures. On examination, the patient had facial asymmetry at rest, with the normal function of the facial nerve bilaterally. The facial sensation was intact symmetrically in the V1, V2, and V3 distributions to light touch. He had nystagmus on the right lateral gaze and mild weakness of the left masseter. There was no other indication of brainstem or cranial nerve dysfunction. The remainder of the physical examination was normal.
A computed tomography (CT) scan maxillofacial without contrast was performed, demonstrating a 5.2 × 6.6 × 4.3 cm intra-axial mass with compression and displacement of the brainstem . There was slight dilatation of the third and lateral ventricles representing mild obstructive hydrocephalus and erosion of the base of the skull involving the carotid canal, foramen rotundum, pterygoid canal, foramen ovale, middle cranial fossa floor, and the internal auditory canal . An underbite occlusion was noted with associated atrophy of the left masticator, mylohyoid, and anterior belly of digastric muscles and underdeveloped left mandible body and ramus .
CT angiography (CTA) of the head and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain with and without contrast was performed for further evaluation. CTA demonstrated bony remodeling of the left sphenoid and petrous portion of the temporal bones related to the mass with external compression (approximately 50% narrowing) of the cavernous and petrous segment of the left internal carotid artery (ICA) . MRI brain showed a 5.2 × 7.8 × 5.1 cm heterogeneously extra-axial enhancing mass centered in the left mesial temporal region with involvement of the skull base and left foramen ovale, rotundum and spinosum, encasement and moderate narrowing of the left ICA, mild obstructive hydrocephalus, and marked compression of the brainstem . In addition, there was associated atrophy of the left masticator muscles with underdevelopment of the left mandible body and ramus .
The patient underwent a left orbitozygomatic craniotomy for resection. Pathology of the resected tumor was consistent with the World Health Organization Grade I Schwannoma. Postoperative imaging demonstrated near-complete resection with a thin rim of the residual tumor along the lateral dural margin of the left cavernous sinus/lesser sphenoid wing and at the floor of the left middle cranial fossa extending posteriorly to the roof of the remodeled left petrous temporal bone . He was evaluated by occupational therapy, physical therapy, speech-language pathology, and physical medicine and rehabilitation physicians while inpatient and was discharged to inpatient rehabilitation on a postoperative day 16. The patient experienced the left cranial nerve IV, V, VI, and VII neuropathies, manifesting as abnormal left eye adduction and external rotation, absent left-sided corneal reflex, left-sided facial weakness, left-sided lagophthalmos, and dysarthria/slurred speech. On follow-up, the patient continues to show significant improvement in the left cranial nerve VI palsy and with improvement, though some residual impairment of the left cranial nerve IV, V, and VII function. Despite these deficits, he is functionally independent with normal breathing and swallowing function. Imaging at 12-month follow-up showed the stable residual tumor. He is currently enrolled in a community college in good standing.