A 62-year-old male with a relevant past medical history for an ischaemic cardiomyopathy had a St. Jude Quadra Assura CRT-D device placed in 2013 for continued left ventricular systolic dysfunction and dyssynchronous ventricular activation. After device implantation, he had significant improvement in his left ventricular systolic function. His ejection fraction improved from 25% to 45% with resolution of his symptoms to New York Heart Association Class I. The patient’s device went into elective replacement indicator mode in March of 2021, and an in-person interrogation revealed that his device was otherwise functioning well with normal impedances and pacing thresholds. The generator was electively exchanged in May of 2021 during an uncomplicated procedure; however, a routine remote transmission 2 weeks later was concerning for device malfunction .
It was initially unclear as to why this alert occurred so shortly after a generator change. Common complications that may cause an acute impedance rise after this procedure include a conductor fracture or connector problem (i.e. incomplete pin insertion into the header or header-lead pin mismatch). However, this was felt to be unlikely given that the patient underwent an uncomplicated generator change and he was otherwise asymptomatic. Other causes, such as lead dislodgement or lead perforation, were also felt to be improbable as this was solely a generator change and the leads were not significantly manipulated.
Further scrutiny of the remote download data, along with dialog from the patient, confirmed the underlying cause of these remote alerts. The patient had chosen to keep his old pulse generator after the replacement, and his remote monitor had not yet been replaced. His home monitor had unintentionally paired with this old device, and these remote download findings were imitating a complication within the newly implanted device. In-person visit the following day reflected a normal exam, and vitals and in-clinic device interrogation demonstrated that the device was in good functioning order. The patient subsequently obtained a new monitor that paired with his new device, and further remote transmissions over the next 18 months showed that the device was functioning well .