A 61-year-old Black African female, medically free, presented to the emergency department of a Military hospital in Khartoum, Sudan, with severe colicky abdominal pain and right iliac fossa swelling for 1 month. The pain was sudden onset, severe, intermittent, and colicky in the right iliac fossa, preventing her from doing her daily activities. It was localized, not radiating to other areas, aggravated by food intake and not relieved by analgesics. On further questioning, it was revealed that there were streaks of blood in her stool. However, there was no constipation, diarrhoea, or vomiting. The patient was experiencing loss of appetite and unintentional weight loss, about 15 kg, 3 months before her illness. Body mass index was 24.2. There was no fever, night sweats, or cardiopulmonary complaints. The patient has no history of a similar condition and had not been diagnosed with colon cancer, inflammatory bowel disease, irritable bowel disease or any recent evidence of pulmonary tuberculosis infection.
She has no family history of colon cancer; however, she has a history of breast cancer in the family. At the time, she was not on any medication or had any known allergies. She is a non-smoker and non-alcoholic.
On physical examination, the patient looks ill, conscious, vitally stable, not pale nor jaundiced and has no signs of dehydration.
Abdominal examination revealed a right iliac fossa mass, oval in shape, 12 × 10 cm, irregular surface, normal skin over it and no scars. The mass has a normal temperature, is tender, and is hard in consistency. It has well-defined edges, is mobile, not compressible or reducible, and not pulsatile. All hernia orifices are intact, and no lymph node enlargement. However, the rest of the abdominal examination was unremarkable, and the digital rectal examination was normal. Abdominal ultrasound was ordered and revealed the presence of colonic mass and multiple gall stones, but it was otherwise not remarkable.
Then computed tomography imaging abdomen was ordered and that showed a segment of bowel loop was seen invaginated into its proximal segment with bowel wall thickening in the ascending colon extending to the transverse colon, which confirmed the diagnosis of colo-colic intussusception. Also, multiple gall stones were elicited by the CT scan .
The patient has low serum sodium, potassium, total bilirubin and albumin levels. Serum CEA tumour marker was within normal ranges. Chest x-ray and echocardiography were normal.
So, an elective laparotomy was scheduled 2 days after the presentation. The patient was kept nil per mouth with full fluid maintenance, antibiotic, proton pump inhibitor, and prophylactic anticoagulant. An incision abdomen was opened through a midline, and a large mass was found, including the terminal ileum, the ileocecal valve, the appendix, the cecum and the ascending colon, which were invaginated in the transverse colon. Adhesions were found between the abdominal wall and the mass and were released, as colonic milking was unsuccessful. The surgeon decided to go for the right hemicolectomy and end-to-end anastomosis .
The cut section of the cecum showed a fungating mass of 6 × 5 × 3 cm .
The histopathological assessment confirmed the diagnosis of well-differentiated grade one adenocarcinoma with perforated muscularis mucosa only, Dukes stage B2. No evidence of lymph-vascular invasion. Furthermore, all the examined lymph nodes were free of neoplasm.
No complications were encountered post-operatively. The patient was discharged home after 5 days and seen after 2 weeks in the clinic in good condition. No evidence of synchronous colorectal cancer was observed by colonoscopy. Oncological follow-up was launched immediately and planned for chemotherapy. One month later the patient was seen in the clinic in a good condition clinically and all investigations lie within normal ranges.