The patient was a 40-year-old female who was admitted to our hospital after pulmonary nodules were detected incidentally, a year before presentation, in a chest CT. No cough, expectoration, chest tightness, shortness of breath, nausea, vomiting, low-grade fever, or night sweats were reported. On physical examination, her trachea was midline, and no deformities were noted in the thorax. Her breathing was stable and breath sounds were clear with no dry or wet rales; the activity of both the lungs was normal, and there was no obvious pleural friction. A plain chest CT scan showed a nodular high-density shadow, measuring approximately 8 mm in diameter, in the left lower lung. The lesion had clear borders, uneven internal density, and a low-density central vacuolar area . The left lower lung was partially resected by video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) was performed, and intra-operative frozen section pathological examination reported: “mesenchymal tumor of the left lower lung, the final result needs immunohistochemistry.” Post-operative histopathological diagnosis was a hemangioblastoma-like clear cell stromal tumor of the left lower lung. The patient was followed up regularly for 3 months after the surgery, with no recurrence or development of distant metastasis.
The specimen submitted was from a wedge resection of the left lower lung lobe. The report of the gross specimen examination described the tumor as follows: postoperative gross specimen, left lower lung; wedge resection specimen: 7.9 × 6.3 × 4.1 cm, located 3.8 cm from the fault edge, with a peripheral gray-brown area of 0.9 × 0.8 cm seen in the lung tissue. The section was described as gray-white to gray-brown, with holes and unclear borders.
Microscopic analysis showed that the tumor was composed of solid, slightly lobulated flake cells with consistent morphology, and scattered dilated vacuolar components within the cells. Tumor cells were noted to be of medium size, with unclear borders, and a bright cytoplasm. The nucleus was deeply stained, oval to spindle-shaped. The nucleolus was not visible, and no necrosis or mitosis was noted . Immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining results revealed the expression of vimentin, Transcription factor E3 (TFE3) (weak), CD34 (strong), and Ki-67 (only 2% expression). The specimen was negative for HMB45, melan-A, S-100, Syn, CgA, CD56, napsin A, TTF-1, CK (AE1/AE3), PAX8, GFAP, desmin, MSA, inhibin-α, CD31, F8, DOG1, STAT6, ERG, ER, CAIX, and CD10 . Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) staining was also negative. Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) showed none Yes-associated protein 1 (YAP1)-TFE3 gene fusions.