A 22-year-old Nepalese man, who did not smoke or use alcohol, presented as an outpatient to Neurology at Tribhuvan University Teaching Hospital with insidious onset of weakness of his right upper limb of more than 5 years’ duration. He initially noticed difficulty in sustaining his grip while holding objects in his hand, which slowly progressed to difficulty with his fine motor skills such as buttoning or unbuttoning, writing, combing his hair, and holding a spoon. He also noticed a tremor and a gradual reduction in the muscle bulk of his right hand. After 2 years of symptoms in his right hand, he had tremors in his left hand as well, but without any weakness. His symptoms were progressive for the first 3 years and static since then. There was no history of neck pain, numbness, tingling, or burning sensation. Our patient denied any loss of sensation, autonomic dysfunction, and changes in bowel or bladder habit. He did not give any history of any form of trauma, surgery, medicine intake, vaccination, and exposure to toxins/heavy metals. Our patient is now a bachelor-level student with a part-time occupation for the last 2 years as a salesman in a department store, and there is no family history of similar complaints or neurological disease. On admission to our hospital, his general condition was fair and his vital signs were stable: blood pressure of 100/70 mm Hg; pulse of 68/minute; temperature of 98 °F and his respiratory rate was 16/minute. On general examination, he was alert and well-oriented to time, place, and person. There was no jaundice, clubbing, cyanosis, lymphadenopathy, dehydration, pallor, and edema present. His spine had no abnormal curvatures, no tenderness or restricted movement. Bilateral chest findings were normal, his heart sounds were normal without murmur, and his abdomen was non-tender without organomegaly. On neurological examination, his higher mental functions, cranial nerves, coordination, sensations, and gait were normal. A neurological examination showed weakness and atrophy of his right hand with no involvement of muscles of the proximal arm. Atrophy was prominent in the first web space in the dorsum of his right hand . Muscle power was assessed by the Medical Research Council scale where weakness was observed on the right side: interossi (2/5), elbow flexon and extension (4/5), wrist flexon and extension (3/5), thenar and hypothenar were atrophied, but the brachioradialis was spared . The power of his left hand and forearm was normal. Tone was reduced around his right wrist and elbow. Minipolymyoclonus was present in the fingers of his bilateral upper limbs, less prominent on the left side. His deep tendon reflexes were bilaterally symmetrical and normal in his upper and lower limbs except the brisk reflex was noted in the right supinator. Sensation was intact and bilaterally symmetrical in his upper and lower limbs. The plantar reflex was normal; a bilaterally downward response and the Hoffman sign were absent in both upper limbs.
A complete blood count (hemoglobin, total leukocyte count, differential leukocyte count, and platelet count), blood urea, serum creatinine, serum electrolytes, liver function tests, thyroid function tests, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, creatine phosphokinase, viral serology markers (human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B and C virus, venereal disease research laboratory test), and a plain cervical spine X-ray were normal. Anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-double-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) antibodies, and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies were absent.
NCT showed features of motor axonal neuropathy with reduced compound motor action potential in the right median and ulnar nerve; however, it was normal in range on the left side. A neurogenic pattern of discharges along with fibrillation and fasciculations was noted in a needle EMG in the bilateral first dorsal interossei, and right biceps and triceps. A recent cervical MRI flexion with contrast showed no abnormality in the visualized spinal cord, dural space, or cord displacement. A previous MRI had been done 2 years ago, which was also normal.
Hirayama disease was diagnosed on the basis of clinical history, examination, NCT, and EMG studies, but the characteristic findings were absent on the MRI (1.5 Tesla). Our patient was advised to use a cervical collar along with cervical extension and distal upper limb physiotherapy and asked to follow up at regular intervals. Because of geographic and financial constraints, our patient could not come for follow-up. However, at the 3-month telephone follow-up, our patient felt that his muscle strength was better than before, and there was improvement in his fine motor activities.