A 73-year-old man was referred to our hospital with bilateral direct inguinal hernia. A trans-abdominal preperitoneal (TAPP) repair was performed using a polypropylene mesh. Operative findings revealed that the hernia content did not include the urinary bladder and that the mesh, which was fixed in the preperitoneal space, was thoroughly dissected. Furthermore, the urinary bladder was not exposed, and the mesh was not in direct contact with it. This mesh was fixed to the lateral border of the rectus abdominis muscle, transverse abdominal fascia, Cooper's ligament, and pubic tuberosity using an absorbable fixation device. The peritoneum was closed with continuous sutures using a 3–0 absorbable braid thread. There were no notable complications during peritoneal closure. The postoperative course was uneventful. One month later, the patient noticed a painful induration in the right inguinal region; computed tomography (CT) revealed fluid collection in this region . The patient had no fever. Blood tests revealed a normal white blood cell (WBC) count and C-reactive protein (CRP) level. Three months after surgery, CT revealed an increase in the fluid collection . CT scans taken both 1 and 3 months after the surgery also revealed an interval between the fluid collection and the bladder, indicating no obvious continuity between them. Serial aspirations of the fluid collection were performed, and no organism was identified on aspirate culture. The fluid had a pus-like appearance; it was neither bloody nor serous, yellowish, and clear that would have otherwise indicated a hematoma or a lymphocele, respectively. Suspecting mesh-related infections, we suggested a surgical intervention; however, as the painful induration subsided following fluid aspiration, the patient wished to undergo a follow-up without mesh removal.
Seven months after the aspiration (10 months after the surgery), he experienced another episode of painful induration in the right inguinal region. While blood examination continued to show normal WBC and CRP levels, CT revealed fluid collection in the right inguinal region . We performed an aspiration, and the aspirate was purulent in appearance as before, being neither bloody nor lymphatic. No organism was found by aspirated fluid culture. Urinalysis was negative for all items including occult blood, WBCs, and nitrite. A urine sedimentation test was also negative for all parameters including red blood cells, WBCs, transitional epithelium, and bacteria. Although the painful induration subsided after aspiration of the fluid collection, he developed gross hematuria and dysuria a month later and visited a urologist. Cystoscopy revealed granulation on the right urinary bladder wall, and a biopsy revealed a dysplastic urothelium. Therefore, the patient was referred to our hospital. Despite improvement in dysuria without any intervention, gross hematuria persisted. Although we suggested mesh removal, the patient refused surgery as his urinary symptoms were improving. Considering the possibility of a malignant tumor, the patient underwent a second cystoscopy that indicated a fistula in the right urinary bladder wall that was discharging purulent fluids . These purulent fluids were similar to what we had aspirated previously. Furthermore, the fluid drained profusely upon compression of the right inguinal region. Histological examination of the biopsy specimen indicated granulation, but no malignancy. Culture testing revealed no bacteria, and there was no evidence of mesh erosion. Hematuria improved without therapeutic or surgical intervention 3 months after the second cystoscopy. Furthermore, 5 months after the second cystoscopy, CT revealed a reduction in fluid collection, and cystoscopy indicated that the fistula was scarred . No further complications such as hematuria, dysuria, or mesh erosion in the urinary bladder were observed during a 42-month follow-up period.