We present a case of a 48 years old female patient clinically diagnosed as T1, N0, M0 (clinical TNM) ductal breast carcinoma. The patient underwent diagnostic mammography (27.03.2013) and the results presented mastopathy with diffuse monomorphic calcifications. No pathological findings were detected (ACR type 4; BIRADS 2). Ultrasonography was performed the next day and it revealed a 1 cm hypoechoic formation, without pathological vascularization, in the left breast, in the lower medial quadrant, parasternal (BIRADS 4). There were no enlarged axillary lymph nodes on palpation or ultrasonography. Core biopsy was performed (29.03.2013) that showed presence of ductal breast carcinoma. The patient was admitted to our Institute (3.04.2013) for scintigraphic SLN detection. We used the dual method of scintigraphic SLN detection using 99mTc-SENTI-SCINT and blue dye injection.
The results revealed double drainage of the radiotracer, primary towards the intramammary lymph nodes and secondary towards the axillary lymph nodes. We were able to detect 2 SLN, the first one in the region of a. mammaria interna and the second one in the axillary region. ( and ) Drainage of the blue dye was towards the internal mammary region and no drainage towards the axillary region was observed.
Radioguided surgical procedure was performed and both SLN, the internal mammary and the one in the axillary region, were extirpated. Ex tempore pathohistological analysis presented no micrometastases in the axillary SLN and micrometastases > 0.2 mm in the internal mammary SLN. The final postoperative histopathological evaluation confirmed these results and the immunohistochemical findings presented ER+, PR-, HER2+. Taking this into consideration, and also the negative tumor markers, negative ultrasonography results and negative bone scan results, the postoperative TNM classification was pT1 N1b M0. The operative procedure included sentinel lymph node biopsy of both axillar lymph node and lymph node around arteria mamaria interna and quadrantectomy, without radical axillary lymphadenectomy, considering the fact that the SLN in the axillary region was negative on ex tempore pathohistological examination. Since the internal mammary SLN was positive for micrometastases, the patient was admitted to the University Clinic of Radiotherapy and Oncology for adjuvant treatment.