A 66-year-old man was diagnosed with castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) and treated with enzalutamide followed by six cycles of docetaxel chemotherapy. However, his serum prostate specific antigen level increased to 899 ng/mL, so he was diagnosed as docetaxel resistant CRPC. Figure shows bone metastases. The patient was treated for bone metastases with 37.5 Gy/15 fr to the thoracic spine (Th 7) as a local radiotherapy from February 2016 to March 2016. The radiation induced only mild dermatitis as an adverse event. Moreover, internal fixation of the left femur was performed to prevent pathological fractures due to metastasis to the left femur on August 2016. He also received six cycles of intravenous injections of radium-223 (50 kBq/kg) once every 4 weeks from September 2016 to January 2017.
On admission in April 2017, the patient was started on cabazitaxel at 22.5 mg/m2 with proactive management of adverse events, including the use of a prophylactic long-acting granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) and an oral empirical broad-spectrum antimicrobial agent (sitafloxacin hydrate, a new-generation, broad-spectrum oral fluoroquinolone that is very active against many Gram-positive, Gram-negative and anaerobic bacteria) to prevent febrile neutropenia. On day 10, grade 4 neutropenia and febrile neutropenia were observed. He was treated with an intravenous broad-spectrum antimicrobial agent (cefepime, a broad-spectrum cephalosporin with enhanced coverage against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria), which resulted in cessation of the fever and increased neutrophil count, although sputum and blood cultures revealed negative. On day 18, he developed a secondary fever of 38 °C again despite neutrophil count of 3000/μL, so antimicrobial administration (cefepime) was restarted due to a suspected infection. Three days later, he complained of dyspnea and had a pulse oximetric saturation (SpO2) of 80% while breathing room air. The serum Krebs von den Lungen-6 (KL-6) and surfactant protein (SP-D) levels were 744 U/mL and 147 ng/mL (normal ranges, < 500 U/ml and < 100 ng/ml, respectively). The serum levels of procalcitonin, endotoxin concentration and (1,3)-beta-D-glucan were not elevated. Chest X-ray showed interstitial opacities indicative of inflammation in the irradiated field of the both lungs . Chest computed tomography (CT) showed interstitial lung disease with ground glass opacities in the irradiated field of both lungs . These characteristic image findings could have been associated with drug toxicity, due to the treatment of thoracic radiation therapy followed by cabazitaxel.
The intravenous steroid pulse therapy was started at a methylprednisolone of 1000 mg a day for 3 days, followed by prednisolone at 1.0 mg/kg of body mass per day for a week. The patient improved and dyspnea disappeared. SpO2 showed 95% while breathing room air. The ground-glass opacities had also improved . The dosage of prednisolone was gradually reduced every week. The follow-up observation is still ongoing.