The patient was a 51-year-old male from southern China who was hospitalized with cough, expectoration, intermittent afternoon and nighttime fever, cervical lymph node enlargement for one month, fatigue, night sweats, shortness of breath, and emaciation. He had a history of diabetes for more than 1 year and had good blood glucose control with insulin therapy. He had been a smoker for 6 years and had a previous excision of a left lung abscess but denied a history of contact with bamboo rats. On admission, the patient had a fever (highest temperature 40.3°C). The patient had multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the neck and right supraclavicular fossa, the largest of which was 2 cm×1 cm in size in the right supraclavicular fossa. It was hard and fixed and had a clear boundary with the surrounding area without tenderness. There were subcutaneous nodules under the xiphoid process (2 cm×2 cm) and on the outside of his right thigh (4 cm×4 cm), which were hard and fixed without swelling and tenderness. The liver and spleen were not palpable under his ribs. His serum white blood cell (WBC) count, neutrophil ratio (NEUT), lymphocyte ratio, hemoglobin level, platelet count (PLT), procalcitonin (PCT) level, C-reactive protein (CRP) level, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) were 24.85×109/L,87.30%,6.50%,79.8 g/L,410.00×109/L,1.47 ng/mL,167.78 mg/L, and 139 mm/h, respectively. His serum potassium, albumin, globulin, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), creatinine, immunoglobulinG, complement C3, and complement C4 levels were 3.2 mmol/L, 20.1 g/L, 49.5 g/L, 197 U/L, 80 µmol/L,21.55 g/L, 1.08 g/L, and 0.26 g/L, respectively. EB virus shell antigen (EBVCA-IGA) and EB virus core antigen (EBNA1-IGA) were negative. No abnormal monoclonal bands were found in serum-immobilized electrophoresis. Tumor markers, immunoglobulinA, immunoglobulinM and total T lymphocytes were in the normal ranges. The blood and sputum cultures were negative, and the patient was HIV-negative. Lung function showed normal lung ventilation, a negative diastolic test, and moderate diffuse dysfunction. Chest CT showed diffuse nodular lesions in both lungs with mediastinal lymph node enlargement .
He was suspected of having bacterial pneumonia and tuberculosis. After receiving piperacillin sodium tazobactam sodium + azithromycin, imipenem, moxifloxacin + cefathiamidine, and diagnostic anti-tuberculosis treatment for 2 weeks (isoniazid 0.3 g qd + rifampicin 0.45 g qd + ethambutol 0.75 g qd + Pyrazinamide 1.0 g qd), the patient’s condition deteriorated, and he had recurrent hyperpyrexia. His hemoglobin, albumin and other indicators then decreased significantly (hemoglobin 56.1 g/L, albumin 15.9 g/L). At that time, the competent doctor completed a right supraclavicular lymph node and bone marrow puncture biopsy after considering the possibility of the patient having a malignant tumor and other diseases. A background of complex inflammatory cells scattered with heterogeneous Hodgkin-like large cells was found in the histological examination of the lymph node. Immunohistochemistry revealed that the heteromorphic large cells were CD30(+), CD20(-), PAX5(±), and CD3(-), and the in situ hybridization results were EBER (-). Bone marrow biopsy in this patient suggested mild hyperplasia of bone marrow hematopoietic tissue, with a small number of naive plasma cells present away from the trabecular bone (no significant atypia) and local fibrous hyperplasia with plasma cell hyperplasia (approximately 20%). Immunohistochemistry results showed MPO (+), CD34 (+), and CD38 (+), and Masson staining showed mild fibrous hyperplasia . The patient was diagnosed with NSHL (Stage II, Group B) . The patient refused chemotherapy, radiotherapy and targeted therapy. After treatment with prednisone acetate tablets 10 mg three times a day, the patient’s cervical lymph nodes decreased in size, but the patient’s condition progressed, with continued hyperpyrexia. A repeat chest CT showed an increase in both of the lung lesions on January 15, 2018 . The clinicians then considered that the patient may have other diseases in addition to NSHL. A bronchoscopic examination showed that the trachea and the walls of the left and right main bronchus were scattered with small nodules, and the nodules were partially fused near the carina . Histopathology of nodules of lung mucosa at the right main bronchial orifice showed local chronic inflammatory disease accompanied by acute inflammation and small foci of suppurative necrosis. T. marneffei was found on the lung tissue culture . Prednisone acetate tablets and antibacterial drugs were discontinued on January 18, 2018. The patient’s temperature returned to normal, the patient had no cough or expectoration, and the subcutaneous nodules decreased after antifungal therapy (after 14 days of intravenous amphotericin B liposome, the patient was switched to 6 days of intravenous voriconazole, followed by oral voriconazole tablets). Reexamination of his WBC, NEUT, hemoglobin, PLT, albumin, and globulin yielded results of 11.20×109/L, 76.0%, 72.9 g/L, 280.4×109/L, 30.7 g/L, and 40.0 g/L, respectively. A chest CT showed that both lung lesions and the mediastinal lymph nodes were decreased in size on February 5, 2018 . The patient was diagnosed with NSHL (Stage II, Group B) and disseminated TSM (in the blood, lungs, skin, and subcutaneous tissue). After the patient was discharged on February 6, 2018, he continued taking voriconazole tablets orally and changed to itraconazole capsule treatment on June 12, 2018. He was hospitalized for “fever” on June 29, 2018. No signs of T. marneffei relapse were found on clinical examination, blood culture, chest CT or bone marrow biopsy during hospitalization, but he insisted on oral itraconazole treatment. Finally, Salmonella was cultured in the blood of the patient, and he was diagnosed with sepsis. After treatment, the patient was discharged, but he still suffered from recurrent fever and died in September 2018.