A 72-year-old male patient was admitted to our hospital because of hematochezia lasting 7 months, a history of open appendectomy with Mc Burney’s incision 20 years ago, and a history of treatment for pulmonary tuberculosis 30 years ago. The patient had symptoms on admission, including abdominal pain, weight loss, anemia, constipation, bloody stools, and loss of appetite. Clinical examination revealed a palpable tumor in the abdomen in the left iliac fossa. The current general condition of the patient with the ASA scoring system was ASA1, BMI was 17.78. The patient had three negative Acid-Fast Bacillus tests. The computed tomography (CT) scan detected an irregular thickening of the sigmoid colon, and the tumor’s tissue protruded into the colon’s lumen with intense heterogeneous enhancement, causing incomplete narrowing. Chest X-ray and CT scan showed old fibrous scar lesions on both sides of the apex of the lungs. A pulmonary function measurement was moderate obstructive syndrome. A colonoscopy revealed a sigmoid colon tumor occupying three-fourth of the colon’s circumference, and histopathological results showed invasive adenocarcinoma. The patient underwent laparoscopic left colectomy with complete mesocolic excision. An end-to-end stapled anastomosis was performed. The operative time was 130 min, and the intraoperative blood loss was 30 ml. The patient had no complications during surgery. A 20 Fr soft polyvinyl chloride surgical drain was placed in the pouch of Douglas through the incision of the right iliac fossa trocar site.
During the postoperative time, he presented with delayed gastrointestinal function recovery. The patient chewed gum on the first operative day to return to bowel function. On the fourth day, he began to pass gas, the abdominal pain decreased, and the visual analog score (VAS) gradually decreased from 6 on the first day to 3 on the fourth day after surgery (scale of 10). The patient had not defecated, the abdomen was not distended, the abdominal ultrasound showed no abnormality, and the small bowel was 22 mm in diameter. The drain output was light yellow to clear on the postoperative days. However, the drain outputs were changed and gradually decreased from about 150 ml on the first to 25 ml on the fourth postoperative day. The amount increased again on day 5 to about 100 ml and 400 ml of clear fluid on day 6, then gradually decreased. Postoperative day 7, the patient got more abdominal pain, presented with abdominal distension, and no defecation. Physical examination revealed moderate tenderness at the hypogastric region. The patient was diagnosed with a suspected anastomosis leakage. A complete blood count (CBC) was taken, and he had a normal-range white blood cell count of 9.0. He had an electrolyte imbalance with a K+ of 2.48. The albumin and protein blood tests were average values. Abdominal ultrasound showed a normal bowel caliber, and no fluid accumulation around the anastomosis was found. Drainage monitoring showed no abnormal discharge. Therefore, the patient was observed with rehydration electrolytes and total parenteral nutrition.
On the ninth day after surgery, the patient had more abdominal pain, could not pass gas and defecate, and the abdomen was more distended. The abdominal ultrasound revealed a dilated small intestine of 35 mm and suspected small bowel obstruction. Abdominal CT scan showed a small bowel obstruction with a diameter of 47 mm, no fluid collection around the anastomosis, a little fluid next to the ascending colonic sulcus, and abdominal drainage that was free of fluid. Specialists worked together to review the CT scan images. The images showed a dilated loop of the small intestine above the transition site with a drainage sonde and no dilation of the loop below the sonde . The patient was diagnosed with an early bowel obstruction due to the drain sonde that had probably compressed the small bowel. The patient was indicated to remove the sonde. He could pass gas and defecate again the next day and was relieved of the abdominal distention. The patient then resumed oral feeding, returned to a stable postoperative state, and was discharged early.