A 20-year-old previously healthy Caucasian male presented to the emergency department (ED) as a transfer from an outside hospital for further evaluation of abdominal pain, watery diarrhoea, nausea, vomiting, fever, chills, cough, and shortness of breath. Six days before admission, the patient was evaluated at an outside ED, where he was prescribed oral ciprofloxacin and metronidazole for colitis, but symptoms continued to progress. The abdominal pain was achy, diffuse, and worst in the right lower quadrant. He experienced watery diarrhoea, ∼10–15 bowel movements per day. In the ED, the patient had a high-grade fever of 102.7 F with accompanying chills and sweating. The patient was tachycardic (heart rate 130 b.p.m.) [see for Electrocardiography (EKG)] but normotensive with an oxygen saturation of 94% on arrival. On physical exam, the posterior oropharynx was erythematous with exudates. The patient had enlarged, tender, bilateral cervical and left inguinal lymphadenopathy, and diffuse abdominal tenderness. The patient was also noted to have a significant scleral injection with mild conjunctivitis bilaterally. Before transferring to our facility, the patient had a negative SARS-CoV-2 Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) by nasopharyngeal swab and a negative rapid antigen test in our ED. Lab work showed leukocytosis with lymphopenia, thrombocytopenia, elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) at 27.4 mg/dL, low fibrinogen level 133 mg/dL, and D-Dimer at 2270 ng/mL FEU. Infectious workup was negative, including blood and urine cultures, stool enteric panel by PCR, and a respiratory viral panel. Computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis indicated right-sided colitis, right mesenteric lymphadenopathy, and mild hepatosplenomegaly (see ). His chest X-ray (CXR) was normal. On admission, the patient was started on piperacillin–tazobactam for suspected colitis. Over the next 24 h, the patient remained tachycardic with intermittent fevers >102 F with the development of hypotension that was initially responsive to intravenous (IV) fluid boluses. He was subsequently transferred to the medical intensive care unit (MICU) for possible septic shock and was started on IV norepinephrine. The patient developed mild respiratory distress with a drop in oxygen saturation to 85%, requiring nasal cannula. A repeat CXR revealed bilateral pulmonary oedema, raising concern for cardiac dysfunction (see ). Pro-brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) was elevated at >30 000 pg/mL. Troponin T high sensitivity was also increased at 148.9 ng/L. Trans-thoracic echocardiography showed dilated cardiac chambers, reduced left ventricular (LV) systolic function of 40–44% with mild global hypokinesis, normal right ventricular systolic function, normal aortic root, and small pericardial effusion with no evidence of tamponade physiology. All visualized valves appeared normal in structure and motion. Colour and Doppler analysis showed mild pulmonic and tricuspid regurgitation (see Videos 1 and 2). This raised the concern for possible myocarditis. The infectious disease team was consulted, and on repeat discussion with the patient, it was found that he had been diagnosed with COVID-19 8 weeks prior. Given that the patient was not improving, the constellation of acute colitis, myocarditis, lymphadenopathy, conjunctival injection, and negative infectious workup, the diagnosis of MIS-C/MIS-A was concluded. Based on currently available data and case reports, the patient was treated with intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIG) 2 g/kg (dose was divided into 1 g/kg q24 h for two doses due to his depressed ejection fraction) and IV methylprednisolone 125 mg IV q12 h. Within 4 h of receiving the medications, the patient’s heart rate normalized, he defervesced, and he reported improvement in his abdominal pain. Over the next 24 h, he was weaned off norepinephrine and, the following day, was transferred out of the MICU. This confirmed the MIS-C/MIS-A diagnosis after adequate response to the treatment. After 5 days, his IV methylprednisolone was transitioned to oral prednisone 60 mg/day and tapered over 3 weeks. Regarding his heart failure with reduced ejection fraction, he was started on IV furosemide and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor. He was discharged on lisinopril, carvedilol, and furosemide for heart failure. The patient was seen at follow-up after 3 months and has a complete resolution of symptoms, and was scheduled for trans-thoracic echocardiogram (TTE) but has not been done yet.