A 73-year-old woman had been treated for diffuse SSc with interstitial pneumonia by prednisolone 5 mg per day in the Department of Internal Medicine. Blood tests were positive for anti-Scl-70 antibody and negative for anti-centromere antibody and anti-RNA polymerase III antibody. The patient had complained of chronic dysphagia and reflux symptoms. Although annual follow-up with endoscopy had first detected an epiphrenic esophageal diverticulum four years ago, the diverticulum was small and asymptomatic. Endoscopy was repeated because of exacerbation of symptoms and onset of postprandial epigastric pain and revealed an enlarged esophageal diverticulum, for which the patient was referred to our department for surgery.
Contrast esophagography and enhanced computed tomography revealed a large 50-mm diverticulum in the right wall of the lower thoracic esophagus (a, b). Esophageal dilatation was mild. The diverticulum was located 5 cm above the esophagogastric junction . Upper endoscopy showed a diverticulum in the lower thoracic esophagus with internal residue and mild reflux esophagitis (c).
High-resolution esophageal manometry revealed persistent high internal pressure in the lower esophagus, which was exacerbated during swallowing . Increased internal pressure was also observed in the area consistent with a diverticulum. As the integrated relaxation pressure was high (median: 41.3 mm Hg) and esophageal peristalsis was observed. This finding was categorized as EGJ outflow obstruction (incompletely expressed achalasia or mechanical obstruction) in the Chicago classification v3.0 . The presence of an esophageal motility disorder associated with SSc was suspected.
The patient subsequently underwent laparoscopic diverticulectomy with Heller myotomy and partial fundoplication. We started the laparoscopic procedure with five ports and an additional incision for a liver retractor (a). The patient's tissues were fragile and hemorrhagic due to long-term steroid use. The diverticulum was dissected transhiataly from the esophagus and surrounding tissues in the inferior mediastinum and resected using a linear stapler with endoscopic confirmation (b–d). The stapler line was covered and reinforced by suturing (e). The vagus nerve was preserved. We performed a Heller myotomy on the opposite side of the diverticulum for over 2 cm from the EGJ on both the esophageal side and gastric side (f). The gastric fornix was fixed to the anterior wall of the EGJ (g). The dilated diaphragmatic crus was closed, and then the esophagus and stomach were fixed to the crus. Because of the fragile tissue and concern about leakage and pulmonary complications, we treated the patient more carefully than usual during her postoperative days. On the seventh postoperative day, contrast esophagography showed no evidence of leakage or stenosis and oral feeding was resumed (a). The patient was discharged on the 12th postoperative day. Dysphagia was improved and her epigastric pain had disappeared. The pathological diagnosis of the specimen was a pseudodiverticulum without a muscular layer and with no evidence of malignancy found (b).