Case: a 23-year-old man.
Medical History: no medical history.
Diagnostic process: On March 23, 2022, he visited a hospital (Iwate Prefectural Central Hospital, Iwate, Japan) for chest and abdominal pain. Computed tomography (CT) revealed multiple intrapulmonary nodules and masses, bilateral pleural effusions, pericardial effusions, and multiple mediastinal lymph nodes. Contrast-enhanced CT scan of the brain showed no metastases to the central nervous system . Pericardial drainage was performed, and cytology of the pericardial fluid confirmed the histology of adenocarcinoma. Thereafter ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration of mediastinum lymph node was performed. The lymph node was pathologically confirmed as metastasis of lung adenocarcinoma and Oncomine Dx Target Test revealed that the tumor was ALK-positive. Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with ALK-positive lung adenocarcinoma (cTXN3M1c: stage IVB).
Treatment: From April 28, 2022, the patient was started on alectinib (300 mg/day) as first-line therapy. The multiple mediastinal lymph nodes reduced in size (partial response) and bilateral pleural effusion and pericardial effusion also decreased. There were no adverse events associated with the use of alectinib. However, 8 months after alectinib initiation, the patient developed symptoms of headache and vomiting. Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed multiple brain metastases . After consultation with the patient, treatment with lorlatinib (100 mg/day) was initiated as second-line therapy from January 20, 2023. Only 12 days after starting lorlatinib, contrast-enhanced MRI of the brain showed that multiple brain metastases had generally decreased in size and his symptoms had dramatically improved. Adverse events associated with the use of lorlatinib were grade 1 elevated total cholesterol and grade 2 elevated triglycerides defined by Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE), both of which were manageable with the use of a statin. After 3 months of treatment with lorlatinib, the patient remains in good condition and contrast-enhanced MRI of the brain showed that multiple brain metastases had completely disappeared .
Follow-up: The response had been maintained continuously for 6 months, when new brain metastases were found in MRI on July 25, 2023.