In May 2012, a 41-year old Asian woman from Thailand presented with consistent pain of the right hip joint since December 2011. She reported a polytrauma with fractures of the zygomatic bone in 1990 in Thailand. After the polytrauma, our patient was treated in an intensive care unit in Thailand for a couple of weeks. After remission, a nose reconstruction was performed with silicone in 1991. In addition our patient suffered from fibromyalgia and osteoporosis. Due to the pain in her paranasal sinus, prolonged cortisone therapy was carried out.
A clinical examination revealed a reduced range of motion (ROM) with pain beginning in the right thigh at a flexion of 20°. Full weight bearing was possible, but our patient presented an insecure walking gait characterized by small steps. As a secondary finding, multiple firm, tender subcutaneous nodules with a dense aspect could be observed as well as cicatrices in the gluteal region.
Pelvic X-ray showed osteoarthritis of the hip joint on both sides with osteolysis in terms of necrosis of the right femoral head . In addition, unclear radiopaque shadows were presumed around the pelvis.
The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans performed showed a bilateral necrosis of the femoral head as well as heterotopic ossifications justifying the indication of total hip replacement. Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) measurements proved osteoporosis.
Blood test results in terms of hepatitis B and C, dengue fever as well as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 1 and 2 were negative so that a possible infection could be excluded.
The findings in the soft tissue were sonographically punctuated and jellylike hyaline spots were described by the radiologist. The histological analysis proved a reaction of foreign body granulomas . There was no evidence for malignancy.
A few days before the hip replacement, our patient admitted having had silicone injections in the gluteal region approximately 15 years ago.
Our patient was given understandable and detailed information about an increased infection risk during her hip replacement due to the silicone granulomas. During the surgical procedure for hip replacement her highly scarred subcutis was prepared and solitary silicone cysts as well as granulomas were removed . The content of these cysts appeared ‘like glue’ as seen in Figure . The femoral head showed advanced necrotic areas . After surgery, our patient improved and wound healing occurred without any complications so our patient was discharged from hospital. The microbiologic analysis described no pathogenic infection after 14 days.
On follow-up examination our patient’s ROM had improved significantly and she reported no pain. Due to her excellent postoperative results a second hip replacement, on the left side, is planned shortly.