A 55-year-old, 168-cm, 88.3-kg male with a body mass index (BMI) of 31.3 kg/m2 was scheduled to undergo RARC for bladder cancer. He had diabetes mellitus and a history of smoking.
After placement of a lower thoracic epidural catheter, general anesthesia was induced. Anesthesia was maintained with combined general and epidural anesthesia. The FloTracTM system (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA) was used to achieve adequate fluid management. The patient was placed in the lithotomy position with stirrups (Levitator®, Mizuho Medical, Tokyo, Japan), after elastic stockings (ES; Comprinet Pro® Size 3, Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) and intermittent pneumatic compression (IPC) devices (Flowtron Excel®, Muranaka, Osaka, Japan) were applied to prevent deep vein thrombosis (DVT). Intraoperatively, phenylephrine was infused at 0.5–1 mg/h to maintain mean blood pressure (BP) above 60 mmHg. Heart rate was kept stable between 50 and 90 beats/min and SpO2 was maintained at 98% or more.
RARC was performed using the da Vinci Xi surgical system® (Intuitive Surgical Inc., Sunnyvale, CA, USA). Total cystectomy, extended pelvic lymph node dissection, and intracorporeal urinary diversion with an ileal conduit were performed uneventfully. However, the surgical duration was prolonged as long as 481 min due to expansion of lymph node dissection. Total blood loss, including urine volume, and total infusion volume were 300 ml and 5560 ml, respectively. The patient remained in the lithotomy position for 515 min, during which he remained in an extreme 25-degree Trendelenburg position for 201 min. He was extubated immediately after the surgery and was transferred to the intensive care unit.
At 3 h postoperatively, he complained of paresthesia and pain over the right calf. The epidural infusion was discontinued because the paresthesia might result from the effect of epidural analgesia. However, the paresthesia and pain were exacerbated 1 h after suspension of the epidural infusion. Urgent blood examinations revealed an elevated level of creatine kinase (CK) (15,800 U/l). Computed tomography (CT) revealed swelling of the right calf . He was diagnosed with WLCS and transferred back to the operating theater for urgent fasciotomy at 7 h postoperatively.
Compartment pressures of the right calf measured under general anesthesia with a needle manometer (TraWave®, Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA) were high at 38, 19, and 14 mmHg in the anterior, lateral, and posterior compartments, respectively. Fasciotomies performed on both sides of the calf reduced compartment pressures to 18, 14, and 12 mmHg, respectively . Subsequent hematological examinations indicated a return of CK to a normal level (218 U/l) by postoperative day 15.
After the fasciotomy, he required debridement procedures twice due to local infection, followed by a skin graft to compensate for the skin defect 43 days after RARC. He was finally discharged from hospital 78 days after RARC without any neuromuscular disorders and in an ambulatory condition.