A 12-day-old male Indian infant was referred to a tertiary care hospital due to poor milk intake and lethargy. The patient was a full-term neonate with an uncomplicated delivery, without any family history of metabolic disorder or consanguinity. The disease started 3 days earlier and the infant was previously admitted to a private hospital and received intravenous antibiotics for the treatment of presumed neonatal sepsis, but without any improvement. Initial biochemical investigations showed ketonuria, no metabolic acidosis, normoglycemia, and a mildly elevated level of ammonia (125 μmol/L). Microbiological examinations were all negative. Upon arrival, the patient had seizure and was intubated.
Further biochemical study with plasma amino acid analysis showed a leucine level of 4163.6 μmol/L (reference values: 42–133.1 μmol/L), isoleucine of 499.8 μmol/L (15.1–74.9 μmol/L), and valine of 784.3 μmol/L (73.6–273.1 μmol/L). Thus, the diagnosis of MSUD (maple syrup urine disease) was made based on clinical and biochemical data.
Whole exome sequencing revealed a novel homozygous missense variant c.196G>A (p.Gly66Arg) in the branched chain keto acid dehydrogenase E1 subunit beta (BCKDHB) gene. The variant was confirmed by PCR-Sanger sequencing to be homozygous in the patient and heterozygous in both parents .
Initial treatment included intravenous fluid and glucose with the aim to provide adequate energy to reduce catabolism and cessation of protein intake for 48–72 hours, administration of cofactors including thiamine, and adjunct treatment of neurological complications. Specific dietary restriction of branched chain amino acids (BCAAs) by using a branched chain-free amino acid supplement was given at the age of 17 days together with expressed breast milk as a source of natural protein via nasogastric tube.
On day 36, natural protein was stopped as the patient developed hospital-acquired pneumonia and diarrhea which resulted in an elevation of BCAAs. On day 45, multiple discrete erythematous macules and papules appeared on the skin of the forehead, hemorrhagic crusts at both upper and lower lips, as well as well-defined erythematous patches at both cheeks, flexor part of neck, forearms, upper anterior chest wall, and perianal regions which rapidly progressed .
The amino acid profile revealed an isoleucine level of 5.9 μmol/L, leucine of 1166 μmol/L, and valine of 159 μmol/L. The serum zinc level was normal (74 μg/dL). Mycological and microbiological examinations were performed and showed negative results. A final diagnosis of acrodermatitis dysmetabolica due to isoleucine deficiency was made based on the clinical findings and low isoleucine levels through this period. Expressed breast milk was added to the feeds with isoleucine supplementation of 100 mg/day. The patient had been on continuous venovenous hemofiltration for a 48-hour period to reduce elevated leucine levels. In addition, skin care with emollients was administered. The patient showed a rapid improvement in the skin lesions which started to recover within 2 days and healed in 10 days with no hyperpigmentation. Subsequent amino acid profile showed an increment of isoleucine to a normal level (45.97 μmol/L).
After hospital discharge, the feeding regimens were continued with branched chain-free amino acid supplement and expressed breast milk with supplementation of isoleucine 100 mg/day and valine 50 mg/day to prevent the deficiency, which yielded total energy of 130 kcal/kg/day, total protein of 3 g/kg/day, leucine, isoleucine, and valine of 50 mg/kg/day each.
A subsequent episode of cutaneous manifestations occurred at the age of 6 months. The patient developed severe lethargy. Leucine encephalopathy was initially suspected and dietary management with cessation of natural protein intake was started as a part of the MSUD emergency protocol. Despite receiving seemingly adequate energy (110 kcal/kg/day) and protein intake from branched chain-free amino acid supplement (3 g/kg/day), the patient's level of consciousness was slow to improve and he was on natural protein exclusion for an extended period despite continuing isoleucine and valine supplementation. A complication of parainfluenza infection and a significant period of diarrhea soon followed and he had been on enteral supplementation of zinc sulfate 2 mg/kg/day together with other micronutrients supplementation. Ten days after admission, disseminated brown maculopapular exanthem appeared on the skin of the extremities, as well as well-defined erythematous patches on the perianal region .
Isoleucine deficiency was initially suspected; however, the amino acid profile later still showed elevated levels of branched chain amino acids with leucine of 533.25 μmol/L (41.63–189.6 μmol/L), isoleucine of 490.53 μmol/L (18.37–72.26 μmol/L), and valine of 400.05 μmol/L (78.57–263.66 μmol/L). Hence, in this subsequent episode of cutaneous manifestation, zinc deficiency causing acrodermatitis enteropathica was confirmed as the serum zinc level was low (56.9 μg/dL) despite continued supplementation.
Skin lesions showed no significant improvement after an increased dosage of enteral chelated zinc to 4 mg/kg/day. Parenteral nutrition with added zinc was then given intravenously due to suspected malabsorption. However, the skin lesions continued to worsen with desquamation in the following week. The patient became edematous, also suspected to be from protein deficiency as a result of malabsorption during the course of treatment . Albumin transfusion, parenteral nutrition containing limited amount of amino acids (based on leucine intake), and extra zinc were given along with branched chain-free amino acid supplement and led to his recovery.