A 65yrs old female came to our department with complaints of pain and swelling of the left hand along the thenar eminence and the proximal aspect of the thumb. She did not have history of any trauma prior to the development of swelling. The swelling was noticed two months ago and was progressive in nature and was painful on movements . She simultaneously developed multiple swellings in the cervical region which most likely pointed towards cervical lympadenopathy . She didn’t have any past history of tuberculosis or exposure to tuberculous contact. She did not have any associated symptoms like loss of appetite, weight loss or any evening rise of temperature.
A plain radiograph of the patient was taken which showed pathological fracture of the base of 1st metacarpal along with lytic lesion at the base of the 1st metacarpal with haziness of the surrounding soft tissue . On x-ray we came to a provisional differential diagnosis of pathological fracture secondary to a pyogenic infection, tuberculous osteomyelitis or soft tissue swelling, malignancy. An ultrasound revealed presence of an abscess. The USG was done to rule out any malignant involvement of the soft-tissue . An MRI scan showed a large heterogeneous lesion at the 1st carpo-metacarpal joint space along with joint space widening . The MRI scan suggested an abscess like picture most likely due to infective etiology and less likely to be neoplastic lesion.
She was then posted for drainage of abscess and debridment with stabilization of the fracture fragment. Intra-operatively we found thick caseous material within the soft tissue and the fragment at base of the 1st metacarpal was freely mobile similar to a loose body . It was not possible to fix that fragment as it looked infected on gross inspection and hence it was removed and sent for biopsy and culture sensitivity along with the surrounding soft-tissue. We also found that after removal of the fragment the joint was unstable and hence a kirschner wire was passed through the 1st carpo-metacarpal joint to stabilize it . Post-operatively the hand was immobilised in a below elbow POP splint to give added stability. A cervical lymph node biopsy was also taken during the same sitting and sent for histo-pathology to confirm if the lymph nodes were due to tuberculosis or some other cause like malignancy or viral respiratory infection which are common in Indian scenario.
The biopsy report came back positive for tuberculous osteomyelitis which suggested fibro-collagenous tissue and few bony fragments showing large caseous necrosis with few epitheloidid cell granuloma. The patient was then started on anti-tuberculous treatment emprerically while awaiting the culture report. A Combination of Isoniazid (300mg), Rifampicin (450mg), Pyrazinamide (1500mg) and ethambutol (800mg) was started as intensive phase for a period of 6 months under the guidance of a chest physician and then the continuous phase for a period of 6 months where Isoniazid (300mg) and Rifampicin (450mg) was given. The culture reports were obtained at the end of 6 weeks and the mycobacterium species showed sensitivity to the primary drugs which were started. Routine liver function tests were repeated every 3 months which were normal in the patient.
At the end of 5 weeks the kirschner wire backed out partially which was then removed and range of movement exercises were started. The cervical lymphadenopathy regressed by the end of 3 months. The patient had 1 episode of recurrence of cervical lymphandenopathy at the end of 7 months of treatment which eventually regressed on the continuous phase of AKT. The patient had almost complete range of movement at the end of 3 months with no sequel due to tuberculosis as compared to the opposite hand with no joint instability . We did not plan any further intervention as the patient was having a stable joint at the end of 3 months and we decided to keep a regular follow up of the patient. The patient was then followed up regularly upto end of 1 year and the ranges of movements were compared with the opposite hand. There was very little restriction of movement of the thumb as compared to the opposite hand with a stable joint not subluxating on movements. Plain radiographs showed some degree of joint remodelling at one year. The grip strength was adequate to do any daily household activity which was the only requirement of the patient .