A 61-year-old man with pneumonia underwent intubation and placement of a CVC with an outer diameter of 2.5 mm. The intended catheter, inserted into the left internal jugular vein, inadvertently entered the left vertebral artery (V1 segment), with its tip entering the aortic arch through the subclavian artery. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed that the catheter was not inserted into the internal jugular vein but was incorrectly inserted into the left vertebral artery and caused occlusion of the left vertebral artery . No antithrombotic drugs were administered. An endovascular management strategy was implemented that combined treatment through a contralateral approach. Treatment was started approximately 5 h following the inadvertent catheter insertion. Under general anesthesia, systemic heparinization was performed, and activated clotting time was maintained above 200 s. The left subclavian artery angiography revealed left vertebral artery main trunk occlusion and a collateral blood flow in the left V3 segment through ascending cervical artery . No vascular occlusions were found in the intracranial vessels. The right vertebral artery had a sufficient vessel diameter, the left vertebral artery was retrograde to the V4 segment, the left posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) territory showed bilateral dominance, and the PICA was not bifurcated from the left vertebral artery . Due to the fear of thrombus formation in the area of stagnant blood flow due to the left vertebral artery occlusion, the distal left vertebral artery was first occluded from the other side to prevent distal embolization. Parent artery occlusion in the V2–V3 segment was considered possible. Initially, a 6 Fr guiding catheter was placed in the right V2 segment. Using ASAHI CHIKAI 10 200 cm (Asahi Intecc), SL-10 (Stryker) was induced in the left vertebral artery through union using TACTICS as a distal access catheter . The distal side of the lesion was approached from the right vertebral artery through the artery union, and coil embolization was performed from V2 to V3 . The left subclavian arteriography confirmed collateral blood flow preservation through the ascending cervical artery . The 6 Fr guiding catheter was subsequently implanted in the left subclavian artery. A microballoon catheter (Pinnacle Blue 27, Tokai Medical Products) and Carnelian Marvel 2.0 Non Taper (Tokai Medical Products) were coaxially guided into the left vertebral artery using Traxcess (Terumo). Through the perforation of the CVC, Carnelian Marvel was guided to the proximal part of the coil mass of the left vertebral artery, and Pinnacle Blue 27 was guided to the origin of the left vertebral artery . The balloon was dilated at the origin of the left vertebral artery and was embolized from the existing coil mass to the perforation of the CVC . With the proximal and distal blood flow to the perforation blocked, the CVC was removed and the balloon in Pinnacle Blue 27 was further dilated . The left vertebral artery was embolized with a coil from its perforation to its origin .
To arrest the remaining extravascular flow, n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate (NBCA) was injected to obtain complete embolization. This procedure was performed under the deflating Pinnacle Blue 27 considering the adhesion of NBCA to the Pinnacle Blue 27 . The left subclavian angiography revealed complete occlusion of the left vertebral artery, and final right vertebral angiography revealed no avascular area [ and ]. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography on the day following the surgery showed good vessel occlusion . No extravascular leakage around the perforation site was observed, and the internal jugular vein was confirmed to be open. Follow-up magnetic resonance imaging showed no cerebral infarction foci and no neurological dropout findings [ and ]. Consent from the patient’s family was obtained before the procedure, and permission to publish the features of this case was also taken from the patient. Furthermore, the identity of the patient has been protected.