A 43-year-old Chinese man with no prior history of cardiac surgery or trauma complained diarrhea, general fatigue, and lower extremities edema for three months. Laboratory test revealed an absolute eosinophil count of 5.69 cells × 109/L with 37.8% eosinophils. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed a 5.4 × 6.0 cm mass containing thrombus in the posterior wall of the left atrium (LA), causing functional mitral insufficiency and MV obstruction. In addition, there was a suspicious endocardial orifice beneath the root of the posterior mitral leaflet (PML) on the left ventricle (LV). Enhanced Computed tomography (CT) revealed the contrast filling the mass cavity, indicating intramural hematoma. Left atrial dissection caused by parasitic infestation was suspected. Based on the patient's hemodynamic collapse, emergency surgery was necessary.
The surgical procedures were recorded in . By removing the thrombus and debris from the false cavity and excising the dissected endocardium, the surgeon found an orifice on the left ventricle beneath the root of the PML, which was confirmed as the entry of the LatD. Direct incision was performed in the P2, and the posterior MA was cut through to reach the orifice. An autologous pericardial patch with an ellipse shape was employed to reconstruct the defect of the LV and MA. After reaching the proposed neo-annulus line, the rest of the ellipse was used to augment the PML. An annuloplasty was performed with another pericardial band (refer to ). The reconstructed MV performed well under TEE after weaning from the cardiopulmonary bypass.
Although the specimen produced no findings, the eosinophil count and the percentage of eosinophils were sharply decreased after surgery. The stool examination revealed the ova of Clonorchis Sinensis, Metagonimus yokogawai and Echinostoma (refer to ), confirming a LatD associated with parasitic infestation of heart. After completing anti-parasitic treatment, the patient was discharged and remained healthy during the 2-year follow-up period (refer to ).