Our patient (a Caucasian woman, aged 38), with no history of previous or current diseases, presented with a maxillary lateral edentulism in the area 1.4 to 1.5. The preliminary radiographic evaluation showed bone dimensions of about 6 to 8mm in the coronoapical direction and 4 to 6mm in the bucco-oral direction .
After the preliminary evaluation, the operation planning started. The rehabilitation of this maxillary edentulism was solved through the placement of two implant fixtures with the contextual sinus augmentation procedure . The surgical operation was performed under local anesthesia, using mepivacaine (20mg/ml) with adrenaline (1:100,000), using the truncal technique at the infraorbital foramen and major palatine foramen. On the buccal side, a full-thickness paramarginal trapezial flap extended from element 1.3 to element 1.7 was performed. Subsequently, a lateral bony window with a Beaver 65 blade used as a surgical scalpel was made.
The bone segment was removed by anatomical tweezers and stored in sterile physiological solution at 4°C. The sinusal membrane was detached by special retractors and raised so as to achieve a curtain effect. An equine collagen sponge was placed in the antral area between the sinus floor and the raised membrane, to protect the latter under the Prichard’s vane ending, during the surgical alveoli preparation.
The neo-alveoli for the implant fixtures placement were performed through the crestal area, with the implant kit drills.
The two implants, with a diameter of respectively 3.5mm (normal platform, NP) and 4.3mm (regular platform, RP), a length of 13mm and conical connection characteristics were placed in situ. The primary stability was measured by resonance frequency analysis (RFA).
The apical area of the fixtures was soaked by the blood clot, in association with an equine collagen sponge, in the sinus area between the sinus floor and the raised membrane. The bone segment mobilized to perform the bone window was repositioned, the surgical area was covered with a collagen sponge layer and the flap was sutured with a nonabsorbable polyfilament.
After monitoring our patient for half an hour, no hemorrhage signs or local and/or general suffering was observed, so she was discharged with a prescription for antibiotic therapy (amoxicillin + clavulanic acid cpr. 1g for oral administration every 12 h for six days), anti-inflammatory (sodium naproxen cpr. 275mg for oral administration every 12 h for three days) and oral antiseptic therapy (0.2% chlorhexidine + cetilpiridine chloride).
Recommendations for oral hygiene and feeding techniques were supplied with the aim of optimizing the postoperative course.
The suture removal on the seventh day showed a good healing of tissues, with a modest share of keratinized tissue differentiation.
The radiographic postoperative control at six months showed a conspicuous neo-bone apposition around the apical area of the implant fixture , in agreement with the indications of Lioubavina-Hack et al.
, according to whom the osteo-implant unit can be considered fully functional when, at X-ray examination, there is an increase in radiopacity surrounding the implant with progressive and gradual decreasing to the periphery.
With regard to the condition of the soft tissues, healing took place by first intention, with net retention of keratinized tissue .
To establish the implant survival Albrektsson proposed the following criteria:the system immobility; the absence of peri-implant radiolucency; the absence of persistent inflammation signs or symptoms.
To clinically evaluate the implant stability and osseointegration, we adopted resonance frequency analysis (RFA), a noninvasive diagnostic technique used to determine the ability of an implant to be subjected to load.
RFA is, in fact, the only noninvasive method that can guide the selection of prosthetic times. Adequate implant stability in bone is crucial to allow, after the insertion of an implant, undisturbed healing with new bone formation.
The implant stability is divided into primary and secondary:
– the primary stability is a mechanical parameter that depends on the bone quantity and quality, the system geometry and the adopted technique . – the secondary stability can be considered as the stability increase as a result of the implant placement during the healing.
This increase is attributable to the bone formation and the remodeling process that occurs in the tissue-implant interface in the surrounding area.
For each implant RFA evaluation has been reported as implant stability quotient (ISQ) values. Measurements were performed by an ISQ device (Osstell ISQ, Osstell AB, Gothenburg, Sweden).
Both implants have shown sufficient primary stability associated with mean values of ISQ=54.22.
At the end of the second month, a higher stability than the threshold value of 57 ISQ was recorded in both implants, with an average value of 59.8 ISQ.
A gradual increase in ISQ values was observed until the third and fourth month, reaching an average value of 63.2 ISQ, after which the ISQ values appeared to level off in a straight line.
The gradual filling of the defect is, therefore, accompanied by an increase in the ISQ values .
The ISQ average values trend found in our study does not seem to be very different from that described in the literature in reports that consider different clinical situations and graft applications, suggesting that the graft incorporation plays a marginal role on implant stability.
On the basis of the recorded values, we can state that the stabilization phase took place between the fourth and sixth month.