A 45-year old man was admitted to the emergency department of our hospital with chief complaint of chest pain. The pain was retrosternal and initiated three days previously, getting worse at the day of admission. Dyspnea as well as head and neck congestion have been superimposed gradually. His medical history included aortic valve replacement (in 1980) due to aortic insufficiency. He was receiving digoxin and warfarin therapy. His vital signs included a blood pressure of 110/70 mmHg, a heart rate of 92 beats per minute, a respiration of 24/minutes and oral temperature of 37.4°C. Edema was evident in his head and neck. The rest of physical examination was otherwise unremarkable. Electrocardiogram showed non-specific ST segment and T-wave changes and chest X-ray revealed mediastinal widening . Echocardiography demonstrated an aneurysm of the ascending aorta with a diameter of 7.3 cm along with a flap, suggestive of acute aortic dissection. There was also mild mitral regurgitation and left ventricular ejection fraction was 50%. Due to the emergency condition of patient, transesophageal echocardiography was not performed. Initial laboratory data were as follows; white blood cell count: 12400 /mm3, hemoglobin: 12.1 gr/dL, hematocrit: 31%, platelet count: 235000 /mm3, Na: 138 mEq/L, K: 4.3 mEq/L, blood urea nitrogen: 15 and creatinine: 1 mg/dL.
The patient was taken to the operating room with the diagnosis of dissecting aneurysm of the ascending aorta (DeBakey Type I and Stanford Type A) along with SVC syndrome. Due to the presence of superior vena cava syndrome, induction of anesthesia with its traditional and usual way was not considered from the beginning; the assessment of the airway was not performed. Even if the airway assessment had showed possibility of endotracheal intubation, sedative and muscle relaxant medications could not be administered to the patient.
Peripheral venous lines in both upper and lower extremities and arterial line through left radial artery were inserted. Slight sedation was made with 50 µg of fentanyl and 1 mg of midazolam, and under local anesthesia arterial and venous cannulas were inserted via femoral access to perform cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB). After ensuring the possibility of CPB, the patient underwent a complete femoro-femoral CPB using anesthetics, including etomidate 0.2 mg/kg, sufentanil 50 µg and cisatracurium 0.2 mg/kg. Then, a laryngoscopy and intubation was performed. Finally, the patient underwent a 7.5 hour surgery for repairing the aortic dissection. The times taken for CPB and aortic cross-clamp were 240 min and 50 min, respectively.
Patient underwent a successful Bentall operation. Postoperation intubation time was 8.5 hours and extubation was performed without difficulty. After eight days with an uneventful postoperative course, patient was discharged. The symptoms of SVC syndrome had been completely resolved at the time of discharge. However, patient returned after one month with a re-dissection. Unfortunately, the second operation was not successful and the patient died.