A 27-year-old woman who had recently immigrated from Syria was admitted to our center at 12 weeks postpartum with progressive renal failure and nephrolithiasis. She reported recurrent kidney stones and urinary tract infections since age 12. She had a family history of renal failure and recurrent nephrolithiasis in her sister and maternal uncle. Her family history was also notable for consanguinity (her parents were first cousins).
Pregnancy history was notable for four spontaneous pregnancy losses in her early twenties. A thrombophilia evaluation identified compound heterozygosity for factor V Leiden and prothrombin G20210A mutation. Imaging by contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed numerous renal calculi up to 1.5 cm filling the calyces of both kidneys. Her next pregnancy at age 26 was treated with low-molecular-weight heparin, and she had a term delivery complicated by mild acute kidney injury. Renal function improved postpartum. During this pregnancy, she was again treated with low-molecular-weight heparin. A urine biochemical evaluation revealed moderate hyperoxaluria (55 mg/day, reference range 4–31) and profound hypocitraturia. She was prescribed a low-oxalate diet, potassium citrate, and high fluid intake. Her serum creatinine was 0.85–1.00 mg/dL until 34 weeks of gestation, when she presented with flank pain, acute kidney injury (creatinine 1.64 mg/dL), and a right obstructing proximal ureteral calculus. A percutaneous nephrostomy was placed. She was delivered 1 week later, at 35 weeks, by elective cesarean section for persistent bleeding from low-lying placenta. The right percutaneous nephrostomy remained in place and her serum creatinine improved to 1.2–1.4 mg/dL.
The patient was seen by Nephrology 1 week postpartum. At that time, she reported persistent right flank pain and dysuria, without fever. Blood pressure was 128/68 mm Hg and she appeared euvolemic. She reported maintaining fluid intake of approximately 3 L/day. Urinalysis shows proteinuria, hematuria, and pyuria (> 100 WBC/hpf), but urine culture was negative. She was continued on high fluid intake, low-oxalate diet, and potassium citrate. She had persistent right flank pain, and her serum creatinine gradually increased from 1.5 to 2.5 mg/dL. At 7 weeks postpartum, a percutaneous nephrolithotomy was performed. The retrieved stone was found to be composed primarily of calcium oxalate monohydrate. Postoperatively, the patient developed fever and was treated empirically with vancomycin and cefepime. Her renal function did not improve. She presented for follow-up 1 month later with persistent flank pain, dysuria, subjective fever and chills, and decreased urine output. The serum creatinine was 6.82 mg/dL, her plasma oxalate level was 85.4 μmol/L (reference range < 1.9 μmol/L), and urine culture was positive for > 100,000 colonies of extended-spectrum beta-lactamase producing Escherichia coli.
Kidney biopsy revealed abundant (> 90/hpf) optically clear intratubular crystalline inclusions which were accompanied by diffuse acute tubular injury, moderately severe tubulointerstitial scarring, and patchy moderate chronic interstitial inflammation, consistent with a crystalline nephropathy. When viewed under polarized light, the crystalline deposits were strongly birefringent, typical of calcium oxalate crystals. Some calcium oxalate crystals in the interstitium were associated with foreign-body-type giant cells. Glomeruli showed mild secondary glomerulosclerosis. Arteries and arterioles were unremarkable. On genetic testing, she was found to be homozygous for G170R missense mutation in the AGXT gene, consistent with PH1. Pyridoxine was initiated.
At 14 weeks postpartum, the patient began intensive hemodialysis, and she was referred for combined liver and kidney transplantation. Predialysis plasma oxalate was 34.3 μmol/L after 3 months of nocturnal dialysis (3 treatments/week, 8 h/treatment). She continued to have flank pain and dysuria. Urine culture was persistently positive for beta lactamase-resistant E. coli despite antibiotic treatment. Because of concern for the emergence of further antibiotic resistance, the inability to durably eradicate her infection with antibiotic treatment given her heavy stone burden, and the potential development of life-threatening sepsis with immunosuppression after transplantation, she underwent bilateral native nephrectomies. One year postpartum, she received a simultaneous liver and kidney transplant.