A 44 year-old male presented to the emergency department with a 5-day history of fever and malaise. He had recently returned to Ireland (his country of residence for 10 years) from Nigeria (his native country) after visiting friends and relatives, without taking malaria prophylaxis. He had a history of hypertension, for which he took ramipril, amlodipine and bendroflumethiazide throughout the previous year. There was no family history of renal disease. He reported having taken over the counter paracetamol during the 5 days prior to presentation, and a single 400 mg dose of ibuprofen on the day of presentation. Consumption of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) beyond the day of presentation was repeatedly denied. He had not taken any other medications commonly associated with AIN such as beta-lactams, fluoroquinolones, sulfonamides or proton pump inhibitors prior to presentation.
On examination, he was euvolaemic, his blood pressure was 169/77 mmHg and he produced 1580 mls of dark urine during the first 24 h. Urinalysis revealed 4+ protein and 3+ blood. He did not have a rash and had no peripheral oedema.
Initial routine blood tests included creatinine 616 µmol/L (baseline 89 µmol/L, 5 months before presentation), haemoglobin 11.2 g/dL, platelet count 70 × 109/L, eosinophil count 0.1 × 109/L, serum albumin 26 g/L, total serum bilirubin 15 μmol/L and lactate dehydrogenase 960 U/L. A blood film was positive for P. falciparum with 0.4% parasitaemia. Initial urine protein–creatinine ratio was 346 mg/mmol (absolute proteinuria = 4448 mg/L).
Tests for HIV, HBV, HCV, ANA and ANCA were all negative. C3 was normal and C4 was low (0.09 g/L). His haptoglobin was low (0.24 g/L) and G6PD enzyme activity was normal. A renal ultrasound described diffusely echogenic kidneys with the right kidney measuring 130 mm and the left kidney measuring 143 mm.
A renal biopsy performed 10 days after presentation demonstrated acute interstitial nephritis with numerous eosinophils, particularly at the cortico-medullary junction . There was an absence of neutrophils or granulomas. Immunofluorescence staining showed no specific pattern of antibody deposition for standard antisera (anti-IgG, anti-IgA, anti-IgM, anti-C3, anti-kappa, anti-lambda, anti-fibrin were all negative). Interstitial fibrosis was minimal. Electron microscopy revealed podocyte foot-process fusion involving the majority of capillaries, and the majority of the surface of affected capillaries, with microvillous transformation of the podocyte cytoplasm .
The patient was treated for severe malaria with intravenous artesunate on day 1, followed by a further 3 days of artesunate and a further 7 days of oral doxycycline. He was also covered empirically with ceftriaxone. Intermittent haemodialysis was started on hospital-day 3, as renal function was not recovering and the patient developed symptoms of uraemia. He received five sessions of intermittent haemodialysis before regaining independent renal function . At 1 year follow up his creatinine had plateaued around 120 µmol/L, with persistent proteinuria (protein:creatinine ratio 172 mg/mmol) after restarting ramipril, amlodipine and bendroflumethiazide.