A 71-year-old Japanese man with no notable medical history, including autoimmune disease, was diagnosed as having gastric cancer and liver metastases in April 2017 : T2N0M1 cStage IV; Union for International Cancer Control (UICC) 7th edition. His maternal grandfather and his brother had gastric cancer. He drank 360 ml of rice wine every day and smoked approximately 50 cigarettes/day until 24 years ago.
Since May 2017, he received first-line chemotherapy comprising four cycles of cisplatin and tegafur, gimeracil, and oteracil potassium, followed by four cycles of second-line therapy with paclitaxel and ramucirumab. Although his liver metastases shrank, in December 2017 (that is, at 7 months after the initiation of chemotherapy) the primary tumor and metastases were found to have progressed.
He had no history of apparent autoimmune disease; his serum autoimmune disease-related markers were negative. During the second-line chemotherapy, his anterior chest and dorsal surfaces of his fingers became reddened, which was considered to be caused by ramucirumab. He had no difficulties in drinking or swallowing solid matter, and showed no obvious neurological dysfunction. Because it seemed he had no evidence that he had autoimmune disease, including dermatomyositis, we decided to initiate nivolumab as the third-line therapy.
Nivolumab (3 mg/kg) was administered in January 2018. A few hours after administration, he developed fever of 38 °C, which gradually dropped down to low-grade fever. Two weeks after administration he visited our hospital for the second treatment with nivolumab, he said he had been suffering from general fatigue, difficulty in swallowing, muscle aches, low-grade fever, face edema, and erythema of the nose, anterior chest, and dorsal surfaces of his fingers. He could easily drink water, but had difficulties in swallowing solid materials. He showed no obvious neurological dysfunction and had no trouble in walking by himself.
Blood tests showed an increase in the levels of creatine phosphokinase (CK; 300 U/L), aspartate aminotransferase (AST; 37 U/L), myoglobin (354 ng/mL), and C-reactive protein (CRP; 3.32 mg/dL). Before nivolumab administration, his CRP level had been slightly high (around 1.0 mg/dL), and his CK and AST levels had been within normal range. Because drug-associated myositis was suspected, he was immediately admitted to our hospital.
After admission, the difficulty in swallowing worsened at the end of January (approximately 20 days after nivolumab administration) and his CK and AST levels gradually increased to > 1000 and > 100, respectively, at 22 days after administration. Because of the worsening of his general condition, nivolumab treatment was suspended. Instead of nivolumab, treatment with prednisolone (0.5 mg/kg, 30 mg/body per day) was initiated at 22 days after nivolumab administration, as frequently applied for drug-induced dermatomyositis .
However, the results of his blood test did not improve, and his general condition worsened. In late February (approximately 40 days after nivolumab administration), he became unable to stand up or eat. The skin lesion had spread over his ears, elbows, and knees, as well as his face, right shoulder, anterior chest, left hip, and fingers. A neurological examination indicated dysphagia, muscle weakness (mainly proximal), and depression of the tendon reflexes of his extremities. Because we considered that the steroid treatment (30 mg/body per day) was ineffective and that long-term high-dose prednisolone was harmful, we reduced the dose of prednisolone to 20 mg/body per day 41 days after starting nivolumab.
More examinations were needed to identify his disease condition correctly. Electromyography of his deltoid muscle and biceps brachii revealed a low motor unit potential (MUP), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a heterogeneous high signal intensity in the bilateral femoris muscles in short-T1 inversion recovery (STIR) images, and a heterogeneous contrast enhancement in the bilateral femoris muscles (mainly proximal) in gadolinium-enhanced T1 images; these findings are suggestive of myositis . The condition of our patient (skin lesion, muscle weakness, elevation of CK level and CRP level, and electromyography findings) fulfilled the diagnostic criteria for dermatomyositis. A muscular biopsy was not performed because it was too invasive to our patient. Although he was negative for anti-Jo-1, −Scl-70, −RNP, −Sm, −Mi-2, −MDA5, and −ARS antibodies, his antinuclear antibody index was 80 and his anti-transcriptional intermediary factor 1-γ (TIF1-γ) antibody index was 111 (normal range < 32). Because anti-TIF1-γ is a marker for paraneoplastic dermatomyositis, our patient was suspected to have paraneoplastic dermatomyositis rather than nivolumab-induced myositis. Also, his reddened anterior chest and dorsal surfaces of his fingers before the initiation of nivolumab, which we had considered a ramucirumab-induced eruption, were actually the V-neck sign and Gottron’s papule on his fingers. The erythema of his fingers was hyperkeratotic, erythematous, flat papules with central atrophy, and on the dorsum of his metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal joints, all of which were compatible with the symptoms of dermatomyositis . Therefore, his diagnosis was changed from nivolumab-induced myositis to paraneoplastic dermatomyositis.
Because we assessed that the applied treatment of prednisolone (30 mg/body per day, tapering to 20 mg/body per day) was not effective, according to the standard treatment for resistant or severe paraneoplastic dermatomyositis [, ], steroid pulse treatment (methylprednisolone 1000 mg/day for 3 days, followed by tapering prednisolone from 120 mg/day to 30 mg/day at 129 after nivolumab administration) and intravenously administered immunoglobulin 30 g/day (400 mg/kg per day) for 5 days once a month three times beginning on day 45 after nivolumab administration were initiated. Our patient’s CK level rapidly decreased in response to the treatment , and his physical activity significantly improved. At 2 weeks after steroid pulse treatment initiation, he could walk by himself, and at 6 weeks he could walk smoothly and stand up with little help. While chemotherapy for his gastric cancer was not applied during the treatment of paraneoplastic dermatomyositis, his general condition improved, and his rehabilitation continued. Despite the improvement of his general condition, the dysphasia was not improved and he could not eat or drink. A nasogastric tube was inserted at day 128 for his nutrition, and tacrolimus, an immunosuppressive agent that is frequently used for resistant or severe dermatomyositis, was administered through it from day 129 after nivolumab administration. We tried to make it possible for him to be discharged from our hospital.
However, his general condition drastically worsened at day 130 after first nivolumab administration. To our regret, at day 142 after administration, he died due to rapid worsening of his gastric cancer. After his death, an autopsy was performed. According to the interim report, the cancer had progressed more than expected. The tumor spread throughout his whole body, and metastasized to his liver, lung, and abdominal cavity. Although muscles were normal in gross appearance, a pathological examination is still under investigation.