A Caucasian female was born at 32 weeks of GA to a 36-year-old woman via emergency cesarean section because of alterations in the fluximetric indices. TORCH screening performed during pregnancy resulted negative. Intrauterin growth retardation was evidenced since 26 weeks of GA. The APGAR scores were 7 and 8 at 1 and 5 min, respectively. Birth weight was 1210 g (6 th percentile), length was 39 cm (13 th percentile), and head circumference was 26 cm (1 th percentile). She was the second baby born to nonconsanguineous parents. The infant was admitted to the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) because of respiratory distress syndrome and received nasal CPAP for 7 days. Physical examination at birth revealed generalized petechial rash and splenomegaly, and a complete blood count evidenced thrombocytopenia (22,000/mm3). Leukopenia (white blood cell count 4900/mm3) and anemia with 10.4 g/dL of hemoglobin were observed since the fifth day of life (DOL). The diagnosis of congenital CMV infection was proven by the detection, by polymerase chain reaction, of CMV DNA on a urine sample (32,000 copies/mL) and on blood sample (71,800 copies/ml). Cephalo-rachidian fluid also tested positive (390 copies/ml). Serological results revealed positive IgM and IgG antibodies anti-CMV. The mother did not performe CMV serology during pregnancy but preconceptional maternal immunity showed positive CMV-IgG and negative CMV-IgM. Thus, the infection was caused by maternal re-infection. Intravenous ganciclovir was started on sixth DOL and was switched to oral valganciclovir as soon as feeding tolerance was achieved (16 mg/kg twice a day). After the first week the infant developed cholestasis without signs of hepatitis. During the recovery the infant received numerous platelet and red blood cells transfusions. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) was administrated for the neutropenia. Since birth, clinical neurological evaluation revealed axial hypotonia and irritability alternating to lethargy. Serial cranial ultrasound showed periventricular cysts, lenticulostriate vasculopathy cysts and bilateral germinal matrix haemorrhage. MRI scan of the brain was acquired at 37 weeks GA. MRI scan was performed on a 1.5 Tesla scanner (Siemens Magnetom Aera Erlangen Germany, release VE11C). Axial and coronal T2-weighted images, volumetric isotropic sagittal T1 weighted Magnetization Prepared Rapid Acquisition Gradient Echo (MPRAGE) image, axial Diffusion Weighted Imaging Echo Planar Imaging Spin Echo (DWI EPI SE) image, volumetric axial Susceptibility Weighted Imaging (SWI) image, volumetric isotropic axial T2/T1 Weighted True Fast Imaging with Steady state free Procession (TrueFISP) image, were acquired.
The patient was sedated with Intranasal dexmedetomidine (2 mcg/kg) and continuously monitored for oxygen saturation and heart rate. MRI scan showed an immature aspect of the gyration of the cerebral hemispheres associated with a reduced myelination of the posterior arm of the internal capsule. T2-weighted sections revealed increased hyperintensity of the parieto-occipital and temporal white matter with cysts in the bilateral periventricular temporal region. Germinolytic cysts with hemosiderin deposit were depicted in the thalamocaudal notch region bilaterally. Interestingly, a market T2 hyperintensity of the inner part of olfactory bulbs was noticed . Any abnormalities in the remaining cranial nerves weren’t found. She was given two CMV IgG transfusions without any improvement of thrombocytopenia, neutropenia and anaemia. Eye examination resulted negative for chorioretinitis and the hearing screen showed normal brain auditory evoked response. Due to long-lasting pancytopenia the infant was transferred to the haematological unit of the referral hospital on day thirty-eighth after birth. The parental informed consent for publication was obtained.