A 51-year-old Moroccan Berber man was referred to our hospital with a history of three months of intermittent painless total gross hematuria, frequency and urgency. The medical and familial histories were unremarkable. Ultrasonography revealed a grade II left hydronephrosis and circumferential thickening of the urinary bladder wall. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed a diffuse neoplasm of the urinary bladder with no lymph node enlargement or distant metastases . Cystoscopic examinations revealed nonpapillary sessile tumors occupying almost the whole of the bladder wall , and the left side of the trigone obstructing the left ureteral meatus. Transurethral resection of the lesion was realized incompletely because of the diffuse character of the tumor. Histopathological specimen examination found a poorly differentiated mucin-secreting adenocarcinoma of the signet-ring cell type .
We performed a complete gastrointestinal endoscopic evaluation and analysis of tumor markers to exclude an extravesical primary tumor site, but no other primary site was found. The tumor was therefore treated as a primary signet-ring cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder.
The patient underwent radical cystectomy with an ileal conduit and bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy. Histopathological examination of the surgical specimen reported adenocarcinoma composed of signet-ring cells with an abundant mucin pool that was invading the perivesical adipose tissue and one lymph node (<2cm) staging the tumor at pT3bN1M0. Adjuvant chemotherapy was then performed with four cycles of cisplatin, a 100mg/m2 on day 1 and gemcitabine 1000mg/m2 on days 1 and 8 combination, every 21 days. The patient was followed up every six months, and a thoracoabdominal CT scan was done every six months. He was free from metastasis, the quality of life was good without symptoms of pain or renal dysfunction, and he achieved weight recovery soon after finishing his chemotherapy. Eighteen months postoperatively, the patient presented with pelvic and back pain. Multiple metastases to spine, lung and pelvis were noted on a thoracoabdominal CT scan. The patient refused to be enrolled in any additional protocol and died four months later due to respiratory distress.