A 78-year-old Caucasian male was diagnosed with temporal arteritis based on clinical presentation and biopsy of temporal artery showing granulomatous inflammation. The chest HRCT revealed pulmonary changes similar to autoimmune ILD. Based on radiological findings, the diagnosis of pulmonary TB was considered but sputum smears and microscopy of bronchial washings were negative and this diagnosis was rejected. Thus, the treatment with methylprednisolone (8 mg/daily) for temporal arteritis was initiated more than a half-a-year ago. At the time, patient was using amiodarone tablets 400 mg/daily for recurrent atrial fibrillation (AF) in 2002.
Patient arrived at the rheumatology outpatient department, complaining of fever and dyspnea, his parameters of central hemodynamics were normal, ECG showed sinus rhythm, C-reactive protein (CRP) was 118 mg/l. The diagnosis of bilateral pneumonia, consistent with pulmonary vasculitis, was established with chest X-ray, and patient was admitted to the rheumatology department. Empiric antibiotic therapy with cefuroxime (4.5 g/daily) and methylprednisolone (32 mg/daily) for suspected exacerbation of vasculitis were prescribed.
On the third day of hospitalization, patient complained of malaise, pressure and tightness in his chest. ECG was performed and the AF was identified. The patient was transferred to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) for direct current cardioversion into the sinus rhythm. Later the patient was successfully transferred back to the rheumatology department. After 24 h, another episode of AF recurred. Electrolytes were within normal range. Pharmacological conversion was prescribed with 300 mg amiodarone IV solution. Despite the pharmacological management of the AF, patient presented with severe dyspnea, tachypnea with signs respiratory insufficiency. The multidisciplinary consult concluded that the patient suffers either from autoimmune interstitial lung disease or drug induced lung injury. In addition, there was little evidence to exclude bacterial infection. Thus, it was decided to discontinue amiodarone therapy, initiate corticosteroid therapy, and repeat bronchoscopy, take sputum smears and bronchial washings for bacterial diagnostics and chest HRCT. The chest HRCT identified pulmonary emphysema, thickening of intra- and interlobular septa, with random distribution nodules, ground-glass opacities, fibrosis and traction bronchiectasis, progression of mediastinal lymphadenopathy . Fiberoptic bronchoscopy with bronchial washings and brushings was performed. Acid fast bacilli (AFB) were found on Ziehl-Nielsen microscopy. The diagnosis of TB was confirmed and the anti-TB therapy was initiated with isoniazid (300 mg/day), rifampicine (600 mg/day), ethambutol (1200 mg/day) and pyrazinamide (2000 mg/day). Control chest HRCT was performed after four months of TB treatment. Signs described on earlier chest HRCT regressed – nodules became more restricted with thinning of intra- and interlobular septa shown . However, the patient developed pneumonia. Blood culture did not confirm bacterial growth, but sepsis was diagnosed clinically. Empiric antibiotic therapy was prescribed. Despite the treatment, multiple organ dysfunction syndrome evolved and patient died. The lung biopsy was not performed thus it is not possible to completely exclude amiodarone induced interstitial lung disease accompanying pulmonary TB.