Our case was a 20-year-old man who had a gunshot trauma to the abdomen, which had exited from his back. The patient was admitted and underwent laparotomy three times. There was a debrided ulcer on his back with leakage of CSF. One week after his discharge, the patient became febrile (T ≥ 39°C) and was admitted to our unit with a diagnosis of meningitis and treated with meropenem, vancomycin and amikacine. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis was as follows: total cell count = 230, total white blood cells (WBC) = 200, polymorph nuclear (PMN) = 70%, lymphocytes (LYM) = 30%, glucose 39 mg/dl and protein 40 mg/dL. The radiological study revealed hydrocephalus, therefore extra ventricular drainage (EVD) was implanted. After four days, samples from the ulcer, urine and CSF yielded A. baumannii. Finally the patient was referred to our center (Golestan Hospital, Ahvaz, southwest of Iran). At this center, EVD was revised twice and the patient received antibiotic therapy with ampicillin/sulbactam, piperacillin/tazobactam, rifampin and ciprofloxacin in different combinations.
On the day of the admission a CSF sample was taken and cultured. After growth, colistin sensitive A. baumannii (isolate number 1) was recovered. After four days, colistin (intravenous and intrathecal) was initiated. Five days after administration of colistin, another CSF sample was taken and cultured again, and colistin resistant A. baumannii (isolate number 2) was recovered. The patient was still ill and did not improve. On the thirteenth day of treatment with colistin, a CSF sample was taken again, analyzed and cultured. However, the culture was negative for A. baumannii but CSF analysis showed meningitis pattern that was as follows: total cell count = 11600, total white blood cells (WBC) = 1600, polymorph nuclear (PMN) = 85%, Lymphocytes (LYM) = 15%, glucose 25 mg/dL and protein 65 mg/dL. Colistin treatment was continued until the last day of his life. The patients expired after 26 days of hospitalization. According to the importance of diagnosis and treatment of A. baumannii meningitis, and since this case of meningitis was particular and rare, we decided to do some additional experiments on two isolates of the A. baumannii.
Conventional microbiology tests were performed for initial identification of A. baumannii . DNA was extracted by sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and the proteinase K method and, blaOXA-51-like gene and partial sequencing of rpoB gene were performed by specific primers (, ). A. baumannii NCTC 12156 (ATCC 19606) was used as the positive control . Antimicrobial susceptibility testing of the two isolates to the following antibiotics was evaluated by the disk diffusion method . The tested antibiotics were as follow: imipenem 10 µg, meropenem 10 µg, ceftazidime 30 µg, cefepime 30 µg, ceftriaxone 30 µg, colistin 10 µg, piperacillin 100 µg, piperacillin-tazobactam 100/10 µg, polymyxin B 300 unit, gentamicin 10 µg, tobramycin 10 µg, amikacin 30 µg, tetracycline 30 µg, ciprofloxacin 5 µg, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 1.25/23.75 µg, rifampin 5 µg, aztreonam 30 µg and ampicillin-sulbactam (10/10 µg) (MAST, Group Ltd, Merseyside, UK). Minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of colistin, imipenem, meropenem and tigecycline were determined by the E-test (Liofilchem, Italy). The results of disk diffusion and E-test were interpreted according to CLSI guidelines. The United States Food and Drug Administration-approved criteria for Enterobacteriaceae was used for the tigecycline breakpoint .
Multiplex PCR for detection of oxacillinase genes such as: blaOXA23-like, blaOXA-24-like and blaOXA-58-like were performed as previously described . Metallo ß-lactamase production and encoding genes such as: blaIMP, blaVIM, blaSPM and blaNDM were investigated by PCR (, ). Both isolates were examined by REP-PCR with primers according to the Bou et al. protocol with some modifications . According to the PCR results, both isolates were blaOXA-51-like positive and according to sequences of rpoB gene alignment, both isolates were confirmed as A. baumannii. Isolate 1 was resistant to all of tested antimicrobial disks except polymyxin B, colistin and ampicillin-sulbactam. Results of E-test showed that isolate 1 was resistant to imipenem and meropenem with MIC > 32 µg/mL and 12 µg/mL, respectively, yet was sensitive to colistin with MIC 0.25 µg/mL. Although disk diffusion results showed that isolate 1 was resistant to tigecycline yet the E-test result revealed tigecycline MIC 1.5 µg/mL, and isolate 1 was categorized as sensitive to tigecycline according to the E-test result. However isolate 1 was sensitive to colistin, but within the colistin zone of inhibition, eight colonies grew, which are indicated in .
Antibiogram results of the second isolate that was recovered after colistin therapy was similar to the first isolate but some changes had occurred. The second isolate was completely resistant to colistin with MIC 256 µg/mL . By disk diffusion, isolate 2 was resistant to both of polymyxin B and colistin but remained sensitive to ampicillin-sulbactam. The MIC results for imipenem, meropenem and tigecycline were unchanged for the second isolate. Multiplex PCR revealed that two isolates had the blaOXA23-like gene . Other investigated genes were negative for both isolates. By phenotypic tests, metallo-ß-lactamase production was negative for the two isolates. Results of REP-PCR revealed that the two isolates were derived from a single strain and were same .