A 71-year-old man was admitted to our hospital because of the detection of an esophagogastric (EG) junction tumor on regular upper endoscopy screening. He had no symptoms, such as dysphagia, epigastric fullness, and gastroesophageal reflux. His medical history included hepatolithiasis, and he had undergone hepatic left lateral segmentectomy at 50 years of age. Physical examination showed no remarkable findings, and laboratory examinations, including assessment of serum tumor markers, such as carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19-9, were normal. Endoscopy revealed a sliding hiatal hernia and an approximately 10 mm elevated mass at the EG junction . Endoscopic ultrasonography showed a mass having mixed echogenicity in the esophageal wall, with partial invasion of the submucosal layer . Upper gastrointestinal imaging showed an elevated lesion at the EG junction . A biopsy specimen was obtained, and the pathological diagnosis on analysis of the specimen was a differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma. Computed tomography did not indicate lymph node metastasis or distant metastasis. The clinical diagnosis was esophageal cancer (cT1bN0M0 cStage I according to the eighth edition of the Union for International Cancer Control classification) . Proximal gastrectomy with D1 lymph node dissection was performed along with jejunal interposition.
Macroscopically, the surgical specimen showed an elevated mass (10 × 8 mm) in the EG junction . Microscopic examination revealed a carcinoma associated with BE. The carcinoma, Barrett’s epithelium, and stratified squamous epithelium are indicated in Fig. . Hematoxylin-eosin staining showed that the tumor was composed of small-to-intermediate cells with scant cytoplasm and irregular hyperchromatic nuclei and was growing with nuclear palisading and tubular structures. A well-differentiated adenocarcinoma component was present independently. The neoplasm arose in Barrett’s epithelium . Infiltration of the submucosal layer to a depth of < 200 μm was noted. Lymphovascular invasion was not identified. The margins of the specimen were free of tumor cells. On immunohistochemical staining, the tumor was positive for chromogranin A and synaptophysin . Ki-67 was positive in 40% of the tumor cells. Thus, the histological diagnosis was an NEC with a well-differentiated adenocarcinoma component arising in BE. No metastasis in the lymph nodes was noted on histological examination. The pathological diagnosis was esophageal cancer (pT1bN0M0 pStage I). The resection margins were free of tumor cells (R0 resection). The patient’s postoperative course was good, and he was discharged on the twentieth postoperative day. He has remained free of the disease at 36 months postoperatively.