A 54-year-old man presented with a 4 d history of cough with white phlegm, chills and fever as well as dyspnea for 1 d. No hemoptysis, chest pain, edema or rash were found.
Before this visit, he had been given 1.5 g of intravenous cefuroxime but received little improvement. According to the above examinations, the initial diagnosis was considered severe pneumonia caused by influenza virus. Thus, the patient was treated with methylprednisolone (40 mg, q12 h), oseltamivir (75 mg, bid), tienam (0.5 g, q8 h) and moxifloxacin (0.4 g qd). Unexpectedly the next morning, the patient’s condition worsened into cough with bloody sputum and shortness of breath with decreased SpO2 to 60%. Hence, the patient was managed with intubation and continuous mechanical ventilation of positive end-expiratory pressure 8 cm H2O, FiO2 40% and SpO2 99%. Caspofungin was added to the initial therapeutic plan.
Further examinations were also performed to find the essential causes. Sputum smear test showed no positive findings. Bronchoscopy showed sporadic mucosal petechiae and bloody sputum in the bilateral bronchi , and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) was collected. Echocardiography revealed left ventricular diastolic dysfunction and moderate tricuspid regurgitation with pulmonary arterial hypertension. The patient was negative for acid-fast bacilli stain, fungi test of BALF, tumor makers and a panel of respiratory viruses and autoantibodies. Under the current comprehensive treatment covering anti-infections of virus, bacteria and fungi, the patient did not improve and had persistent hemoptysis and hematuria under assisted ventilation. Inflammation and myocardial impairment-related laboratory values were elevated, and hemoglobin and platelet counts remained below normal levels .
The NGS report of the BALF on day 6 after admission indicated the cause. To our surprise, NGS indicated an infection of Leptospira interrogans. Subsequently, it was retrospectively interviewed that the patient worked as a rubbish cleaner of rivers with high exposure risk of Leptospira infection.
The patient reported a 30 yr history of smoking and drinking. He denied any history of hypertension, diabetes or other chronic disease.
The patient and his families denied any history of hypertension, diabetes or other chronic disease.
On examination, his temperature was 37.5 °C, pulse was 118/min, respiratory rate was 19/min, and blood pressure was 81/54 mmHg at admission. He was in a conscious state but in compulsive position with cyanotic face. His superficial lymph nodes were not swollen. Lung examination showed bilateral rales. Other physical examinations were normal.
Arterial blood gas analysis showed lower PaO2 of 64 mmHg and SpO2 of 94.3% with 2 L/min oxygen support. Laboratory investigations revealed decreased white blood cell count of 1.7 × 109/L and platelet count of 56 × 109/L, elevated C-reactive protein of 190.81 mg/L, creatinine phosphokinase of 372 U/L, creatinine of 117 μmol/L and activated partial thromboplastin ratio of 1.30 and a positive urine occult blood test. The throat swab for influenza virus antigen was positive.
Chest computed tomography (CT) indicated infectious lesions of both lungs and emphysema with pulmonary bullae .