A 58-year-old Caucasian male with relapsed/refractory Sézary Syndrome (r/r SS) stage IVA was referred for allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation (allo-HCT). The patient had received multiple therapies prior to being assessed for a transplant . Positron Emission Tomography/Computed Tomography (PET/CT) with [18F]fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) prior to transplant (1/17/2017) revealed interval development of a new hypermetabolic soft tissue nodule in the skin of the posterior right shoulder with maximum standard uptake value (SUVmax) of 12.3 and a hypermetabolic right paratracheal lymph node . Skin biopsy was consistent with residual CTCL/SS, a bone marrow biopsy demonstrated hypocellularity with extensive involvement of mature T-cell lymphoma (79% by flow cytometry), and cytogenetic studies revealed no aberrations. The patient underwent allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation (allo-HCT) using a fully matched male sibling donor. The myeloablative conditioning regimen prior to transplant consisted of hyperfractionated total body irradiation combined with high dose cyclophosphamide. Graft versus host disease (GVHD) prophylaxis consisted of tacrolimus and methotrexate. Tacrolimus was subsequently changed to sirolimus due to peri-transplant neurotoxicity. Shortly after transplantation (week 7), the patient developed a diffuse erythematous rash, a biopsy of which was most consistent with skin GVHD (vs CTCL vs drug rash) and received prednisone, mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) with ongoing sirolimus with improvement, and subsequent tapering to low dose prednisone (5 mg daily/ week 23). A bone marrow biopsy 4 months after allo-HCT showed persistent marrow (and peripheral blood) involvement with sézary cells (15% bone marrow involvement by mature T-cell lymphoma with CD4+/CD8+ ratio > 100). There was also mixed chimerism by short tandem repeat (STR) assay with 82% donor cells . There was incomplete resolution of the skin manifestations of CTCL, which included generalized erythema and pruritus. Repeated skin biopsies were consistent with residual CTCL/SS. Five months after allo-HCT, STR studies again demonstrated persistent mixed chimerism, and donor lymphocyte infusions (DLI) in two separate doses were administered on weeks 26 and 31 (1 and 3 X 10e7 CD3 cells/kg, respectively) without complete resolution of skin symptoms or erythema. Following allo-HCT, there was a gradual worsening of a right shoulder skin lesion noted on PET/CT prior to transplant, and thought to be related to mycosis fungoides secondary to CTCL. The skin mass eventually extended over the superior aspect of the right shoulder with ulceration and hard induration, and 3 months post allo-HCT, the patient underwent subsequent involved-field radiotherapy with a total dose of 50 Gy. The lesion persisted and grew to 17 × 10 cm in maximum dimension with worsening necrosis, ulceration, and spread to the anterior chest wall , a skin biopsy was performed and histopathology revealed poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of the shoulder showed a right lesion with no bone or muscular invasion, but there was extensive right axillary lymphadenopathy. FDG-PET/CT revealed worsening of disease with extensive markedly hypermetabolic soft tissue thickening in the right shoulder with SUVmax of 26.7 and interval development of markedly hypermetabolic partially necrotic right axillary lymphadenopathy with SUVmax of 27.3, as well as worsening in FDG uptake of the right paratracheal lymph node. There was interval development of hypermetabolic focal cutaneous lesions, left axillary lymph nodes and pulmonary lesions (T3N2B; Stage IV SCC) .
After discussion of treatment options with the patient, intravenous pembrolizumab was started at a dose of 200 mg every 3 weeks. The patient had an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance of (ECOG 3) prior to beginning of treatment. After 2nd cycle of pembrolizumab, a macular rash appeared on the lower back. Skin biopsy demonstrated superficial perivascular mixed inflammatory cell infiltrate with normal CD4+/CD8+ ratio and was consistent with grade I skin immune related adverse event (IRAEs) due to pembrolizumab. Prednisone 60 mg was started and tapered over a total of 4 weeks with complete resolution of the skin symptoms secondary to IRAEs. The cutaneous manifestations including generalized erythema and pruritus which were secondary to CTCL resolved completely after the 2nd cycle of immunotherapy. A FDG-PET/CT after the 5th cycle of pembrolizumab showed marked metabolic response and near-complete resolution of the superficial right shoulder mass (SUVmax of 1.9), and complete resolution of right paratracheal and left axillary lymph nodes, as well as pulmonary and cutaneous lesions. There was decreased but persistent FDG uptake in the necrotic right axillary lymph nodes (SUVmax of 18.2) . Given the rapid and significant response, pembrolizumab was continued for another three cycles and repeated PET/CT showed continued response with decreased FDG avidity in the right axilla. After cycle 14, the patient underwent right axillary lymph node dissection encompassing levels 1–3 nodes for assessment of the residual persistent lymphadenopathy on the right side. Histopathology demonstrated metastatic squamous cell carcinoma in 3 of 17 lymph nodes. His post-operative course was uncomplicated. The complete course of pembrolizumab treatment consisted of 14 cycles, over a course of 9 months. Follow up 24 months after initiation of immune checkpoint blockade therapy (14 months after stopping pembrolizumab) revealed no evidence of recurrence of cSCC. There was no compelling evidence of either progression of CTCL/SS or a flare in GVHD throughout his course of checkpoint inhibition therapy (most recent peripheral blood flow cytometry on week 120 showing no morphologic or immunophenotypic evidence of atypical lymphocytosis or sézary cells and CD4+/CD8+ ration of 0.65).