A 63 year-old woman was referred to our department because of a strong family history of neurological diseases: her mother had died at the age of 59 years with Alzheimer’s dementia and her two sisters had died at age 69 and 59 y respectively with a diagnosis of frontotemporal lobar degeneration associated with minor symptoms of parkinsonism. A C9ORF72 repeat expansion was found by genetic analysis in the youngest sister.
Her personal medical history included appendectomy, diabetes mellitus, and a complete excision of a melanoma.
Parkinsonism was first diagnosed in 2009 at the age of 63 years when left akinesia and tremor appeared. Her symptoms responded poorly to levodopa, and the response rate was estimated to be approximately 20% by both the patient and her husband, and progressively worsened. At the onset, neurological examination revealed a resting tremor associated with akinesia. The Parkinsonism was bilateral but was clearly predominant on the left side. Rapid and alternative movements in the left hand were severely hypometric. Her left lower extremity was also akinetic, and she had severe difficulties in performing repetitive movements. She had no limitation in oculomotor movements and no gait disorder. She never developed motor fluctuations or dyskinesias. The patient fulfilled the criteria for IPD according to the UK Parkinson’s Disease Society Brain Bank : i/ the parkinson’s syndrome was defined by bradykinesia, with a 4–6 Hz resting tremor associated with muscular rigidity; ii/ no exclusion criteria were observed; iii/ the clinical presentation included more than 3 supportive prospective criteria (unilateral onset, rest tremor, progressive clinical course, persistent asymmetry affecting the side most affected at the onset of the disease).
A complete neuropsychological assessment two years after the onset of the disease (2011) revealed preservation of global cognitive efficiency (MATTIS DRS score: 137/144 ), difficulties in the executive functions (with a score at 10/18 on the Frontal Assessment Battery ), no difficulty in mental flexibility (Trail making test ) or sensitivity to interference (stroop test ), and global slowness (Coding subtest of the WAIS ).
After the discovery of the disease, we asked the patient for permission to test for the C9ORF72 gene abnormality. The number of repeat expansions was superior to 30 and was therefore considered to be abnormal.
In 2012, a comprehensive neuropsychological assessment was performed (see results in Table ) and revealed: a slight decrease in global cognitive efficiency (MATTIS DRS score ), normal efficiency in long-term verbal episodic (free and cued recall test ) and visual (modified Taylor complex figure ) memories, language (oral denomination ), praxis (Mahieux’s battery and visuospatial skills (Modified Taylor complex figure - copy ); low scores in short-term memory (WAIS-III digit span subtest ), and the prefrontal functions including verbal initiation (verbal fluencies ), and conflicting task (stroop test ). Unfortunately, our patient also exhibited significant difficulties in visual gnosis (Poppelreuter and PEGV ).