A 57-year-old woman without a history of drinking was referred to our hospital after presenting with vomiting for a week. She had a history of partial mastectomy for breast carcinoma 4 years prior and had undergone periodical surveillance with the administration of anastrozole. At surveillance computed tomography (CT) scan, a gallstone was identified 1 year prior to this admission. On physical examination, she had a body temperature of 37.8° and mild tenderness of the entire abdomen. Laboratory tests showed leukocytosis (white blood cell count, 18,060/μL) and elevated serum levels of hepatobiliary enzymes (aspartate aminotransferase, 133 U/L; alanine aminotransferase, 357 U/L; γ-glutamyl transpeptidase, 569 U/L; alkaline phosphatase, 239 U/L; total bilirubin, 5.3 mg/dL), amylase (1,899 U/L), and C-reactive protein (3.1 mg/dL). A CT scan revealed a stone measuring 6 mm in the papilla of Vater, dilation of the common bile duct, the disappearance of the stone from the gallbladder, acute pancreatitis, and absence of chronic pancreatitis and MPD dilation . Emergency ERCP was performed to remove the CBDS, which had led to acute cholangitis (moderate grade [1]) and pancreatitis by obstructing the bile duct and MPD. At ERCP, the papilla was swollen and red owing to CBDS impaction at the orifice of the papilla (a, b). After a guidewire was unintentionally inserted into the MPD a few times using a wire-guided cannulation technique, biliary cannulation was achieved by directly pushing a catheter (ERCP catheter; MTW Endoskopie, Düsseldorf, Germany) in the direction of the bile duct without advancement of the guidewire. Although the edge of the CBDS was endoscopically invisible in the papilla after biliary cannulation, cholangiography revealed no filling defects in the bile duct (c, d). A retrospective comparison of the fluoroscopic images before and after cannulation revealed that a calcified stone measuring 5 mm had moved into the MPD from the papilla of Vater (b, c). This suggested that the CBDS had migrated into the MPD due to the pushing motion of the catheter. However, because stone migration could not be realized during the ERCP session, stone removal was attempted by applying sweep procedures to the bile duct using a balloon catheter after biliary endoscopic sphincterotomy (EST). The moment of CBDS discharge into the duodenum could not be endoscopically observed during repeated sweep procedures. The session was completed without intervening with the MPD.
Her general condition gradually deteriorated with persistent oliguria and abdominal pain after ERCP; thus, contrast-enhanced CT was performed on the evening of the next day. The CT scan revealed a stone measuring 6 mm in the MPD with upstream dilation, no dilation of the bile duct, and evidence of deterioration of pancreatitis compared with the findings of the previous day . The migration of the CBDS into the MPD became apparent after confirming the CT findings. A second ERCP was performed the next morning. Pancreatography revealed a stone measuring 5 mm in the MPD, whereas cholangiography showed no filling defects in the bile duct (b, c). Pancreatic sphincterotomy was performed, followed by the placement of a pancreatic stent with an internal flap (Geenen, 5 Fr×7 cm; Cook Medical Japan, Tokyo, Japan) to relieve the MPD obstruction (d, e). Acute pancreatitis improved rapidly after the placement of the pancreatic stent. Subsequently, a third ERCP was performed 4 weeks later for complete MPD clearance. Pancreatography revealed that the MPD stone had spontaneously passed through the intestine within the 4-week period.