The patient was a 24-year-old female weighing 70 kg, with mandibular trauma as a result of a car accident without any loss of consciousness after the accident. Five days after the accident, the patient decided to undergo an open reduction and fixation surgery for the right mandibular angle fracture at Imam Khomeini hospital, Ahvaz, Iran. She had no history of any previous diseases except a history of an abortion under general anesthesia 6 years ago performed without any complications. The patient’s physical examination had no abnormal findings except paresthesia of the inferior lip, tenderness and edema in her right mandibular angle, forehead and scalp tenderness on the right side with no evident fracture. All nodes in the maxillofacial area except for the mandible itself were normal. There were no occlusion and the maximum jaw opening was 10 mm. The patient had a class II airway according to the Mallampati classification. As per the regulations of the maxillofacial ward, any patient with car accident should undergo a pre-operational neurosurgical consultation. Permission for performing the surgical procedure under general anesthesia was obtained from the patientduring the neurosurgical consultation. The laboratory analysis data were all in the normal acceptable ranges.
At 8:30 am, a general anesthesia was induced using 2 mg midazolam, 150 µg fentanyl, 100 mg lidocaine, 0.5 mg atropine, 300 mg thiopental sodium and 100 mg succinylcholine. Then the patient was intubated using a size 7.5 nasotracheal tube and 40 mg atracurium was administered for muscular relaxation. Tetracycline 1% ophthalmic ointment (Sina Darou, Tehran, Iran) was applied to the eyes, to keep the eyes shut during the operation. Anesthesia was maintained by infusion of 100-200 µg/kg/min propofol, 0.1 µg/kg/min remifentanil and 50% N2O- 50% O2. The patient underwent mechanical respiration and the monitoring included an electrocardiogram, noninvasive check of blood pressure and pulse oximetry implicated during the anesthesia. During the operation, the patient received 2000 mL of ringer's serum while the volume of bleeding was 100 mL and the patient released 150 mL urine. To maintain hemostasis, the surgeon locally injected 5 mL of 2% lidocaine with epinephrine 1:100000 after aspiration, into the right mandibular angle. After intraoral vestibular incision in mandibular angle area, displaced angle fracture was reduced and rigid fixation was performed using 2 four-hole miniplates at the external oblique ridge bythe Champy technique. After irrigation suturing with absorbable material was performed, the surgery and anesthesia were performed without any complications. At the end of the operation,the left pupil was completely dilated without any reaction to light while the right pupil was 3 mm with normal reaction to light. To reverse the muscular relaxation, 3.5 mg neostigmine and 1 mg atropine were administrated. To rule out intracranial hemorrhages and related eye and optic nerve pathologies, consultation with neurosurgery (in another hospital) and ophthalmology (in the same hospital) services was performed. After extubation, the patient was transferred to the recovery room 2 hours and 20 minutes after the induction of anesthesia, being conscious and oriented with a fairly general state without any complaint of blurred vision. The report of the ophthalmology consultation was as follows: Marcusgunn was negative; the dilated eye was reactive to light, the cornea and the anterior chamber were transparent, the retina vessels had normal appearance, the disc and the capsule were normal without any bleeding, and the lens was normal. Two hours and 10 minutes after ophthalmologic consultation, the patient was transferred to another hospital for neurosurgery consultation. At this point the diameter of the left pupil was 5 mm and the right pupil was 3 mm both being reactive to light. The neurosurgery team performed a brain computed tomography (CT) scan for the patient, the results of which were normal. In the neurosurgery consultation report, it was indicated that the examination of the cranial nerves was normal, the eyes movements were normal, the diameter of the right and the left pupils were respectively 3 mm and 4 mm, and both of them were reactive to light. The patient was returned to the hospital 3 hours and 50 minutes later when the left pupil mydriasis was completely resolved, being in fair general health with stable vital signs. The patient examination was normal days after.