A 52-year-old man (height, 160 cm; weight, 54 kg; body mass index, 21.0 kg/m2) having a diagnosis of esophageal cancer was scheduled for mediastinoscopic subtotal esophagectomy. He had undergone surgery for patent ductus arteriosus at 3 years of age. Preoperative examination revealed restrictive ventilatory impairment (%VC, 78%).
General anesthesia and epidural anesthesia were planned for the surgery . The epidural catheter was inserted through the Th9–Th10 intervertebral space and placed 5 cm into the epidural space. General anesthesia was induced through rapid sequence induction with propofol 150 mg, fentanyl 100 µg, remifentanil 0.1 µg·kg−1·min−1, and suxamethonium 60 mg. Anesthesia was maintained with desflurane, fentanyl, and remifentanil. An electromyographic tracheal tube (NIM TriVantage™ EMG Endotracheal Tube; Medtronic Japan Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) was used to avoid recurrent laryngeal nerve paralysis. Suxamethonium was used only for induction. Rocuronium was administered after the completion of the mediastinal procedure.
Approximately 1 h after the start of the surgery, the EtCO2 level suddenly exceeded its scale range (EtCO2, 227 mmHg; imCO2, 17 mmHg) when the operator was dissecting adhesions between the trachea and esophagus during the mediastinoscopy procedure. At the same time, the patient’s blood pressure and heart rate dropped to 72/52 mmHg and 45 beats/min, respectively. The percutaneous oxygen saturation (SpO2) remained at 99%. The operator was immediately notified that the EtCO2 level was abnormally high, and insufflation through mediastinoscopy was stopped. The patient’s vital signs improved with hyperventilation on 100% oxygen and administration of a vasopressor. The soda lime present in the anesthesia machine turned completely purple within minutes and had to be replaced. Suspecting a direct influx of carbon dioxide into the trachea caused by tracheal injury based on the sudden rise in EtCO2 during the tracheal manipulation, the surgery was interrupted and the trachea was observed by bronchoscopy. The right side of the trachea, near the carina, was damaged . We administered 50 mg of rocuronium and replaced the NIM tube with a left double-lumen endobronchial tube to initiate left lung ventilation. The operator suspended the mediastinal procedure and initiated a laparoscopic transhiatal procedure. Afterward, the right thorax was opened, and the damaged area was filled with the greater omentum. As the repaired trachea showed no leakage and the patient’s vital signs remained stable, we proceeded to awaken the patient from anesthesia and extubate the double-lumen endobronchial tube. The patient was then transferred to the intensive care unit. The durations of surgery and anesthesia were 7 h 33 min and 9 h 12 min, respectively. Blood loss and urine output were 20 and 680 mL, respectively. The patient received 1500 mL of crystalloids and 1000 mL of colloids. Although anastomotic leakage was noted on postoperative day 11, the patient was treated with fasting and antibiotics (tazobactam/piperacillin) and was discharged from the hospital on postoperative day 54.