A 31-year-old male presented with a headache, nausea, and vomiting in November 2008. His family history revealed arterial hypertension in his mother and brother. His father died from liver malignancy, while his paternal uncle died of a brain tumor. Physical examination did not reveal any abnormality, apart from arterial hypertension (150/100 mmHg). Visual fields were normal in both eyes, and no other cranial nerve sensory or motor defects were present. MRI showed the presence of a large sellar mass (16 × 28 × 19 mm) with bilateral parasellar involvement . Pituitary hormone assessment showed central hypothyroidism and low prolactin levels . The clinical diagnosis was of a non-functioning pituitary tumor with partial hypopituitarism. Levothyroxine (50 µg/day) replacement was started. Blood pressure responded well to the ACE inhibitor (Ramipril 1.25 mg/day). Transsphenoidal surgery was performed in February 2009 with partial tumor resection leaving residual tumor in both cavernous sinuses . The histopathological examination revealed only necrotic material. Postoperative assessment showed additional gonadotroph and growth hormone deficiency and testosterone enanthate (250 mg/month) was initiated. Over the next 4 years, annual MRIs showed a stable residual tumor. In 2013, the patient developed a severe headache, and a pituitary MRI revealed an increase in the residual tumor volume with the same pattern of growth. In November 2013, the patient underwent gamma knife radiosurgery with a dose of 12 Gy to the 50% margin.
Two years later, he developed panhypopituitarism . He had normal visual fields. Hydrocortisone was added to the replacement therapy (10 mg on waking up and 5 mg late in the afternoon). An MRI follow-up showed mild reduction of the size of the residual tumor.
In November 2017, the patient was admitted to the emergency room due to loss of consciousness, severe headaches, especially in the left retrobulbar area, nausea, and vomiting. The MRI showed a significant tumor progression (from 22 × 23 × 12 mm to 42 × 35 × 27 mm in 3 years) with tumor extension to the left orbit through the inferior orbital fissure . A transcranial surgery was performed with a partial tumor resection. Histopathological examination demonstrated tumor tissue composed of groups of uniform round to oval tumor cells with finely granulated chromatin surrounded by delicate fibrous septa, features suggestive for paraganglioma. Neuroendocrine character of the tumor cells was confirmed by positivity for synaptophysin and chromogranin A. S100-positive sustentacular cells were scattered in the interlobular interstitium. Mitoses were present (fewer than 5 per 10 high power field) and Ki67 proliferative index reached 10% in multiple foci. There were signs of tumor invasion into surrounding brain tissue .
Plasma free metanephrine and normetanephrine were within the normal range . Assessment of the plasma level of dopamine metabolite 3-methoxythyramine was not determined since this analysis is not a routine at our center. Initially, 68Ga-DOTANOC, which is the most sensitive method to detect bone deposits of paraganglioma , was not performed. Thus, the presence of the distant metastases early during the clinical course could not be excluded.
The patient’s relatively young age and the aggressive course of the disease prompted the genetic testing. However, next-generation sequencing (NGS) from blood sample showed no germline mutations in SDHA, SDHB, SDHC, SDHD, SDHAF2, TMEM127, MAX, VHL, RET, NF1, GOT2, MDH2, EGLN, EPAS, SLC25A11, MAX, and FH genes.
The patient was well until January 2019, when left-sided headaches became severe, and tumefaction in the left submandibular region was palpable. The MRI of the neck revealed a tumor mass in the left submandibular region as well as a smaller lesion in the ipsilateral masticator space . A nodular soft tissue lesion in the body of the second lumbar vertebra consistent with metastasis was detected on the MRI performed due to back pain . The patient underwent stereotactic radiotherapy of the sellar region with the total dose of 48 Gy/24 fractions in May 2019 and posttreatment sellar MRI showed a necrotic transformation of the residual tumor in the left cavernous sinus, while the orbital component remained unchanged. A submandibular lesion was removed. The histopathological findings were principally the same as in the sellar tumor. Immunohistochemical analyses performed according to standard protocols at the Department of Clinical Pathology, Uppsala University Hospital showed strong expression of somatostatin receptors (SSTR) type 2A and 3 in all tumor cells, whereas SSTR1 and SSTR5 were negative. Additional immunohistochemical analysis with ATRX antibody (HPA001906, Atlas Antibodies; dilution 1:100; incubation time 20 min) demonstrated the lack of immunolabeling in the tumor cells with preserved staining in non-neoplastic cells, strongly suggesting an ATRX gene mutation . ATRX immunolabeling was negative both in the specimen from the primary sellar tumor from 2017 and in the specimen from submandibular tumor deposit from 2019. In order to confirm the ATRX gene mutation, a molecular genetic analysis was performed using NGS panel covering 20 genes related to CNS malignancies on DNA extracted from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumor tissue from the submandibular tumor lesion. In concordance with lack of ATRX immunolabeling in tumor cells, a nonsense mutation in ATRX was detected in exon 12 causing pre-termination at Gly-1350 in the central portion of the ATRX protein preceding the helicase ATP-binding and C-terminal domains. An additional TP53 p.Arg283Cys missense variant localized in the region encoding the C-terminus of the central DNA-binding domain was also identified. The sample was wild-type with respect to hotspot mutations in IDH1, IDH2, and TERT promoter. No obvious copy number variation (CNV) could be detected . Following the molecular genetic finding of a TP53 variant, immunohistochemical analysis of TP53 (DAKO, monoclonal antibody, clone D0-7, catalogue number GA616; ready-to-use; incubation time 20 min) was performed showing a negative result .
A follow-up MRI in August 2019 revealed an increase in the volume of the masticator lesion and an increased volume of the lumbar metastasis. In December 2019, 68Ga-DOTANOC PET/CT was performed (application 191 MBq) and showed the full extent of the disease . Octreotide LAR was initiated LAR (30 mg i.m. every 28 days). Based on the results of 68Ga-DOTANOC PET/CT, Karnofsky performance status (80%), and an increased Ki67 index (10%), we decided to perform Peptide Receptor Radionuclide Therapy (PRRT) with 177Lu-DOTATATE. We performed four out of six planned cycles of the therapy with a dose of 5.55 GBq each following 1-month suspension of octreotide before treatment. During the follow-up, the patient responded well to the treatment; he no longer had headaches and lower back pain, and submandibular swelling has resolved. The follow-up CT, MR, and 68Ga-DOTANOC examinations have been scheduled; however, the patient developed acute calculous cholecystitis that required emergent surgery and resulted in the delayed control examinations.