An 82-year-old woman with a past medical history of valvular heart and coronary artery disease (CAD), stroke, diabetes, atrial fibrillation, chronic kidney disease, and osteoporosis presented in a secondary-care hospital after a generalized tonic-clonic seizure following an acute exacerbation of her chronic back pain. The patient complained of back pain, but denied chest pain or dyspnoea. On admission elevated blood pressure (171/91 mmHg) was noted, oxygen saturation was 93% on 4 L/min of oxygen and there were signs of biventricular acute heart failure with fine bibasilar crackles indicating pulmonary oedema, elevated jugular venous pressure, and swelling of the lower extremities. A delayed left-sided pupillary response was noted while the neurological status was otherwise unremarkable. The patients long-term medication consisted of apixaban 5 mg b.i.d., lisinopril 20 mg/day, torasemide 30 mg/day, levothyroxine 100 µg/day, acetaminophen 4 g/day, metamizole 3 g/day, fentanyl patch 50 µg/24h, and amitriptyline 25 mg/day. Electrocardiography (ECG) documented sinus rhythm with intermittent ST-segment elevation in the precordial leads . Laboratory tests revealed a markedly increased N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide (at admission: 21 219 ng/L, max. 59 475 ng/L, normal <738 ng/L) and only modestly elevated troponin values (at admission 76 ng/L, max. 204 ng/L, normal <14 ng/L), while creatine kinase repetitively remained normal. Brain MRI demonstrated bilateral cerebellar and occipital vasogenic oedema consistent with PRES. Echocardiography demonstrated a newly reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) with apical akinesia and the patient was transferred to our hospital for left heart catheterization.
Immediate left heart catheterization was planned but initially not feasible due to agitation and disorientation of the patient. Transthoracic echocardiography in our hospital showed a normally configurated left ventricle with a severely reduced biventricular ejection fraction with akinesia of the entire apex extending to the midventricular segments as well as akinesia of the right free wall and a moderate to severe low-flow–low-gradient aortic stenosis (, Videos S1–S3). Computed tomography (CT) ruled out aortic dissection and pulmonary embolism but demonstrated new osteoporotic fractures of the thoracic spine. Concomitant CT angiography demonstrated high-grade diffuse arteriosclerosis and a stented right coronary artery (RCA) with preserved flow in all distal coronary arteries, rendering reliable quantification of coronary stenosis inconclusive. Invasive coronary angiography revealed serial 90% stenoses in the mid-segment of the left circumflex artery (LCX) and a proximal 80% in-stent restenosis in the previously stented RCA ( and ). The left anterior descending artery (LAD) itself demonstrated no significant lesions. Left ventriculography was not conducted due to previously performed echocardiography and acute on chronic renal failure. The RCA was treated with a drug-eluting stent , the stenoses in the LCX were not treated simultaneously because of increased agitation of the patient, which was considered acceptable due to small vessel size, sufficient collateral flow, and lack of angina. Follow-up ECG showed new biphasic T-wave inversions in the precordial leads and QTc prolongation , while laboratory tests demonstrated no signs of increasing troponin leakage. Given the characteristic wall motion pattern with apical ballooning with reduced LVEF and a coronary pathology not explaining the wall motion abnormality in context with ST-segment elevation and prolonged QTc with subsequent T-wave inversion, TTS with concomitant obstructive CAD and PRES was considered as the most appropriate diagnosis and the initial back pain exacerbation due to fractures in the thoracic spine appeared a likely trigger for the TTS event .
The patient was treated with analgesia to minimize recurrent triggers (acetaminophen 4 g/day, metamizole 3 g/day, hydromorphone max. 32 mg/day), levetiracetam 1000 mg/day to prevent recurrent seizures, dual antiplatelet medication (aspirin 100 mg/day, clopidogrel 75 mg/day) after coronary artery stenting and intensive heart failure therapy including angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (lisinopril 2.5–10 mg/day, dose was limited by symptomatic hypotension and acute on chronic renal failure) and loop diuretics (varying doses of furosemide IV, max. 70 mg/days or torasemide oral, max. 50 mg/days). Because of bradycardia and hypotension, beta-blockers were postponed. Since the patient refused cardiopulmonary resuscitation, heart rhythm monitoring was not performed despite QTc prolongation.
While heart failure symptoms improved, the clinical course was complicated by intermittent episodes of decreased consciousness, acute renal failure, and electrolyte disturbances. Electroencephalography demonstrated no evidence of epileptic potentials and CT ruled out intracranial haemorrhage, hence we suspected either prolonged PRES symptoms or hypoactive delirium and installed continuous observation and conservative anti-delirious measures. Follow-up cerebral MRI 5 weeks later showed resolution of the vasogenic brain oedema. Follow-up echocardiography 4 weeks later demonstrated complete normalization of LVEF without any residual wall motion abnormalities .
The patient was discharged 4 weeks after hospital admission without evidence of heart failure and without clinically apparent neurological defects to geriatric rehabilitation. The discharge medication included ramipril 1.25 mg/day for TTS, aspirin 100 mg/day and clopidogrel 75 mg/day after percutaneous coronary intervention on top of edoxaban 30 mg/day for atrial fibrillation, pantoprazole 40 mg/day, torasemide 2.5 mg/day, levothyroxine 100 µg/day, and acetaminophen 4 g/day plus buprenorphine patch 35 µg/24 h for chronic back pain. Levetiracetam was stopped after resolution of vasogenic oedema on cerebral MRI. Regular check-ups for adaption of lisinopril, torasemide, and edoxaban at the patient’s general practitioner were planned, as well as cardiologic and neurologic follow-up after 3 months at an outpatient clinic.