A 13-year-old male with global developmental delay and epilepsy secondary to Lennox Gastaut syndrome presented to his local general pediatrics service in March 2022 with a bilateral lower limb purpuric rash, arthritis, severe anemia (Hb=5.9g/dl), normal platelets (368x109/L), elevated C reactive protein (CRP=80mg/L) and elevated serum IgA (5.6 g/L range 0.5-3.5g/L) . In the peripheral hospital, due to the presence of lower limb purpura and arthritis, the child was diagnosed with IgA vasculitis and managed conservatively .
After an initial improvement, he presented again a year later in February 2023, with a lower limb purpuric rash and arthritis. He had moderate anemia (Hb=9.5 g/dl), raised acute phase reactants (CRP-47mg/L, ESR-79mm/hr) normal platelets (352 x109/L), normal INR (1.18) and a raised urine protein to creatinine ratio (Pr:Cr=0.23 g/mmol). Again, he was diagnosed with recurrent IgA vasculitis. Three weeks later, an oral mass was noted. He was given amoxicillin-clavulanic acid and referred to the pediatric nephrology and rheumatology teams at the Red Cross Children’s Hospital for further workup of incalcitrant IgA vasculitis.
Upon admission, he was noted to have an additional 3-week history of progressive lower limb bruising, pain and swelling, poor feeding, and irritability, and he had recently stopped walking. His caregivers complained of the mass in his lower jaw that was growing and becoming disfiguring to his face.
Past medical history revealed that he was a twin, born at term, and that he had developed multiple seizures as an infant. His parents were known to abuse alcohol and amphetamines, and they had nine older children. Due to these circumstances, he and his twin were placed in the care of their elderly grandparents from birth. His seizures were well controlled with phenobarbitone (6 mg/kg/day), valproic acid (40 mg/kg/day), risperidone (0.06 mg/kg/day), and lamotrigine (5 mg/kg/day). He was unable to communicate verbally and was unable to perform self-care activities like feeding, dressing, and toileting independently. His twin brother had normal neurological development. The family received a care dependency grant from the government, and he attended a special-needs school. According to his grandfather, he normally ate cooked porridge, noodles, cabbage, and bananas and required a long time and a lot of support to feed.
His physical exam revealed a severely underweight child (24.5kg below the 5th centile for age) with rapidly progressive weight loss for 4 months . He could not communicate and was irritable, in pain, and lying flexed in his bed. His blood pressure was 103/70mm Hg, and his heart rate was 110 beats per minute. He had an open mouth with a large right-sided intraoral mandibular fungating and protruding mass with no active bleeding or discharge. He also had petechial and ecchymotic lesions on his upper and lower limbs . There was bilateral pitting pedal and pretibial edema with effusions, pain, and limitation of his bilateral ankles, knees, and right wrist.
He had severe anemia (Hb = 4 g/dl), leukopenia (1.8 x109/L), elevated CRP (89 mg/dl), elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR = 42 mm/hr), and a normalizing urine protein to creatinine ratio (0.041 g/mmol). Anti-nuclear antibody, anti-proteinase 3 antibody, and anti-myeloperoxidase antibody were negative. Complement 3 and 4 levels done previously when the child was having proteinuria were normal (C3-1.5, 0.9 to 1.8; C4-0.28, 0.1 to 0.4) and not repeated since proteinuria was improving.
A computed tomography (CT) scan of the jaw mass revealed an inflammatory mass or abscess evident both externally as a facial swelling and intraorally as a mass with no bony destruction . Maxillofacial and Oral Surgery was consulted, and an examination, dental extractions, and biopsy were performed during which gingival friability with hypertrophy and bleeding with deep periodontal pocketing were noted throughout the dentition. All maxillary and mandibular teeth were also noted to be mobile. The retained deciduous teeth were removed, and the gingiva was debrided. Biopsies were taken from the reported intra-oral lesion and two predetermined areas of skin on the upper and lower limbs. After surgery, the surgeons commented specifically on the multiple loose teeth, remarking on the possibility of vitamin deficiency. Histology of the oral mass showed extensive hemorrhage with fibrin and organizing hematoma within the subepithelial stroma. There was focal ulceration and reactive changes within the overlying epithelium. There was no evidence of vasculitis or a vascular neoplasm.
A skin biopsy revealed follicular hyperkeratosis and perifollicular extravasated red blood cells with no associated vasculitis , which is pathognomonic for vitamin C deficiency. Direct immunofluorescence studies were negative for IgA deposition. Serum level of vitamin C was not available. The serum iron was low, but vitamin D, vitamin B12 and folate were normal. An X-ray of the ankles showed white lines of Frankel, a Trummerfeld zone, and Wimberger’s ring epiphysis .
In summary, this young boy with Lennox Gastaut syndrome and difficult social circumstances presented with lower limb purpura and arthritis and was initially mis-diagnosed with IgA vasculitis. Upon further weight loss, persistently raised inflammatory markers, anemia, and the development of an intra-oral mass with multiple loose teeth, scurvy was diagnosed clinically.
He was treated with vitamin C 100 mg orally three times a day and improved rapidly. His family was provided with dietary advice to enrich his meals with vitamin C, and he was referred to social services for an assessment of his home circumstances. After a week, he had significant improvement in his irritability, appetite, purpuric rash and edema and was discharged . At two-month follow-up he had gained 4 kg, was walking and mobilizing well and his family reported improved appetite and vigor beyond the previous baseline.
WBC- white blood cells; Hg- hemoglobin; MCV- Mean corpuscular volume; RDW- red cell distribution width; PLT- platelets; CRP- C-reactive protein; ESR-Erythrocyte sedimentation rate; Cr: creatinine; P:Cr- urine protein to creatinine ratio.