A 33-year-old man referred to our hospital with oligotrophic nonunion of the middle humeral diaphysis and nail breakage. He had a history of Gustilo type I open fracture 12 years before (May 2006), secondary to a motorcycle accident, with a multifragmentary pattern (Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen/Orthopedic Trauma Association type 12B3). He had been initially treated with debridement, wound closure, and positioning of a uniplanar external fixator. After 6 months of clinical and radiological follow-up, there were no signs of healing and persistent pain at fracture site . It was then decided to convert the external fixator into a roamed retrograde IM nail. The patient was followed up clinically and radiologically until 2017 and had returned to his normal life without complaining of any pain during everyday life and working activity. Unfortunately, unlike the good clinical outcome, the follow-up X-rays showed an oligotrophic nonunion of the midshaft of the humerus with, at least, 1 cm of bone loss. A year later(May 2018), the patient came to our attention because, after a mere twisting movement, he heard a snap and, subsequently, pain and loss of function to the right arm. With plain radiographs, a nail breakage was assessed . He complained of moderate pain and functional disability of the involved limb and was then admitted to our hospital. Full blood count, sedimentation rate, and C-reactive protein level were preoperatively investigated for infection and were negative. We decided then to schedule a one-stage surgical procedure of nail removal and new osteosynthesis with autogenous iliac crest bone graft. After regional nerve block and general anesthesia, the patient is seated in a lazy beach chair position, with the head of the bed elevated approximately 30°. This position allows good surgical exposure of the humerus and eases access to the iliac crest. In addition, a padded bump is placed under the ipsilateral hip to ease in the access of the iliac crest by increasing the crests’ prominence. The humeral nonunion was exposed through an extended anterolateral approach. A straight incision at the lateral border of the biceps muscle was made, and, after cutting the fascia, the biceps muscle was retracted medially, bringing the brachialis muscle into view. The brachialis muscle was split longitudinally throughout its lateral third and transected down to the bone. Through deltopectoral surgical exposure, the two proximal screws were removed. Distally, the radial nerve was identified, surrounded with a vessel loop and the distal screw was then removed. The nonunion zone was debrided by removing all fibrous tissue, interposed muscle, and necrotic bone followed by decortication, until bleeding bone was observed to provide a viable bed for the bone graft and to stimulate callus formation. The debridement left almost 2 cm bone gap and exposed the broken nail which was removed. A tricortical bone graft is obtained from the iliac crest according to previously described technique . The iliac crest graft was trimmed to enable it to snugly telescope into the fracture fragments (the harvested bone graft was then packed into the defect) and then, a 4.5mm limited contact dynamic compression plate was placed on the anterior face of the humerus . Dynamic examination of the synthesis under fluoroscopy has been used as an intraoperative method to assess the stability of the construct. Wound closure was provided. Three sets of intraoperative cultures were done with negative results. Post-operative X-rays showed good alignment of the nonunion and refilling of the bone defect. The patient was allowed early rehabilitation with free shoulder and elbow motion to avoid joint stiffness. He was followed up radiologically at regular time intervals of 4 weeks and clinically with Constant shoulder score (CS), subjective shoulder value (SSV), and visual analog scale (VAS). Visits were scheduled until bone graft union was radiologically confirmed at final follow-up . At this point, good clinical function was achieved with SSV of 80%, VAS 0, and CS of 76 .