A 67-year-old Lebanese woman presented to Notre Dame des Secours University Hospital (Jbeil, Lebanon) on 8 July 2021, with a 3-week history of acute severe lumbar back pain, radiating to the lower extremities and associated with impaired mobility and lower extremity weakness. It is noteworthy that the patient reported having chronic lumbar pain for the past 3 months, yet the last few weeks were marked by hyperalgesia without a history of trauma. She complained of night sweating but had no fever, chills, cough, or dyspnea. However, the patient recalled a 1-week history of fever 1 month ago, after taking the second dose of the Pfizer–BioNTech coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) vaccine. She was admitted to the hospital on the same day, and was referred to the Department of Infectious Diseases for adequate investigation and management. The patient was known to have hypertension, diabetes, dyslipidemia, and hypothyroidism—all treated with medications. She also had a history of lumbar L4–L5 disc herniation, for which arthrodesis was performed 4 years ago. She reported a history of unpasteurized dairy product consumption. Owing to the fact that Lebanon is an endemic area for brucellosis , the presence of chronic symptoms with a recent exacerbation shed light on the plausibility of Brucella infection with spinal involvement. On physical examination, her temperature was 36.8 °C, respiratory rate 15 breaths per minute, blood pressure 150/80 mmHg, and pulse 105 beats per minute. We noted a painful percussion of the lumbar spine at L3/L4 as well as painful passive mobilization and lumbar paravertebral tenderness. No lymphadenopathy, hepatomegaly, or splenomegaly could be observed. On neurological examination, the range of motion was not decreased for lower extremities; neither sensory deficits nor sphincter abnormalities were present.
The performed blood tests were indicative of inflammation: hemoglobin 9.4 g/dl, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 100 mm per hour, and C-reactive protein (CRP) 70 mg/l. White blood cell count was 6410/μl, and leukocyte formula showed 56% neutrophils, 33% lymphocytes, and 7% monocytes. Blood chemistry was within the normal values. Bacterial serology (BrucellaCapt test) indicated that anti-Brucella antibodies were positive at a titer of 1/5120 (reference range 1/180). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbar spine, performed on 9 July 2021, revealed a multifocal spondylodiscitis involvement of the T12–L1 and L3–L4 discs and their respective adjacent vertebral bodies, with epidural thickening, significant foraminal narrowing at L3–L4 level, and the formation of a paravertebral abscess of 9 mm next to T12. No nerve root compression lesions of the spine were identified. The MRI also showed a grade I anterolisthesis (spondylolisthesis) at L4–L5 . Magnetic resonance imaging of the lumbar spine used a high field of 1.5 T.
The diagnosis of Brucella spondylodiscitis was set. The patient was treated with an inpatient regimen of doxycycline 100 mg by oral route every 12 hours, intravenous ciprofloxacin 400 mg every 12 hours, and intravenous gentamicin 480 mg per day for 2 weeks, which was followed by an outpatient oral antibiotic regimen with doxycycline 100 mg every 12 hours, rifampin 900 mg per day, and ciprofloxacin 500 mg every 12 hours to complete a total treatment duration of 3 months. The patient subsequently experienced a complete resolution of her symptoms and became completely healthy. As part of her follow-up, blood tests were done, indicating normal C-reactive protein and erythrocyte sedimentation rate. An MRI was also performed at the end of the treatment and showed a complete resolution of the paravertebral abscess . Magnetic resonance imaging of the lumbar spine using a high field of 1.5 T was performed at the end of the treatment.