A 5-year-old girl was presented with a lump and pain in her right knee. The patient was with a history of falling from a bike two months prior to the admission with no significant injury related to the fall. General examination was within normal limit. The patient complains of unexplain loss of weight. Pain was felt out of proportion and worsen at night.
Physical examination of the right knee showed a solid circumferential mass (diameter 30 cm, contralateral 26 cm) on the proximal tibia . The range of motion of the right knee is limited to 120° compared to 140° in the contralateral side due to the mass and pain. A plain radiograph was obtained which showed an osteoblastic lesion on the proximal tibia with a discrete margin and narrow transition zone. The cortex of the bone was intact with no periosteal reaction . The margin of the lesion was further described on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with contrast . A computed tomography scan of the chest showed no metastatic nodules. Histopathological and immunochemistry examination confirmed the diagnosis of osteosarcoma with a high degree giant cell-rich subtype .
Three cycles of neoadjuvant therapy regiment with cisplatin, ifosfamide, and adriamycin were administered to the patient. Multidisciplinary approach surgery with plastic surgeon and cardio thoracic vascular surgeon was conducted in this patient.
The surgery was performed with a torniquet in a supine position with an anteromedial approach on the proximal tibia. The popliteal bundle was then identified and preserved. Ligation and anastomosis of the vein involved with the tumor were performed prior to wide excision. Wide excision was performed with the respect to preserve the epiphyseal plate proximally and 13 cm of the epiphyseal plate distally. The proximal tibia segment was clear from the tumor with osteotome and bone curette The proximal tibia segment was recycled using liquid nitrogen for 40 min. The recycled autograft was left to be thawed at room temperature for 15 min and soaked in 160 mg gentamycin saline for 5 min . The recycled autograft was re-implanted and fixed with a locking 2.7 mm T-plate and a straight reconstruction 2.7 mm reconstruction plate (Heng Jie, China). The bone defect on the medial side was filled with a vascularized fibular graft which was harvested by prior to wide excision. The remaining bone defect was filled with bone graft and bone substitutes. A medial hemigastrocnemius flap was used for soft tissue coverage.
Postoperatively we performed an X-ray to evaluate the surgery. From the X-ray, the plate and screws are well-fixated . Postoperative histopathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of conventional osteosarcoma HUVOS 1 with free tumor margin.
Postoperative condition showed good surgical and functional outcomes. Postoperative complications did not occur in this patient. Radiological union was achieved in 1 year followup with the ROM of 120° in the affected knee. Functional outcome was calculated with musculoskeletal society tumor score (MSTS) with the result of 76,6%.