A 24-year-old male patient with recurrent fever (up to 40°C), palpitation, shortness of breath, and precordial pain after activity over the past 3 weeks was admitted to our hospital. The patient had a history of working in high-altitude areas and recurrent oral ulcers before the onset. The vital signs on admission were as follows: a body temperature of 36.4°C, heart rate of 110 beats per minute, and regular, blood pressure of 118/68 mmHg. Electrocardiogram presented sinus rhythm. Auscultation was notable for a diastolic murmur on the 3rd intercostal area of the left sternal border, and a pistol shot sound in the groin. The patient had no perineal ulcer. The acupuncture test was negative.
Echocardiography showed: left ventricle enlargement; a sonolucent area ~11.5 × 25 mm was located next to the right coronary sinus, which communicated with the dilated aortic root; a flail-like moving flocculent vegetation ~17 mm long was located in the junction area of the right and left aortic valve on the aortic side; the right and left aortic valve leaflets were both impaired, resulting in severe aortic regurgitation (, ); and the right coronary artery showed intramural course and was compressed by the surrounding abscess. It also showed an abnormal opening at the junction of the left and right aortic valves, with only a 2.7 mm wide ostium compared to a 4.3 mm one in the left coronary artery ; the ejection fraction was 69%; mild pulmonary hypertension was presented; and no obvious abnormality was observed in the aortic arch and its branches.
Computed tomographic angiography showed that the right coronary sinus was of an irregular shape, and was pushed to the left by a 2.2 × 1.4 × 2.1 cm cystic structure in the anterior part of the aortic root. Enhancement was observed in the cystic structure, which communicated with the aorta ; the left coronary artery arose from above the left coronary sinus; the right coronary artery arose from above the junction of the left and right coronary sinus, and the proximal segment was surrounded by the abscess (5.1 × 2.0 cm), resulting in mild-to-moderate stenosis (, ). Coronary angiography was not performed. Cranial MRI indicated no intracranial infection.
Initial laboratory results were notable for leukocyte of 14.91 × 109/L, albumin 28.4 g/L, procalcitonin 0.38 ng/ml, and C-reactive protein was 110.2 mg/L. Hemoglobin was 105 g/L. Cardiac troponin I (cTnI) was 0.23 pg/ml. N-terminal pro-b-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) was 609.51 pg/ml. The pre-operative blood culture result was negative. The clinical evidence suggested infective endocarditis, aortic insufficiency, aortic root abscess, and coronary heart disease.
The patient then received a Bentall procedure to replace the damaged aorta and valves with a 23# valved conduit. The intraoperative findings were listed as follows: the left atrium was enlarged; there was abundant vegetation in the damaged aortic valves; and a bulge was found next to the right coronary sinus, with a complete three-layer structure (intima, media, and adventitia). The bulge communicated with the aortic root and was also full of vegetation, which compressed the right coronary sinus and blocked the right coronary ostia . The left and right coronary arteries both started at the left coronary sinus and were ~4 mm apart. The right coronary artery showed ~3 mm intramural course, surrounded by purulent exudate and tissue edema. Surgical debridement was performed to clear all vegetation and remove the damaged aortic valve leaflets and part of the valvular annulus . The portion of the aortic valve annulus under the right coronary sinus was reconstructed with a bovine pericardial patch. The bulge was preserved outside the conduit to have better support for the unstable annulus. A 23#SJM valved conduit was inserted, with perforation in the corresponding position of the ostia of the coronary arteries. Stenosis in the right coronary disappeared soon after the compression was removed. The coronary arteries were then anastomosed to the conduit at the assumed positions with buttons. After the surgery, the patient was sent to the intensive care unit with tracheal intubation and received intravenous ceftriaxone 2 g/day for at least 4 weeks as an anti-infective therapy.
The intraoperative and post-operative blood cultures were both negative. Therefore, we performed a post-operative high-throughput sequencing examination, which showed oral streptococcal infection. The patient then received cardiotonic therapy, anti-inflammatory treatment, and other necessary symptomatic support. Post-operative echocardiography showed that the artificial aortic conduit and valves were in normal position and functioned well . The closure of the bulge was successful, with no blood flow signal inside . No stenosis or obstruction was observed in the opening of the coronary arteries. Post-operative blood routine examination showed that the leukocyte returned to normal at 9.21 × 109/L. The patient described that the chest pain disappeared and was discharged 15 days after the surgery. Four weeks after surgery, the follow-up echocardiography showed no positive finding.