A 59 year old man with Crohn’s disease presented to dermatology in March 2016 with a scalp growth. Biopsy showed a spindle cell/desmoplastic melanoma (Clark level IV, Breslow thickness 1.75 mm, mitotic figures at least 5/mm2, no perineural/lymphatic invasion) with positive deep margins. In April 2016 he underwent wide excision with sentinel lymph node biopsy that revealed residual mixed spindle cell/desmoplastic melanoma that was completely excised with negative margins and negative nodes (stage IIB, pT4A). Previous to this the patient had a history of Crohn’s disease requiring hospitalization and following lymph node dissection, treatment was changed from infliximab and azathioprine to single therapy vedolizumab, an inhibitor of integrin α4β7, with the intent of limiting immunosuppression as much as possible while still optimizing therapy for Crohn’s disease.
Surrounding Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD), the patient was initially diagnosed with Ulcerative Colitis in 1991 and did not require treatment until developing a perirectal abscess in 1999. At that time the diagnosis was changed to Crohn’s disease rather than Ulcerative Colitis. Crohn’s disease is heterogeneous in its clinical manifestations, and the Montreal classification schema is used to better categorize a patient’s clinical course by age of onset, disease location, and disease behavior. The patient’s Montreal classification was A2 (onset between 17 and 40 years old), L3 (ileocolon location) and B3p (penetrating behavior with perianal disease). He has had no extra-intestinal manifestations of his IBD. Following the perirectal abscess in 1999 the patient was started on mesalamine and had approximately yearly flares requiring prednisone tapers for disease control. In 2010 he required more frequent tapers and his symptoms began to more aggressively emerge if his prednisone dose was reduced below 20 mg daily. In 2011 he presented to our institution’s Gastroenterology clinic. Pathology review from the outside hospital colonoscopy biopsies in 2010 showed inflammation of the cecum, descending colon, sigmoid colon, and rectum consistent with moderate to severe colitis. A repeat colonoscopy in 2011 confirmed active moderate-severe disease. He was started on azathioprine and mesalamine enemas/suppositories and continued on oral mesalamine. On this regimen he was able to be weaned off prednisone with symptom control. His course was complicated by the development of shingles, which required dose reduction of his azathioprine. He had a repeat colonoscopy in the June 2012 that showed active disease in the terminal ileum, cecum, and right colon. He was then started on infliximab infusions every 8 weeks and continued on dose-reduced azathioprine and rectal mesalamine (enemas/suppositories). Repeat colonoscopy in June 2013 showed normal terminal ileum with mild colitis proximally and mild to moderate proctitis. His rectal mesalamine therapy was escalated and repeat colonoscopy in November 2015 showed Crohn’s disease to be in remission.
In April 2016 IBD therapy was changed from infliximab and azathioprine/mesalamine to vedolizumab in response to his melanoma diagnosis. Vedolizumab has been administered 10 mg/kg intravenously every eight weeks in conjunction with IV steroids since that time. The patient underwent surveillance colonoscopy as recently as May 2017 with pathology consistent with normal ileum and colon and patchy quiescent colitis in the sigmoid and rectum .
In April 2016 the patient presented to our Oncology clinic for initial consultation surrounding the diagnosis of melanoma when following resection and work up revealed no evidence of disease. In July 2017 he presented with a nodule on his scalp, and biopsy demonstrated recurrence of melanoma (BRAF wildtype; NF1, SF3B1, TERT, TP53 variants). Subsequent positron emission tomography showed a hypermetabolic and large lytic lesion in the sacrum as well as a fludeoxyglucose avid lesions in the thyroid and lung, consistent with metastatic melanoma.
Immunotherapy with pembrolizumab was initiated in September 2017. Additionally, stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) was pursued for treatment of the large sacral mass including 22.5 Gy in three fractions. Of note the maximum cumulative dose of radiation his rectum could have received over the course of treatment is 50 cGy. Following the fourth cycle of pembrolizumab in December 2017, CT imaging revealed resolution of the previously visualized right middle lobe nodule and no growth of the sacral mass, consistent with our group’s published experience with pembrolizumab and SBRT . Likely also contributing to this response is the abscopal effect from his radiation therapy as well as the synergistic effect of radiation therapy and immunotherapy which has been well-described in an Opinion article by Ngwa et al. The patient now continues beyond cycle eleven of pembrolizumab with no evidence of progression of disease and having had no flare of IBD symptoms or toxicity related to radiation.