A 68-year-old male was admitted with a one-year history of progressive difficulty in walking. Parkinson's syndrome had been diagnosed by a neurologist who commenced treatment with levodopa, but despite the medication his walking continued to deteriorate. Three months before admission, he had numerous falls and developed urinary incontinence.
On neurologic examination, the patient's cognitive function was impaired (Korean Mini-Mental Status Examination score 17 out of 30). He showed parkinsonism features such as bradykinesia with rigidity and tremor predominant on the right side of the body. Tendon reflexes were normal, without bilateral extensor plantar responses. He showed a short-stride gait. His postural reflexes were impaired. There was no significant orthostatic blood pressure decline. He did not show any cerebellar symptoms. Autonomic failure involving urinary incontinence and poorly levodopa-responsive parkinsonism satisfied the requirements of criteria for the diagnosis of probable MSA with predominant parkinsonism (MSA-P).
Hematological and biochemical screening and chest X-ray were normal. A brain MRI scan showed enlargement of the ventricles and narrowing of the high convexity CSF spaces with relative dilated Sylvian fissures . The Evans ratio was 0.38 . There was no atrophy on the MRI scan of the putamen, middle cerebellar peduncle, pons, or cerebellum, as seen in MSA . Further 18F-fluorinated-N-3-fluoropropyl-2-b-carboxymethoxy-3-b-(4-iodophenyl) nortropane positron emission tomography (18F-FP-CIT PET) neuroimaging study showed asymmetrically decreased FP-CIT binding in the left posterior putamen . 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (18F-FDG PET) demonstrated decreased metabolism in the left basal ganglia and preserved metabolism in the brainstem and cerebellum .
The patient was initially diagnosed with probable MSA-P based on the revised diagnostic criteria set forth in the 2008 MSA second consensus statement. Although the patient's clinical symptoms such as poorly levodopa responsive parkinsonism with autonomic failure and neuroimaging findings were consistent with MSA, there was a possibility that the patient's worsening gait, cognitive impairment, and urinary incontinence could be caused by the coexisting NPH. Therefore, 50 mL of CSF removal was performed. Cerebrospinal fluid pressure and contents were normal. After CSF drainage, the patient showed improvement in timed gait, although cognitive parameters remained in the abnormal range . The patient also emphasized that he was more comfortable walking after CSF drainage. On the basis of this outcome, NPH could be responsible for the patient's gait and memory impairment, and VP shunt operation was performed, despite underlying MSA. At two weeks post-operatively, his gait and cognitive parameters were improved .