A 38-year-old male with a 3-month history of a temporal opisthotic bump was admitted to the hospital. The patient had no history of immunosuppressive medical treatment, intravenous drug use, previous organ transplantation or sexual promiscuity. Moreover, he did not experience any signs of headaches, dizziness, nausea, vomiting nor did he have any other sensory or motor deficits. Routine laboratory analysis showed standard parameters within normal limits, and the serologic test was negative for Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV), Hepatitis-B Virus (HBV), Hepatitis-C Virus (HCV), and Epstein Barr virus (EBV). According to his medical history, the patient underwent craniotomy 4 years earlier, because of the presence of an abnormal and heterogeneous magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) enhancement signal located in the right temporal and parietal lobe, together with evident edema . The MRI performed 3 months after follow-up revealed that the tumor was successfully removed. Postoperative pathological examination of the tumor led to a diagnosis of GCG, with a Ki-67 index of 50%. Histological examination showed that many giant tumor cells were densely arranged, with blood vessel hyperplasia and focal necrosis. The tumor cells had obvious atypia and eosinophilic cytoplasm, and the nuclei were eccentric with mitosis that was easy to observe . Moreover, pathological findings were evaluated. Pyrosequencing presented that no O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase promoter methylation was shown . Fluorescence in situ hybridization suggested no loss of heterozygosity in 1p/19q chromosome . Levels of IDH1, TERT, and BRAF were determined by multiple polymerase chain reaction amplification combined with high-throughput sequencing, which did not indicate a mutation of IDH1-R132/R172, TERT-C228T/C250T or BRAF-V600E. The patient accepted to be subjected to postoperative chemotherapy with temozolomide for 6 weeks, and concomitant local 63.66 Gray radiotherapy. Follow-up was not stopped after the first surgery. During a visit after 4 years when the patient presented the bump, the MRI brain scan resulted in a well-defined signal pointing out two nodule-like features of 3.1x2.5 cm and 4.0x1.8x3.7 cm located kin the right temporal lobe and subcutaneous soft tissue, respectively , with a slightly hypointense signal on T1-weighted imaging (T1WI, ), isointense and slightly hyperintense signal on T2-weighted imaging (T2WI, ), and isointense signal on fluid attenuated inversion recovery . The lesion showed significant edge enhancement and heterogeneous reinforcement inside the tumor . A preoperative diagnosis of a recurrent glioblastoma was made.
The patient underwent transtemporal craniotomy under preoperative and intraoperative neuronavigation, together with electrophysiological monitoring. The tumor was pinkish in color, solid, bloody, and was closely adherent to the brain parenchyma and subcutaneous tissue. The entire tumor was removed.
The postoperative histopathological examination led to a diagnosis of leiomyosarcoma. The microscopic examination revealed the tumor was composed of spindle-shaped cells with an abundant mitotic activity , and the Ki-67 labeling index was 10-20%. Immunohistochemical staining was positive for h-caldesmon , vimentin, SMA, and desmin, but negative for S-100, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), CK-pan, CD34, CD31, CD117, Oligo-2, Dog-1, PR, and STAT6.
The postoperative course was uneventful and no postoperative complications occurred. In addition, positron emission tomography (PET) was performed to identify potential extracranial primary sites, and serum tumor markers were measured; both were negative. One month after surgery, the patient underwent postoperative 54 Gray radiotherapy. Immediate post-operative cranial CT and follow-up MRI were performed 3 months after surgery , and demonstrated complete removal of the tumor and no signs of recurrence. During the last telephone follow-up in December 2020, the patient stated that he did not report any abnormal condition and that he was leading a normal daily life. Based on these results, his conditions seem stable and therefore, the patients will undergo routine follow-up with MRI.