A 38-year-old multigravida with an intrauterine pregnancy at 35
weeks was found unconscious at her home and airlifted to the
nearest tertiary care center. Throughout transport and upon
arrival at the ED, her mental status alternated between combative
and lethargic and was unable to provide any coherent information
regarding her present condition or past medical history. Her
family later reported that the patient had presented to her
primary care physician five days earlier with complaints of left
otalgia and low grade fever. Treatment was initiated with
azithromycin for otitis media, but her pain continued to worsen
precipitating an emergency room visit the day before her admission
to the hospital. She received prescriptions for
amoxicillin-clavulanate and opioids at this visit but had not yet
started these medications. Her husband reported several bouts of
emesis that same evening before her changes in mental status the
following morning. Her primary obstetrician was also contacted and
she verified an uncomplicated prenatal care with a term vaginal
delivery in her first pregnancy, followed by a caesarian delivery
for breech presentation in her second pregnancy. The patient had
been counseled during this pregnancy regarding mode of delivery
and opted for repeat caesarean section at 39 weeks.
On arrival in the ED, she was febrile to 38.7 C, with a pulse rate
of 152 bpm, respiratory rate of 40, blood pressure of 147/80,
and Glasgow coma score of 11 (4 for eye opening, 1 verbal, 6
movement). Fetal heart tones were noted to be 170 bpm with
reassuring variability. Uterine contractions were noted every 2-3
minutes and initial sterile vaginal exam indicated cervical
dilation of 4 cm with 50% effacement. The fetus was
vertex in presentation with a size consistent for stated
gestational age and a normal amniotic fluid index. The remainder
of the physical examination was significant for purulent drainage
from her left ear with marked erythema of both tympanic
membranes. She was also noted to have decreased breath sounds at
the base of the right lung. Complete blood count revealed a
leukocytosis of 55 000 with 70% granulocytes and
22% bands. Chest X-ray indicated a possible infiltrate in
the right middle and lower lobes. The patient was then intubated
for airway protection, sedated, and given cetriaxone (2 g q 12
hours, IV) for empiric treatment of meningitis before being sent
to the radiology suite. CT scan of the head revealed fluid
collection in the middle ear and mastoid on the left. She was
transferred to the intensive care unit and lumbar puncture
obtained with 12 750 leukoctyes (80% PMN), glucose <5,
and protein of 965. Preliminary blood and cerebrospinal fluid
cultures indicated gram positive cocci in chains, consistent with
S. pneumoniae. Vancomycin (1 g q 24 hours,
IV) was then added for broader coverage, and dexamethasone (10
mg q 6 hours, IV) started as adjuvant therapy. Myringotomy at
bedside revealed frank purulence in the middle ear which was
evacuated and sent for culture. Continuous fetal and uterine
monitoring was initiated with an experienced labor and delivery
nurse posted at bedside for signs of fetal distress or continued
preterm labor. This comprehensive level of care was continued
until the level of sedation was decreased and the patient was
extubated. Uterine contractions ceased in regularity after the
first 24 hours with no further cervical change noted. Patient
remained intubated until hospital day eight when her mental
status had returned to baseline. At this time, she was
transferred to the antepartum floor for two additional days of
surveillance before discharge home. Final cultures from blood,
CSF, and ear were consistent with S. pneumoniae
with sensitivity to vancomycin. Patient completed the final four
days of a 14-day course of vancomycin and ceftriaxone at home.
Her obstetrical care was then returned to her primary
obstetrician.
At 38 weeks gestation, the patient presented to her primary
obstetrician with uterine contractions and was noted to be 9 cm
dilated. She had a successful VBAC delivery of a male infant
weighing eight pounds with APGAR scores of 8 and 9, at 1 and 5
minutes, respectively. Mother and child are doing well at the
time of this writing, with no sequelae since delivery.