A 58-year-old white man presented to an outside hospital for evaluation of bright red blood hemorrhaging from the rectum. In the course of the workup, an adrenal mass was found incidentally by abdominal computed tomography (CT). The patient’s past medical history included hemophilia A, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and testicular cancer. His surgical history was significant for cholecystectomy and tonsillectomy. The patient’s initial physical examination was benign with the exception of a large, firm, palpable, nonpulsating, nontender mass in the upper left quadrant of the abdomen. His baseline factor VIII activity level was 12%. While the patient was being evaluated in the hospital, he received 3500 U of recombinant factor VIII (Advate; Shire/Baxter Healthcare, Westlake Village, CA, USA) twice daily with a goal factor VIII activity level between 80% and 100%.
The initial CT scan of the patient revealed a large, heterogeneous, hemorrhagic mass in the suprarenal fossa causing mass effect on the stomach, pancreatic tail, and left kidney . The mass was estimated to be 18 × 17 × 16 cm in size. The differential diagnosis included hemorrhagic adrenal malignancy or benign tumor vs. pure hemorrhage or hematoma of the adrenal gland. There were no signs or symptoms of hormone overproduction. The patient was normotensive, not tachycardic, was normokalemic, and had no cushingoid symptoms or appreciable gynecomastia. The patient underwent a comprehensive endocrinologic workup with biochemical evaluation for a functional adrenal tumor, including plasma metanephrine (<0.20 nmol/L), normetanephrine (0.22 nmol/L), 17-hydroxyprogesterone (74.6 ng/dl), estradiol (30 pg/ml), dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (43 μg/dl), a dexamethasone suppression test (14.4 μg/dl at 0 minutes, 23.3 μg/dl at 30 minutes, and 26.1 μg/dl at 60 minutes), adrenocorticotropic hormone (27 pg/ml), aldosterone (3 ng/dl), renin activity (8.5 ng/ml/h), and androstenedione level (0.215 ng/ml). The biochemical evaluation showed no evidence of an occult functional adrenal lesion or condition.
After a more detailed history focused on trauma, the patient recalled that he had sustained a slight fall in the previous weeks that provided a mechanism for the mass, most consistent with a hematoma. The patient was discharged from the hospital, and the adrenal mass was monitored on an outpatient basis. A repeat CT scan at 4 weeks following diagnosis did not demonstrate any change in the size of the mass, and the patient had no appreciable changes in signs or symptoms. At around the seventh week, the patient reported increasing symptoms of early satiety and left upper quadrant pain, but repeat imaging did not reveal any enlargement of the mass. The patient was taken to the operating room for en bloc resection, and, given the patient’s history of hemophilia A, he required extra monitoring and management perioperatively. Specifically, he received 2–4 U/kg/h of recombinant factor VIII, and his factor VIII activity was monitored to maintain an activity level ≥80%.
Through a midline approach, the mass was visualized and found to displace the left kidney inferiorly, the spleen superiorly, the pancreas laterally, and the stomach anteromedially. The mass was adherent to the surrounding structures, including the adrenal gland, the tail of the pancreas, and the capsule of the spleen, without any definable plains of dissection, necessitating removal of 40% of the pancreas, spleen, adrenal gland, and a portion of the diaphragm. The mass was removed and sent for evaluation in the pathology department . Given the abutment of midline vascular structures, including portal vein, aorta, and vena cava, a postresection intraoperative ultrasound was obtained to confirm the patency of these structures, and no occult thrombosis was detected. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy was performed given the gastric abutment and extensive greater curvature/short gastric dissection and revealed normal gastric mucosa.
The postoperative mass was measured to be 20 cm. The final pathological analysis determined the specimen to be an adrenal vein aneurysm consisting mostly of thrombotic material with a conservative measurement of 15.9 cm . The wall of the vessel itself was comprised mainly of thick smooth muscle with some elastic fibers and no elastic lamina. The adrenal gland was adherent to the mass and was benign. All of the en bloc surgical specimens were benign.
Postoperatively, the patient’s factor VIII activity level was maintained with a goal of 60–80% in the first 3 days and a goal of 50% for the first 2 weeks. His postoperative hospital course was complicated by a low-output pancreatic leak, for which he was discharged with percutaneous drains in the pancreatectomy bed and on total parenteral nutrition with clear liquids for comfort. The patient made a full recovery from his pancreatic complications approximately 4 weeks postoperatively, and he was reevaluated with CT at 6 months postoperatively with postsurgical changes of absence of spleen, 40% of pancreas, adrenal gland, and absence of the adrenal mass. At 23 months of postoperative follow-up, the patient was doing well without any new issues.