A 6-year old African male was admitted in the pediatric ward with a 3-month history of a right testicular mass which was painless. He had no history of trauma, difficulty in passing urine or blood in urine. The parents denied any history of cancer in the family. His past medical, social, family and environmental history were uneventful. Either it was reported that, the patient received Diphtheria, Tetanus, Pertussis and Haemophilus influenza and Hepatitis B, pneumo-conj, and Measle-Rubella (MR) vaccines at the right schedules. On admission, physically, the patient was ill-looking, pale and febrile (39.2 °C). His weight and height were 20.2 kg and 86 cm, respectively with pulse rate and blood pressure of 68 beats per minute and 127/73 mmHg, respectively. The right testis was swollen, painless, and non-tender, nodular and firm in consistency. The overlying scrotal skin was shining with engorged overlying blood vessels. His neurological examination revealed normal motor function (normal gait and muscle tone), normal sensory function and normal reflex responses.
The laboratory tests included the following: haemoglobin level 8.3 gm/dl (low), aspartate transaminase (AST) 10-36 IU/l (normal), alanine transaminase (ALT) 36-39.1 IU/l (normal), serum creatinine 0.81 mg/dl (normal), protein in urine 3.1 gm/ml (normal), human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) were both negative. Pelvic computed tomography (CT) scan showed a heterogeneous mass with well-defined margins without microcalcification . Multiple bilateral inguinal enlarged lymph nodes were noticed. There was no ascites or intraperitoneal free air. Besides, there was no pelvic lymphadenopathy.
The tumour was poorly vascularized and was in continuity with the spermatic cord. The tumour measured 3.8 × 2.8 × 3.9 cm. The left testis was normal in size and orientation. The panel of tumour markers included: lactate dehydrogenase of (472 UI/l), alpha-fetoprotein (1.43 UI/ml) and human chorionic gonadotrophin beta (2.9 mUI/ml). The patient’s tumour was staged as clinical stage I. By using the criteria for risk stratification of patients with RMS established by the Children’s Oncology Group for Soft-Tissue Sarcoma (COG-STS) committee which adopted data from the Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study (IRS) -III and IRS-IV; the patient was regarded to be in low risk group (group I) by having clinical stage 1 and embryonal histopathological type.
The pelvic, abdominal and chest CT scans showed no metastases to either lungs or mediastinum. The patient had operation (orchidectomy). During the operation, external oblique aponeurosis was opened; ilio-inguinal nerve was isolated and secured. Inguinal canal contents were dissected. There was no vas deferens that was seen and the left testis was infiltrated by the tumour and the tumour had gone beyond the tunica vaginalis. A straw colored jelly-like material was seen surrounding the tumour within the scrotal sac.
The dissected inguinal canal contents were clamped, ligated with vicryl 3/0 and transected. The malformed testis by the infiltrating mass was dissected and excised and hemostasis was achieved. The specimen was taken for histological evaluation. Retroperitoneal lymph node dissection was not performed in our case as radiologically there was no lymphadenopathy. Macroscopically, the submitted specimen comprised of a grayish-yellow fibro-fatty tissue that measured 4 × 3 × 2 cm. The cut surface showed a lobulated white-tan and firm mass . There was no necrosis or haemorrhage.
Microscopically, the tumour was composed of the presence of small to medium size undifferentiated cells . These were oval to spindle, hyperchromatic cells with focal stromal myxoid degeneration were noted. Tunica albuginea and rete testis both were infiltrated by tumour. The tumour showed a high mitotic count which measured 50 mitoses per 10 high power field (HPF). The diagnosis of embryonal RMS was confirmed using myoD1 antibody which showed strong and diffuse intranuclear staining of the tumour cells .
The tumour recurred five months after radical inguinal orchiectomy (RIO) had been done because the patient delayed to start chemotherapy on time until when the parents saw a mass which was gradually increasing in size. Then he was taken back to hospital where he was given chemotherapy after evaluation with chest CT scan to rule out for metastasis which revealed normal findings. The chemotherapy agents used were 1.2 mg iv cyclophosphamide, 0.94 mg iv actinomycin D and 1032 mg iv vincristine which he completed after 5 months. We followed-up the patient for one year and his postchemotherapy period was uneventful. Currently, the child is healthy and he is continuing with schooling.