A 55-year-old man with interstitial lung disease (ILD), mild pulmonary hypertension with mean pulmonary artery pressure of 36 mm Hg, and coronary artery disease with multiple coronary stents was admitted to our tertiary academic hospital with cough and constitutional symptoms. At baseline, the patient was on 8 liters (L) of oxygen through an oxymizer at home but developed worsening non-productive cough, fatigue, and exertional dyspnea 4 days prior to admission.
His initial diagnostic evaluation was remarkable for a chest X-ray (CXR) with diffuse infiltrates with a background of severe fibrotic lung disease. His procalcitonin was negative and his brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) was normal at 50 pg/mL (normal reference range <100 pg/mL). Echocardiogram was notable for left ventricular ejection fraction of 50–55%. His oxygen requirements increased rapidly from the time of admission, and he was intubated due to labored breathing. He received broad-spectrum antibiotics and corticosteroids with clinical improvement and was extubated within 4 days.
After extubation, he was evaluated for the lung transplant given his severe ILD. The patient had been pending outpatient transplant evaluation prior to admission but given the severity of his acute presentation an inpatient expedited evaluation was recommended. As part of this evaluation, age-appropriate index colon cancer screening was required. Given his tenuous respiratory status, colonoscopy was deferred and instead computed tomography colonography, known as virtual colonoscopy, was pursued.
On the first day of his bowel preparation (hospital day 4), the patient was started on 4 L of PEG in the evening. He had difficulty consuming PEG at an appropriate rate due to taste and abdominal discomfort. While he completed the bowel prep by morning, his stools were not clear. He was then given a split-dose regimen of 4 L in the evening and 2 L overnight, but his stools still had sediment and the patient struggled with appropriate consumption. The following day, the patient was again given a total of 6 L preparation without clear stools. During this time, the patient was offered to be given PEG through a nasogastric tube (NGT) but refused due to concerns about discomfort. No pro-motility agents were given during this time. Of note, throughout the 3 days of bowel preparation, the patient was on a clear liquid diet.
At this point, he developed hypoxia and tachypnea again and his BNP rose to 475 pg/mL. CXR showed worsening bilateral opacities concerning for pulmonary edema without obvious focal consolidation concerning for aspiration. Echocardiography demonstrated an inferior vena cava diameter greater than 2.0 cm without respiratory variation consistent with volume overload. His bowel prep was held, and he was given diuretics with improvement in his respiratory status, BNP, and CXR. At this point, the gastroenterology consult team was engaged due to difficulty tolerating oral bowel preparation and after further discussion the patient was amenable to NGT delivery of bowel preparation. He was allowed to consume clear liquid diet during the day, and in the evening was given 6 L PEG by NGT at a rate of 1 L per hour. His stools became clear of sediment, and he tolerated the bowel preparation successfully without cardiopulmonary complications. He underwent computed tomography colonography, which showed no colonic polyps or signs of malignancy. He eventually underwent successful bilateral orthotopic lung transplant.