A 86-year-old woman was diagnosed with RA at the age of 60 years. She had been receiving treatment with methotrexate (MTX) at a dose of 4–10 mg/week and the remission was maintained for approximately 10 years. In addition, she had been treated with prednisolone (PSL) at a dose of 2–5 mg/day for approximately 10 years. However, she had been treated with a reduced dose of MTX since 5 years ago due to renal dysfunction. Two years ago, she stopped taking MTX due to a few medication errors, and golimumab (GLM) 100 mg/month, which is an anti-TNF- α antibody, was started. After 6 months of GLM treatment, her medication was changed to baricitinib (BARI) 2 mg/day because there was no symptomatic improvement. Subsequently, she maintained in a state of remission to low disease activity. After 1 year and 3 months of BARI treatment, she experienced palpitations and nausea. She underwent a checkup with an internal medicine doctor; however, nothing was found. At that time, she stopped taking BARI based on her personal judgment. Instead of BARI, iguratimod (IGU) 25 mg/day was prescribed, but she stopped taking IGU in a few days later due to itching symptoms on her entire body. Finally, she had been treated with PSL only, without any new medication after she stopped taking BARI. After 3 months of only PSL intake, she visited our hospital due to generalized pain and difficulty in performing physical movement. There were no falls or trauma, but she could not walk. The physical examination revealed swelling and tenderness in the bilateral wrist joints and low back pain. Regarding blood examination, C-reactive protein (CRP) was 4.5 mg/dL (normal range: 0–0.3 mg/dL), erythrocyte sedimentation rate 60 mm/h (normal range: 0–15 mm/h), rheumatoid factor 233.6 U/mL (normal range: 0–15 U/mL), and serum matrix metalloproteinase-3 176 ng/mL (normal range, male: 36.9–121 ng/mL; female: 17.3–59.7 ng/mL). Bone mineral density (g/cm2) results were 0.412 and 0.683 at the right femoral neck and the lumbar spine (L2-L4), respectively. Radiography and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed L2 compression fracture and sacral fracture . A L3 compression fracture was also found, but it was asymptomatic and obsolete. Furthermore, 3 years ago, she fell and injured a left femoral neck fracture and underwent bipolar hip arthroplasty at another hospital. Malignancy and infectious diseases were ruled out after the examination results. After admission to our hospital, BARI was administered again to improve the RA disease activity and no heart palpitations or nausea was recorded. Furthermore, teriparatide was initiated to enhance osteoporosis treatment while controlling that her renal function did not deteriorate further . Two weeks after admission, a follow-up computed tomography (CT) was performed and revealed a new non-traumatic thoracic compression fracture at Th12. One month after admission, she lost her balance, while she was transferred from a wheelchair in the ward and hit the right side of her chest on the fence, resulting in the fracture of a right rib. Three weeks following this accident, she could walk by pushing a wheelbarrow and was discharged to the nursing facility. However, 1 month after she was discharged, she fell in the bathroom of the nursing facility and could not walk. Radiography and MRI revealed left pubic and sciatic fractures, and she was readmitted to our hospital. Although daily rehabilitation was performed, the progress was very slow due to the pain at the fracture sites. She could not walk even with a cane. She was discharged to the nursing facility in a wheelchair.