A 67-year-old Jewish female was admitted to our hospital because of worsening effort dyspnea and cough, extreme fatigue, and functional decline. Her complaints began 2 months prior to admission, following a single episode of fever (38 °C), transient bilateral loss of sight, and vomiting. Her medical history includes a bioprosthetic tricuspid valve implantation 4 years prior to the current hospitalization due to tricuspid stenosis, followed by a pacemaker implantation due to periprocedural complete heart block. Her regular medical therapy includes allopurinol (100 mg per day), bisoprolol (2.5 mg per day), apixaban (2.5 mg twice a day), and vitamin D3 (1000 international units per day). The patient had not undergone recent medical procedures (including dental care) and had no history of intravenous drug use.
At the time of her admission, the patient was alert and afebrile, and presented normal vital signs. Physical examination demonstrated no significant findings, without peripheral stigmata of endocarditis, heart murmurs, or neurological deficits. Initial laboratory tests revealed mild hemolytic anemia [decrease in hemoglobin from a recent level of 14.9 g/dL to 12.2 g/dL, increased lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels up to 1080 U/L, and mild indirect hyperbilirubinemia], in addition to the presence of schistocytes in the peripheral blood smear. Additional abnormal laboratory results included increased levels of C-reactive protein (CRP) and an elevation of cholestatic liver enzymes. Urinalysis demonstrated hematuria and mild proteinuria, without clinical or laboratory findings of acute kidney injury. A mildly elevated level of rheumatoid factor was noted. Chest X-ray and fundoscopy revealed no pathological findings. Transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated a 1.1 cm vegetation on the tricuspid valve. Transesophageal echocardiogram demonstrated severe tricuspid stenosis as a complication of the attached vegetation, as well as an additional 1.1 cm vegetation on the pacemaker electrode . Fluorodeoxyglucose positron-emission tomography–computed tomography (FDG PET-CT) demonstrated pathological rectal uptake, suggestive of a neoplastic process. No septic pulmonary emboli were observed. During the first 2 days of hospitalization, a total of five blood culture sets were positive for S. gallolyticus, and susceptible for beta-lactam antibiotics as well as for clindamycin, erythromycin, and vancomycin. The minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) for penicillin and ampicillin was 0.094 µg/mL. Intravenous therapy with ceftriaxone was initiated, according to the antibiotic sensitivity profile of the pathogen.
On day 11 after admission, open-heart surgery was performed. The involved tricuspid valve was replaced by a tissue valve (Mosaic 27 by Medtronic). The infected pacemaker electrodes were removed and replaced by temporary, and later permanent, epicardial electrodes. The intraoperative and postoperative course was uneventful. Positive growth of S. gallolyticus was obtained from both the removed valve and electrodes. The patient was treated with 2 g of ceftriaxone for an additional 6 weeks. After a rehabilitation process in our hospital, the patient was discharged for further ambulatory follow-up, including endoscopic evaluation of the rectal lesion mentioned above. To the best of our knowledge, the patient refused to undergo this evaluation because of personal reasons. Three years after her discharge, the patient is clinically stable, with no clinical or laboratory findings that raise suspicion of rectal malignancy.