A 59-year-old Caucasian female patient was referred to our emergency department by ambulance from another hospital where no operative service was available at night. On arrival in the emergency department, the patient presented in circulatory shock with pulse around 160 bpm and blood pressure 65/35 mmHg. Her laboratory results were remarkable for: pH acidic at 7.13, pCO2 8.6 kPa, PO2 low at 5.3 kPa, lactate high at 9.2 mmol/L, BE −8.8 mmol/L. Her CRP was 48 mg/L and WBC low normal at 3.5*109/L. On examination, she showed all signs of general peritonitis. The patient was prepared for emergency laparotomy immediately.
According to the patient’s journal records she had undergone laparoscopic implantation of a gastric stimulator in 2004 due to gastroparesis. The patient had a medicated hypertension and a medicated hyperlipidaemia in her medical record but no further conditions. She had earlier been operated with open surgery for appendicitis, C-section and ovarian cysts. Between April 2012 and June 2014 the patient had shown up several times to different hospitals in our county . She had then presented with abdominal pain, bloating and fever. Mechanical small bowel obstruction had been suspected each time but either the CT scans had been inconclusive or a sub-ileus condition had been resolved during small bowel series. Discussion with the respective gastric surgeons had revealed that the patient had a partial gastroparesis due to idiopathic neuropathy. The patient’s symptoms had eventually been interpreted as pseudo-obstruction and colonoscopy had been recommended. This examination however had not shown any pathology besides minor diverticulosis. The patient’s recurring symptoms had got better after initiation of a treatment with neostigmine and erythromycin before meals. Follow-up at a gastrointestinal centre had been planned. June 2014 the patient showed up to her nearest hospital during early morning, once again with abdominal pain and nausea. The abdominal tenderness was focused around the umbilicus but physical examination was otherwise without remark. Blood samples showed CRP at 1 mg/L, WBC at 10.8*109/L. Body temperature was 37.1°C, blood pressure 120/79 mmHg and pulse 51 bpm. The abdominal pain was assessed as functional and the patient was sent home. The same evening however the patient was referred by ambulance to the same hospital. She was tackycardic (around 140 bpm) and low in blood pressure (about 75/50 mmHg). Body temperature was 35.8°C. She had vomited several times before she had ringed the ambulance. Clinically she presented this time with peritonitis, no bowel sounds. After she’d been stabilized initially a CT scan showed signs of small bowel obstruction.
Our hospital was contacted when it became clear that surgery was inevitable and that there were no resources available at night at the other two nearer hospitals. This was when the patient was referred and presented as described above. After immediate admission to the operating room the abdomen was opened with a midline laparotomy and bloody-serous fluid was found in the abdominal cavity. Approximately two thirds of the small bowel were necrotic. No adherences between the bowel and the abdominal wall could be seen but interenteric adherences were present without causing a stricture. We identified that herniation of small bowel through the loop of the stimulation-leads was causing a mechanical strangulation ileus of the small bowel. To prevent recurring strangulation, it was decided to cut the leads. The strangulated bowel was not recovering and had to be resected. Continuity was provided with a hand-sewn end-to-end enteroentero-anastomosis. The patient was left with 120 cm small bowel . The leads were shortened to the level of the abdominal wall and the stimulation device was left in place. Perioperatively a treatment with cefotaxime and metronidazole was started according to national standards. The patient was extubated the first postoperative day and was able to be discharged from our hospital on the eighth postoperative day.
Two months later the patient was seen in our day-clinic for follow up and for explanting the stimulation device under local anaesthesia. She was feeling well but experiencing some symptoms of her gastroparesis anew.