A 41-years-old right-handed man with height 1.82 m, presented in our outpatient clinic complaining for sudden loss of active extension of his right thumb. He experienced an extravagating pain and a popping sound at the dorsoradial aspect of his wrist. 4 days earlier, he was engaged as one of the four coffin carriers during the funeral of a relative. He was the second tallest of the carriers, and due to their different standing level, they could not carry the coffin on their shoulders, but it rested on their palms for over 200 m to normalize the different heights. As a result, our patient had to keep his wrist overloaded in full extension. He experienced pain in the dorsal aspect of his wrist from the first 50 m, but kept on until the end.
Physical examination revealed tenderness over the third dorsal wrist compartment with the inability of his right thumb interphalangeal joint extension and weakness of the first metacarpophalangeal joint extension. Radiographs of the hand and wrist showed no bony abnormalities, and the clinical diagnosis of EPL tendon rupture was made.
Surgical exploration of the third dorsal wrist compartment verified EPL rupture at the level of Lister’s tubercle. The tendon was degenerated, brownish and a large necrotic area of almost 5 cm was apparent . We hypothesized that the necrosis of the tendon happened due to the severe and continued crushing between the styloid process of the third metacarpal and the Lister’s tubercle. This led to a subsequent swelling and narrowing of the space of the third dorsal compartment, under the dorsal carpal ligament, thrombosis of the vessels, and long-acting ischemia of the tendon, which in combination with the crushing injury led to necrosis and rupture of the tendon. The large necrotic area of the tendon rendered direct repair not possible and tendon transfer using the extensor indicis proprius (EIP) was decided. The EIP tendon was transferred to the distal healthy stump of EPL using Pulvertaft suture technique . Postoperatively, the patient’s hand was immobilized in a short-arm cast with the wrist in slight extension and the thumb in abduction and extension for 4 weeks. Then, the cast was exchanged for a shorter thermoplastic splint, which immobilized the wrist, fingers, and thumb in extension but was removed for intermittent exercise. This was applied for a further 2 weeks. In the meantime, an experienced hand therapist commenced a re-education program, stressing the synergistic movements of flexion and extension. 2 months postoperatively, he was able to fully extend and flex the interphalangeal joint of the thumb. At the 2 years follow-up, he remained asymptomatic .