An asymptomatic 59-year-old Caucasian man was referred to the clinic for routine dental evaluation. A radiologic examination revealed a unilocular radiolucent area at his anterior right maxilla with well-circumscribed sclerotic border (Figures and
).
All his maxillary teeth with the exception of his left maxillary cuspid had been removed over the years, uneventfully; the most recent extractions were performed 7 years previously. There was no history of trauma to his maxilla or of any other surgery. He was a non-cigarette smoker, had no further illness and was otherwise healthy. On examination, the alveolus was of normal consistency with expansion or swelling; there was no pain or tenderness; there was no change in the color of the soft tissues around the lesion. There was no lymphadenopathy.
Based on the clinical and radiographic examinations, differential diagnosis should be performed with other radiolucent lesions such as residual, radicular or lateral periodontal cyst, odontogenic keratocyst, globulomaxillary cyst, traumatic bone cyst and ameloblastoma.
Residual cyst is the first pathology that should be considered depending on the similarity of radiologic appearance, clinical evaluation and location, unless the lesion is located around the tooth root region and the lesion is unilocular and asymptomatic as in the presented case.
On the one hand residual lateral periodontal cysts occur along remnants of the lateral root surface of a tooth and 80% occur in the mandibular premolar, canine, lateral incisor area. On the other hand, polycystic appearance may be seen radiologically.
A unilocular clinical appearance can also be seen with odontogenic keratocysts. The usual localization of keratocysts is the posterior mandible and ascending ramus and for large keratocysts their radiologic appearance can be multilocular. In addition, in up to 40% of odontogenic keratocysts an unerupted tooth is involved in the lesion.
Globulomaxillary cysts are one of the pathologic lesions seen in this region of the maxilla. On clinical examination this cyst is localized between the maxillary lateral and canine tooth; radiological evaluation shows unilocular radiolucency. Although recently most so-called globulomaxillary cysts are usually found to be odontogenic cysts of various types, it should be also considered for differential diagnosis.
Traumatic bone cyst should be discussed in the diagnosis. A generally agreed etiologic factor for this cyst is bleeding into the bone after trauma. Organized hematoma will develop the cystic defect. Similarly, according to the literature, the most probable etiologic factor for intraosseous epidermoid cysts is traumatic implantation of epidermoid cells into the bone. This lesion is usually seen at the first and second decades of life primarily at the premolar and molar area of the mandible. The lesion is usually asymptomatic but sometimes pain or paresthesia occurs. The radiologic appearance is well-defined unilocular radiolucency.
Ameloblastomas generally occur at the posterior mandible and are mostly seen in multicystic (86%) form. Unilocular lesions are mostly localized at the pericoronal area of an unerupted mandibular third molar.The patient was scheduled for surgery. Under aseptic conditions, his anterior superior alveolar nerve was blocked with local infiltration using 4% articaine hydrochloride and 1:100,000 epinephrine. A full thickness mucoperiosteal envelope flap with two oblique release incisions was carried out to expose the lesion and the surrounding alveolar bone was removed by round and fissure burs under irrigation with sterile saline solution. On clinical examination the lesion appeared well demarcated from the surrounding bone. The unilocular mass was removed totally (Figure ). Sharp edges were rounded and the wound was closed with 3–0 vicryl suture. It was noted that the pathologic lesion was surrounded by resistant lining with fluid inside. The wound healed satisfactorily, and there was no recurrence during the follow-up period of 36 months.
The gross pathologic specimen was a well-circumscribed cystic lesion containing soft, tannish yellow material in cross-section. Grossly the extracted cystic lesion measured 1.0×1.0×0.7cm.Microscopic examination of the specimen revealed a cavity that was lined with stratified squamous epithelium resembling epidermis (Figure ). A well-developed granular cell layer was seen and the lumen was filled with regenerating orthokeratin. The final diagnosis was epidermoid cyst.