A 48-year-old man was admitted to our department with the diagnosis of an adenocarcinoma of the gastroesophageal junction. Preoperative staging was negative for distant metastases. Endoscopic ultrasound findings confirmed the presence of a locally advanced tumor (type I – Siewert classification). It was an adenocarcinoma of the distal esophagus arising from an area with intestinal metaplasia and infiltrating the esophagogastric junction from above. As a consequence preoperative synchronous chemoradiotherapy was proposed. The scheme was consisted of fluorouracil (15 mg/kg of body weight) daily for five days and cisplatin (75 mg/m2 of body surface area) on day 7 and a course of radiotherapy (40 Gy administered in 15 fractions, anterior-posterior mediastinal fields) over a a three week period, beginning concurrently with the first course of chemotherapy. After the completion of chemoradiotherapy, the stage of the disease was reevaluated (CT scans of the abdomen, chest, pelvis, upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and ultrasound). Restaging was completed with no evidence of distant disease and surgical removal of the primary tumor and lymphadenectomy was proposed. The patient was eligible for an Ivor Lewis esophagogastrectomy.
He was intubated with a left-sided 37-F double-lumen endotracheal tube by a specialist anesthesiologist experienced in cardiothoracic surgery anesthesia. The technique includes the following points. The tube was held with the bronchial curve concave anteriorly. As the tip was passed through the larynx, the tube was rotated 90 degrees to direct the endobronchial part to the intended side. The tube was then connected to the breathing circuit via a double catheter mount.
The abdominal part of the operation was uneventful. During the second phase and while the intrathoracic esophagus was being mobilized a hissing noise was heard and a careful inspection revealed part of the double-lumen tube and the inflated tracheal cuff protruding through the ruptured membranous tracheal wall into the operating field. This resulted in an approximately 3 × 1 cm oval-shaped laceration of membranous trachea, extending to 1 cm above the carina . The ventilation and oxygenation of the patient could now only be continued by occlusion of the tear by the surgeon's finger and subsequently by a surgical gauze swab. Our first attempt was primary interrupted suturing which failed and resulted in enlargement of the laceration probably due to the previous chemoradiotherapy. Tracheal repair was then performed by tailoring and suturing a bovine pericardial patch, using a running Vicryl 4-0 suture. This led to control of the leakage and normal ventilation was re-instituted. The main operation was completed by performing a classical Ivor Lewis esophagogastrectomy with a 2-field lymphadenectomy. Esophagogastric continuity was restored with an end-to-end anastomosis using an EEA 25 mm circular stapling device.
In order to reinforce the tracheal repair at the end of the operation, the gastric conduit was moved toward the posterior wall of the membranous trachea. Single interrupted nonabsorbable 3-0 prolene sutures were placed between the stomach and the lowest edge of the rigid tracheal rings . This manipulation moved the gastroesophageal conduit into contact with the pericardial patch on the posterior wall of the membranous trachea, sealing the wall laceration. In order to check the effectiveness of our technique the pleural cavity was filled with normal saline and the ventilation pressure was raised to 30 cm H2O. A careful inspection for air leakage was negative. Two thoracic drains were placed as usually and the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit intubated and mechanically ventilated. A no 7.5 single lumen endotracheal tube was substituted for the double-lumen tube and was advanced bronchoscopically to just above the carina. The patient was extubated on the second postoperative day and had an uneventful recovery. Nutrition and subsequent airway management were in line with our usual protocols. Chest tubes were removed on 9th postoperative day, two days after the patient started to feed orally. He was discharged home on 14th postoperative day without any respiratory or swallowing problems.