A 61-year-old man was diagnosed with MG and thymoma. He was scheduled for median sternotomy to undergo resection of the thymoma.
The patient started having progressive dysphagia 4 wk prior, and the associated symptoms included diplopia, ptosis, general weakness, and easy choking. He denied chest pain, bloody sputum, and fever. Serologic tests were positive for antibodies against the acetylcholine receptor (serum level: 88.3 nmol/L). Computed tomography revealed a 5.4 cm enhanced lobular mass in the anterior mediastinum, which was declared to be a thymoma. He was diagnosed with MG, and intravenous immunoglobulin was administered at a dose of 600 mg/kg once-daily for 5 consecutive days. The symptoms of MG subsided after 20 d, and he was referred for surgical intervention. Preoperative echocardiography revealed preserved systolic function and normal wall motion without major valvular dysfunction. Thus, a medium sternotomy for anterior mediastinum tumor resection was arranged.
In the operating theater, general anesthesia was induced with lidocaine 60 mg, thiamylal sodium 300 mg, fentanyl 50 μg, and rocuronium 40 mg. A 37-Fr double lumen endotracheal tube was intubated, and then an arterial line and a central venous catheter were placed smoothly. The operation was uneventful until the closing of the sternal wound. Electrocardiography showed sudden onset ST elevation, followed by ventricular tachycardia and severe hypotension. Cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation was initiated immediately with electrical defibrillation (200 J), and the surgeon started to perform direct cardiac massage. However, ventricular tachycardia/fibrillation and hypotension persisted. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) was performed 40 min after the initiation of cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation.
The patient had a history of cigarette smoking and coronary artery disease with a bare metal stent placed 11 years prior. In January 2021, he suffered from a cervical spine injury with disc fracture at C5–6 and central cord syndrome from a traffic accident. He underwent cervical discectomy and interbody fusion with a cervical cage. After transfer to the intensive care unit, chest pain was mentioned. Then, sudden onset bradycardia following ventricular tachycardia and cardiac arrest occurred. Coronary angiography showed spasms in three vessels without obvious atherosclerotic lesions. He was transferred to a normal ward 10 d later and then discharged after rehabilitation was completed.
The patient denied any family history of MG.
After ECMO insertion, the patient’s arterial blood pressure was approximately 90/50 mmHg. The heart rate was around 70 beats per minute and respiratory rate was set at 12 breaths per minute. Capnography showed a low end tidal CO2 level (under 20 mmHg).
Arterial blood gas data showed acidosis (PH = 7.304) with elevated PaCO2 (70.4 mmHg) and HCO3- (35.3 mEq/L). Serum lactate level also increased (8.5 mmol/L). Serum creatine kinase (CK) and CK muscle and brain isoenzyme levels were in normal range but troponin-T level was elevated (0.039 ng/mL).
Electrocardiography indicated a return to sinus rhythm with ST elevation within 10 min. Subsequent transesophageal echocardiography exhibited global hypokinesia. Further assessment through angiography unveiled diffuse CAS with three vessels involved .