The patient was a 68-year-old woman with lung cancer originally diagnosed in 2008, with recurrence four years later and again in 2021, even following several interventions including lobectomy, resections, chemotherapy, and radiation. Unfortunately, the patient then went on to develop metastatic disease including the brain– routine imaging for staging at this time showed a 2 mm right postcentral gyrus lesion . She underwent further treatments including 3 cycles of first line systemic therapy and 11 cycles of maintenance therapy.
As of September of 2022, the patient had been on her combination of systemic maintenance treatments for approximately 6 months; repeat imaging for re-staging showed a new 6 mm lesion in the left posterior temporal lobe which was seen to increase in size by late November of 2022 . Around this time, she was admitted to hospital for symptomatic management, and ultimately decided to discontinue systemic therapy targeting her cancer.
According to the patient, this is around the time when she first noticed her dissociative symptoms. When asked to retrospectively rate her symptoms as they felt at this time, she scored a 5 on the Dissociative Experiences Scale– II (DES-II) [, ], with the majority of her symptoms reflecting depersonalization and derealization (score of 3.6 on depersonalization and derealization factor items). She was started on 4 mg daily oral dexamethasone in mid-November and underwent stereotactic radiation to the left temporal brain metastasis in mid-December. Her dexamethasone was then increased to 12 mg in mid-December, before being tapered back to 4 mg over the following four weeks. In mid-January of 2023, the dexamethasone was increased back to 8 mg, as the patient was describing distressing symptoms of depersonalization and derealization. For example, “a sensation of not being connected to her body… new over the past few months and has been occurring intermittently, but more pervasive in the past few days” as well as describing a “feeling of being dissociated and a sensation that her voice is not her voice, and that she feels separate from her body. She does not feel particularly anxious and denies the sensation of being tied into any feelings of anxiety or stress.” These experiences did not represent true out-of-body experiences, rather depersonalization episodes wherein the patient felt estranged from her own body and experiences. Similarly, the patient described episodes of derealization, where she felt detached from her external reality.
At a follow-up visit several days later, it was noted that these symptoms had improved with the increased dose of dexamethasone. By the time of assessment by writers in early February, her DES-II score had decreased to 0.71 (score of 0 on depersonalization and derealization factor items); at this assessment she was denying any symptoms of dissociation, or any other associated symptoms. She stated that when she had been experiencing the depersonalization and derealization previously, the episodes had lasted for approximately one to two hours at a time and were intermittent throughout the day, but did occur on most days. Throughout, her presentation was inconsistent with previously documented cases of autoimmune encephalitis associated with immunotherapy , and there was no evidence of stroke on neuroimaging.
The patient remained well with respect to her symptoms of dissociation for several weeks. Her dexamethasone was decreased to 6 mg daily in the beginning of March, and subsequently decreased again to 4 mg daily by the end of the month. Her dissociative symptoms then returned, for example as she “continues to have a sense of being outside of her body and difficulty focusing.” She was offered a trial of methylphenidate 5 mg in the morning to try to assist with this symptom as well as her energy and lack of focus. Sadly, within the next two weeks her overall cancer symptom burden (especially pain) had worsened to the point where she required an admission to the palliative medicine service (unrelated to the methylphenidate), and she chose to undergo medical assistance in dying shortly thereafter.
Other than her cancer, the patient’s past medical history was notable for immune-mediated arthritis while on pembrolizumab as of early 2022; diverticulitis; osteoarthritis; remote history of ‘non-A, non-B hepatitis’ leading to hospital admission over 25 years ago; myopathy of unknown origin following bronchoscopy with general anesthesia approximately ten years ago, which resolved with steroids over the course of a few days; COVID-19 in early 2022; and varicose veins. She had no history of head injury, seizure, or stroke. The patient had finished preliminary college and was previously employed full-time but had since retired. She had a 29 pack-year history of smoking, having quit at the time of her cancer diagnosis, and did not regularly use any other recreational substances other than the occasional glass of wine.
As a part of her assessment, the patient underwent a semi-structured interview using the Structured Clinical Interview for the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th edition (DSM-5; SCID-5). She denied any current or previous history of symptoms consistent with any psychiatric disorder other than the depersonalization and derealization detailed in this report. Her mental status exam at time of assessment was grossly normal. She had no previous psychiatric diagnoses and no family history of any psychiatric conditions. She was right-handed. Complete neurological examination was grossly normal, other than that her voice was somewhat hoarse, and she endorsed some subjective memory complaints, though nothing objectively notable or that impaired the course of the assessment. Her motor exam was only notable for limited bilateral hip flexion due to pain (4/5 bilaterally). She did have a slight intention tremor in her left hand, which she indicated was not new.