We present a case of VUR detection during evaluation of renal function by dynamic scintigraphy with 99mTc-DTPA.
A 6-year old boy was prenatally diagnosed with bilateral hydronephrosis. Postnatal imaging by voiding urethrocystography revealed severe bilateral VUR (grade IV/V on left and grade III/V on the right side). Renal ultrasonography showed bilateral hydronephrosis and reduction of the renal parenchyma of the left kidney. The renal function was evaluated by dynamic scintigraphy (year 2005). After i.v bolus injection of 99mTc-DTPA, 120 short time frames (4 s in vascular phase and 10 s in dynamic phase) within 20 minutes were taken, matrix size 64 x 64, using one headed SOPHA gamma camera. It has been shown that left kidney participated in the global renal function with only 2% .
Static 99mTc-DMSA scintigraphy (year 2005) was performed for evaluation of renal cortical morphology. Three hours after the injection of 99mTc-DMSA (dose of 2 MBq/kg body weight), static images in supine position were obtained (posterior-PA, anterior-AP, left oblique-LO and right oblique-RO), using a double-head MEDISO gamma camera, 256 x 256 matrix size (100-300 Kcnts for each image). The scan data showed focal cortical parenchyma defect in the mid-third of the right kidney and very small functional renal tissue on the side of the left kidney - state D according Smelly classification for reflux nephropathy .
Surgical treatment was implemented, initially bilateral cutaneous ureterostomy have been created in order to obtain good renal drainage and promote optimal renal growth. Classic antireflux procedure (Leadbetter-Politano ureterocystoneostomy) was performed after 12 months.
During the following five years, the child has been regularly checked in outpatient pediatric Nephrology Clinic. Renal functional studies, as degradation products and clearance of endogenous creatinine, were in normal range, as well as proteinuria. The child had neither urinary infection, nor hypertension.
The follow up 99mTc-DMSA scintigraphy (year 2008), showed improvement of the findings at the side of the right kidney, without any change in the left renal function .
Three years after (year 2011), control renal diuretic scintigraphy with 99mTc-DTPA was performed. Diuretic (furosemid) was given 15 minutes after the start of the dynamic renal scintigraphy. This scan data showed almost identical findings concerning the renal function in comparison with initial scan. However, during the diuretic phase an increase in the radioactivity in the region of the left kidney was noticed. This finding suggested failure of the antireflux procedure on the left side, with reappearance of VUR .