The patient was an 18-year-old male. From May 2021, he had a paroxysmal cough, whistle sound during sleep and shortness of breath. Enhanced chest computed tomography (CT) in a local hospital showed neoplasms on the trachea and the opening of the right main bronchus respectively on June 1, 2021. Pulmonary function test showed forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1)/forced vital capacity (FVC) was 0.63, FVC predicted was 56.29%, diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO) predicted was 71.46%, maximal voluntary ventilation (MVV) predicted was 40.6%, and bronchial dilation test was negative. Flexible fiber scope showed a neoplasm in the middle 1/3 segment of the trachea. The length of the neoplasm was about 1.5 cm, and had wide base and papillary top, resulting in about 40% of airway stenosis. Another neoplasm was found in the opening of the right main bronchus, resulting in about 90% of airway stenosis. The two lesions were independent and the tracheal mucosa between these two lesions was smooth and intact. The flexible fiber scope could enter along the gap, and the ridge between the right upper bronchus and intermediate bronchus was widened. Biopsy of the lesion at the opening of the right main bronchus was performed. A large number of lymphocytes were found infiltrated in the lesion by hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining. Only a small number of Ki-67 positive cells could be found in the lesion. In addition to this, we also found that TTF-1 (−), Syn (−), and LCA ( +) in lymphocyte, CD3 ( +) in T lymphocyte, CD20 ( +) in B lymphocyte by immunohistochemistry. In this patient, left nasal polypectomy was performed in August 2020 and postoperative pathology showed left nasal polyp with a little eosinophil infiltration. The patient had no allergic history, no cancer in his family history, no smoking and drinking, no special occupational exposure.
On admission in June 2021, vital signs of the patient were body temperature 36.7 °C, pulse rate 84 beats/min, respiratory rate 18 breaths/min, blood pressure 110/70 mmHg and oxygen saturation 98% on room air. On physical examination, whistle sound could be heard in his right lung when inhaling. Tumor biomarkers, such as carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), neuron-specific enolase (NSE), squamous cell carcinoma associated antigen (SCC), gastrin-releasing peptide precursor (Pro-GRP) and cytokeratin 19 fragment (CYFRA21-1) were normal. Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), serum ferritin (SF), β2 microglobulin (β2-MG), autoantibody series, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA), antistreptolysin O (ASO), hypersensitive C-reactive protein (hs-CRP), rheumatoid factor (RF), IgA, IgM, total IgG, IgG1, IgG2, IgG3, IgG4, IgE, complement C3, complement C4, κ light chain, γ light chain, lymphocyte subsets (including T cells, B cells and NK cells) were all normal. Blood cell counts, procalcitonin (PCT), interleukin 6 (IL-6) and serum amyloid A (SAA) were also in normal range. Xpert MTB/RIF, acid-fast staining and tuberculosis-DNA-polymerase chain reaction (TB-DNA-PCR) in sputum were also negative. Serum T-SPOT. TB was also negative. Only serum rubella virus IgG (Rub-IgG), cytomegalovirus IgG (CMV-IgG) and herpes simplex virus type I IgG (HSV-I-IgG) were detected positive. Arterial blood gas analysis on room air were in normal range: pH 7.404, PO2 96.5 mmHg, PCO2 35.5 mmHg, HCO3− 21.7 mmol/L, SO2 97.4%. Chest CT three-dimensional image of trachea and bronchial showed 0.9 × 1.0 × 1.5 cm irregular neoplasm adhered to the right wall of the trachea at the first thoracic vertebra level and 1.0 × 1.4 × 2.5 cm irregular neoplasm adhered to the opening of the right main bronchus . Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) of enhanced chest magnetic resonance (MRI) showed that signals from the neoplasms in the trachea and the right main bronchus had been enhanced, and the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) value was about 1.7, which indicated malignant . Positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) showed high uptake of the lesions with maximum standardized uptake value (SUV max) 8.54 and mean standardized uptake value (SUV mean) 5.08. There were no obviously enlarged lymph nodes in bilateral hilum and mediastinum . That means we did not exactly confirm the lesions were malignant or not. Nasopharyngoscope showed no abnormalities.
After admission, transbronchial mass biopsy via flexible fiber scope (Olympus BF-IT260) was performed twice and the masses were removed by directly clamping through large biopsy forceps at the same time. The histopathological, immunohistochemistry (IHC), special staining, molecular pathology and metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS, DNA + RNA) of both biopsy samples were similar. Numerous lymphocytes, plasma cells, neutrophils and a few eosinophils infiltrated the bronchial submucosa . A few large histocytes were scattered in the mass . Special staining showed PAS (−), acid fast (−) and silver hexamine (−).IHC showed ALK (5A4) (−), CD1a (−), CD2 ( +/−), CD20 (−/ +), CD3 ( +/−), CD30 (−), CD4 ( +/−), CD5 ( +/−), CD56 (−), CD7 ( +/−), CD8 (+/−), CK5/6 (−), Cyclin D1 (+ , scattered), CMV (−), Langerin (−), GATA-3 (−), MUM-1 (+ , scattered), PAX5 (+ , local), TDT (−), TTF-1 (−). S-100 (+ , scattered) , CD68 (KP1) (+), CD68 (PG-M1) (+ , foci), and HLA-DR ( +) . Ki-67 proliferation index was about 40%. Epstein-Barr Virus-encoded RNA (EBER) in situ hybridization was negative. BRAF V600E mutation was not detected by fluorescence PCR. Molecular pathology showed TB-DNA-PCR negative. No malignant tumor cells were detected in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) from the right upper lobe. Fungal smear, acid-fast staining, TB-DNA-PCR and bacterial culture of BALF were all negative. TB-DNA-PCR and Xpert MTB/RIF of the masses were also negative. No pathogen was detected in this two biopsy samples by mNGS.
According to the examination results above, the patient was diagnosed with primary diffuse RDD in central airway definitely through multidisciplinary discussion of respirology, radiology, oncology, pathology, radiotherapy and thoracic surgery. After two transbronchial resections , chest CT and bronchoscopy showed the neoplasms in the trachea and the opening of the right main bronchus were significantly smaller than before, and the airway stenosis was improved significantly . Cough, shortness of breath of the patient were disappeared, and there was no whistle sound. No more treatment was given to the patient. After 5 months of follow-up, the patient had no symptoms and the trachea and the right main bronchus were unobstructed. (Fg. G–I).