A 4.5-year-old girl presented to the emergency department with a 2-day history of progressive fatigue, fever, and tachycardia. The patient was diagnosed with ALL 4 months prior and was receiving chemotherapy and following up with the oncology team. The patient’s Glasgow coma scale (GCS) on admission was 15/15 and systems examination demonstrated tachycardia but otherwise unremarkable.
Initial blood work showed leukopenia with a white cell count (WCC) of 1.4 × 109 L (4–13.5) and an elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) of 25 mg/L (<5). All other parameters were unremarkable.
Due to the patient’s cardiac symptoms, an echocardiogram was requested. The echocardiogram revealed vegetations and a diagnosis of infective endocarditis (IE) was made. The patient underwent CT scanning which demonstrated three ring-enhanced lesions in the frontal lobe, temporal lobe, and brainstem (pons) measuring up to 0.7 cm and surrounding vasogenic edema with a right to left midline shift.
A lumbar puncture was performed but both the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cultures and blood cultures were negative. After 2 days of admission to the neurosurgical department, the decision for surgical intervention was made due to sterile cultures and difficulty to obtain source control as well as worsening neurological symptoms where the patient started to develop right lower limb weakness. The patient subsequently underwent a burr-hole drainage of the frontal and temporal collections using frameless navigation. This was done using an open right frontal technique with two burr holes and there was no intraoperative imaging during the procedure. Pus culture was aspirated but was also sterile with no growth. The patient was commenced on PiperacillinTazobactam and Vancomycin IV with Amphotericin B and Voriconazole for fungal cover. The patient underwent a total of 6-week duration IV-only antibiotic therapy. The patient also received prednisolone steroid therapy. Midazolam was prescribed as required for seizure prophylaxis. Following the burr-hole aspiration, the patient had an uneventful postoperative course with no surgical complications or re-operation. Postoperative CT scan showed no evidence of hemorrhage and resolution of the midline shift and vasogenic edema. The Glasgow outcome scale (GOS) at discharge was 3/5 due to moderate right lower limb hemiplegia.
At the 1-year follow-up, the patient still suffered from mobility impairment requiring a wheelchair for transportation for long distances. However, GOS at the 1-year follow-up was 4/5 due to minor right lower limb hemiplegia which was an improvement from the GOS at discharge (3/5) as the patient had some improved motor function and required minor assistance with daily activities. The patient was not academically delayed and did not have intellectual disability. For the European Quality 5D Youth quality of life questionnaire, the patient reported “a lot of problems” with mobility and “some problems” with pain and discomfort occasionally requiring painkillers. The European Quality Visual Analog Scale for this patient was 70%. Otherwise, the patient reported no problems with self-care, usual activities, and personality and mood disturbance.