A 56-year-old Qatari female on a routine visit to her primary health care physician for hypertension was incidentally discovered to have hypercalcemia. The physician referred her to the accident and emergency department at our institution for the management of the asymptomatic hypercalcemia. The patient was seen by the medical team and admitted for investigations and management. Her medical background was significant for hypertension and respiratory compression symptoms, particularly when the patient lied down in lateral position. There was no previous history of neck surgery or irradiation, smoking or alcohol consumption. There was also no family history of thyroid disease or malignancy.
Upon clinical examination, the patient had visible and palpable antero-lateral neck swelling (2 × 2 cm) in the upper neck region, not tender, and with no palpable lymph nodes. The systemic review was unremarkable. Her laboratory tests showed high calcium (3.13 mmol/L) and very high parathyroid hormone (PTH 1036 pg/mL) but normal kidney function, suggesting primary hyperparathyroidism. Liver function tests were normal. Ultrasound scan (US) of the neck showed two lesions suggesting a left thyroid nodule and left PA. The patient undertook 99mTc-sestamibi scintigraphy, and the findings were consistent with left superior PA . Ultrasound-guided FNAC of the thyroid nodule revealed a colloid nodule. Hence, diagnosis of left thyroid nodule and PA associated with PHPT was established, and the patient was booked for left hemithyroidectomy with PA excision.
A senior resident surgeon with assistance and direct supervision of a consultant surgeon performed the procedure. Since the patient had compression symptoms, left hemithyroidectomy with parathyroid adenoma excision were undertaken. Intraoperatively, the left PA was found to be ectopic being intramuscular within the strap muscles, and it was giant (9 gm, ). Intraoperative serum level of IOiPTH was done before excision, and after 10 and 20 min of excision, and there was >50% drop in the IOiPTH level. Postoperatively, the patient was kept on calcium gluconate infusion. In the morning of the next day, she received calcitriol 0.5 μg TID, and her calcium level was 2.04 mmol/L. At the time of discharge on the third postoperative day, the patient was doing well, and her serum calcium was 2.20 mmol/L.
Upon follow-up, the patient was seen at our Thyroid Surgery Clinic after a week. She was satisfied with the procedure and had no complaints, normal calcium level, and normal thyroid function. On her second visit to our clinic 3 weeks after her discharge, her thyroid function showed mild hypothyroidism (TSH 21.0 μU/mL, FT4 10.4 μU/mL), and vitamin D level was low (11.0 nmol/L). Hence, the patient was started on thyroxine 50 μg and ergocalciferol 50,000 IU weekly.
Gross appearance of the surgical specimen demonstrated a PA (3 × 2.5 × 1.5 cm, 9 gm) with solid tan homogeneous cut surface. The left thyroid lobe (4.5 × 3.5 × 2 cm) revealed a 1.5 × 1.5 cm well-circumscribed partially cystic solid lesion with focal calcified areas in the upper and middle pole. Microscopically , there was a benign encapsulated neoplasm composed exclusively of large polyhedral cells with distinct plasma membranes and extensively vacuolated (water-clear) cytoplasm. A rim of normal parathyroid was seen adjacent to the adenoma. A small amount of unremarkable adipose tissue was also present. These findings diagnosed WCCPA.
WCCPA is a rare cause of PHPT. Our literature review showed that only 20 cases have been reported in the literature . Histologically, these adenomas are characterized by water clear cells with foamy cytoplasm containing vacuoles . WCCPA must be distinguished from water clear cell parathyroid hyperplasia, in which all four parathyroid glands have water clear cells as their dominant histology . The differential diagnosis of WCCPA includes water-clear cell parathyroid hyperplasia and metastatic carcinoma with clear cell morphology . On other hand, clear cell metastatic carcinomas (specifically clear cell renal cell carcinoma) can have the same morphology and immunohistochemistry of WCCPA [both stain for paired box gene(8) (PAX8), and to some extent to renal cell carcinoma (RCC) monoclonal antibody] , . Moreover, RCC can produce PTH-related peptide which results in hypercalcemia, that can also be seen with PA . However, WCCPA, unlike clear cell RCC (CCRCC), stains negative for carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX).