A 30-year-old immunocompetent Turkish man presented to our clinic with a painful corneal abscess and severe vision loss in his left eye. His family and medical history showed no remarkable findings. The systemic examination results were not significant. He was a farmer and careless contact lens wearer. His eye symptoms started a month ago and had been treated with topical antibiotics and antiviral therapy for 2 weeks without microbiological examination. Due to disease progression despite treatment, he was referred to our tertiary ophthalmology clinic for further investigation and treatment. Visual acuity of the right eye was only light perception. Marked ciliary congestion and extensive corneal abscesses with corneal melting were observed. The anterior chamber structures were not visible because of excessive corneal abscesses . Corneal scrapings were taken immediately, and topical vancomycin (50 mg/ml), topical ceftazidime (50 mg/ml) hourly, and topical fluconazole (Fluzamed 0.3%, World Medicine, London, England) eight times daily were started immediately.
The microbiological samples for diagnostic procedures taken from corneal tissue, contact lens, and contact lens solution were inoculated onto Sabouraud dextrose agar (SDA) and brain hard infusion (BHI) agar on the day of admission. The plates were incubated at 37 °C. After 4 days of incubation, a phaeoid mold was observed on the plate, which was inoculated with a corneal tissue sample. No growth was observed in the other culture samples. The colony appearance of the fungus was white to grayish on the margin, with an olive green umbonate center and a woolly surface . The slide culture technique was used to examine the microscopic features of the fungal colonies. Direct microscopic preparation was performed using lactophenol cotton blue (LPCB) staining. The LPCB preparation showed septate hyphae with short or long slender conidiophores bearing single conidia. The conidia were oval and unicellular, with a larger end towards the apex . The mold was identified as Scedosporium apiospermum by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI TOF-MS) (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). Antifungal susceptibility was studied using the gradient strip test and broth microdilution method at public health institutions. The isolate was resistant to fluconazole, amphotericin B, and miconazole, and sensitive to voriconazole.
Due to treatment unresponsiveness, fluconazole was switched to voriconazole on the third day of follow-up. Systemic voriconazole (Vfend 200 mg intravenously, Pfizer, USA) was added every 12 hours after the antifungal susceptibility test, as it was still unresponsive on the seventh day of follow-up. Despite adequate treatment, no clinical improvement was observed, and corneal melting was observed during follow-up. Therefore, surgical intervention was performed to remove infected tissue. Therapeutic penetrating keratoplasty was performed. The purulent material colonizing the anterior chamber was aspirated and sent for microbiological examination together with the corneal button preoperatively.
A week after the surgery, a well-formed anterior chamber with moderate corneal graft edema was observed. The visual acuity of the eye was 20/125. Oral and topical voriconazole with moxifloxacin and dexamethasone were maintained for a month after surgery . The treatment is summarized in Fig. .
Keratoplasty sutures were excised in the sixth month after surgery. The final visual acuity of the affected eye was 20/100, and a clear donor cornea and silent anterior chamber were examined during the second year of follow-up.