A 63-year-old Japanese man was referred to our department by an otolaryngologist because of swelling in the left lower gingiva. He had no symptoms except for trismus. His maximal interincisal distance was 30 mm. He ran a bicycle shop and had few opportunities for frequent exposure to ultraviolet rays and sunlight. He had smoked for 20 years (from the ages of 20–40 years) and had regularly drunk alcohol for 43 years. He had hypertension, hyperuricaemia and chronic kidney disease (eGFR=25) but no family history of skin cancer. The history of the present illness revealed that he had suffered multiple recurrent BCCs before presenting to our department . A skin cancer on the right wing of the nose had been diagnosed and surgically resected. The lesion was resected in situ with a 2-mm negative margins. Histopathological examination revealed that the tumour was nodular BCC (pT1N0M0). He received regular observation once a month in the first year after the surgery and showed no signs or symptoms of recurrence or metastasis, and was extended the period to once a half-year from the second year after the surgery. Five years after the surgery, regular computed tomography (CT) unveiled that the cancer recurred in the skin of the right side of his neck, around the lower edge of the mandibular bone, on the right side of the cervical lymph nodes, and over the right submandibular gland . He was diagnosed as rT4aN2bM0. Then, he underwent modified radical neck dissection type III with level I to IV, and right submandibular sialoadenectomy. Pathological examination revealed recurrent lesion with surgical margin positive and two positive nodes with ENE (total 2/26 including RIIa; 1/9 with ENE and RIII-1; 1/2); thus, he was carried out postoperative intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) (total dose: 60 Gy in 30 fractions). Six years after the initial treatment, he suffered a second local recurrence on the right side of the nasal vestibule with the size of 9×10×9 mm. This time, he was diagnosed as rT1N0M0. Against 2nd recurrent lesion, he first was treated with radiotherapy (total dose: 66 Gy in 33 fractions) and finally underwent surgery. A third recurrence, occurring 7 years after the initial treatment, was on the side of the external right nostril, which was surgically resected. Its diagnosis was rT1N0M0 and the evaluation of surgical margin was negative. All the recurrent tumours exhibited infiltrating features in the pathological examinations.
An extraoral examination revealed asymmetry of the face and swelling of the buccal region, this time on the left side, but no apparent enlarged cervical lymph nodes . An intraoral examination revealed that the lesion was 33 × 12 mm in size with induration that extended toward the buccal mucosa, and intractable ulceration was present around the buccal mucosa and the lower gingiva .
CT and magnetic resonance imaging depicted the lesion in the left buccal region, extending through the buccinator muscle toward the platysma muscle and reaching close to the surface of the buccal skin . Additionally, this lesion was also extended towards alveolar bones, and CT found the signs of osteolysis with the adjacent bone marrow exhibiting the significant signs of osteosclerosis. An incisional biopsy sample from the buccal lesion showed features of neoplasia: the formation of nests composed of basaloid-like epithelial cells underneath the oral epithelium and a palisading arrangement of the peripheral cells of the nests. Immunohistochemical (IHC) stains also revealed partial positivity for malignancy in the specimen. These pathological findings were indicative of metastatic BCC (pM1).
One month after the biopsy, the patient underwent left-sided selective neck dissection with level I to II and left-sided marginal mandibulectomy. The lesion was resected in situ with a 5-mm safety margin, and 10 mm of the lower mandibular edge was left . Pathological examination revealed that the tumour had infiltrated the musculature with negative nodes. IHC stains were positive for cytokeratin (CK) 5/6, p63 and 34βE12; partially positive for CK AE1/AE3, Ber-EP4 and Bcl-2 protein; and negative for calponin, α-smooth muscle actin and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) . The clinical history and pathological findings indicated a diagnosis of metastatic BCC (pT0N0M1) in the left buccal region that exhibited morphoeic features; this is a histologically uncommon type of primary BCC and other recurrent BCCs .
Nine months after this surgery, he suffered a relapse in the same region. Because of his history of radiotherapy in the facial region, he additionally received palliative radiotherapy (total dose: 24 Gy in 12 fractions). In the 11 months since the radiotherapy was completed, the tumour size (18 × 8 mm) has remained stable. Given the patient’s treatment history and the tumour’s resistance to previous treatment, his prognosis is considered poor. He has refused additional treatment, and considering his history of radiotherapy and his renal dysfunction, it should not be reasonable to carry out surgery including reconstruction, and he is now being monitored regularly.