A 38-year-old male patient presented with a painless mass on his right thigh. He reported no significant medical history other than psoriasis and had no family history of cancer. Physical examination revealed a palpable non-tender mass measuring approximately 30 cm along its long axis. No overlying skin discolorations or ulcerations were observed. Imaging studies, including magnetic resonance imaging, showed a soft-tissue tumor in the right quadriceps, 22 cm long axis, heterogeneous, taking contrast, in contact with the femur on its external face. This was associated with a heterogeneous, 15-cm fat mass in the posterior compartment . Chest, abdomen, and pelvis computed tomography (CT) performed as complementary studies to detect any metastases identified a homogeneous, rounded, dense, and pleural lesion limited to the level of the anterior parietal pleura of the left upper lobe without parenchymal reaction and two pulmonary parenchymal nodules with slightly spiculated outlines, all of which were suspected of metastasizing .
Pathological examination of the surgical biopsy of the anterior mass favored a LGFMS, whereas the histological characteristics of the posterior mass were that of a hibernoma. A biopsy of the pleural lesion revealed pleural metastatic localization of a LGFMS. Based on the biopsy findings of the subpleural mass, which revealed the presence of sarcoma metastasis alongside multiple metastatic pulmonary nodules, neoadjuvant chemotherapy with a six-cycle regimen of adriamycin was proposed.
The patient is placed under general anesthesia in the supine position; preventive antibiotic therapy is administered.
Sarcoma of the quadricipital compartment
A large anterior approach is made to carry out the biopsy path, moving to the outer edge of the rectus femoris. Passage through the vastus muscles, maintaining a safety plan regarding the tumor raising the tumor from distal to proximal. In Proximal and lateral, taking away part of the vastus aponeurosis and detached from the lateral subtrochanteric ridge. The excision is macroscopically complete and distant.
Weight of the tumor: 4 kg 300 .
Hibernoma in contact with the hamstrings.
A longitudinal incision is made carrying the biopsy path, and the lesion is excised with a safety border corresponding to the tumor capsule. The hamstrings are preserved, and no sciatic nerve exposure occurs.
The posterior mass (hibernoma) was resected, with a small safety border corresponding to the tumor capsule.
Histological examination of the anterior mass revealed a well-limited intramuscular tumor associated with two distinct components, a LGFMS and a SEF, in approximately equivalent proportions. Areas of LGFMS had alternating low-to-moderate cellularity, and a fibrohyaline to fibromyxoid matrix, as well as monotonous spindle cells with regular nuclei which were arranged in short bundles or bands. A few collagen rosettes were observed . The SEF contingent was mainly found in the proximal part of the tumor and was composed of monotonous epithelioid cells arranged in cords spanning the dense fibrous stroma . The probability of tumor necrosis after chemotherapy was estimated to be 40%. The tumor resection was complete (R0). Immunohistochemical analysis revealed intense and diffuse expression of MUC4 in the two components . A genetic molecular study using RNASeq showed a FUS-CREB3L2 fusion transcript characteristic of this entity.
The posterior thigh mass revealed a well-differentiated adipose tumor consistent with a hibernoma. The tumor displayed a lobular architecture, with adipocytes exhibiting finely granular and eosinophilic multivacuolar cytoplasm and central or paracentral nuclei . Complete tumor resection was performed, and adjuvant radiotherapy was administered. After 6 months, the patient underwent a left upper lobectomy. Eight months later, a right wedge resection of the middle lobe was performed due to the presence of pulmonary metastases. After 15 months, a recurrence of lung metastases was identified, and the patient was treated with pazopanib. At the 2-year post-operative follow-up after the surgical resection of the two tumors of the thigh, the patient had no other issues related to the tumors.