A forty-year-old psychotic and intravenous-drug-addicted Caucasian male was cared by prehospital service for coma due to drugs overdose. In this emergency situation, without any intravenous access available, an IO device (EZ-IO™; Teleflex Medical, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.) was promptly inserted by the emergency medical technician (EMS) on scene in the upper portion of the left tibia to administer therapeutics and initiate mechanical ventilation. Hospitalization in the intensive care unit of the University Hospital of Tours (France) with close monitoring lasted three days. Several attempts to establish another IV catheter were unsuccessful and no central catheter was used as the need for infusion was expected to be short due to a rapid clinical improvement. The IO catheter was removed at Day 1, with report of local inflammation around the insertion site. An erysipelas was diagnosed. Treatment with oral amoxicillin-clavulanic acid (1gx3/day) was introduced. The patient reported psychiatric problems with schizophrenia, multiple intravenous-drug intoxications with coma, and regular cocaine and heroin use. He left the hospital against medical advice three days after IO device removal.
Three months later, he asked for a consultation in the same hospital because of fever and bone pain in the left leg and was hospitalized again. Other complaints were chills and inability to walk normally and to bear weight on his left leg. Redness, warmth, point tenderness and swelling on the site of the IO access were present . He was afebrile, without hemodynamical instability. Laboratory results were only significant for leukocytosis at 12.4.109/L and C reactive protein at 51.2 mg/l. Blood cultures were negative. Routine radiographs revealed an ill-defined osteolysis of the metaphysis and the epiphysis with a condensed area and blurred periosteal appositions . The magnetic resonance showed an important marrow edema with T1-weighted hyposignal and fat-saturated-T2-weighted hypersignal extending in the left tibia, measuring twenty-one centimeters. Soft tissues were infiltrated. No abscess was visualized but the radiologist could not achieve gadolinium injection because IV access was lacking. MR imaging was compatible with the diagnosis of osteomyelitis.
An open biopsy of the left tibia revealed Gram positive cocci with focal signs of acute osteomyelitis, bone remodeling and marrow fibrosis containing polymorphic inflammatory infiltrate comprising neutrophils, foamy macrophages, lymphocytes and plasma cells. Treatment with piperacillin-tazobactam and vancomycin was initiated. Culture from the surgical site grew methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA). An oral switch with levofloxacin 750 mg/day and rifampin 900 mg/day for six weeks was introduced. A favorable outcome was noted eighteen months later.