A 13-year-old previously healthy female student presented with gradual exertional dyspnea that improved on leaning forward. The condition progressed over 2 months and was associated with two attacks of coughing blood-tinged sputum, night fever, decreased appetite and weight loss. She was discovered to have a massive pericardial effusion with no clinical or radiographic evidence of tamponade. Therapeutic pericardiocentesis revealed an exudative fibrinous effusion with marked leukocytosis, predominant polymorphonuclear lymphocytes and abundant lympho-plasmacytic cells. Its culture and sensitivity were negative. A Chest Computed Tomography (CT) showed marked pericardial effusion with mild pericardial thickening, left pleural basal thickening in addition to bilateral patchy areas of pulmonary interstitial thickening (consolidation) and ground glass veiling.
An extensive work up showed normal complete blood count (CBC), elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP), normal liver function tests apart from hypoalbuminemia, normal kidney function tests, negative tuberculin test, negative blood culture and sensitivity, negative anti-nuclear antibodies, rheumatoid factor and virology, normal complement 3 and 4 and normal thyroid profile, the workup was negative for respiratory viruses and bacteria. She received empirical antibiotics and a short course of steroids and was discharged home.
Despite initial improvement, shortness of breath, hemoptysis, fever and weight loss recurred, and she was readmitted. On examination she appeared toxic, orthopneic, tachypneic, febrile (temp; 38.5 °C-39°C) and tachycardic with no evidence of pulsus paradoxus. Her neck veins were congested and non-pulsating. Her cardiac examination showed increased dullness of the bare area of the heart, distant heart sounds, no murmur or pericardial rub. Bilateral scattered crackles and wheezes were apparent on chest auscultation. The patient had no lower-limb oedema, hepatomegaly or lymphadenopathy.
The investigations including diagnostic pericardiocentesis, and CT-chest were similar to the initial admission except for normocytic anemia. In addition three early-morning sputum samples smears with Ziehl–Neelsen (ZN) stain, Interferon-Gamma Releasing Assay (IGRA) test and sputum culture were negative.
The patient received vancomycin and ceftriaxone, with marked improvement. Due to extensive adhesions pericardiotomy was recommended. The encysted pericardial fluid was aspirated. Pericardiotomy was done with multiple biopsies taken from the pericardium. The patient tolerated the procedure without postoperative complications.
Pericardial fluid analysis showed predominant lymphocytes. The Mycobacteria Growth Indicator Tube (MGIT) culture for tuberculosis (TB) was negative after 2-months incubation.
Pericardial Pathology revealed marked storiform fibrosis with excess lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate. The immune-histochemistry showed an increased number of IgG4-positive plasma cells, findings that were compatible with IgG4 related disease. Serum IgG: 2600 mg/dl (700–1600), Serum IgG4: 168 mg/dl (40–120), (value for IgG4-RD > 135 mg/dl), Serum IgG4/total IgG: 0.064 (cut off value for IgG4-RD > 0.08).
Thus, the patient was diagnosed with IgG4 related disease affecting her pericardium and lungs. She was started on 0.6 mg/kg prednisone together with 2.5 mg/kg azathioprine. After 2-weeks the patient returned to her usual physical activity. After three months, there was no recurrence of pericardial or pleural effusion, with normalization of hemoglobin, ESR and CRP. However, the lung lesions persisted and she was switched to mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) and rituximab was discussed.
2 years later, the patient started to complain of progressive dyspnea, with high ESR, CRP, so the decision was to start rituximab. The patient received 4 intravenous doses of rituximab 500 mg, each dose was one week apart from its following dose. After those four doses, the patient showed marked initial improvement of her general condition, dyspnea and cough.
6 months later, the patient started to redevelop progressive dyspnea, and productive cough with whitish sputum, culture and sensitivity were negative, the patient was not feverish, the chest auscultation showed left basal inspiratory crepitations. The hemoglobin level was 9.4 mg/dL, normal white blood cell count and differential, normal basic metabolic profile, ESR = 16, CRP was negative.
CT chest with intravenous contrast was done and showed: diffuse mediastinal infiltrative soft tissue mass lesion is seen surrounding the mediastinal structures with no evidence of obstruction, associated with bilateral circumferential pleural and fissural thickening, more evident on the left side, with bilateral pleural effusion, there was also pericardial thickening with effusion. There was bilateral diffuse thickening of central and peripheral pulmonary interstitium in the form of hilar and peribronchovascular soft tissue thickening and thickening of interlobular septae.
Echocardiography showed normal ejection fraction, EPAP = 30 mmHg, no pericardial involvement.
Left thoracotomy was done, superior mediastinal and pleural biopsies were taken, the pathology showed: inflammatory fibrosing reaction with no active IgG-4 related disease in the tissue examined.
The patient received one dose of intravenous rituximab 500 mg and oral prednisolone was increased to 1 mg/kg/day and the patient was discharged for follow-up.
One week later the patient developed a sudden onset of massive hemoptysis. She was brought to emergency room with altered mental status, bradycardia, hypotension and hypoxia. She was intubated, and mechanically ventilated but despite resuscitation the patient passed away. The timeline of the events is shown in Fig. .