We describe a 33-year-old female with an enlarged heart and copious fluid in the cavum pericardii, as confirmed by echocardiography, although she had been asymptomatic for 4 years. In January 2012, she presented to the hospital with a severe cough and cheese-like-sputum mixed with blood but no fever. X-ray examination suggested that there was a diffuse exudate in the right lung but no tumor mass . Leukocytes and C-reactive protein (CRP) were within the normal range. Pneumonia was diagnosed and antibiotics prescribed. Symptoms eased after 1 week but there was no obvious change in the chest x-ray . The patient presented to the hospital again in November 2013 and 6 more times between November 2013 and June 2014. The “pneumonia” in the right pulmonary lobes persisted. According to the chest x-ray, the exudates decreased but did not disappear between episodes . Earlier, high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) did not suggest lymphangioleiomyomatosis and showed no bronchiectasis. Upon examination, the patient did not have yellow dystrophic nails, as are often seen in yellow-nail syndrome. She had no other previous medical, social, or family history to suggest a diagnosis.
During a hospital visit in June 2014, the patient’s CT scan still presented diffuse exudation in the right lung . Her erythrocyte sedimentation rate, CRP, and other labs (antinuclear antibody, double-stranded DNA [dsDNA], histones, U1-snRNP/Sm, SS-A 60 kD, Ro52, SS-B, Scl-70, cardiolipin/ACA, Jo-1, ribosome/PO, nucleosomes, proliferating cell nuclear antigen, and Pm-Scl) were negative. Mucous hyperemia of the bilateral bronchi and a milky-white sputum in the lumen was confirmed with bronchoscopic examination . Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BAL) was bloody and positive for Sudan III stain. Triglycerides were high (7.91 mmol/L). A biopsy of the right lung via bronchoscope showed normal tissue with some cellulose exudates and squamous epithelium. Apirated pericardial fluid was orange and chylous; a chyle test using Sudan III stain was positive. Laboratory data included leukocytes (1.21 × 10− 9/L, mononuclear cells 90%), triglycerides (18.72 mmol/L) and total cholesterol (2.07 mmol/L). From these data, chylous reflux syndrome involving the pericardium and lung was diagnosed. An ultrasound examination showed obstruction of the left carotid segment of the thoracic duct:the internal diameter of the left cervical thoracic duct is about 2.3 mm, its terminal lumen is thin and the inner diameter is less than 1 mm. Lymphatic imaging by CT of the lower extremity (99mTc-DX) showed that the lymphatic system of both lowerlimbs was unobstructed, and radioactive filling around the pericardium supported chylous effusion and continuous development of the upper thoracic duct.Magnetic resonance in mediastinum revealed that the thoracic duct from the tracheal carina to the diaphragm could be seen and that the lumen was slender. An abnormal tubular structure was seen around the carina and the bronchi on both sides, with that on the right being more obvious. The cervical portion of the thoracic duct was tortuous and appeared slightly tapered at the end. Direct lymphangiography showed that the contrast agent flowed slowly. The thoracic duct was slightly broadened in the lower and middle segments but broader in the upper segment. There was reflux of contrast agent into the left neck, left subclavian, and left bronchomediastinal lymphatic trunks. Contrast agent was deposited in the pericardium . A lymphatic obstruction at the thoracic duct was noted but its cause was unclear.
During surgery, the end of the thoracic duct, ampulla, and various lymphatic trunks were found to be parceled and compressed by thicker fibrous tissue and a vascular sheath of the internal jugular vein. Chylous reflux was observed in the lymphatic tubes of the neck, bronchomediastinal, and subclavian trunks. Lymph fluid was not flowing freely into the blood. Thicker fibrous tissue and the vascular sheath were separated, yet the end of the thoracic duct remained compressed by the neck trunk. The thoracic duct and ampulla were at an angle owing to displacement by the chest wall lymphatic tubes, so lymphatic drainage was limited. Therefore the involved chest wall lymphatics were ligated, compression of the thoracic duct was relieved, and lymph flow returned to normal. Chylous reflux in the neck and subclavian trunks was significantly alleviated. After surgery, the patient felt severe tightness in her chest, and the pericardial effusion increased significantly for a week. There was a moderate amount of pleural effusion on the left and a small amount on the right. Pleural fluid on the left was aspirated and triglycerides were 12.63 mmol/L. Symptoms improved after pericardial and hydrothorax aspiration, and both cough and expectoration were diminished. The dimensions of the chylopericardium were as follows: apex, 18 mm; left rear, 37 mm; left, 28 mm; right front, 12 mm. The patient is being followed even now.