The 72-year-old Mrs T. of European origin consulted her physician because of symptoms of abdominal distension, dyspepsia, and anorexia, which caused a 5 kg weight loss. Her personal medical history consisted of drug-induced chronic pancreatitis and a resected benign breast nodule. She stated that she had no allergies and no smoking habits. Chronic medication consisted of a daily pancreatic enzymatic substitution. The patient was professionally active as an employee in an insurance company, with no relevant exposure reported. Her family history included a case of colorectal cancer and of breast cancer, for an aunt and a cousin, respectively.
Radiological examinations reported a mobile pararectal mass at least 8 cm long, without any other lesion. Blood markers (Human Chorionic Gonadotropin, serum alpha feto-protein, lactate dehydrogenase, Carcino-embryonic antigen, tumoral antigen 19-9, and tumoral antigen 125) levels were in the usual range. Initial explorative celioscopy in August 2013 was subsequently converted to laparotomy, which allowed complete resection of a jejunal tumor. No other abdominal nor pelvic lesion was detected. Pathological analysis confirmed the diagnostic of a GIST with typical immunohistochemical profile and strongly positive DOG1, CD34, and CD117 markers. The Ki67 proliferation index was evaluated at 10%, and the necrosis contingent was below 50%. Molecular sequencing revealed that the exon 11 of C-KIT gene was deleted (as in 70% of GIST) .
Considering that the tumor was located in the intestine, that its largest dimension was 11 cm and its mitotic index higher than 5 per mm2, it was classified as belonging to the 6b group in the Miettinen classification , with an associated metastatic risk higher than 90%. Circumferential margin was evaluated null, and no serous breaking was observed. The latter mostly determines the local recurrence risk and the overall survival in intermediate or high-risk localized GIST . Consequently, the oncology committee approved a 3-year adjuvant therapy with imatinib dosed at 400 mg per day, as recommended. The patient went through active controls every 4 months during the first 3 years and then every 6 months during the following 2 years after the imatinib treatment was completed. Active follow-up consisted of standardized quality of life evaluations, clinical examinations, and computed tomography scanners. Analysis of the liver and renal functions and blood count monitoring were also performed.
No clinical event happened until October 2018, when the patient reported shoulder and left-arm painful functional limitation. Humeral bone swelling was clinically palpable. Brachial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT) evidenced a 10 cm-long heterogeneous tumor localized on the half-proximal left humeral bone. It was characterized by a low signal in T1-weighted pulse sequence and a heterogeneous intense signal in T2-weighted pulse sequence. Gadolinium injection revealed a heterogeneous contrast enhancement. Lesion borders were clearly delimited with a significant homogeneous contrast in proton-density-weighted signal, also after gadolinium injection. No significant cortical reaction or muscular invasion was observed. No other suspicious lesions were detected by body scan and bone scintigraphy. The analysis of percutaneous bone biopsies confirmed the diagnosis of a GIST. The oncology committee validated the reintroduction of imatinib dosed at 400 mg per day from mid-December 2018, and then approved surgical resection in view of the good clinical and radiological responses . Surgery performed in May 2019 consisted of a 15 cm humeral diaphyseal resection below the surgical neck and, at the same time, reconstruction with intercalary allograft. Fixation was achieved with locked nail and plate materials.
Pathological analysis consisted of macroscopic examination after anteroposterior opening to select areas of interest for systematic sampling. The surgical humeral bone resection measured 15.5 × 2.4 × 3.8 cm. The tumor area of 9 cm in height had a heterogeneous aspect, including hemorrhagic and fibrous modifications . A margin of 0.8 cm from the tumor to the distal section evidenced complete surgical resection. The significant histological regression consisted of poor contingent of spindle atypical cells and major fibrosis tissue reaction . The immunohistochemical study with antibodies DOG1, CD117 (C-KIT), and CD34 confirmed the previous diagnosis of a GIST with a retained protein profile .
Until now, the patient continues to take a daily dose of 400 mg imatinib, until disease progression or pharmacologic adverse events occur. In June 2020, more than 1 year after surgery, she fully recovered the upper limb function, the engraftment was successful, and no recurrence was observed .