A 73-year-old Asian man with hypertension was referred to our hospital with exertional dyspnoea. He underwent successful cavotricuspid isthmus ablation therapy for atrial flutter at another institution 10 years earlier. They noticed a large LA and pulmonary hypertension (PH), but did not find any shunt flow . He had no limitations until 2 years before this presentation, when he felt palpitations. He was in New York Heart Association Class III and was treated with diuretics by a family physician, but treatment failed to markedly improve symptoms.
He had a Grade 2 systolic murmur in the third intercostal space on the left sternal border. There was no extremity oedema. Electrocardiography showed sinus rhythm with first-degree atrioventricular block, complete right bundle branch block, and ST-T abnormalities. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed mild ventricular septal hypertrophy, mild PH, moderate TR, and left-to-right shunt. Tricuspid valvular annulus was dilated to 52.2 mm (normal 28 ± 5 mm3) or 25.8 mm/m2 in diameter. Transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) showed an enlarged CS. Catheterization study showed O2 step-up between right atrium (RA) and right ventricle . Left atrium angiography suggested the defect represented inferior sinus venous-type atrial septal defect (ASD).
Intraoperative TOE showed a posteromedial left atrial wall defect communicating with the dilated CS draining into the RA through a Thebesian valve, establishing the diagnosis of CSASD .
Surgery was performed through a midline sternotomy under standard cardiopulmonary bypass. Via right atriotomy, through the dilated CS orifice (30 mm × 30 mm), a defect in the septum between the CS and LA was 2 cm × 2 cm in diameter and clearly identified . No other anomalies existed. The defect was closed directly with interrupted Teflon-pledgeted mattress sutures, in combination with tricuspid annuloplasty using a 29 mm SJM Tailor ring .
The postoperative course was uneventful. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 23. Transthoracic echocardiography at hospital discharge showed a left ventricular ejection fraction of 56%, trivial regurgitation of the tricuspid valve and no residual interatrial shunting. Warfarin was administered for 3 months. At the follow-up 12 months after the surgery, he was without functional limitations in normal sinus rhythm without conduction disturbance.
The patient gave written informed consent for publication of this report.