A 62-year-old male with a chief complaint of bloating visited our hospital on May 29th, 2020. The patient with an 80 pack-year history of smoking underwent coronary artery stenting operation two times (One was on August 10th, 2017, the other one was on October 1st of 2017) due to coronary atherosclerotic heart disease. This patient has been treated with Plavix, aspirin, rosuvastatin and isosorbide mononitrate.
During physical examination, no obvious abnormal breath sounds in the chest or abnormal cervical lymph nodes were found. An enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the chest and positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) showed a 3.4 × 3.2 cm cavity mass in the upper lobe of the left lung and enlarged left hilar and mediastinal lymph nodes, with the largest node being about 2.6 × 2.8 cm . There were no obvious metastases based on magnetic resonance imaging of the brain and PET- CT of the abdomen and bone. Analysis using a fiber optic bronchoscope identified a tumor which blocked the opening of the proper segment of the left upper lobe. The pathological result by biopsy confirmed squamous cell carcinoma .
Measurements of serum tumor markers showed elevated level of cytokeratin 19 fragment (Cyfra21-1: 4.77 ng/mL, reference: ≤ 3.3 ng/mL), neuron-specific enolase (NSE: 19.60 ng/mL, reference: ≤ 15.2 ng/mL), and squamous cell carcinoma antigen (SCCA: 2.58 ng/mL, reference: ≤ 2.5 ng/mL). The results were negative for serum carbohydrate antigen 125 (CA125), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Immunohistochemical staining showed positive staining for CK5/6, P40 and PD-L1 (+ 80% tumor cells), and negative staining for TTF-1, PD-1 and weakly positive staining for ALK-Ventana. Molecular analysis indicated no EGFR mutation or ROS1 fusion.
Combined with the patient’s chest enhanced CT, bronchoscopy, and PET-CT conditions, the patient was diagnosed with a locally advanced NSCLC with TNM stage of cT4N1M0 stage IIIA. On one hand, left pneumonectomy may be necessary if direct surgery was performed. However, the patient has a history of two times’ coronary artery stenting operations which made the surgical risk of left pneumonectomy very high. On the other hand, it was very likely that lobectomy alone may not achieve complete microscopic resection (R0). It was therefore recommended to give neoadjuvant chemotherapy plus toripalimab for 3 cycles after lung cancer multiple-disciplinary team (MDT) assessment. If the tumor and lymph nodes are significantly reduced, then surgery will be given. If the tumor does not shrink, radiotherapy and chemotherapy will be given. The patient agreed with the treatment plan and signed an informed consent form.
From June 25th, 2020 to August 6th, 2020, the patient accepted 3 cycles’ neoadjuvant chemotherapy (docetaxel 130 mg and cisplatin 130 mg) plus immunotherapy (toripalimab 240 mg). the patient’s chest enhanced CT on August 5th, 2020 showed that the tumor remission was significant. After an MDT evaluation, surgical treatment was recommended after the third cycle’s treatment. The patient's perioperative physical conditions and surgical indications were evaluated by enhanced CT of brain, chest and abdomen, and by coronary CT angiography, pulmonary function, and echocardiography.
The patient received the VATS left upper lobectomy and lymph node dissection on September 16th, 2020. The procedure was as follows: The thoracoscopic observation hole was at the 7th intercostal space of the mid-axillary line, and the operative hole was at the 4th intercostal space of the anterior axillary line and the 7th intercostal space of the posterior axillary line. The branches of the lingual segmental artery, posterior segmental artery and left upper pulmonary vein were cut respectively by endoscopic linear cutting stapler after opening the fissure. Anterior apical artery and left superior lobar bronchus were densely connected by fibrotic lymph nodes. The left superior lobar bronchus was firstly cut with scissors at the bifurcation of lingual bronchus and proper bronchus. However, the adhesion of lymph nodes and blood vessels was still very dense. Thus vascular blocking tapes were put on the left pulmonary artery root and lower pulmonary artery respectively to avoid hemorrhage during operation . The lymph nodes were carefully separated with scissors from the blood vessels after the vessels were blocked. The anterior apical artery was then cut with an endoscopic linear cutting stapler. The tumor and lung were placed in retrieval bags and removed through the front operation hole. Then the upper lobe bronchus stump was suspended with 3 silk threads and closed with an endoscopic linear cutting stapler . Intraoperative frozen pathological examination showed that there was no residual tumor at the cut edge of the bronchus. Finally, the lymph nodes in groups 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, and 11 were completely removed. Intraoperative blood loss was about 50 ml without blood transfusion.
In the perioperative period, the patient’s vital signs were stable, and there were no complications such as arrhythmia, thrombosis, pulmonary infection, and air leakage. The postoperative routine pathological results showed that the tumor had achieved complete remission . The patient recovered well and was discharged on the 7th day after surgery. Moreover, the patient received the 4th cycle’s chemotherapy and immunotherapy consistent with preoperative treatment plan on October 14th, 2020.