This is a reported case of a 71-year-old female patient without any medical history. She admitted to the hospital because of progressive jaundice, and it lasted 1 month but no complaint of abdominal discomfort. Her past medical history was unremarkable. There were no significant findings on physical examination with the exception of severe malnutrition. Height was 160 cm, and weight was 50 kg. Laboratory findings were as follows: total bilirubin, direct bilirubin, and albumin were 233.0, 128.0 μmol/l, and 3.25 g/dL, respectively, and amylase was within the normal range. The serum level of carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19-9 was 20.2 U/mL, and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) was 3.02 ng/ml. Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a 10-mm solid hypovascular mass in the periampullary region and distal common bile duct as regards the ampullary tumor. The common bile duct and the main pancreatic duct on the distal side of the mass were dilated at 20 mm and 9 mm in diameter, respectively. The endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) revealed that a 1.2 × 1.4 cm hyperechoic mass in the ampulla of Vater. There was no evidence of lymph node metastasis, peritoneal dissemination, or distant organ metastasis. The upper endoscopy revealed a mass in the duodenal papilla of Vater, and the biopsy result was primary duodenal papilla adenocarcinoma. The final diagnosis was an adenocarcinoma tumor of the ampulla of Vater with TNM staging which was cT1N0Mx according to the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) 8th Staging . MDT meeting consisted of surgeons, physicians, clinical and medical oncologists, radiologists, pathologists, and clinical nurse specialists (CNSs) which were organized to make clinical decisions. The informed consent was signed, and tLPD following the described technique was performed. The operation time was 480 min, and the estimated blood loss was 50 ml. With no postoperative complications as well as no diarrhea, the patient was discharged on POD8 uneventfully. The pathological result is as follows: intestinal-type ampulla of Vater carcinoma; metastasis to 01/29 lymph node metastasis (LN group 14) was confirmed. The resection margin was negative of tumor involvement (R0).
Trocars’ placement. We used 5 trocars: one 10 mm trocar was placed through the umbilicus for camera; two 12 mm trocars were placed at the midclavicular line 1 cm higher compared to the umbilicus in the right and left sides for the instrument; two 5 mm trocars were placed at the right and left subcostal. The surgeon stands on the right side of patient in the SMA’s dissection phase and changes to the middle position when dissecting the posterior surface of the artery with the rest of the surgical phases, with the second and third assistants holding the middle and right cameras and the first assistant standing on the side left.
Step 1: We mobilized the first jejunal loop and approached the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) from the left posterior side. After exploring the peritoneum to exclude metastases, the right-sided assistant lifts the mesentery of transverse colon upward, and the left-sided assistant pulls the first jejunum to the left side. We open the peritoneal along the meso of the first jejunal loop, dissecting the lymph node group 14 and group 15 along the first jejunal artery (FJA), middle colic artery, and right colic artery. We proceeded to exposing the FJA adjacent to the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) and isolated and ligated close to the origin of the FJA. Dissection of the left border of the origin of SMA just above the left renal vein (LRV) including LN station no. 14 or left-sided SMA LNs was done (Video ).
After transecting the first jejunal loop with GI stapler with the corresponding mesenteric, the ligament of Treitz was then mobilized with dissection of the 3rd and 4th portions of the duodenum. We assessed and classified the anatomy of the first jejunal vein (FJV) before and during surgery. In the case of the anterior, a simple approach and dissection should be done. In most of the cases, we found the common trunk between the FJV, and the inferior pancreaticoduodenal vein (IPDV) goes posteriorly to the SMA: after ligation of the FJA, the SMA was dissected and lifted, the FJV was approached and hemo-locked just below the left side of the SMA, and then, we continued in dissecting the first jejunal loop and the pancreatic uncinate process behind this vein.
The main surgeon changes to middle position. We continued dissecting on the posterior side of the SMA and ligated the posterior pancreaticoduodenal artery (PPDA) (if any) on this posterior surface. We proceeded to dissecting the superior border and then passing the superior border to the right border to separate the SMA from the SMV. The neural plexus around the SMA is carefully preserved . We found that extensive mobilization of the duodenum and head of the pancreas from the left side (Kocher maneuver) to the proximal right peritoneal fold of the duodenum is easy during this phase.
Step 2: We have done mobilization of the entire pancreaticoduodenal mass and approached the superior mesenteric vein from the posterior side of the pancreas. We detached the great omentum from the transverse colon and detached the hepatic flexure from the duodenum and pancreatic head to the lower border of the pancreas. We proceeded to exposing the right margin of the superior mesenteric vein (SMV) and dissected the gastrocolic trunk of Henle (the confluence of the veins of the pancreatic head and the right colon before flow into the SMV). Mobilizing the hepatic flexure of the colon and the duodenum was done. We then exposed the posterior surface of the duodenum and the head of the pancreas to the left border of the aorta above the renal vein at the origin of the SMA.
Step 3: We have transected the stomach and pancreatic neck and dissected the hepatoduodenal ligament and the celiac lymph nodes. We started dissecting the right gastroepiploic artery (RGEA), right gastric artery from the level of the antrum. The stomach was transected using a stapler about 2 cm from the pylorus. The right gastric artery (RGA) was transected at its origin; then, we dissected the lymph node groups 8a, 12a, 7, and 9 in front of the hepatoduodenal ligament to the origin of the left gastric artery and superior border of the celiac trunk. The gastroduodenal artery (GDA) is dissected and ligated, and isolating the common hepatic artery (CHA) from the origin to the GDA’s bifurcation was done. The tissue plane between the inferior surfaces of the pancreatic neck is then blunt dissected, and we revealed the anterior surface of the SMV and the portal vein (PV). A nelaton was inserted from the inferior to the superior side of the pancreas. We transected the pancreas at the pancreas neck and exposed the pancreatic duct with at least 5 mm in length. After resection of the pancreatic neck, we carried on dissecting lymph node groups 8b and 12p in the inferior surface of the PV and right-sided celiac artery (CA).
Step 4: We isolated the entire pancreaticoduodenal mass from the SMA, SMV, and PV. The proximal loop of the jejunum is passed to the right side through retroperitoneal defect. We systematically performed dissecting the meso-pancreas from SMV, SMA, and PV. We resected the entire mesopancreas on both anterior and posterior sides of the SMA including the right-sided SMA LNs (Video ). This procedure is often quite difficult with the convenient technique but becomes much easier with left posterior SMA-first approach. We continued dissecting the lymph nodes posterior to the main bile duct up to the proximal side of hepatic hilum. This step was done easily with our technique after the entire pancreaticoduodenal mass was mobilized subtotally after this step. After the cholecystectomy, the common bile duct was dissected and divided at the level of the right hepatic artery. Specimens were taken en bloc: duodenal and pancreatic head, lymph node groups 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 12a, 12b1, 12b2, 12v, 13, 14p, and 14d (or left-sided SMA LNs), and the right-sided SMA LNs and 15.
Step 5: Small opening at umbilicus, remove the sample.
Step 6: Reconstruction phase. The first loop of the jejunum is then brought through the transverse mesocolon. Pancreatojejunostomy is performed with double-layer end-to-side, modified Blumgart fashion. The inner layer is duct to mucosa anastomosis, using 5-0 monosyl suture (6 stitches: 3 posterior, 3 anterior). We placed an internal drainage with a plastic stent. The second layer is 2 interrupted U-shape suturing between the posterior and anterior pancreatic walls and seromuscular layer of the jejunum using Prolene 3/0. Hepaticojejunostomy is performed distal to the pancreato-jejunostomy about 10 cm with one-layer fashion. The anastomosis of the common hepatic duct to the jejunum in an end-to-side fashion using 5-0 monosyl continuous suture for the posterior layer and interrupted suture for the anterior layer was done. A distal loop of jejunum approximately 60 cm distal to defect in the transverse mesocolon is brought antecolic. Antecolic gastro-jejunostomy performed via the enterotomy and gastrotomy using a GI stapler. Defect in gastrojejunostomy is oversewn with interrupted 3-0 Vicryl suture (Video ).