MG is a 60-year-old Arabic lady diagnosed with scleroderma, also known as systemic sclerosis. She is under annual observation without systemic medication by a Rheumatologist, having previously required high dose oral corticosteroids. Her past ocular history is positive for right amblyopia, which can now be attributed to a macular scar of unknown aetiology. In her adult life, she had been diagnosed with chronic open angle glaucoma, undergoing a trabeculectomy & three needlings in the right eye.
The left eye also had a failed trabeculectomy, which was then managed by a Baerveldt tube (BVT) insertion. Eight months after this primary surgery, she developed anterior uveitis with hypopyon, with both intra-vitreal and anterior chamber samples revealing no growth. Unfortunately, this was further complicated by conjunctival erosion, tube exposure, leak around the sclerostomy site and hypotony. She was taken back to theatre for tube revision, including using a tube extender and a single layer amniotic membrane transplant (AMT) over the exposed area.
She was referred to the Western Eye Hospital (WEH) to answer a specific question: what should we do about the tube exposed once again through the conjunctiva in the left eye despite the revision with AMT? After much deliberation and lengthy discussions with the patient, we explored the techniques which would minimise further erosions and delivered the following options:Completely abort the premise of conjunctival drainage by removing the BVT and either doing:○ Endocyclophotocoagulation (ECP), hence prohibiting aqueous production. ○ Assess the integrity of the angle, by completing a minimally invasive glaucoma surgery such as an iStent, hence encouraging drainage through the irido-corneal angle. ○ This was unacceptable to MG, since she wanted to avoid staged procedures such as sequential ECP’s and potentially eventual tube revision. Move the existing tube into the ciliary sulcus, +/− iridotomy to observe its position○ Although this would not address the issue of friability of the conjunctiva overlying the tube Retract the tube, with a right angle clip and pass this existing tube through the pars plana○ This would circumvent completely discarding the tube, although the plate would have to be retracted back away from the precarious limbal area. The clip would extend the tube enough for it to reach the vitreous cavity. ○ The disadvantage of this technique is this clip has a high profile and would potentially put undue stress on an already compromised conjunctiva by tenting it up. Move the plate to the supero-nasal quadrant and enter anterior chamber (AC) Take out original tube and put in a pars plana tube (PPT)
We proceeded with revision involving gluing double layered pericardial tissue (tutoplast) and autologous conjunctival graft harvested from the infero-nasal quadrant of the ipsilateral eye, sutured over the graft. Despite careful follow-up, the tube was observed to be eroding through the conjunctiva once again at 2 months . Further surgical intervention became inevitable and she underwent a tube extraction, pars plana tube plate stabilisation, pars plana vitrectomy (PPV), pars plana tube insertion , phacoemulsification and intra-ocular lens insertion, jointly with the vitreo-retinal surgeons and with high dose prednisolone cover both pre- and post-operatively. This satisfied her request of having a definitive procedure including refractive correction and had an advantage over the right angle clip of possessing a flatter profile, as well as the plate being suitably distal from the limbus.
Pre-operatively, we had multi-disciplinary team meeting to discuss the best way to circumvent future conjunctival erosion. Whilst not in the literature, we decided to harvest the capsule which had grown over the end plate of the original tube. We sutured this over the new tube, specifically over a single layer of tutoplast prior to conjunctival closure (see Fig. ). The closure itself took 2 h to complete and we considered the role of fibrin glue in achieving this, as we wanted to circumvent the adherence and subsequent fibrosis it would lead to, in case a further revision would be necessary. We did proceed using glue with the premise that it assisted the dispersal of pressure, minimizing the tension on the conjunctiva with sutures alone.