We report the case of a 12-month-old Caucasian boy, who was treated at the Department of Interventional Radiology for biliary stricture following living donor liver transplantation (LDLT). During the post-partum period, our patient developed fever and presented with increased liver enzymes and progressive conjugated hyperbilirubinemia. Ultrasound examination of the abdomen revealed complete obliteration of the extra-hepatic biliary system indicating type III biliary atresia.
At an age of four months, hepatoportoenterostomy (Kasai procedure) was performed to allow for bile drainage . A histopathological examination revealed fibrous remnants of extra-hepatic bile ducts and gallbladder with lymphocyte infiltration of the tissue. In the following weeks, biliary cirrhosis developed, accompanied by cystic bile retention, recurrent bile duct infections and malabsorption. Six months after the Kasai procedure, our patient underwent LDLT: the diseased liver was removed and segments II and III from our patient’s mother were used .
Several revisions were necessary during the recovery period. Our patient presented with hypoplasia of the portal vein and inadequate flow from the portal anastomosis. Therefore, a porto-caval hemi-transposition was performed. The surgeon anastomosed an arterial inter-position graft from an ABO-identical deceased donor end-to-side to the recipient retro-hepatic vena cava and end-to-end to the portal vein of the liver graft. In order to increase portal flow, the inferior vena cava was ligated below the level of the transected liver veins of the recipient. Improvement of his overall condition, however, was not lasting. Over the course of two months following surgery, our patient developed occlusion of the hepatico-jejunostomy reflected by cholestasis and confirmed by ultrasound and X-ray imaging studies.
Our surgeon advised percutaneous trans-hepatic cholangiography and drainage (PTCD) under sonographic guidance, and was present when the procedure was carried out by our interventional radiologist. During PTCD a thin needle is inserted percutaneously and advanced through liver tissue under radiographic or sonographic guidance until a bile duct is entered. Non-ionic iodinated contrast is then used to outline the bile duct system. When the correct position of the needle is confirmed by X-ray, a catheter is inserted to allow the bile to drain either into a small pouch attached outside the body or into the small intestine.
Cholestasis subsided after an external bile duct drain (6 to 8F catheter; BARD®, Karlsruhe, Germany) was inserted and our patient’s general condition improved. However, persistent loss of bile via the drain increased his malabsorption, nutritional deficiency and weight loss. Further radiological interventions became necessary. Between the 12th and 17th months, five attempts were made to canalize the completely occluded hepatico-jejunostomy, since our surgeon did not deem it necessary to perform revision surgery unless unavoidable. After multiple attempts in 12 interventions under general anesthesia, catheterization through the hepatico-jejunostomy was finally successful.
Our radiologist dilated the stricture by balloon twice to a diameter of 5mm . This effectively re-established the bile drainage to the gut. The percutaneous biliary drain could then be removed during the same intervention. In addition, the trans-hepatic access was embolized with coils to counteract the development of a peri-hepatic bilioma.
All PTCD interventions were accomplished under general anesthesia with mechanical ventilation. Anesthesia in a weak and malnourished child demands effective co-operation between anesthesia teams and pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) personnel during the peri-operative care period. Anesthesia was induced with short-acting drugs such as propofol and remifentanil and maintained with sevoflurane to keep potentially drug-induced central or hepatic toxicity low. Intervals of arterial hypotension, hypercarbia, hyperoxia, and hypoxia were meticulously averted. After each intervention our patient was transferred to the PICU where sedoanalgesia was tapered and our patient weaned from ventilation. His post-operative recovery periods were uneventful. No clinical signs of impaired neurodevelopment were observed.
Six months after the last PTCD our patient was well and the transplanted liver had gained full function as expressed by normal liver parameters (aspartate transaminase 56U/L, alanine aminotransferase 35U/L, γ-glutamyl transpeptidase, 59U/L, lactate dehydrogenase 296U/L, total bilirubin 0.37mg/dL). At two-year follow-up no further surgical and radiological interventions were found to be necessary.