A 71-year-old female was referred to the colorectal service with bleeding per rectum and loose bowel motions. Her past medical history included colonic polyps for which she had last undergone colonoscopy 19 years before the current investigations. Routine blood tests showed a haemoglobin count of 113 g/L with a normal mean cell volume. Her faecal immunochemical test result was > 400 µgHb/g.
The patient underwent a colon capsule endoscopy (CCE) which was reported by a consultant gastroenterologist with experience of reading over 200 CCE procedures. The bowel preparation regimen and dietary recommendations, and protocol used for the procedure are described in “Appendices and ”. The CCE reader reported that all segments of the colon and rectum were visualised, with good bowel preparation throughout. The transit times for the capsule, in minutes, from mouth to cecum, cecum to hepatic flexure, hepatic to splenic flexure was 191, 96 and 6 respectively. The total colon passage time was 471 min. 17 polyps were reported, the largest polyp was 10 mm, located in the left colon . 5 of the 17 polyps reported were in the right colon, size range 5-7 mm. Angiodysplasia was also detected and was thought to be the cause of the rectal bleeding. The patient subsequently underwent a routine colonoscopy, for polypectomy. The colonoscopy was performed with the CCE report available and revealed a 40 mm polypoid tumour with a malignant appearance in the caecal pole just proximal to the ileocaecal valve . 2 further polyps were identified at colonoscopy, a 5 mm polyp at the hepatic flexure and a 3 mm polyp in the sigmoid colon. Despite the macroscopic concern of invasion within a large villous polyp the histopathology from the biopsies of the caecal lesion were reported as tubulovillous adenoma with low grade dysplasia.
A staging CT scan of the thorax, abdomen and pelvis identified the caecal pole mass with no evidence of local or metastatic disease. Given the size and appearance of the tumour, the patient underwent a laparoscopic right hemicolectomy with primary anastomosis. Her recovery was uneventful, and she was discharged on the 4th post-operative day. The right hemicolectomy pathology specimen was reported as a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma, pT2 pN0 (0/19) M0 with no EMVI, R0 resection, stage 1, Dukes’ A. The tumour was KRAS variant (Gly12Val), BRAF non-variant and MSI was detected.
Subsequent review of the CCE recording, and the colonoscopy images, was carried out. Despite frame-by-frame analysis, the caecal pole tumour could not be definitively identified on the CCE images by the original CCE reader, or by an additional CCE reader with experience of reading over 500 CCE procedures (Additional file ). On re-review of the polyp images, there was no change to the number of polyps reported, although some were noted to be subtle. While one polyp was found at colonoscopy at the hepatic flexure, none of the remaining 4 polyps in the right colon reported by CCE were found at colonoscopy or on examination of the pathology specimen.