A 53-year-old white man presented to our Department with a 2-month history of a painful and moderately swollen left wrist. His past medical history was unremarkable. Standard anteroposterior and lateral X-rays of his left wrist revealed two osteolytic lesions involving the distal ulna and the lunate fossa of the distal radius without any joint involvement . Subsequent biopsy of his left ulna under regional anesthesia produced brown spongy material, histologically characterized by the presence of large numbers of multinucleated giant cells and spindle cells in a dense collagenous background. These findings were histologically consistent with a diagnosis of GCT and correlation with the clinical and radiological findings was recommended by the pathologist. As he had no other skeletal manifestations, a complete resection of the distal ulna (9.5 cm length) followed, along with curettage and cementoplasty of the distal radial metaphysis, to support the articular surface . The resected distal ulna specimen and the curettings from the distal radius were submitted for histopathological evaluation; our patient was discharged 2 days later, with a forearm cast and instructions to attend the clinic in 2 weeks’ time for re-evaluation and removal of sutures.
Two weeks postoperatively, he was re-admitted to our orthopedic department with diffuse musculoskeletal soreness, anorexia, constipation, nausea, and localized abdominal pain. He also reported weight loss of approximately 5 kg. On palpation he had tenderness in the thoracic wall, the second and fifth metacarpals of his right hand, the left tibia, the pelvic ring, and the left shoulder girdle and humerus. Plain radiographs revealed multiple osteolytic lesions in his ribs, right hand, left tibia, and scapula .
A histopathological examination of both the resected ulna and the curettings of the radius revealed similar findings: numerous, multinucleated, osteoclast-type giant cells were noted amid a mononuclear, spindle cell, histiocytoid component . Many of the giant cells were clustered in large nodular aggregates separated by fibrous septa containing fibroblast-like spindle cells. The spindle cell component showed no evidence of atypia or sarcomatoid features . There were prominent foci of hemorrhage with relatively restricted hemosiderin deposition . Mitoses were observed (up to five mitotic figures/ten high power fields) but no atypical mitoses or necrosis were seen. On the resection specimen of the ulna, the lesion focally disrupted the cortex producing periosteal reaction with woven bone trabeculae, extending in the surrounding adipose tissue and skeletal muscle . Based on the similar findings of both lesions and the rarity of multifocal GCT of bone the histopathology report included in the differential diagnosis a BT of hyperparathyroidism, either primary or in the setting of a paraneoplastic PTH-like protein production and suggested further patient evaluation.
Our patient’s laboratory examination showed high total serum calcium (14.5 mg/dl, normal range 8.8–10.4), low serum phosphorus (2.3 mg/dl, normal range 2.5–4.5), and low 25-hydroxyvitamin D (9.74 ng/ml, normal range > 30). PHPT was suspected and confirmed by the elevated PTH levels of 1453 pg/mL (normal range 15–65). Serum potassium and sodium concentrations and thyroid hormone levels were in reference range as well as the main cancer indicators: cancer antigen (CA) 15-3, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), CA 125, and prostate-specific antigen (PSA). Serum protein electrophoresis was also normal. His human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) was elevated (25.3 mUl/ml, reference level < 5). An isotope bone scan showed multiple sites of uptake over his ribs bilaterally, the lower pole of both scapulae, multiple foci in his pelvis, the metacarpal bones of his right hand, and his right tibia. At subsequent radiological work-up, both computed tomography (CT) and ultrasonography of his neck revealed a 4.5 × 2.5 × 3.2 cm mass emanating from the right lobe of his thyroid gland. Parathyroid subtraction technetium-99m (99mTc) sestamibi (MIBI) scintigraphy showed extensive uptake in his right lower parathyroid gland . Multiple endocrine neoplasia was excluded because of the normal MRI imaging of his pituitary gland.
Appropriate medical care was given to our patient including hyperhydration and high doses of diuretics and diphosphonates. After his health status improved and his serum calcium nearly normalized, a specialist surgeon was consulted for further surgical treatment. Surgery consisted of extensive resection: total thyroidectomy with removal of the parathyroid glands. A mass measuring 4.8 cm in greatest diameter, abutting the thyroid gland was documented at surgery. The mass was surrounded by a thick capsule, had a tan-brown, solid, and microcystic cut surface, and rubbery consistency. On histologic examination, the tumor comprised small cells with minimal to scanty cytoplasm and round nuclei, arranged in an organoid pattern, with frequent perivascular pseudorosettes. Thick fibrous septa emanating from the capsule were noted within the tumor. There was capsular invasion, with extension of neoplastic groups in the surrounding loose connective tissue adjacent to striated muscle, and foci of vascular invasion in the tumor capsule. The histologic findings were consistent with a parathyroid carcinoma. The neoplasm did not appear to invade the adjacent thyroid lobe and did not involve the margins of resection.
Our patient experienced postoperatively persistent hypocalcemia requiring calcium and vitamin D replacement. His condition was characterized as “hungry bone syndrome.” He is now recovering 12 months after surgery, with a serum PTH level of 7.1 pg/mL and serum calcium level of 10.7 mg/dl and he is under calcium and vitamin D replacement therapy. The lytic bone lesions have almost disappeared and no other additional orthopedic intervention is necessary. He is closely followed by general surgeons, oncologists, and endocrinologists.