A five-year-old typically developing female was referred by her primary care provider for evaluation of a rash reported to be sensitive to sunlight and had been reoccurring for the last 4 years. Cutaneous exam revealed fine scale on her trunk and extremities as well as small pink flat papules on lower left leg. She was diagnosed with ichthyosis vulgaris and provided with a treatment plan. She was subsequently referred to gastroenterology for decreased appetite. Two weeks later the child presented to the Emergency Department for right knee pain. Her mother reported her daughter had experienced bilateral lower extremity pain and had been limping. During the evaluation she was able to walk for the physician without reporting pain and no tenderness was reported with palpation. The mother reported her daughter was bitten by a tick about 1 year ago and that no workup or treatment was conducted. Radiographic scans of the right knee and leg showed no abnormalities. Laboratory testing for Lyme disease was conducted and found to be negative. She was discharged with the diagnosis of tenosynovitis. The child presented again to the Emergency Department the following week for left knee and ankle pain. She reported pain in her left calcaneus when asked to bear weight. Migratory arthralgia was noted and further laboratory testing, including a vitamin C level, was ordered. Her vitamin C level was found to be < 5 umol/L (reference range: 23 to 114 umol/L). Her prealbumin level was also low, 14 mg/dl (reference range: 17–36 mg/dl) as was both her ferritin 3.9 ng/ml (reference range: 6.2–137.0 ng/ml) and her iron saturation 15% (reference range: 20–55%). Both vitamin A and vitamin D were found to be within the normal reference range. With the diagnosis of the vitamin C deficiency, the child was started on ascorbic acid and referred to the feeding program.
The participant was the youngest of six children and raised by her biological parents in a middle-class household in a small town. She was born full term by caesarian section with a birth weight of 3.88 kg. There were no prenatal or postnatal complications. No delays in development were noted by the primary care provider or parents. She scooted at 6 months and walked before 1 year. No problems were noted with her gait until several weeks prior to the initial visit to the Emergency Department for knee pain.
At 1 year of age, she transitioned from infant formula to milk and cereal snacks. She never accepted baby food. For 4 years after transitioning off infant formula her diet consisted of cereal snacks, one type of cracker, and, inconsistently, chocolate pudding, vanilla ice cream, chocolate, and banana. Except for the occasional banana, she never ate fruit, vegetables, or meats. She drank skim milk, water, and, rarely, soda. She refused to taste new foods or drinks. Additionally, at the time of her diagnosis with vitamin C deficiency, her body mass index was at the 1st percentile. Based upon her inadequate growth and extremely limited diet, she was admitted to an intensive day treatment feeding program. During the course of intensive treatment she learned to eat 29 foods from all food groups through the use of an intervention involving gradual repeated exposure to novel foods . In 6 months after intensive treatment, her weight had increased by four kilograms, her height increased by three centimeters, and her body mass index reached the 61st percentile. At 1 year after completion of intensive treatment, her height had increased by 7.6 cm and her weight had increased by seven kilograms Her body mass index reached the 85th percentile (see Fig. ). Across the span of the 1 year after intensive treatment she continued to be monitored as an outpatient by a feeding therapist who continued to address the child’s diet variety and helped the family maintain the gains made during intensive treatment. At all outpatient appointments, a meal was conducted allowing the therapist to verify the child’s consumption of a variety of foods.
How unusual was this case?
To determine how this case compared to the existing literature, articles describing cases of scurvy secondary to diet limitations published from 2000 to 2018 were reviewed. PubMed and Google Scholar were searched using the search terms, “scurvy” and “ascorbic acid deficiency”. The reference section and citation listing of each article identified from these searches were then examined to identify additional articles. Sixty-one articles describing either a case study or a case series reported on 77 children diagnosed with scurvy as a result of diet insufficiencies (see Additional file for an alphabetical listing of all studies). Selected demographics from these studies are shown in Table . While the child in the current study was only slightly younger than median age as the children in the existing literature, she differed from most of these children who were predominantly males with special needs, most often, autism spectrum disorder. Of the 77 reported cases, only six were females without special needs.
While all 77 children reported in these studies had limited diets, it is not clear that all could be described as selective eaters or to what degree their diets were the result of refusal to eat a variety of foods. Six of the children exhibited oral motor dysfunction which limited the range of foods they could eat [, ]. While some, or possibly all, of these six children might have obtained sufficient nutrition by consuming lower texture foods, oral supplement, or multi-vitamins, it is probable their parents did not know how to modify their diets to match their oral motor limitations. There were also three children dependent upon tube feeds who either received an insufficient amount of enteral formula or received homemade tube feeds deficient in vitamin C . There were other children whose diets were not adjusted to meet their specific health needs, for example, one child receiving a ketogenic diet was not receiving any vitamin supplementation and another child received only a limited diet due to multiple food allergies . For various reasons, the parents of 18 children, (five children with typical development, 14 children with special needs other than autism) limited their diets to the point these children developed vitamin C deficiency. Of the nine children with typical development with parent-limited diets, all but two were less than 2 years of age.
Fifty-nine of the children described in the existing literature could be described as selective eaters whose scurvy resulted from their limited intake. Of these children, 41% had autism spectrum disorder, 31% had intellectual disabilities, and 86% were male. Four of these 59 children were females with typical development like the girl in the current study. The child in the current case study had a diet similar to the diets of these 59 children identified as selective eaters in the existing literature on vitamin C deficiency. None of these children reportedly consumed vegetables or fruits, most consumed only starches and dairy products, with a few eating a limited number of proteins. The child in our case study was anemic, as were 42% of the children in the existing literature, an expected finding given the role of vitamin C in iron absorption. While the child in our case study did not exhibit signs or symptoms indicative of additional nutrient deficiencies, other deficiencies were considered likely so she was placed on a multivitamin within a day of the initial diagnosis of vitamin C deficiency. Her pediatrician conducted further testing and found her vitamin A and vitamin D levels were within the normal range. Of the 59 children described in the existing literature, 22% were identified with an additional nutrient deficiency beyond anemia (e.g. vitamin A, vitamin D). Given the diets reported for these 59 children, it is possible, if not probable, that more of these children had other nutrient deficiencies, but further deficiencies were either not reported or not identified.
The girl described in our case study had a body mass index at the 1st percentile prior to her feeding treatment. Underweight was also a common problem among the 59 children in the existing literature, with 32% being described as underweight. It is not surprising so many of these children were underweight. Many of children had anemia, which decreases appetite and eating was no doubt uncomfortable or even painful for many of these children, 71% of whom exhibited gingival symptoms.