An 8-month-old male child was admitted to the hospital because of cough and hemoptyses for more than one month with butterfly erythema and hepatomegaly. An episode of acute onset of alveolar hemorrhage (hemoglobin 8 g/L, Fib 0.5 g/L), pulmonary infection (Enterobacter cholera, Pseudomonas Aeruginosa, Enterobacter cloacae, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Parainfluenza virus. Acinetobacter and oligoxomonas maltophilia were detected in alveolar lavage fluid with Next Generation Sequencing(NGS), hypoxemia and psychosis were presented. Personal history: The patient was a full-term natural birth baby, and had retarded psychomotor development manifested as dysphasia and poor active grip with regular rehabilitation treatment at the age of 4 months old. Family history: His father worked in the administrative department of electronic components waste recycling. The parents and the sister were in good health. His father’s antinuclear antibody spectrum showed suspicious positive anti-SM antibody and weak positive anti-RNP/Smith antibody. The mother and the sister were negative in routine of auto-antibodies, immunity and hematuria detecting. Past history: He had been hospitalized twice for bronchopneumonia and moderate anemia. Laboratory text of autobiographies showed, positive antinuclear antibody (ANA) (nuclear granular + cytosolic) 1:640, anti-double, stranded DNA (dsDNA) and others were detect in the patient.
The Whole-exome showed novel compound heterozygous mutation of PRKDC was detect in the patient , which had been reported to be pathogenic for this variant to involve in the pathogenesis of immunodeficiency type 26 . The CD19 + CD27 + CD38dim IgD/IgM of classical immunoglobulin class conversion B lymphocytes decreased significantly which be converted from IgM to IgG, IgA, IgE, etc. . The polymorphism of B-cell receptor (BCR) and T-cell receptor(TCR) were limited in patients with PRKDC mutations . Above the result present the patient had the deficiency in the VDJ rearrangement with secondary immune disorder.
The treatment was given MP combined with CTX immunosuppression, and the dose was adjusted according to the ratio of T/B/NK cell subsets , supplemented with plasma exchange three times to remove auto-antibodies and inflammatory mediators, and anti-infection treatment were performed with cefoperazone sodium and sulbactam sodium, teicoplanin, azithromycin and voriconazole according to the etiological examination. Finally, the patient’s blood oxygen and hemoglobin were stable, and pulmonary exudation was improved obviously in assessment of high-resolution chest CT . Chest High-resolution CT showed the imaging changes of DAH . Bronchoscope record: hemorrhagic diffuse alveolar in left and right side of the bronchial .