A 10-year-old female child presented with incomplete median nerve palsy without any recovery 8 months after an anterior glenohumeral shoulder dislocation. The shoulder dislocation was caused by a fall from a horse. A closed reduction was performed within 6 h after trauma, followed by a period of 4 weeks of relative immobilization and subsequent physiotherapy. The initial X-ray is shown in . Clinical examination revealed an isolated incomplete palsy of the median nerve: hypoesthesia at the level of the palmar aspect of digits 3 and 4 (equivalent to a medical research council scale [MRCS] score S2); complete anesthesia at the level of the palmar aspect of digits 1 and 2 and at the thenar region (MRCS score S0); weakness of the second flexor digitorum profundus muscle (MRCS score M2); and paralysis of the flexor pollicis longus (MRCS score M0). There were no signs of instability in the shoulder. An electromyography performed 7 months after trauma showed no conduction through the median nerve. The interpretation of ultrasound examination and magnetic resonance imaging was complicated by scar tissue around the infraclavicular plexus; however, a clear image of nerve compression at the level of the proximal median nerve was seen ( and ). There were no signs of structural lesions of the glenohumeral joint or the capsule. As there was no functional recovery of the median nerve 8 months after trauma, and considering the imaging and electrodiagnostic findings, the decision was made to proceed with surgical exploration. An infraclavicular approach to the brachial plexus was performed. The plane between the deltoid and pectoralis major muscles was developed, and the pectoralis major was partially detached from its insertion. The conjoint tendon was retracted laterally, and the pectoralis minor tendon was spread medially. A proximal dissection of the infraclavicular plexus was carried out. The physiological fat embracing the brachial plexus had completely turned into fibrous scar tissue. A careful dissection of all terminal branches of the infraclavicular plexus was performed. However, the median nerve could not be retrieved initially. When stimulating the posterior aspect of the putative MC nerve, a response was elicited at the level of the median nerve musculature. The dissection was continued more distal, and a common origin of the MC and median nerves was revealed, with bifurcation just distal to the glenohumeral joint. The common nerve trunk of the MC and median nerve presumably underwent a compression-elongation injury during dislocation, with the subsequent formation of surrounding scar tissue. Given that the nerve fascicles of the median nerve lie posteriorly at the level of the common nerve trunk, these were more susceptible to the trauma. A careful neurolysis was performed with resection of the surrounding scar tissue ( and ). The post-operative course was uncomplicated. Four months after surgery, there was a complete motor recovery, and the patient resumed horseback riding and artistic gymnastics. After 4 months, there was still some dysesthesia in the median nerve area with an MRCS score between S3+ and S4 at the median pulp of the thumb and index finger. Twelve months after surgery, there was complete motor and sensory recovery.