An 80-year-old woman consulted to our emergency department presenting abdominal pain of 24 hours of onset associated to cognitive impairment. Her past medical history revealed smoking, hypothyroidism, dilated cardiomyopathy, hypertension, celiac disease with low adherence to gluten-free diet and a Non-Hodgkin T-cell lymphoma associated to enteropathy diagnosed in 2010 secondary to an enterectomy performed in context of an acute abdominal pain at another medical centre. After the resection, the patient underwent chemotherapy [R-CHOP regimen: an immunochemotherapy regimen consisting of rituximab, cyclophosphamide, hydroxydaunorubicin hydrochloride (doxorubicin hydrochloride), vincristine (Oncovin) and prednisone used to treat both indolent and aggressive forms of non-Hodgkin lymphoma].
Physical examination evidenced hypotension (90/50 mm Hg), tachycardia, cognitive impairment and abdominal tenderness. Laboratory tests showed only low red blood cell count (25% for normal values of 36%–46%) with no other abnormalities. Fluid replacement and vital support were initiated with immediate haemodynamic improvement. An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan was then requested, evidencing pneumoperitoneum and gastric mucosal enhancement with a clear stop in continuity in the greater curvature prior to the antropyloric junction with no other abnormal findings . Immediate intravenous antibiotic treatment and urgent surgery were conducted. Exploratory laparoscopy was performed evidencing a 4-quadrant peritonitis secondary to a 5 cm perforation at the antropyloric junction caused by a necrotic malignant tumour . Due to the patient’s haemodynamic instability, conversion to open surgery was decided to perform an antrectomy and Billroth II gastro-jejunostomy. Full inspection of the gastrointestinal tract was performed during surgery, without any abnormal findings. Nasogastric tube was placed for gastric decompression as well as a trans-anastomotic tube for enteral nutrition. Two drains were left as witnesses of intraabomdinal conditions. The patient was transferred to the ICU in critical condition requiring mechanical respiratory assistance and vasoactive drugs for support. On the first postoperative day, the patient developed a cardiogenic shock that did not respond to resuscitation manoeuvres, causing the patient’s death.
Grossly, the resected specimen showed an ulcerated whitish tumour of 5.6 × 3.8 cm. The lesion involved and perforated the gastric wall with extension into the serosa .
The histological sections of material, embedded in paraffin and coloured with haematoxylin and eosin, showed a neoplastic proliferation of diffuse medium to large cells with abundant cytoplasm and round or angulated nuclei, accompanied by a pronounced and polymorphic inflammatory background and extensive areas of necrosis . Neoplastic cells formed an ulcerating mucosal mass with transmural infiltration of the stomach.
The immunohistological techniques were carried out on histological sections of 3 microns by means of an automated system in accordance with the manufacturer’s guidelines (Benchmark XT, ULTRA). Atypical cells showed positivity for CD45, CD3, CD7 and CD8, according with T-Cell lineage. Staining for CD30, CD4, CD5, CD56, anaplastic lymphoma kinase-1 and keratin cocktail (AE1AE3) as well as B-cell differentiation markers (CD20, PAX5 and CD138) was found to be negative .
There was no expression of Epstein–Barr virus latent membrane protein 1.
The histopathological and immunohistochemical findings, together with the patient’s medical history, allowed the diagnosis of enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma of gastric localisation in a patient with celiac disease.