A 29-year old Egyptian male patient presented to Emergency room (ER) with acute, severe, colicky, steady increasing, right lumbar and right iliac fossa pain associated with nausea and vomiting. On examination he had Blood pressure (BP) 143/74 mmHg, T37.4 °C, Pulse 77/minute, and Oxygen (O2) saturation 99%. Local abdominal examination showed a small right iliac fossa (RIF) scar of previous appendectomy, local tenderness with rebound. The patient gave history of appendectomy 1 ½ years earlier and was evaluated in the ER as a case of acute abdomen with probability of stump appendicitis. To figure out a final diagnosis a complete work up was done. Laboratory results showed high CRP (18 mg/dl), ESR 5, creatinine 1.4, white blood cell count of 7.2 × 103/mm3 (81.6% neutrophils), hemoglobin 14.6 gm%, platelets 243 × 103/mm3, and unremarkable urine analysis. Abdominal ultrasonography (US) described a well-defined blind ended tubular non compressible structure seen at the upper limits of the right iliac fossa measuring about3 cm in length and 1 cm in diameter associated with inflammatory changes at the cecum , increased echogenicity of the surrounding omental fat and rim of free fluid around raising the possibility of stump appendicitis for computed tomography (CT) confirmation.
CT abdomen done and showed an inflamed blind ended loop emerging from the posterior aspect of the middle part of the right colon at the right lumbar region (at a distance measuring about 3.5 cm distal to the inferior surface of the liver and about 7 cm proximal to the ileo-cecal junction) measuring about 1 cm at maximum diameter and about 5 cm in length associated with stranding of the surrounding fat planes and minimal amount of fluid collection around (inflammatory changes). Multiple mildly enlarged reactive mesenteric lymph nodes (LNs) were also seen. The patient was admitted and treated conservatively by injection levofloxacin and metronidazole for the possible differential diagnosis of acute diverticulitis.
The patient was discharged after 3-days and followed in the out patient department (OPD). The patient during OPD follow up visits offered colonoscopy examination, but he refused and missed for further follow up. Seven months later the patient again presented to ER with acute, severe, colicky, right lumbar and right iliac fossa pain associated with nausea and vomiting. US showed well defined blind ended tubular non compressible structure seen at the right lumber region emerging from the right colon measuring about 3.3 cm in length and 1 cm in diameter associated with increased echogenicity of the surrounding omental fat and multiple mildly enlarged mesenteric LNs. The patient was operated on by laparoscopic appendectomy and the histopathology showed an appendix measuring 5 × 1 cm.
Microscopically , the sections showed appendix with focal ulceration of the mucosa associated with polymorph inflammatory cell infiltrate that extends to the serosa associated with lymph follicle hyperplasia. No granuloma or specific pathogen was identified. No evidence of malignancy was present and finally diagnosed with acute suppurative appendicitis with peri-appendicitis. The patient experienced an uneventful course and discharged from the hospital after 4-days.