A 61-year-old male with no history of rheumatologic or prior ophthalmic disease presented to ophthalmology clinic with acute concerns of profuse tearing, pain, and blurred vision in the right eye. Pain was described as sharp and burning in character, with severity 7/10. General medical history was significant only for atopic dermatitis and hypertension. He had previously been treated for atopic dermatitis with dupilumab (Dupixent; Sanofi) injections for nine months, which had been stopped more than two years prior due to lack of efficacy. 18 weeks prior to presentation in eye clinic, he had started therapy with tralokinumab (Adbry; LEO Pharma), with an initiation dose of 600 mg subcutaneous injection, followed by maintenance dosing of 300 mg subcutaneous injection every two weeks. The patient reported significant improvement in atopic dermatitis symptoms since starting tralokinumab, but described symptoms of bilateral eye redness, irritation, tearing, and photosensitivity that had been worsening since onset six weeks after starting tralokinumab injections. His ocular symptoms had not improved with the frequent use of non-preserved artificial tears.
Initial examination revealed best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of 20/50 in the right eye and 20/40 in the left eye. Intraocular pressure, pupil reactions, confrontation visual fields, and extraocular motility were normal bilaterally. Eyelids and periocular skin showed no active dermatitis, with mild eyelid skin thickening/hypertrophy. Slit lamp examination revealed 2–3 + conjunctival injection and fine papillae on the superior and inferior tarsal conjunctiva bilaterally, with mild punctate epithelial erosions of both corneas. The right cornea had a perilimbal, crescentic infiltrate measuring 1.2 mm wide and spanning from 4 o’clock to 7 o’clock, with an overlying epithelial defect and 20–25% stromal thinning. No anterior chamber reaction was present.
A diagnosis of bilateral papillary conjunctivitis and right eye peripheral ulcerative keratitis (PUK) was made. Cultures of the corneal ulceration were negative. Treatment of active PUK was initiated with oral prednisone burst at 40 mg daily to arrest the immunologic corneal melt, oral doxycycline 100 mg twice daily to suppress matrix metalloproteinases involved in stromal collagenolysis, oral ascorbic acid 500 mg twice daily to stabilize and allow re-building of stromal collagen, and bacterial infection prophylaxis with topical moxifloxacin 0.5% four times daily. A blood draw was done for systemic rheumatologic evaluation prior to starting oral steroid. A comprehensive metabolic panel was entirely within normal limits, and screening for rheumatoid factor, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide, anti-nuclear antibody, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, and angiotensin converting enzyme were all negative. A complete review of systems with focus on rheumatologic disease symptoms was unremarkable.
Due to lack of available photography equipment, no imaging was performed at the initial evaluation. At a follow-up examination three days later, slit lamp photos were obtained, documenting moderate and improving papillary conjunctivitis and a resolving inferior crescentic corneal infiltrate and ulcerative keratitis . The corneal epithelial defect had almost fully healed. BCVA was 20/40 in the right eye. Topical moxifloxacin was decreased to twice daily and oral prednisone was maintained at 40 mg per day. Additionally, topical tacrolimus 0.03% was prescribed twice daily to control tralokinumab-associated ocular surface disease and papillary conjunctivitis. At one week from initial presentation, follow-up exam revealed a nearly-resolved inferior crescentic PUK infiltrate with the overlying epithelium fully intact, along with diminishing papillary conjunctivitis and punctate corneal erosions. BCVA in the right eye had improved to 20/25. Oral prednisone was stopped, completing a seven-day total burst. A taper of topical prednisolone 1% was used in the right eye over four weeks, starting at four times daily, to ensure resolution of all corneal inflammation. Oral doxycycline and topical moxifloxacin were stopped since all epithelium was intact. At follow-up one month later, BCVA had returned to 20/20 in each eye, with no active corneal inflammation. Bilateral papillary conjunctivitis and resulting corneal epithelial erosions were resolved. In discussion with the patient and his dermatologist, continued use of tralokinumab was planned given the high efficacy in treating his atopic dermatitis. Options for maintenance control of tralokinumab-associated ocular surface disease were discussed, including topical cyclosporine and lifitigrast, but the patient elected to continue topical tacrolimus 0.03% daily due to good tolerance and efficacy. At final follow-up 4 months later, he maintained good control of atopic dermatitis with ongoing tralokinumab injections and had no recurrence of papillary conjunctivitis or other ocular surface symptom concerns.