Thirty years old nulliparous lady presented three and a half years back (November 2016) to our tertiary care hospital. She had already been evaluated at another center for abnormal vaginal bleeding and found to have left adnexal mass. Subsequently she underwent exploratory laparotomy, left salpingo-oophorectomy and hysteroscopic polypectomy. Postoperative histopathological examination revealed endometrioid carcinoma of left ovary and moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma in the resected polyp. Omental and peritoneal biopsies did not reveal evidence of tumor deposits. Two weeks after surgery, she presented to our tertiary care hospital for further evaluation. Histopathological review of slides confirmed the previous findings. She was diagnosed as a case of synchronous endometrioid carcinoma of ovary and adenocarcinoma of uterus and was further evaluated. Detailed general physical, systemic and gynecological examinations were normal.
Routine hematological, biochemical, hormonal profile was normal and tumor markers were not elevated .
Gadolinium enhanced magnetic resonance imaging of pelvis revealed two tiny hemorrhagic cysts in right ovary. There was no focal lesion in the uterine cavity and endometrial thickness was 5 mm. She underwent staging laparotomy along with hysteroscopy. Intra-operatively right ovary and fallopian tube were found to be normal while left ovary and fallopian tube were absent. No metastatic deposits were found in any abdominal or pelvic organs. Biopsies were taken from right ovary, omentum and lymph nodes along with peritoneal washing. Hysteroscopy guided uterine curetting was done in the same setting. Frozen sections obtained during the procedure did not reveal any evidence of tumor. Histopathological examination of uterine curetting revealed moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma . She was planned for conservative management as she desired preservation of fertility. She was given high dose oral progestin (megestrol acetate, 160 mg) and leuprolide acetate 3.75 mg monthly injections for three months along with four cycles of carboplatin and paclitaxel based chemotherapy as per our protocol .
After three months she underwent hysteroscopy guided endometrial biopsy which was normal. She was given monthly injection of leuprolide for further three months. Repeat CA-125 levels were normal.
Six months later, she was allowed for spontaneous conception. Her cycles were monitored along with ovulation study. A repeat hysteroscopy guided endometrial biopsy was normal. However she did not conceive spontaneously and was planned for assisted reproduction one year after last cycle of chemotherapy. Routine ultrasonography revealed right ovarian endometriotic cyst. Prior to assisted reproduction she was planned for diagnostic hystero-laparoscopy, but she did not agree for the same. Hysteroscopy guided endometrial biopsy did not reveal any abnormality. As she wanted conception despite explaining the risks, she underwent ovulation induction for six cycles along with intrauterine insemination. However she still did not conceive. She was planned for right sided oophorectomy followed by in vitro fertilization (IVF) with donor egg subject to absence of any abnormality in right ovary. However she did not agree for procedure and underwent IVF with donor egg at another center. She again presented to us at 27 weeks of gestation along with cholestasis of pregnancy for which she was managed conservatively. She underwent elective cesarean section at 37 weeks of gestation and delivered a healthy baby of weight 2.7 kg. Intraoperatively, 5 × 6 cm right ovarian cyst was found which drained chocolate coloured fluid on puncture and cystectomy was carried out. Histological examination revealed endometriotic cyst of right ovary. Uterus was spared as she wanted to preserve her fertility. She is being followed periodically and is normal nine months following delivery. She is being administered injection depot medroxy progesterone acetate once every three months.