An 83-year-old white woman presented to her general practitioner initially with 1 month of nasal obstruction, intermittent epistaxis, and anosmia. This is on the background of atrial fibrillation, hypertension, and osteoarthritis. Her regular medications were apixaban, digoxin, amlodipine/valsartan, frusemide, metoprolol, and paracetamol with no known drug allergies. She lived with her son, mobilized independently with a walking stick, and was independent with all activities of daily living (ADLs) with an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) score of one. She did not smoke tobacco and drank three to four standard units of alcohol per day.
On examination, her vital signs were within normal range and the rest of the physical and neurological examinations were normal. Her blood pressure was within normal range at 120/70 mmHg. A nasal speculum examination found a large tissue growth in her left nasal cavity and a subsequent computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a large soft tissue mass opacifying the left maxillary, ethmoidal, frontal, and sphenoid sinuses – there was no intracranial extension . Laboratory findings including a full blood count, renal function, and liver function were unremarkable. She was referred to the Ear, Nose, and Throat surgical team and underwent a debulking surgery.
On frozen section the provisional diagnosis was a poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma on the basis of what was thought to be evidence of squamous differentiation in amongst a population of poorly differentiated cells. Only after processing and examination of the whole lesion was it appreciated that the tumor had both mature and immature components from more than one germ cell line.
A postoperative positron emission tomography (PET) scan revealed some ongoing soft tissue thickening in her left nasal cavity and her maxillary, ethmoid, and frontal sinuses with no evidence of distal fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-avid disease . She received postoperative IMRT 60 Gy in 30 fractions to her sinuses. The treatment technique was a seven-field step-and-shoot IMRT plan with 80 control points. This was prescribed to a dose of 60 Gy. The difficulty in planning this was the close proximity of critical structures including brainstem and optic chiasm; the dose to the planning target volume (PTV) near these structures was reduced to 54 Gy in order to maintain tolerable dose constraints to these adjacent organs at risk. This resulted in a significant resolution of the tumor with no evidence of FDG-avid disease in her left maxillary sinus or nasal region on a repeat PET scan 6 months post-completion of radiotherapy . We have followed her up closely at 3 monthly intervals and she had no evidence of local recurrence on nasal endoscopic examination at her 2-year follow-up.