A 73-year-old white man with no relevant past medical or surgical histories, presented with symptoms of cough, progressive dyspnea, and two episodes of hemoptysis, not associated with any fever, weight loss, or night sweats. The patient did not report any symptom suggestive of urinary obstruction such as hesitancy, intermittency, weak stream, dribbling, or incomplete void. He was referred by his family physician to a pulmonologist, who in turn asked for a complete work-up including a chest X-ray, complete blood count, and a serum biochemical evaluation. The patient's laboratory evaluation was within normal ranges with a creatinine of 1 mg/dl (N<1.3 mg/dl), alkaline phosphatase of 75 U/L (N<104 U/L), and no evidence of anemia, leukocytosis, hypoalbuminemia, electrolyte imbalance or disturbed liver function tests. His X-ray film showed "extensive cannon-ball type lesions" involving both lungs.
The patient underwent an enhanced computed tomography (CT)-scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis. The CT-scan of chest showed a diffuse nodular type of metastatic disease involving all segments, with multiple pleural based lesions ranging in size from few millimeters to 2 cm . There was also evidence of multiple mediastinal enlarged lymph nodes, the largest measuring 5.3 × 3.2 cm at the level of the left upper lobe bronchus. Few lymph nodes were also noted in both axillae. No gross bony lesions were observed. CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis revealed multiple retrocrural, para-aortic, and pelvic lymph nodes with no lesions seen in the liver, spleen, pancreas, and adrenals. The patient had no ascites but had an enlarged prostate with a volume equivalent to about 77 g.
The presence of the above described lesions of the lung and enlarged lymph nodes raised the possibility of either a primary lung cancer with diffuse metastases or a lymphoma.
Fine needle aspiration cytology of a subpleural lesion under CT-guidance was suggestive of a non-small cell carcinoma that could probably be arising from an adenocarcinoma. The patient was asked to perform a series of tests including an assessment of his prostate specific antigen (PSA) which in turn was 146 ng/ml (N<4 ng/ml). His high PSA was associated with the presence of a nodular left prostatic lobe on digital rectal examination. A prostatic biopsy revealed a moderately differentiated acinar prostatic adenocarcinoma with a Gleason's score of 9 (4+5)/10. A whole-body bone scan revealed no evidence of bone metastases.
A tru-cut biopsy of the lung under CT-guidance showed a metastatic prostatic adenocarcinoma, identical to the prostatic biopsy and positive on immunohistochemistry for PSA and negative for cytokeratin 7 .
The patient was commenced on total androgen blockade consisting of lutenizing hormone releasing hormone analogue and nilutamide (anti-androgen). Three months after therapy, PSA dropped to 0.19 ng/ml (N<4 ng/ml) and a restaging chest CT-scan was done revealing a remarkable decrease in the diffuse metastatic nodular lung disease as well as in the mediastinal lymph nodes .