A 55-year-old woman was diagnosed with SLE at the age of 21, and was hospitalized for 3 months for steroid pulse therapy. Subsequently, she continued to take prednisolone (5–15 mg/day every alternate day) from the age of 21 until now. Moreover, she had undergone surgery for necrosis of the right femoral head at the age of 30 and developed deep vein thrombosis with a positive antiphospholipid antibody at the age of 40, diabetes at 47, and cataract at 52. Her oral medications included prednisolone (5–15 mg/day every alternate day), carvedilol (1.25 mg/day), furosemide (40 mg/day), spironolactone (25 mg/day), and vildagliptin (50 mg/day). She has been hypertensive for 10 years and has been on an antihypertensive. (irbesartan, 100 mg/day). Her blood pressure at regular outpatient visits ranged from 130/80 mmHg to 150/90 mmHg.
She suddenly experienced chest pain approximately 2 weeks prior to visiting our institution. She continued to rest at home but developed fever and had several episodes of vomiting and general malaise. Upon visiting her local doctor, she was diagnosed with severe liver dysfunction and was immediately rushed to our hospital. She was initially admitted to the hepatology department, and treatment for fulminant hepatitis was started.
Physical examination revealed a height and weight of 150.5 cm and 37.8 kg, respectively. Her blood pressure was 80/60 mmHg, and her heart rate was 110 bpm in sinus rhythm. She had a fever with body temperature of 38 °C. Her extremities were cold, and her jugular veins were raging. Laboratory data were as follows: hemoglobin, 9.1 g/dL; platelet count, 182 × 109/L; total protein, 5.4 mg/dL; albumin, 2.7 mg/dL; total bilirubin, 3.42 mg/dL; direct bilirubin, 2.34 mg/dL; aspartate aminotransferase, 1565 mg/dL; alanine aminotransferase, 2543 IU/L; prothrombin time-international normalized ratio, 11.39; activated partial thromboplastin time, 66.4 s; serum-creatinine, 1.85 mg/dL; hemoglobin A1c, 6.4%; brain natriuretic peptide, 452 pg/L; C-reactive protein, 6.4 mg/L; fibrin-fibrinogen degradation product (FDP) D-dimer, 34.1 µg/mL; anti-nuclear antibody, 160 H (Homogenous 160 H, Speckled 160 H); 50% hemolytic complement activity (CH50), 21; C3, 55 mg/dL; C4, 21 mg/dL; anti-cardiolipin immunoglobulin G, < 8 U/mL; direct coombs test, positive; indirect coombs test, negative; and antiplatelet antibody test, negative. Her antiphospholipid antibody test was negative after steroid treatment.
Computed tomography (CT) revealed DeBakey type II acute aortic dissection, a large amount of bloody pericardial fluid and a saccular aneurysm of the distal arch . CT showed a 50-mm-diameter pericardial effusion around the left ventricle, a 52-mm-diameter dissected ascending aorta, a 48-mm-diameter distal arch saccular mass, and a 24-mm-diameter inferior vena cava. Emergency pericardial drainage was performed, and 700 mL of bloody pericardial effusion was removed. Since her liver function and coagulation function were failing, emergency surgery was deemed impossible, and plasma exchange therapy was initiated. Her liver function gradually improved , and she resumed eating after 1 week.
Unfortunately, she developed peritonitis due to perforation of the small intestine at 3 days after she started eating . CT revealed ascites in the pelvis and around the liver. The wall of the ileocecal region was thickened, and there was also a small free air bubble near the intestine. The gastrointestinal surgical team drained the foul-smelling abscess, and bacteriological examination revealed the presence of Escherichia coli. The surgical team subsequently opened the abdomen and performed an ileal resection and pelvic drainage.
At 3 months after the onset of acute aortic dissection, the patient’s condition improved to the point where she could walk after diligently following the treatment protocol. Three more months later, CT revealed that the diameter of the type II dissected ascending aorta had enlarged to 64 × 66 mm, and the saccular aneurysm in the distal arch had also enlarged to 56 mm. Therefore, surgery was decided . Although the antiphospholipid antibody test was negative, CAPS with surgery remained possible. We, therefore, developed a strict surgical plan, called modified triple therapy. In our department, patients with SLE with a history of positive antiphospholipid antibodies or thrombocytopenia are treated in accordance with the protocol for CAPS . These patients are treated with intravenous gamma globulin (IVIG) for 5 days before surgery, plasma exchange during cardiopulmonary resuscitation, and IVIG for another 5 days until the FDP decreases. The postoperative platelet count begins to increase thereafter. In our patient, we calculated the predicted plasma volume [= 0.065 × body weight (kg)] × (1−Ht) and replaced 30% of that volume using fresh frozen plasma (FFP). Globulin was also administered intravenously for 5 days (200 mg/kg/day).
Subsequently, sternotomy was performed. We established a CPB into the left atrial venting tube via the right upper pulmonary vein, inflowing from the right subclavian artery and outflowing through the right atrial appendage. We exfoliated the tissue surrounding the ascending aorta and placed a tape around the distal ascending aorta. The dissected ascending aortic aneurysm had enlarged to 65 mm in diameter. However, there was little adhesion to the right ventricle, right atrial appendage, or pulmonary artery. We also identified a saccular aneurysm of the distal arch, which had expanded to 55 mm; however, there were only a few adhesions to the surrounding tissues, such as the left recurrent nerve . We performed extended aortic arch replacement, removing the distal arch true aneurysm under systemic hypothermia with selective antegrade cerebral perfusion . To sufficiently protect the brain, the target minimum core temperature was adjusted to approximately 28 °C. Systemic rewarming was initiated after distal anastomosis. We performed anastomosis to the proximal aorta with double felts at the ST-junction. Pump weaning was achieved without inotropic support, and hemostasis was established in the usual manner. Circulatory arrest time was 38 min, and the aortic cross-clamp time was 98 min. The time required for CPB was 196 min, and the operative time was 6 h and 13 min. Intravenous methylprednisolone was administered intraoperatively and 1 day postoperatively. The usual dose of oral prednisolone was resumed on the second postoperative day.
Pathological examination of the ascending aorta revealed aortic dissection with cystic degeneration of the tunica media and fragmentation of the media elastica with atherosclerosis.The operative, CPB, aortic cross-clamp, and circulatory arrest times were 373, 196, 98, and 38 min, respectively. The respiratory support time was 10 h postoperatively. The patient was discharged from the intensive care unit on the second postoperative day, and rehabilitation was initiated. No other complication except atrial fibrillation was noted. CT revealed a well-running prosthetic graft and the absence of pseudoaneurysms at the anastomosis site on both the proximal and distal sides .
C-reactive protein. decreased gradually, although it did not reach normal values during hospitalization. White blood cell count decreased, thus ruling out infections. Moreover, liver function slowly improved, and albumin recovery was delayed .
Postoperatively, FDP was not elevated. Platelet count recovery was delayed, as it only increased on the 10th postoperative day . Moreover, there were no complications related to postoperative thromboembolism or hemorrhage nor the aorta; however, a right-side pyothorax was noted at 4 months postoperatively, a cystic rectal fistula 7 months later, and peritonitis due to colon perforation 1 year later. All complications were treated and resolved immediately. Now, nearly 4 years postoperatively, the patient remains in good health and is being followed up at the outpatient clinic. She has been able to resume her daily activities effectively.