A 35-year-old Chinese woman complained of a lower abdominal mass for 2 mo and abdominal distension for 2 wk.
The patient accidentally found a mass in her lower abdomen in May 2020 with no related clinical symptoms. She delayed hospitalization for 2 mo due to the coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic. Two months later, due to abdominal distension and right waist discomfort, the patient went to the gynecology clinic to seek medical help. Since the onset of the disease, the patient has had no dysuria or menstrual changes.
The patient’s past medical history included a loop electrosurgical excision procedure for cervical erosion 10 years ago.
No family history was identified.
Physical examination showed that the patient's abdomen was flat and soft, with no abnormal bulge, tenderness, or rebound pain. A cystic-solid mass of approximately 10 cm, which was painless and could not be pushed, was palpated slightly higher than the pubic bone. Gynecological bimanual examination showed no abnormalities of the vagina, cervix, or uterus.
Laboratory studies were normal except for an elevation in serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) to 132.69 ng/mL.
Gynecological B-mode ultrasonography examination showed that there was a cystic-solid mass close to the surface of the right ovary, mainly cystic, and the sound difference of the internal diaphragm was noisy. The appearance of thick and intense light spots followed by sound shadows, as well as a small blood flow signal in the solid part, allowed us to calculate a resistance index of 0.55. Computed tomography (CT) showed a cystic mass in the posterior rectal pelvis, extending to the level of the sacral promontory but not reaching the bony components of the sacrum or coccyx. The size of the mass was approximately 10 cm × 9 cm, and it showed polycystic changes with a septum and calcification. Contrast-enhanced CT indicated that the septum of the mass could be enhanced. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a mass of abnormal signal on the right side of the pelvis measuring approximately 10 cm × 7 cm. Its borders were clear, with mixed high signal on T2-weighted imaging (T2WI) and localized lamellar low signal within. The right adnexal region was a cystic abnormal signal focus with a moderate signal on T1-weighted imaging (T1WI) and a slightly high signal on T2WI, with nodular ring reinforcement on an enhanced scan. No enlarged lymph nodes or abnormal masses were seen in the pelvis. There was also no abnormal signal in the pelvic wall tissue .