A 48-year-old female patient who had never smoked presented with decreased visual acuity. On April 2008, she received right upper lobe lobectomy to treat lung adenocarcinoma with clinical stage IA (T1N0M0), according to the TNM Classification of Malignant Tumors, 7th edition. Her pathological stage was Stage IIIB (T4N1M0), and she received four cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy with paclitaxel and cisplatin. On August 2015, there was no evidence of disease, and regular cancer surveillance was terminated. In December 2021, she revisited our hospital with decreased visual acuity for about 3 months. Fundus photographs revealed bilateral choroidal metastatic lesions , but computed tomography showed no definitive lung mass. Positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) scans showed extensive bone metastatic lesions and focal hypermetabolism in the left uterine cervix . Magnetic resonance image (MRI) revealed two tiny metastases in the left middle frontal gyrus and lingual gyrus on brain. On pelvic MRI, there was a 6.0 × 4.3 × 2.1 cm heterogeneously enhancing mass in the endocervical canal. On January 2022, pathology from the excision biopsy of the uterus showed primary lung adenocarcinoma with an immunohistochemistry of TTF-1+, CK7+ and Ki-67+ without PD-L1 expression, which were similar findings as those from previously resected tissue in 2008 . The real-time polymerase chain reactions to epidermal growth factor receptor and ROS proto-oncogene 1 receptor tyrosine kinase (ROS1) were negative, and anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) fluorescence in situ hybridization was also negative. Subsequently, she received four cycles of chemotherapy with pemetrexed and cisplatin, and stable disease was observed. However, she suffered anaphylaxis during the 2nd cycle of cisplatin injection, so it was discontinued. We performed next-generation sequencing (NGS) of the uterine tissue and plasma, and then identified the presence of the KIF13A-RET fusion gene from the plasma sample . Tissue NGS showed MDM2 copy gain (tier II) without RET fusion. The patient began treatment with selpercatinib 160 mg twice daily, based on her plasma result thanks to the Named Patient Program. She also received intravitreal injection of bevacizumab. After 6 months of RET-targeted therapy, PET-CT revealed a partial response for multiple bone metastases . Optical coherence tomography showed improvement of the subretinal fluid and choroidal folds after treatment . She is continuing selpercatinib medication for more than 9 months without any safety issues.