An 8-year-old spayed female British Shorthair cat weighing 4.3 kg presented to the
University of Zurich Small Animal Hospital with ptyalism, weakness and facial muscle
twitching intermittently for less than 1 week.
On complete neurological examination, mentation and cranial nerves were normal. The main
abnormalities were generalised weakness with crouched walking and rapid exhaustion,
spontaneous tremors, muscle twitching, reduced proprioception and increased patellar
reflex.
Serum biochemistry revealed the following abnormalities: increased ammonia (313.3 µmol/l;
reference interval [RI] <70), increased postprandial bile acids 76 µmol/l (RI <25),
decreased cholesterol (1.9 mmol/l; RI 2.6–6.8), decreased alanine aminotransferase (26 U/l;
RI 34–98), slightly decreased urea (7.3 mmol/l; RI 7.4–12.6) and decreased creatinine
(86 µmol/l; RI 98–163). Complete blood cell counts revealed leukopenia (3.900/μl; RI
4.6–12.8) with the presence of bands (1650/μl; RI 232–1010).
Based on these findings, the primary differential diagnosis was HE. The cat was
hospitalised pending further diagnostics and treated with levetiracetam (20 mg/kg IV q8h
[Levetiracetam mepha; Mepha Pharma]), amoxicillin–clavulanic acid (20 mg/kg IV q8h [Co-Amoxi
Mepha Trockensub 550 mg; Mepha Pharma]) and lactulose (0.5 ml/kg PO q6h [Rudolac, Streuli
Pharma]) and intravenous maintenance fluid therapy with isotonic crystalloids at 2 ml/kg/h
(Ringer-Acetat; Fresenius Kabi).
Abdominal CT was performed and revealed an intrahepatic PSS. Medical management for HE was
continued in the hospital, as indicated above.
After 24 h without any focal seizures and an improved neurological status, the cat was
discharged home with medical management in preparation for the PSS attenuation with oral
levetiracetam (30 mg/kg q8h [Levetiracetam mepha; Mepha Pharma]), amoxicillin–clavulanic
acid (20 mg/kg q8h [Co-Amoxi Mepha Trockensub 550 mg; Mepha Pharma]) and lactulose
(0.5 ml/kg q8h [Rudolac; Streuli Pharma]).
The cat remained asymptomatic following discharge until 2 weeks later when a
fluoroscopy-guided coil embolisation of the intrahepatic shunt was performed under general
anaesthesia without any complications.
The cat was discharged 3 days after shunt ligation with no clinical signs of HE or any
evidence of portal hypertension after the embolisation. Medical therapy was continued at
home with addition of the antithrombotic clopidogrel (4 mg/kg PO q24h for 8 days
[Clopidogrel 75 mg; Sandoz–Novartis]).
One week after the procedure, the cat presented with recurrence of weakness, apathy and ear
twitching. The following day, it developed generalised tonic–clonic seizures, which stopped
with the administration of midazolam (0.5 mg/kg IV [Dormicum; Roche]). Owing to the increase
in seizure activity, the cat was additionally treated with phenobarbital (3 mg/kg IV q12h
[Phenobarbital; Bichsel]).
An abdominal ultrasound was performed on the same day to evaluate the correct localisation
of the intrahepatic coil. The coil was detected in the shunt vessel, with no remaining blood
flow and no primary or secondary signs of portal hypertension.
The biochemistry profile showed the following abnormalities: mildly increased postprandial
bile acids (32 µmol/l; RI <25), increased alanine aminotransferase (137 U/l; RI 34–98)
and decreased urea (4.7 mmol/l; RI 7.4–12.6). Ammonia was normal (31.7 µmol/l; RI
<70 µmol/l).
The cat’s mentation declined rapidly over the following night with an increased number of
seizure events that were no longer controllable with antiepileptic therapy. The cat was
induced into general anaesthesia for a 3T MRI of the brain. MRI revealed bilateral
symmetrical areas of increased T2 signal intensity at the lateral geniculate nuclei,
tegmental reticular formation and pons. Moreover, bilateral and symmetrical, fine, laminar
areas of increased T2 signal intensity were visible at the cortical grey matter, adjacent to
the grey–white matter transitions of the occipital lobes . The lentiform nuclei showed a diffusely and
symmetrically moderate increased T1 signal intensity .
Imaging diagnosis of a multifocal symmetrical encephalopathy was determined. The primary
differential diagnosis for the changes was a metabolic toxic disease, in line with the
presumptive diagnosis of PANS. The bilateral changes in the pons mirror recently reported
changes in suspected osmolar myelinolysis. Additionally, concomitant postictal cortical brain oedema or early-stage laminar
cortical necrosis were considered the most plausible cause of the occipital lobe bilateral
T2W hyperintensities. The T1 hyperintensities at the lentiform nuclei were compatible with
manganese deposition and were considered to be residual from the PSS.
The cat was kept under total intravenous anaesthesia with ketamine (Ketanarkon 100; Streuli
Pharma), dexmedetomidine (Dexdomitor; Zoetis) and midazolam (Dormicum; Roche) continuous
rate infusion, and mechanically ventilated (Hamilton Medical) with synchronised intermittent
mandatory ventilation for 24 h.
Because of the patient’s rapid decline in neurological status despite the aggressive
medical management, failed attempt to wean the patient without re-occurrence and following
discussion on the prognosis with the owners, the decision was made to attempt rescue therapy
with TPE for the PANS-associated refractory seizures.
A 6 F × 10 cm haemodialysis catheter was placed percutaneously in the right jugular vein. A
single standard session of TPE was performed using the PrisMax device (Baxter Healthcare)
with a paediatric Prismaflex TPE 1000 set (Baxter Healthcare) as an extracorporeal circuit.
The TPE session lasted 2.5 h, exchanging a total of 300 ml plasma, representing 200% of the
patient’s plasma volume (154 ml) estimated using the formula 55 ml × BW (kg) × (1 – PCV),
where BW denotes body weight and PCV the packed cell volume. Isovolaemic fluid replacement with type-matched feline fresh frozen plasma was used
during TPE. Circuit anticoagulation was maintained using ACDA 30% solution (ACD A; Bichsel)
at an infusion rate automatically adjusted for by the TPE device to maintain a constant
circuit citrate concentration of 3 mmol/l. Calcium substitution with calcium gluconate 2.5%
solution (B Braun Medical) was administered to maintain normal serum ionised calcium
concentration.
During TPE the cat was maintained under general anaesthesia and mechanically ventilated as
prior to the session. Electrocardiography, capnography, pulse oximetry and non-invasive
blood pressure measurements were monitored during the session. No significant adverse events
were present during the TPE session, besides a self-resolving period of bradycardia. At the
end of TPE, the cat was spontaneously breathing, maintaining a normal oxygen saturation on
room air and was then extubated. There was no evidence of seizure activity in the recovery
period or thereafter. The cat became conscious and responsive within 24 h. Medical
management with anticonvulsants and antibiotics was continued post-TPE. Reduced
neuromuscular function persisted for 48 h before the cat was able to stand. On day 5
post-TPE the cat had normal motor function, was ambulatory and eating spontaneously.
The following abnormalities were noted on serum biochemistry 24 h post-TPE: increased total
bilirubin (98.3 µmol/l; RI 0.1–3.5), total proteins dropped to 45 g/l (from 70 g/l prior to
TPE), low serum albumin (19 g/l: RI 32–42) and decreased phosphate (0.68 mmol/l: RI
0.9–1.8). Packed cell volume dropped to 23% from 35% prior to TPE. Serum ammonia was
55.4 µmol/l.
The cat remained hospitalised with supportive care and monitoring for almost 2 weeks before
discharge. The cat was discharged with phenobarbital (2 mg/kg PO q12h [Phenobarbital;
Bichsel]) and levetiracetam (15 mg/kg PO q8h [Levetiracetam Mepha; Mepha Pharma]).
Neuromuscular function had improved dramatically at the 1-month recheck and no seizure
activity was reported by the owner. Complete blood count and serum biochemistry were normal.
The last follow-up was 2 months after discharge and the cat was in good general condition,
without any seizure activity.