A 45-year-old Chinese woman presented with pain in right side of waist and right buttock, which has been present since April 2018.
She was experiencing pain extending from the right waist to the right buttock since April 2018. Initial physical examination and vital signs showed no significant abnormalities, and initial laboratory results were within the normal range.
Twenty-three years ago, the patient had a history of removal of a vaginal mass and a cesarean section. The previously removed vaginal mass was considered benign (not available for review). She was told that additional clinical or radiological follow-up was not necessary.
There was no family history of specific genetic or infectious diseases.
Physical examination revealed tenderness over the kidney region on percussion. Her vital parameters were: temperature, 36.5 °C; pulse rate, 75 beats/min; blood pressure, 135/88 mmHg.
The laboratory test findings were unremarkable. Biochemical tests showed normal levels of glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase, glutamic pyruvic transaminase, total bilirubin, direct bilirubin, indirect bilirubin. Her electrolyte profile and renal function tests were normal. Tumor markers such as α-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, and carbohydrate antigen 199 were negative, and there was no evidence of hepatitis A, B, C or E virus infection. Her blood pressure increased during hospitalization, and auxiliary examination showed increased levels of 24-h urine vanillylmandelic acid (VMA) (22.40 mg/24 h) and urine methoxynorepinephrine (NMN) levels (3880 μg/24 h).
Ureteral stent implantation and laparoscopic pelvic mass biopsy were performed on May 17, 2018. Routine postoperative pathology showed that the cystic wall-like tissues of the pelvic mass were covered with squamous epithelium and other nerve tissues, suggesting the possibility of mature cystic teratoma. The patient recovered well after the operation and was referred to the gynecology department for further treatment. On December 6, 2018, the patient underwent transvaginal resection of the vaginal mass and laparoscopic release of pelvic adhesions. Routine postoperative pathology showed that the vaginal wall nodule was a malignant tumor, pending further diagnosis by the immunopathology. After the surgery, the patient developed abdominal distension and failed to pass flatus. X-ray indicated ileus and an ileus catheter was placed. However, the abdominal distension continued to aggravate. On December 24, 2018, CT-guided peritoneal puncture and drainage were performed; cytological examination revealed no tumor cells in the ascites fluid. The immunopathological examination of the vaginal mass was consistent with malignant paraganglioma. On immunohistochemical analysis, the tumor cells expressed S100 (+), Syn (+), CgA (+), CD56 (+), CD10 (-), Ki67 (+, 5%) and CK (-).
At the onset of symptoms in early April 2018, the patient had undergone B-ultrasonography at a local hospital, which showed right-sided hydronephrosis accompanied by distension of the right upper ureter and hypoechoic pelvic cavity on the right side. On admission at our hospital, enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed right hydronephrosis, right lower ureter mass, and right-sided vaginal mass .