A ten-year-old girl of Turkish origin with consanguineous parents (for pedigree, see Additional file : Figure S1) presented at the paediatric ward of a general hospital with arthralgia. A flexion contracture of the right-hand little finger had been present since early infancy and she had been suffering from progressively swollen and painful knees, wrists, elbows and ankles since the age of three. She regularly had a swollen face and in the past she suffered from recurrent respiratory infections. Her father and his sister also experienced similar childhood-onset joint complaints . The father had been diagnosed with JIA as a child.
On examination, our patient had a camptodactyly of her right fifth finger and a mild curvature of her left index finger. Her metacarpal joints, right wrist, both ankles and both knees were swollen. Extension of both elbows was limited. Iridocyclitis was not present. In view of her joint complaints and recurrent respiratory infections, an autoimmune disease and immunodeficiency were suspected. Laboratory tests showed no signs of inflammation. Reumatoidfactor, ANA and anti-CCP were all negative. Total IgG and total albumin were low (IgG 1.57 g/l and albumin 20 g/l), indicating a secondary immune deficiency.
During a follow-up physical examination, an enlarged liver was found, though no heart murmur was heard. Laboratory tests revealed normal liver enzymes and persistently low IgG with normal IgM and IgA. In CT imaging no intrapulmonary lesions were found. However, pleural and pericardial effusion of unknown origin were present. The girl was referred to our University Medical Centre for further diagnostic tests.
With regard to protein loss, faecal analysis showed an increased alpha antitrypsin clearance, suggesting PLE. An abdominal ultrasound with Doppler was conducted and showed hepatomegaly and portal hypertension (reversed flow in portal vein). A full cardiac analysis was consequently carried out. The electrocardiogram was normal. Echocardiography showed moderate pericardial effusion and a septal diastolic bounce, suggesting constrictive pericarditis. The Doppler measurements were not conclusive. Because we could not confirm a cardiac origin of the portal hypertension, we decided to exclude a hepatogenic origin of the portal hypertension first. A percutaneous liver biopsy revealed a-specific fibrosis interpreted as chronic venous congestion. To determine intra-cardiac pressure to confirm constrictive pericarditis, heart catheterization was then performed, which showed elevated venous pressures (mean 22 mm of mercury), equalization of end-diastolic pressures in all cardiac chambers and a right ventricular pressure of 31 mm of mercury (upper limit of normal). Kussmaul’s sign was positive. As the presence of the square root sign of the right ventricle was inconsistent and enhanced ventricular interdependence was absent, we could not confirm the diagnosis of constrictive pericarditis. Moreover, a thickened pericardium was not seen on a subsequent cardiac MRI.
Since the diagnosis of constrictive pericarditis could not be confirmed, other diagnoses were reconsidered. Investigations to rule out JIA and other autoimmune diseases causing polyarthritis were undertaken, including an ultrasound of the joints and a puncture of the synovial fluid. The synovial capsule seemed thickened. The synovial fluid was mildly honey-coloured and showed some multinucleated macrophages (CD68 positive) without signs of inflammation. Inflammatory arthritis was thus excluded. CACP syndrome was suggested and further evaluation was performed. X-ray examination showed coxa vara, peri-articular osteopenia and flattened metacarpal and phalangeal joints. As the overall clinical presentation and results were suggestive of CACP syndrome, the girl and her father were referred for genetic testing and counselling. Meanwhile the patient was treated with immunoglobulin supplements and Cotrimoxazol prophylaxis. Because high doses of IgG were needed to compensate for her losses (1.6 g/kg/28 days), intravenous administration was chosen for better tolerance of treatment despite potential pharmacokinetic disadvantages. However, due to excessive enteral protein loss, normal serum IgG values could not be achieved. As constrictive pericarditis with subsequent PLE was the best explanation for the excessive IgG losses, this indicated a pericardiectomy. During this procedure a thickened parietal epicardium and fibrotic visceral epicardial layer on the right and left ventricle were removed, after which central venous pressure dropped from 14 to 7 mm of mercury. After this intervention the PLE and portal hypertension were resolved quickly. Supplementation of intravenous immunoglobulins was discontinued successfully. Repetitive measurements of serum albumin and IgG were all within normal ranges, indicating a full stop of the PLE. One year after the pericardiectomy, all echocardiographic measurements were normal, meaning no effusion, normal wall motion and normal Doppler measurements.
Clinically, the girl is in good condition. Besides the camptodactyly and limited extension of her elbow, no other joint complains were left. Additionally, the oedema and joint swellings disappeared.
With regard to the genetic testing, the genome-wide array analysis (Affymetrix CytoScan HD array platform) of the girl and her father showed a total of 83 Mb of shared homozygosity, including the PRG4 gene (see Additional file : Figure S2). The homozygous regions did not contain other candidate genes likely to explain the phenotype. Sanger sequence analysis of the coding sequence of PRG4 was performed on the DNA of the girl in our laboratory (NM_005807.3). All exons in the gene were eventually tested. Sixty percent of the PRG4 gene was sequenced and analysed successfully by conventional PCR and Sanger sequencing, including complete exons 1–6 and 8–13. As the analysis of exon 7 encountered technical problems and no pathogenic mutation was found in the PRG4 gene, diagnostic exome sequencing was carried out essentially as previously described in literature (Genome Diagnostics Radboudumc, gene package ‘multiple congenital anomalies’, version DG2.3×) . A homozygous pathogenic one basepair deletion, c.1290del (p. (Thr431fs), was identified in exon 7 of the PRG4 gene, resulting in a premature stop codon (see Additional file : Figure S3). No other pathogenic mutations were identified in the disease gene package.