A 45 year-old Greek male with PHPT admitted to our department for parathyroidectomy due to diagnosed PHPT caused by benign parathyroid adenoma. The patient was an Officer in Hellenic Air Force, married without children. On admission, he reported fatigue as the only symptom he experienced and the vital signs were normal (blood pressure: 135/65 mmHg, heart rate: 72 pulses/min, temperature: 36.8 °C). Our findings during the physical examination were the following: 1. head: eyes, nose, mouth, ears were normal, 2. neck: without any swelling area and trachea in the central position, 3. anterior torso: thorax and abdomen without abnormalities during observation, normal breath sounds, normal heart sounds and normal abdominal sounds, 4. posterior torso: without any spinal curvature or lung deformity, 5. pelvic and rectal examination: normal, 6. upper and lower extremities: without any abnormalities. Moreover, the results of our neurological examination were: 1. normal mental status, 2. cranial nerves evaluation: normal findings, 3. normal reflexes, 4. motor function and balance: normal findings, 5. sensory examination: normal findings, 6. coordination examination: normal findings. His medical history was free and there was not any family history for hypercalcemia or multiple endocrine neoplasia syndromes. The patient was not taking any medication before diagnosis. Besides, no allergies were reported and the patient did not smoke or consume alcohol. Laboratory tests revealed a serum total calcium of 2.8 mmol/l (normal range 2.05–2.55 mmol/l) with an elevated PTH of 204.70 pg/ml (normal range 15.00–68.30 pg/ml). Serum phosphate was 3.2 mg/dl (normal range: 2.5–4.5 mg/dl), 25 hydroxyvitamin-D level was 27.2 ng/ml (normal range: 20–50 ng/ml) and 24-h urine calcium level was 202.1 mg/24 h (normal range: 100–300 mg/24 h). Thyroid function tests were normal. The detailed laboratory results are reported in Table . Neck ultrasound revealed that the thyroid gland had normal dimensions and there was an inferior right-sided 23 x 11 x 13 mm extrathyroid nodule, indicative of parathyroid adenoma . Furthermore, the patient underwent 99mTc–Sestamibi scintigraphy (MIBI) and the result was in accordance with the neck ultrasound . Under the diagnosis of PHPT and with a CaPTHUS score of 4 [Intact PTH level ≥ 2 times upper limit of normal PTH level, Sestamibi scan results positive for 1 enlarged parathyroid gland, Neck ultrasound results positive for 1 enlarged thyroid gland and concordant sestamibi and neck ultrasound study results (identifying 1 enlarged gland on the same side of the neck)] indicative for single gland disease, the patient was admitted for focused parathyroidectomy . However, intraoperatively, we did not find any parathyroid gland at the lower pole of the right thyroid lobe. Therefore, we continued with a right neck exploration and only a normal parathyroid gland was recognized on the superior right pole of the thyroid. Thus, we decided to proceed on exploring the left side of the neck which revealed two normal parathyroid glands. Nevertheless, after repeated attempts to discover the pathologic right parathyroid gland, we noticed a small bulging at the right lower thyroid pole suspicious for an intrathyroidal parathyroid adenoma. Prior to the attempt to dissect this bulging, we finally found an enlarged nodule, morphologically similar to parathyroid adenoma. This was at the right side of the neck in connection with the carotid sheath, far away from the thyroid gland [Type C based on the nomenclature of parathyroid classification , which was excised and sent for frozen section . Ten minutes after the excision of the suspected adenoma, a blood sample was taken and the intact PTH level dropped and was within normal range (49.30 pg/ml), indicating a reduction of more than 50% from the preoperative level. The frozen section report showed a “parathyroid neoplasm, with a low possibility of parathyroid carcinoma, due to the presence of fibrous bands”. Based on these findings, we decided to perform right hemithyroidectomy with additional ipsilateral central neck dissection . In the immediate postoperative period and until discharge, paracetamol (1000 mg, four times per day), nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (lornoxicam 4 mg, twice per day) and omeprazole (20 mg, twice per day) were administered intravenously. The patient received and tolerated well liquid and solid food six hours after the procedure. In the first postoperative day, serum calcium, phosphate and PTH levels were 2.175 mmol/l, 1.04 mmol/l (normal range: 0.74–1.52 mmol/L) and 45.80 pg/ml respectively. Τhe patient discharged without any complications, in the second postoperative day. To our surprise, the final pathology report revealed that: (1) the first dissected “parathyroid neoplasm” was a parathyroid adenoma and not a carcinoma, with 2.7 cm maximum diameter, (2) there was one smaller subcapsular parathyroid adenoma, with 1.1 cm maximum diameter, located at the lower pole of the right thyroid lobe and (3) a normal parathyroid gland was found at the inferior border of the right central neck dissection specimen. Finally, eighteen months after surgery, patient’s serum calcium, serum phosphate and PTH levels were still within normal range (2.425 mmol/l, 1.06 mmol/l and 55.0 pg/ml respectively), confirming a successful, curative parathyroidectomy for PHPT. Furthermore, the patient did not report any symptom and physical and neurological examination did not reveal any pathological signs.