A 63-year-old woman was admitted to the Second Hospital of University of South China for management of frequent urination, urgent urination, odynuria, and dysuria, accompanied by intermittent urine spillover for over 10 years. She reported that the greatest problem was that she had to lift her hips and change her posture constantly every time she urinated, passing some urine with each change in posture. She had a 5-year history of SUI before onset of these symptoms and had had four urethral caruncles resected 17, 16, 7 and 1 year before the current presentation. Additionally, she had not been sexually active for almost a decade. Physical examination showed an approximately 2.5 × 2.0 cm circular bright red polyp with a relatively wide base at the outer urethral orifice that bled when touched. In addition, turbid urine was passed when the anterior vaginal wall was squeezed. Urethroscopy showed the orifice of a diverticulum at 7 o’clock in the mid urethra. The diameter of the orifice was relatively large, enabling insertion of a F19.8 urethroscope into the diverticulum. The diverticulum cavity had smooth walls, and could be filled with 50 mL of normal saline . The normal course between the urethra and bladder was hard to identify. Extensive trabecular hyperplasia and multiple diverticula were found in the bladder. Cystourethrography confirmed multiple diverticula in the bladder, and a spherical area of contrast filling in the mid plane of the pubic symphysis . During cystourethrography, the patient passed only a small amount of urine, the residual urine volume being 300 mL. There was visible urethral leakage of urine when abdominal pressure was applied during the physical examination and urodynamic studies. A urodynamic study revealed an abdominal leak point pressure of 88 cm H2O, a maximal urethral closure pressure of 80 cm H2O, and a functional urethral length of 3 cm.
In accordance with findings on urine culture, piperacillin sodium and sulbactam sodium (2.5 g, q 12 h) were administered preoperatively and other preparatory measures were taken. The operation was performed by the chief urologist, who has over 30 years of experience, assisted by two other urologists. Epidural anesthesia was administered, after which then the patient was placed in the lithotomy position and a 20 F double-antrum air chamber catheter inserted into the bladder. A straight incision was made in the anterior vaginal wall. The vaginal wall and periurethral fascial were then dissected inferiorly and laterally along the wall of the diverticulum from the distal end of the urethral diverticulum to the pubocervical fascia and across the level of the bladder neck. When the diverticular sac was separated below the pubic symphysis, the whole diverticulum, which encircled the urethra, was completely exposed. Because there were extensive and advanced adhesions between the diverticulum and surrounding tissues, the wall of the diverticulum was resected in sections by dissecting it from the surface of the bulbospongiosus muscle. Next, the neck of the diverticulum and remaining diverticular tissue was resected, while preserving part of the diverticular neck. The remaining diverticular wall was varus sutured to the diverticular neck with 4–0 absorbable thread to restore urethral integrity and continuity, after which the sutured urethra was covered externally with the surrounding bulbospongiosus muscle and peri-urethral fascia and closed with absorbable sutures. The natural appearance of the urethra was restored as well as possible. Polypropylene mesh (10 × 15 cm; Gynecare Gynemesh) was tailored to serve as urethral mesh (1.5 × 3.0 cm) using the urethral circumference as a model and the mesh used to wrap 2/3 of the periurethral fascia of the mid-urethra and cover the neck of the diverticulum . Fixation was achieved by suturing the fascia and tissues surrounding the urethra, anchoring the mesh to the fascia and tissues between the urethra and the vaginal, in neither a retropubic nor transobturator manner, and then suturing the incision in the vaginal wall. Such three-layer suturing (periurethral fascia, mesh and vaginal wall flap) is known as “sandwich suturing”. Finally, the polyp at the urethral orifice was resected.
The volume of intraoperative blood loss was about 100 mL. The operation time was 105 min and the procedure was uneventful.
In accordance with the results of preoperative urine culture and drug sensitivity testing, piperacillin sodium and sulbactam sodium (2.5 g, q 8 h) were administered for 5 days. Pathological examination of the resected specimen showed transitional epithelial cells. Additionally, plasmocytes and lymphocytes were found infiltrating the area of the lesion . In addition, a polyp was found at the outer urethral orifice. The urethral catheter was removed 4 weeks after the procedure. Cystourethroscopy showed good recovery of the urethra with no mesh exposure.
The patient was followed up 6 and 20 months after the operation and reported that she no longer frequent urination, urgency, odynuria, dysuria, or incontinence. Routine urine examinations were negative. Ultrasound examination showed that a residual urine volume of about 10 mL. Her ICI-Q-SF score, using an internationally recognized incontinence scale, decreased from 12 preoperatively to 1 postoperatively.