A 40-year-old woman was referred to our strabismus clinic with a complaint of double vision. She had already been diagnosed with hyperthyroidism, and her thyroid function had normalized after 2 months of treatment with antithyroid medication; subsequently, 2.5 mg carbimazole was used as a maintaining dose. She did not take systemic steroid medication, because her dysthyroid ophthalmopathy was not severe (Clinical Activity Score, CAS 2) and there was no aggravated symptomatic sign. She subsequently developed worsening diplopia and proptosis in her left eye 1 month prior to presentation. At the initial examination, her visual acuity was normal in both eyes (20/20), and 2 mm exophthalmos was noted in her left eye. She exhibited left hypotropia of 35 prism diopters (PD) in the primary position with marked limitation of left eye elevation . Asymmetric enlargement of the inferior and medial rectus muscles was demonstrated in her left eye on computed tomography (CT), and was compatible with dysthyroid ophthalmopathy . The forced duction test (FDT) revealed restriction in the upward direction in her left eye. She described a highly predictable fluctuating pattern of diplopia, that spontaneously switched at approximately 8 o’clock every night. To differentiate the causes of the fluctuating diplopia, such as myasthenia gravis, we performed laboratory tests, including a determination of acetylcholine receptor antibody titer; all results were normal. Based on her description, we recommended that she keep a diary to record her diplopia episodes and have her picture taken during episodes of both mild and severe diplopia. At the next visit, during which she exhibited relatively mild diplopia, cover testing revealed left hypotropia of 7 PD in the primary position with mild limitation of left eye elevation . Her diary clearly revealed the “every-other-day” pattern of diplopia. During the 6 months since the first visit, her thyroid function remained normal and the proptosis of her left eye decreased. A cycle involving diplopia-free days was gradually predominant. Finally, the left hypotropia of 7 PD remained, but without a cyclic pattern. Her diplopia was well compensated with mild chin elevation.