A 47-year-old woman with past medical history of non-intravenous heroin and amphetamine abuse, tobacco dependence, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia presented to the emergency department with complaints of right lower extremity swelling and rash 1 week prior to arrival. Pain in the leg was reported to be recurrent. She had leukocytosis of 23.9 k/μL (79.7% neutrophils), creatinine of 2.4 mg/dL (with a baseline creatinine of 1 mg/dL), C-reactive protein elevation to 10.8 mg/L. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 20. She also had mild elevation of lactic acid to 2.4 and hypotension, both of which resolved after receiving a 1 l bolus of normal saline. Ultrasound of bilateral lower extremities was performed, and no deep venous thrombosis was identified, so patient was admitted for IV antibiotic treatment of right leg cellulitis. Physical exam was only significant for erythema of the right leg up to the mid shin. Blood cultures and urine cultures collected prior to starting antibiotics showed no growth. Renal ultrasound obtained to evaluate the acute kidney injury found a hypoechoic region in the right kidney. MRI of the abdomen identified multiple infarcts with the largest measuring 5 cm in the upper pole and 4 cm in the mid-pole of right kidney and catecholamines were 8 μg/day (ref 15–100 μg/day). These showed a preserved capsular enhancement. Right renal artery and vein were patent. No surrounding edema or diffusion restriction was observed to suggest an abscess. Patient did not complain of any abdominal pain or nausea. Patient denied any history of spontaneous abortions, but noted a family history of blood clots, which prompted a hypercoagulable work up. PT/INR and APTT were within normal limits. Her AST was 20 U/L (Ref 10–40), ALT was 30 U/L (Ref 7–52), total bilirubin was 0.4 mg/dl (Ref 0.2–1.2), and direct bilirubin was 0.1 mg/dl (Ref 0–0.2). Factor V Leiden mutation was not detected. The activity of protein C and S were 114 and 102, respectively, within their normal ranges. Antithrombin III activity was 85, also within normal range. Antiphospholipid antibodies and homocysteine levels were within normal limit. The chance of vasculitis in a patient with an ESR of 20 is very small, but nonetheless, workup for collagen vascular diseases was performed. The patient’s ANA screen was negative and she was also negative for double stranded DNA antibodies. ANCA serology was negative. Rheumatoid factor was negative too. Hepatitis A IgM antibody, B antigen and core IgM antibody, and C antibody and HIV p24 and antibody were negative. 2D echo was performed to rule out cardioembolic sources, and the test was without any abnormalities. EKG showed normal sinus rhythm, no atrial fibrillation, and she denied history of palpitations. She was placed on continuous telemetry and there were no episodes of atrial fibrillation on telemetry. She was diagnosed with amphetamine/heroin induced renal infarct based on exclusion of other possibilities.
The patient was asymptomatic with respect to the renal infarct. Mechanical thrombectomy was not an option considering that no large clots were discovered on imaging. Systemic thrombolysis was also not done because she was outside a likely temporal window of benefit. She was advised regarding drug cessation and was discharged with antibiotics for her cellulitis. She was advised to follow up in the outpatient hematology clinic. While she did not come to the appointment, she did return to the hospital with recurrent pain in her leg a month later. At that time, abdomen CT repeat did not discover any new infarcts, and the previous renal infarct was scarred over.