A 72-year-old woman with progressive symptoms of gait disturbance, constipation, and urinary incontinence for 1 year was referred to our hospital. She showed no medical or trauma history and was wheelchair-dependent due to lower-leg weakness. Physical examination revealed motor weakness, bilateral numbness of the lower extremities, and anal sphincter impairment. Her Aminoff-Logue scale gait, micturition, and bowel scores were 5, 2, and 2, respectively. Computed tomography revealed no significant brain abnormalities. Spinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed diffuse spinal cord edema in Th5-Th11 and multiple flow voids on the back of the region, indicating venous congestion and perimedullary venous ectasia . The conus medullaris ended at the L1 vertebral level. We suspected spinal vascular malformations and performed spinal angiography followed by endovascular treatment under IOM.
A neurophysiological monitoring unit (Neuromaster MEE-1208; NIHON KOHDEN Corp. Tokyo, Japan) was used for IOM. All electrodes were inserted into the scalp according to the International 10-20 system for electroencephalography. SEPs were elicited by stimulation of the anterior tibial nerve at the ankle (intensity: 20–40 mA, duration: 0.2 ms, and repetition rate: 5.7 Hz) and recorded through needle electrodes inserted into the scalp at CZ’-FZ. MEPs were elicited by transcranial electrical stimulation using corkscrew-like electrodes placed on the scalp at C3-C4. Monophasic stimulation of five square-wave pulses (intensity, 550V; single pulse duration, 0.5 ms; interstimulus interval, 2 ms; and repetition rate, 2 Hz) was applied. MEPs of the lower extremities were recorded using needle electrodes inserted into the abductor pollicis brevis, tibialis anterior, and abductor hallucis. Anal MEPs were recorded using electrodes inserted into the bilateral bulbospongiosus muscles. The stimulating electrode of the BCR was placed at the pubic symphysis, with the cathode on the dorsum of the clitoris and the anode on the labia majora. Short trains of five square-wave pulses (intensity, 40 mA; single pulse duration, 0.2 ms; interstimulus interval, 2 ms; and repetition rate, 2.7 Hz) were used to elicit BCR. Recordings of the evoked response of the BCR were performed using the same needle electrodes as the anal MEPs.
All spinal angiography and treatments were performed under general anesthesia using propofol (4–10 mg/kg/h) and remifentanil (0.25–0.5 μg/kg/min). Baseline monitoring was performed after induction of general anesthesia. All SEPs and MEPs were recorded, except the anal MEP and BCR at baseline. Diagnostic and treatment angiography was performed using a cobra-shaped 4-French catheter (Medikit, Tokyo, Japan) through the femoral artery access. The left Th8 segmental artery injection demonstrated delayed spinal venous drainage in the anterior spinal artery, while the left L2 segmental artery injection revealed a SEAVF with perimedullary venous drainage. The shunt was supplied from the left dorsal somatic branch through the retrocorporeal anastomosis and was located in the contralateral ventral epidural space with a venous pouch [ and ]. Intradural venous reflux through the posterior spinal vein was observed from the lower edge of the venous pouch at the L2 vertebral level . No other feeders were detected in other segmental arteries. Endovascular embolization of the shunt was then performed. After placing the guiding catheter on the left L2 segmental artery, a 1.5-Fr flow-directed catheter (Marathon; Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) was advanced over a microwire (CHIKAI X 010; ASHI INTECC, Aichi, Japan) into the dorsal somatic branch. After confirming the absence of posterior spinal artery opacification, N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate (NBCA) (Histoacryl; B. Braun, Melsungen, Germany) diluted with iodized oil (Lipiodol; Guerbet, Aulnay-sous-Bois, France) at 17% was injected from the microcatheter. The NBCA infiltrated the upper part of the venous pouch through the shunt point and control angiography revealed complete shunt obliteration [ and ]. Anal MEP/BCR monitoring revealed no potential during the procedure and no changes in other MEPs and SEPs were observed after treatment [ and ].
The post treatment clinical course was stable without complications and anticoagulant medication was initiated to prevent venous thrombosis. The patient was transferred to a rehabilitation hospital with a modified Rankin scale score of 3. At the 3-month follow-up, the lower-extremity paraplegia had improved, but fecal and urinary disturbances remained unchanged. Spinal MRI showed the disappearance of flow voids and remnant thoracic cord edema. At 18 months after the treatment, she could walk with a walker, and constipation and urination improved. The Aminoff-Logue scale gait, micturition, and bowel scores were 4, 1, and 1. Anal MEP/BCR monitoring revealed potentials that were not observed during the follow-up angiography [ and ; mean latencies and average amplitudes of anal MEP and BCR, approximately 60 ms and 50 ms and 9.5 μV and 295 μV, respectively]. The angiography showed persistent shunt occlusion and improved venous drainage of the spinal cord, while MRI confirmed a normal spinal cord without edema [ and ].