The patient was a 74-year-old man who presented to our institution with a 2-week history of confusion and memory disturbance. On neurological examination, the patient was found to have disorientation and mild left-sided hemiparesis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head demonstrated a mass lesion, 4 cm in diameter, in the right frontal lobe with surrounding edema; the ring-enhancing lesion was strongly enhanced by gadolinium contrast on T1-weighted imaging . Subsequent computed tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen and pelvis revealed a suspicious lesion in the left lateral wall of the urinary bladder with small calcifications and an enlarged lymph node of the carina tracheae, but no mass lesions in the lung fields . He denied any hematuria or other urologic symptoms. Preoperatively, these findings were considered consistent with a metastatic brain tumor. Craniotomy was performed and the tumor completely removed. Postoperatively, he regained consciousness, the left-sided hemiparesis improved, and the patient showed a remarkable improvement in quality of life.
Histological examination of the brain specimen revealed metastatic LCNEC characterized by diffuse proliferation of large atypical cells with coarse nuclear chromatin and frequent nucleoli [Figure , ]. The carcinoma cells expressed CD56, chromogranin A, synaptophysin and thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) [Figure –].
A urology consultation was requested. The patient underwent cystoscopy and the bladder mass was biopsied. Histological and immunohistochemical examination revealed LCNEC, the same findings as the brain specimen . Finally, the patient was diagnosed with a brain metastasis from LCNEC of the urinary bladder.
Aggressive chemotherapy was initiated with carboplatin and etoposide. The patient also received whole brain radiotherapy. Head MRI done 4 months after surgical treatment showed complete removal of the brain metastasis and no evidence of recurrence or new lesions. However, the patient suddenly died of pulmonary embolism 5 months after surgical treatment.