An 82-year-old man was brought to the hospital after sustaining a mechanical fall at home and was found to have a non-operable left greater trochanter fracture. On abdominal imaging, he was incidentally found to have a 9.2 cm dominant mass at the dome of the liver straddling the left and right hepatic lobes with a 6 mm right lower lobe pulmonary nodule, which was suspicious for metastatic intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma. A subsequent liver biopsy confirmed moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma. Based on his age and performance status, the patient began treatment with single agent gemcitabine 1000 mg/m2 on days one and eight every three weeks in conjunction with pegfilgrastim.
On the fourth day of his first cycle with gemcitabine, the patient developed a blanchable maculopapular rash on his upper chest, which eventually resolved with loratadine and diphenhydramine. However, the patient became increasingly fatigued after day eight of gemcitabine. Due to these side effects, gemcitabine was dose reduced to 500 mg/m2 every other week. Although his fatigue improved on the days he did not receive chemotherapy, the patient complained of new onset of shortness of breath and a dry cough that persisted into his second treatment cycle. During an office visit, a pulse oximetry measurement registered the patient as breathing 92% on ambient air. A chest X-ray showed bilateral pleural effusions . Even after initiating furosemide to facilitate diuresis and a short course of corticosteroids, the patient continued to have dyspnea on exertion. The patient, who had no significant history of cardiac or pulmonary disease, underwent a transthoracic echocardiogram, which revealed an estimated pulmonary artery systolic pressure of 35 mmHg assuming a right atrial pressure of 15 mmHg; this finding was consistent with pulmonary hypertension likely secondary to gemcitabine . Computed tomography (CT) angiogram of the chest was performed to rule out pulmonary thromboembolism (PE), and it was negative. The patient was promptly treated with diuretics and gemcitabine was discontinued given the high suspicion of drug related toxicity causing pulmonary hypertension.
The patient could not tolerate any further treatment with gemcitabine at which point his regimen was changed to fluorouracil and leucovorin. Despite this, he endured worsening symptoms and ultimately opted for hospice care.