A Chinese boy developed multiple motor tics, such as eye blinking, shoulder elevation, throat clearing, and vocal tics, such as saying “I want to rape you” when he was 9 years old in 2016. He also had a history of repeatedly and uncontrollably examining doors or windows and was diagnosed with TS and obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD). The above symptoms disappeared after he was prescribed 50 mg/d sertraline, 10 mg/d aripiprazole and 1 mg/d risperidone. In June 2020, he developed frequent tongue-biting, which manifested as a sudden, rapid, recurrent, non-rhythmic, aimless, involuntary behaviour after getting oral ulcers. The symptom slightly abated after the ulcer healed but aggravated once more when he caught a cold. The patient appeared agitated and bit his tongue frequently when he presented to our inpatient ward in July 2020. He presented with continuous oral bleeding and a necrotic anterior third of the tongue with no symptoms of vomiting, diarrhoea, arthritis or cardiac changes and negative neurologic examination results. A third generation cephalosporin was not effective in preventing the tongue-biting. We administered 20 mg/d haloperidol and 20 mg/d diazepam to prevent further injury of the tongue, which was still severely injured.
We arranged an emergency operation to remove the necrotic tongue tissue; we used gauze instead of hard mouth openers, administered 6 mg/d trihexyphenidyl to prevent extrapyramidal reactions, and performed lumber puncture to rule out intracranial infection. After his subjective discomfort reduced, both tongue-biting and agitation subsided to some extent, and the patient became capable of describing important sensory experiences on day 3 (three days after the first admission). The tongue-biting seemed to have different features: sometimes it was unanticipated and severely injurious, often accompanied by bleeding and only temporarily relieved by sedative drugs. Other times, it was premonitory and temporary. When the patient felt pressure, tension, entanglement, or discomfort, he would utter a premonition of “I am going to bite, it is coming." He could not completely control the tongue-biting but stopped automatically after obtaining satisfaction and comfort. Compulsive and autistic characteristics were also observed: a feeling of “not just right” appeared when his mobile phone was not fully charged, or a bunch of grapes were not fully eaten; he felt immense discomfort and needed to repeat tongue-biting from the beginning when the process was interrupted. He always wore black clothing in the same style, spoke in a flat tone, and asked others to respond with specific words in a particular posture. There was no history of growth retardation, encephalitis, or poor concentration level compared with that of his peers.
The laboratory results concerning blood cell count, red blood cell morphology, liver and kidney function, electrolytes, blood lipids, lactic acid, ceruloplasmin, anti-streptolysin-O (ASO), CSF protein level and white cell count, TORCH pathogens (Toxoplasma gondii, rubella virus, cytomegalovirus, and herpes simplex virus) and findings of electroencephalogram (EEG), electrocardiogram, and brain MRI were all normal.
Before the results of CSF antibodies tests came out, we treated his tongue-biting behaviour as a new manifestation of TS; we employed the Yale Global Tic Severity Scale to assess the severity of tic symptoms , the Premonitory Urge for Tics Scale to assess the characteristics of premonitory urges (PU) , the Children's Yale-Brown Obsessive–Compulsive Scale to assess obsessive–compulsive symptoms , and the modified Rankin Scale to assess neurological function . The patient scored 42 and 4 in the Autistic Behavior Checklist (ABC) and Swanson, Nolan, and Pelham Parent Rating Scale (SNAP-IV) respectively, which were unable to diagnose autism spectrum disorder and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. His attention level was better than 5–15% of the population in the Integrated Visual and Auditory Continuous Performance Test (IVA-CPT). His intelligence quotient (IQ) score was 85, better than 20% of the population in the Raven’s Standard Progressive Matrices (SPM). He scored 87–93, lower than the average level in the visual and verbal memory subscales of Children’s Memory Scale (CMS). He was prescribed 6 mg/d risperidone for 5 days, which was adjusted to 6 mg/d risperidone and 10 mg/d olanzapine for the following 5 days, and finally to 6 mg/d risperidone and 10 mg/d aripiprazole due to insensitivity to D2R antagonists. We concurrently prescribed 200 mg/d sertraline to improve the patient’s obsessive–compulsive symptoms. However, unanticipated tongue-biting with bleeding was still frequent on day 12. TS patients with refractory tics and severe self-injury can be treated with deep brain stimulation , but the patient’s age precludes this option. On day 12, the D2R antibody titre detected by cell-based assays in the serum sample showed a ratio of 1:32, while the CSF sample showed negative findings . The other 15 different autoimmune encephalitis antibodies, including anti-NMDAR and anti-CASPR, paraneoplastic antibodies and oligoclonal bands in both samples were negative. After consultation with senior neurologists, the patient was diagnosed with possible D2R encephalitis based on the clinical features of acute onset movement disorders and D2R antagonist insensitivity. With parental consent, he was administered immunotherapy (1000 mg/d methylprednisolone for 5 days) to control the tongue-biting as soon as possible. Consequently, the frequency of tongue-biting decreased significantly by day 20, and he was administered 50 mg/d prednisone to continue immunotherapy after discharge.
The patient was followed up by telephone or face-to-face meetings every two weeks after discharge . It is worth mentioning that there were two incidences of recurrence with different clinical features. Unanticipated tongue-biting and bleeding reoccurred on follow-up day 42 (62 days after the first admission) when the dosage of prednisone was reduced to 30–40 mg/d. The frequency of PU and ability of voluntary suppression decreased sharply. The follow-up D2R antibody titres in the serum and CSF sample were 1:100 and 1:1, respectively . MRI and ASO were also normal, and video EEG lacked evidence to support a diagnosis of epilepsy. Definite D2R encephalitis was then diagnosed, and tongue-biting decreased after another round of immunotherapy (1000 mg/d methylprednisolone for 5 days) by follow-up day 56. However, premonitory tongue-biting became frequent with the intensity of PU and obsessive–compulsive symptoms increasing significantly on follow-up day 70. During this period, sertraline, risperidone, and aripiprazole were discontinued for more than 2 weeks. The tongue-biting did not improve much after these drugs were re-administered. D2R antibody titre (in serum and CSF), MRI, ASO, and video EEG were re-examined and yielded negative results. The improvement in tongue-biting was unsatisfactory at follow-up day 84 after immunotherapy (22.5 g/d immunoglobulin for 5 days and 1000 mg/d methylprednisolone for 3 days). Considering the characteristic PU and compulsive symptoms, the psychotropics were adjusted to 20 mg/d aripiprazole, 200 mg/d fluvoxamine, and 1.5 mg/d lorazepam (dosage gradually increased within a week). Although we cannot completely rule out effects of immunotherapy after discharge, the remission of tongue-biting was closely related to the increased dosage of psychotropics according to the parents’ observation at follow-up day 98. The cognitive function also recovered at the ending of follow-up, with the attention level better than 45–55% of the population, IQ score elevating to 92 and memory scores elevating to 98–103.
The patient was satisfied with the treatment that he had received and felt an improvement in his symptoms. His quality of life was almost unaffected by his symptoms at follow-up day 98. The patient and his parents have stated that they will not reduce or discontinue the psychotropics again without the psychiatrist’s approval—even if the tics become stable or fluctuate over a short period.