A 60-year-old male patient was admitted in the Emergency department of our Hospital with symptoms of abdominal pain with 2 weeks of evolution and progressive worsening and acute low gastrointestinal bleeding. The patient denied nausea, vomiting, fever and weight loss. He didn’t have personal history of medical or surgical diseases. The patient also didn’t have any history of familiar malignant disease.
On initial clinical observation the patient was haemodynamically stable. The examination of the abdomen revealed a palpable painless mass in the periumbilical region, left hypochondrium and left flank. There was evidence of low gastrointestinal bleeding (hematochezia). The initial haemoglobin value at admission was 133 g/dl. An emergency non-total colonoscopy showed no gastrointestinal lesions that could cause the bleeding. An Angio-CT was requested and showed a large exophytic mass arising apparently from the 4th duodenal segment and first jejunal segment with approximately 20 × 14 x 13 cm, with vascularization provided from branches from the upper mesenteric artery, with vascular dilatations inside the tumor and apparent intratumoral bleeding, without intraperitoneal bleeding .
The patient’s condition deteriorated, and he became haemodynamically instable, with new episode of low gastrointestinal bleeding (hematochezia). The haemoglobin value dropped to 8,6 g/dl, requiring fluid resuscitation and blood transfusion.
Due to haemodynamic instability the patient was submitted to emergency laparotomy, in witch a large tumor was found arising from the first jejunal segment (2 cm after duodenual-jejunal flexure) (e and ). A segmental enterectomy was performed, resecting the mass and adjacent jejunum and the 4th duodenal segment. A side-to-side manual anastomosis was performed between the 3rd duodenal segment and the jejunum .
The post-operative period ran without complications. The patient started oral feeding at the 7th post-operative day, after performing a gastrointestinal oral contrast study that confirmed the integrity of the anastomosis. The patient was discharged at the 11th post-operative day.
The histopathologic exam of the surgical specimen showed a gastro-intestinal stromal tumor of epithelioid cell nature, with low mitotic count (<5 per 50HPF), significant mucosal ulceration, high vascularization and tumoral necrosis. The imunohistochemical analysis revealed positivity for CD117 (c-kit) and DOG-1. The tumor was categorized as T4N0 stage IIIA. A mutation on c-KIT was found in exon 9. According to size, location and mitotic count, the tumor was categorized as high-risk GIST.
The patient was evaluated by Medical Oncology and started Imatinib therapy (400 mg per day). The follow-up continues, and the patient is free of disease recurrence for 3 years.