An 88-year-old man presented to the emergency room with a complaint of a skin color change in the right scrotal area for 1 d.
The patient had right scrotal pain and swelling for 1 wk before presenting with a red skin color change in the right scrotal area. The patient was initially administered oral fluoroquinolone (ciprofloxacin) in accordance with epididymitis for seven days, but the symptoms was aggravated, and skin color was changed from red to black with foul-smelling.
Seven years prior, the patient had visited the urology department for voiding dysfunction. The patient had a-blocker (silodosin 8 mg daily) and 5 alpha reductase inhibitor (finasteride once daily) for several years, but voiding symptom was aggravated. The total IPSS score was 26, and the Quality of Life (QoL) score was 5. On uroflowmetry, the maximal flow rate (Qmax) was 6.5 mL/sec, voiding volume was 182 mL, and residual urine volume was 258 mL. The prostate volume was 126 cc on transrectal ultrasonography. He was diagnosed with refractory to medical therapy for LUTS with BOO and we planned a TURP. However, he was not suited for surgery under general anesthesia because of a high (grade III) American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) score: History of non-ST elevated myocardial infarction (NSTEMI), cerebrovascular accident, and poor-controlled chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Also, the spinal anesthesia cannot be performed in this patient because of spinal stenosis as consultation of anesthesiologist. Therefore, we decided MIS under local anesthesia (intraurethral lidocaine injection before procedure and analgesic injection intravenously during procedure) and implanted a thermo-expandable urethral stent (Memokath 028) . Six months after surgery, the Qmax was 14.8 mL/sec and the residual urine volume was 85 mL. Thereafter, he did not visit our urology department. The patient had undergone a suprapubic cystostomy 4 years after the initial surgery at a local medical center nearby his hometown, because the prostatic stent was not working.
No relevant personal or family history was identified.
On physical examination, the patient’s blood pressure was 110/70 mmHg, heart rate was 90/min, body temperature was 36.0°C, and oxygen saturation was 96% in room air. The skin color change indicated necrosis and ranged from the right lower abdomen to the right scrotum . The left lower abdomen, left scrotum, and penis were normal. In digital rectal examination, the tenderness and heat of entire prostate was identified.
The levels of several serum inflammatory markers were elevated. The white blood cell count was 13.62 /uL, C-reactive protein level was 23.79 mg/dL, procalcitonin level was 7.12 ng/mL, serum lactate level was 3.5 mmol/L, serum creatinine level was 2.47 mg/dL, and serum glucose level was 133 mg/dL. In urine analysis, pyuria was identified (many/high power field) and Enterobactor cloacae was isolated in urine and blood culture . The antibiotics susceptibility of microorganisms was described in Table . The Fournier’s gangrene severity index value was seven points: serum potassium level was 5.5 (1 point), serum creatinine level was 2.47 (3 point), and serum bicarbonate level was 16.3 (3 point).
The abdominal-pelvic enhanced computed tomography revealed emphysematous changes and inflammatory infiltration in the right inguinal, suprapubic, scrotal, and perineal regions . In addition, the prostatic urethral stent was observed in the enlarged prostate . There was no abscess formation or emphysematous change in prostate and urethra.