A 74-year-old Chinese woman consulted her local physician about she has a history of perianal pruritus and hematochezia for nearly a month. So she was admitted to our hospital for investigations and treatment. At physical examination, eczematous plaque with white scaling and ulcerations was found on the left side of the anus, which measured about 5 × 3 cm. On digital rectal examination, a hard tumor was palpable on the left anterior wall of the anal canal, which measured about 1 cm in radius. Prior to this presentation, she did not have history of acute appendicitis. No lymph node metastasis or remote metastatic lesions were found on the computed tomography scan. Laboratory tests showed almost all of the tumor markers were normal and colonoscopic examination did not show any abnormalities. Subsequently, histological examination of biopsies was performed on the perianal skin and anal canal. The diagnosis of GCA in the anal canal with perianal Paget disease was made. About a week later, Miles’ operation with lymph node dissection was performed. After the surgery, several chemotherapy regimens were given and the patient was stable for 24 months.
The tissue was fixed in formalin, embedded in paraffin and 4 um thin sections were cut and stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Immunohistochemical staining was performed using commercially available antibodies to the following antigens: synaptophysin (Syn), CD56, chromogranin A, CDX2, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), Villin, CK 20, epithelial membrane antigen, CK7, GCDFP-15, S100, HMB45, P63, and Ki-67. All the protocols were employed according to the manufacturers’ recommendations .
Histological examination of the anal canal revealed an invasive lesion in submucosal and muscular layer, which mainly in the anal canal but focally invading the lower rectum . The tumor was composed of signet-ring-like cells on confluent growth model and copious mucin was produced as well . Focally, the vessel invasion was found as well . Peripheral to the normal anal glands, we found individual adenocarcinoma in situ . Unfortunately, the transition between the confluent nest of signet-ring-like cells and Paget disease in the epidermis was not found. Simultaneously, the results of immunohistochemistry showed signet-ring-like cells were positive for Syn, CD56, CDX2, CEA, Villin, and cytokeratin (CK) 20 . However, Negative staining for chromogranin A was shown . The Ki67-labeling index reached 40% in the most concentrated spot . Therefore, we made a diagnosis of GCA in this patient.
Meanwhile, on the lesion of perianal Paget disease, the result showed isolated/small groups of atypical neoplastic cells were present in the epidermis without dermal invasion . The cells showed pale clear cytoplasm and large hyperchromatic nuclei . Focally, the hair follicle was involved by the tumor cells . Immunohistochemically, the neoplastic cells were positive for CK20, CDX2 and epithelial membrane antigen but negative for CK7, GCDFP15, S100, HMB45, and P63 . The Ki67-labeling index reached 60% in the most concentrated spot . Therefore, we made a diagnosis of Paget disease in this patient.