A 64-year-old Caucasian woman experiencing diarrhea, nausea, early satiety and discomfort in the upper abdominal region was referred for a gastroenterologist consultation by her pulmonologist.
The patient was diagnosed with poorly differentiated metastatic non-small cell lung carcinoma (G3) (T2aN1M1a) in 2018. She received chemotherapy with carboplatin, paclitaxel, and bevacizumab. After the initial good response, the oncological disease relapsed in 2019, and treatment with nivolumab was started. At first, the patient tolerated immunotherapy well, but after the seventh course of nivolumab, the patient was diagnosed with diabetes possibly caused by immunotherapy-associated beta cell destruction. Diabetes was managed with insulin therapy. In December 2020, after 64 courses of nivolumab therapy, the patient started experiencing diarrhea, nausea without vomiting, early satiety and upper abdominal discomfort. In February 2021, after performing an esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) with biopsy, the patient was diagnosed with ICI-induced gastritis. Initial omeprazole treatment was effective and well tolerated, and thus continued. During the following years, several EGDs with biopsies and abdominal computed tomography (CT) scans were performed to evaluate the endoscopic, pathohistological, and radiological response to treatment and the natural course of the disease. The course of the disease and its treatment are presented in Table .
The patient denied any other chronic diseases or the concomitant use of other medications. She underwent conization of the cervix and tonsillectomy.
The patient denied allergy to food or drugs. She developed a rash after the first course of chemotherapy. Her family history was insignificant.
The patient was slightly underweight (body mass index 18.22 kg/m2). No other significant changes were detected.
No remarkable abnormalities were observed in the patient’s recent blood laboratory examination results.
To evaluate the possible origin of symptoms related to upper gastrointestinal tract dysfunction, an EGD with multiple biopsies was performed. Colonoscopy was not performed due to typical upper gastrointestinal symptoms. Tumour-like endoscopic changes in the stomach were found. The stomach mucosa was covered with whitish plaques throughout the entire stomach, affecting the course of the gastric folds in the upper curve. However, following air insufflation, the folds were almost completely smoothed out. In the pre-papillary region, the mucosa was thicker . An infiltrating stomach neoplasm was suspected; therefore, an abdominal CT scan was performed. The scan revealed stomach changes related to chronic gastritis: the wall of the pyloric part of the stomach was evenly thickened, and edematous, the mucosa clearly differentiated, diffusely and more intensively accumulated contrast material, and clear masses were not differentiated. The stomach body wall was evenly stretched, not thickened .