An 81-year-old woman was hospitalized with a chief complaint of fever. She developed fever, headache, and vomiting 5 days prior to admission and was treated conservatively at a local hospital. Three days prior to admission, her fever symptoms recurred and were accompanied by several vomiting episodes, abdominal pain, and shortness of breath.
Consequently, the patient visited the emergency room of a local hospital and was misdiagnosed with cholecystitis, based on the results of abdominal computed tomography, and tenderness in her right upper quadrant on examination. She underwent laparoscopic cholecystectomy the next day and received antibiotic therapy; however, her fever persisted. Her guardian identified a mass-like lesion on the right side of her neck where an adhesive patch had been applied and notified the medical staff. Upon confirming the presence of a tick, the tick was removed (May 30). A single dose of 100 mg doxycycline was administered, and the patient (along with the tick) was transferred to the Chosun University Hospital in Gwangju City, Korea . On admission (May 30), physical examination indicated that the patient was febrile, with a blood pressure of 90/60 mmHg and body temperature of 37.8 °C. She looked acutely ill on inspection, and her pulse and respiratory rates were 131 beats/min and 22 breaths/min, respectively. Skin examination confirmed a tick bite lesion on the right side of the neck . Laboratory investigations further revealed the following findings: white blood cell count, 9,260/mm3 (91.6% polymorphonuclear leukocytes); hemoglobin level, 12.6 g/dL; platelet count, 24,000/mm3; aspartate aminotransferase level, 71.1 U/L; alanine aminotransferase level, 38.7 U/L; and creatine phosphokinase level, 255 U/L.
The patient indicated that she was a resident of a rural area and lived close to a cattle farm with approximately 100 cows; the farm was separated from her house by only a single wall. The patient had a vegetable garden at her home, where she spent a considerable amount of time working almost every day both in the morning and evening. During the medical history interview on admission, the patient reported that she first noted discomfort in her right side of neck on April 22, 2017, which was prior to the initial appearance of symptoms. When her husband was asked to inspect the area, he mentioned that it appeared to be a wart. At that time, she developed a papular lesion, accompanied by itching and persistent discomfort, for which she began applying adhesive patches on May 6, 2017.
We suspected that the patient was bitten by the tick at least 1 or 2 days prior to showing the site to her husband on April 22. A. phagocytophilum was identified from the patient specimen through polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Subsequently, the patient was treated with 100 mg doxycycline twice daily for 10 days. The patient showed improvement in the C-reactive protein level and pancytopenia, normalization of liver function test results, and symptom improvement with treatment. She was discharged accordingly.
The developmental stage and species of the tick were morphologically identified by microscopy, using standard taxonomic keys . After morphological identification, the tick was washed in 70% ethanol for 2–5 times, washed again in sterilized distilled water for 3 times, and dried by placing on a sterile filter paper. The tick was then placed in the MK28 hard tissue grinding tube (Bertin Technologies, Rockville, MD, USA), 600 μL of phosphate-buffered saline (10% fetal bovine serum, 5% penicillin/streptomycin) was added, and ground by using FastPrep®-24 Classic Instrument (MP Biomedicals, Solon, OH, USA). The genomic DNA of the tick was then extracted, using a G-spin Total DNA Extraction Kit (iNtRON Biotechnology, Seongnam, Korea), following the manufacturer’s protocol. Total RNA was isolated using the Viral Gene-spin™ Viral DNA/RNA Extraction Kit (iNtRON Biotechnology, Seongnam, Korea). For molecular biological identification of the tick, genomic DNA was subjected to the mitochondrial 16S rRNA gene-targeted PCR assay .
PCR was performed on the tick lysate and the patient’s blood to detect for vector-borne infectious pathogens. DNA was extracted from the patient’s initial blood specimen and from the tick, using the QIAamp Blood and Tissue Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany), following the manufacturer’s instructions . Anaplasma-specific ankA- and groEL-based nested PCRs (n-PCRs) were performed; the primers used for groEL were HS1/HS6 (for the first PCR) and HS43/HS45 (for the nPCR), while those for ankA were ANK-F1/ANK-R1 (for the first PCR) and ANK-F2/ANK-R2 (for the nPCR) [, ]. To detect Rickettsia spp., Rickettsia-specific ompA fragment was amplified using primers R190.70F/RR190.701R (for the first PCR) and R190.70F /RR190.602R (for the N-PCR) [, ]. For the detection of Borrelia spp., pyrG N-PCR was performed by amplifying the CTP synthase genes, using primers pyrG-1F/pyrG-1R (for the first PCR) and pyrG-2F/pyrG-2R (for the N-PCR) . The gene encoding the Orientia tsutsugamushi 56-kDa antigen was amplified using the designed primers 56BO-144F/56BO-1395R (for the first PCR) and 56BO-406F/56BO-1088R (for the N-PCR). To assess for severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome virus RNA, we performed reverse transcription PCR, as previously described . The genomic DNAs of A. phagocytophilum KZ_A3, Rickettsia conorii, Borrelia burgdorferi, and the O. tsutsugamushi Karp strain served as positive controls for Anaplasma-specific, Rickettsia-specific, Borrelia-specific and O. tsutsugamushi-specific targets, respectively. In each PCR run, the reaction mixture without template DNA served as the negative control. All primer sequences and PCR cycling conditions are shown in Table .
Positive PCR products from the patient’s blood and the tick were sequenced and aligned to the GenBank database to identify revealed bacterial agents at the species level and to compare our sequences with published sequences using BLAST analysis and ClustalW alignment .
DNA sequences were identified and analyzed using DNASTAR Lasergene v6 (DNASTAR, Madison, WI, USA). A phylogenetic tree was constructed by the neighbor-joining method using ClustalX version 2.0 , based on sequences of the amplified Anaplasma-specific groEL and ankA gene fragments from the specimen and from GenBank. A bootstrap analysis was performed using 1000 replicates to improve the confidence level of the phylogenetic tree.
A thick peripheral blood smear was examined for the presence of A. phagocytophilum in the neutrophils. A drop of the patient’s blood was smeared onto a glass slide, air-dried, and stained with Diff-Quik solution (Sysmex Corporation, Kobe, Japan), following the standard procedure. The smear was observed under a microscope at a magnification of 1000x.
For A. phagocytophilum culture and isolation, the human promyelocytic leukemia cell line HL-60 (KCLB-10240) was maintained in RPMI1640 medium (Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA USA), supplemented with 2% fetal bovine serum (Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA USA) and 2 mM L-glutamine at 37 °C and under 5% CO2 conditions. The buffy coat or tick lysate solution was inoculated into HL-60 cells. Infected cells were cultured under the same conditions as above, with regular medium changes (cell density of 1–5 × 105 cells/mL). They were then stained with Diff-Quik at 2–3-day intervals and were subsequently cytocentrifuged for microscopic examination.
An indirect immunofluorescence assay (IFA) was performed, following the standard procedure and/or manufacturer’s instructions (Fuller Laboratories, Fullerton, CA, USA) . In-house IFA commenced with antigen fixation of the heavily-infected HL-60 cells onto Teflon-coated slides with acetone. An anti-A. phagocytophilum serum (Fuller Laboratories, Fullerton, CA, USA) was then added to the antigen slides, and the slides were incubated in a humidity chamber at 37 °C for 30 min. DyLight 488-labeled goat anti-human IgG or IgM (Fuller Laboratories, Fullerton, CA, USA) was used as a secondary antibody under the same conditions. The antigen slides were counterstained with 0.005% Evans blue and mounted for fluorescence microscopy. Manufacturer’s slides containing infected HL-60 cells (Fuller Laboratories, Fullerton, CA, USA) and the human serum were used as positive and negative controls, respectively. For the serological diagnosis of scrub typhus, murine typhus, and Lyme disease, IgM and IgG antibodies against the standard O. tsutsugamushi antigen (Gilliam, Karp, Kato, and Boryong strains), Rickettsia typhi, and B. burgdorferi were assessed using in-house IFA .
To investigate A. phagocytophilum infection, the cytoplasmic area of occupied vacuoles was explored by electron microscopy at the ultrastructural level. The cultured cells were stained with Diff-Quik at 2–3-day intervals, cytocentrifuged to confirm the infection level, and then examined, using scanning and transmission electron microscopy (SEM and TEM, respectively).