A 71-year-old woman presented with severe headache of acute onset. Head computed tomography (CT) showed Grade I subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH, Fisher Grade 3) of the Hunt and Hess grading system. CT angiography revealed an aneurysm with a bleb in the right A1 segment. Three-dimensional (3D) CT image reconstruction revealed a segmental duplication of the distal one-third of the right A1 segment, associated with an irregular aneurysm and blebs.
Emergent endovascular coil embolization was performed for each of the aneurysms. A 7F guiding catheter (Guider Softip XF; Boston Scientific, Fremont, CA, USA) was introduced into the right proximal internal carotid artery under general anesthesia and systemic heparinization. Before the coil embolization, diagnostic digital subtraction angiography revealed two saccular aneurysms at the proximal junction of the fenestration and posterior aspect of the fenestration that appeared to be “kissing” each other. 3D image reconstruction revealed small bleb formation in each of the aneurysms. Because we could not determine which of the aneurysms was ruptured, we decided to treat each by coil embolization. During the endovascular procedure, we used 3D angiographic reconstruction to determine the appropriate working angle for separating the aneurysmal sac from the fenestration.
We used a support catheter (Cerulean G40; Medikit Co., Tokyo, Japan) to lead the microcatheter into the distal A1. A microcatheter (Excelsior SL-10; Boston Scientific) was placed within the posterior distal aneurysm. The aneurysmal sac and neck were successfully packed with several detachable coils. Then, we treated the proximal aneurysm at the proximal bifurcation of the fenestration using the same technique. Another microcatheter (Excelsior SL-10 Pre-shaped S; Boston Scientific) was selected for obtaining safe aneurysmal catheterization and adequate stability during the coil placement. Because the aneurysm had a wide neck above the bifurcation, we packed only the aneurysmal sac with a detachable bioactive coil (DELTAPAQ CERECYTE, Micrus Endovascular San Jose, CA, USA) to preserve both channels of the fenestrated A1. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged without any neurologic deficits.