A 60-year-old-male patient presented to the dermatology clinic due to a cutaneous lesion in the left iliac region. His history was insignificant and he had no family or genetic history of leiomyosarcoma. In present history, the lesion was itchy without any other symptoms and existed 20 years before the attendance. In the physical examination, we noted an ulcerative nodule with a 3 cm diameter, moveable with the skin and non-stick with the layer underneath (the muscles) .
Systemic investigations, including complete blood count (CBC), liver and renal function test, and blood sugar level were normal. With these clinical findings, Leishmania and squamous cell carcinoma were considered and a biopsy was required. An excisional biopsy was performed and sent to the pathology department, where one section measuring 3 × 9 × 9 was studied, Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) sections showed ulcerated epidermis. Interlacing fascicles of elongated spindle-shaped cells with blunt-ended (cigar-shaped) nuclei invading the dermis and parts of subcutaneous adipose tissue. The nuclei revealed variable pleomorphism & hyperchromasia with scattered atypical mitosis. All the deep and lateral surgical borders were free of malignancy . The section was also stained with (SMA) which is more sensitive to leiomyosarcoma and the result was positive . Negative immunohistochemical staining for S100 and CD34 ruled out malignancies of nervous and vascular origins, respectively [, ]. Chest, abdomen, and pelvis CT with contrast were performed to investigate metastasis and they was normal .
We referred the patient was referred to a senior surgeon to excise the nodule. The pathological examination and the surgical operation have taken place in Aleppo University Hospital. The lesion was eradicated with 3cm safety margins. The excision also included the major iliac muscle. Two localized transposition slides were made, after that, a drainage tube was put, and finally, it was closed by simple sutures . The surgery was successful; the patient received the usual postsurgical antibiotics, anti-inflammatories and painkillers. And had been covered with antibiotics, anti-inflammatories, and painkillers after it . The follow-up was twice a year in the first year and then once a year until now and no metastatic nor recurrence has been noted so far.
A general physical examination of the patient including the surgical site to monitor any changes after surgery was performed at each follow-up visit.