A solitary pulmonary nodule measuring 25 mm in diameter was found in the left lung of a 38-year-old female whose chest roentgenogram underwent preoperative assessment in January 2006 during preparation for a bilateral faucial tonsillectomy due to recurrent tonsillitis. The computer-assisted tomography (CT) of the chest showed two well-circumscribed nodules (approximately 25 and 5 mm in diameter, respectively) without apparent contrast enhancement in the lower, left lobe . In addition to the nodules, multiple thin-walled, irregularly shaped cysts were distributed predominantly on the basal and medial areas of the lungs . She was asymptomatic, and physical examinations found no abnormalities. She was an ex-smoker but to the very mild degree of 0.6 pack-year. However, her past medical history was remarkable. Vocal cord nodules were resected when she was 25-, 26-, and 27-years-old; three episodes of spontaneous pneumothorax (PTX) occurred at the ages of 26, 27, and 30 years (chest tube drainage for left PTX at 26-years-old, and operations were performed for a right PTX at 27- and for left PTX at 30-years-old). The resection of multiple uterine myomas followed when she reached 30 years of age, and the left-sided thyroid gland was extirpated to remove a well-differentiated papillary adenocarcinoma when she was 32-years-old. The family history taken from interviews with the patient and her mother was extraordinary in terms of PTX events and neoplasms . Her mother (III-2 in Fig. ) had experienced spontaneous PTX and renal cancer (no detailed information on histological type), and the maternal grandmother (II-2 in Fig. ) had undergone a spontaneous PTX. Fibrofollicuoma-like papules were noted on faces and necks of both the patient (IV-1 in Fig. ) and her mother, but were not mentioned for any other family members during their interviews. Later, we confirmed by CT of the chest that the mother had multiple pulmonary cysts with characteristic features similar to those of the index case.
For the patient described here, a CT-guided needle biopsy of the left pulmonary nodule (the larger nodule) was performed to determine a diagnosis. Pathological examination revealed that it was a clear cell carcinoma of undetermined origin. No clear cell carcinoma of the kidney was identified by magnetic resonance imaging. Ultrasonography of the thyroid gland showed no abnormalities. Subsequently, on February 28, 2006, a left lower lobectomy was performed. The left hilar lymph node was negative for metastasis, and no further resection of mediastinal lymph nodes was performed. Neither recurrence nor metastasis has been found since then or up to the writing of this case report in 2015.