A healthy 32-year-old female with no history of thrombosis or livedo reticularis was in good health until the last week of September 2017. At that time, she began to develop epigastric pain with tenderness that radiated to the lower abdominal region. Over the next 11 days the patient developed bilateral wrist and knee joint pain and stiffness, recurrent daily fevers, nausea and vomiting, profuse diaphoresis and a lacy rash throughout her body. The patient sought medical treatment and was admitted to a local hospital.
A physical examination on admission revealed a temperature of 39.2 °C, a pulse of 123, blood pressure of 129/81, respirations of 20 and oxygen saturation of 98 % on room air. Her skin was diffusely erythematous with a lacy rash. An abdominal examination revealed guarding and pain out of proportion to light palpation in all quadrants, with this being most pronounced in the epigastric region.
Laboratory studies performed on admission showed a white blood cell count of 6.3/mm³. Hematocrit and haemoglobin were 11.2 g/dL and 33%, respectively. ESR was 8 mm/h−
1 and CRP was 1.7 mg/dL. Liver function studies revealed an elevated aspartate aminotransferase of 446 (normal: 14–36 units/L), elevated alanine aminotransferase of 839 (normal: 9–52 units/L), elevated lactate of 2.6 (normal: 0.5–2 mmol/L) and total bilirubin of 0.9 mg/dL.
A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis revealed hepatosplenomegaly, multiple wedge-shaped anterior and posterior splenic infarcts coursing from the lateral aspect of the capsule to the splenic hilar region , and moderate thickening of the descending and transverse colonic wall, suggestive of colitis. A pelvic ultrasound revealed moderate free fluid. A CT angiogram revealed no vasculitis or vascular insufficiency. A transesophageal echocardiogram revealed no vegetations or valvular insufficiency. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain was performed because of waxing/waning mental status; the results were unremarkable.
The work-up for hypercoagulability revealed a positive lupus anticoagulant with a partial thromboplastin time of 35.8 (normal: 25–35 s) and a PTT/LA mixing study time of 52 (normal: <40 s); a thromboplastin time of 11.5 (normal 10–12 s) , an antithrombin III level of 126 (normal: 80–120 %), a protein C level of 121 (normal: 70–180 %) and a protein S level of 29 (normal: 60–140 %). A number of tests were performed to detect APS antibodies: lupus anticoagulant (11.4; normal, <11.5 seconds), beta 2 glycoprotein I Ab IgG/A/M (9; normal, <20), anticardiolipin antibody IgG (<14; normal, <14); anticardiolipin IgM (>150; normal, <12) IgA (<11; normal, <11). There was also positive detection of anti-phosphotidyl serine (APSA) IgM. A formal haematology consultation was requested. Their documented conclusion was that positive anticardiolipin IgM and lupus anticoagulant with splenic infarcts could point to a diagnosis of antiphospholipid antibody syndrome justifying anti-coagulation therapy, but would require follow-up positive APS antibody testing for confirmation. Follow-up testing for ACA and APSA antibodies remained positive up to 7 months following the initial presentation and after anti-coagulation therapy was completed (see ).
Blood and urine cultures were performed to determine the aetiology of the fever of unknown origin, and the results were negative. The infectious serologies and DNA tests for multiple viral infections were negative for the presence of HIV, hepatitis A, hepatitis B, hepatitis C and Epstein–Barr virus. The serology for other infections, including malaria, Lyme, Ehrlichiosis, Q fever, , West Nile, , Histoplasma and Aspergillus, was also negative. Serological tests for rheumatological conditions, including ANA, anti-SS-A/SS-B, actin smooth muscle Ab, SM/RNP Ab and anti-CCP, were also negative. However, testing revealed the presence of a primary infection of CMV (which could have been due to either endogenous reactivation or exogenous reinfection): the CMV IgM titre was 240 AU ml−1, IgG was positive and CMV DNA was 1598 IU ml−1 during the first week of admission .
Initially, the patient had been treated for suspected Lyme, ehrlichiosis and babesiosis infection with doxycycline and ceftriaxone, with vancomycin being started on day two of admission. Vancomycin was discontinued due to red man syndrome, at which point a rapid response was initiated and the patient was given IV benadryl, which ameliorated the episode. After a CT scan of the abdomen showed evidence for multiple splenic infarcts, coagulation studies confirmed the presence of antiphospholipid antibodies and prophylactic IV heparin was initiated, followed by lovenox at discharge. The patient was discharged 11 days after admission in fair condition. Several months after discharge, the patient had multiple near-syncopal episodes with tachycardia, orthostatic hypotension and diaphoresis. A tilt table test was performed, which confirmed the diagnosis of postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS). The patient was treated with ivabradine, which provided no relief and exacerbated her symptoms. Treatment with compression stockings and sodium chloride 1 g tablets provided moderate, sporadic relief. Episodes of POTS continue to trouble the patient, although they have decreased in frequency. Five months after discharge, CMV DNA became undetectable and the titres of IgM and IgG came down, suggesting resolution of the primary infection . The patient discontinued lovenox shortly thereafter. The patient continues to be free of symptoms of hypercoagulability, while intermittent episodes of livedo reticularis persist.