A 68-year-old man presented with severe spontaneous pain in the affected upper limb with a feeling of electricity running through it.
The patient was in a car accident 8 years ago, which had resulted in complete damage to his right brachial plexus. Right after the car accident, he began to experience severe spontaneous pain in the affected upper limb with a feeling of electricity running through it. After the injury, the patient was admitted to a recovery-phase rehabilitation ward for 6 mo and received daily occupational and physical therapy. After discharge from the hospital, the patient returned to community life while receiving weekly occupational and physical therapy at a rehabilitation hospital. After about 1 year of hospital rehabilitation, the patient began receiving twice-weekly group rehabilitation at a seniors’ day care facility.
The patient had retired from work after the injury. Based on the description of his daily life during initial assessment, he utilized day care services for seniors twice a week in the morning and took a walk around the neighborhood on days when the day care service was not available. He spent most of his afternoons at home, often in front of the television, or pruning his garden plants and doing laundry. He had a strong desire to do more despite his pain, saying, “If only I could get rid of this pain, I could do more things”.
The patient gave written consent after being informed of the study procedure. The experimental protocol was approved by the Kio University Ethics Committee (approval number: H30-31).
From the car accident 8 years ago to the present, there were no illnesses that caused any problems.
The patient had no significant past history or family history.
He has continued to take pain medication regularly, in the morning and evening, to this day. The sensory-motor function of the affected upper limb had not changed significantly since the time of the injury; he had flaccid motor function with complete paralysis and a severely dulled sensory function. Tactile stimuli to the right shoulder, elbow, and fingers extremities were faintly perceptible but worsening of spontaneous pain with tactile stimuli was observed.
No abnormalities were found in the blood and urine tests.
The significance of the ADL for the patient, his pain characteristics, and psychological status were assessed beforehand. The pain circadian rhythms and physical activity during the day were also evaluated. All prior assessments were performed using questionnaires, which the patient was asked to answer on the spot.
The patient was asked to select five activities that he often did in his daily life, and to rate the importance of these activities on a scale of 0-10 (0: not important, 10: very important).
The NP diagnostic questionnaire (DN4) was used to determine NP, the Short-Form McGill Pain Questionnaire 2 (SFMPQ2) was used as a multidimensional assessment of pain intensity, and the NP symptom inventory (NPSI) was used to assess the severity of NP. Psychological states were assessed using the Hospital Anxiety and Depressions Scale (HADS) for depression and anxiety, and the pain catastrophizing scale (PCS-4) for pain catastrophizing thoughts.
DN4: DN4 is an evaluation scale developed to classify NP and non-NP. It consists of 10 questions related to NP (e.g., “Do you have a burning pain?” “Do you have pain like an electric shock?”). If four or more items are applicable, the pain is judged as NP.
SFMPQ2: SFMPQ2 consists of 22 questions and can be categorized into four sub-items: Continuous pain, intermittent pain, affective descriptors, and NP. Each item was answered on a numerical rating scale of 11 points, and higher the score, more severe was the pain experienced.
NPSI: The NPSI is a 10-item questionnaire related to NP (e.g., “Do you have burning spontaneous pain?”) (“Do you have attacks of pain, like a knife stabbing?”). It can be classified into the following sub-items: Spontaneous pain, attacks of pain, provoked pain, and abnormal sensations. These symptoms were self-evaluated by the patient on an 11-point numeric rating scale by selecting the number that best described the average pain he had experienced within the last 24 h (range, 0 to 10, where 10 indicates maximum pain). The higher the total score, greater the severity of the symptoms of NP.
HADS: HADS contains 14 items and two subscales. The two subscales independently assess depression and anxiety. Higher scores indicate more severe anxiety and depression.
PCS-4: PCS-4 is a shorter version of the 13-item PCS and contains four items. Higher scores indicate more severe catastrophic thinking.
The pain circadian rhythm was assessed over seven days. Pain intensity was measured at six time points per day (waking up, 9:00, 12:00, 15:00, 18:00, and 21:00 h) using a 10-cm visual analogue scale (VAS), written on paper. The assessment was done by the patient himself and in case of difficulty in conforming to the time of measurement, he was asked to complete the assessment in the range of one hour before and after of the scheduled time (e.g., if it was difficult to perform the assessment at 15:00 h, he was asked to do it between14:00 and 16:00 h).
An active style Pro HJA-750C activity monitor (OMRON, Kyoto, Japan) was used to assess the amount of physical activity during the day, and the patient was instructed to wear the device on his waist from the time of waking up to bedtime. The physical activity meter recorded the events every 10 s, and the composite acceleration was calculated from the vertical, longitudinal, and lateral accelerations by means of its 3-axis accelerometer. In order to separate walking from daily living activities, high-pass filtering at 0.7 Hz was used to calculate the ratio of the synthetic accelerations before and after the filtering, and walking and living activities were distinguished based on the synthetic accelerations calculated at 10-second intervals. The intensity of each activity was estimated in metabolic equivalents (METs)[,]. In the present study, we calculated the sedentary activity (SA) of less than 1.5 METs (e.g., watching TV or reading in the supine or seated position) and light-intensity physical activity (LIPA) 1.5-3.0 METs (e.g., standing and standing activities, such as housework and walking) within the wearing time. There were no missing data due to failing to wear the device during the survey period.
Pain characteristics and psychological status: The results of the questionnaire assessment revealed a DN4 score of 6, which exceeded the criterion for determining NP. The SFMPQ2 recorded a total value of 46 (subscale scores: continuous pain, 14/60; intermittent pain, 16/60; NP, 16/60; affective descriptors, 0/40). The NPSI showed moderate NP with a total value of 43 (subscale scores: spontaneous pain 17/30; attacks of pain 10/20; provoked pain 10/30; abnormal sensations 6/20). The HADS score was 9/21 for depression, 6/21 for anxiety, and 12/16 for PCS-4.
Importance of daily life activities: In the assessment of the importance of ADL, walking and day care services for seniors, which are mainly performed in the morning, was very important to the patient, who commented positively, “I feel less pain when I am moving.” In terms of afternoon activities, he commented, "I have no choice but to go because the pain bothers me if I sit still" .
Pain circadian rhythm and physical activity: Figures and show the results of early assessment of the pain circadian rhythm. In terms of all observation points, there was little difference between days, at particular times of the day, and the VAS was consistently the highest on waking . In the 7-d average pain circadian rhythm, the VAS score decreased to a minimum value at 12:00 h, but then tended to worsen again over time .
Figure shows the results of early assessment of physical activity. The average physical activity during the 7 d, as described by the patient, involved marked LIPA in the morning, but afternoon onward, the LIPA decreased and SA increased. Furthermore, we classified the days on which the activity time was lower (4 d) and higher (3 d) than the 7-d average of LIPA, and confirmed the LIPA time and the pain circadian rhythm for each time period . On days with a longer LIPA duration, more time was spent in LIPA in the afternoon than on days with a shorter LIPA duration, and the VAS scores after 12:00 h were lower on days with a longer LIPA duration than on days with a shorter LIPA duration.