A 47-year old Caucasian man with history of depression and remote polysubstance abuse presented to his primary care physician with two months of cough, dyspnea, and asthenia. Chest radiography demonstrated patchy, diffuse interstitial infiltrates. Chest computed tomography (CT) disclosed diffuse lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, and bilateral bronchiectatic changes . Body positron emission tomography (PET)/CT showed diffuse, hypermetabolic (mild-moderate 18 F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake) lymphadenopathy without other evidence of malignancy. The initial differential diagnosis included atypical respiratory infection, granulomatous disease, and lymphoproliferative disorder. He underwent bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage, with negative staining for acid-fast bacilli, no malignant cells on cytology, and no growth in bacterial and fungal cultures. Transbronchial lung biopsy revealed non-specific chronic inflammation, and fine needle aspirate of a left neck lymph node was non-diagnostic. A repeat bronchoscopic evaluation nine months later was similarly unrevealing. Serum protein electrophoresis showed no evidence of monoclonal gammopathy, and angiotensin-converting enzyme levels were within normal limits. Serum inflammatory markers were elevated (erythrocyte sedimentation rate 111 mm/hr, C-reactive protein 7.28 mg/dL), but an extensive biochemical evaluation for infectious etiologies, including HIV, tuberculosis, coccidioidomycosis, aspergillosis, cryptococcosis, blastomycosis, and histoplasmosis, was negative. Due to an elevated Strongyloides IgG antibody titer, he was treated with ivermectin but had no improvement in his symptoms.
While this workup was in progress, the patient described progressive memory difficulty and recurrent, stereotyped spells involving perception of an unpleasant odor followed by nausea and dizziness. The spells lasted about one minute, occurred up to seven times per day, and coincided with episodic confusion noticed by his girlfriend. A routine electroencephalogram (EEG) was normal, and the patient was treated empirically with levetiracetam without benefit.
His neurological exam was notable for short-term memory impairment (1 out of 3 object recall after 5-minute delay) and hyporeflexia with length-dependent sensory loss in the lower extremities. Routine bloodwork revealed hyponatremia, with serum sodium of 131 mmol/L. Lumbar puncture was performed, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis revealed glucose 55 mg/dL, total protein 33 mg/dL, and 12/mm3 white blood cells (88% lymphocytes, 11% monocytes) and 15/mm3 red blood cells. CSF cytology was negative. Gadolinium-enhanced brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at 3.0 Tesla was normal. Video-EEG monitoring performed over two days captured twelve electrographic seizures—most were subclinical but some had associated dyscognitive features—with ictal onset over the left temporal region . Electrographic features of the seizures, including early emergence of rhythmic theta- and alpha-range frequencies, suggested mesial temporal origin. Levetiracetam was substituted with divalproex, which led to complete resolution of the patient’s seizures based both on his report and on repeat video-EEG monitoring one month later. His cognitive deficits also improved subjectively, though formal neuropsychological testing was not pursued.
The constellation of subacute encephalopathy, temporal lobe seizures, and mild lymphocytic CSF pleocytosis raised the possibility of autoimmune encephalitis. Serological analysis revealed elevated voltage-gated potassium channel (VGKC) antibodies (850 pmol/L; Athena Diagnostics, reference range 31–88 pmol/L). Testing for N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor and glutamic acid decarboxylase antibodies was negative. VGKC antibodies can be associated with underlying neoplastic disease, and, to further evaluate this possibility, excisional biopsy of a level V lymph node in the right neck was performed.
Histologic sections revealed lymph nodes with variable sized follicles, some with atrophic germinal centers . Germinal centers with penetrating vessels were present, conferring a “lollipop” appearance . Mantle zone lymphocytes were arranged in concentric rings (“onion-skinning”). The interfollicular areas and medulla were expanded by large sheets of mature plasma cells. No granulomas were seen. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated the presence of polytypic plasma cells. Flow cytometry provided no evidence for a clonal lymphocyte population or aberrant antigen expression. IL-6 concentration in undiluted serum was 7.12 pg/mL (reference range 0.31-5.00 pg/mL) but the level was 174.08 pg/mL when tested in serial dilutions, suggesting prozone effect. Taken together, these results were most consistent with MCD, plasma cell variant. Of note, HHV8 staining of lymphoid tissue and serum HHV8 immunofluorescence assay were both negative. Repeat HIV antibody testing was also negative.
The patient was treated with two four-week cycles of weekly rituximab infusions followed by maintenance rituximab infusions every two months for a planned two-year course. Antiepileptic drug therapy with divalproex was continued with some dose adjustment required for breakthrough seizures. Serum IL-6 levels were not monitored to track response to therapy, but serial PET scans have shown decreased size and FDG-avidity of diffuse lymphadenopathy without complete resolution. A repeat VGKC antibody titer six months after initiation of rituximab was lower but remained elevated at 656 pmol/L. At last follow-up, the patient’s cough was persistent, now being managed with prednisone, but the constitutional symptoms that led to initial presentation had resolved.