A 92-year-old woman presented to the surgery department complaining of ruptured bleeding and pain in a right frontal mass for two weeks.
Symptoms started two weeks before presentation with ruptured bleeding and pain in a right frontal mass.
The patient had hypertension for more than seven years and had taken amlodipine besylate tablets for a long time. The patient's self-reported blood pressure control was satisfactory. The patient had a right frontal mass one year ago, which was about the size of a grain of rice, with no obvious cause. Because it did not adversely affect her, she did not pay attention to it, and the lump gradually increased in size. The tumor increased significantly in the recent five months to about 4 cm × 5 cm in size.
The patient denied any family history of skin cancer.
On physical examination, the vital signs were as follows: Body temperature, 37.1℃; blood pressure, 148/54 mmHg; heart rate, 63 beats per min; and respiratory rate, 20 breaths per min. A ruptured mass, with a diameter of 4 cm, was found on the right forehead. There was no discharge of pus or significant bleeding.
Routine blood levels were normal (red blood cell count, 3.49 × 1012 PCS/L; hemoglobin, 106 g/L; mean platelet volume, 10.7 fL; and platelet volume distribution width, 12.1%). Serum hormone levels were also normal (total triiodothyronine, 0.76 ng/mL; thyrotropin, 7.35 μIU/L). Urinalysis findings were normal (hematuria, +; leukocyte esterase, ++; white blood cell count, +).
Computed tomography examination of the lungs revealed calcified nodules in the lower lobe of the left lung and a calcified aortic wall. B-ultrasound examination revealed multiple calcifications of the liver, gallstones, and cysts in both kidneys.
The mass appeared to be deep and subcutaneous fat layer. During surgery, the base of the mass and the surrounding skin were completely excised along a circumference of 2 cm. A pathological examination of the right frontal mass confirmed the diagnosis of highly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). Rapid pathologic examination showed that the operative margin was negative.