A 63-year-old male patient, with a history of dyslipidemia, Barret’s esophagus, and a former smoker, consulted for a 15-day history of precordial oppression, irradiated to the neck and upper left limb. It was described as moderate to severe in intensity, exacerbated by physical activity, and relieved with pain. An exertion test was requested on an outpatient basis which had a positive result for myocardial ischemia since the patient presented with precordial pain of maximum intensity. Vital signs at admission: Blood pressure 120/70 mmHg, heart rate 100 beats per minute, respiratory rate 12 breaths per minute, SO2 97%, temperature 37 degrees Celsius. On physical examination, there was no jugular engorgement or neck masses, the heart was rhythmic without murmurs or gallops, respiratory sounds were normal, he had no abdominal masses, lower limb edema, or neurological deficit. Given the findings in the stress test, the patient was taken to cardiac catheterization plus angioplasty due to trunk disease associated with the compromise of three major vessels. A multidisciplinary board determined he was a candidate for myocardial revascularization; during the pre-surgical evaluation, a mass in the left inferior pulmonary lobe was found. The patient was taken to revascularization without complications. Subsequently, further studies were performed to stratify the lung mass, considering the patient was a good candidate for surgical resection. He was then taken to left lower lobectomy by thoracoscopy with mediastinal lymph node emptying. The histopathological diagnosis yielded a primary pulmonary adenocarcinoma, T2aN2M0, stage IIIA. He received chemotherapy and adjuvant radiation therapy with good evolution. After completing the oncho-specific therapy, a PET-CT was performed, where a metabolically active lesion was detected at the left perihilar level and para-aortic area with a Standardized Uptake Value (SUV) of 3.5, plus diffuse pulmonary basal opacities which could be secondary to radiotherapy . Within the extension workup for the suspicious lesions, he underwent an EBUS-TBNA, taking a sample from both the left hilar area and the stump adjacent to the prior left inferior lobectomy . In liquid-based cytology with the pap smear and the cell block with the H&E stain, rounded structures were observed, without a double-wall, corresponding to damaged red blood cells (RBC). Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS), Gomori Methenamine-Silver (GMS), and mucicarmine staining were negative but trichromic staining was positive. Immunohistochemical stains were performed on the paraffinized tissue of the cell block using the automated DAKO auto-stainer Link and Ventana® platform, which were negative for malignancy. Finally, the observed spherules showed reactivity to glycophorin, concluding that both the morphologic pattern and the expression profile corresponded to a myospherulosis . No further management was recommended, and the patient continues to be monitored periodically by the oncology group without evidence of recurrence of the disease.