In July 2010, a 43-year-old woman presented to our clinic with a 1-year history of vestibular symptoms, progressive ataxia, postural instability and recurrent falls, which started after sustaining a shock when falling on the kerb while preparing a cigarette. She noted then that her “stomach muscles just did not do what they were supposed to” to maintain her posture. Her medical history included a diagnosis of anxiety–depression a decade prior, but she was no longer on medication. She did not have any family history of neurological or psychiatric disorder. She reported a depressed mood, increasing irritability, personality change with uncontrollable anger and disinhibition with coprolalia, and cognitive decline. Her uncle noted significant short-term and working memory problems, a reduced span of attention and a reduced capacity for the higher-level organization of her affairs, mainly financial matters.
Neurological examination revealed a dystonic gait, with dystonia more noticeable in the lower than upper limbs. She also had diffuse hyperreflexia, dysmetria, and bilateral non-habituating palmomental and pollicomental reflexes. On neurocognitive examination, she scored 27.5/30 on the Mini-Mental State Examination and 89.5/100 on the Neuropsychiatry Unit Cognitive Assessment Tool (NUCOG). Of note, her scores on most domains other than language (attention, memory, executive function and spatial function) were about 0.5 standard deviation below the mean—lower than what would be expected given her educational background of higher school certification. Notably, she was unable to recall three items, but recalled all with a categorical prompt, suggesting a more frontal-executive origin to her memory difficulties. The formal neuropsychological assessment indicated marked impairments in processing speed, working memory, delayed recall and executive function. Her memory difficulties were secondarily affected by her executive dysfunction, whereby she had retrieval difficulties which were aided by prompting. Her blood investigations, including full blood count, renal panel, liver function test and thyroid function test were normal. Her hormonal assays were unremarkable. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of her brain revealed diffuse white matter abnormality (Panel A) with rarefaction and cystic degeneration replaced by fluid (Panel B), and a radiating stripe-like pattern indicative of residual tissue strands (Panel C) involving anterior and posterior areas. However, the grey matter was preserved. Genetic testing was done, and she tested positive for a homozygous mutation in the EIF2B5 gene. Given the classical neuroimaging and genetic findings, she was diagnosed with vanishing white matter disease (VWMD).
With no definitive treatment, the patient deteriorated physically, necessitating nursing home care 3 years after the initial onset of symptoms. According to her uncle whom we contacted in late 2018, she continued to remain in the nursing home, but her condition was stable.