A 57-year-old female patient was admitted for generalized pain in the lower extremities with mild left-sided distal paresis of the left leg and paraesthesia of the left lower leg and foot progressing for 2 months. Spinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an intraspinal mass in the region of the lower thoracic spine at the level of the T12 vertebrae. It was hyperintense on gadolinium enhanced T1-weighted images and inhomogenous and hypointensive on T2-weighted images . A subsequent MRI scan of the brain and entire spine revealed no other suspect lesions. Due to increasing pain, rapid resection was planned for suspected tumor.
Intraoperatively, an intradural, black, soft, and hypervascularized neoplasm was encountered which diffusely invaded the dura. Instantaneous surgical section of the tumor confirmed a malignant melanoma. Due to diffuse tumoral infiltration and probable severe postoperative deficits the tumor was incompletely removed with decompression of the neurologic structures . The macroscopic aspect of the lesion was that of a malignant pigmented tumor. Histological examination showed spinal cord tissue with an invading black tumor consisting of tight clusters of tumor cells. The cells were polygonal to spindle shaped with intracytoplasmic brown pigment. Nuclear pleomorphism and mitoses were visible. Immunohistochemistry showed S-100 and HMB45 immunopositivity in tumor cells. They were positive for Melan-A with a mib-labeling index ranging from 5% to 10%. illustrates histopathology and immunohistochemistry of the investigated tumor. Pyrosequencing of tumor DNA detected no BRAF V600E mutation.
The postoperative phase was uneventful and the neurological state of the patient was unchanged. Parallel to further diagnostics and two weeks after the operation, adjuvant radiotherapy was initiated. With three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy (3D-CRT) we employed a total of 40 Gray in 16 fractions in the area of T11 to L1 vertebrae with no acute toxicity except for mild nausea.
Possible primary melanoma sites and distant melanoma metastases were excluded by computed tomography (CT) scans of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis, esophagogastroduodenoscopy, coloscopy, bone scan, and dermatological, ophthalmological, and gynaecological examination. S-100 was not elevated in the serum. Finally, the diagnosis of primary intradural extramedullary spinal malignant melanoma was established. In the course of the gynaecological examination an early stage invasive ductal breast cancer of the left breast was diagnosed. Surgical treatment was offered to the patient and performed. Adjuvant chemotherapy and radiotherapy were also planned. The patient was regularly in follow-up care. At 8, 20, and 28 weeks after the operation MRI scans of the spinal cord showed a residual lesion with 6 mm length after 20 weeks and 4 mm after 28 weeks. At 15 weeks after surgery, primarily because of the newly diagnosed breast cancer, a whole body 2-deoxy-2-(18F)fluoro-D-glucose positron emission computed tomography (18F-FDG PET/CT) scan was performed to complete staging. Again, no local tumor progress in the spinal cord was visible. The PET/CT revealed two metabolically active skeletal lesions at the third right ridge and at the fifth thoracic vertebral body. A biopsy of both lesions showed no tumor cells. At last follow-up, 104 weeks after radiotherapy, the patient was recurrence-free and showed unchanged neurological symptoms.