An 80-year-old woman without known cardiovascular atherosclerotic risk factors was admitted to our hospital due to worsening effort angina over 1 month. The patient had a history of PCI of the left anterior descending artery (LAD) with overlapping 2.5/24 mm and 2.75/24 mm EXCEL sirolimus-eluting steel stents (JW Medical System, Weihai, China) due to non-ST-segment myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) at another hospital 2 years prior. Electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed ST segment depression and T wave inversion in leads V1-V4. Echocardiography showed marked hypokinesis in the anterior wall of the left ventricle, whereas the serum cardiac troponin I level increased to 1.10 ng/ml (normal range 0.0–0.04) and the creatinine kinase-MB level increased to 23.6 U/L (normal range 0–16). According to the data presented above, she was diagnosed with and managed for non-ST-segment myocardial infarction (NSTEMI).
The patient received loading doses of aspirin (300 mg, p.o.), ticagrelor (180 mg, p.o.), and heparin (6000 IU, i.v.) before the PCI procedure. Coronary angiography revealed mild-to-moderate stenosis in the left circumflex coronary artery (LCX) and right coronary artery (RCA) and severe ISR in the proximal LAD . The underexpanded segment of the patent stent was observed clearly before contrast injection without cardiac motion . Inflation of a 2.75/12 mm noncompliant balloon (NCB, Boston Scientific Corp., Natick, MA) at high pressure (20–24 atmospheres) several times failed to dilate the resistant lesion . Then, OCT examinations were performed on a workhorse wire (Runthrough NS, Terumo, Japan) using the C7-XR OCT intravascular imaging system (LightLab Imaging Inc., St. Jude Medical, USA). The cross-sectional OCT images found that severe stenosis occurred at the overlap region with 2-layer underexpanded stents and severe calcification beneath the struts . The minimal stent diameter (MSD), minimal lumen diameter (MLD), and minimal lumen area (MLA) of the lesion were 1.21 mm, 0.93 mm, and 0.68 mm2 by OCT, respectively. Longitudinal OCT analysis showed that the length of the overlap region was approximately 5 mm.
In order to avoid the passage of the wires through the struts and their subsequent crush, we exchanged the rota-wire through a micro-catheter (Finecross, Terumo). Double-layer metallic stents and calcification ablation were performed by rotational atherectomy using a 1.5 mm burr (RotaLink, Boston Scientific) via a 7Fr EBU3.5 guiding catheter. The ablation speeds were between 140,000 and 150,000 rpm, and runs were kept short (≤ 15 s), with a “pecking” motion and conservative force to reduce the risk of no-reflow phenomenon, thermal injury and burr entrapment. Fortunately, the 1.5 mm burr passed the lesion with 10,000 rpm down from 150,000 rpm after about 25 runs, followed by another 10 runs for better modification. The total ablation time was 7 min, and the SA procedure was free of complications. Repeated OCT evaluation post-SA was performed on the Runthrough NS wire after wire exchange through the Finecross microcatheter. The OCT images demonstrated that the metallic struts of the underexpanded stents had completely disappeared in approximately two quadrants . The length of the ablated stent portion was about 3 mm, and the minimum calcium thickness at the MLA site was 450 µm. We were confident that adequate lesion modification had been achieved and that there was no need to upsize the burr.
Based on the information acquired from the post-RA OCT, subsequent high-pressure dilatation was performed with a 2.75/12 mm noncompliant balloon (20 atmospheres), resulting in optimal expansion. Two clear calcium fractures were observed on the cross-section OCT images post-SA and NCB dilatation . The new implanted stent size was also determined under the guidance of OCT. Both the proximal and distal landing zones were selected at the adjacent relatively normal regions with thin and intact neointima. The mean lumen diameters of the proximal and distal reference were 2.41 mm and 2.61 mm, while the mean patent stent diameters of the proximal and distal landing zones were 2.82 mm and 2.96 mm, and the length of the target lesion was about 10.5 mm (Additional file ). Finally, we implanted a 2.75/12 mm Nano (Lepu Medical Technology, Beijing, China) polymer-free sirolimus-eluting stent (SES) that was expanded at 14 atmospheres over 30 s. After a final post-dilatation (2.75/12 mm NCB) at 24 atmospheres, a good angiographic result was achieved . The final OCT showed satisfactory apposition and expansion of the stents , with an MLA = 5.53 mm2. Off-line analysis of the OCT images was performed using the ILUMIEN OPTIS OCT imaging system (St. Jude Medical, Minneapolis, MN, USA). Longitudinal and 3D reconstruction of the OCT images clearly showed the effect of the entire PCI procedure step by step .
The patient suffered from severe shortness of breath post PCI with complete symptom relief after intravenous aminophylline 125 mg. We speculated that the transient dyspnea might be the side effect of ticagrelor. So we adjusted her DAPT strategy. The first loading doses of clopidogrel (300 mg) was administered 12 h after the ticagrelor administration. Then the patient was treated with aspirin (100 mg), clopidogrel (75 mg) once per day. She had an uneventful recovery and was discharged 7 days later on aspirin, clopidogrel, a beta-blocker, a statin, and an angiotensin receptor. Routine follow-up coronary angiography was repeated 12 months later, and the final outcome was excellent.