A 90-year-old woman with no history of abdominal surgery presented with vomiting and lower abdominal pain. On examination, she was afebrile with normal vital signs. Her abdomen was significantly distended with tenderness near her umbilicus. Laboratory tests revealed an elevation in inflammatory markers (white blood cell count of 8300/μL and a C-reactive protein level of 6.49 mg/dL), but a normal lactate level. Contrast computed tomography showed a small bowel obstruction with a transitional zone in the right lower abdomen. A right indirect herniation could be seen, but there was no bowel involvement and thus was not considered to be the cause of obstruction . She was hospitalized for small bowel obstruction of unclear origin. Although inflammatory markers improved the next day, symptoms worsened, and urgent laparoscopy was performed on the same day for suspected bowel strangulation.
A laparoscopy with a three-trocars technique (12 mm at navel and two 5 mm trocars at the bilateral abdominal flank) was performed . Upon inspection, a large bulging mass was seen medially to the right medial umbilical fold with incarceration of small bowel (A). This attachment was found to be the obstruction site, and an incarcerated internal supravesical hernia was suspected. The bowel was tightly incarcerated and could not be reduced via traction or exterior compression. Incision of the hernia ring was necessary for reduction, but there was no space between the bowel and the orifice wall. We decided to dissect the peritoneum in a manner similar to the transabdominal pre-peritoneal (TAPP) approach for inguinal hernia repair, in order to distinguish the peritoneum from any content inside the sac. We began peritoneal incision near the medial inguinal fossa and extended it towards the hernia ring. The peritoneum was mobilized prior to each incision. With this wide incision, the orifice loosened allowing space for a precise incision of the orifice, and the bowel was reduced without injury (B). This revealed a hernia ring of approximately 2 cm × 2 cm (C). There was a concern of abscess formation since the sac contained inviable bowel, and so we chose to partially resect the sac to prevent fluid accumulation (D). The naval trocar site was extended roughly 3 cm and the gangrenous bowel was resected with a stapling device. The proximal and distal bowel was viable, and a functional end-to-end anastomosis was performed. Operation time was 143 minutes with trivial bleeding. The patient was discharged on post-operative day 18, since a worsened rectal prolapse required surgery during her stay. No recurrence was seen 12 months later.