A 15-year-old boy was admitted to the hospital in November 2019 with complaints of an acute headache for 3 h.
The child presented with a sudden severe headache for 3 h with no inducing factors. He was conscious and had no history of nausea, dizziness, or fever.
The boy had normal growth and development and no history of other special diseases. In August 2011, the child presented at another hospital with complaints of a headache for more than 1 wk. At that time, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), magnetic resonance angiography (MRA), and magnetic resonance venography (MRV) were performed. The scans revealed that there was no vascular abnormality, abnormal signal intensity, or any other findings suggestive of an AVM . At that time, the doctor did not administer any treatment, and the headache was ameliorated by itself. In October 2013, the child again presented at another hospital with headache and nausea for 2 d. His MRA scan revealed a small right temporal AVM, the size of which was 6.2 mm × 1.9 mm . Digital subtraction angiography revealed the presence of a suspicious lesion in the right temporal lobe . The boy was treated for headaches and was not examined further. In February 2019, the boy presented at our hospital complaining of a sudden headache and vomiting for 2 h. He was conscious when he came to our hospital. His Glasgow coma scale score was 14, and National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale score was 1. Computed tomography of the head demonstrated acute intracerebral hemorrhage in the right temporal lobe. The MRA revealed a small AVM in the right temporal lobe . Symptomatic treatment was given to the child during hospitalization, and gamma knife radiosurgery was suggested. Unfortunately, the child’s parents rejected radiotherapy.
The patient did not have any personal or family history of brain AVM.
The patient was conscious when examined at our hospital in November 2019. His Glasgow coma scale score was 15 and his National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale score was 1.
Laboratory examinations showed no significant abnormality.
A small AVM within the right temporal lobe was visualized in the MRA , and cerebral angiogram revealed the presence of a 21.6 mm × 21.2 mm right temporal AVM, which was supplied by the inferior temporal branches of the right posterior cerebral artery. Venous drainage occurred through superficial cerebellar veins into the right sigmoid sinus. It was classified as Spetzler-Martin grade 1 .
In November 2019, computed tomography of the head demonstrated the presence of an acute intracerebral hemorrhage in the right temporal lobe . Digital subtraction angiography displayed abnormal vascular clusters, which were slightly larger than those seen 10 mo ago. The size of these clusters was 24.3 mm × 22.8 mm. The AVM was classified as a Spetzler-Martin grade 1 .
After receiving consent from the child’s parents, we conducted genetic analysis for the child and his parents. We discovered a mutation that might be related to the incidence of AVM, NOTCH2 heterozygous mutation [NM_024408.3; c.1418A>T; p.Asp473Val]. The mutation was only found in the child.