A 71-year-old Japanese man (height: 170.2 cm; weight: 54.5 kg) was referred to our outpatient clinic with the chief complaints of right facial numbness and itching, cervical pain, and right arm numbness with spasms in 2020. The patient’s history indicated that had been taking a calcium channel antagonist for hypertension (amlodipine, 5 mg/day) for the past 10 years. In 2016, he developed numbness and hypoesthesia in the right side of all branches of trigeminal nerve distribution and was diagnosed with idiopathic trigeminal nerve palsy. He has been taking gabapentin, amitriptyline, pregabalin, and clonazepam; however, these drugs did not improve his symptoms. In 2019, the patient developed cervical pain and right arm numbness; he was diagnosed with no evidence of a neurological abnormality.
At his first visit in 2020, he had complained of right facial numbness and itching, cervical pain, and right arm numbness. His medical records indicated a right facial palsy with mild numbness localized to the right cheek that might be gradually expanding. However, the sensory disturbance had not spread beyond the face at the time of the first visit.
A seemingly involuntary spasmodic twitching was noted at the right labial commissure. In addition, his speech was slightly slurred, and the right side of his mouth would fatigue with continued mastication, suggesting oral dyskinesia or a similar neurological disease. Right-dominant bilateral trapezius muscle tenderness and pain of 62 mm in visual analog scale were observed. The sites of the right arm numbness (rated 9/10) and triceps spasm were consistent with C6 involvement. Manual muscle testing was not performed at this time. Blood biochemistry results were within normal limits. On plain cervical radiographs, cervical straightening from C2 to C7 was observed in the lateral view, while signs suggesting stenosis of the right C6 intervertebral foramen were observed in the oblique view. Cervical magnetic resonance imaging revealed evidence of disc protrusion at C5/6 and at C6/7, with no apparent spinal compression or right C6 neuroforaminal stenosis.
These findings suggested a diagnosis of cervical discogenic pain or facet arthritis, and his facial symptoms suggested oral dyskinesia or another neurological disease, but not trigeminal nerve palsy. We prescribed mirogabalin (5 mg/day), extended-release paroxetine (12.5 mg/day), and clonazepam (0.5 mg/day) to be taken at bedtime, as well as biperiden (2 mg/day). However, this did not improve his symptoms after 1 week. For diagnostic and therapeutic purposes, we performed a stellate ganglion block at the second visit; however, this sympathetic nerve block also failed to improve his symptoms.
Because we observed tongue fasciculation while examining his complaints of dysphagia at his third visit, we diagnosed bulbar palsy as the cause of his dysphagia. We referred him to the neurology department, where an examination revealed evidence of hypoesthesia and muscle weakness in the right C6 distribution, tongue fasciculation, muscle weakness during neck extension, and exaggerated deep tendon reflexes. At the first visit to the outpatient service of neurology, the neurologist noted a progressive weight loss. Consequently, the neurological findings were as follows: sensory disturbance in the left trigeminal area and motor weakness on the left face, dysphagia, dysarthria, perioral fasciculation, tongue atrophy, and fasciculation. Attenuation of the corneal and blink reflexes as well as bulbar palsy were confirmed in a series of neurological tests. In the manual muscle strength test, weakness was observed in the trapezius, infraspinatus, and subscapularis muscle, but the muscle strength of the lower limbs was normal. The patient also had a positive Trömner reflex but showed no abnormalities in the Romberg test, suggesting upper motor neuron disease with pyramidal tract involvement. Moreover, magnetic resonance imaging of the head and neck showed atrophy of the tongue, trigeminal nerve, and masseter and temporalis muscles. Based on these collective findings, FOSMN was diagnosed, and a neurologist assumed responsibility for the patient’s treatment. The patient’s muscle weakness, weight loss, conversational difficulties, and dysphagia rapidly progressed following our encounters, necessitating a tracheotomy and gastrostomy.