Patient, female, 42 years old, height 159 cm, weight 61 kg, usually regular menstruation, cycle 30 days, period 3–4 days, medium volume, red color, denied history of dysmenorrhea. 2006 full-term cesarean section, intraoperative hemorrhage, treated with blood transfusion, 2010 cholecystectomy due to “gallbladder stones”. In 1999, she delivered a baby girl at term; in 2006, she delivered a baby girl by cesarean section. On September 22, 2020, she was admitted to the hospital with “lower abdominal pain for 8 hours after vigorous activity”. Emergency ultrasound showed multiple fibroids in the uterus (with ruptured fibroids at the base of the ectopia?) The uterus was irregularly enlarged as large as 2+ months of pregnancy, and a completely convex mass was seen at the base of the uterus, about 9*8*5 cm in size, hard, with anisotropic vascular hyperplasia on the surface and twisted and exposed blood vessels at the tip of the mass. The left anterior wall of the uterus showed a completely convex mass, about 7*6*4 cm in size, soft and cystic in nature, with clear borders, the right wall of the uterus showed a slightly convex mass about 4 cm in diameter, hard and clear borders, the rectal fossa of the uterus was closed, some intestinal tubes and bilateral ovarian adhesions with the posterior wall of the uterus were seen, the bilateral fallopian tubes had no obvious abnormalities with the naked eye, and the umbilical ends were visible. The intraoperative diagnosis: uterine fibroids (multiple) and intestinal adhesions. Intraoperative diagnosis: uterine fibroids (multiple) and intestinal adhesions. After the operation, there was obvious abdominal distension and vomiting, and the standing abdominal plain film suggested: abdominal intestinal distension with fluid flattening (in the shape of “spring” change). The postoperative pathology report suggested: uterine smooth muscle tumor (several), one with edema and deformation, and was discharged 11 days after surgery.
On August 3, 2022 (2-years postoperative), the patient visited the clinic for six months due to anal swelling, the symptoms were not related to menstrual cycle, and a fecal imaging was performed: the distal part of the rectal jug abdomen was seen to be mildly protruding anteriorly during forceful evacuation, with a cystic pouch-like change, about 2.8 cm in length and 0.8 cm in depth. The local intestinal lumen of the sigmoid colon was slightly narrowed, with an upper and lower range of about 3.3 cm, and the margin The lumen of the sigmoid colon was slightly narrowed, with an upper and lower range of about 3.3 cm, and the margin was not well defined, See . The intestinal lumen was slightly narrowed, and the endoscope could barely pass through. Conclusion: colonic occupying lesion (whole abdomen enhanced CT is recommended). The intraoperative pictures are shown in . Further CT examination suggested that: the intestinal wall at the junction of sigmoid colon and rectum was thickened with mass-like changes, the range was about 4.4cm×2.3cm, the measured CT value was about 49HU, after enhancement, moderate enhancement was seen, the CT value was about 75HU, the plasma membrane surface of the intestinal canal corresponding to the lesion was still smooth; the distribution and morphology of the remaining abdominal intestinal canal did not show obvious abnormal changes, the mesenteric fat gap was still clear, and no obvious enlarged lymph nodes were seen. No obvious enlarged lymph nodes were seen. The bladder was full and no significant abnormal density foci were seen in the bladder. A small cystic hypodense foci, about 2.4 cm × 1.7 cm in size, could be seen in the right adnexal area, and no significant abnormal enhancement was seen after enhancement. The size and shape of the uterus were acceptable, and no significant abnormal enhancement was seen after enhancement. The biopsy report after colonoscopy suggested tubular adenoma (rectum) with mild heterogeneous hyperplasia of the glandular epithelium (low-grade intraepithelial neoplasia). The pathological report is shown in . The patient was referred to a general hospital for gastrointestinal surgery, where colon cancer was highly considered and a biopsy was performed, which showed tubular adenoma (rectum) with low-grade intraepithelial neoplasia. The pathological report is shown in . The patient refused further treatment and returned to the hospital 2 months later with no significant change in the symptoms of anal distention. After MTD discussion, colonoscopy was performed again with the patient’s informed consent, and the endoscopist was changed. The pathological report of the third colonoscopy biopsy is the same as before, and the pathological report is shown in . The lesion was partially excised from the colon with adequate information, and endometriosis was considered in the intraoperative frozen section, and the excised tissue is shown in . Immunohistochemical results: CK (AE1/AE3) (+), CK20 (-), CDX-2 (-), CD10 (+), ER (3+), PR (2+), WT-1 (+), p53 (~5%+), Ki-67 (~10%+). The routine pathological report is shown in , and the immunohistochemistry is shown in . Postoperative symptomatic treatment and recovery was good. Postoperative follow-up until the writing of this manuscript the patient was generally well with no significant discomfort.