The case was a 25-year-old woman, gravida 2, para 0, with a spontaneous abortion 3 years previously. She had no family history of birth defects or genetic disorders, and she had no alcohol or smoking habits. She had a normal first trimester scan at 12 weeks; however, a sonographic examination revealed a 32 × 22 × 33 mm exophytic, mixed echogenic mass arising from the sacrococcygeal region at 16 weeks. The inner solid size was approximately 23 × 23 × 16 mm, with high vascularization seen on Doppler flow. No other abnormalities were detected, and non-invasive prenatal testing was at low risk. The parents requested to continue the pregnancy after being extensively counselled by our antenatal diagnostic centre regarding the diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis of high-risk SCT. The tumour grew in parallel with the foetus, measuring 107 × 106 × 93 mm and with polyhydramnios (amniotic fluid index 25.4) appearing at 24 weeks. Furthermore, the mother developed gestational diabetes with no other symptoms. Magnetic resonance imaging was performed at 27 weeks . There was no evidence of possible invasion to the foetal pelvis or abdomen. The intact spine, foetal kidneys, and bladder were normal. Based on the MRI findings, a diagnosis of type I in the Altman classification was confirmed.
The gradual growth of the SCT was identified by weekly or biweekly sonography, with no signs of foetal cardiac failure until 31 weeks and one day, and the foetal echocardiogram showed that the combined cardiac output increased to 679 ml/kg/min, accompanied by an enlarged cardiothoracic ratio and a full dilation of the inferior vena cava. Multiple large blood vessels arising from the middle sacral artery were supplying the teratoma. Doppler ultrasound, echocardiography and MRI findings are recorded in . Fortunately, the middle cerebral artery-peak systolic velocity(MCA-PSV) was in normal state all the time. Considering the possibility of foetal heart failure, we conducted a multidisciplinary consultation to avoid irreversible complications in succession. Thus, a premature caesarean section and EXIT procedure were scheduled at 32 weeks’ gestation.
A multidisciplinary team, including obstetricians, anaesthesiologists, neonatologists, and assistant nurses, was organised for the procedure. After combined epidural and general anesthesia with sevoflurane inhalation was administered as the primary anaesthetic technique, laparotomy was performed with a classic Pfannenstiel approach considering the posterior placenta. The uterine incisions were clamped to reduce bleeding. Once the foetal head and neck were exposed, the uterine cavity was filled continuously with warm physiological saline solution to maintain an adequate uterine volume to avoid placental abruption and compression of the umbilical cord . Meanwhile, IV nitroglycerin (NTG) was used to keep the uterus adequately relaxed. Amniotic fluid was slowly released, and the foetus was slowly delivered . The placental circulation was maintained for a total of 32 min until the intact teratoma was excised without rupture . Foetal health signs were stable through SpO2 monitoring and foetal ultrasonography during the entire operation. The newborn was then transferred to the neonatal operating table for further suturing and evaluation. The maternal perioperative blood loss was 700 mL, and gauze filled in uterus was removed after 24h to prevent postpartum atony and haemorrhage.
A male infant was born with an SCT of 200 mm in diameter. The weight of the baby was 2200 g, and the teratoma weighed 2065 g. His Apgar score was 8-8. On account of premature delivery, the baby was discharged 19 days after birth with normal MRI results of the abdomen, cerebrum, and kidneys. During the hospital stay, the baby’s condition was stable, and there were no tumour-related complications. Pathological findings revealed an immature teratoma and no malignant elements. Comfortingly, he showed normal development with good heart function and no postoperative complications within 18 months. His mother also did not suffer from postpartum bleeding or infection, and she was discharged without any complications.