A 62-year-old female with a history of NIDDM, dyslipidemia, and HT, previously was diagnosed with stage IIB left triple-negative breast cancer in 2008. Left modified radical mastectomy and completed AC (doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide) followed by paclitaxel were given. Postoperative radiotherapy was performed after adjuvant chemotherapy. In December 2014, she developed a new right breast mass. She underwent right nipple-sparing mastectomy with sentinel lymph node dissection with reconstruction. Rt breast pathology showed invasive ductal carcinoma, second primary breast cancer, pT1cN0M0, stage IA, (ER: 10%, PR: 10%, HER2-negative, Ki67: 10%). Adjuvant TC (docetaxel and cyclophosphamide) for 4 cycles followed by tamoxifen was administered since July 2015. In February 2018, she developed chronic cough with weight loss for 5 kg. chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed mediastinal, right hilar, right interlobar lymph nodes metastases with multiple discrete lung nodules. The liver and bone were unremarkable. Mediastinal lymph node biopsy at 11R and 4R station was performed and reported invasive ductal carcinoma (ER: 60%, PR: negative, HER-2 2+, and negative by ISH testing). She was then diagnosed with recurrent HR positive HER2 negative breast cancer. Due to her cough with dyspnea, palliative chemotherapy, docetaxel was given for eight cycles with partial response. Letrozole was then maintained for 9 months from August 2018 to May 2019. Because of disease progression with no visceral crisis and reimbursement policy, a second-line combination of fulvestrant and palbociclib has been subsequently started since May 2019. Neither neutropenia nor GI toxicity was observed during this treatment. The following chest CT scan for evaluation was performed and showed a partial response as shown in Figure . She regularly took metformin 2000 mg/day, glipizide 5 mg/day, losartan 100 mg/day, amlodipine 10 mg/day, and simvastatin 10 mg/day since May 2019. Her serum creatinine was stable approximately 0.9–1.07 mg/dl during palbociclib treatment.
In September 2019, due to the Thai Oncology Prior Authorization (OCPA) program, the patient had been requested to change treatment from palbociclib to ribociclib (600 mg/day) plus fulvestrant. Otherwise, she cannot do reimbursement for palbociclib's cost. During follow up, occasional mild palpitation without QTc prolongation was reported. Neither neutropenia nor GI toxicity was observed during this treatment like previous palbociclib. However, approximately 4 weeks after changing to ribociclib, her serum creatinine gradually increased from 0.94 to 1.31 mg/dl. She currently took antidiabetic, antihypertensive and antidyslipidemic drugs without dose modification. Moreover, no herbal products or oral supplements or NSAIDs were reviewed. Her disease and treatment timeline were shown in Figure .
In November 2019, she was sent to the emergency department with progressive dyspnea for 1 week with intermittent epigastric pain, nausea but no vomiting. On admission, she had blood pressure 124/65 mmHg, pulse 106 beats per minute, respiratory rate 22 times per minute, and core body temperature 36.3°C. Initial investigations showed blood urea nitrogen 56 mg/dl, creatinine 2.8 mg/dl, sodium 133 mEq/L, potassium 5.6 mEq/L, chloride 102 mEq/L, bicarbonate 6 mEq/L, CPK 715 U/L (29–168 U/L), glucose 217 mg/dl and blood lactate 13.7 mmol/L (<2 mmol/L). Arterial blood gas showed severe mix wide anion gap acidosis plus normal gap metabolic acidosis (pH 7.12, pCO2 20.8 mmHg, Po2 66.8 mmHg, anion gap 25). Complete blood count indicated leukocytosis with left shift (WBC 21320/mm3, N 94%, L2.9%). The 12-leads electrocardiogram (ECG) was performed in the emergency room as shown in Figure .
This patient was diagnosed with severe lactic acidosis, suspected from metformin-associated with preexisting renal insufficiency with acute respiratory failure. Ribociclib and fulvestrant were temporarily discontinued. Three days after renal replacement therapy, her clinical was stabilized; she was able to extubate and remove double lumen. Her renal function gradually recovered, and serum creatinine was reduced to 2.25 mg/dl. Additionally, her creatinine further decreased to 1.51 mg/dl in 1 month after discharge to the hospital. All changes in serum creatinine were shown in Figure . Drug–drug interactions from ribociclib with metformin have been reviewed previously. So, the potential reason for severe lactic acidosis is considered to be from metformin associated lactic acidosis (MALA) predisposing from pre-renal acute kidney injury with drug–drug interaction from ribociclib with metformin.
Owing to her severe renal impairment persist after discharge, permanent withholding ribociclib was continued but fulvestrant monotherapy was given since December 2020. At that time, her chest CT scan in January 2020 showed progressive disease at lymph nodes, lung, and liver nodules. Fulvestrant was stopped and then capecitabine was given. Currently, she continuously received capecitabine with good performance status and response. No adverse event was observed.