A 78-year-old man with a history of a pacemaker implantation for chronic atrial fibrillation not compatible with MRI and in the process of chemotherapy for pancreatic cancer visited our department complaining of severe left-sided tremors. He had a right thalamic infarction 2 years before his visit and developed involuntary movements and dysesthesia on the left side of his body a few months later. As involuntary movements gradually aggravated and started interfering with his daily life, the patient was referred to our department for treatment. At the patient’s request, surgical treatment for symptom relief was considered. Although the prognosis for pancreatic cancer was considered to be more than 6 months at the time of surgery, we performed CT-guided Vim thalamotomy under local anesthesia without pulse generator implantation considering the patient’s general condition.
Stereotactic CT scan with contrast was preoperatively used to identify the target and plan a safe trajectory to avoid blood vessels on the brain surface and around the ventricles. We targeted the area near the middle frontal gyrus that is at the lower end of the convergence range. The boundary between the posterior internal capsule and thalamus was aimed and targets were determined based on the site of infarction within the thalamus.
The preoperative stereotactic targeting (tip of the electrode) coordinates relative to the mid-commissural point and trajectory angles were as follows: 10.5 mm to the right, 5.5 mm posterior, 1.0 mm superior, anterior commissure-posterior commissure angle of 67.3°, and coronal plane angle of 28.5° to the right. Since the CT scan has difficulty showing a high-resolution structural image, we used the previous thalamic infarction as a landmark of the ventralis caudalis (Vc) nucleus and the border between the thalamus and the internal capsule. The tentative trajectory was aimed at the Vc/ Vim border.
On the morning of surgery, a Leksell G frame (Elekta, Stockholm, Sweden) was attached to the patient’s head under local anesthesia, and subsequently stereotactic CT scan was performed. After a 4-cm straight skin incision, a burr hole was fashioned along the trajectory. Following dural opening, a thermocoagulation electrode was inserted to the target. Subsequently, macrostimulation was performed using 1-mm diameter, 4-mm length electrodes at 100 μs, 133 Hz up to 5 mA to confirm that no adverse effects occurred followed by radiofrequency coagulation at 70°C for 60 s. Another radiofrequency lesion was made along the trajectory, 2 mm anterior and 1 mm medial to the first lesion aiming at the border between the Vim and the ventralis oralis nucleus.
Following the surgery, the involuntary movements of the left side of the body reduced although ataxia remained. Postoperative CT showed an appropriate lesion in the right thalamus . However, 6 months after surgery, the patient died of pancreatic cancer.