The patient was a 63-year-old-woman, 158 cm tall and weighing 62 kg. She was admitted to our hospital for left femoral shaft fracture. She underwent an abdominal contrast-enhanced CT scan because she developed left leg edema and was suspected of suffering deep vein thrombosis of the lower extremity, and a large retroperitoneal mass was discovered. She had no abdominal symptoms, had been in good health, and had no specific family, past medical, or drug history. She had not complained of headache and had no history of hypertension. Routine hematological examination and biochemical tests were within normal limits. Plasma adrenaline was 0.042 ng/ml [normal range (NR): <0.07], plasma noradrenaline 0.341 ng/ml (NR: 0.06-0.46), and plasma dopamine <0.01 ng/ml (NR: <0.014). Regarding tumor markers, carbohydrate antigen 19-9, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and alpha fetoprotein (AFP) were all negative. An abdominal contrast-enhanced CT scan and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 6.5 cm heterogeneous retroperitoneal mass with a cystic component. MRI showed a high intensity tumor with signal intensity greater than that of the liver and central higher signal intensity on T2-weighted images. 131I-Metaiodobenzylguanidine (131I-MIBG) scintigraphic scan tomography was performed and the retroperitoneal tumor accumulated 131I-MIBG 48 hours after radioisotope injection . Her deep vein thrombosis seemed to be caused by congestion and movement limit due to bone fracture and had no connection with retroperitoneal mass because her leg edema improved before abdominal surgery. Under the diagnosis of paraganglioma in the retroperitoneum, the patient underwent surgery. The resected tumor (6.5 × 5 × 3 cm) was solid and easily removed en bloc. The tumor appeared grossly encapsulated on its external surface . The cut surface showed two distinct components: brown-red lesion with a cyst and a whitish area accounting for 10% of the tumor . The tumor had no necrosis or hemorrhage. Histological examination of the brown-red lesion with a cyst revealed well-defined nests of neoplastic cells containing finely granular cytoplasm and enlarged nuclei referred to as 'Zellballen' . Several tumor cells had eosinophilic hyaline globules in the cytoplasm. These neoplastic cells were positive for chromogranin A, synaptophysin and Grimelius stain. A population of S-100-positive sustentacular cells that were present at the peripheries of the cell nests was seen. This lesion was diagnosed as paraganglioma. Paraganglioma had <1% of MIB-1-positive cells. Histological examination of the whitish area revealed the proliferation of spindle shaped Schwann cells and a small number of ganglion cells, characterized by plump cytoplasm . Immunohistochemical staining revealed positive immunoreactivity for S-100 protein in these cells. Cells of each component were well differentiated and no mitosis was observed. There was no evidence of malignancy. The tumor was composed of approximately 90% paraganglioma and 10% ganglioneuroma. Focal interminglings of the two components were noted; however, two components were separated in the greater part of the tumor. Abrupt transition of two different components of paraganglioma and ganglioneuroma was seen. The diagnosis, based on these histological findings, was composite paraganglioma-ganglioneuroma in the retroperitoneum. The postoperative course was uneventful and no additional therapy was given according to informed consent. She has been under close periodic observation and there is no evidence of this disease 18 months after surgery.