A 50-year-old Bangladeshi male presented with retrosternal compressive chest pain for 2 days, associated with abdominal discomfort and nausea. He was dyslipidemic, normotensive, diabetic on Insulin, and a recent smoker. On admission his pulse was 110 beats/min, blood pressure was 110/70 mmHg and unremarkable precordial examination. Respiratory rate was 24 breaths/min and chest auscultation revealed bi-basal crackles. Electrocardiography (ECG) showed ST elevation in leads II, III and aVF. Bedside echocardiogram revealed a left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction (EF) of 50 % with hypokinetic basal and mid segments of inferior, infero-septal and infero-lateral walls. Troponin I was raised at 17.46 ng/ml. NT-Pro BNP was 1673.90 pg/ml. Given the delayed presentation (~48 h), he was not thrombolysed, but given loading doses of aspirin (300 mg) and clopidogrel (600 mg), subcutaneous enoxaparin, anti-anginal medications and intravenous furosemide.
Coronary angiogram done the same day revealed totally occluded right coronary artery (RCA) , significantly diseased obtuse marginal (OM) and moderately diseased left anterior descending (LAD) arteries. PCI to RCA (infarct related artery) was done with a 3.5x38mm DES (XIENCE Xpedition Everolimus Eluting Coronary Stent System, Abbott Vascular, USA). Distal Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) III flow was achieved with no immediate complication . As he had received a single dose of LWMH 9 h prior to PCI, he was only given an additional dose of enoxaparin equivalent to 0.3 mg/kg intravenously at the time of PCI, in accordance with guideline recommendations . Unfractionated heparin was not used. Staged PCI to OM was planned for a later date. As he had no contraindications, he was given a loading dose of 60 mg prasugrel, which was continued on 10 mg daily, along with aspirin 75 mg twice daily.
Two days after PCI, a pericardial rub was noted. Lung auscultation revealed bi-basal crackles and diminished breath sounds in the lower zones. Mild pericardial effusion (~5 mm) was seen on echocardiogram. As we suspected a haemorrhagic effusion, LMWH was discontinued, prasugrel was withheld, and he was switched back to clopidogrel (75 mg) and reduced dose of aspirin (75 mg) once daily. He was regularly monitored over the next few days, both clinically and echocardiographically: the intensity of the rub gradually diminished, concomitant with increasing pericardial effusion. Serial ECG showed evidence of gradual reduction of voltage. Nine days after PCI, he became hypotensive and tachycardic with jugular venous distension, clinically suggestive of cardiac tamponade; this was confirmed by echocardiography which revealed massive pericardial effusion more in anterior, apical and lateral regions and features of diastolic collapse of right ventricle , with further reduction of LV EF to 35 %. There was no evidence of left ventricular free wall rupture (LVFWR). Subsequently, he also developed acute pulmonary oedema with bilateral pleural effusions .
Percutaneous pericardiocentesis was attempted immediately, but as it failed to yield fluid, emergency pericardiotomy was done under general anaesthesia: about 400 ml of haemorrhagic fluid was drained by sub-xiphoid incision. A further 300 ml of blood and 250 ml of clots were evacuated 2 h later through previous subxiphoid incision, by finger dissection from the pericardial cavity, mainly around the RA and RV; a retropericardial drain tube was left in situ, and removed 2 days later. Laboratory examination of the pericardial fluid demonstrated haematocrit value of 40 %, similar to that of peripheral venous blood. Given that the pericardiocentesis was a life-saving procedure that needed to be done on an emergency basis, we proceeded to do so while the patient was still on DAPT, which alternatively, could not be discontinued owing to the impending risk of stent thrombosis.
Post procedure, the central venous pressure reduced to 10cmH20, with improved haemodynamic parameters, and he was extubated the same evening. Following drainage, echocardiography revealed improved EF of 50 % and effusion was reduced to minimal. As his haemoglobin had fallen from 12.9 g/dL to 8.2 g/dl, he was transfused two units of whole blood.
As he remained in acute pulmonary oedema with bilateral pleural effusions, 700 ml of haemorrhagic pleural fluid was aspirated from the left pleural cavity 2 days after pericardial fluid drainage and sent for investigations: pleural fluid protein was 26 mg/dL, LDH raised at 542U/L. ADA was within normal limit, and cytology showed plenty of red blood cells, lymphocytes, histiocytes and mesothelial cells in a proteinaceous background, but no malignant cells. Broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotics were given and he remained afebrile throughout.
Following the resolution of both pericardial and pleural effusions, he was discharged 1 week after pericardiotomy, with stable haemodynamic parameters on DAPT comprising of Aspirin (75 mg) and clopidogrel (75 mg) daily, in addition to diuretics and anti-ischaemic medication. He underwent successful staged PCI to OM 6 months later, at which time a check angiography of the left system revealed mild in-stent restenosis of the RCA stent, which was treated with a balloon angioplasty with satisfactory result. Subsequently, he was given DAPT comprising of Aspirin 75 mg daily and ticagrelor 90 mg twice daily. He remained well at 1 year of follow up with no further effusions, as confirmed by echocardiography.