On August 31, 2022, a 28-year-old Chinese female was initially diagnosed as "24 d after cesarean section, 9 d after breast swelling and pain".
The cesarean section was conducted 24 d before the diagnosis, and the operation was without incident. During the 9 d preceding the diagnosis, the patient experienced breast pain, lethargy, little aversion to colds, nausea and vomiting. On August 27, 2022, an ultrasound test in another hospital reported: “Left breast hypoechoic area, BI-RADS category 3, consider inflammation, right breast hyperechoic mass, consider milk accumulation,” where BI-RADS is the abbreviation for Breast Imaging-Reporting and Data System. Oral consumption of Chinese medicine and cefuroxime axetil pills had no noticeable effect. On August 30, 2022, the other hospital conducted another ultrasound test that reported: “During lactation, several hypoechoic nodules were observed in the left breast, the larger ones were about 2.6 cm × 1.2 cm (in the direction of 8 o’clock) and 1.3 cm × 1.0 cm (in the direction of 10 o’clock), the shape was irregular, the edges were blurry, and fine light spots were detected inside, the imaging behind remained unchanged, and there was no impact on the surrounding tissues. Color Doppler Flow Imaging (CDFI); no blood flow signal was found inside, considering breast abscess, breast cyst with infection.” Under ultrasonography guidance, a fine needle puncture was performed, and 7 mL of purulent fluid was collected. The patient reported the pain and enlargement of both breasts to be excruciating. There was an absence of fever, but the patient experienced lethargy. The pain rating [visual analogue score (VAS) rating] was 7.
The patient reported no other known medical conditions or allergies.
The patient was a non-smoker and a non-drinker with no family history; she also denied any interaction within epidemic areas.
Body temperature was 37 °C, multiple 4 cm × 4 cm sized masses were palpable in the left breast, and a 10 cm × 7 cm sized mass was palpable in the right breast, with obvious tenderness. The breast skin on the surface of the left breast lump was dark and about 2 cm × 2 cm in size.
The white blood cell count (WBC) was 8.3 × 109/L, the neutrophil percentage was 69.8%, lymphocyte percentage was 22.8%, C-reactive protein (CRP) was 16.39 mg/L, procalcitonin (PCT) was 0.03 mg/L, and milk bacterial culture was positive for Staphylococcus epidermidis.
On August 30, 2022 in the lactating breast, several hypoechoic nodules were observed in the left breast. The larger nodules were about 2.6 cm × 1.2 cm (in the direction of 8 o’clock) and 1.3 cm × 1.0 cm (in the direction of 10 o’clock) .The shape was irregular, the edge was fuzzy, and fine light spots were detected inside. CDFI revealed no blood flow signal inside, several cystic nodules were seen in the right breast, the largest nodule was 0.4 cm × 0.4 cm (in the direction of 10 o’clock) , and the internal sound transmission was poor.