We report the case of a 67-year-old Caucasian man who was reported to be an active smoker. His oncological history included immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) as a paraneoplastic syndrome with 7000 platelets/mcL, associated with a 4.6-cm lung carcinoma as an incidental diagnosis. Diagnostic testing was performed, ruling out syphilis, hepatitis, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, without gamma alteration in serum protein electrophoresis or any blood smear findings. No further autoantibody tests were performed. Corticosteroids were administered during 1 week at 1 mg/kg of methylprednisolone doses together with intravenous immunoglobulins during 5 days, with complete resolution of ITP.
After surgery, stage IIB (pT2aN1), moderately differentiated nonkeratinizing squamous cell carcinoma was confirmed. Surgical margins were affected, thus treatment was completed with concurrent weekly docetaxel with radiotherapy with good tolerance. Six months after initial presentation, early progression was evidenced with pleural thickening and pleural effusion. The pathological study was completed with no targeted mutations found and with programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) <1% in tumor cells and 25% in stroma cells by 22C3 immunohistochemistry assay. First-line chemotherapy with carboplatin and paclitaxel was started, with partial response after receiving six cycles. Eighteen months after finishing first-line chemotherapy, with maintained response, new pleural progression was evidenced, as confirmed by positron emission tomography (PET) scan. It was thus decided to start a second line with atezolizumab (an anti-PD-L1 antibody).
Two weeks after receiving immunotherapy, he presented to the emergency room with severe dyspnea accompanied by intense asthenia, myalgia, and fever of 39 °C. He denied contact with people suffering coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID19) infection. Upon presentation, he was conscious and alert with all neurological functions preserved, hemodynamically stable, tachypneic, with 93% oxygen saturation in room air. He looked pale and had bruises on both arms on physical examination. Painless hepatomegaly and splenomegaly stood out, and auscultation revealed an abolition of left lung sounds. A blood test confirmed moderate pancytopenia, glomerular filtration rate of 50 ml/minute (previously normal), an increase in acute-phase reactants (C-reactive protein and ferritin), and elevated levels of D-dimer >20 times normal value . A computerized angiotomography was performed with no signs of pulmonary thromboembolism, neither lung infiltrates nor pleural effusion.
During the next 24 hours, he started vomiting with an altered level of consciousness with drowsiness. He had miotic pupils, without other signs of neurological dysfunction. On examination, he had developed progressive jaundice with abdominal pain in the right flank. A few hours later, he suffered a tonic–clonic seizure.
Initially, COVID-19 was rejected, and blood tests were repeated at 24 hours, revealing pancytopenia, hyperbilirrubinemia, and hypertransaminitis. Head computed tomography (CT) was performed with no alterations, and a blood smear showed anisocytosis with some elliptocytes. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) and intubated due to neurological deterioration with a score of 8 on the Glasgow scale. After assessing the risks and benefits, no lumbar puncture was done. Empirical broad-spectrum antibiotic treatment was started, but the possibility that it was a hemophagocytic syndrome was raised and a differential diagnosis was started. Serologies were negative for HSV1-2, CMV, EBV, HIV, HBV, HCV, and HLTV-1 viruses. Elevated IL-6 (19.4 pg/mL) and CD25 (6516 U/m) were found with normal angiotensin-converting enzyme levels. He had 110 CD4 and 620 CD8 lymphocytes with very low CD4/CD8 ratio of 0.18. H-score for hemophagocytic syndrome was 256 points (> 99% probability). Given the high suspicion, treatment with high-dose corticosteroids was initiated using 20 mg dexamethasone bolus as 1 mg/kg equivalent of methylprednisolone since day 1. Finally, bone marrow biopsy was performed, showing reactive hypercellularity, hemophagocytosis, and dysplastic signs in megakaryocytic and erythroid reactive lines, thus confirming hemophagocytic syndrome .
Severe pancytopenia persisted despite transfusions, so it was decided to initiate tocilizumab at 8 mg/kg, without success, so we continued with anakinra without analytical or neurological improvement during day 2. Treatment with mycophenolate mofetil was added on day 3 for the next two days and finally, 5 days after admission, etoposide 100 mg/m2.
Without any clinical improvement, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed, showing extensive white matter damage . To study the degree of brain involvement, an electroencephalogram was done and revealed symmetrical background activity consisting of a 2–4 Hz, bilateral, irregular, low-voltage rhythm with no reactivity to eyelid closure–opening, corresponding to diffuse and severe degree brain involvement. Hence, it was decided to limit the therapeutic effort. Finally, the patient died 1 week after presentation.
Autopsy of the patient was performed, confirming the syndrome with hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis affecting the bone marrow, lymph nodes, liver, and spleen as well as the central nervous system.