A 66-year-old female presented to the ophthalmic emergency clinic with vision loss and irritation in the left eye 5 weeks after completing her final cycle of chemotherapy for early-stage breast cancer. She reported 3 weeks of watery discharge from the right eye, and 5 days of a red, itchy left eye, with left visual disturbance and floaters for 4 days. She had self-medicated with chloramphenicol 0.5% eye drops without benefit. She had a history of invasive ductal carcinoma of the breast for which a left partial mastectomy had been performed. There were no metastases reported in sentinel nodes, but adjuvant chemotherapy and radiotherapy were recommended. Five weeks prior to presentation she had completed 4 cycles of doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide, followed by 12 cycles of paclitaxel. She experienced peripheral neuropathy of the fingers and toes 7 weeks after beginning chemotherapy; this had improved since cessation of paclitaxel. She had no other past medical or ocular history, and she was not taking any regular medications.
On examination, best corrected visual acuities (BCVA) were 20/25 on the right and 20/80 on the left. Superficial punctate epithelial erosions were present in both eyes, and the left eye had fine keratic precipitates, grade 1+ anterior chamber cells, grade 2+ anterior chamber flare, posterior synechiae, vitreous cells, grade 2+ vitreous haze and retinal vascular sheathing. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) confirmed no cystoid macular edema (CME) . Fundus fluorescein angiography demonstrated retinal vessel wall staining with predominantly venous leakage in both eyes .
One week after presentation, right BCVA was 20/25 and left BCVA was 20/200, and there had been no change in the intraocular inflammatory signs. Serum c-reactive protein and angiotensin-converting enzyme were within normal limits, and her chest x-ray was normal. Syphilis IgG, antinuclear antibodies, and antineutrophil autoantibodies were negative. The Quantiferon Gold interferon-gamma release assay, and serological tests for Toxoplasma gondii and Treponema pallidum were negative. Diagnostic left anterior chamber paracentesis and pars plana vitrectomy were performed. Microscopy and culture of both aqueous and vitreous were negative for bacteria, including acid-fast bacilli, and fungi, and polymerase chain reaction of the samples did not detect cytomegalovirus, enterovirus, herpes simplex virus 1 and 2, varicella-zoster virus, parechovirus, Neisseria meningitidis, and Streptococcus pneumoniae. Cytology and immunophenotyping did not support a diagnosis of vitreoretinal lymphoma.
The patient was commenced on prednisolone acetate 1% drops (Pred Forte) 4-times daily, and cyclopentolate 1% once daily to both eyes; valaciclovir was continued whilst awaiting test results. Five days following the vitrectomy, left BCVA had improved to 20/50, but right BCVA was reduced to 20/40. At this time the right eye had vitreous cells and grade 2+ vitreous haze , with scattered retinal vascular sheathing, while the left eye had grade 0 vitreous haze, with persistent retinal vascular sheathing. A diagnosis of bilateral intermediate uveitis and retinal vasculitis associated with paclitaxel was made. The patient was switched to oral prednisolone 60 mg (1 mg/kg) once daily. By this stage she had developed toenail and fingernail onycholysis and hyperkeratosis. Fungal scrapings of her nails were negative.
One week later, BCVAs were 20/40 and 20/60 on the right and left respectively. Right eye demonstrated grade 0.5+ anterior chamber cells, grade 0 anterior chamber flare, and grade 3+ vitreous haze; left eye anterior and posterior segments were normal, with resolution of the retinal vessel sheathing. Within one month of starting oral prednisolone, the patient reported a substantial subjective improvement in her ophthalmic symptoms, and the vitreous inflammation had resolved. Oral prednisolone was weaned from 60 mg and ceased over 4 months. Two months after stopping prednisolone there was no uveitis in either eye. The patient continues to be reviewed annually, and at most recent follow-up 15 months after ceasing treatment, right BCVA was 20/32 and left BCVA was 20/40, with normal anterior and posterior segments in both eyes.