A 40-year-old man presented to a urologic specialist with a primary concern of erectile dysfunction resulting from perineal blunt trauma during a bicycle accident three months earlier. The trauma occurred when the patient attempted to evade a collision, leading to a direct impact on his perineum by the bicycle’s frame. Subsequently, the patient reported a progressive decline in the duration of his erections and insufficient penile tumescence as persistent symptoms associated with the perineal injury. He underwent urologic evaluation, but clinical examination revealed no visible signs of penile injury. Based on the mechanism of injury and the gradual deterioration of erectile function, a high clinical suspicion of post-traumatic vascular damage prompted the decision to forgo penile Doppler ultrasound during the initial evaluation. Instead, the patient was referred directly for angiography, which provided a more detailed visualization of the vessels involved in penile erection, aiding in the assessment of potential vascular abnormalities.
Digital subtraction angiography of the left internal iliac artery confirmed the presence of an arteriospongious fistula supplied by two branches of the pudendal artery . We performed superselective catheterization of the branches using a microcatheter (Progreat, Terumo, Belgium) and embolization with microcoils (Tornado, COOK) to exclude a fistula from systemic circulation. Post-embolization angiogram revealed that an aberrant communication was occluded .
After the first endovascular intervention, the patient reported that erectile function was still inadequate. Three months after the initial procedure, we decided to repeat angiography because the condition was getting worse. An abnormal blush consistent with traumatic arterio-spongious fistula was identified near the previous interventional location . Accordingly, we performed another therapeutic embolization with microcoils (Tornado COOK; Interlock Boston), which restored erectile function to normal .
During the first and second embolization procedures, selective angiography of the right internal iliac artery and its branches was also performed, demonstrating normal anatomy and the preservation of normal vascular patterns.
The interventional radiologist verified the angiographic success of the endovascular treatment by observing the fistula’s exclusion from circulation on the post-embolization control angiogram. The clinical success was assessed by the referring urologist during a final follow-up appointment three months after the second procedure. The urologist confirmed the success of the treatment through a thorough clinical examination and an evaluation of the patient’s satisfaction with erectile function, evaluated using the Sexual Health Inventory for Men (SHIM) questionnaire. Before the embolization therapy, the patient’s erectile dysfunction severity was classified as severe, with a score of 7 points. However, within a few days following the second embolization procedure, the patient reported a complete restoration of fully potent erections, and the patient’s score significantly improved to 23 points. Therefore, no further tests or procedures were required.