A 51-year-old male patient was admitted to hospital with hematuria and underwent laparoscopic radical cystectomy and modified single cutaneous ureterostomy (CU) five years ago. The patient has no history of smoking or any comorbidities. CT scan indicated clinical staging of T2N0M0 and the preoperative cystoscopy revealed multiple masses in the bladder and posterior urethra. Subsequent pathology confirmed urothelial carcinoma. Due to the patient’s refusal of neoadjuvant chemotherapy, he underwent RC directly. The operation lasted five hours with 200 ml of blood loss. The pathology results indicated that the tumor invaded the bladder muscle layer and the prostate duct without metastatic lymph nodes. And the patient received three cycles of GC (gemcitabine and cisplatin) chemotherapy after surgery. And this patient’s postoperative course was free of serious complications.
After accidently discovering a mass in the ureteral cutaneous stoma, the patient was admitted to hospital after a biopsy confirmed the presence of a high-grade urothelial carcinoma . The patient had no history of smoking, which was consistent with the RC preoperatively. As shown in , CT revealed that the local soft tissue around the cutaneous stoma was thickened, but no other lesions were visible. After evaluating the case, we chose robot-assisted completely intracorporeal resection of cutaneous ureterostomy tumor and ileal conduit surgery. The total time for the operation and the blood loss were 400 minutes and 150 ml, respectively. Postoperative pathology indicated that: “The tumor is an invasive high-grade urothelial carcinoma that infiltrates the entire ureteral wall.” Five days after surgery, the patient defecated, and creatinine levels in blood decreased from 183.2 umol/L to 119.3umol/L. Then single J tubes were removed one month later.
Following surgery, the patient received five cycles of nab-paclitaxel chemotherapy in combination with PD-1 immunotherapy, followed by PD-1 immunotherapy for maintenance. During the ten-month follow-up postoperatively, no evidence of tumor recurrence and complications was discovered .
All ports are raised above the usual 5cm. As shown in , a six-port technique was adopted. In brief, a 12-mm camera port was positioned above the umbilicus in the midline. The robotic ports were positioned 2cm above the umbilical, along the lateral margin of the rectus sheath. Both the right and left ports were positioned 8cm from the midline. The last 8-mm robotic instrument port was placed in the right anterior axillary line, 3cm below the right costal arch. Additionally, a 12-mm assistant port was positioned above and inside the left anterior superior iliac spine. And the other 12-mm assistant port was positioned 3cm below the left costal arch in the parasternal line.
As shown in , the location of the ureterostomy was determined. The adhesions around the stoma and in the pelvic cavity were separated, followed by the intestine surrounding the stoma was separated. Then the left and right proximal ureters were dissociated. To ensure that the margin was negative, we clipped the left and right ureter and incised the distal margin for frozen pathology.
We established the ileal conduit using the Bricker ureteroenteric technique. Cut the ileum 20cm from the ileocecal junction and extract the expected 12cm ileal conduit. The intestine was then reconstructed for continuity. The left ureter and ileum were then anastomosed. As shown in , the guidewire and single J stent were inserted into the left ureter, and the distal end of the single J stent was inserted into the ileal conduit. The right ureteroenteric anastomosis was performed in the same way. Then we suspended the outlet of the ileal conduit to the stoma . Afterward, a drainage tube was placed in the coeliac beneath the stoma and removed six days following surgery . Finally, we extracorporeally resected the stoma and 1cm skin around it, and cut the incised margin for frozen pathology , followed by enterostomy of the ileal conduit. The video of the surgery is in the additional material.