A 62-year-old Caucasian man was transferred to our tertiary hospital for further management of transient left hemiparesis following iatrogenic trauma due to the insertion of a central line to his right common carotid artery (CCA) at a peripheral center. Our patient had initially presented with symptoms of nausea, vomiting, fever, weakness and dizziness for several days. He did not have any abdominal pain, dypsnoea or urinary symptoms. His background medical history included ischemic heart disease (requiring two previous coronary angiograms with the insertion of a coronary stent to his left anterior descending artery), hypertension, hypercholesterolemia and excessive alcohol consumption (more than 80 g per day). His usual medications were atenolol, felodipine, aspirin and naproxen.
Laboratory studies conducted at the regional hospital showed a creatinine (Cr) level of 269 μmol/L (normal range: 60 μmol/L to 110 μmol/L), aspartate transaminase (AST) of 2309 IU/L (normal range: 8 IU/L to 40 IU/L), alanine transaminase of 1994 IU/L (normal range: 5 IU/L to 60 IU/L), gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT) of 177 IU/L (normal range: 40 IU/L to 78 IU/L), bilirubin of 33 μmol/L (normal range: 3 μmol/L to 18 μmol/L), white cell count of 27.8 × 109/L (normal range: 4 × 109/L to 11 × 109/L) hemoglobin (Hb) of 120 g/L(normal range: 135 g/L to 180 g/L), an international normalized ratio (INR) of 2.4 and platelet count of 50 × 109/L (normal range: 150 × 109/L to 400 × 109/L). Metabolic acidosis was also noted.
A provisional diagnosis of multiorgan failure due to septic shock was made. Empirical intravenous antibiotics (cefotaxime) were started. A central venous cathether was sited in his right internal jugular vein under ultrasound guidance. Following this, however, he experienced a transient ischemic attack with left-sided weakness lasting five minutes. A duplex ultrasound of his right neck was performed, demonstrating the presence of the central venous catheter (CVC) passing through his right internal jugular vein posteriorly into the lumen of his right CCA. He was subsequently referred to the Vascular Surgery Service at our tertiary hospital for further management.
On admission to our hospital, our patient had a heart rate of 89 beats per minute (atrial fibrillation), blood pressure of 156/56 mmHg and oxygen saturation of 98%. He had mild bilateral leg edema, a palpable liver edge and a raised jugular venous pressure. No pulsatile mass was identified.
In our Intensive Care Unit, a diagnosis of heart failure was made in association with a central venous pressure of 35 mmHg. An incidental right common iliac aneurysm of 6.4 cm×6.2 cm had been detected on non-contrast computer tomography (CT) of his abdomen and pelvis at the referring hospital. An iliocaval fistula was not suspected at that time. He was started on continuous venovenous hemodiafiltration (CVVHDF) for anuric acute renal failure and fluid overload. Clinical and laboratory evidence of disseminated intravascular coagulation led to the commencement of Vitamin K and fresh frozen plasma.
An operative endovascular approach was planned in light of our patient's multiple acute comorbidities. Our patient consented to the removal of the central line with carotid angiography and endovascular balloon inflation to aid hemostasis.
Intra-operatively, with our patient in the supine position and under general anesthesia, his right common femoral artery was punctured in a retrograde manner using the standard Seldinger technique. A 5 French sheath was inserted and an attempt made at passing a 0.035 Glidewire into his abdominal aorta. The wire was noted to pass up well to the right of the midline consistent with the anatomical position of the inferior vena cava (IVC). Contrast angiography via the right femoral sheath demonstrated opacification of the right common iliac artery aneurysm as well as the IVC. It was noted that the pressure and waveform from the left internal jugular CVC displayed a mixture of arterial and venous patterns. An intra-operative diagnosis of an iliocaval fistula was made.
A left common femoral artery sheath was then placed and access to his abdominal aorta was achieved. An aortogram then demonstrated the large right common iliac artery aneurysm and associated iliocaval fistula .
Access into his right CCA was then achieved with a Cook Shuttle sheath (Bloomington, IN, USA). Carotid angiography demonstrated the catheter entry point into his mid-right CCA . The catheter was removed and angiography revealed a carotid-to-jugular arteriovenous (AV) fistula . An 8 mm×40 mm Abbott FoxCross (Abbott Park, IL, USA) angioplasty balloon was positioned distal to the carotid bifurcation and inflated for three minutes. Angiography then demonstrated a persistent fistula. The balloon was re-inflated for five minutes. Subsequent angiography revealed a widely patent carotid artery with no AV fistula or contrast extravasation visible .
Our patient remained hemodynamically unstable during surgery and, in consultation with cardiologists, the anesthetists asked that an urgent repair of the iliocaval fistula be considered during the same operation.
A calibrated aortogram was performed and bilateral Abbott Perclose devices (Abbott Park) were deployed. A 24 mm×96 mm Cook Zenith bifurcated stent graft (Bloomington) was introduced via the left iliac system. Access to his abdominal aorta was also obtained via his right femoral artery. We placed a 12 mm×107 mm TriFab Limb Extension endograft limb landing in the right external iliac artery distal to the aneurysm and iliocaval fistula. Consideration was given to coil embolization of his right internal iliac artery prior to this but it was felt not to be necessary due to the anatomy at the iliac bifurcation. A 12 mm×56 mm endograft limb was placed on the ipsilateral left side and landed in the distal left common iliac artery. There was an immediate reduction in our patient's measured central venous pressure and a classical venous waveform returned. Completion angiography demonstrated a small amount of late filling of the common iliac aneurysm via a type two endoleak but no iliocaval fistula. It was felt that, on correction of his coagulopathy, this would allow for thrombosis of the aneurysmal sac. Wires and sheaths were removed and the Perclose devices used to seal the femoral puncture sites with good effect. Our patient received four units of fresh frozen plasma, one unit of pooled platelet and eight units of cryoprecipitate.
By postoperative day three, our patient's acidosis was corrected and his biochemistry and hematology parameters had improved: his Cr was 116 μmol/L, GGT was 135 IU/L, bilirubin level was 30 μmol/L, AST was 552 IU/L, Hb was 84 g/L, platelet count was 55 × 109/L and INR was 1.37. His central venous pressure was normalized to 15 mmHg. He was making an adequate amount of urine and CVVHDF was ceased. Our patient was extubated successfully and a CT angiogram demonstrated a successful endovascular repair with patent endografts and no evidence of endoleak or AV fistula. Our patient was transferred back to his regional hospital after a satisfactory progress CT angiogram and was discharged home three weeks later. At six-week follow-up there remained no evidence of endoleak on a progress CT angiogram .