An 81-year-old woman was referred to our hospital because of constipation and pelvic mass. She had undergone a total hysterectomy for uterine myoma and left salpingo-oophorectomy for an ovarian tumor 40 years ago. Information on when she had experienced menopause was unclear. She had a medical history of hypertension, dyslipidemia, and ischemic enteritis. Physical examination revealed that she had a pelvic mass, and transabdominal ultrasonography revealed the presence of a 10-cm round pelvic mass.
The levels of cancer antigen (CA) 125, CA19-9, and carcinoembryonic antigen were within normal limits. On unenhanced computed tomography (CT), a 10 × 10-cm mass demonstrating isodensity mixed with hypodensity with the skeletal muscle was observed at the center of the pelvis (a). MRI of the lower abdomen was performed using a 3-T MAGNETOM Skyra (Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen, Germany). On MRI, the mass was well circumscribed and revealed isointensity compared to the skeletal muscle on T1-weighted imaging (T1WI) and low signal intensity mixed with high signal ranges (arrows) on T2-weighted imaging (T2WI) (b, c). On dynamic gadolinium-enhanced fat-suppressed T1WI, the mass was continuous with the right ovarian artery and vein, suggesting that it originated from the right ovary and indicated mild enhancement of the peripheral area in the early phase and increased enhancement in the delayed phase (arrows) (d, e). The central area with enhancement reflected the abundant intratumoral vessels (curved arrow). Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) at a b-factor of 800 s mm−2, the tumor revealed heterogeneously high signal intensity corresponding to the peripheral enhanced area (arrow) (f), and the apparent diffusion coefficient values of the high-intensity areas on DWI were 0.60–080 × 10−3 mm2 s−1. Thus, several fibrous tumors, including ovarian stromal tumors with minor sex cord elements, were suspected; malignancy could not be ruled out. We performed contrast-enhanced chest and abdominal computed tomography scans to examine the whole body. No distant metastasis was observed.
She underwent abdominal surgery under general anesthesia, and the mass was removed. Right salpingo-oophorectomy was also performed. Pathological examination revealed a mass measuring 104 × 96 mm in diameter, and the cut section was white to light yellow in color (a). The sex cord elements are observed in the peripheral part of the mass (arrow). Microscopic examination revealed features of a fibrothecoma with minor sex cord elements (b, c). The sex cord cell aggregates with dense proliferation and angiogenesis resembling Sertoli-stromal cell aggregates were scattered at the peripheral sites of the mass and focally immunoreactive for calretinin (d) and inhibin-α (e), suggesting sex cord-stromal and fibrous neoplasms. A final diagnosis of fibrothecoma with minor sex cord elements in the right ovary was made.
Her postoperative recovery was favorable, so she was discharged from our hospital 7 days postoperatively. She was followed up at a gynecology clinic near her house. The patient did not exhibit signs of local recurrence or metastasis within 2 years.