A 14-year-old female with SMA2 was referred for psychiatric review with progressively declining body weight over 12 months. Despite incremental weight gain in the decade prior, the patient’s weight plateaued at approximately 29 kg from age 12 (Basal Metabolic Index (BMI) 18) and fell to a nadir of 24.8 kg (BMI 11, < 3rd centile) at age 14.
Due to the SMA, the patient was wheelchair-bound and dependent on full-time assistance since early childhood. She had multiple complications including bilateral lower limb contractures, scoliosis, osteoporosis, obstructive sleep apnoea requiring respiratory support, and gastroparesis. The patient was able to attend mainstream schooling with some educational support. Her 12-year-old brother also had SMA2, adding to the significant burden on the caregivers. The patient had no previous psychiatric history nor was there any family history of mental health issues.
Initially, the patient’s poor weight gain and subsequent loss was attributed to several medical complications including pneumonia and gastroenteritis, and chronic gut dysmotility associated with SMA. Over a 2-year period, this was managed with dietetic input and with minimal improvement. With increasingly severe weight loss by age 14, the patient also began to demonstrate increasing social withdrawal and decreased interest in usual activities prompting the neurology team to administer the Eating Disorder Examination-Questionnaire (EDE-Q) and the Depression Anxiety Stress Scale (DASS) which indicated possible AN. This triggered a referral to the psychiatry team. There was no previous involvement of mental health teams.
On psychiatric review, the patient was vague and guarded regarding her diet. However, with prompting around the EDE-Q responses, she acknowledged extreme restrictive eating practices, body image preoccupation/distortion, intense fear of weight gain, and calorie counting. A diagnosis of AN and comorbid depression was made. It was formulated that lifelong disability, chronic carer burden with two disabled children, the life-limiting nature of SMA, the restrictions on adolescent individuation, and subsequent loneliness contributed to the development of the patient’s depression. Together with the undiagnosed and untreated depression, chronic feeding and swallowing difficulties associated with SMA made the patient more vulnerable to developing an eating disorder. For the patient, food restriction was seen as a powerful way to exert control and independence, particularly in association with tendencies to internalise emotions, perfectionistic traits, and low self-esteem. The patient was unsurprised by the AN diagnosis and described relief at having it finally recognised because for so long the SMA had been her family’s overriding focus. The parents were extremely surprised by the diagnosis.
Initial management included close medical monitoring and outpatient weight restoration. Following principles of Family Based Treatment, the parents were initially empowered to take responsibility for ensuring the patient undertook increased oral intake. Skin fold anthropometry was used to determine a minimum healthy weight of approximately 30 kg. Body composition and nutritional assessment by anthropometry is used clinically in SMA, as opposed to standard growth charts which are not appropriate in this population. Family sessions initially prioritised helping the family to find their roles in supporting recovery, psychoeducation, externalising the eating disorder, and meal support skills, and later on emotional attunement. Individual psychological therapy focussed on skills in emotional regulation, challenging eating-disordered cognitions and behaviours, and improving insights on the function of AN as a motivation to rely on family as emotional support. The supplementary individual component intended to provide a private therapeutic space for the patient to promote the process of individuation. Such process was hypothesised to have been interrupted by SMA due to the patient’s reliance of caregivers for everyday needs, which then have contributed to the maintenance of AN. The patient developed major depression, likely worsened by the removal of her usual coping strategy of restriction, and was commenced on fluoxetine and olanzapine. Following a 9-month period of weight restoration and stability, there was a relatively brief relapse with weight loss to 28 kg requiring brief inpatient admission and further intensive outpatient care. Since this time, the patient maintained a weight of around 35 kg with stable mood and was discharged by the psychiatric service. Given the multi-dimensional nature of the formulation, it was believed that the combination of family work, individual psychotherapy, and pharmacotherapy were all vital and contributed to the final positive outcome of the patient’s AN and depression.