We report a case of a 5-month-old female baby delivered through cesarean section at 37 weeks + 3-days gestation, on account of maternal request for bilateral tubal ligation, to a 38-year-old para 5 mother with APGAR score of 8 and 9 at 1 and 5 min, respectively. The baby was delivered at a district hospital and referred to the Komfo Anokye Teaching Hospital 4 hours after birth, with a birth weight of 3.7 kg. There was associated anorectal agenesis with a rectovaginal fistula, for which a sigmoid colostomy was performed at 3 weeks of age. The mother had no known history of exposure to teratogenic agents such as ionizing radiation or hormonal contraceptives. She has no family history of hereditary diseases or congenital anomalies and no history of birth defects in her community. In addition, the mother of the baby had no history of consanguinity or illness during pregnancy. The baby is the last of 5 children all of whom are alive and well. The mother is a teacher, and the father, a 44-year-old banker. None of the parents smoke cigarette, and the mother’s immunization was up to date. The mother was a regular antenatal clinic attendant. She had antenatal ultrasonography which did not document any fetal anomaly. There is no known history of maternal ingestion of teratogenic medications in the first trimester of pregnancy.
At birth, the baby had six limbs, two upper and four lower limbs, vitiligo on the root of the nose, and a right corneal opacity. The two medial lower limbs had power of 1/5, and the power in the two lateral lower limbs was 5/5. There were two pelvises, each had a genitalia and palpable pelvic bones. The genitalia of both pelvises were phenotypically female, vestigial on the right and well developed on the left, with mons pubis, clitoris, labia majora and minora, and an introitus which exuded feces and urine. There was an associated sacral meningocele. An abdominal ultrasound scan found an ectopically located right kidney at the right iliac fossa, adjacent to the urinary bladder which was malrotated and enlarged 6.5 cm by 3.0 cm, with the dilatation of the right pelvicalyceal system. There was a single urinary bladder which was of uniform wall thickness and a single uterus measuring 2.5 by 1.1 cm, which was centrally located in the pelvis. Computed tomography scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis as well as magnetic resonance imaging of the spine was undertaken to help rule out additional anomalies. Echocardiogram was performed, and the findings were normal. Hip disarticulation with triradiate cartilage enucleation of the dysplastic medial lower limbs, symphysiodesis with size 2 ethibond sutures, soft-tissue reconstruction, and closure of the meningocele was performed under general anesthesia and fluoroscopic guidance. The surgery was performed at 5 months of age. The clinical photograph, as well as a plain X-ray of the baby, that was taken at 3 weeks of age, before the surgery, is shown in . The ventral and dorsal appearances of the baby at the time of surgery are depicted in . The immediate post-operative ventral and dorsal photographs are shown in . In addition, a picture showing the ventral surface of the baby, 10 days following the surgery and a post-operative plain radiograph are shown in ; 6 months following the surgery, the baby is alive and well, as shown in .