A 77-year-old woman who had undergone CABG with bilateral ITAs 6 years ago, with right ITA to left anterior descending artery and left ITA to obtuse marginal artery, presented to our hospital with symptoms of heart failure and was diagnosed with severe mitral and tricuspid regurgitation . Echocardiography revealed a dilated mitral annulus and central severe mitral regurgitation jet due to atrial fibrillation. Structural interventions were recommended. However, surgical mitral and tricuspid valve repair was performed for mitral and tricuspid regurgitation because addressing them simultaneously may improve the clinical outcome.
Thoracotomy rather than resternotomy was performed because the patent ITA graft crossed over the sternum . An 8-mm Dacron tube graft was connected to the right axillary artery through which cardiopulmonary bypass was established, thereby preventing embolism due to atheroma burden in the ascending aorta and reducing the risk of ITA injury as the graft ran close to the ascending aorta . Accordingly, aorta was not clamped. The femoral vein and superior vena cava were cannulated for venous drainage. Her temperature was maintained at 24 °C, and systemic potassium was administered at a concentration of 40 mEq/L. Further, potassium was periodically administered to maintain a concentration of > 7 mEq/L. Total given potassium was 180 mEq and was added in the reservoir as total of 180ml solution. Thus, cardiac arrest was achieved, the fourth right intercostal space was entered to access to the valves. And a camera port was placed in the fifth intercostal space along the mid axillary line . The venting cannula was placed through the right upper pulmonary vein to the left atrium and another venting cannula was put in the left ventricular through the thoracotomy across the mitral valve. The carbon dioxide insufflation was performed to prevent air embolism. Suction at the level of 20-60mmHg was applied to the reservoir for better venous drainage and blood-less operating filed. The dilated mitral and tricuspid annulus was fixed using an annuloplasty ring . She was returned to normothermic conditions, and a spontaneous heartbeat was restored. The duration of cardiac arrest was 135 min, whereas that of cardiopulmonary bypass was 218 min. Postoperative echocardiography revealed trivial mitral and tricuspid regurgitation and preserved cardiac function with an ejection fraction of 64%.