A 62-year-old man presented with pain in the left chest and right flank for 7 d.
The patient had no respiratory symptoms, and pulmonary function test results were normal.
The patient was previously healthy and had no relevant medical history.
The patient had been a smoker for 8 years (35 pack-years) and quit smoking 2 years earlier.
Physical examination was unremarkable.
A routine blood examination, including tests for white blood cell count, hemoglobin, and other electrolytes, indicated that all levels were within normal range. However, the results of the biochemical tests indicated a slight increase in lactate dehydrogenase (1824 IU/L, with a reference range of 208-450 IU/L) and C-reactive protein (0.885 mg/dL, with a reference range of 0.0-0.5 mg/dL). A polymerase chain reaction test for coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) was conducted, but no evidence of the virus that causes COVID-19 was found.
The posteroanterior view of the chest radiograph showed a lesion of dense consolidation in the left lower pericardial area and calcific nodules consistent with an old tuberculosis scar in both upper lobes . Additional chest computed tomography revealed several enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes and a huge mass with necrosis, involving the upper and lower lobes of the left lung, with invasion of the pericardium . In addition, a low-attenuation lesion was present in the liver, consistent with a metastatic tumor . Further, multiple lymphadenopathies were found in the bilateral paratracheal, subcarinal, left hilar, left cardiophrenic, internal mammary, and upper abdominal areas. The right lower lung lobe showed small nodules and mild pericardial effusion, also consistent with metastasis. An approximately 9-cm sized lesion in the left lung showed uneven 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose uptake on positron emission tomography (PET; Figure ). Further, PET showed numerous metastatic lesions involving the mediastinum; liver; bilateral lung lobes; bones of the skull, bilateral humeri, scapula, left clavicle, sternum, vertebras (cervical, thoracic, lumbar), bilateral ribs, pelvis, and bilateral femurs; peritoneum; and retroperitoneum.