We report a case of a 29-year-old female who was hospitalized with dyspnoea at rest and fatigue with minimal exertion over the preceding 3 weeks. The patient also complained of fever and sweating. She had no past medical history or regular medications. Four days before her hospitalization, she presented to the emergency department with these symptoms. At that time, neither cardiac nor abdominal ultrasounds were performed and the patient was referred to the infectious diseases department. There, laboratory investigations revealed leucocytosis, anaemia, and increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR). An abdominal ultrasound showed hepatomegaly and splenomegaly. Analysis of a 50 mL serous liquid from the right pleura excluded tuberculosis. The patient continued to be evaluated by the haematology department, where clinical examination identified heart murmurs. Because of the fever and murmur, IE was suspected, even though she had no prior history of cardiovascular disease.
A physical examination by the cardiology department revealed orthopnoea, rales in the lung bases, and cardiomegaly. Her blood pressure was 110/60 mmHg, and her heart rate was 112 beats/min. Cardiac auscultation identified a Grade III/VI systolic murmur and a diastolic murmur at the third left sternal border. The spleen was palpable. A 12-lead electrocardiography showed sinus rhythm and a chest X-ray confirmed the cardiomegaly and diffuse interstitial prominence
: Laboratory investigations showed anaemia (haemoglobin: 8.3 g/dL), leucocytosis [white blood cell count : 8700 per mm3, 85% polymorphonuclear cells, increased levels of C-reactive protein (16.58 mg/dL), and increased ESR (30 mm/1 h)]. Blood cultures were collected before administering antibiotics. The anaerobic streptococci identified on the fifth day of admission were susceptible to the initial antimicrobial regimen.
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed a BAV with two cusps (right and left) with a dome opening and mobile masses with dimensions of 12 mm × 2.3 mm and 6 mm × 1.6 mm severe AR, moderate mitral regurgitation (MR) aborted abscess (pseudoaneurysm) located in the mitral-aortic intervalvular fibrous area fistulae in the membranous ventricular septum between the left and right ventricles pericardial and right pleural effusion . Left atrial volume index (LAVi) was increased: 40 mL/m2. Left ventricle diameters were also increased: end-diastolic diameter (LVEDD): 62 mm, end-systolic diameter (LVESD): 48 mm. Left ventricle ejection fraction (LVEF) was 55%. The dimensions of the right cavities were normal. Tricuspid regurgitation (TR) was mild and pulmonary artery systolic pressure (PASP): 35 mmHg. A transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) confirmed the TTE findings of vegetations on the BAV , aborted abscess , AR , MR , and restrictive perimembranous ventricular septal defect (VSD) with left-to-right shunting and a systolic gradient of 112 mmHg . Holter monitoring for 24 h did not detect arrhythmias.
According to the modified Duke criteria, the patient had a definite diagnosis of IE. Empirical antimicrobial treatment started with amoxicillin (2 g every 6 h) and gentamycin (3 mg/kg/day intravenously). She also received treatment for heart failure (HF). Her fever rapidly diminished, but the symptoms of HF persisted. Based on the guidelines for managing IE, urgent surgical intervention was indicated due to HF, large vegetations, and uncontrolled local infection. The decision was made to transfer her to the cardiovascular surgery department. Intraoperative TOE confirmed the TTE and TOE findings and provided detailed information. The VSD was 2 mm with morphological features of a perforation. Mitral regurgitation was moderate, without vegetations or structural abnormalities of the mitral valve. After 10 days of antibiotics, surgical correction consisted of abscess resection, debridement of the surrounding infected tissues, reconstruction of the annulus, then replacing the native BAV with a mechanical Sorin Carbomedics 21 mm prosthesis. The VSD was closed with a pericardial patch. Oral anticoagulation started the first day after surgery, and antibiotic therapy continued for 4 weeks.
At the 1-month follow-up visit, the patient was asymptomatic with normal electrocardiography. TTE revealed normal prosthesis function . Six months after surgery, she had no symptoms, and TTE showed a standard range of prosthesis function , mild MR , LVEDD: 57 mm, LVESD: 38 mm, LVEF: 56%, and LAVi: 39 mL/m2.