A 21-year-old male presented with a chief complaint of a left neck mass since childbirth. His history included an uneventful full-term pregnancy, normal vaginal delivery, and no other congenital defects. Family and medical histories had no remarkable findings. There were no other congenital deformities and no complaint of hearing loss. Routine head and neck region examination revealed a mass at the level of thyroid cartilage on the anterior middle 1/3 border of sternocleidomastoid (SCM) . The mass had changed neither in size nor in consistency since childhood. The patient had not reported a history of infection or inflammatory changes in his neck mass. It was painless with no fluctuation in size or discharge. It was 1*1 cm in dimension with smooth surface texture and normal surrounding skin. Moreover, it was not moving with tongue protrusion.
In palpation, it was mobile, firm in consistency with no tenderness or erythema, and also no discharge in compression. No regional lymphadenopathy was palpated. Spiral neck CT scan illustrated a 9*4-mm soft tissue density containing a sinus tract which was located on the left middle 1/3 of the neck extended through SCM at the level of the thyroid cartilage to the hyoid bone .
The sonographic findings illustrated a mixed echo 4*8.5-mm lesion with small cystic particles, definite margins without vascular components superficial to SCM, with a 17-mm long tract beneath it. This tract arch was about 6 mm superiorly but did not penetrate underneath the muscle .
It was completely resected by an adequate excision via an elliptical incision. There were cartilaginous fragments in the center of the lesion. Furthermore, there was a tract laid beneath the lesion which was extending upward. The tract was exposed as much as possible, and it terminated at the level of the hyoid bone next to the anterior belly of the left digastric muscle .
The microscopic findings demonstrated a polypoid lesion covered by epidermal tissue with pilosebaceous follicles, sweat glands, and adipose tissue in the dermis, as well as a hyaline cartilage tissue just beneath the dermis. Straight muscle and neuron bundles were also observed in the depth of the lesion around the cartilage tissue . These findings were compatible with CCRN.