A 39-year-old male was referred to our clinic with right proximal thigh mass that was growing over the past 4 years, associated with numbness over medial aspect of the thigh. Moreover, He suffered from weight loss (20 kg) in the past 6 months. Apart from these, the patient denied respiratory and gastrointestinal symptoms. There was no history of constitutional symptoms. On presentation, he had no history of trauma and no family history of malignancy. There was no history of masses other was in his body.
Vital signs were stable, on local examinations, it showed a mass over anteromedial aspect of the thigh, overlying skin was intact. In approximation, the size of the mass was 7x10 cm, it was soft firm, and rubbery inconsistency. The mass was not mobile, neither tender nor pulsatile, or hot upon palpation. Sensation was decreased over the medial aspect of the thigh with the distribution of the obturator nerve. No palpable lymph nodes were identified.
Initial X-ray radiographs of the right femur and hip revealed a faint soft tissue swelling with no calcification or bony involvement. Computed Tomography showed a large soft tissue mass of fatty density in the right groin extending down to the upper medial compartment of the right thigh with the size of 8.7 × 8.6 × 11 cm with a displacement of the adjacent muscles .
Magnetic resonance imaging with intravenous contrast enhancement showed large intramuscular anteromedial thigh mass arising from the psoas muscle invading the pectineus muscle; it is seen encasing the posterior division of the obturator nerve. On T1-weighted image isointense signals with a decreased T2-weighted image signal intensity and a heterogeneous enhancement of the non-soft tissue component, with no bony involvement .
Chest X-ray was unremarkable. Subsequently, CT-guided biopsy was proceeded, the result of biopsy was in favor of hibernoma but well-differentiated liposarcoma cannot be ruled out. Hence, the patient was admitted electively and marginal resection of the mass was performed. Macroscopically, tan-red to brownish mass 11cm in length, firm, and rubber in consistency . On histopathology, multiloculated oval brown fat cells confirmed hibernoma-like lipoma variant.
Postoperatively, upon regular follow-ups in the clinic for 16 months, the patient is doing well, started to regain normal sensation over the medial aspect of the thigh with no sign of local recurrence.