A 76-year-old male patient presented with symptoms of an apical periodontitis proceeding from tooth 46. The periapical radiograph of tooth 46 revealed an overhang of an amalgam restauration into the distal interspace and a slight widening of the periodontal ligament was evident . Pulp sensibility testing (-78 °C) was negative while the occlusal percussion test was positive. The patient gave informed consent to root canal treatment of the affected tooth. The treatment was performed in three appointments. Following application of rubber dam, access cavity preparation and localization of the root canal orifices, an apex locator (Propex, Dentsply Sirona, Bensheim, Germany) was used for determination of the working lengths. Instrumentation of the canals was performed with both hand nickel-titanium (NiTi) files and engine-driven Hero Shaper (Micro Mega, Besançon, France) up to size 30 and 4% taper. All canals were extensively rinsed with a 2% sodium hypochlorite solution. However, during the first appointment an engine-driven instrument fractured in the apical portion of the distal root, which could not be removed . The patient was immediately informed about this circumstance and possible consequences. After the first and second appointment, calcium hydroxide was used as an intracanal dressing, and the access cavity was sealed with an intermediate restorative material. The root canal filling with gutta-percha and AH Plus (Dentsply Sirona, Bensheim, Germany) sealer was established according to the cold lateral compaction technique two weeks after the beginning of the treatment, while the patient was free of symptoms. The access cavity was sealed with an adhesively bonded composite (Tetric, Ivoclar Vivadent, Glattpark, Switzerland) core. The root canal fillings in both mesial root canals and distal root canal were short (about 1.5 mm from the apex in the distal root and about 3 mm from the apex in the mesial root) due to substantial intracanal calcification .
As the patient stayed free of symptoms, a full ceramic crown was inserted two months later to guarantee coronal sealing and stabilization of the tooth. One year later, the follow-up radiograph revealed slight translucencies around both root tips. The patient was elucidated about this finding and adequate treatment plans for solving this issue were explained . However, the patient refrained from further treatment options as he was free of symptoms and due to his age, he was not willing to put any further efforts in an asymptomatic tooth. Consequently, two years later the apical lesions increased significantly in size, which was documented radiographically and possibilities to address this issue were again discussed with the patient . But the patient still was not interested in any treatment option as he was still free of symptoms.
Another two years later, in total five years after root canal obturation, the patient was diagnosed with an AIP type 1, which was treated with prednisone 10 mg per day for one month and then on a low dose basis of 2.5 mg per day for long-term therapy . At this time the periapical lesions associated with booth roots remained nearly unchanged . Another two years later and still under the maintenance dosage of 2.5 mg of prednisone per day, the periapical lesions decreased in size, but even more at the mesial root . Three additional years later, which was in total 10 years after the root canal treatment and 5 years after beginning of glucocorticoid therapy, both lesions disappeared almost completely . Another year later (11 years after root canal treatment and 6 years after beginning of glucocorticoid therapy) the former lesions healed nearly completely . The patient is still instructed by his internist to continue lifelong with the glucocorticoid therapy taking 2.5 mg prednisone per day.