The patient was a 37-year-old woman. She was diagnosed with ossifying fibroma in the left side of the mandible, for which segmental mandibulectomy and scapular flap reconstruction were carried out in October 2018 at the Division of Oral and Maxillofacial Disease, Osaka University Dental Hospital . First, an incision was made in the left submandibular region, and the left inferior margin of the mandible was identified. The left mandibular first premolar was then extracted, and segmental mandibulectomy of the region posteriorly from the left first premolar and including the muscular process and the mandibular angle was performed. The left scapular flaps were a cutaneous flap of 13 × 5 cm2 and an osseous flap of 8 × 2.5 cm2, which were lifted with vascularization. The cutaneous flap and the osseous flap were adjusted in size to match the extent of the defect and implanted into the bone defect. For fixation of the osseous flap to the mandible, 2 titanium 4-hole miniplates were used at the mandibular body (anterior) and 1 4-hole miniplate and 1 2-hole miniplate were used at the mandibular branch (posterior). For revascularization of the cutaneous flap, the circumflex scapular artery in the flap was anastomosed to the left facial artery on the neck side, and the circumflex scapular vein was anastomosed to the left facial vein on the neck side to restore blood flow. The defect in the oral cavity was closed with the scapular cutaneous flap.
As a result of the surgery, the teeth from the mandibular left first premolar to the left second molar were missing, with all other teeth except the bilateral maxillary second molars remaining . After healing of the wound, prosthetic treatment of the missing mandibular left molars started at the Division of Prosthodontics, Osaka University Dental Hospital. First, a three-dimensional plaster model of the mandible was made from multidetector-row computed tomography (MDCT) imaging data , and the location and amount of bone growth in the secondary reconstruction were simulated in order to explore the best site for implant placement. Specifically, implant diagnostic simulation software (Landmark System, iCAT Corp., Osaka, Japan) was used to determine the ideal implant superstructure for occlusion on the basis of the position of opposing teeth, and virtual implants were placed directly under the superstructure. In the present case, the buccolingual width of the reconstructed area was significantly reduced as a result of the osseous flap reconstruction, and all of the virtual implants deviated from the bone. Given this situation, the quantity of bone ideally needed to support the implant was planned. The area corresponding to the lower left first premolar was close to the boundary between the mandibular bone and the grafted bone; to avoid implant placement at this site, a proximal cantilever bridge with implants at the left mandibular second premolar and first molar as abutments was planned for the final implant prosthetic device.
Secondary reconstruction using a particulate cancellous bone and marrow (PCBM) graft was performed by an oral surgeon in February 2020 on the basis of the results of the above simulation. First, an incision was made in the lower part of the left side of the mandible, and the inferior left margin of the mandible and the inferior margin of the scapula bone (the graft bone) were identified. The soft tissue attached to the graft bone was detached buccolingually to expose the whole area around the graft. Next, a titanium mesh plate that had been prepared in advance was placed, following the morphology of the bone from the inferior margin of the mandible and graft bone and fixed in position with screws . In the bone cavity created between the titanium mesh plate thus fixed and the grafted bone on the lingual side, corresponding to the defect of the lingual alveolar bone from the left first premolar to the second molar, a sufficient amount of PCBM harvested from the left ilium was grafted to the height of the alveolar apex.
After the wound had healed, cone-beam CT was carried out to reconfirm the quantity of grafted bone, and a final simulation of the implant placement was performed . A surgical template was fabricated, and implant placement surgery was then performed. First, the oral surgeon opened the center of the cutaneous flap in the oral cavity to reveal the grafted bone, and the prosthetist then placed the implants (Genesio Plus; φ3.8*10 mm, GC Company, Tokyo, Japan) at the planned sites (35 and 36) . Primary stability of each implant was under 20 Ncm because the bone density of the implant sites augmented by PCBM was relatively low.
After a 5-month unloading period, a second surgical procedure was performed to place the abutment and healing cap. Placement of the implant superstructure was judged to be difficult because the intraoral cutaneous flap had become thicker due to subcutaneous fatty tissue; therefore, the oral surgeon performed alveolar ridge plasty by reducing the amount of subcutaneous fatty tissue on the cutaneous flap and correcting the shape of the flap. The abutment and healing cap were then placed by the prosthetist. After waiting for the wound from the second procedure to heal, impressions were taken using the open-tray method, and provisional restorations were placed. After placement, peri-implant cleanliness and the occlusal relationship were carefully checked, precise impressions were taken again using the open-tray method, and a fixed partial denture fabricated by monolithic zirconia was tighten by fixing screws . To evaluate masticatory function, masticatory performance (Soshaku-noryoku sokuteiyou gummy jelly, UHA Mikakuto, Osaka, Japan) and maximum bite force (Dental Prescale II, GC, Tokyo, Japan) were evaluated before and after prosthetic treatment. Masticatory performance improved from a pre-prosthetic treatment score of 4 to a post-treatment score of 6 , and maximum bite force improved from a pre-treatment value of 398.8N to a post-treatment value of 658.4N . In addition, oral health-related QOL was evaluated using the Oral Health Impact Profile-14 (OHIP-14), which improved from a pre-treatment score of 15 to a post-treatment score of 1.