A 65-year-old gentleman, who is a known case of diabetes mellitus type 2, hypertension and ischemic heart disease, presented to our hospital with sudden painful unilateral vision loss. The patient was non-fluent aphasic with left sided facial palsy and weakness due to recurrent attacks of ischemic stroke.
His sudden onset of painful vision loss is located in the right eye, started at midnight, persistent and the patient can see only the light. There was no history of discharge, photophobia, eye swelling or redness, nausea, or vomiting. No evidence of trauma or headache was documented. He was on dual antiplatelets.
On admission, the patient was conscious, alert, and oriented. Neurological examination showed non-fluent aphasia, residual left-sided weakness, and old left facial palsy. The right-sided power was preserved while the left side was power 4 out of 5 with limb elevation unsustainability. Moreover, the sensation modalities were intact and the remaining systemic examination was unremarkable .
Head CT was done upon arrival, showing no evidence of ischemic or hemorrhagic brain insult and multiple right fronto-parietal old infarct lesions were detected. At this point cardiac origin of thromboembolization was suspected, which was ruled-out by ECG and ECHO.
Central retinal artery occlusion (CRAO) diagnosis was confirmed by an ophthalmologist.
Then, CT angiogram of the brain and carotids was done and revealed an obliterated, thrombosed, and non-opacified right internal carotid artery from the carotid bifurcation up to intracranial petrous/foramen lacerum segments with attenuated cavernous and supra-clinoid segments .
Anticoagulation started by the vascular team and further investigations were obtained such as carotid doppler for extracranial carotid system which showed :Thickened intima/media in both sides Right carotid system illustrated the totally occluded right ICA by a thrombus starting from its bulb and proceeding cranially. Left carotid system duplex scanning revealed average velocity along the carotid arteries and no areas of abnormal high velocity.
As a result, right carotid stump endarterectomy and ligation of the stump under general anesthesia was planned. During the procedure, dissection was done along the platysma and fibrous tissue bluntly, exposing the internal carotid up to the bifurcation using a self-retaining retractor. Then, the facial vein was ligated and a loop was placed superior and inferior to the common carotid. The incision made along the stump to remove the plaque, occluding the vessel. Next, blood backflow was checked and visualized within the vessel. Finally, closure of the carotid stump, muscle, subcutaneous sheath, and skin was performed. , illustrate the intraoperative findings.
The postoperative period was uneventful and the patient discharged on postoperative day two.