An otherwise healthy 22-year-old woman, who had accidentally worn her contact lenses over the course of one night, was referred to the Ophthalmic Department of Bari University, Bari, Italy for a 1-week history of ocular pain and photophobia in her left eye, which appeared red. The patient wore contact lenses to correct myopic refractive error. She had no history of trauma, and her drug and medical history were unremarkable. She was first referred to a private ophthalmologist, who had prescribed topical tetracycline and sulfamethylthiazole, both three times daily, and systemic azithromycin (250 mg, twice daily) at a private clinic. However, after 5 days of treatment, the patient came to our clinic because the symptoms had not improved.
Her best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/50, using a Snellen chart. On the first detailed slit-lamp examination (SL9900 Slit Lamp, CSO, Florence, Italy), she exhibited full involvement of the anterior segment with severe conjunctival and ciliary congestion, along with a substantial paracentral corneal abscess in her left eye. The anterior chamber and underlying structures were not fully explorable because of the extent of the corneal lesion. There was no suspected scleral or intraocular extension of the infection. Her fellow eye examination was normal, with a BCVA of 20/20. The patient underwent B-scan ultrasonography (HiScan Touch Unit, Optikon, Rome, Italy) of the left eye, which revealed no signs of posterior pole involvement (vitritis, retinal detachment, etc.). Conjunctival swabs were then obtained, and specimens were collected and subjected to combined smear microscopy and culture. Since the patient was no longer in possession of her contact lenses, smear and culture of the contact lens and its container was not possible. Due to the serious conditions of the patient and the non-response to the previous treatment regimen, her medication was switched to intravenous ceftriaxone (Roche Pharma, Basel, Switzerland) 2 g once daily, along with a drop of 1% atropine (Farmigea, Pisa, Italy) 2 times daily, ofloacin (Allergan; Ocuflo; Dublin, Ireland) eye drops 4 times daily, and topical gentamicin (ribomicin eye drops; Farmigea, SPA, Pisa, Italy) 4 times daily.
Within 2 days of starting the new treatment regimen, the patient’s ophthalmic condition had worsened severely; her BCVA deteriorated and dropped to counting fingers. On slit lamp examination, the abscess had extended to two-thirds of the corneal surface, with fibrinous strands in the anterior chamber and no visible details. Conjunctival swabs showed the presence of Aspergillus spp. Because of the unrelenting deterioration, she was scheduled to undergo penetrating keratoplasty, which was performed on the same day.
Microbiological examination of the explanted cornea revealed numerous SA colonies. On the advice of an infectious disease specialist, the patient’s therapy was adjusted to an hourly fortified antifungal eye drop (VRCZ 1 % solution; Vfend, Pfizer Inc., New York, NY, USA), and intravenous VRCZ, 6 mg/kg once, twice daily (Vfend; Pfizer Inc.). Within 1 week of discharge, the patient showed mild conjunctival hyperemia, the donor cornea was well positioned with a continuous nylon suture, and the anterior chamber was clear and showed normal depth. The dilated fundus examination results were normal. She continued therapy with hourly fortified VRCZ eye drops and oral itraconazole 100 mg twice daily (Janssen Pharmaceutica, Beerse, Belgium). Two weeks later, the condition of her left eye was stable, with mild corneal edema and no sign of acute graft rejection. Her BCVA improved to 20/25, and all medications were discontinued, except for the steroid eye drop. The patient was scheduled for a 1-month follow-up.
This case report received ethical approval from the Ophthalmic Department of Bari University, Bari, Italy. Informed consent was obtained from this case report at the time of hospitalization.