A 38-years-old Caucasian man was referred to the Ophthalmology Unit of the AUSL-IRCCS Hospital of Reggio Emilia, complaining progressive decrease vision in his right eye over the past few years. His history was negative for systemic and ophthalmic diseases, eye rubbing, and allergic conjunctivitis. All the available family members examined were negative for any physical or ocular abnormalities.
On presentation, uncorrected visual acuity was “hand motion” in the right eye, due to a high degree compound myopic astigmatism, and 20/20 unaided in the fellow eye. Following application of a rigid gas permeable contact lens (CL) the visual acuity in the right eye improved to 20/40.
At the slit-lamp examination, the cornea in the right eye showed advanced ectasia with Vogt striae and faint apical scar. Extensive iris atrophy with multiple transillumination defects, mostly in the inferior quadrant was found . The pupil was oval and decentered super-nasally, with a diameter of approximately 3 mm, poorly reacting to light. Intraocular pressure (IOP) measured by Goldman applanation tonometry was 26 mmHg in the right on topical therapy with timolol 0.5%, brinzolamide 0.1% and travoprost 0.001%. The left eye presented a normal IOP of 13 mmHg.
Gonioscopy revealed the presence of peripheral anterior synechiae for 360° with extensive obstruction of the trabecular meshwork in the right eye and normal open-angle in the fellow eye. Optic disc in the right eye showed severe glaucomatous changes. No fundus alterations were found in the left eye.
Endothelial microscopy (CEM 530 Specular Microscope, Nidek Medical Srl) revealed a severely abnormal endothelium in the right eye with undefined cell morphology. The left eye presented a cell density of 2340 cell/mm2 with regular morphology.
Corneal tomography (Pentacam HR, Oculus) confirmed the diagnosis of bilateral KC with more severe involvement of the right eye. Pachymetry map showed the thinnest point measuring 177 μm in the right eye. The left eye presented topographic signs of a forme fruste KC with a central pachymetry thickness of 549 μm .
In the right eye, the Humphrey visual field (HFA II 750, Carl Zeiss Meditech Inc., Dublin, CA) showed severe tubular constriction. Visual field in the left eye was normal.
Because of the severe glaucomatous damage in the right eye, the uncontrolled IOP on maximum tolerated medical therapy, and a stable corneal disease a glaucoma drainage device implantation (GDI) was advised.
A 350 mm2 Bearveldt tube insert (BGI; Abbott Medical Optics, Abbott Park, IL) was implanted. A fornix based conjunctival flap was lifted, the endplate was positioned in the superior-temporal quadrant and sutured to the sclera at a measured distance of 10 mm from the limbus. The tube was inserted into the anterior chamber away from the corneal endothelium. The limbal portion of the tube was covered with a donor scleral patch . Surgery was uneventful.
GDI implant was positioned well away from limbus not to disturb the CL, that continued to be well tolerated. After 3 months from surgery, IOP reached a stable value of 16 mmHg without anti glaucomatous topical therapy.