A 21-year-old previously healthy man was performing construction work when he slipped and fell from a 30-foot roof. He sustained a closed left-sided sacral fracture as well as right superior and inferior pubic ramus fractures. The patient initially had a pulse of 135 bpm, blood pressure of 104/63 mmHg, and hemoglobin of 11.7 g/dl. He received normal saline and 2 units of packed red cells. His pulse decreased to 104 bpm and blood pressure increased to 121/60 mmHg. Chest radiographs and FAST (focused assessment with sonography for trauma) examination were normal. At 12 hours, he remained hemodynamically stable (pulse 90 bpm, blood pressure 130/88 mmHg, and hemoglobin 10.1 g/dl).
On physical examination, the patient had severe pain in his left buttock. He was alert and oriented and had no other injuries. He had a left-sided foot drop. He had otherwise normal motor function including normal perianal sensation and rectal tone. AP pelvis radiographs and coronal and axial computed tomography (CT) cuts demonstrated left superior and inferior ramus fractures with a comminuted Denis zone 2 sacral fracture. There were fractures also laterally at the sacral alae . There were fractures of the left L4 and L5 transverse processes indicative of vertical instability, making this a type C pelvic ring injury. The patient was started on enoxaparin and sequential compression boots for deep venous thrombosis within 12 hours of admission. His fluid requirement was 1900 ml, 1560 ml, and 1090 ml of normal saline over the first 12, 24, and 48 hours, respectively.
While awaiting surgical clearance for fixation of the sacrum, the patient's pelvis was stabilized with circumferential sheeting which had been placed when the patient initially arrived. The patient was gently repositioned every 4 hours alternately placing a pillow under either the left or the right lumbar spine and buttock to diminish the risk of decubitus ulcer formation. Within 24 hours of admission, the patient demonstrated clinical and radiographic evidence of ARDS and required intubation and positive pressure ventilation. Bilateral infiltrates were noted on chest radiographs and chest CT. ORIF was delayed until the patient's pulmonary function resolved. However, 72 hours after admission, the patient still required significant positive pressure ventilation. One possible etiology of the pulmonary failure was thought to be multiple fat emboli released by motion at the sacral fracture site. Therefore, the decision was made to provide more rigid provisional skeletal stabilization using the pelvic C-clamp to, theoretically, reduce the fat embolic load to the lungs.
The patient was taken to the operating room intubated and under ventilator support. The patient was positioned supine on a radiolucent flat table. The pelvic sheet was removed. Posterior pelvic skin was intact with no evidence of ecchymosis or degloving injury. After prepping and draping, a starting point was identified by fluoroscopically locating the intersection of a line along the long axis of the femoral shaft and perpendicular to this line at the level of the anterior superior iliac spine. The side struts of the pelvic C-clamp (Synthes, PA) with attached spikes were passed through stab incision until the tips of the spikes contacted the lateral cortex of the flat portion of the ilium directly opposite the S1 body. Spike tips were hammered into the iliac cortex. The struts were manually compressed, and the outer screws were tightened to secure the frame. Screw tightening is performed under fluoroscopic guidance to avoid over compression of the zone 2 sacral fracture .
Within 24 hours of C-clamp application, the patient's pulmonary function improved. The fraction of inspired oxygen and positive end-expiratory pressure decreased from 100% to 50% and 8 cm H2O to 5 cm H2O, respectively. The patient was kept intubated. Forty-eight hours after C-clamp application, the patient was returned to the operating room for definitive ORIF. The C-clamp was removed, and the patient was placed prone on a radiolucent flat table. Prepping and draping were performed, and the patient received intravenous antibiotics prior to skin incision. A midline skin incision was performed, with dissection carried out to the sacroiliac joints. The sacral fracture was debrided of interposing hematoma and periosteum. Reduction was performed using a pelvic reduction forceps placed on the spinous process and lateral ilium, and Schanz pins placed in the posterior superior iliac spines . Under fluoroscopic imaging, a sacroiliac screw was placed in the left sacrum, S1 body and extending into the right sacrum. Care was taken not to over compress the fracture site. A reconstruction plate was added posteriorly as a tension band plate .
The patient was extubated within 12 hours after surgery. He was maintained on 20 lbs foot flat weight bearing for 3 months. At one-year postop, the patient ambulates without assistive devices . He has no pain and does not use an ankle foot orthosis, although he continues to lack active ankle dorsiflexion.