A 78-year-old Japanese woman with diabetes mellitus was admitted to our institution with a 1-week history of back pain and a 1-day history of paralysis of both legs. She had been bedridden for a week prior to admission in another hospital. There was no history of trauma. No gastrointestinal symptoms were present. Her temperature was 36.8°C, blood pressure was 100/70mmHg, and pulse was 103 beats per minute. On physical examination, her patellar tendon reflexes were present, but Achilles tendon reflexes were absent. All sensory modalities were absent below the inguinal level. Her leg muscles were completely paralyzed bilaterally. There was no anal wink. Anal tone was diminished, and there was no voluntary contraction of the external sphincter.
Admission laboratory values included a white blood cell count (WBC) of 18,800 per mm3, her hemoglobin was 9.4g/dL, and her hematocrit was 30%. Her Westergren erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 80mm/hour, and C-reactive protein (CRP) was 30.02mg/dL. Initial radiographic examination of her lumbar spine at admission showed only spondylotic change. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed soft tissue swelling anterolaterally at intervertebral disc level T11/12 and a gas-containing epidural abscess that compressed her spinal cord . Magnetic resonance imaging showed involvement of the T11/12 disc space and adjacent vertebral body with decreased signal intensity on T1-weighted images and increased signal intensity on T2-weighted images with a gas-containing epidural abscess .
The patient was urgently admitted to our hospital and taken to the operating room for decompression and disc debridement. Hemilaminectomy was done from T10 to T12, and the epidural abscess was removed, followed by T11/12 disc debridement. The epidural abscess was yellow and turbid. Cultures later grew C. perfringens and Escherichia coli. The wound was closed over subfascial drains.
On the second postoperative day, she was confused, and hydrothorax appeared. Thoracic drainage was then performed by a surgeon. Intravenous antibiotic treatment was begun with imipenem/cilastatin at 0.5g every 8 hours for 2 weeks, followed by piperacillin/tazobactam at 1.0g every 8 hours for 2 weeks, and then ampicillin-sulbactam at 1.0g every 8 hours for 2 weeks.
Postoperatively, she experienced some sensory and motor return in her legs, but back pain and left chest pain in the sitting position continued. A CT scan 6 weeks after the operation showed T12 vertebral bone destruction ; her WBC count and CRP were 8800 per mm3 and 0.26mg/dL, respectively. She went on to have fusion surgery with instrumentation and subsequently experienced complete relief of her pain. She was discharged 2 months later, at which time she was able to walk with a cane. Examination 18 months after surgery showed normal gait without a cane. Plain radiograph at 18 months after operation showed complete union between the T11 and T12 vertebral bodies .