An 80-year-old woman was admitted to her home doctor’s practice with abdominal pain and fever. She was diagnosed with acute cholecystitis via ultrasonography (US) and was successfully treated with antibiotics. When biliary colic relapsed, the patient was referred to our hospital. She had suffered from hypertension for 10 years. There were no special notes in her family history or from her relevant physical examination, nor were there any other significant clinical findings.
First, images obtained by US showed gallbladder duplication and an elevated lesion with a diameter of 1 cm in the proximal portion, which was identified as an accessory gallbladder . An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan with enhancement revealed a low-density mass with early enhancement in the proximal gallbladder. Direct liver invasion was less conspicuous on CT imaging . Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) revealed that both cystic ducts had diverged from the common bile duct individually, so an H-type duplicated gallbladder was considered according to Boyden’s classification . Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) indicated a hypoechoic lesion with a ragged edge, and an increased central area signified penetration into the hepatic parenchyma through the gallbladder bed . The maximum standardized uptake value (SUV) from 18F-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) was revealed as 5.97 at the accessory gallbladder. No other metastases were identified in any of the images . The patient’s laboratory tests revealed a normal complete blood count and mild liver dysfunction with an indocyanine green plasma disappearance rate of 15% at 15 min. The serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level, carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) level, and serum SPan-1 antigen level were 2.2 ng/mL (normal range, < 5 ng/mL), 35.6 U/mL (normal range, < 37 U/mL), and 21 U/mL (normal range, < 30 U/mL), respectively. Consequently, the patient was diagnosed with advanced gallbladder carcinoma of the accessory gallbladder (H-type), stage IIIA (T3, N0, M0) according to the 8th edition of the UICC TNM classification of malignant tumors . The total liver volume (TLV) was estimated to be 832 mL by three-dimensional volumetric simulation software (Synapse Vincent®; Fujifilm, Tokyo, Japan), and the volume for the limited resection of segments 4a and 5 was estimated to be 93 mL, which was equivalent to 11.2% of the TLV. A double gallbladder was clearly identified macroscopically after laparotomy . Intraoperative cholangiography was performed in the primary cystic duct with a near-infrared ray vision system (Photo Dynamic Eye®: PDE, HAMAMATSU Photonics, Shizuoka, Japan), which revealed a pair of cystic ducts that had been diagnosed preoperatively . Intraoperative frozen-section examination of the accessory cystic duct was submitted. Although radical dissection of the lymph nodes in the hepatoduodenal ligament, including the no. 13 lymph nodes on the posterior surface of the pancreatic head, was performed during the examination while preserving the biliary tract using a near-infrared ray vision system, no enlarged lymph nodes were found. As several studies have addressed, a near-infrared ray vision system can be useful for visualizing the extrahepatic biliary anatomy during hepatobiliary surgery. The pathological report from the frozen specimen proved negative for carcinoma at the surgical margin, so sectionectomy of S4a and 5 with MGs was performed. The operation time was 325 min, and the intraoperative blood loss was 550 mL. No blood transfusion was needed. Examination of the resected specimen showed that the gallbladder wall was thin, and the demarcation between the wall and the mass was clear. The mass was pedunculated with a fine stalk, and there was space between the mass and the gallbladder wall. Pathological examination of the surgical specimen revealed biliary type adenocarcinoma (WHO); papillary adenocarcinoma; papillary expanding type (9 × 7 mm); pTis (M); int, ly0; v0; ne0; pEM0; pCM0; pPV0; pA0; pR0; and pN0 (0/7). The disease progressed through stages Tis, N0, and M0 and ultimately to stage 0 (according to the 8th edition of the UICC TNM classification of malignant tumors ) . Seven days after the operation, portal thrombosis of the posterior branch was revealed, and conservative therapy was indicated; satisfactory results were achieved. The patient was discharged 65 days after surgery. No recurrence was observed for 1 year after surgery.