A 58-year-old male patient who experienced a sudden fall was sent to the emergency room of the First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University with speech difficulties and a lack of movement in his left limbs. On Aug. 26, 2016, a computed tomography (CT) scan of his head showed a hematoma in the upper part of the right forehead, and coronal contrast-enhanced T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) suggested a tumor lesion at the right frontal sagittal sinus .
The tumor mass was surgically removed and the patient recovered well. However, 3 days after the operation, a CT scan of his brain and chest revealed three lumps on the right side of the chest . Twenty-three days after the first operation, the patient underwent thoracic surgery to remove two lumps from the lung parenchyma. The third lump was not removed because it was very closely associated with the aorta and bronchi.
Post-operative pathology showed that both the intracranial tumor and lung tumors were grade I meningiomas with similar marker expression (epithelial membrane antigen negative, S100 protein negative, somatostatin receptor 2 positive, vimentin positive, signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 negative, smooth muscle actin negative, CD34a negative, cytokeratin AE1/AE3 negative and Ki67 3–5% positive). This diagnosis was independently confirmed by Huashan Hospital Fudan University . The patient received no additional radiation or chemotherapy post-surgery. At the 1-year follow-up visit, he was able to care for himself, and a further CT scan suggested no recurrence of the intracranial tumor and no progression of the remaining lump in the right chest .
Extracranial metastases of meningiomas are extremely rare, so we performed WES of the patient using paraffin-embedded tumor tissues and blood samples to obtain an overview of the somatic mutation landscape. Blood and lung tumor tissue were sequenced at a depth of around 100×, while the brain tumor was sequenced at a depth of more than 500× to identify possible genetic heterogeneity that may be associated with metastasis .
WES revealed 97 and 28 somatic mutations in the brain tumor and lung metastasis, respectively, that passed the MuTect2 filter with an allele frequency > 0.01 . Twelve mutations (including five synonymous mutations) were shared by the original tumor and its metastasis . Among all mutations, the only known driver mutation causative of meningiomas was a frameshift deletion of NF2, which was present in both brain and lung tumors. We validated this mutation by Sanger sequencing . No other driver mutations from Intogen’s list of ~ 500 pan-cancer driver genes were shared by the two tumors.
NF2 mutations are the most frequent in meningiomas, and loss of NF2 has been confirmed to cause meningioma in a mouse model . Loss of NF2 protein also leads to the elevation of Yap1, a downstream effector protein , and we visualized increased Yap1 using immunohistochemistry in both the primary brain tumor and its lung metastasis . Among the other genes carrying nonsynonymous mutations that were shared between the brain and lung tumors , the functions of YBX3 and CDT1 have previously been studied in different types of cancers [, ]. and YBX3 protein was reported to inhibit intestinal cell differentiation and promote epithelial cell proliferation [, ]. CDT1 is required to initiate DNA replication, while CDT1 overexpression promoted re-replication and malignant behavior [, ].
Our patient harbored a frameshift mutation of YBX3 and a CDT1 G164D mutation in both tumors. Since YBX3′s mRNA level in brain is very low and it’s known to play an oncogenic role in cancers, the frameshift mutation of YBX3 in the patient is less likely to drive tumor formation. Although effect of G164D mutation on the CDT1 protein is unknown. We used REVEL and M-CAP algorithms to predict the consequence of the mutation, and found it to have a minimal impact on protein function . The only known driver mutation detected by MuTect2 that was unique to the lung tumor was a G to A substitution in CHD8 that results in an R1303Q change in the protein sequence. However, the frequency of this mutation is low, and it failed to pass the filter of two additional caller algorithms, Strelka and Varscan2 .
Genomic studies from other solid tumors suggested that tumors contain multiple subpopulations (clones) with distinct genomic profiles. These clones may grow, evolve, and regress during disease progression or treatment. Thus, tumors from one metastatic site usually evolve from one subclone of the original tumor to contain additional mutations . It has also been established that increased intratumoral heterogeneity is associated with tumor recurrence in meningiomas . To explore the heterogeneity of the original brain tumor and its relationship with pulmonary metastasis, we used the sciClone R package to evaluate mutation data. Surprisingly, only one dominant clone was found in the brain tumor, and it was also shared by the metastatic tumor .
The immune system prevents extracranial metastasis of brain tumors such as glioblastomas (GBMs) in a response involving MHC-I proteins . We genotyped the type I human leukocyte antigen (HLA) of the patient using OptiType and HLA-HD algorithms but did not identify any mutations in HLA type I genes.