A 15-year-old otherwise healthy boy presented to the Cornea Service at Rabin Medical Center complaining of foreign body sensation, burning, tearing, and irritation in both eyes accompanied by mild transient photophobia. One year's treatment with topical steroids and various antibiotics had been associated with only partial remission with intermittent exacerbations. Clinical examination showed a best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of 6/9 OU with correction. Intraocular pressure was 15 mmHg in both eyes. No pathologic findings were noted in the eyelids. There was only trace conjunctival injection. On slit-lamp examination, discrete, centrally located, slightly elevated, grayish-white corneal subepithelial opacities were detected, with a granular texture bilaterally . They did not stain with fluorescent dye. The anterior chambers and vitreous were clear, with no inflammatory reaction, cells, flare or any kind of opacification. A diagnosis of TSPK was made on the basis of the clinical appearance of bilateral superficial punctuate epithelial keratopathy with minimal conjunctival reaction, the chronicity of the disease with remissions and exacerbations, and the partial response to topical corticosteroids. The patient did not agree to use soft contact lenses, and he was already receiving topical corticosteroids for a long period. Therefore, we decided on a trial with topical cyclosporin A. After receiving consent from the patient and his family, the patient was prescribed 0.5% cyclosporin A drops in castor oil 3 times a day.
Over the next 3 months, there was a slow but noticeable improvement in clinical symptoms. On follow-up slit-lamp examination, the corneal subepithelial opacities had cleared almost completely, and the minimal conjunctival injection had disappeared. Continued treatment for the next 4 years led to total regression of the disease. Every attempt to taper the cyclosporin A treatment resulted in a reappearance of symptoms and of corneal opacities.
At the most recent follow-up visit, 4.5 years after presentation, the patient was still applying cyclosporin A drops 3 times daily. He had no symptoms. Visual acuity was 6/6 in both eyes. There was no conjunctival inflammation, and the corneas were clear without opacification. Endothelial cell count was within normal range in both eyes.