We describe a case of scabies infection in a 19 year old Caucasia female at 27 weeks gestation that presented complaining of a two month history of a rash on the breast, face and abdomen with intense itching. No systemic symptoms were described. The physical examination demonstrated an erythematous, papular rash in these areas. No vesicles or bullae were seen. Skin biopsies were obtained for hematoxylin and eosin (H & E) histologic examination, as well as for direct immunofluorescence (DIF). Following the biopsy procedures, 60 mg of prednisone was administered intramuscularly to address the intense itching; all other clinical prenatal tests were normal. Following clinical clearance, no recurrence of the primary rash was appreciated. In addition, no post-scabies eczema was detected.
Routine H & E staining was performed; DIF of four micron thick skin cryosections was also performed, with multiple fluorescein isothiocyanate ( FITC)-conjugated secondary antibodies. We utilized the following antibodies of rabbit origin: 1) anti-human IgG, 2) anti-human IgA, 3) anti-human IgM, 4) anti-human fibrinogen, 5) anti-human albumin, and 6) anti-human C5-9 (membrane attack complex of complement (MAC)), all from Dako (Carpinteria, California, USA). We also utilized 7) anti-human Complement/C1q (Southern Biotech, Birmingham, Alabama, USA). To colocalize the immune response of the patients with neural structures, we stained for 8) anti-human glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), conjugated with Cy3 (Sigma Aldrich, St Louis, Missouri, USA). We also utilized 9) anti-ezrin and 10) anti-junctional adhesion molecule (JAM-1; also known as platelet adhesion molecule, or CD321 antigen) monoclonal antibodies at 1:50 dilutions (Invitrogen Corporation, Carlsbad, California, USA); the secondary antibodies were Alexa Fluor® 647-conjugated anti-mouse IgG antibodies . The slides were then counterstained with 4’, 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (Dapi) (Pierce, Rockford, Illinois, USA).
Note H&E sections of Sarcoptes scabei mites, located immediately beneath the stratum corneum of the epidermis Spongiosis was observed within the epidermal stratum spinosum. A florid, superficial and deep, perivascular dermal infiltrate of lymphocytes, histiocytes, eosinophils and neutrophils was present (, red arrows). Some inflammation and necrosis of some of the eccrine sweat glands was also detected (, black arrows). also displays our DIF and IHC results.