The patient was a 3-month-old girl born at 40 weeks of gestational age with a birth weight of 2600 g. She was the first child of healthy non-consanguineous parents. She had no history of phototherapy for jaundice. Newborn Screening and regular 1-month checkup were unremarkable. At 2 months of age, the patient’s mother noticed jaundice and discolored stool and visited a local clinic. The infant’s weight gain had been insufficient during the last month. Her body weight remained around 4500 g despite the fact that she had been fully breastfed 8 to 10 times/day. She had icteric sclera and her skin was yellowish brown. Laboratory examinations showed a total bilirubin concentration of 9.74 mg/dl, direct bilirubin concentration of 5.64 mg/dl, and prothrombin time–international normalized ratio of 1.2. The patient was referred to our hospital after intravenous vitamin K infusion.
Although she was in good condition, yellowing of the sclera was evident and the skin was brownish in color. She excreted creamy grayish-white stools. Blood test data at the time of admission were AST 195 U/L, ALT 43 U/L, GGT 95 U/L, albumin 3.7 g/dl, AFP 35898.7 ng/ml, T-chol 196 mg/dl, and triglycerides 233 mg/dl. At the last follow-up at 13 months of age, the data were AST 69 U/L, ALT 29 U/L, GGT 83 U/L, albumin 4.5 g/dl, total cholesterol 208 mg/dl, and triglycerides 233 mg/dl. And no evidence of Epstein-Barr virus, Cytomegalovirus, Hepatitis A, B, and C virus was found in this case. Serum amino acid analysis showed a normal citrulline level of 39.9 nmol/ml and an elevated threonine concentration of 385.0 nmol/ml. The threonine/serine ratio was within the normal range. Abdominal ultrasonography confirmed the presence of a gallbladder and the absence of the triangular cord sign in the hilar region, and 24-h biliary scintigraphy showed poor excretion. Biliary atresia was ruled out by cholangiography. We performed laparoscopic liver biopsy. Macroscopically, the liver was generally yellow due to cholestasis. Pathological examination demonstrated cholestasis and hydropic changes, no obvious inflammatory cell infiltration within the lobule, no evidence of fat deposition , and a mild ductular reaction in the margins of the portal area as confirmed by cytokeratin 7 immunohistochemistry . The bile ducts were adequate in number, and the interlobular bile duct count/portal vein count ratio was about 0.7. Berlin blue staining revealed iron (hemosiderin) deposition in the periportal hepatocytes . Immunostaining for adipophilin, a fatty droplet-binding protein, showed positive staining in the cytoplasm of the hepatocytes; however, the perivacuolar areas were not clearly stained, indicating no evidence of steatosis .
Genetic analysis revealed compound heterozygous variants in SLC25A13: NM_014251.3, c.674C > A(p.Ser225*), and c.1801G > T(p.Glu601*). The infant’s father and mother were found to be carriers of each mutation. She was diagnosed with NICCD and treated with ursodeoxycholic acid. Her bilirubin concentration gradually declined and her jaundice improved. Her stool color returned to normal. She was fed medium-chain triglyceride milk and her body weight increased. At 5 months of age, she resumed consumption of normal milk and breast milk, and her stool color improved. Her body weight exceeded 5000 g, and her total bilirubin concentration decreased to around 2 mg/dl. She was discharged from the hospital at 4 months of age. She was in good condition after discharge and showed normal psychomotor development at the last follow-up at 13 months of age.