A 49-year-old man came to the clinic because of episodes of hemoptysis. He had no accompanying symptoms including chronic cough, sweating, or weight loss. Episodes were not related to digestion or any other condition and contained little fresh blood. He denied any history of significant pulmonary infection including tuberculosis. He had a history of falling from a height of 6 m 7 months ago causing left-sided hemothorax and was treated with a tube thoracostomy. No other information was available about that incident. On physical examination, he had normal vital signs. Chest examination revealed no significant finding except for the scar of tube thoracostomy. Other organs were unremarkable. He underwent a thoracic CT angiography. On CT angiogram descending aortic injury distal to the left subclavian artery branch of the aortic arc was seen. There were at least two contrast-enhanced outpouchings with diameters of about 50 mm on the medial and lateral sides of the descending aorta containing thrombosis. One of them had close proximity to the left main bronchus. .
As soon as the CTA was reviewed, the patient was scheduled for endovascular repair of the thoracic aorta. In a hybrid operation room and under general anesthesia, vascular access was obtained from right common femoral artery. Digital subtraction angiography was performed and critical points were marked, including the left subclavian artery orifice, proximal margin and distal extension of injury, and the diameter of the aorta . After final measurements, a 34 ∗ 161 stent graft was deployed in the aorta from the inferior margin of the left subclavian artery to the distal of the injured segment of the aorta, excluding pseudoaneurysms from the circulation. Completion angiography showed no contrast blush in regular or delayed sequences . The patient left the hospital 2 days after the operation and hemoptysis did not occurred then after. CT angiography 2 months later revealed remodeling of the thoracic aorta and complete thrombosis of pseudoaneurysms .