A 15-year-old girl of Caucasian French origin was referred to a paediatric rheumatologist for recurrent pain in her fingertips in the last few months, with gradual onset. She had no past medical history, and no surgical history except for one tonsillectomy. She was born with a monozygous twin to non-consanguineous parents.
At first visit, she complained of pain in her fingers and toes that had appeared a few months previously. Progressively, she presented drumstick fingers, and then multiple bone pain localization (metatarsals, wrists).
Pulmonary function test, cardiac investigation and capillaroscopy were normal. Sensory or motor impairment, joint or skin involvement, calcinosis, Raynaud’s syndrome, signs of dysthyroidism or diabetes were not found. Respiratory examination was normal, and the differential diagnosis of hypertrophying osteoarthropathy could be excluded.
otological examination found an auditory defect at 45 dB only at 2000 Hz. Ophthalmological examination reported mild hyperopia.
She presented some clinical features not reported in other members of her family: slender frame, high forehead, facial asymmetry, moderate scoliosis. Her growth was regular and homogeneous.
The patient declared no repeated microtrauma of extremities or any unusual exposure to vinyl chloride.
Initial laboratory tests found no inflammatory syndrome, and blood count was normal. There were no autoantibodies or immune deficiency. Phosphocalcic exploration was considered normal. The corrected value of calcaemia was a little low (2.02 mmol/L) but with a normal level of ionized calcium. This could be explained by a level of vitamin D3 below standard values but could not explain the symptoms. Leprosy was not looked for, given no travel in affected areas and a perfectly normal lifestyle and hygiene.
The first radiological examination found transverse AO of all the distal phalanges in both fingers and toes and confirmed scoliosis.
In some metatarsals, the bone was found to have a nodular, heterogeneous appearance, suggestive of a fracture-consolidation cycle.
A number of enchondromas and cortical defects were also found, located on the metaphysical part of the fibula and tibia . Sclerosis was found in the left horizontal branch of the mandibula, with no malignancy.
Since the symptom of AO was retained, a diagnostic evaluation was carried out.
Besides medical examination, a bibliographical search of the MEDLINE biomedical database was made using the keywords “acro-osteolysis” and “enchondromatosis” to identify any previously reported cases.
The clinical and radiographic examination initially directed diagnosis towards a Hajdu-Cheney syndrome, soon discarded owing to the presence of long-bone lesions and the absence of NOTCH2 mutation. Despite the absence of obvious deafness and dental anomalies, the diagnosis of familial osteolysis related to mutations in the TFNRSF11A gene was also suspected. The molecular study of this gene did not reveal any abnormality. At the same time, the laboratory test results ruled out acquired or lysosomal AO. In view of the atypicality of this AO, genetic investigation on DNA microarray was prescribed. Patient’s and legal guardian’s consent were obtained prior to genetic testing.
A bone biopsy was performed during the femoral graft intervention. It showed viable bone span, surrounded by new bone with an irregular contour area in some cases, associated with a resorption area sometimes filled with osteoclasts or osteoid spans, surrounded by osteoblasts and fibrosis. These results suggest a hyperactivity of osteoclasts, with bone degenerative involvement and fibrosis, which can explain fragility and fractures (Additional file ). These kinds of anomaly had already been noted in a previous case .
Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) array analysis was performed on genomic DNA isolated from peripheral blood lymphocytes (Maxwell 16 Promega© kit Low Elution Volume) using an oligonucleotide microarray (60 K; Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, California) according to the manufacturer’s protocol to identify possible genomic copy number aberrations. The results were interpreted with the Agilent Cytogenomics 4.03.12 software. Genomic positions were defined using NCBI37/hg19.
QMF-PCR was performed as previously described by Niel et al. on a Professional thermocycler (Biometra) to confirm the aberration identified by array-CGH. Primers (sequences available on request) were designed in PTHLH for exons 1, 2 and 3. Exon 4 of CFTR [cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator on chromosome 7] and exon 6 of PLP1 [proteolipid protein 1 on chromosome X] genes were co-amplified as controls. Briefly, the principle is based on comparisons of the fluorescent profiles of multiplex PCR fragments, the amplification being stopped at the exponential phase. This procedure allows the detection of heterozygous deletions (twofold reduction of fluorescence intensity) and heterozygous duplications (1.5-fold increase). The forward primers were labelled with the fluorescent phosphoramidite 6-FAM dye. The PCR reactions were performed in duplicate in 25 µl reactions using the QIAGEN Multiplex PCR kit (Qiagen, Courtaboeuf, France), with 300 ng of genomic DNA and a mix of primers (concentration range 0.1–0.8 mM). The reaction started with an initial denaturation of 15 min at 95˚C, followed by 19 cycles at 95˚C for 30 s, 55˚C for 30 s, and 72˚C for 45 s, and a final extension of 10 min at 72˚C. Then 2 ml of the purified PCR products were added to 9.8 ml formamide and 0.2 ml Genescan-500 Rox size standard (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). The fluorescent PCR products were separated on a 16-capillary sequencer (ABI PRISM 3100 Genetic Analyzer, Applied Biosystems). The results were processed by Genescan 3.7 software (Applied Biosystems) to obtain electropherograms for each sample. Each product was identified by its size, and fluorescence intensities were correlated to the copy number of the relevant exons.
Array CGH revealed a gain of genomic copy number at chromosome 12p11.22-p11.23 with a size of 900 kb encompassing the PTHLH gene and confirmed by QMF-PCR. According to the February 2009 human reference sequence (NCBI Build 37-Hg19) on the University of California Santa Cruz (UCSC) Genome Browser, the duplication occurred in chromosome 12, extending from base 27,232,251 (the first-deleted probe) to base 28,123,884 (the last-deleted probe). No other abnormality was observed, apart from well-known benign copy number variations. Follow-up kin study showed an amplification of PTHLH in the proband’s mother (data not shown). In French law, genetic examinations can be prescribed for a minor only if he or she can personally benefit from immediate preventive or curative measures, which was not the case here insofar as the patient’s sister, a minor, had no bone symptoms.
Because of reported cases of repeated fractures in the literature, we started a bisphosphonate treatment (9 mg/kg/year, 3 sequences of 3 days, every four months). Recurrent pain (first mechanical then mixed) was treated with self-administered analgesics after a period of therapeutic education, resulting in overall pain relief in the extremities. Two years after the first visit, the patient presented a cotyloid fracture initially treated with iliac grafting. Unfortunately, the hip evolved towards destruction of the cotyloid bottom, requiring total hip prosthesis at age 17 years . Shortly after surgery, a severe L5-S1 spondylolisthesis appeared with posterior sacrum rocking requiring anterior-posterior arthrodesis (Additional file ). Since then, the patient has regularly presented atypical mild fractures: long bones and ribs requiring brief immobilization. These may occur without trauma but induced persistent pain and reduced quality of life. The last serious fracture was femoral, treated by bone graft, unfortunately with failure of the treatment. Bisphosphonates are regularly adjusted according to the progress of the bone remodelling process (alkaline phosphatase, beta-crosslaps, procollagen type 1 N-terminal propeptide). We did not use denosumab as the patient presented lesions of the mandibulae with a risk of osteonecrosis. We cannot be sure that this treatment is effective in this case, but there are no alternatives, and no perspective of good progression at this point.