The case was a 5-year-old-girl, who was admitted to the hospital with a 2-year history of intermittent convulsions. She was born to healthy, unrelated parents. Her mother had slight vaginal bleeding for one week at the three months pregnancy without any therapy. She appeared normal at birth at 40 + 1 weeks of gestation and had normal Apgar scores. Birth weight, length, and head circumference were within normal ranges. Family history was unremarkable for neurologic diseases. Her psychomotor development was delayed. Her parents reported that she sat at eight months, and walked with support until 18 months. She suffered from bruxism and characteristic stereotyped hand movements such as clapping and tapping started at the age of 2 years. At the age of 3 years, she developed seizures characterized by staring eyes, hands rubbing and hypokinesis of the head (10 times per day), severely associated with lip and face cyanosis (1 time per day). Her parents reported that her EEG in a specific hospital showed abnormality at three years of age, and the seizures were not adequately controlled after one year of Chinese medicine therapy. Thus, they gave up drug therapy. In the last year, another abnormal behavior was observed. She regularly tapped her lips using the right hand, and bed using the left hand in awake and stopped until sleep. In the last month, the frequency of seizure increased significantly, and seizure symptoms developed more serious. So her parents took her to our hospital for comprehensive examination. She was diagnosed with RTT from her history and clinical findings. A cerebral magnetic resonance image was normal. Mutational analysis of MECP2 revealed a mutation in this affected girl. Twenty-four-hour video-EEG recordings revealed a slowing advantage rhythm (5-6 Hz) of occipital region and extensive slow wave activity in the background activity. Besides, multifocal discharges were noted during awake, especially in the Rolandic region, significantly aggravated to evolution toward electrical status epilepticus during sleep (ESES). Several partial seizures and constantly-tapping her lips using right hand were recorded during EEG recordings, which was the same as that described by the parents. To our surprise, tapping- lips in light and slow rhythm could trigger extensive low amplitude fast wave rhythm , and relatively stronger and quicker rhythm could result in multifocal bilateral discharges . Corresponding discharges were disappeared when the movement was intervened by parents. The patient chose left hand to rhythmically tap lips when the right hand was restricted, but there were no synchronic discharges accompanied by the action. Moreover, the synchronous phenomenon of action and discharge was not observed when the right hand was tapping cheek or abdomen. More interestingly, the discharges were not precipitated by tapping- lips using observer’s hand at the certain tempo and intensity. The coexistence phenomenon persisted in different EEG caps, instruments, and rooms, which ruled out the possibility of an artifact. By the phone call following-up, the total frequency of epilepsy seizures was markedly less after one year of treatment with valproate, but hand stereotypies did not respond to the antiepileptic drug.