A 60-year-old male with past medical history of hypertension and hyperlipidaemia presented to the emergency department with 8 days of fevers, cough, and worsening dyspnoea, with mild abdominal pain and diarrhoea despite completing a 3-day course of azithromycin as an outpatient. He denied chest pain, nausea, or vomiting. The patient was afebrile with maximum temperature of 37.4°C, heart rate at 96 b.p.m., and peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2) of 87%. The physical exam demonstrated clear lungs and tachypnoea.
The nasopharyngeal swab was positive for SARS-CoV-2 by reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction (RT–PCR), and the chest radiograph showed severe bilateral opacities . Admission labs were significant for lymphocytopenia, elevated inflammatory markers, and liver dysfunction. Initial high-sensitivity troponin, creatine kinase, and creatine kinase-MB (CK-MB) were also elevated .
The patient was initially placed on a non-rebreather mask with supplemental oxygen via nasal cannula and placed in the prone position, but SpO2 remained at 82%. He was quickly intubated for acute hypoxaemic respiratory failure and started on hydroxychloroquine therapy for severe COVID-19 infection.
ECG obtained after admission demonstrated diffuse new ST-segment elevation, with QTc interval measured at 437 ms . Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) was significant for severe segmental left ventricular (LV) systolic dysfunction, ejection fraction (EF) 15–20% with hypokinesis of the apex, distal anterior septum, and anterior and lateral walls, with a small pericardial effusion. Right ventricular size and function were normal (; , Videos and ).
Based on diffuse ECG changes suggestive of pericarditis, TTE findings, and laboratory evidence of systemic inflammation, the patient was initiated on treatment of fulminant myopericarditis on hospital day 1 with a 4-day regimen of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) 20 g daily and methylprednisolone (50 mg every 6 h).
After the patient was intubated, haemodynamic support with epinephrine was initially started and weaned off 1 day after initiation of high-dose steroids and IVIG. Over the next few days, he remained afebrile with improving haemodynamics. Laboratory values demonstrated recovery of organ perfusion and inflammation .
Follow-up limited TTE on hospital day 6 demonstrated recovery of LV systolic function, confirmed again with full TTE on day 35. Previous areas of regional hypokinesis were no longer appreciated (; , Videos and ). A repeat ECG on day 6 was noted with transient horizontal ST depressions across precordial and limb leads , before resolution of all ST–T wave abnormalities on follow-up ECG on day 13 . He remained off pressor support and was extubated on hospital day 17; however, he required reintubation within 3 days for persistent respiratory failure due to aspiration. A tracheostomy was performed which was successfully decannulated on hospital day 38. The patient was ultimately discharged for physical rehabilitation on hospital day 52.