The patient is a 68-year-old man with a history of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN-1), initially diagnosed in 1993 when he was found to have symptomatic calcium nephrolithiasis secondary to hypercalcemia . Premorbid, the patient exhibited an optimal performance status with normal nutritional parameters. Medical history was non-contributory aside from pharmacologically well-managed schizoaffective disorder. The patient was previously employed in the airline and postal service industries. Although family history was non-contributory, genetic testing confirmed presence of a mutation in the MEN1 gene. He subsequently underwent total thyroid and parathyroidectomy with parathyroid re-implantation in his left forearm. Later in 1993, he began to complain of diarrhea and was discovered to have elevated gastrin levels consistent with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, prompting abdominal exploration with duodenectomy and resection of gastrinoma tumors.
After this initial operative procedure, the patient was placed on omeprazole (20 mg BID). His symptoms were well controlled initially, but in 4 years began to complain of vague upper abdominal symptoms such as nocturnal “gurgling” and “uneasiness,” partially relieved by antacids. His fasting serum gastrin levels (pg/mL) were found to be steadily increasing over a 9-month interval period (4000 pg/ml, August 6, 1997; 8288 pg/ml, April 1, 1998). Despite an increase in his prescribed dose of omeprazole (40 mg BID), symptoms persisted. A somatostatin receptor scintigraphy (SRS) scan was performed showing 2 small fossae of disease near the second portion of the duodenum.
Subsequent upper endoscopies in 2003 and 2006 demonstrated disease progression with innumerable polyps in the stomach (cardia, fundus, body, and antrum) and duodenum (duodenal bulb and 2nd portion). Pathologic diagnosis of gastric carcinoid tumors and duodenal gastrinomas was confirmed. His gastrin levels continued to rise despite medical management, with a maximum gastrin level of 29,000 pg/mL, in 2006.
In late 2006, he underwent exploratory laparotomy, enucleation of pancreatic body/tail lesions, and peripancreatic, periduodenal, and perigastric lymphadenectomy. Surgical pathology showed metastatic neuroendocrine carcinoma, which was gastrin- and chromogranin-positive, compatible with metastatic gastrinoma in the lymph nodes and pancreas. The patient’s postoperative gastrin level subsequently decreased to 5000 pg/mL. He was started on octreotide LAR 20 mgs Q28d. To control gastrin levels, his prescribed dose was increased to 30 mgs. He has been maintained on this dose to-date.
A follow-up endoscopy in late 2007 was significant for disease progression with enlarging multiple, nearly obstructing, polypoid-appearing masses with superficial ulcerations in the stomach (cardia, fundus, proximal antrum) and duodenum (bulb and proximal second portion) . A series of gastrin levels taken during 2007 ranged from 497 to 9178 pg/mL.
In early 2008, the gastrin levels continued to increase despite octreotide LAR therapy (January, 2994 pg/ml; March, 9084 pg/ml; April, 14,813 pg/ml; May. 19,262 pg/mL). After a multi-disciplinary group convened, the decision was made to perform optimal tumor cytoreduction. In May 2008, the patient underwent a pancreaticoduodenectomy with near-total gastrectomy. Surgical pathology of the stomach indicated widespread multifocal neuroendocrine tumor invading into the lymphatics, subserosa, and perigastric lymph nodes; tumors were found to be chromogranin-positive and gastrin-negative consistent with carcinoid tumors . Multiple duodenal tumors and pancreatic head lesions were gastrin- and chromogranin-positive, consistent with gastrinoma .
Since the optimal cytoreductive surgical procedure in 2008, the patient has remained on octreotide LAR (30 mgs Q28d) and esomeprazole (20 mg BID). His gastrin levels have been well controlled (range, 100–624 pg/mL; current 114 pg/mL) with no radiographic evidence of disease progression or progression of gastric carcinoids on surveillance endoscopy . Normalization of serotonin and chromogranin A levels were observed (data not shown)