A 56-year-old female presented to OPD with complaints of right sided supraclavicular neck swelling for last 2 years and associated pain and tingling in the right arm for past 1 year. There was no history of fever, trauma, systemic illness. On examination, a 5X4 cm spherical swelling was palpable in the right supraclavicular area which was non tender, not fixed to the overlying skin and it was more mobile in the horizontal direction than in the vertical direction. On neurological examination, muscle power in all muscles of the upper limb was found to be 5/5 with no signs of wasting and sensations were intact. Tinel sign was negative. Decision to take a FNAC of the swelling was taken which revealed spindle shaped cells and schwann cells which was suggestive of schwannoma. Furthermore, CECT neck was done which showed a heterogeneously enhancing solid cystic lesion in the right supraclavicular region medially extending into and causing widening of right C6-C7 neural foramen .
MRI neck and chest were also ordered which showed a well-defined solid cystic lesion in right supraclavicular region which was isointense on T1WI and heterogenous enhancement was seen on post contrast scan which confirmed our diagnosis of Schwannoma most probably arising from the brachial plexus .
After a thorough evaluation of the case, and taking proper consent from the patient after explaining all possible complications, the decision of undertaking excision of the tumour under general anaesthesia was made. A horizontal incision was given over the swelling and tumour was exposed. Trunks of the brachial plexus were seen passing around the tumour .
The tumour was carefully excised without causing any damage to the trunk and sent for histopathological examination.
The histopathology of the tumour specimen showed a characteristic cellular pattern of alternating regions containing compact spindle cells called Antoni type A areas and more loosely arranged, hypocellular zones called Antoni type B areas which was consistent with the diagnosis of Schwannoma .
Hence, a final diagnosis of schwannoma of the Brachial plexus was made. In the postoperative period, numbness and tingling in the right arm along with stiffness at the elbow joint was noticed. Patient is being regularly followed up in the last 6 months and has shown improvement in stiffness, tingling and numbness with regular physiotherapy.