A 37-year-old Caucasian woman came to our department to undergo a total-body PET-computed tomography (PET/CT) with F18-FDG for evaluation of a solitary lung node. Her family history was unremarkable. During clinical evaluation, she said she had been experiencing occipital headache and movement disorder for two years; therefore, in agreement with our patient, PET/CT of her brain, using three-dimensional acquisition, was performed after the total-body scan. Both PET/CT scans were performed after intravenous administration of 300 MBq of F18-FDG and fasting of six hours; image acquisition was performed with a hybrid Discovery 16ST PET-CT system (GE Medical System, Milwaukee, TN, USA).
No pathological uptake was detected corresponding to a solitary lung node with a 12 mm maximum transverse diameter and regular margins in the superior lobe of her right lung, in the CT images, nor in her other examined anatomic districts.
A CT scan of her brain, performed before a cerebral PET scan, showed a hypodense mass in her left cerebellar hemisphere. Brain PET revealed intense and focal uptake of the tracer in the left hemisphere of her cerebellum, corresponding to the lesion discovered by CT, with an SUVmax of 14, while the SUVmax in the contralateral cerebellar hemisphere was 6.5 .
Metabolic data were suggestive of a malignant condition. Four days later, MRI of her brain was performed. This revealed a slightly-enhancing, bulky mass in her right cerebellar hemisphere that measured 5 × 4 × 3 cm. On T1-weighted images, the lesion was hypointense and slightly enhancing after the administration of gadolinium. The T2-weighted fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images showed the characteristic features of LDD: striations representing the folia of the cerebellum in association with hydrocephalus and dislocation of the fourth ventricle . MRI was performed using a 3-T permanent magnet (GE Medical System).
We fused the PET images with MRI views of our patient. The comparative analysis of the images was achieved by using the software Advantage MRI-PET Fusion (GE Medical Systems), which is available on the system's workstation (Advantage Windows 4.4, GE Medical Systems) and allows simultaneous analysis of images. In particular, CT (obtained by co-registration with PET) and MR images were first aligned by identifying three or more pairs of corresponding landmarks to align the anatomical images. Subsequently, once the MR examination was sampled and adequately aligned with CT data, unnecessary CT data were discarded and, using the fusion software, were replaced by PET images. Post-processing thus yielded a single PET/MRI examination resulting from the fusion of the brain PET images with the brain MRI scans.
Image analysis of PET/MRI-fused images was performed by a nuclear medicine physician and a radiologist. The borders of the lesion were correctly fused and integrated PET/MRI views confirmed our suspicion that F18-FDG was taken up heterogeneously within the tumor, similarly to isointense bands of tissue in corresponding T2-weighted FLAIR images. Furthermore, by analysis of the PET/MRI images, we had confirmation of a lesion with similar metabolism and intensity signal to normal grey matter; the PET-only brain images suggested a hypothesis of a malignant neoplasm .
Subsequently, total surgical resection of the lesion was performed and a histological examination confirmed the diagnosis of LDD. Histological examination of specimens revealed abnormal cerebellar cortical construction, showing a rather inversely arranged cell-layer construction. Large neurons with clear nuclear bodies and smaller neurons were present at the lateral sides of the folia.