A 61-year-old Caucasian man with no past medical history presented to another teaching hospital with a 2-week history of hematuria. He had a transurethral resection of a 3-cm papillary bladder tumor located near the left ureter meatus. The final histologic examination led to the conclusion that it was a urothelial carcinoma pT2 G3.
The patient was referred to our outpatient clinic after 2 months. He still reported hematuria. The result of his physical examination was totally normal. All the biological workup was normal except for a decreased hemoglobin level (10 g/dl). Thoracoabdominopelvic computed tomography (CT) showed a 4-cm heterogenic and enhanced bladder tumor with invasion of the left ureter and another 3-cm mass with the same characteristic located in the left renal pelvis. No other sign of malignant disease was found by CT.
The multidisciplinary team decided to start with upfront surgery. The patient had a midline laparotomy, which revealed that the abdominal cavity was free of ascites and calcinosis. The liver was free of disease. Therefore, the patient had an en bloc radical cystectomy and a left ureteronephrectomy associated with para-aortic and bilateral pelvic lymph node dissection. He also had a cutaneous transileal urinary diversion. The surgery lasted 245 minutes with no need for blood transfusion.
The immediate follow-up was normal. The patient was discharged 1 week after surgery.
The final histologic examination showed a synchronous high-grade urothelial carcinoma of the bladder (pT3) and the left renal pelvis (pT3) with free margin.
All the lymph nodes dissected were free of disease: nine para-aortic lymph nodes, five right pelvic dissection lymph nodes, and seven left pelvic lymph nodes.
The multidisciplinary team decided to add adjuvant chemotherapy. However, the patient was lost to follow-up.
He consulted our outpatient clinic after 1 year for cutaneous masses located in the left hypochondriac (1), the back (2), and the cervical region (1) . No other abnormal signs were found in the physical examination.
Thoracoabdominopelvic CT was performed, which showed multiple pulmonary metastases but no sign of local recurrence.
The patient had a biopsy of the left hypochondriac lesion , and the histology confirmed the metastatic origin. The tumor was CK7- and P63-positive .
The patient was then referred for chemotherapy. However, he never received treatment because of deteriorating general status.
The patient died 1 month after the biopsy.