A 66-year-old male was referred to our department because of cough, chest pain and weight loss. His past clinical history, family history were unremarkable. Given the persistency of symptoms, chest X-ray was performed and showed a subtle opacity at the upper segment of the right lower lung. Whole body computed tomography (CT) scan confirmed the presence of a pulmonary malignant-looking nodule without hilar lymphadenopathy. 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) revealed avid uptake of the pulmonary nodule as well as oropharyngeal, sigmoid colon, and prostate gland uptake . Subsequently, the patient underwent video-assisted bronchoscopy, which revealed normal findings. Conversely, video-assisted laryngoscopy showed an infiltrative ulcerated lesion involving the base and both valves of the tongue. Oropharyngeal biopsy was performed and histology revealed an infiltrative squamous cell carcinoma. Subsequently, CT guided lung biopsy showed a lung adenocarcinoma. The patient underwent colonoscopy with polypectomy and histology revealed the presence of adenocarcinoma. Finally, specimen from the prostate gland revealed an adenocarcinoma (Gleason score: 3 + 3), too . Abnormally enlarged lymph nodes in the abdomen up to 1.7 cm in diameter along with several non-specific lymph nodes have been identified. CT scan of the neck and facial bones showed a bulky mass in the right aspect of the oral cavity, infiltrating the base of the tongue with preservation of the adjacent mandibular cortical bone abutting the midline, given a horseshoe-like appearance of the tumor. There was infiltration of the muscles of the tongue base whereas the left mylohyoid muscle was preserved. Bilateral enlarged lymph nodes at level II and III have been identified. Given the presence of these multiple malignant tumors, multidisciplinary assessment was necessary. The laryngeal lesion was treated by radio and chemotherapy whereas the sigmoid and prostate tumors were treated by surgical excision. In regard to the pulmonary tumor, the decision about whether surgery or radiotherapy would be more appropriate was considered later. Consequently, chemotherapy and radiotherapy were started given almost complete resolution of the lung tumor; instead we observed progression of the sigmoid tumor along with two enlarged lymph nodes in the pelvis, whereas the tumor of the prostate gland did not change in size. The patient had left hemicolectomy and prostatectomy, which confirmed the presence of adenocarcinoma with features of vascular invasion, adipose tissue invasion, and no extramural or perineural involvement. Metastases were found in 10 out of 19 lymph nodes. As a result, the histological staging was pT3 N2B R0 B. Prostatic specimen confirmed the presence of adenocarcinoma with no infiltration of the urinary bladder. However, multifocal extension by the tumor to the adjacent tissues was observed. A 30-day interval follow-up PET-CT scan showed an avid focal uptake at segment 5 of the liver suspicious of a sigmoid adenocarcinoma metastasis and at the apical segment of the right lower lobe in accordance with the known pulmonary tumor. A further multidisciplinary assessment regarding the appropriate patient’s management suggests surgical treatment for the pulmonary lesion, stereotactic radiotherapy for the metastatic deposit in the liver and adjuvant chemotherapy for the sigmoid tumor of colon. Surgical specimen after right lower lobectomy showed a G3 type lung carcinoma with prevalent aspects of acinar growth and absence of pleural infiltration, vascular invasion, or necrosis. The tumor did not involve the bronchial or vascular surgical resection margins or adjacent lymph nodes. Immunocytochemistry was TTF1 (+) and CDX2 (−), whereas histopathological staging was pT1 N0. The patient received stereotactic radiotherapy for the liver metastasis and adjuvant chemotherapy for the sigmoid colonic tumor. An 18-month interval follow-up PET-CT scan demonstrated no recurrence.