A 54 year old female presented with a history of a swelling in her right buttock of 6 years duration. Her main complaint was difficulty in defecation when sitting due to a large lump in the perineum . She also had features of obstructed defecation syndrome such as excessive straining with unsuccessful attempts to evacuate, prolonged episodes in the toilet, rectal pain, rectal digitation and laxative dependency. Obstructed defecation symptoms were not relieved by regular use of laxatives. She had no obstructive urinary symptoms. She had not undergone any major gynecological procedures.
She was a diagnosed patient with multiple neurofibromatosis type 1 since the age of 17 years and had undergone excision of neurofibromas adjacent to right knee joint and over the right buttock 7 years back. She did not have a family history of neurofibromatosis. She did not give a past history of hypertension or other comorbidities. On examination, she had multiple neurofibromas all over the body and one plexiform neurofibroma over left knee area. There was a non reducible lump of 25× 20 cm size over the right buttock. It had an expansile cough impulse and was non tender on palpation. Digital rectal examination was normal. Therefore, a clinical diagnosis of a secondary perineal hernia was made.
Contrast enhanced computed tomography showed a large poorly enhancing mass in the region of right ischiorectal fossa suggestive of herniation of a large neuropathic bladder and rectum through right ischiorectal fossa. Her US scan of the abdomen revealed mild right sided hydronephrosis. She underwent sigmoidoscopy which was normal up to the proximal sigmoid colon. Barium enema showed herniation of the rectum through a defect in the pelvic floor.
The patient was planned for a hernia repair by a combined surgery with participation of colorectal, urological and plastic surgical teams. The patient was positioned on Lloyd Davies position and the repair of her hernia was done using an abdominal approach with a lower mid line incision. There was a large hernia sac extending in to right buttock area which contained a large neuropathic urinary bladder . A defect was noticed in the levator ani posteriorly on the right side, through which the urinary bladder and a portion of rectum had herniated. Openings of the ureters were not demonstrated and the right ureter was traced up to pelvic brim and stenting done. Cystectomy and reduction cystoplasty was followed by suprapubic catheterization . Hernial orifice was repaired with a prolene mesh. She was discharged six weeks following surgery. Currently she is on regular clinic follow up and intermittent urethral catheterization training.