A 67-year-old Iranian woman was sent to the retina clinic 3 days ago with a complaint of decreased vision of counting fingers in her left eye. Her prior medical history revealed no evidence of hypertension, diabetes, or cardiovascular disease, as well as no history of drug consumption. The spherical equivalent was −0.5D in both eyes (OU). Intraocular pressure was 14 mmHg OU. The fundus examination revealed engorged and tortuous retinal veins, as well as intraretinal hemorrhage, both of which were consistent with CRVO. There was a whitening in the cilioretinal artery zone, consistent with the diagnosis of cilioretinal artery occlusion. Additionally, hemorrhage encircled the fovea inferiorly in a radial pattern .
Spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) revealed a minor increase in retinal thickness. Additionally, a hyperreflective band was observed in the area of CILRAO, including both the superficial and middle retinal layers, but the lesion’s lower border looked hyperreflective only in the middle retinal layer, consistent with the diagnosis of paracentral acute middle maculopathy (PAMM). In the Henle layer, an oval-shaped hyperreflective region around the foveal center was found, corresponding with the radially oriented bleeding observed in fundus imaging.
En face optical coherence tomography (OCT) segmentation at the level of the deep capillary plexus (DCP) revealed a hyperreflective region in the distribution of the cilioretinal artery as well as base-out wedge-shaped hyperreflective lesions pointing to the fovea, which corresponded to the oval-shaped hemorrhages. In the area exclusively affected by venous occlusion, fern-like perivenular hyperreflective lesions were also observed inferotemporal to the fovea.
En face OCT segmented at the DCP level demonstrates a diffuse hyperreflective area corresponding to the distribution of cilioretinal artery occlusion due to globular PAMM .
The right eye has 20/20 vision and normal fundus examination. Cardiology and laboratory evaluations revealed no abnormalities in the current patient.