The patient is an 8-year-old Chinese boy born as the sole child of unrelated parents. In his medical history, the patient experienced recurrent upper and/or lower respiratory tract infection 3-4 times per year from birth. 6 months before, the patient presented with a painless mass measuring 2 x 2 cm on his upper lip. He had no lymphadenopathy and/or organomegaly. HIV antibody was negative and the complete blood count was within normal range. Absolute lymphocyte count revealed a decreased CD4+ T-cell count of ~1075 cells/μl with a CD4 to CD8 ratio of 0.7. Additionally, the patient was detected with an elevated EBV-DNA copy number (5.5*10^3 copies/ml).
Excisional biopsy revealed dense infiltrate of small to medium-sized lymphoplasmacytic cells imparting a vaguely nodular arrangement at low power . Under high-power, 2 types of neoplastic cells were present, 1) small round to oval cells with scant pale cytoplasm and loosely clumped chromatin, 2) cells exhibited plasmacytoid appearance with Dutcher bodies . Immunostaining with a panel of antibodies was performed. Results showed that the neoplastic cells were diffusely immunoreactive for pan-B cell markers (CD79a, CD20, and CD19) with a lower staining intensity in the fraction of plasmacytoid cells . As expected, the plasmacytoid cells were positive for plasma cell markers (CD38 and MUM1) . Ki-67 proliferation index was estimated to be 5-10%, consistent with the indolent feature of this entity . Additionally, the EBER testing demonstrated a strong and diffuse immunoreactivity in the neoplastic cells . Further PCR-based clonal analysis disclosed clonal immunoglobulin (IG) gene rearrangement . The morphologic and the immunophenotypic features together with the EBV status and the clonal assessment were consistent with EBV-positive EMZL.
EBV+ EMZL is referred to occur only in immunocompromised individuals so far. For the present patient, his medical history illustrated that he seemed vulnerable to respiratory infections from birth. Besides, the laboratory test results disclosed an unexplained CD4+ T-cell lymphopenia. The finding of EBV+ EMZL along with CD4+ T-cell lymphopenia in a child with a clinical history of recurrent infections prompted us to suspect certain immunodeficiency in the patient contributing to his illness. To elucidate the potential genetic causes, a thorough screening for candidate genes using targeted next generation sequencing (NGS) analysis of a set of immune-related genes was performed with genomic DNA obtained from the patient and his parents. Not surprisingly, the analyses revealed an in-frame insert mutation in MAGT1 gene (c.828_829insAT) in the patient. Subsequently, the mutation was validated by conventional Sanger sequencing assay. Meanwhile, genetic testing of his parents indicated that the mutation was inherited from his healthy mother who was a hemizygous carrier of this variant whereas his father was wild-type . This MAGT1 variant has not been reported previously. It is located in MAGT1 exon 6 with 2-nucleotide insertion between the position 828 and 829 (c.828_829insAT). As a result, it changes the alanine at codon 277 to methionine and introduces 10 erroneous amino acids followed by a premature stop codon TGA at codon 287 (p.A277M.fs*11) . As a result, it leads to the production of a frameshift truncated MAGT1 protein of 287 amino acids (p.A277M.fs*11), while the wild-type protein consists of 367 amino acids. According to the American college of Medical Genetics and Genomics standard and guidelines, this frameshift variant is predicted to be likely pathogenic. Collectively, the patient fulfills the diagnostic criteria of XMEN disease in both clinical and genetic aspects.
The combined data from clinical evaluations, pathologic findings, and genetic testing suggested an XMEN disease and the resultant development of EBV+ EMZL. The patient has received 4 cycles of Rituximab in combination with CHOP chemotherapy for the lymphoma and he responds well.