A 51-year-old man presented at our hospital with acute dysarthria and mild tetraparesis since 3 days in May 2017. He had bilateral hearing loss, for which he had been using hearing aids from the age of 40. His sister had died suddenly of unknown causes at the age of 36. No other cardiovascular risk factors were found. On admission, physical examination revealed bilateral horizontal gaze-evoked nystagmus, mild dysarthria, and decreased pharyngeal reflex. The test for bilateral Babinski’s reflex was positive. An urgent computed tomography (CT) scan showed chronic lacunar infarction in bilateral centrum semiovale. In the 24 h following admission, the patient rapidly developed progressive flaccid quadriplegia and tongue weakness, necessitating ventilator support. The plantar response became absent bilaterally.
For the possibility of Guillain-Barre syndrome and brainstem encephalitis, lumbar puncture was performed which showed normal. Subsequently, an emergent brain diffusion-weighted imaging revealed a heart-shaped area of hyperintensity in the bilateral ventral medulla with apparent diffusion coefficient reversal . Fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) detected multiple deep white matter hyperintensities and subcortical infarcts . Magnetic resonance angiography showed mild to moderate ectasia of the basilar artery . Computed tomographic angiography (CTA) revealed mild stenosis in the left vertebrobasilar junction and the right vertebral artery, which did not converge with the proximal basilar artery . Electrocardiography revealed sinus bradyarrhythmia, and an echocardiogram showed concentric left ventricular hypertrophy with left ventricle outflow tract obstruction. Serum creatinine levels were within the normal range, and urine protein levels were mild increase (781.8 mg/24 h).
At 40 days after admission, unexpectedly, a scheduled repeat diffusion-weighted scan revealed two new subcortical infarcts in the bilateral cerebral hemispheres . We first considered the possibility of a cardioembolic cause due to the hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. However, detailed analysis of the patient’s history revealed typical clinical manifestations of FD: painful acroparesthesias, hypohidrosis, and postprandial diarrhea from the age of 6. Angiokeratomas were also found in the lower abdomen, groin, and neck . Ophthalmological evaluation showed increased tortuosity of the retinal vessels . His mother had hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. His eldest daughter and second daughter had mild episodic burning pain in the limbs since age 6 and age 9, respectively, and the second daughter had shown skin lesions similar to the patient on her back starting from age 12. The remaining third daughter and youngest son reported no clinical symptoms and signs. The leukocyte α-galactosidase A activity was found to be dramatically reduced (0.1 nmol/day/spot; normal: 100–500). FD diagnosis was confirmed by sequencing the α-galactosidase A gene , which revealed the previously described c.877C > T [p.P293S] missense mutation . Genetic analysis in families revealed his mother and three daughters had the same GLA gene mutation in heterozygosis. The patient declined enzyme replacement therapy because of the high cost. He was treated with aspirin and atorvastatin and was extubated after 3 weeks. After 2 months of treatment and rehabilitation, the patient could sit in a wheel chair but his motor function did not recover to a usable level. Despite the standard ischemic stroke prevention measures, follow-up showed the patient died of heart failure 2 years later.