A 67-year-old European man was admitted to the Department of Urology in December 2019 with major complaints regarding recurrent hematuria, dysuria, pain, and enlargement of the left testicle, pain in the lumbar and sacral section of the spine, and hyperhidrosis. The patient also reported a recent loss of weight: around 3 kg down from 97 kg within the last month. A medical interview revealed occupational exposure to asbestos since the patient had been working in a factory producing asbestos seals for several years. His body mass index was 37.8 kg/m2, and body surface area was 2.09 m2. Physical examination revealed lower limb edema as well as painful and enlarged left testis of regular shape and firm consistency, without any palpable focal lesion. Owing to enlarged testis, ultrasonography imaging (USG) and blood tests were performed. USG revealed diffuse testis enlargement but did not reveal any focal malignancies originating from the testis. Results of the blood test showed an increased level of β-hCG (644.4 lU/l). The other tumor markers, that is, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) α-fetoprotein (AFP), and prostate-specific antigen (PSA) remained within the normal range (230 U/ml, 1.58 U/ml, and 0.874 ng/ml, respectively). Surprisingly, the following magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a mass up to 62 mm in the posterior part of the prostatic gland, infiltrating seminal vesicles and anterior rectum wall together with bilaterally enlarged iliac lymph nodes. Additionally, computed tomography (CT) confirmed metastasis in pelvic lymph nodes. Cystoscopy was performed, and a biopsy specimen from tumor mass from prostate and bladder was taken. Histopathological examination of the specimens obtained in the cystoscopy revealed prostate and muscle of the bladder infiltration consisting of high-grade invasive urothelial carcinoma with trophoblastic differentiation and the presence of large syncytiotrophoblastic cells. Urothelial carcinoma cells were positive for cytokeratin 20 (CK20), GATA3, p63, and CKHMW but negative for PSA. Some of these large syncytiotrophoblastic cells inside the tumor showed positivity for β-hCG . Keeping in mind that urothelial cancer most often originates in the bladder, the patient was diagnosed with urothelial bladder cancer. However, reassessment of the radiographic imaging led to the conclusion that the tumor was predominantly located in the prostate, which suggested the prostate as the primary origin and established the diagnosis of urothelial prostate cancer with secondary bladder involvement. However, the treatment of urothelial cancer remains the same regardless of primary origin. As subsequent radiography imaging of the chest did not reveal any focal changes, the presence of metastasis in the chest was excluded. In March 2020, the patient started neoadjuvant chemotherapy with intravenous cisplatin 75 mg/m2 on the first day and intravenous gemcitabine 1000 mg/m2 on the 1st, 8th, and 15th repeating cycle every 4 weeks (cisplatin–gemcitabine protocol, PG). His symptoms improved significantly, and the β-hCG concentration decreased (205.2 mIU/ml) within the first 2 months of therapy. However, after two cycles, β-hCG level slightly increased (504.8 mIU/ml) and hyperhidrosis recurred. After four cycles, computed tomography (CT) revealed that local treatment could not be implemented owing to rectum infiltration. PG chemotherapy was continued up to six cycles. Four months later, after completion of PG chemotherapy, MRI showed disease progression. Pelvic tumor enlarged to 90 mm in diameter, and pelvic lymph nodes enlarged to maximum 21 mm in short-axis diameter . Simultaneously, β-hCG concentration increased to 9446 mIU/ml. In October 2020, palliative chemotherapy was implemented (paclitaxel 80 mg/m2 once a week). After the fifth cycle of paclitaxel, the patient presented with polyneuropathy, so gabapentin was administered but withdrawn because of dizziness. However, the dizziness aggravated, so a CT scan of the brain was performed. It revealed small, diffuse metastases up to 8 mm in the pons. At that time, the β-hCG concentration reached the highest value of 31,163 mIU/ml. Palliative radiotherapy was planned, but owing to rapid deterioration of general condition (PS ¾), the patient did not manage to start the treatment. Eventually, the patient died in November 2020, 2 weeks after diagnosis of brain metastasis, because of disease progression.