At 23 weeks of gestation, a pregnant 24-year-old Albanian woman, gravida 3, para 2, was admitted to our hematology clinic with chest pain, nosebleeds, gingival bleeding, general weakness, and fatigue. One year prior to admission, she had been diagnosed as having acute myeloid leukemia and was treated with doxorubicin and cytarabine according to our chemotherapy protocol.
Six months after chemotherapy, while in remission, she became pregnant. Her pregnancy progressed with no complications until the 23rd week of gestation. Her general health became impaired, and laboratory test results confirmed a relapse of acute myeloid leukemia. Her obstetric examination findings and fetal sonography results were normal and appropriately correlated with the gestational age. Blood count results revealed that her maternal hemoglobin (Hgb) level was 8.5g/dL, platelet (Plt) count was 65×109plt/L, red blood cell (RBC) count was 2.8×109 cells/L, white blood cell (WBC) count was 45×109 cells/L with 50 percent blast cells, hematocrit (Hct) was 29 percent, and sedimentation rate was 35mm. Her urea and creatinine levels were within the normal ranges.
The attending medical team included a hematologist, an oncologist, and an obstetrician. After analyzing our patient’s history, medical examination results, and laboratory data, the medical team proposed that our patient begin chemotherapy treatment without delay. In spite of the medical team’s advice and consultations with our patient, she categorically refused any kind of chemotherapy treatment. Our patient’s decision was therapeutically challenging for the medical team.
Our patient was frequently followed up with clinical assessments and laboratory tests. At 32 weeks of gestation, urine culture results showed an Escherichia coli infection, which was treated with ceftriaxone. A blood count performed at this time revealed a RBC count of 2.5×109 cells/L, WBC count of 30.8×109 cells/L, Plt count of 41×109plt/L, Hgb level of 6.6g/dL, and Hct of 22.2 percent.
Supportive therapy including fresh whole blood and blood product transfusions was administered to stabilize our patient. The fetal condition was closely monitored using ultrasound and later using cardiotocography. At 34 weeks of gestation, a course of betamethasone was administered. The ultrasound measurements showed slight intra-uterine growth restriction, but no fetal distress.
At 35 weeks of gestation, our patient’s general health declined and there was evidence of fetal distress. Laboratory test results at this time showed the following alterations: RBC, 3.1×1012 cells/L; WBC, 38.6×109 cells/L; Hgb, 10g/dL; Hct, 28 percent; Plt, 10×109plt/L; lymphocytes, 12.8 percent; monocytes, 10.4 percent; and granulocytes, 76.8 percent. Coagulation analysis revealed a prothrombin time of 16.8 seconds (reference range, 9.8 to 13.4 seconds) and an activated partial thromboplastin time of 24.0 seconds (reference range, 27.9 to 41.6 seconds).
An emergency Caesarean section was performed, and a healthy baby was delivered (weight, 1900g; Apgar score, 5/6). During the operation, 1U of fresh whole blood and 3U of fresh plasma were transfused because of intra-operative bleeding. Then, two hours after the Caesarean section, our patient developed generalized purpura and petechiae, gingival bleeding, and operative wound bleeding . Approximately 300mL of blood was drained from the Douglas pouch. Laboratory test results showed a Plt count of 8×109plt/L. After consulting with our hematologist, we administered another 2U of blood, 8U of fresh plasma, and 15U of platelets. Five days after the Cesarean section, our patient was transferred to our Hematology Clinic, where she agreed to undergo chemotherapy.
Six days after delivery, she began chemotherapy comprising an anti-metabolite and anthracycline, namely cytarabine (200mg/m2 for seven days) and doxorubicin (60mg/m2 for three days), respectively. Close neonatal follow-up revealed normal development. To date, our patient remains in complete remission, and the development of her baby, now three years of age, has progressed with no complications.