A 76-year-old lady presented to the outpatient clinic with the chief complaint of right flank pain and swelling that protrudes with efforts, reduced mostly in resting position and increasing in size for about 2 months before hospital admission . The bulging was not associated with gastrointestinal and urinary problems. The patient’s past medical history was positive for diabetes mellitus (DM), hypertension (HTN) and hyperlipidemia (HLP), and an overweight body mass index (BMI) of 28.9. She underwent hysterectomy, laparoscopic cholecystectomy, and urinary bladder prolapse repair surgery previously. She did not have any history of back trauma and heavy lifting previously. She had three children born by vaginal delivery. She used metformin and losartan for medications. There was no family history of the hernia in her parents, siblings, and children. In the physical examination in standing position, we found a soft, mildly tender, irreducible, and smooth border-right lumbar mass (on right scapular line just below the costal margin) which protruded when coughing. No bowel sounds were auscultated on the hernia.
A computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen revealed a large herniated sac (60*30 mm) beneath the right 12th rib in the upper lumbar triangle with protrusion of retroperitoneal fat, right renal pelvis, ureteropelvic junction and proximal ureter with consecutive hydronephrosis extended to the posterior aspect of the kidney . After conducting preoperational evaluations and informed consent, the patient was operated under general anesthesia in a right lateral position. A transverse incision about 10 cm was made on the bulging area. After dissection of skin, subcutaneous tissue, and muscle layer (latissimus dorsi), a hernia sac through a 3 cm defect was found. There was a herniated retroperitoneal and omental fat in the sac, so it was reduced back and closure of the abdominal wall defect was done using retro-muscular or sublay Monofilament Polypropylene Mesh (Paha® 8*15 cm) . Mesh was fixed to the fascia with non-absorbable interrupted sutures using a tension-free technique. The muscles and fascia were sutured separately with absorbable sutures, and the wound was closed. A drain catheter was not necessary to be placed. The operating time was 41 min, there were no hospital postoperative complications, and we discharged the patient 24 h after the surgery. The patient was visited and followed up on the 7th, 30th, and 60th days after discharge from the hospital, and there were good results.