Four years 3 months old female presented with 9 months- history of pubic hair growth and enlargement of the clitoris. Her condition was associated with adult-type body odor and aggressive behavioral changes. She had no axillary hair growth, acne, breast enlargement or vaginal bleeding, and no rapid weight or height gain.
She was born at 38 weeks gestation, following an uncomplicated pregnancy with no polyhydramnios. Her birth weight was 4.5 kg. She had been noted to have macroglossia with no feeding or respiratory difficulty. She was also noted to have right-sided hemihypertrophy involving the trunk and limbs. She had neither hypoglycemic attacks nor omphalocele. No documented follow up growth data were available. There was no family history of note and no consanguinity. A clinical diagnosis of Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome was established, and her family had been reassured without a plan for further follow-up.
Examination showed a well-looking female with whole right side hemihypertrophy, protruded tongue and transverse ear lobe crease. Her height was 102 cm (50th centile) and weight 15 kg (25th centile) using the centers for disease control and prevention growth chart. She had normal blood pressure. Her Tanner staging was A1, P2, and B1. She had a prominent right labia, and clitoromegaly (1.5 cm). She had no hirsutism, acne or a palpable abdominal mass.
Left wrist x-ray showed a bone age of 7 years. An ultrasound scan showed a 2 cm well defined rounded hypoechoic lesion with multiple tiny calcifications in the right suprarenal region. Computed tomography (CT) showed a 37 × 32 mm well-circumscribed solid mass in the right suprarenal region , no other abnormalities were found.
Hormonal investigation measured using fluorometric enzyme immunoassay showed elevated levels of testosterone 2.3 ng/ml. (0.1–0.4 ng/ml), progesterone 4.99 ng/ml. (0.1–0.3 ng/ml) and dehydroepiandrosterone sulphate 73 ng/ml. (1–6 ng/ml) with normal early morning cortisol level 15.6 ng/ml. (7–28 ng/ml) .
During laparotomy, an enlarged right adrenal gland has been removed; measuring 5 × 3.5 × 3 cm and weighing 15 g, with an outer glistening nodular surface. The left adrenal gland was of normal appearance and was not biopsied.
Histopathology revealed well-circumscribed tumor-forming nests with trabeculae and sheets of polygonal cells with eosinophilic and vacuolated cytoplasm, fibrous bands with dystrophic calcification were seen. The tumor was not infiltrating the capsule, with no mitosis, atypia or necrosis, (Wieneke index score = 0). Findings were consistent with adrenocortical adenoma.
Convalescence was uneventful. The child has been covered during the perioperative period with a course of corticosteroids. One week post-surgery steroids have been stopped for 48 h and early morning cortisol has been evaluated. It was found to be low (1.9 ng/ml; normal values, 7–28 ng/ml). Thus the patient was started on oral maintenance steroid therapy, which will be continued until recovery of her adrenal function. The postoperative testosterone level was found to be 0.02 ng/ml. (0.1–0.4 ng/ml) .