A 59-year-old African-Caribbean man presented with a two-month history of neck pain, hoarse voice, dysphagia and breathing difficulties. He had an anterior neck swelling that increased rapidly in size. Clinical examination revealed an enlarged, hard and fixed goitre that was very tender on palpation. The trachea was deviated to the left side and there was no cervical lymphadenopathy. Fibre-optic laryngeal examination showed reduced mobility of the right vocal cord. Blood test showed a normal blood cell count and calcium and thyroid function tests, negative thyroid peroxidase autoantibodies and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 95 mm/hr. A computed tomographic (CT) scan of the neck and thoracic outlet showed a large enhancing thyroid mass predominantly affecting the right lobe causing deviation of the trachea to the left with no cervical lymphadenopathy .
During surgery this thyroid mass was found invading all the surrounding structures, including the carotid arteries, internal jugular vein and the right recurrent laryngeal nerve. The trachea was significantly deviated to the left side by this mass and no tissue planes could be identified for dissection. Anaplastic carcinoma of the thyroid was suspected, though unlikely due to the age of the patient. As surgical resection was impossible, a wedge biopsy was taken to establish histological diagnosis. Histopathology showed an admixture of fibrous tissue with focal collagen hyalinization and inflammatory infiltrate rich in lymphocytes and plasma cells. Occasional giant cells were present with atrophic thyroid follicles. At this stage, the diagnosis was confirmed as Riedel's thyroiditis, based on the histology results. The patient was subsequently started on 80 mg/day of prednisolone. After four weeks, there was marked improvement in the voice and swallowing of the patient with reduction in the size of the goitre. Within two weeks of starting steroids, the ESR was noted to have fallen to 10 mm/hr. Prednisolone was gradually tapered over 10 months to a dose of 5 mg on alternate days. Repeat CT scan confirmed reduction in the size of the goitre with minimal shift in the trachea .