The first case was a 35-year-old male, classified as ASA physical status 2, with a history of narcolepsy, who required general anesthesia for lumbar herniated disk surgery.
The day before surgery the patient was observed and a pre-operative anesthesia assessment was performed. The patient described episodes of excessive sleepiness and cataplexy since adolescence, as well as occasional occurrence of sleep paralysis. He had been diagnosed with narcolepsy with cataplexy, 2 years before the surgery. He was medicated with modafinil 200 mg daily, remaining asymptomatic ever since. He underwent an appendectomy at the age of 21 under general anesthesia without known complications. At the time of the present surgery, the patient’s weight was 91 kg and body mass index was 27 kg/m2. Both the physical examination and laboratory tests were normal. After a literature search, it was decided that the patient should take his morning dose of modafinil; surgery was scheduled to start at 8 AM.
Intraoperatively, the ASA standard monitoring was used, plus neuromuscular blockade and invasive arterial pressure (using Datex Ohmeda Aisys). Bispectral index (BIS) and entropy were both monitored to guide the anesthesia level and possibly increase the information on the hypnosis in case there was difficulty in awakening from anesthesia. The BIS, muscle tone activity (EMG), state entropy (SE), and response entropy (RE) values were recorded throughout the procedure. Cardiac output was monitored using LiDCO rapid.
Total intravenous anesthesia with remifentanil and propofol by target-controlled infusion (TCI) was performed, using the base primea orchestra from fresenius kabi. Anesthesia was induced with remifentanil to achieve a target cerebral concentration (Ce) of 2.5 ng/mL (Minto’s Pharmacokinetic model), followed by 1% propofol at 200 mL/h until loss of consciousness (LOC), which happened after 148 mg of propofol were infused. At the moment of LOC, the predicted cerebral concentration (Ce) of propofol was 5.9 ug/mL (Schnider’s Pharmacokinetic model). At that moment, the pump was switched to TCI mode and a cerebral target concentration of 3.7 ug/mL was set, according to a previously published formula, aiming at keeping the BIS between 40 and 60 (9, 10). Rocuronium was administered at 0.6 mg/kg. After tracheal intubation, propofol target Ce was reduced to 3.0 ug/mL and remifentanil was reduced to a target Ce of 1.0 ng/mL. The patient was then placed in jack-knife position.
Anesthesia was maintained with remifentanil and propofol by TCI, both titrated to keep BIS between 40 and 60. The BIS and Entropy were slightly above 60 mmHg occasionally and this was associated with the presence of EMG activity . A total of 924 mg of propofol and 1726 ug of remifentanil were administered. During surgery, propofol Ce varied between 1.5 and 2.5 ug/mL, while remifentanil Ce varied between 0.7 and 4.5 ng/mL. The patient was submitted to mechanical ventilation in controlled volume mode. Ventilation parameters were set in order to obtain a target ETCO2 of 35 mmHg. No additional neuromuscular blockers were given. Intravenous acetaminophen 1 g and parecoxib 40 mg were administered for post-operative analgesia and the surgical wound was infiltrated with ropivacaine 0.375% before skin closure.
The duration of anesthesia was 104 minutes. At the end of surgery, the TOF had spontaneously recovered to 100%. Propofol infusion was stopped and remifentanil infusion was continued at a Ce 2 ng/mL throughout the recovery phase. After repositioning the patient in supine position, he immediately opened his eyes, followed commands and calmly removed the tracheal tube himself, following the instructions provided by the anesthesiologist.
The hemodynamic alterations were recorded throughout the procedure ( and ). On arrival at the operating room, the patient presented an arterial pressure of 150/75 mmHg, which corresponds to a mean arterial pressure (MAP) of 100 mmHg. After the start of remifentanil and propofol perfusions, his arterial pressure declined, as expected, and the lowest value of MAP was 58 mmHg. The patient presented a hypertensive response to tracheal intubation (173/90 mmHg) and jack-knife positioning (161/72 mmHg). During surgery, the cardiac output varied between 4.4 and 5.9 l/minute . At the end of the surgery, with the reduction of propofol and remifentanil perfusion, the arterial pressure increased gradually and with supine positioning, awakening, and extubation, the patient presented another hypertensive response (186/91 mmHg).
At the end of surgery, the patient was transferred to the post-anesthesia care unit (PACU), where he remained, alert and oriented for 90 minutes. The remifentanil perfusion was progressively reduced and no additional opioids were needed for pain control. No narcolepsy events occurred at the ward, the patient slept normally that night, and was discharged home the following day. Postoperative interviews were performed and no signs of awareness or recall were detected.