A 61-year-old man was referred to our hospital because of dyspnea. He had multiple pulmonary metastases from renal cell carcinoma (RCC) and had previously been treated with molecular-targeted agents and ICIs (pazopanib, sunitinib, nivolumab, and axitinib gradually). Chest X-ray revealed bilateral pneumothorax and chest tube drainage was performed. Chest computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a pulmonary cavity in the left upper lobe (LUL) . A CT prior to treatment revealed a nodule 3 cm in diameter, and a follow-up CT demonstrated cavity development at the same site that had developed during treatment with Axitinib, a vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (VEGFR-TKI) . Major air leakage continued for 1 week after chest tube drainage had been performed. Even after occlusion of the segmental bronchus (left B1 + 2) with an Endobronchial Watanabe Spigot was performed using a flexible bronchoscope, air leakage continued for 10 days. At this point, we performed thoracoscopy-assisted surgery under general anesthesia. Since in our case the bronchopleural fistula was large on CT and direct suturing may have been difficult, we planned to fill the cavity with a pericardial fat pad (PFP), which is often used as a sealant to control air leaks during pulmonary resection.
During the operation, a huge cavity with a pleural defect was found in the LUL . It was difficult to repair the pleural defect using staples or direct sutures as the pleura around the cavity was thick and hard. Therefore, we harvested a pedicle pericardial fat pad (PFP) using an ultrasonic scalpel and used it to fill the cavity, which was sutured with the thick pleura around the cavity using a 4-0 absorbable monofilament suture . Prior to this maneuver, the cavity was sprayed with fibrin glue. Finally, we sutured the thickened fibrous tissue adhered to the parietal pleura near the cavity in order to assure sealing and PFP fixation. Next, the pulmonary air leak was unclear via right-side thoracoscopy, and we extensively scratched the parietal pleura to provoke adhesion.
After the operation, the air leakage from the left lung immediately disappeared and recurrence was not seen. The right pneumothorax was recovered after pleurodesis with OK-432. Chest CT at 3 months after the surgery demonstrated that the pulmonary cavity was occluded by the PFP .