A 42-year-old male patient presented to the tertiary care center outpatient department with complaints of pain and swelling of the left thumb for 1 year. Physical examination revealed globular swelling of about 6×4×5 cm with a firm consistency at the proximal phalanx region and interphalangeal joint of the thumb in such a way that bony palpation of the phalanx and joint range of motion cannot be appreciated . It was gradually progressive in nature and associated with tenderness over the whole of the thumb. The overlying skin was stretched without any adherence to the underlying mass. There was a limitation of the metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal joint range of motion. The patient gave no history of any constitutional symptoms such as an evening rise in temperature, significant weight loss, and loss of appetite.
Radiographs of the left hand with the wrist joint were suggestive of the expansile lytic lesion with a “soap bubble” appearance involving the whole of the proximal phalanx with soft tissue extension and destruction of metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal joints suggestive of Campanacci grade 3 GCT .
A routine blood workup revealed hemoglobin 8.7 mg/dL, total leukocyte counts 6,800 cells/mm3, erythrocyte sedimentation rate 27 mm/1st h, and highly sensitive C-reactive protein 9 mg/L. Rest other blood investigations were unremarkable. On open biopsy, grossly there was a gray-brown mass with a lobulated appearance following which provisional diagnosis of GCT was made.
Histopathology examination revealed multinucleated scattered osteoclastic giant cells interposed between numerous ovoid mononuclear clusters of stromal cells with pale cytoplasm suggestive of GCT . Report did not reveal any evidence suggestive of malignancy.
Metabolic workup rules out other differentials which counterfeit GCT, such as aneurysmal bone cyst (ABC), benign chondroblastoma, non-ossifying fibroma (NOF), simple bone cyst (SBC), enchondroma, spina ventosa, and metastasis, and some primary osseous tumors such as chondrosarcoma, osteosarcoma, brown tumor of hyperparathyroidism, and giant cell reparative granuloma (GCRG); the final diagnosis of GCT of the left thumb proximal phalanx was made.
On exploration of the swelling, the tumor was found to extend into surrounding soft tissue with involvement of the entire proximal phalanx with metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal joint . Decision of en-bloc tumor excision was made instead of standard curettage to ensure there was no residual tumor left behind which was confirmed intraoperatively by histopathological assessment of the frozen sections of tissue at both the ends of the void created. It was coming out to be negative . The resulting bone defect was rectified by the fusion of distal phalanx and metacarpal bone with k-wire fixation and application of thumb spica . The first web-space deepening procedure was also performed to preserve the functionality of the thumb postoperatively.
Subsequently, the k-wire was removed 6 weeks postoperatively. Clinically, the wound was healthy. Although there was shortening of the thumb amid arthrodesis of the metacarpophalangeal joint (between the 1st metacarpal and distal phalanx), the patient was able to hold objects and make a fist . Thus, there occurs no functional morbidity to the patient, which is also explained by the Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand (Quick DASH) score of 17% and Musculoskeletal Tumor Society functional score of 25.