Details of the case have been presented earlier but in brief it is about a 40-year-old woman, weighted 60 Kgr, who underwent an uncemented left total THA in 2001 for secondary degenerative osteoarthritis in a dysplastic hip. All the components had been manufactured by Mathys Medical Ltd., Switzerland, and consisted of a size 14 uncemented stem with 12/14 taper, a 28-mm small ceramic head, a 48 mm expansion shell and a 48/28 polyethylene inlay. The operation was straightforward and carried out according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In February 2003, she was referred back to the Orthopaedic outpatient office complaining for right groin pain and crepitus, with no significant history of trauma. Radiographs showed a multiple fragmented ceramic head and significant notching of the cone . The patient underwent revision surgery. Intraoperatively findings included diffuse metallosis, a pseudocapsule containing black metalloid fluid, excessive wear of the cone, a multifragmented head and major wear of the insert . The uncemented stem and the acetabular component were not loose. Metallotic tissue was thoroughly excised, ceramic debris were carefully removed, the area was well irrigated and the polyethylene insert was revised with a similar one. As there were severe notching of the taper of the stem, an effort was made to revise it, but this was proved impossible, as it was absolutely stable. Actually, during the procedure of removal, a non-displaced fracture at the greater trochanter was created. A 28 small cobalt-chromium femoral head was finally placed at the existing taper whereas non-absorbable transosseous sutures were used for greater trochanter fixation. At the 24-month follow-up examination, the patient had no pain, used no walking aids, and had normal activity without any signs of loosening or other implant pathology in plain radiographs . We were able to re-examine her 13 years after the revision operation because of left knee pain and she still had normal activity, no pain and full range of motion at her hip joint. The Harris-Hip score was excellent (95). An x-ray of her hip 13 years after revision had no signs of wearing or other pathology .