A 52-year-old woman presented to the emergency room with intense pain and swelling of the left leg and lumbar area, accompanied by high fever. According to the patient, the pain occurred 6 days ago without traumatic events. After assessing the patient’s medical history it was known that 23 years ago she delivered a baby via Caesarean section. Unfortunately, an early postoperative period was complicated: laparotomy, hysterectomy and cholecystectomy were performed due to pelvic abscess formation and peritonitis. At a subsequent time the patient remained healthy until her current hospitalization.
Clinical evaluation revealed swelling of the previously mentioned areas and painful palpation. There was significant redness in the lateral middle part of the left thigh. Initial blood workup showed elevated levels of serum C-reactive protein (518 mg/L) and procalcitonin (4.4 ng/mL). Due to a septic condition, the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit.
For further evaluation, a computed tomography (CT) scan was performed. It revealed free air in the left leg and presacral abscess draining to the left gluteal area and thigh through the greater sciatic notch . Moreover, it showed fixated ileum to the abscess. To treat thigh phlegmon, multiple incisions and fasciotomies were performed in the left gluteus and thigh, releasing a large amount of purulent discharge. Thigh phlegmon gradually resolved, however, the origin of the presacral abscess was still unknown. CT data and postsurgical colonoscopy with terminal ileoscopy raised suspicion of an ileal fistula causing bowel content evacuation to the presacral space. The second surgery was performed. Ileal diverticulum was found approximately 10 cm from ileocecal valve. A fistula was connecting the lumen of diverticulum with presacral abscess. Ileal fistulectomy and presacral abscessotomy were performed. Postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged from the hospital. Histological examination of the surgical specimen identified the perforated ileal diverticulum, forming fistula to the presacral abscess. According to the pathology report, the ileal diverticulum was more likely congenital.