A 51-year-old male was referred to our center due to a large perineal mass. The mass was first discovered 30 years ago as a chestnut-sized small movable cystic nodule. Subsequently, he watched himself for a long time because of no unusual changes. The cyst started to grow suddenly 4 months previous to the visit and caused great discomfort in the perineum due to its large size.
On physical examination, an approximately 15-cm cystic mass was observed in the left perineum near the anus. There was no sign of inflammation such as tenderness or redness. Ulceration or discharge was not observed. On a digital rectal examination, there were no specific findings in the anus. A colonoscopy was performed and was unremarkable. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a 6.7 × 16 cm lobulated mass in the medial aspect of the left perineum with an intermediate signal on T1WI, a high signal on T2WI, and peripheral wall and internal septal enhancement . There was no significantly enlarged inguinal lymph node. Laboratory values were within normal ranges, except for TPLA (+), FTA-ABS IgG (+), and FTA-ABS IgM (−). Preoperative pathologic tests such as fine needle aspiration and core needle biopsy were not performed because the mass was considered as an epidermal cystic mass.
The patient underwent excision of the mass with a negative margin. On exploration, a cystic mass with sebum and keratin was identified in the left perineum . It had a clear margin without invasion of anal sphincter and urologic tissues. Because the preoperative diagnosis was a cystic mass such as an epidermal inclusion cyst made by the MR pelvis, the surgery was performed with minimal gross margin. The skin was preserved as much as possible and closed easily without any reconstruction. Histopathological analysis showed the cyst had a thin wall composed of benign squamous epithelium. Some sections of the wall were thick, indicating a microinvasive squamous cell carcinoma (pTisN0M0, pStage0) .
The patient was discharged 2 days after the surgery without a significant postoperative complication. We performed regular follow-up examinations with CT every 6 months, and he showed no evidence of recurrence at 3 years postoperatively.