A 75-year-old Caucasian woman was admitted to our hospital with febrile illness accompanied by dyspnea without other specific symptoms, such as cough or sputum. She was normotensive, and her heart sounds were normal with bibasal lung crepitations. An electrocardiogram demonstrated sinus rhythm with a normal axis and oxygen saturation in room air was 75%. Platypnea and orthodeoxia were major features of her illness. When supine on 35% oxygen by face mask, arterial blood gas measurements yielded persistent hypoxemia (pO2: 70 mmHg, pCO2: 30 mmHg) with counterbalanced metabolic acidosis (HCO3: 18 mmol/l, pH 7.44). However, in the upright position, she developed severe hypoxemia (pO2: 40 mmHg). Biochemical tests showed renal failure (urea: 100 mg/dl, creatinine: 2 mg/dl, hematocrit (Hct): 30%), increased lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels (600 U/L) and increased markers of inflammation (erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR): 100 mm, CRP: >100 mg/dl), while a chest X-ray showed a few bilateral diffuse interstitial infiltrates, predominantly in the lower lobes.
Five months before admission, oliguric acute renal failure was detected and kidney biopsy revealed rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis with 100% crescents compatible with Wegener's disease or nodular polyarteritis. She was initially treated with sessions of renal dialysis and plasmapheresis combined with pulses of methylprednisolone. Afterwards, the treatment switched to oral methylprednisolone at 48 mg/day combined with oral cyclophosphamide at 100 mg/day for 2 months with progressive lessening of the doses. Cyclophosphamide was finally withdrawn due to severe side effects (leucopenia). During the last trimester, she was in good condition under treatment with 16 mg/day of methylprednisolone.
She was initially treated with empirical antibiotic treatment and underwent computed tomographic (CT) scanning which showed patchy areas of ground-glass opacity . With the suspicion of Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia and despite a negative test for HIV, fiberoptic bronchoscopy and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) were performed. Immunostaining of the specimens was positive for P. jiroveci and several cysts were microscopically visualized. Thus, the treatment was changed to high-dose intravenous co-trimoxazole and prednisolone.
Although she became afebrile, the clinical presentation deteriorated with excessive platypnea coupled with orthodeoxia. Sitting up was associated with a fall in her oxygen saturation of up to 67% under oxygen administration. As there was no evidence of liver disease or hepatopulmonary syndrome, a transthoracic echocardiogram was performed. Intravenously administered normal saline was not detected in the left atrium after two or six cardiac circles excluding the presence of intracardiac or intrapulmonary shunts. Due to the respiratory distress, a pulmonary angiogram was not performed. A new CT scan revealed further deterioration consisting of organized consolidations with air bronchogram at the lung bases and air in the mediastinum . On day 15, she was intubated and admitted to the intensive care unit. At the same time, BAL examination was positive for cytomegalovirus (CMV) through polymerase chain reaction (PCR) (23,000 copies/ml). Intravenous ganciclovir (5 mg/kg, twice a day) was added to the treatment. Despite the appropriate treatment, she died on day 25.