Our 31 year old male patient was born in a rural village in Myanmar with limited access to medical care. He recalls being frequently ill during his childhood, but otherwise had normal development. He had been diagnosed with malaria due to frequent flu-like symptoms. He also had episodes when he was unable to move properly. The duration of these episodes is unclear, likely weeks. He had one episode at four years old where he could not speak, followed by a full recovery. His childhood progressed with these episodes until the age of 18 years. At this time, he developed difficulty writing with his right hand and switched to writing with his left. Within a year he developed dysarthria, described as trouble pronouncing words and phonating, as if “only air came out.” He also had a mildly abnormal gait without tripping or falling. Up until this time he was taught by missionaries and learned how to read, write, and speak English, which he did well despite his symptoms. However, his symptoms progressed and by 21 years of age he was unable to talk, walk, or write. It is unclear if his symptoms were due to dystonia and/or rigidity and bradykinesia at this time, though both are possible. He was brought to the nearest city for hospitalization, during which time he was tried on multiple medications. It is unknown what was tried initially, except for trihexyphenidyl; he had no response to any of them. He was then started on carbidopa/levodopa with profound improvement in his motor and speech abilities. He was discharged without a clear diagnosis but continued on carbidopa/levodopa functioning near normal.
At the age of 24 years he fled Myanmar to Malaysia. Doctors evaluated him there and advised him to stop carbidopa/levodopa as his exam was normal. After about 1 month off the medication he started to develop difficulty walking and talking. He restarted carbidopa/levodopa and these symptoms improved. He tried to discontinue carbidopa/levodopa a few more times but with each attempt his symptoms would return within several weeks.
At the age of 29 years he moved to the United States and was diagnosed clinically with dopa-responsive dystonia. He had head imaging and blood work that were reportedly unremarkable. He was on 450 mg/day of levodopa at the time. His symptoms had no diurnal variation, were relatively consistent throughout the day, and only seemed to worsen when he was tired. Trihexyphenidyl 4 mg/day was added with little benefit.
He first presented to us in October 2016 at the age of 31 years. At this time he was on carbidopa/levodopa 10/100 mg 1.5 tablets three times per day and trihexyphenidyl 2 mg twice per day. On exam he had dystonia in his neck and trunk that was subtle at rest and became prominent with walking. He displayed posterior shift and flexion in the neck, and mild extension in the trunk. He exhibited a sensory trick with improvement in his posturing when touching his hand to his chin; this also occurred but to a lesser degree when he imagined touching his chin without actually touching it, and to an even lesser degree when the examiner touched his chin. He had mild improvement when walking backwards. While walking forward he also had increased arm swing with mild choreic movements in his fingers, right side greater than the left. The remainder of his general and neurological exam was normal, with no parkinsonism and no evidence of dystonia in his limbs at rest or with action (including writing) or in his face. His exam can be seen in the included video (additional files , , , , and ).
He was referred for genetic testing to further elucidate the etiology of his dystonia. A 16-gene dystonia panel was sent through Invitae, including ANO3 (DYT23), ATP1A3 (DYT12), GCH1 (DYT5A), GNAL (DYT25), PARK2 (AR juvenile parkinsonism), PNKD (DYT8), PRKRA (DYT16), PRRT2 (DYT10), SGCE (DYT11), SLC2A1 (DYT9 and 16), SLC6A3, SPR (DYT5B), TH (DYT5B), THAP1(DYT6), TOR1A (DYT1), and TUBB4A (DYT4). This revealed a homozygous missense mutation in the TH gene (p.Thr494Met, transcript NM_199292.2) leading to a diagnosis of autosomal recessive tyrosine hydroxylase deficiency. This mutation is likely pathogenic and has been previously reported in patients with more severe phenotypes [, ].
He has no known family history of neurological or medical disease, nor of consanguinity. He knew his mother, father, older sister, and three younger brothers well until the age of 21 years when he left his village for medical care. He has had little to no contact with them since.