A 29-year-old Moroccan man presented to our hospital with a 6-month history of headache in his left skull, associated with homolateral facial pain, numbness, diplopia, exophthalmia, eye watering, and an episode of epistaxis. Eleven years before, he had received radiotherapy for undifferentiated carcinoma of the nasopharynx, initially classified as T1N1M0. The radiation dose he had received was 70 Gy in 35 fractions delivered using the classic 3-fields technique (2 lateral opposed fields abutted to an anterior low-neck field). This technique had been applied during the previous 20 years because it seemed to be the simplest.
The patient’s physical examination revealed a left ptosis, hemifacial edema, and decreased visual acuity. Magnetic resonance imaging disclosed a tumor process of the skull base involving the sphenoid bone with its two left wings, the squamous part of the left temporal bone, and the left maxillary bone, associated with intracranial expansion, as well as a second, isolated mass in the temporal lobe .
Direct nasofibroscopy with biopsy was performed. The histological results with immunohistochemistry were in favor of osteosarcoma with the following characteristics: spindle-cell neoplasm pleomorphism with badly limited cytoplasm, an irregular nucleus with frequent atypical mitoses, and an associated osteoid matrix. The results of immunohistochemistry with anti-AE1/AE3, anti-endomysial antibodies, and anti-CD34/CD31 were negative .
A complete search for distant metastasis by positron emission tomography and by enhanced computed tomography of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis produced no results. We reviewed the initial pathology and documentation outlining the patient’s original radiation therapy and confirmed that the tumor developed in the previously irradiated field. The tumor was deemed unresectable, and further radiation therapy was not advised. The patient was started on chemotherapy consisting of four cycles of ifosfamide, cisplatin, and doxorubicin, to be followed by four planned cycles of doxorubicin and ifosfamide. A physical evaluation after the second cycle revealed improvement of clinical signs, but after this initial remission, the patient’s condition deteriorated, and he died 1 month after his third cycle of chemotherapy.