A 56-year-old, G2P2A0, menopausal, married patient sought gynecologic care with a history of abnormal uterine bleeding, initiated in August 2008. Her individual and gynecological history were unremarkable, except for controlled hypertension. She denied diabetes, smoking and alcoholism. The pelvis and abdomen physical examination was unremarkable. Gynecological examination revealed the following: a cervix with no visible abnormalities, physiological secretion, no signs of infections, and a normal uterine bimanual digital examination. Mammography and ultrasonography had no alterations. Transvaginal pelvic ultrasonography demonstrated a thickened endometrial echo (18 mm), with signs of hypervascularization on Doppler scan. In January 2009, a hysteroscopy with endometrial biopsy was performed and revealed a poor differentiated serous adenocarcinoma of the endometrium. A total abdominal hysterectomy, with pelvic and para-aortic lymphadenectomy, was performed. During exploration of the abdominal cavity, no signs of local or distant carcinomatosis were identified. The patient underwent bilateral adnexectomy. Since the greater omentum was macroscopically normal, supracolic omentectomy was not performed. Analysis of the surgical specimen revealed a 2 cm grade III uterine papillary serous adenocarcinoma of the endometrium with lymph-vascular space invasion. Surgical margins and six lymph nodes were free of disease. Cytology of peritoneal fluid resulted negative. The pathological analysis could not conclude a complete clinical stage according to the FIGO (International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics) classification. Initially, the patient's FIGO classification was considered IB G3. After review of criteria and inclusion of omentectomy for clinical stage, it was not possible to define between stage IB and III A because the omentectomy was not performed. Adjuvant radio/chemotherapy was indicated. External radiotherapy was performed (5,000 cGy in 25 fractions) during the month of May 2009, followed by 6 cycles of chemotherapy with carboplatin and paclitaxel, which was completed in October 2009. On day 1 of each chemotherapy cycle, the patient received paclitaxel, 175 mg/m2, intravenously (IV) over 3 hours, carboplatin area under the curve (AUC) 6 IV over 30 minutes, and the treatment cycle was repeated every 3 weeks. The patient received follow-up care and remained without complaints until April 2010, when she reported episodes of headache and visual disturbance. A brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed and identified an expansile mass in the right parietal lobe , suggesting a secondary hematogenous implant.
The level of tumor marker CA-125 found was 11.4 U/mL (reference value ≤ 35). The patient underwent a craniotomy for tumor excision to relieve compression of the adjacent structures. The procedure occurred without complications, with complete excision of the lesion. Histopathologic examination revealed metastasis of a uterine papillary serous adenocarcinoma of the endometrium with free margins. External radiotherapy (4,000 CGY in 20 fractions) was then performed in July 2010. At follow-up, a new brain MRI in October 2010 showed a lobulated mass in the right parieto-occipital region. In January 2011, a new craniotomy with complete metastasis excision and tumor-free margins was performed due to return of the symptoms, followed by a new cycle of radiotherapy (4,000 CGY in 20 fractions). The patient complained of severe pain in the lower dorsal region in March 2011. At this time, the bone scintigraphy demonstrated secondary neoplastic lesions in the cranial vault, distal half of the femurs and proximal end of the tibias. The patient was placed in palliative care with the use of opioids for pain management and psychological counseling. She died on May 2011 due to the progression of the disease.