A 67-year-old man was hospitalized in our hospital complaining of a 10-day history of fever, with a temperature up to 38.8˚C. He denied cough, dyspnoea, chills, shivers or chest pain. Before hospitalization, azithromycin was given orally for 5 days and intravenously for 3 days, and levofloxacin was given intravenously for 1 day. However, the patient still had a fever. He had a past medical history of tuberculosis and gastritis. He was allergic to penicillin, cephalosporin and sulfonamide. He had smoked 10 cigarettes a day for more than 20 years. He retired from an office work and had no pneumotoxic exposure.
At admission, physical examination revealed bilateral reduced breath sounds. The patient was conscious but in a poor state of mind. He was emaciated, with a BMI of 16. The remainder of his physical examination was normal. The results of routine blood examination showed that the white blood cell (WBC) count (10,180/mm3 [normal range 3500–95,000/mm3]) and neutrophil (NEU) count (8600/mm3 [normal range 1800–6300/mm3]) were elevated. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) (58 mm/h [normal range 0–15 mm/h]) and C-reactive protein (CRP) were increased (96.7 mg/L [normal range 5–10 mg/L]). Albumin was decreased (34.8 g/L [normal range 40–50 g/L]). The chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed scattered patchy high-density nodules with blurred edges in the bilateral lungs. Pleural effusion was present on the right side .
Anti-mycoplasma pneumonia test and T cell spot test of tuberculosis infection (SPOT. TB) were negative. Thyroid function, rheumatism series, immunoglobulin, complement, respiratory system tumour markers, vasculitis antibodies series, and other laboratory results were normal. The rheumatism series included anti-u1RNP Ab, anti-Smith Ab, anti-SSA Ab, anti-SSB Ab, anti-ScL-70 Ab, anti-PM-SCL Ab, anti-Jo-1 Ab, anti-CENP-B Ab, anti-PCNA Ab, anti-HHT Ab, anti-ZDB Ab, anti-HTT Ab, anti-M2 Ab, ANA, anti-dsDNA Ab, ASL, RF, CRP. The respiratory system tumour markers included CEA, CYFRA21-1, SCC, PRO-GRP, CA-125, NSE. The vasculitis antibodies series included cANCA, PR3-cANCA, pANCA, MPO-pANCA, anti-GBM Ab. In addition, cultures of sputum smears were negative for bacteria, fungi or acid-fast bacilli.
After empiric combination treatment with intravenous moxifloxacin (0.4 g, qd) and meropenem (1 g, q8 h) for approximately 2 weeks, the patient still had a fever . During this period, hydrotalcite (1 g, tid) was given orally, ambroxol (30 mg, bid) and lansoprazole (30 mg, qd) were also given intravenously for dissolving sputum and protecting stomach. Thymopentin was given intramuscularly (20 mg, qd) for improving immunity. On two occasions, dexamethasone (5 mg, st) was given by intravenous injection under a fever in evening. The patient was in poor nutritional status, with difficulties in sputum excretion, making him at high risk for bronchoscopy. Considering these situations, we decided to perform CT-guided lung puncture biopsy for diagnosis.
The percutaneous lung puncture biopsy was then performed under the guidance of CT. The lung tissue pathological features displayed acute and chronic inflammation, the proliferation of alveolar cells and fibrous tissue, and the existence of multinucleated giant cells . Silver staining of the tissue showed round foreign bodies in foam cells . The identification of the organism types in lung tissue was performed by standard biochemical tests using a standard method on a Vitek 2-GN ID card (bioMerieux, Marcy l'Etoile, France). P. fluorescens was identified, and Vitek 2 antibiotic susceptibility testing (AST) of P. fluorescens was performed. The results of AST showed that P. fluorescens was susceptible to ceftazidime, ciprofloxacin, cefepime, amikacin, gentamicin, tobramycin, piperacillin-tazobactam, and levofloxacin. Meanwhile, the P. fluorescens was resistant to ampicillin, cefazolin, imipenem, sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim, ampicillin/sulbactam, cefotetan, and ceftriaxone . According to the susceptibility pattern, moxifloxacin and meropenem were discontinued, and ciprofloxacin (0.4 g, bid) was administered for 4 days. The patient had no fever during treatment with ciprofloxacin . Then, the patient was discharged and continued to use oral ciprofloxacin.
The patient had a return visit one month later. He denied clinical symptoms. The WBC and NEU counts of his blood samples were in the normal range. Chest CT showed the absorption of the pleural effusion and the inflammatory sites in the lungs . Six months later, the patient returned again and bronchoscopy was performed. No bacteria, acid-fast bacilli, fungi or spores was found in the bronchial brushings and BALF specimen.