A 59-year-old woman visited our hospital for a routine breast checkup. Since she first had a breast examination at our hospital in 2017, she has been undergoing regular checkups every year. Last year, her breast examination showed negative findings. However, a mammography (MG) performed this year revealed a new density.
She is currently on medication for high blood pressure and diabetes, and has no other breast symptoms.
She had no history of breast surgery.
She had no family history of cancer, including breast cancer.
The breast lesion was not clearly palpable on physical examination.
No specific laboratory examinations were performed for breast lesion in this patient.
In the MG, focal asymmetry was noted in the right upper outer peripheral breast . The density was similar to or slightly lower than that of the breast parenchyma. It was not accompanied by distortions or microcalcifications. In the ultrasound (US) examination, the lesion was shown as a 1.5 cm, irregularly shaped mass with an angular margin . The echo was slightly higher than that of fat. There was no increased vascularity in the color Doppler study. In breast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the lesion was shown as a 1.3 cm mass with an irregular shape and margin located in the right upper outer peripheral breast, about 6 cm from the right nipple. The mass showed a similar T1 signal intensity and a slightly higher T2 signal intensity compared to muscles or the breast parenchyma . The lesion exhibited reduced diffusivity with hyperintensity in diffusion-weighted images and hypointensity in the apparent diffusion coefficient map compared to normal breast tissues. In the contrast enhancement study, the lesion showed heterogeneous internal enhancement with an initial slow and delayed persistent enhancing pattern. There was no axillary lymph node metastasis.
The patient underwent breast-conserving surgery and sentinel lymph node biopsy. Grossly, an ill-defined whitish tumor of roughly 1.6 cm × 1.4 cm was observed. Microscopically, invasive cancer showed diffuse infiltrating nests of cribriform or solid sheets composed of two types of cells: basaloid and ductal epithelial cells . The cribriform space was filled with bluish or pinkish mucoid materials that were Periodic acid Schiff-positive . Surrounding breast tissue also showed extensive intraductal proliferation of tumor cells forming small cribriform or tubules. Small round glands lined by benign-looking uniform cells were noted at the periphery of the intraductal carcinoma, suggesting in situ AdCC arising in the background of MGA . Benign small glands of MGA were p63 negative but S-100 positive. However, in situ AdCC was p63 positive but S-100 negative, similar to that of invasive element . Immunohistochemical staining revealed myoepithelial differentiation with strong p63 positivity and epithelial differentiation with cytokeratin (CK) , CD117, and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA). Triple markers of estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and human epidermal growth factor receptor2 (HER2) were negative. The Ki-67 proliferation index was low (less than 17%). There was no lymphovascular or perineural invasion. There was no tumor metastasis in sentinel lymph nodes.