A 61-year-old female presented with several months of unsteady gait, intermittent headaches, confusion, and episodes of urinary incontinence. Her past medical history was unremarkable. Physical examination was notable for impaired tandem gait without focal deficits. Conventional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated tetraventricular hydrocephalus without transependymal flow, but with ventral displacement of the brainstem and dorsal displacement of the cerebellum without an obvious obstructive lesion on pre- or post-contrast imaging. Previous outpatient neurology workup concluded a diagnosis of normal pressure hydrocephalus based on her clinical symptomatology and radiographic findings, which prompted neurosurgical consultation. However, given the degree of fourth ventricular dilatation and subtle displacement of the brainstem and cerebellum, additional imaging sequences were ordered to rule out fourth ventricular outlet obstruction before considering surgical intervention (e.g., ventriculoperitoneal shunting). Constructive interference in steady state (CISS) and half-Fourier acquisition single-shot turbo spin echo (HASTE) MRI sequences suggested encystment of the fourth ventricle with thin margins of arachnoid membrane extending through the foramina of Luschka bilaterally into the pontocerebellar cistern . These findings suggested the diagnosis of noncommunicating tetraventricular hydrocephalus secondary to mechanical obstruction at the outlet of the fourth ventricle. As such, a fluoroscopic dynamic cisternogram through an external ventricular drain was performed to confirm outlet obstruction, defined the boundaries of encystment, and determine the operative approach for definitive surgical intervention.
Digital subtraction cisternography demonstrated contrast outflow through the foramina of Monro and cerebral aqueduct; however, there was a paucity of flow through the preponderance of the fourth ventricle with contrast tracking peripherally along the ependymal walls and stopping just past the apertures of the foramina of Magendie and Luschka without extension into the basal cisterns . Delayed fluoroscopic images confirmed persistent obstruction at the level of the fourth ventricle outflow pathways. Given this localization of obstruction, a suboccipital craniectomy was performed for exploration and intervention. A thick, dense, opaque-white arachnoid membrane was identified at the foramen of Magendie masking the obex . This arachnoid membrane was completely excised after mobilization of the tonsils, restoring cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) flow dynamics. Frozen sections were consistent with benign fibrovascular tissue, however, a meningothelial lining was not observed to confirm the diagnosis of an arachnoid cyst. CSF studies were unremarkable. The external ventricular drain was clamped to monitor for 3 days and then removed on postoperative day 3 without complication. Postoperative MRI demonstrated a significant decrease in the size of the ventricular system with marked reduction in the size of the fourth ventricle and interval resolution of brainstem displacement . Postoperatively, her gait returned to baseline with complete resolution of her headache, confusion, and urinary incontinence. At 3-month clinical follow-up, she was without symptomatology.