A 20-year-old male college student visited the local hospital due to fever, disturbance of consciousness, and convulsion. He had abdominal distension, vomiting, and gradual abdominal pain without diarrhea after meal three days before. The patient had no meningeal irritation and no history of neurological disorder in his family. Physical examination on admission showed body temperature of 40.2 °C, blood pressure of 90/50 mmHg, and heart rate of 160 bpm. The patient developed a coma and abdominal distension of no reason. He became hypotensive and was commenced on norepinephrine treatment (Maximum dose reached 0.72ug/kg/min). Hematological examination revealed raised white blood cell (WBC) of 30.89 × 109/L and D-dimer level of 13,484 ng/ml (normal value 0–243 ng/ml), slightly decreased blood platelet (PLT) of 75 × 109/L. Coagulation tests suggested abnormal coagulation profile with prothrombin time (PT) of 14.5S (normal value 11.5–14.8S), activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) of 35.8S (normal value 25.1–36.5S), thrombin time (TT) of 36.5 S (normal value 14-21S), fibrinogen (FIB) of 1.64 g/L (normal value 2.38–4.98 g/L), and fibrin degradation products (FDP) of 71.2ug/ml (normal value 0–2.01ug/ml). There were apparent liver and kidney dysfunction with alanine aminotransferase (ALT) of 131.6 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) of 111.3 U/L, total bilirubin (TBIL) of 33.8 μmol/L, creatinine of 125 μmol/L, and urea of 8.2 mmol/L. Laboratory investigations showed elevated level of C-reactive protein (CRP 221.85 mg/L) and procalcitonin (PCT 1.76 μg/L). But normal range of serum amylase and lipase, and the results of immunoglobulin lymphocyte subsets and connective tissue diseases are normal. CSF (cerebrospinal fluid) examination showed pale bloody CSF, red blood cells of 12,000 × 106/L, white blood cell of 100 × 106/L, with a pressure of 230cmH2O. Head CT performed at local hospital showed cerebral edema and subarachnoid hemorrhage . No abnormality was found in digital subtraction angiography (DSA) of skull. Purulent urine was drained from the indwelling urinary catheter. The patient was initially diagnosed with subarachnoid hemorrhage, sepsis, and septic shock. Therefore, meropenem (1.0 g, Q8h) and datomycin (0.5 g per day) were given for anti-infection, and anticoagulant therapy (enoxaparin 6000U, Q12h) was given, blood culture was also performed before antibiotics are used.
One day later, the patient was transferred to our hospital due to shock and multiple organ dysfunction. Abdominal CTA (computed tomography arteriography) and CTV (computed tomography venography) revealed no abnormalities, but local edema and thickening of the ascending colon wall with peritoneal thickening were found by abdominal CT plain scans . Head CT plain scans showed aggravated cerebral edema and subarachnoid hemorrhage . Lumbar puncture was not performed due to severe cerebral edema and high intracranial pressure. Four days later, both blood and urine were used for PACE seq mNGS (pathogen capture engine mutagenic next-generation sequencing), which detected 23 and 3 unique reads of B. cereus, respectively . Six days later, the blood culture results at the local hospital were reported as Bacillus cereus, and the results of drug sensitivity report that Cefazolin, cefoperazone sulbactam, levofloxacin, vancomycin and linezolid are effective.
Accordingly, the patient was diagnosed with B. cereus sepsis and sepsis-associated encephalopathy, complicated with multiple organ dysfunction, including gastroenteritis, acute kidney injury, urinary tract infection, and acute respiratory distress syndrome. Anticoagulation was promptly discontinued in view of the patient's increased subarachnoid hemorrhage. Sufficient meropenem (1.0 g, Q8h) combined with linezolid (0.6 g, Q12h) was administered for anti-infection. Adjuvant treatments, such as sedative and analgesic anti-sympathetic therapy, body temperature management, cerebral protection, assisted ventilation, hemoperfusion to remove inflammatory mediators, and volume management were also given. The patient's vital signs were gradually stabilized, and the laboratory test indicators showed improvement after a week. The patient had gastrointestinal bleeding during the treatment of patients, and was given symptomatic hemostatic treatment.
After 12 days, the patient developed increased heart rate (> 100 beats/min) and fever (39.2 °C). Reexamination of head CT showed significantly aggravated cerebral edema and multiple subarachnoid hemorrhages . Head CTA showed bilateral anterior, middle and posterior cerebral arteries with uneven thickness, multiple luminal narrowing, and dilatation changes, suggesting local cerebrovascular inflammation. CTV showed fine contrast in the left transverse sinus, sigmoid sinus and the opposite side of the internal jugular vein, and less uniform local density of transverse sinus . Venous sinus thrombosis was considered. Active adequate anticoagulation therapy was given, and because meropenem and linezolid had been anti-infective treatment for 2 weeks, considering the side effects of the drugs, the anti-infective treatment regimen was adjusted to cefoperazone/sulbactam (3.0 g, Q8h) combined with vancomycin (1.0 g, Q12h). Repeated head CT showed alleviated cerebral edema and subarachnoid hemorrhage after 2 weeks. .
After forty days, the patient's organ function and consciousness recovered, but he was in a minimally conscious state, and his limbs could move spontaneously and still could not communicate. He was transferred to a rehabilitation hospital for continued treatment. During this period, lumbar puncture examination was performed intermittently, and no abnormality was found. After 2 months, the patient was able to communicate and take care of himself, but his cognitive function remained poor. After 4 months, his cognitive function gradually recovered. Six months later, he was able to return to school and continued his education. Clinical course timeline is described in Fig. .