We present the case of a 52-year-old Mexican man who worked as an office employee and lived in a suburban area of the city of Colima, Mexico. He and his wife denied recent trips outside the city. Zoonosis was absent. He was not physically active and did not have an adequate diet. Pathological antecedents revealed liver cirrhosis, diagnosed 12 years ago, alongside esophageal varices that had been treated with sclerotherapy 7 years prior. He also had a diagnosis of essential hypertension, diagnosed 20 years ago. His treatment prior to hospitalization included 20 mg of propranolol every 12 hours, which was used to treat his essential hypertension, esophageal varices, and to reduce his portal hypertension.
He arrived at our institution “IMSS General Hospital Zone 1, Colima” in the early afternoon (day 1, see Table ). He began to experience extreme pain localized in his right foot, 16 to 18 hours prior to admission, with a local pain scale of 10/10. He denied any recent forms of punctures to the overlying skin (including animal and insect bites).
On physical examination during admission, he was somnolent, oriented in person and space, but not oriented to time. His vital signs were: arterial pressure (AP, systolic/diastolic) 67/49, mean AP (MAP) 55, heart rate (HR) 88, respiratory rate (RR) 16, and body temperature 36 °C. He presented hepatopathy facies and spontaneous eyelid opening, his oral mucosa was dry, and his neck showed jugular engorgement grade I. Both hemithorax were slightly hypoventilated with no adventitious sounds. Precordial was rhythmic with low intensity sounds and no murmurs were heard. Peristalsis was present in his abdomen but low in intensity and there was no hepatosplenomegaly. His upper extremities were symmetrical, eutrophic, with no signs of edema; he moved his upper extremities freely without any limitation, no asterixis was present, and a force scale of 4/5 was seen. During exploration of inferior extremities, there was a clear asymmetric pattern. His right lower extremity was volume augmented with signs of edema ++ including large and small bullae formation with serohematogenous liquid inside involving most of his right foot and ankle . The pedal pulse was present but weak and had a local elevated temperature on palpation. His movements were markedly limited due to extreme pain. Deep vein thrombosis maneuvers were performed and were not present. Plantar reflexes were also not seen.
A peripheral intravenously administered high-dose double scheme of antibiotics (clindamycin plus ceftriaxone), crystalloid fluids, and corticosteroids was initiated. Laboratory studies were performed soon after admission: hemoglobin (Hb) 12.6 g/dl, hematocrit (Htc) 40.3%, mean corpuscular volume (MCV) 103.9 fL, white blood cells (WBC) 39,400/mm3, neutrophils 37,460/mm3, platelets 104,000/mm3, thrombin time (TT) 26.7 seconds, international normalized ratio (INR) 2.15, partial thromboplastin time (PTT) 42.8 seconds, glucose 61 g/dL, urea 102.72 mg/dL, creatinine 1.8 mg/dL, total bilirubin (TB) 3.4 mg/dL, direct bilirubin (DB) 2.6 mg/dL, indirect bilirubin 0.8 mg/dL, albumin 1.5 g/dL, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 35 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 58 U/L, P 7.1 mEq/L, Ca 8.4 mEq/L, Cl 106 mEq/L, K 6.4 mEq/L, Na 129 mEq/L, Mg 1.72 mEq/L, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 420 U/L, and C-reactive protein (CRP) 16.07 mg/L. Correction of hypoglycemia and electrolyte imbalance was initiated. Deep vein thrombosis was ruled out by clinical assessment and Doppler ultrasound. Aspiration of bulla liquid was obtained and sent to a laboratory for cultivation (positive to Cedecea lapagei, results returned on day 2). Interdisciplinary consultation with angiology was carried out (no indications were added). He was classified with a Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score of 11, Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation (APACHE) II of 22 points (42.4% mortality rate), and a Laboratory Risk Indicator for Necrotizing Fasciitis (LRINEC) score of 11 points (high risk > 75% of having necrotizing fasciitis) .
In the late afternoon (day 1) his somnolence and disorientation persisted, he was hypotensive with an AP of 80/40 with a MAP of 55, and he was unresponsive to fluid resuscitation. His hypoglycemia persisted despite vigorous treatment. No fever was present and his skin was pale. His left lower limb had ascending progression of serohematogenous bullae proximal to the patella. His extreme pain continued. Since our patient’s MAP was persistently below 65 mmHg despite intravenously administered fluid therapy, an anterior jugular central venous catheter was placed and we decided to include norepinephrine 8 mg in 0.9% 1000 cc physiological solution passing at a rate of 8 ml/hour, categorizing the case as septic shock . Concomitantly he had developed acute kidney injury (AKI) “Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes” (KDIGO) stage II.
During the night (day 1), abundant large fetid serohematogenous bullae and edema continued to advance up his right thigh with persistent generalized hypoperfusion. Because of previous mentioned conditions, it was decided to change antibacterial therapy to intravenously administered imipenem and clindamycin. Bullae fluid culture results and antibiogram were not available at that time. Norepinephrine was boosted to maintain MAP above 65 mmHg. Intensive care unit (ICU) was called in for valorization to admit our patient. Unfortunately, due to the lack of space in the ICU, this idea was dismissed. Since rapid deterioration was evident, new laboratory studies were ordered (approximately 10 hours after initial blood test): Hb 10.1 g/dL, Htc 32.7%, MCV 107.5 fL, WBC 11.6/mm3, platelets 35,000/mm3, TT “Does not coagulate”, PTT “Does not coagulate”, glucose 30 g/dL, urea 115.5 mg/dL, creatinine 2.4 mg/dL, K 6.4 mEq/L, Na 130 mEq/L, LDH 406 U/L, and CRP 220 mg/L. His SOFA score was 16.
Necrotizing fasciitis was our primary diagnosis due to clinical and laboratory findings (LRINEC score of 12 points). Even though the diagnosis was very likely, the lack of a biopsy study meant that we could not confirm such a diagnosis. Multiple organ dysfunction secondary to septic shock was also diagnosed. The differential diagnosis of animal or insect bite was dismissed due to lack of exposure history and lack of puncture wound.
During the next morning (day 2) he maintained the same general conditions. Norepinephrine was boosted up again (MAP 50). Soon after, he entered cardiopulmonary arrest and cardiopulmonary resuscitation was performed. Unfortunately he died later that morning.