The patient was an 18-year-old Chinese American female being evaluated in the Adoption Medicine Clinic (AMC) at the University of Minnesota. She had been adopted at age 3 years from China. Prior to adoption, she had lived in an orphanage after being relinquished by her biological parents at the age of 5 months. Her previous medical history included a ventricular septal defect (VSD) that was repaired prior to adoption and bilateral strabismus that had been repaired during childhood. She had a resting bilateral hand tremor that was diagnosed as psychogenic by Pediatric Neurology. There was a history of delayed developmental milestones, including gross motor and speech delays. The patient did not start walking until approximately age 24 months. She did not start speaking in phrases or sentences until age 4. Following adoption, the patient’s adoptive mother attempted to obtain resources to help support the patient’s growth and development. She received occupational therapy services from age 3 to 4 years, but this had been discontinued due to lack of insurance coverage. Throughout childhood the family had difficulty obtaining appropriate therapeutic support, and the patient was moved to multiple school districts to identify and obtain resources. She was able to secure financial support from county services at age 16. Despite these challenges, the patient was able to continue to generally progress with her developmental milestones.
The patient had a history of intellectual disability. She had a school individualized education program (IEP) evaluation at age 13 that revealed a full-scale intelligence quotient (IQ) of 70. She was provided school services under the category Developmental Cognitive Disability, mild-moderate. She was evaluated by Pediatric Neuropsychology at age 15 due to ongoing concerns for intellectual disability and developmental delays and was diagnosed with mild intellectual disability and static encephalopathy. She was subsequently evaluated by Pediatric Neurology, who agreed with these diagnoses. The patient also underwent diagnostic testing for autism spectrum disorder (ASD) at age 15, which was not consistent with an ASD diagnosis.
As the patient reached adolescence, she began to have significant difficulty with emotional regulation and mood and was diagnosed with severe depression. She was hospitalized on two separate occasions due to concerns for anxiety, depression, self-injurious behaviors, and suicidal ideation. She was referred for psychotherapy and had been maintained on mood-stabilizing medications, including fluoxetine and escitalopram. She was taking escitalopram at the time of evaluation. The patient previously had dialectical behavioral therapy (DBT) and eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR) therapy. She had also been treated for an eating disorder at an outpatient program. Throughout adolescence, she continued with social isolation and self-injurious behaviors, including skin picking and cutting, although her mood had improved following initiation of medications and therapy. She had recently started with a mental health coach prior to her evaluation. The patient and adoptive mother had ongoing attachment difficulties. The patient also reported a history of poor sleep related to anxiety and use of electronics prior to bedtime. She was taking melatonin.
At the time of her visit to the AMC, despite the presence of known global delays, diagnosis of mild intellectual disability, and a history of congenital cardiac disease, the patient had not undergone genetic testing. The family had established contact with the patient’s biological family. There was no known consanguinity between parents. She had an older sibling with a hand deformity and a younger sibling without identified medical concerns. Neither sibling was reported to have developmental delays. There was no family history of substance abuse or mental health issues. The patient had an adaptive IEP with occupational therapy support and a plan to transition to adulthood following her senior year of high school. Of note, the patient had spent the majority of ninth grade homebound due to anxiety symptoms and was in a half-day therapy program throughout tenth grade.
On clinical evaluation, the patient displayed appropriate growth and physical development. Weight-for-age was 67th percentile and height-for-age was 37th percentile. Body mass index (BMI) was age-appropriate at 72nd percentile. Vital signs, including blood pressure (91/70) and heart rate (71), were age-appropriate. She did not display any dysmorphic features. She had evidence of self-injurious behaviors, including healed scars on her arms and evidence of skin picking on her scalp. She had a healed surgical incision from her VSD repair. She did not display physical findings consistent with fetal alcohol syndrome. Examination of head and neck was unremarkable. Lungs were clear to auscultation. She demonstrated a quiet systolic heart murmur best heard at her left upper sternal border. Her abdomen was soft and non-tender. Cranial nerves were intact. Deep tendon reflexes were symmetric. She demonstrated appropriate bilateral muscle strength and tone. Laboratory values, including complete blood count (CBC) and vitamin D levels, were within normal limits. She had evidence of stage 2 iron deficiency with low ferritin and elevated iron-binding capacity. She was started on an iron supplement. As part of her clinical workup, the patient was evaluated by a genetic counselor, who recommended obtaining a comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) and single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) microarray and testing for Fragile X syndrome, given her history of developmental delays and diagnosis of intellectual disability. She was referred to occupational therapy for management of her sensory sensitivities and fine motor delays.
Chromosomal microarray identified a 6.8 Mb deletion at chromosome location 5p15.31-5p15.33 (arr[GRCh37] arr[GRCh37] 5p15.33p15.31(26142_6858476)x1). This area of chromosome 5 is included in the larger deletion associated with Cri-du-chat syndrome. Although smaller than the typical Cri-du-chat deletion, this patient’s deletion was a likely explanation for her history of developmental delays, intellectual disability, and short stature. It may also have contributed to her congenital heart defect. Interestingly, on further discussion with the adoptive mother and review of medical records, it was found that the patient displayed the characteristic high-pitched cry of Cri-du-chat syndrome during infancy. This patient was referred for further evaluation by a medical geneticist and encouraged to contact her biological family to discuss the genetic testing results and whether any further testing of her siblings was warranted. She was formally seen and assessed by a geneticist and genetic counselor. At that time, additional genetic testing through a karyotype was pursued, which was able to rule out the possibility that this terminal deletion was the result of a translocation. That visit was also critical in determining whether any additional testing or healthcare management was indicated based on the genes included in the deleted region, and to discuss implications for inheritance and future childbearing. She was evaluated by Neurology and underwent brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) that revealed no intracranial abnormalities other than a presumed incidental cavernoma in the right thalamus that did not correlate with her symptoms.