A 36-year-old, previously healthy Sri Lankan woman presented to our tertiary care hospital with generalized body swelling and foamy urine of 2 weeks’ duration. Her physical examination revealed that she was pale and edematous. She had bilateral axillary lymph node enlargement that was nontender (right 3 × 2 cm, left 1 × 2 cm), as well as multiple cervical and inguinal lymph nodes measuring less than 1 cm. Her blood pressure was 170/90 mmHg. She had nontender hepatomegaly 7 cm below the right costal margin. Laboratory investigations revealed a hemoglobin level of 9.5 g/dl, a platelet count of 52 × 109/L, and a white blood cell count 12.8 × 109. Her reticulocyte count was 1.2%. Blood examination revealed normochromic normocytic red cells, absolute neutrophil leukocytosis, and large platelets with moderate thrombocytopenia.
The appearance of her bone marrow biopsy was compatible with granulocytic proliferation with normal megakaryopoiesis, indicating an inflammatory process. Initially, her serum creatinine level was 1.08 mg/dl, but it rose within 1 week to 3.2 mg/dl. Her serum electrolytes were normal. Her aspartate aminotransferase level was 15 U/L, and her alanine aminotransferase level was 29.7 U/L. Her total protein was 5.8 g/dl with albumin 2.7 g/dl. Her international normalized ratio was 1.09. Her alkaline phosphatase level was 467.8 IU/L. A urine full report showed pus cells 8–10 and red cells 0–1 in high power field, and a highly positive result for albumin. Her urine protein excretion was high at 3.17 g (normal range 0–0.15 g) for 24 hours. Her urine protein creatinine ratio was 3868 mg/g of creatinine (normal range <150 mg/g of creatinine).
An ultrasound scan of the patient’s abdomen showed hepatomegaly of 16.8 cm in size without focal lesions, moderate ascites, and normal-sized kidneys. She had no splenomegaly. A chest x-ray showed bilateral mild pleural effusion. The results of two-dimensional echocardiography were normal. Her lipid profile was normal. Her C-reactive protein level was 49 mg/dl. Her erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 34 mm in the first hour. Results of blood and urine cultures were negative. Her human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1) and HIV-2 antibodies, antibody to Mycoplasma pneumoniae, hepatitis B surface antigen, and hepatitis C antibody test results were negative. Antinuclear antibodies, double-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), and direct Coombs test results were negative. Serum protein electrophoresis revealed features of an acute-phase reaction with hypogammaglobulinemia.
An axillary lymph node biopsy revealed numerous small follicular structures. The centers of these follicles were small and consisted of follicular dendritic type cells resembling burnt-out follicles. Blood vessels, some with hyaline walls, were seen in the centers of the follicles. Concentric layers of lymphocytes were seen around the follicles corresponding to the mantle zone. The parafollicular tissue also showed extensive proliferation of the postcapillary venules. Small lymphocytes were seen among the venules. Occasional reactive follicles were seen. The appearance was highly suggestive of CD of hyaline vascular type with lymphoid subtype.
A diagnosis of multicentric CD of hyaline-vascular variant was made. The patient was started on diuretics and antihypertensives and commenced on rituximab 375 mg/m2 weekly for 4 weeks. She experienced dramatic clinical, biochemical, and hematological improvement. After a 7-week hospital stay, she was discharged. One month after discharge, her laboratory parameters had normalized, and she was clinically well. She was followed at the nephrology clinic, and no complications were encountered.