We report the case of a 3-month-old male infant with bilateral corneal opacity since birth who was transferred from the pediatric unit for further ophthalmic care. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s parents to publish this report. Prenatal and natal history were unremarkable apart from the fact that the mother, aged 35 years at the time of childbirth, was HIV positive. There was no family history of similar ocular disorders or other congenital anomalies. Upon initial ophthalmic examination, a positive light pursuit was found. There was a homogeneous bilateral central corneal opacity without neovascularization. Ophthalmologic examination under general anesthesia revealed a deep anterior chamber with iris strands that crossed the anterior chamber from the iris. The lens was transparent on the edges and did not adhere to the cornea. The retina was difficult to evaluate because of central corneal opacity. The intraocular pressure measured with a Schiotz tonometer was respectively 18 mmHg and 20 mmHg in the right and left eye. Other malformed features found in the physical pediatric examination included: broadening of the nose base and microcephaly , bilateral polydactyly with camptodactyly, clinodactyly of the supernumerary finger , an umbilical hernia with hypochromic macules of the abdomen and bilateral supernumerary toe with hypertrophy of the hallux . There were no genital, vertebral, or cardiac anomalies on pediatric physical examination. Laboratory examination revealed that the child was also HIV positive. The diagnosis of Peters plus anomaly Type 1 was made. Management consisted of the administration of mydriatics, one drop two times per day, 3 days a week. One drop of dorzolamide in the evening was also prescribed. Immediate penetrating keratoplasty (PKP) in both the eyes was advised. After being informed that this intervention was not available in our country, the parents did not bring the child back for further consultation, and were lost to follow-up.