A 60-year-old male with a history of prostate cancer status post-prostatectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy presented to the Emergency Department with complaints of generalized body swelling, orthopnea, and weight gain of 80 pounds in 6 months.
The patient reported that the generalized body swelling had started as bilateral lower extremity edema deteriorating into anasarca that was unresponsive to diuresis. Vitals at admission were temperature 36.7 degrees Celsius, blood pressure 124/81 mm Hg, heart rate 90 beats/minute, respiratory rate 16, and oxygen saturation 95% on room air. Examination revealed anasarca with significant scrotal edema and 3+ pitting edema involving bilateral upper and lower extremities. Significant laboratory findings included serum creatinine-1.68 mg/dl, elevated alkaline phosphatase-450 U/L, total bilirubin 5.4 mg/dl (Direct predominant), and troponin 0.12 ng/ml and pro-BNP 20,730 pg/ml, indicating multiorgan dysfunction. EKG showed sinus rhythm with 1st degree AV block, low voltage QRS in all leads, and right axis deviation, as shown in .
CT abdomen pelvis was obtained, which showed diffuse anasarca, and numerous pulmonary nodules in both lungs concerning for metastatic disease. Transthoracic echocardiography was completed which showed bi–atrial enlargement, biventricular hypertrophy, septal wall thickening, starry sky appearance of the tissue, grade one diastolic dysfunction (E/A ratio 3.1 and E/E’ ratio 11.71) and apical sparing of longitudinal systolic strain, all of which were suggestive of cardiac amyloidosis resulting in restrictive cardiomyopathy .
Further biochemical investigations for amyloidosis were sent including serum and urine protein electrophoresis and immunofixation. Light chain analysis showed Free Kappa Light Chains 24.12 mg/dl (reference range 0.33–1.94 mg/dl), Free Lambda Light Chains 1.46 mg/dl (reference range 0.57– 2.63 mg/dL), and Kappa/Lambda ratio 16.52 (reference range: 0.26- 1.65) with no evidence for monoclonal gammopathy. Interestingly, Technetium-99 m pyrophosphate (PYP) scan for transthyretin-related (ATTR) cardiac amyloidosis was unrevealing. For further work up, the patient underwent right heart catheterization and endomyocardial biopsy. A right heart catheterization revealed pulmonary capillary wedge pressure of 32 mm Hg, right atrial pressure of 27 mm Hg and mean pulmonary artery pressure of 42 mm Hg. Endomyocardial biopsy was notable for cardiac amyloidosis with positive Congo red staining .
The patient subsequently underwent bone marrow biopsy confirming the diagnosis of AL type amyloidosis (Amyloid AL type) characterized by hypercellular bone marrow with trilineage maturation, findings confirmatory for multiple myeloma. The patient was transferred to the bone marrow transplant treatment floor (BMT) and initiated on chemotherapy with bortezomib, cyclophosphamide, and dexamethasone, along with aggressive intravenous (IV) diuresis. However, kidney function progressively declined requiring renal replacement therapy. On day 18 of admission, the patient became hemodynamically unstable with a blood pressure of 70/40 mm of Hg and heart rate of 52, which did not respond to IV fluids. The patient was transferred to the medical intensive care unit (ICU) for a higher level of care where he was treated with sepsis protocol due to sudden hemodynamic decompensation. Overnight the patient developed pulseless ventricular tachycardia and was defibrillated and emergently intubated. Despite being maintained on dual vasopressors, his condition continued to worsen leading to multi-organ failure. Due to guarded prognosis, a family meeting was held by the BMT team, and a shared decision was made by the family to pursue comfort measures only. The patient passed away shortly thereafter.