A four-year-old female with American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) status III, SJS, and epilepsy was scheduled for Blepharoplasty in Rasuol Akram Hospital. She had a family history of SJS, with an uncle also suffering from SJS. Her symptoms started with muscle weakness at 10 months old, leading to a myotonia diagnosis. She had a drug history of Tegretol syrup and baclofen tablets. She had normal intelligence and speech. She also had a history of knee fracture surgery one year ago with no anesthesia problems. In the preoperative examination, she had a small ASD in echocardiography with a normal EF of 60%. Lab tests were normal. The patient’s weight was 10 kg.
Evaluation of the airway and the Mallampati scoring were unsuccessful due to the patient’s inability in mouth opening and facial muscle rigidity . Due to limited mouth opening and micrognathia, difficult intubation was predictable despite a prior history of anesthesia. Difficult intubation equipment and considerations were arranged (LMA and pediatric fiberoptic bronchoscope, video laryngoscope, and special blades for difficult intubation were available at the bedside in the OR).
The anesthetic machine was cleaned of volatile agents by disconnecting and removing the vaporizer and renewing CO2 absorbent using a new disposable breathing circuit and O2 flushing for 50 minutes.
Dantrolene was sufficiently available. Because the patient did not cooperate, an awake intubation plan was impossible. As the possibility of malignant hyperthermia inhalation induction with sevoflurane with spontaneous breathing was unsafe, we decided to do rapid sequence induction of anesthesia.
First, we gave an intravenous line with 20 g chatter from the patient’s right hand. For anesthesia induction, we injected 30 μg of fentanyl, 20 mg of propofol, and 8 mg of rocuronium. Sugammadex was present in the OR before anesthesia induction. About 45 seconds after the rocuronium injection, a 3.5-cuffed endotracheal tube was inserted without difficulty by video laryngoscopy (blade 2 of C-MAC Video Laryngoscope) and fixed. Blood pressure, heart rate, and body temperature were monitored during anesthesia. General anesthesia was maintained with total intravenous anesthesia, consisting of 2% propofol (100 μg/kg/min) and remifentanil (0.15 μg/kg/min). She received rocuronium every half an hour during the operation. Ventilator settings were done with tidal volume 125 cc, respiratory rate of 16, peep 3 cm H2O, peak airway pressure was 28 cm H2O, and the mean pressure of 7 cm H2O. Capnography, pals oximetry, temperature, ECG, and noninvasive blood pressure monitoring were used during the operation.