A 59-year-old man, a former captain of the army, who was a known case of RP in the last 40 years was referred by an ophthalmologist to our neuro-oncology clinic with symptoms of headache, progression of visual dysfunction including further restriction in visual field, and severe decrease in visual acuity within the last 2 years. On physical examination, he could barely do the finger count from a 1-m distance in both eyes and the visual field was severely restricted to a small portion of central field. Funduscopic examination revealed the typical findings of RP. He had a relative afferent pupillary defect in the right eye (Marcus Gunn pupil) and both pupils had a sluggish response to light. The rest of his neurologic examination was unremarkable. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) of the macula showed a diffuse loss of ellipsoid zone, sparing the fovea . Perimetry demonstrated a severe visual field restriction in both eyes which interestingly affected the temporal fields of both eyes rather than the nasal fields .
Due to the presence of headache, a right-sided Marcus Gunn pupil and further restriction of temporal fields in perimetry, a brain CT scan was requested which revealed a sellar lesion, resembling a pituitary adenoma. So, he was advised to perform a gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and also hormonal tests. The lab results for hormonal assay were all in normal range, depicting a non-functional adenoma. Due to the presence of an intracranial shell fragment, radiology technicians canceled the MRI and he refused to return to neuro-oncology clinic for 2 months. After this time, he was visited again and considering the safety of brain MRI in certain intracranial ballistics (non-steel-containing) and also the benefits of the correct diagnosis outweighing the potential risks in this very patient, we advised the patient to undergo the brain MRI after obtaining the informed consent. Brain MRI, despite showing a metallic artifact, revealed a sellar lesion with hypo-intensity in T1, iso- to hyper-intensity in T2 and homogenous enhancement after gadolinium injection, all in favor of a pituitary macroadenoma .
Another reason that led to his sellar mass remaining undetected was the presence of an intracranial ballistic fragment. He was serving as an Iranian Army soldier during the Iran-Iraq war and suffered a penetrating intracranial retained ballistic fragment when he was 22.
We offered endoscopic trans-nasal trans-sphenoidal surgery for the removal of the sellar lesion, but the patient who was being informed that his vision would not change very much by three retina fellowships decided against this operation and was discharged.
We also offered him the options of stereotactic biopsy followed by radiotherapy and stereotactic radio-surgery. However, considering the dismal prognosis of acquiring visual improvement followed by either treatment, he refused other therapeutic options and follow-up MRI studies as well. The patient is still being followed on a bi-monthly basis (8-month follow-up). His brain CT scan has not shown any obvious change in size of lesion and no obstructive hydrocephalus during this period, and he is still under follow-up to be evaluated for these two parameters, as well as clinical symptoms of high intracranial pressure.