A 4-year-old girl was admitted to our hospital in November 2014 with a large, painful and worsening mass (about 20 × 23 cm) on the left side of the neck . From her past medical history, she initially presented in December 2012 (then aged 2) with a 1-month history of the parents noticing a red left eye and decreased vision. She was found to have cells in the anterior chamber, iris nodules, vitreous opacities and secondary glaucoma. The right eye was normal. Computed tomography (CT) scans showed left intraocular soft tissue density mass lesions with specks of calcifications. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a left intraocular mass that was hyperintense relative to the vitreous on T1WI and markedly hypointense relative to the vitreous on axial T2WI . Depending on the calcification, demonstrated well with contrast administration and thin sections with fat suppression, a diagnosis of retinoblastoma stage E was made. There was no positive family history. Enucleation was proposed but was refused by the girl’s parents. After 1 year (in December 2013), the patient presented with periocular oedema and conjunctival chemosis for 3 months. She had been enucleated in another hospital. The CT and MRI before operation are shown in Fig. . Histopathological examination revealed the retinoblastoma and showed that tumour cells had invaded the sclera, but tumour cells were not found at the end of the optic nerve. She did not receive any chemical or radiological treatment after the operation. In May 2014, the patient presented with a growing mass in the left orbit and small hard lump of the left side of the neck . Fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) of the lump was performed, and it was found positive for tumour deposits of retinoblastoma cells in a local hospital. The parents refused chemotherapy once more due to poor financial situation. After 6 months, the patient presented again because the mass of the left side of the neck was growing too large and painful to tolerate . A multidepartment collaboration mode of treatment was applied, which involved surgery, postoperative chemotherapy and/or additional local radiotherapy.
A systemic workup including bone marrow biopsy and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis was also carried out. The bone marrow was negative for tumour deposits of malignant round cells. The CSF cytology was within normal limits. Based on this, a diagnosis of stage IVa metastatic retinoblastoma (a distant metastatic retinoblastoma without CNS involvement) was made. The systemic condition of the child was poor.
A one-stage surgery was conducted immediately. The orbital tumour was completely resected in December 2014. Since the patient had a large tumour invasion range in the left side of the neck not suitable for complete resection, the tumour was resected as much as possible while retaining organ functions. Histopathological examination revealed orbital retinoblastoma and a large intraparotid mass. The immunohistochemical staining results were as follows: Syn(++), β-micprotin(++), Ki-67(++, index 80%), CD56(++), NSE(++), Rb(++), MyoD1(++), Fli-1(+), S-100(-), CgA(-), CD99(-), CD57(-), vimentin(-), EMA(-), myogenin(-), Pax-5(-), CK18(-), LCA(-), and desmin(-). Metastasis of the parotid and submandibular glands was confirmed, and the patient underwent systemic evaluation for any other site of metastasis; however, there was no other organ involvement.
The patient was started on a 3-weekly high-dose chemotherapy protocol with vincristine, etoposide and carboplatin (VEC regime). Following six cycles, the left orbital tumour had regressed completely, there was a small residual tumour in the left side of the neck, and additional local radiotherapy was performed on the parotid and submandibular glands . At the most recent follow-up at 28 months, the tumour was inactive and stable as of April 2017 . The girl remained on maintenance therapy and under our follow-up care.