A 59-year-old Japanese man presented with a six-month history of numbness of his right hand and dull pain in his nuchal region. He had no history of cervical trauma. Three months before the first visit to our hospital, numbness had spread over all four of his limbs. No muscle weakness was observed; however, our patient showed gait ataxia because of the spasticity of his lower extremities. In a physical examination, bilateral hypesthesia (soft touch and pin prick) and a marked increase of the deep tendon reflexes in his upper and lower limbs were observed.
Lateral X-ray films showed the absence of the posterior arch of the atlas along with atlantoaxial instability . The atlantodental interval was 9.62 mm in a flexion position while no interval was observed in an extension position . Sagittal magnetic resonance imaging revealed atrophy of his spinal cord and myelomalacia that was observed as a T2-high signal intensity area at the C1 level. Computed tomography (CT) showed the complete absence of the C1 posterior arch and an os odontoideum . A cleft in the C1 anterior arch was also observed : the two lateral masses were completely separated on both sides. A real model of his cervical spine was produced based on data from three-dimensional CT with contrast dye for the evaluation of the vertebral artery . Figure shows the view from the posterior direction and Figure shows the view from the lateral direction. Complete absence of the C1 posterior arch and hypertrophy of the spinous process of the axis were observed.
Our patient underwent posterior occipito-C4 fixation with pedicle screws. Our patient was placed in a prone position in a Mayfield head clamp. At the beginning of the operation, his neck was slightly flexed in order to expose the surface of the laminae. A midline incision was made with subperiosteal exposure of his occiput and cervical spine. His neck position was then changed to a neutral position. We did not observe any bony elements between his occipital bone and C2 lamina. His occipital plate was fixed with two bicortical screws. Pedicle screws were inserted bilaterally into the C3 and the C4 vertebrae and unilaterally into the right pedicle of C2. Since his left vertebral artery ran through the pedicle of C2 (high-riding transverse foramen), screws were not inserted into the left C2 pedicle in order to avoid vertebral artery injury. Then his neck position was changed to a moderate extension position under control of fluoroscopy to achieve a good atlantodental interval. Rod fixation was performed between his occipital plate and the C4 screws. Rigid fixation was achieved by this procedure. A corticocancellous graft harvested from his posterior iliac crest was placed on the decorticated occipital bone and C2 lamina and fixed to his occipital bone with a biodegradable poly-L-lactate screw (Fixsorb-MX; Takiron, Osaka, Japan). Residual bone chips were grafted on the surface of the decorticated lamina (C2 to C4) and fixed with fibrin glue.
Our patient’s posture was managed using a cervical orthosis (Ortho collar, ARIZONO Orthopedic supplies co., Ltd., Kita-Kyusyu, Japan) for three months after surgery. Anteroposterior and lateral cervical radiographs were performed two, four and six weeks after the operation to check for loosening or dislocation of the implants and grafted bone. Three months after the operation, fusion between his occipital bone and C4 was assessed using lateral radiographs of his neck in flexion and extension position. Solid fusion was likely attained at this time . The pedicle screws were positioned properly at C3 and C4 . After the operation, the pain in his nuchal region disappeared and symptoms of his myelopathy improved. Only slight numbness of his upper limbs remained. Complete bony union of the grafted bone was observed in a CT scan performed six months after the operation. No recurrence of symptoms was observed during three years of follow-up after the operation.