A 57-years-old male patient was admitted to the general surgery department with abdominal distention, weight loss and hematuria. During physical examination, significant distention and multiple palpable tumor masses were identified on the abdomen . Contrast-enhanced abdominal multi detector CT imaging was performed with a four-detector row CT scanner (Somatom Sensation 4®, Siemens Medical Solutions, Erlangen, Germany). Multiple, well-defined, soft tissue masses with homogenous pattern, measuring maximum 6 × 5 cm in size were observed in the mesenteric and retroperitoneal areas . In some masses, central necrosis and coarse calcifications were seen . There was grade 3 hydronephrosis in the left kidney due to the left ureteric invasion . However, CT did not reveal liver metastasis and/or the lymph nodes with pathological size.
Ultrasonography (US)-guided true-cut® biopsy was made, histopathologic and immunohistochemical analyses demonstrated stromal tumor which, C-KIT (+), CD34 (-), S-100 (-), desmin (-), actine (-) Ki-67 (+) and with a proliferation index of <%1. During the operation, not only the tumor filling the whole abdomen but masses invading small bowel mesentery, left hemicolon and the left ureter have been detected. The patient underwent left ureterectomy, left nephrectomy and total colectomy. Proximally from the treitz, small bowel resection from a distance of 200 cm was applied. The mass have been totally removed and taken out of the abdomen . The operation has been completed with an end-ileostomy .
Postoperative histopathological analyses revealed that the tumor was total 25 cm in diameter. It was composed of spindle-shaped cells with hemorrhagic areas. Mitotic activity was 3 mitoses per 50 HPF. The tumor invaded the small bowel serosa, colonic submucosa and the left ureter. Thus the tumor was not described as an extra-GIST that arose from the soft tissue of the abdominal cavity (omentum and mesentery) and retroperitoneum because of the existance of an attachment of serosa of GI tract . The tumor was described as a GIST with predominant mesenteric and retroperitoneal invasion and classified as a lower grade GIST according to Bucher grading system for GIST after surgical resection .
He had an uneventful postoperative course and was discharged home on postoperative day 3. As of 17 months after the surgery, he is alive and free of recurrence.