The patient is a 41-year-old male. His chief complaint is left flank pain. He has no medical history/family history.
The subject consulted a nearby doctor with left stomachache and fever as chief complaints in 1 month prior to the surgery. Diverticulitis of the descending colon splenic flexure was doubted in CT and the subject was hospitalized. A colonoscopy revealed an irregular flat elevated lesion on the splenic flexure. The subject was transferred to our hospital for examination and medical treatment.
The height is 175 cm, body weight 54.6 kg, pulse 66 beats/m, body temperature 36.3, and blood pressure 114/76 mmHg. The abdomen was slightly distended, and mild left stomachache was recognized. The stool frequency was 1 time/day.
In blood biochemistry examination, values were as high as 22.5 ng/ml in CEA and 81.0 U/ml in CA19-9 tumor markers.
Significant hyperplasia (4 cm) of the colon mucous membrane was observed on the descending colon splenic flexure and it was accompanied by elevation of surrounding adipose tissue density. The surrounding lymph nodes swelled up to around 5 mm. Since strong hyperplasia was seen in the mucous membrane, it was thought as reactive enlargement accompanied by inflammation. The finding that indicates distant metastasis was not seen in the liver and lung .
A semicircular, lateral spreading tumor of granular-type (i.e., an aggregate of IIa-like tumors) was observed in the descending colon splenic flexure .
Notable abnormality such as irregular ulcer and scar or bamboo joint-formed appearance was not recognized.
Biopsy was performed twice for the lateral spreading tumor of granular-type of descending colon. The tumor was diagnosed pathologically as a tubular adenoma without evidence of malignancy. However, we judged that the lesion in the descending colon was a cancer based on the elevated CEA level and CT findings. We also considered the possibility of coexistence of inflammatory lesion near the tumor because of an edematous change of the mucosa . Therefore, it was determined to place a covering stoma 20 cm proximal from the terminal ileum at the time of surgery.
D3 left hemicolectomy and loop type stoma construction were performed. No abnormality was confirmed in the small intestine such as thickness, fistula, mass, and adhesion to abdominal wall during the operation.
Gross examination confirmed that the main tumor was a laterally spreading tumor (granular-type) in the descending colon . No gross findings were recognized that supported Crohn’s disease, e.g., longitudinal ulcers, their scars, or cobblestone appearance. Histopathologically, the surface of the main tumor was composed of uniform proliferation of atypical glands (either tubular or villous in configuration) and containing both low- and high-grade areas . This lesion stained diffusely positive for p53 by immunohistochemistry . Therefore, we diagnosed these atypical glands in the surface area this as dysplasia, and this lesion continuously invaded the muscularis propria . In deeper areas of the main tumor, deposition of extracellular mucin was observed leading the diagnosis of mucinous adenocarcinoma . p53 was positive in 50% of tumor cells in mucinous carcinoma . The final diagnosis was mucinous adenocarcinoma associated with dysplasia, in the descending colon, type 5, 50 × 48 mm in size, pT4a (SE) pN2a (4/28), Ly1, V1, cM0, pStage IIIC (UICC TNM classification, 8th ed., and Japanese classification of colorectal carcinoma, 9th ed) . Furthermore, another dysplasia, not continuous from the main tumor, was confirmed by multiple sampling analyses in the resected specimen approximately 5.2 × 1.8 cm in size (indicated by blue line in Figs. and ). This dysplasia was not associated with adenocarcinoma (i.e., completely confined in the mucosa). We further obtained the following findings that supported pre-existing transmural chronic inflammation (e.g., Crohn’s disease) as follows: (a) irregular thickening of the muscularis mucosae, (b) fibrosis in the submucosa and muscularis propria, and (c) sporadic formation of lymphoid aggregates in the submucosa and subserosa in the resected colon specimen . Taken together, the histopathological features of main tumor were consistent with colitis-associated cancer.
The ileus state was prolonged for over 40 days after the surgery. On day 55 endoscopies were performed to newly find orbicular ulcers in the terminal ileum . We excluded the possibility of tuberculosis or cytomegalovirus by an interferon-gamma release assay and serum antibody assay. Re-examination of endoscopy on day 77 revealed the development of longitudinal ulcers in the ileum . With a clinical diagnosis of Crohn’s disease, the patient received infliximab administration, and the lesions of small intestine ameliorated significantly on day 103. Furthermore, ileus was improved and therefore the subject was discharged on day 112 . Seventy-three days after the discharge, CEA suddenly was elevated and intestinal edema, and ascitic fluid appeared in abdominal contrast-enhanced CT. The subject was diagnosed as ileus attributable to peritoneal dissemination. Overall status gradually worsened and he passed away on day 207. The final cause of death was judged as peritoneal dissemination.