In our paper, we describe the case of a 30-year-old woman with recurrent respiratory tract infections over the span of 3 years. She was first diagnosed with AN (restricting type) at the age of 16, and despite the physicians’ best efforts and the support of a clinical psychologist adequate cooperation and nutrition were extremely difficult to establish throughout her therapy. She had no history of smoking or drug abuse. In late 2017, the patient was referred to the Emergency Rescue Department (ER) by her general practitioner (GP) due to worsening symptoms of a respiratory tract infection. A week prior, initial symptoms included productive cough, fever and a mild dyspnea that were treated with antibiotics on an outpatient basis due to the patient’s refusal for hospitalization. On admission to the ER she complained of moderate dyspnea, chest pain, hemoptysis and productive cough. Her heart rate was elevated at 110 bpm and she had a decreased blood pressure value of 80/40 mmHg. Body temperature was normal, and she was fully alert and oriented. With a body weight of 23,5 kg and a height of 158 cm, her Body Mass Index (BMI) on admission was 9.2. Abnormalities in the lab results included an elevated C - reactive protein (CRP) level of 54.56 [mg/l, positive > 5 mg/l], decreased serum albumin (24.85 [mg/l, lab norm 35-40 mg/l) and a relatively low sugar level of 55.2[mg/dl]; pH level was 7.49. A chest X-ray revealed multifocal, ill-defined consolidations predominant in the right lung .
She was admitted to the internal medicine ward and treated empirically with ceftriaxone and levofloxacin. Blood cultures and sputum samples were collected before antibiotic administration and came back negative a few days later. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) samples collected during bronchoscopy came back negative, and tuberculosis was ruled out after several test panels; mycological cultures turned out negative as well. Cystic fibrosis was considered as another differential diagnosis option, but the tests had also negative results (CFTR gene test panel, twice). The patient’s condition stabilized after a few days of nutritional and antibiotic therapy, and she left the hospital at her own request shortly after refusing talks with a psychiatrist. She underwent further treatment on an outpatient basis. Due to the chronic nature of the patient’s ailment she was referred for a computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest. It revealed massive cylindrical and saccular bronchiectases, with some segments of the bronchi filled with fluid content. Furthermore, diffuse areas of ground-glass opacification were described in both lungs . Unfortunately, the patient did not follow therapeutic recommendations or treatment of any kind.
Sixteen months later, the patient was readmitted to the hospital due to another prolonged episode of pneumonia. She reported chronic cough in the past year and recurrent symptoms of respiratory tract infections, such as mild fever and periods of productive cough, exertion dyspnea and rhinitis. She was treated on an outpatient basis with clarythromycin without much effect. Chest X-ray on admission revealed once again diffuse consolidations, more dominant in the right lung . Due to the worsening of the radiological image, another CT scan was performed to assess the lungs more precisely. Compared to the previous scan, a generalized progression of bronchiectases was observed with a notable enlargement of their diameter. Antibiotic therapy using ceftazidime and ciprofloxacin was used, and the extensive test panels repeated including tests against HIV, the flu virus, Bordetella pertussis and atypical pneumonia pathogens. Samples for these tests were collected before antibiotic therapy and all gave negative results. After 10 days of therapy and marked improvement of the patient’s general condition, she was discharged from the hospital and referred to a psychiatric ward for further treatment.