A 60-year-old male presented to the emergency room (ER) of our hospital with recent-onset New York Heart Association (NYHA) Class IV dyspnoea. He had hypertension (HT) and uncontrolled diabetes mellitus (DM) for the past 20 years. He also had an acute coronary event 18 years ago for which he underwent coronary angiography and stenting was performed to left anterior descending (LAD) artery. His last documented left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) before this event was 35–40% with severe hypokinesia involving the LAD territory. He was on aspirin, statin, and beta-blocker for CAD; oral hypoglycaemic drugs, and insulin for DM and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor for HT. His clinical status deteriorated rapidly from NYHA II to IV in the last 4 days before presentation at ER. On examination, he had a heart rate of 130/min, blood pressure of 170/90 mmHg, respiratory rate of 30/min, systemic oxygen saturation of 70% on room air, and raised jugular venous pressure. Auscultation revealed fine basal crepitation and left ventricular (LV) third heart sound. Echocardiogram showed an LVEF of 35% with regional wall motion abnormality in LAD territory. N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide levels were 8923 pg/mL. With the above history, he was initially managed as ADHF with non-invasive ventilation, diuretics, and vasodilators.
Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus tachycardia, Q waves in anterior leads . However, no new ST-T changes were noticed in comparison with his previous ECG. Serial cardiac biomarkers (Troponin I and CK MB) were in the normal range. Blood investigations showed anaemia (haemoglobin of 10.4 g/dL), hyperkalaemia (6.9 mEq/L), deranged renal function (serum creatinine—6.7 mg/dL and blood urea nitrogen—46 mg/dL), and poor glycaemic control (HbA1c of 8.9%). Arterial blood gases analysis showed hypoxaemia (pO2 of 60%) and metabolic acidosis (pH of 7.22). Urine analysis showed active sediments (3–5 red blood cells/high power field) and proteinuria (24-h urine protein of 1.4 g/day). A chest radiograph showed pulmonary oedema with bilateral pleural effusion .
He was managed with anti-hyperkalaemic measures (insulin-dextrose infusion, salbutamol nebulization, oral potassium binders). Despite the above measures, his hyperkalaemia was persistent. Later in the course, he had multiple episodes of haemodynamically unstable monomorphic VT in <3 h duration requiring electrical cardioversion supplemented with intravenous amiodarone. He was mechanically ventilated due to worsening respiratory symptoms and hypotension. Sustained low-efficiency dialysis was also performed for 8 h on Day 1.
On Day 2 of admission, he had increasing requirements of oxygen (FiO2) and endotracheal tube suction showed bloodstained secretions. There was also a haemoglobin drop of ∼5 g/dL (10.4–5.4 g/dL). High-resolution computed tomography was performed to find the cause of bleeding, which showed diffuse bilateral perihilar consolidation and areas of ground-glass opacities predominantly involving the dependent lobes suggestive of diffuse alveolar haemorrhage (DAH) . Taking into consideration a new onset of renal dysfunction and DAH, a possibility of active vasculitis was kept and an immunology consultation was taken.
Subsequent investigations showed strongly positive c-ANCAs (ELISA and indirect immunofluorescence). Antinuclear antibodies and anti-glomerular basement membrane antibodies were negative.
Based on the above results, a diagnosis of ANCA-associated pulmonary renal vasculitis precipitating acute heart failure was made. Refractory hyperkalaemia and severe metabolic acidosis (secondary to acute kidney injury) combined with hypoxaemia and heart failure, precipitated the VT storm in an already scarred myocardium. In addition to the treatment of heart failure, he was started on immunosuppression (methylprednisolone pulse therapy—1 g daily for 3 days) and seven sessions of plasma exchange.
With the above measures, the patient improved significantly and could be extubated 3 days later. Renal biopsy was initially deferred as he was on dual antiplatelets (clopidogrel was added at admission) and later on because of anticipated technical difficulties (the patient being obese). He was also started on intravenous cyclophosphamide (10 mg/kg/dose), initially every 2 weeks for the first three doses followed by every 3 weeks for the next 6 months.
At 6 months follow-up, he was doing well from a cardiac point of view with LVEF of 40% and NYHA II functional status. However, his renal function deteriorated further requiring renal replacement therapy (RRT). He was also counselled about the need for an intracardiac defibrillator for the prevention of sudden cardiac death which he refused because of financial constraints. A telephonic follow-up performed at 9 months revealed that he had a sudden cardiac arrest and died during a session of dialysis.