A 27-year-old pregnant woman, primigravida, MC twin pregnancy, with a gestational age of 21 weeks was referred to our center due to TTTS stage 3. Her pregnancy was a product of in vitro fertilization (IVF). She had no history of medical disease or drug usage. Fetal echocardiography showed biventricular hypertrophy, cardiomegaly and severe pulmonary valve stenosis (PS) in recipient twin. No other major anomalies were detected in the both fetuses. Fetoscopic laser photocoagulation (FLP) was done at our center due to TTTS stage 3. After that, the course of the TTTS stopped, but PS persisted with presence of severe tricuspid valve regurgitation and at 32 weeks of gestation, the pregnancy was terminated by cesarean section due to fetal growth restriction (FGR) and absent Doppler wave in umbilical artery of recipient twin. Both babies were born with good APGAR score. After birth, in transthoracic echocardiography of recipient twin, Doppler spectral showed severe PS with peak pressure gradient more than 100 mmHg . Contrast injection in lateral view of angiocardiography detected severe valvular and sub valvular pulmonary stenosis . After birth, due to the persistence of stenosis, After initiation of prostaglandin infusion, the recipient twin underwent balloon pulmonary valvuloplasty at the age of one month, when the weight of baby was 1300 g with heart rate:155–160/min, respiratory rate:70/min, O2 saturation > 75–80, lactic acid(in ABG):12. The baby was under mechanical ventilation with SIMV PC mode and the preoperative trans thoracic echocardiography showed right ventricular hypertrophy (decreased end diastolic diameter), significant TR, small pulmonary annulus, small PDA (diameter = 2 mm with left to right shunt) and PFO with dominant right to left shunt. Balloon inflation of stenotic pulmonary valve in stenotic location showed a full dilation of stenosis . Post procedure transthoracic echocardiography showed significant reduction in transpulmonary valve gradient . Due to dynamic infundibular (subvalvular) stenosis and persistence of high transpulmonary valve gradient (about 100 mmHg), propranolol with maximum dose of 2 mg/kg was started and after 4 weeks, the gradient reduced from 100 to 30 mmHg. The baby had a good growth after treatment, with 3700 g weigh after three months.