A 75-year-old Korean man presented to our hospital with chronic dry cough and exertional dyspnea.
The patient’s symptoms started 6 mo previously and had been gradually worsening. At the time of presentation, he felt dyspnea upon walking at his own pace.
He was an ex-smoker with a 35 pack-year history. He worked for a rubber-related product manufacturer for 30 years. He was not aware of any previous respiratory disease.
During the physical examination, auscultation with a stethoscope revealed inspiratory crackles in the right upper lung field. He appeared to have a slender habitus and flattened thoracic cage. His body mass index (BMI) was 18.4 kg/m².
Laboratory findings showed that antinuclear antibody was positive (1:40, mixed and speckled pattern). Rheumatoid factor, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody were unremarkable.
Pulmonary function test showed a moderate restrictive ventilatory defect and low level of diffusion capacity of carbon monoxide. Forced vital capacity and total lung capacity (TLC) were 53% and 66% of the predicted level, respectively. Defect and low level of diffusion capacity of carbon monoxide was 47% of the predicted level, and residual volume (RV) was 73% of the predicted level. RV/TLC ratio was 48%.
Bronchoalveolar lavage, performed in the right upper lobe by flexible bronchoscopy, showed few lymphocytes (9%). The other results obtained for culture were unremarkable.
Initial chest X-ray showed a subpleural and irregularly shaped increased opacity in the right upper lung zone . High-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) revealed subpleural thickening and consolidation with traction bronchiectasis in only the right upper lung field, which met the radiologic criteria of definite PPFE .
Transbronchial lung biopsy was performed in the right upper lung field to make a histopathologic diagnosis. The histopathological findings of lung tissue obtained from transbronchial lung biopsy revealed collapsed alveoli with parenchymal fibroelastosis on higher magnification view, and elastic van Gieson stain demonstrated septal elastosis with intra-alveolar collagenosis, which met the histopathologic criteria of definite PPFE .