A 70 year-old male presented with a 4-month history of dry cough and general malaise. He had had a right arm melanoma excised 5 months previously but otherwise had no significant medical history. Clinical examination revealed a left pleural effusion confirmed by chest radiograph which subsequently drained blood-stained fluid positive for reactive mesothelial cells and lymphocytes. Cytology was negative for malignant cells. Computed tomography (CT) of his thorax and abdomen undertaken just prior to discharge from hospital revealed a left renal mass consistent with renal cell carcinoma (RCC) and multiple bilateral subpleural nodules. Renal function was normal at this stage.
The patient was electively re-admitted a week later for planned thoracoscopy and pleural biopsy. Biopsy confirmed the subpleural nodules to be metastatic RCC deposits. Following repeat chest drain insertion the patient collapsed some hours later and became acutely dyspnoeic with oxygen saturations of 82% on room air and a systolic blood pressure of 96 mmHg. There was no clinical evidence of lower limb deep vein thrombosis. Arterial gases confirmed type I respiratory failure and an electrocardiogram revealed a sinus tachycardia with new right bundle branch block. Subsequent CT pulmonary angiogram (CTPA) demonstrated a large saddle embolus with thrombus extending into the lobar branches of both main pulmonary arteries . Massive PE was diagnosed and in view of its acute setting and the patient being in extremis the origin of the PE was not sought at this stage. Moreover a team of chest physicians; oncologists and urologists concluded that with the combination of neoplastic disease; a recent biopsy and a chest drain in-situ thrombolysis would be deleterious to the patient. Intravenous heparin was commenced whilst a cardiology opinion was sought to explore the possibility of percutaneous intervention. We as a faculty had no previous experience of using percutaneous mechanical thrombectomy (PMT) for dealing with massive PE at the time. The lead cardiologist was asked to review the patient with a view to endovascular intervention by a chest physician who wanted to exhaust all the options available. The cardiologist had remembered a case in the literature where the AngioJet system had been used to treat massive PE and from this a consensus decision was reached to pursue PMT as a definitive therapy for the patient.
We proceeded to rheolytic thrombectomy using the AngioJet system (Possis Medical, Minneapolis, MN). Access was gained via 5-French (F) and 10F sheaths into the right femoral vein. A 4F sheath was also introduced into the right femoral artery for blood pressure monitoring. We confirmed the absence of thrombus in the inferior vena cava (IVC) angiographically before proceeding with right heart catheterisation. A 0.035-inch guidewire was placed in the right ventricle over which a 5F multipurpose-1 (MP-1) diagnostic catheter was fed. Pulmonary angiography via this catheter revealed filling defects in both pulmonary arteries . A temporary pacing wire was then placed in the right ventricular apex via the 5F sheath to protect the patient from bradyarrhythmia. Mean pulmonary artery pressure was measured at 35 mmHg.
Thrombectomy was performed using a 6F AngioJet Xpeedior catheter directed to both main pulmonary arteries via a 9F MP-1 catheter in the right ventricle . This was undertaken through the 10F sheath in the right femoral vein. The AngioJet system was used for a total of 2 minutes and 10 seconds and selective pulmonary angiograms revealed significant reduction in thrombus burden from both left and right pulmonary arteries with significant restoration of blood flow . A quantitative measure of perfusion improvement was not assessed due to our relative inexperience with this procedure. Clinically, however, as perfusion returned to each main vessel the patient suffered what appeared to be a pre-syncopal episode on both occasions although all observations including heart rate, blood pressure and oxygen saturations remained within the normal range. Why this occurred remains unclear. The entire process took a total of 1 hour and 35 minutes and required 90 ml of contrast. Heart rate remained within normal range throughout. Following thrombectomy the collection bag could be seen to contain a significant amount of thrombus material .
Both the temporary wire and arterial sheath were left in situ overnight and the patient remained on intravenous heparin. The chest drain was subsequently removed and the patient was off supplemental oxygen within 3 days. Ultrasound of the abdomen and pelvis on day 2 post rheolytic thrombectomy was essentially normal and showed patent IVC, hepatic, portal and renal veins. Despite this a prophylactic IVC filter was inserted in preparation for planned cyto-reductive nephrectomy in approximately six weeks and subsequent immunotherapy. Following insertion of the IVC filter the patient was warfarinised and then discharged home.