A 53-year-old Caucasian woman presented to the emergency department with a one month history of progressive dyspnea on exertion, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, general edema and central cyanosis.
Her medical history was notable for recurrent pulmonary infections in childhood and an unstudied chronic productive cough not related to tobacco use. She was not given any lifelong medical attendance. No other family or pharmacological relevant antecedents were known. On physical examination she was not in distress. Her blood pressure was 124/67 mm Hg, pulse rate of 76 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 20 breaths per minute with an oxygen saturation of 85% while breathing room air. Her lungs had bibasilar crackles on auscultation. A 3/6 holosystolic murmur was present in the aortic area with back radiation. An elevated jugular venous pressure was noted and she presented with mild bilateral edema of the legs. Mild cyanosis of the lips and nail beds was also evident. The remainder of her physical examination was normal.
She had a white-cell count of 7600 per mm3, a hematocrit value of 57% and her platelet count was 108,000 per mm3. Levels of serum electrolytes, creatinine and urea nitrogen were normal and levels of hepatic transaminases, serum alkaline phosphatase, bilirubin, total protein and albumin were also normal. Cardiac enzymes were negative and the level of B-type natriuretic peptide was 230 pg per mL (normal range 0 to 100). Arterial blood gas values obtained while the patient was breathing room air revealed pH of 7.36, a carbon dioxide partial pressure of 56 mmHg, an oxygen partial pressure of 60 mm Hg, a bicarbonate level of 32 mmol per liter and an oxygen saturation of 87%. Furthermore, with supplemented oxygen of 24% and 28% the oxygen partial pressure was raised to 62 mm and 65 mm Hg, respectively. An electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm, a 'strain' pattern on anterior leads (< 1 mm) and normal axis. A chest X-ray showed a mild enlarged cardiac silhouette and what was first described as an alveolar-interstitial congestion pattern on the left side. A subsequent transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) with Doppler showed normal sized cardiac chambers, a conserved left ventricular ejection fraction. A moderate, almost continuous but predominantly diastolic, color flow in the main pulmonary artery distal to the pulmonary valve was present and compatible with a patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) with minimal right-to-left shunt associated with an estimated pulmonary arterial pressure of 55 mmHg.
The patient was admitted to the internal medicine department for further evaluation. She was initially managed with furosemide (20 mg three times a day) and supplemented oxygen with a 24% face mask. A therapeutic phlebotomy of one unit blood (500 mL) was performed resulting with significant symptoms improvement. A pulmonary test function (PTF) revealed a relevant obstructive-restrictive pattern. A chest high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) scan revealed hyperlucency and diminished vascularity in the right lower and middle lobe with hyperinflation of the pulmonary parenchyma which was confirmed by the computed tomography (CT) angiography (Angio-CT) to be a diffuse hypoplasia/agenesis of right superior and inferior branches of the pulmonary artery , compatible with SJMS. The patient declined cardiac catheterization and was ultimately oriented to a cardiothoracic surgery consultation. She was discharged on day ten maintaining the bronchodilator and heart failure therapeutics and influenza and pneumococcal vaccinations were recommended.