A 57-year-old Chinese female was referred to National University Hospital, Singapore in February 2016 for management of a hard swelling over her right TMJ. This patient suffered from chronic right TMJ pain for more than 5 years. She had consulted several physicians over the past few years, but could not obtain a definitive diagnosis. There was no prior treatment provided. Her past medical history includes surgical excision of left breast fibro-adenoma, recurrent upper urinary tract infection, stress urinary incontinence and infective colitis. She was on active follow up with the Otolaryngology department for hoarseness of voice. She was a non-smoker and non-drinker. There was no known history of any genetic disorder. The patient denied any history of trauma or infection to the jaw area. There were no other family members with a history of temporomandibular joint or jaw swelling.
On examination, a localized swelling was palpable over the right pre-auricular region which measured 15 mm by 20 mm. It was tender upon palpation and had a bony hard texture. The swelling appeared distinct from the TMJ capsule as it did not move when the right mandibular condyle translated anteriorly during mouth opening. On maximal mouth opening, the condylar translation at both TMJs was similar. The maximal mouth opening was normal. The overlying skin was normal in consistency and was not fixed to the swelling.
A series of lab tests were ordered, including liver function test, renal function test and complete blood count. All results were being found to be within normal ranges. A dental panoramic tomogram (DPT) was taken , but no distinct lesion could be observed at the right TMJ. Unenhanced computed tomography (CT) was taken subsequently . It revealed a sharply defined hyper-dense benign-looking ovoid mass measuring 10 mm by 13 mm by 20 mm within the subcutaneous layer over the right pre-auricular region. It was closely associated with the lateral aspect of the right TMJ. No bony erosion of the right TMJ was noted and both the joint capsule and mandibular condyle appeared normal.
The provisional diagnosis was tumoral calcinosis (TC) of the right TMJ. This was because the mass appeared distinct and was not contiguous with the right mandibular condyle. There was no erosion of the mandibular condyle. The joint space and capsule appeared preserved on CT. Other less likely differential diagnoses included synovial osteochondromatosis, synovial chondrosarcoma and osteochondroma.
In view of the swelling and chronic pain of more than 5 years, she was advised to undergo surgical excision of the calcified mass. Subsequently, surgical excision of the calcified mass was performed through a pre-auricular approach under general anaesthesia in March 2016 . Intraoperatively, the mass which was excised was juxta-articular in terms of location. It was well-circumscribed, bony hard on palpation and had no fixation to the TMJ capsule.
Histological examination of the specimen reported nodular fragments of amorphous pink matrix and fibrous tissue with calcified areas. There were areas of foreign body reaction. Figure there was no evidence of epithelial proliferation, atypia, neoplasm or malignancy. The specimen tested negative to Congo-red stain. Refractile crystals were not identified. The histological findings were compatible with tumoral calcinosis.
The post-operative recovery was uneventful. Pain at the right pre-auricular region was resolved after surgical excision of the swelling. There was no limitation of function of the right TMJ. Maximal mouth opening was normal and the patient could eat well. Upon histological confirmation of TC, a baseline serum electrolyte test was ordered for this patient. The baseline serum calcium and phosphate levels were normal.
The patient was reviewed regularly for 3 months. However, she subsequently defaulted on her follow-up appointments after the review in April 2016. She eventually returned for a review on September 2017, 17 months after surgical excision. There was no clinical recurrence noted. The pre-auricular skin wound healed with minimal scarring. She reported minor sensory deficit in the right pre-auricular region with a Visual Analog Scale score of 1/10. Other than the minor sensory deficit, there were no other adverse outcomes. She was able to functional well without any limitation or pain. Serum electrolytes were tested again and levels were normal. Further follow-up appointments were arranged. However, the patient defaulted on the subsequent appointments.