A 44-year-old man, accounting himself to be basically healthy except for smoking for more than 20 years, presented in the clinic. The major complaint of this gentleman for this visit is that he has continually experienced “recurrent numbness on the right side” in the past 2 months. The paroxysmal numbness is patchy, without weakness of the limbs, slurred speech and skewed mouth. The symptoms lasted only about 10 to 30 s. The frequency of the symptoms varied from once a week to 6 times a day. The distribution of the numbness is erratic, mostly within the upper extremity, followed by the distal part of the lower extremity, and the least on the trunk, but all on the right side of the body. Through careful medical history interrogation, we found out that 2 years ago, this gentleman had manifested a symptom of inflexible right hand during a Mahjong playing, which lasted for about 5 mins and resolved totally. A similar inflexible right-hand symptom had recurred 3 times in the most recent 2 months. Furthermore, this man noticed an elevated fasting blood glucose on a physical examination performed 8 months prior to admission, but he did not take any pertinent measures to improve it except for the recent weeks’ intake of metformin. These findings lead to the admission of this patient.
On admission, physical examination found no obvious abnormalities except for his obesity with a Body Mass Index (BMI) of 28.2 kg/m2. Lab investigation only found mild-elevated serum lipids (TC 5.20 mmol/L, TG 3.04 mmol/L, LDL-C 2.85 mmol/L) and hyperglycemia (a fasting blood glucose of 7.56 mmol/L and a HbA1C of 7.1%).
Auxiliary investigations showed that 24-hrs electrocardiogram (ECG), color echocardiography, electromyography (EMG) and electroencephalogram (EEG) were all normal. A single flat plaque was detected on the right subclavian artery on carotid ultrasound. MRI-Brain diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) indicated multiple spotted hyperintensities within the left prefrontal cortex and centrum semiovale , suggesting recent multifocal diffusion-restricted lesion caused by artery-to-artery embolism (corresponding to the upper extremity area of the precentral gyrus, which is highly consistent with the 3 times of inflexible hand symptom that had happened within the past 2 months). MRA showed mild focal stenosis at the horizontal segment of left MCA , which is quite un-conspicuous.
TCD showed that a much-increased blood flow velocity was detected at left MCA and left anterior cerebral artery (ACA) (142 cm/s and 147 cm/s, respectively) with distorted spectral waveforms, indicating mild focal stenosis at these two arteries.
A dual-channel, dual-depth TCD micro-emboli monitoring protocol was applied, and the sample volume was set as 10 mm all through. At a depth of 54-64 mm, 4 MES were detected at left MCA within a 30 mins time duration. At a depth of 52-63 mm at right MCA and a depth of 70 mm at left ACA, no MES were detected within 30 mins . A double-check monitoring was conducted, and 6 MES were detected at left MCA within 30 mins. Again, no MES were detected at right MCA and left ACA.
The diagnosis was then established as clinical TIA with diffusion-restricted lesion and type 2 diabetes mellitus. Aspirin 100 mg q.d., clopidogrel 75 mg q.d., atorvastatin 40 mg q.n., and blood glucose control therapy were then given to the patient, followed by a series of TCD micro-emboli monitoring to evaluate the effect. After just 2 days of treatment, the number of detected MES decreased to 2 on the 30 mins continuous monitoring, and with zero at the serial TCD monitoring at 3 days, 5 days and 3 months after treatment. A follow-up of clinical symptoms lasting for 1 year was also negative.