A 38-year-old female patient, who usually suffers from mild headaches, presented with the chief complaint of a sudden severe headache. She was referred to our neurosurgery department after an 11-mm mass lesion was identified in the sella turcica. The patient had given birth one year earlier and was breastfeeding her child. Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was, therefore, not performed to avoid side effects on infants, as recommended in Japan. Pituitary adenomas and RCC were suspected . Hydrocortisone (10 mg/day) was prescribed due to low levels of adrenocorticotropic hormone (09:00 h: 5.5 pg/mL, normal range: 7.2–63.3 pg/mL) and cortisol (09:00 h: 4.9 µg/dL, normal range: 7.07–19.6 µg/dL), along with hypereosinophilia (8.2%), indicating mild adrenal insufficiency. Subsequently, her symptoms of headache improved. An endocrine check-up and contrast-enhanced MRI were scheduled after breastfeeding stopped.
Five months later, after her initial visit to our department, she was infected with SARS-CoV-2, even after receiving the first and second doses of the SARS-CoV-2 vaccine 7 and 6 months earlier, respectively. She had a fever of 38°C and a severe headache that persisted for several days, for which acetaminophen was prescribed. The fever subsided, but the mild headache persisted. One month later, the patient revisited our department, complaining of a headache that had persisted for five days. Head MRI revealed mild enlargement of the lesion and sphenoid sinus mucosal thickening, leading to the diagnosis of pituitary apoplexy . The dose of hydrocortisone was increased to 15 mg/day for sick day management, and the patient was monitored. Since then, the patient has experienced persistent headaches and an undulant fever with temperatures varying between 36°C and 39°C for two weeks. In addition, polyuria and polydipsia have began. An investigation to identify the source of the infection was performed at a local physician’s office and our emergency outpatient. The investigation included a polymerase chain reaction test of SARS-CoV-2, a urine test, and a computed tomography scan of the trunk of the body. However, no obvious abnormality was noted. Two days after visiting the emergency outpatient, due to persistent symptoms and having also started vomiting, the patient was reassessed by MRI, revealing a pituitary cystic mass with a ring-shaped contrast enhancement that partially extended into the third ventricle and increased signal intensity on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) . From the symptoms and MRI findings, she was suspected of having a PA, although the inflammatory marker was slightly elevated, with a white blood cell count of 9230/μL and a C-reactive protein level of 1.33 mg/dL. She was in a critical condition, with complaints of severe headache, frequent vomiting, and persistent high fever. To promptly alleviate these symptoms, we decided to perform emergency endoscopic transsphenoidal surgery for drainage on the same day.
Intraoperative findings showed that the sphenoid sinus mucosa was thickened . The base of the sella turcica was opened, and the dura was incised to reveal the pituitary gland. When the pituitary gland was incised, a yellowish-brown content was drained . The tissue surrounding the cyst was degenerated and sclerotic; fibrous tissue was collected from the cyst margins and near the pituitary stalk . After thoroughly lavaging the inside of the cyst, we concluded the surgery. The cultures with a yellowish-brown content were negative for bacteria. Microscopically, the cystic lesion was covered with ciliated columnar epithelium and stratified squamous epithelium, and a dense inflammatory cell infiltrate consisting mainly of lymphocytes and plasma cells were observed around the cyst. A small number of neutrophils and eosinophils were also present. Storiform fibrosis was not observed [-]. Immunohistochemical analysis showed more than 50 immunoglobulin G4 (IgG4)-positive plasma cells per high-power field and an IgG4/IgG ratio of 30–40%, thus close to fulfilling the histopathological diagnostic criteria for IgG4-RH . However, due to the absence of storiform fibrosis in tissue, any other lesions in the body suggestive of IgG4-related disease, and a normal preoperative serum IgG4 level (65.7 mg/dL, reference range 11–121 mg/dL), a final diagnosis of hypophysitis secondary to RCC was made. The bacterial culture of cyst content was negative, and a small number of neutrophils were observed in the tissue, which ruled out PA. Consequently, antibiotics were administered at routine doses, including an intravenous bolus of 1 g of cefazolin once intraoperatively and five times every eight hours postoperatively, followed by oral clarithromycin at 400 mg/day for ten days for sinusitis prophylaxis.
The headache and fever quickly subsided after surgery. The patient was prescribed prednisolone (45 mg/day) immediately after the diagnosis, and the lesions shrank promptly . Over one year, the prednisolone effects gradually tapered off until it was discontinued, and there was no recurrence of hypophysitis. However, central hypothyroidism, central hypogonadism, and diabetes insipidus persisted. A growth hormone (GH)-releasing peptide-2 test 3 months after surgery revealed severe GH deficiency (peak GH: 5.6 ng/mL, whereas the normal value is above 9.0 ng/mL), and GH replacement therapy was started a year and a half after the surgery.