A 9-month-old boy, Arabic - Saudi, known to have mild eczema, presented to the emergency department with a history of left-hand swelling that had started 5 days before the presentation. It started on the dorsal aspect of his left hand and extended above the wrist joint. It was associated with tenderness and was warm to the touch. He was afebrile, and all other joints were unaffected. The swelling affected his daily activities. There was a pigmented area on his left hand with no itchiness, pus discharge, or skin changes. Systemic review was unremarkable. His neonatal history was unremarkable with uneventful pregnancy. He has no family history of similar condition, no history of consanguinity between parents, and no previous history of congenital or metabolic diseases in the family. He was admitted 1 month before this presentation as a case of hypocalcemic seizure where he was treated with intravenous calcium gluconate on the same side as the swelling.
Local examination showed a swollen left hand, mainly in the dorsal aspect, crossing the wrist joint, with bluish discoloration, redness, hotness, and tenderness, no fluctuation or skin changes or discharge, and restrictive hand motion with good and intact pulses.
Investigations were done, with hematology (complete blood count: white blood cells 11.3 × 109/L, hemoglobin 12.7 g/dL, platelets 530 × 109/L), inflammatory markers [erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 9 mm/hour, C-reactive protein (CRP) 0.36 mg/L], and biochemistry (sodium 139 mmol/L, potassium 4.7 mmol/L, urea 1.5 mmol/L, creatinine 14 μmol/L, corrected calcium 2.5 mmol/L, phosphate 1.8 mmol/L, vitamin D 120.6 nmol/L) were all within normal range. A diagnosis of post-intravenous-line cellulitis was made, and he was admitted for clindamycin intravenous antibiotic treatment. Upon admission, left-hand ultrasound was done, and it was normal. The swelling started to subside slowly; he was discharged with oral Augmentin, to be followed up in the outpatient clinic in a week. On follow-up, he was doing well, with a normal bone profile and biochemistry. Examination of the hand revealed hard swelling over the dorsal aspect of the left hand with mild restriction of range of motion. X-ray was ordered during this visit.
X-ray showed calcification from the intravenous calcium given earlier. A diagnosis of iatrogenic calcinosis cutis was made. He was managed conservatively with multiple follow-ups, and a left-hand X-ray was scheduled for after 2 months. Complete resolution of calcification happened within 2 months .