A 34 year-old man came to our Outpatient Headache Clinic in Latina ICOT hospital, (Italy) presenting a daily orbito-frontal bilateral headache, that he had been suffering from since he was 18. The patient had assumed it was a chronic sinusitis.
The patient had not recently undergone any diagnostic evaluation. The only examination that had been performed for his condition was a brain MRI, performed 8 years ago in a private clinic. This MRI detected no abnormalities, except a soft radio-opacity of the paranasal and zygomatic sinuses, and hypertrophy of the nasal mucosa. The general practitioner (GP) did not advice any specific treatment after this MRI-based diagnosis, and patient continued to use naphazoline.
The headache experienced by the patient was bilateral, throbbing, sometimes very severe, and associated with nausea, vomiting, photophobia, osmophobia and worsened by head movements.
The patient had been treated by his GP with medication to relieve the headache (metamizole, rizatriptan, zolmitriptan, acetylsalicylic acid, nimesulide, ibuprofen, naproxen sodium), consumed more than once a day, until the age of 24. Since then, he had stopped the consumption of such painkillers because he found that naphazoline nitrate nasal spray was more effective. He began with 2 shots (0,14 mg of drug for any shot) for each nostril 3 times a day, and at the time of presentation, due to pain recurrence, was using the spray 5–6 times a day, and experiencing immediate, yet temporary, relief of the symptoms every time. When asked, the patient said that he had used naphazoline nitrate nasal spray on an occasional basis since the age of 16, in order to self-medicate for self-diagnosed chronic rhinitis.
During the patient’s visit to the clinic, respiratory examination, blood pressure, heart rate, mental status, reflexes, sensory system, cranial nerve, motor system, gait and coordination were normal. Since his headache characteristics were suggestive for a migraine-like headache, further evaluations were required to exclude the diagnosis of an acute sinusitis. Through a CT scan, a relapse of chronic sinusitis was excluded. The patient was then referred to an otolaryngologist, who suggested a detoxification from naphazoline nitrate through the use of aerosol therapy, with mucolytics and steroids, and thermal water spray.
The chronic headache disappeared following the treatment suggested by otolaryngologist. After three months of headache diary recording and clinical re-evaluation, the clinical picture was dramatically changed: patient presented only sporadic attacks of migraine without aura (ICHD-II 1.1). By an anamnesis re-evaluation it emerged that an episodic headache arose in childhood and worsen over the years, until it became chronic by the age of 18. One year after naphazoline detoxification, the patient has suffered from a few attacks during the year, treated with triptans.