The patient was an 8-month-old male with a past medical history of premature birth at 26 weeks, bilateral grade III intraventricular hemorrhage leading to hydrocephalus status post shunt placement, oropharyngeal dysphagia, and hypertension, who initially presented to the emergency department for poor feeding and was subsequently found to have VP shunt malfunction and several injuries concerning for NAT. These injuries included bilateral femoral fractures, facial bruising, and subconjunctival hemorrhages. The patient has a history of recurrent hospitalizations and has been following up with multiple different specialties, most notably neurosurgery and gastrointestinal.
The patient’s mother reported that 1–2 weeks before presenting to the emergency department, she noticed the patient came home from day care 1 day not moving his legs as much and refusing to bear weight on his legs when she would lift him up. She denied any known injuries at the time or increased fussiness. The mother also noticed around that time that he had a dark brown mark on the left side of his face, as well as a red spot on his eye. Due to poor oral intake, she decided to go to the emergency department. Of note, the patient’s mother denies knowledge of any recent injuries, including accidental falls, motor vehicle accidents, or previous problems with bleeding.
On physical examination, the patient was noted to be cachectic-appearing, and the admission weight was 5.7 kg. He was also noted to have a hyperpigmented area on the side of his face concerning bruising and subconjunctival hemorrhages. On musculoskeletal examination, the patient had bilateral legs flexed outward at the hips and knees. The patient cried with movements of the legs. The dorsalis pedis pulses were 2+ bilaterally. The skeletal survey obtained showed fractures in the proximal diaphysis of the right femur and proximal diaphysis of the left femur ( and ). Both fractures had angular deformities with apices pointing anteriorly and laterally. There was soft tissue swelling in the right and left thigh. The fractures appear to have happened simultaneously. No osteopenia or Wormian bones was detected.
After orthopedics was consulted, the plan was to initiate a large Pavlik harness. The lower extremities were wrapped in a frog-leg position. The size was based on the manufacturer’s sizing chart. Specific recommendations included non-weight bearing of bilateral lower extremities, genetics consultation, and obtaining a full metabolic workup for possible metabolic bone disorders. We did not restrict the patient’s positioning following Pavlik harness placement. Physical therapy and occupational therapy were consulted to expedite the patient’s recovery process during his stay. After initiating the harness, a repeat skeletal survey was obtained 8 days after the initial presentation, which showed callus formation on the left femur fracture indicative of a partial healing process. There was also a progressive callus seen about the proximal right femur fracture that was compatible with healing. 2 weeks after the initial presentation, a right and left femur X-ray with a two-sided view of anterior–posterior and lateral obtained revealed a left femur fracture with about one shaft width dorsal displacement distal fracture fragment and lateral angulation of the distal fracture fragment ( and ). Subtotal callus about the fracture site was compatible with partial healing. On the day of discharge, the patient went home with a spica harness, and his foster mother was educated on using the harness, as well as patient handling in supine, sitting, and held positions. A follow-up appointment was scheduled for 1 month after discharge. Two-view radiographs obtained at that visit demonstrated evidence of healing of his bilateral femoral shaft fractures with good bony callus and bridging bone formation between the two fractures ( and ). Some amount of remodeling had already occurred.