A 29-year-old man sustained an unstable lateral compression type 1 pelvic ring injury, an ipsilateral sacroiliac dislocation, and an opposite vertical sacral fracture in a road traffic accident involving a motorcycle. There were no neurological deficits. Radiographs and computed tomography imaging were done, which revealed that the patient had right sacroiliac dissociation with left sacral fracture AO type B1, as well as bilateral superior and inferior pubic rami fractures , resulting in spinopelvic instability. Upon arrival at the hospital, the patient was hemodynamically unstable and required immediate stabilization in the intensive care unit (ICU). Unfortunately, the patient developed a nosocomial MRSA infection during his stay in the ICU, which further complicated his recovery. After 22 days of injury, the patient underwent a comprehensive treatment approach that included closed reduction and percutaneous fixation of the pelvic ring, as well as minimally invasive spinopelvic fixation in a single setting. With the patient in the prone position, the first reduction and fixation of the right sacroiliac dissociation were followed by lumbopelvic fixation of the left side which involved the insertion of L5 pedicle screw and an iliac screw.
The patient was positioned in a prone manner on the imaging table, with the pelvis and chest adequately supported by silicone pads. Subsequently, right sacroiliac fixation was done using percutaneous cannulated cancellous (CC) screws. The fluoroscopic machine was set up in a lateral position, and traction was applied to the lower limb. A free guide wire was superimposed upon the iliac cortical density and anterior sacral slope, which were marked on the skin. The superior border of S1, along with the posterior sacral slope, was marked, and subsequently, a guide wire was carefully inserted within the zone of safety to facilitate the appropriate positioning of the screw. The operation proceeded in the standard fashion using inlet, outlet, and lateral radiographs, and an 80 mm CC screw was inserted over the guide wire.
A 4-cm paramedial incision was made over the lumbosacral region between L5 and S1 on the left side. Using the fluoroscopic technique, the lateral borders of the pedicle of L5 vertebrae were marked. The thoracolumbar fascia was dissected carefully, and the pedicle was exposed. Using an awl, entry was made through the lateral border of the pedicle, and a track within the pedicle was created by probing with a Lenke-style freehand probe. A 6.5 mm ×40 pedicle screw was placed after tapping the track.
The fluoroscope is positioned on the left side of the iliac crest, with an angulation in the sagittal and coronal planes in the obturator outlet view. This ensures that the X-ray beams are aligned parallel to both the inner and outer tables of the ilium. Next, an incision of 1.5 cm is made over the posterior superior iliac spine (PSIS). The iliac screw direction was guided by the teardrop which is formed by the cortical layer of the iliac bone. The accurate placement of the screw in the middle of the teardrop was done. The burr channel was meticulously established toward the medial aspect of the PSIS using a bone awl, followed by a thorough evaluation using a probe. For the screw head to enter the burr hole, the medial PSIS was opened using a chisel. An 8.5 × 80 mm screw was put in. To find the ideal screw length and diameter, we employed intraoperative probing as well as pre-operative imaging .
The rod was bent accordingly in two planes to accommodate the more dorsal and lateral positions of the iliac screw compared to the pedicle screws. It was then passed through the screw heads from distal to proximal and firmly secured using set screws. Radiographs were employed to verify the alignment in the anteroposterior, lateral, and teardrop perspectives. Early mobilization with weight-bearing was implemented. illustrates the paramedial incision on the left side utilized for spino-pelvis instrumentation. During the 1-month follow-up, the patient successfully walked without experiencing any discomfort, and the X-ray exhibited a secure spinopelvic and sacroiliac fixation .