We present the case of a man in his 60s who experienced atypical docetaxel-induced RRD. Although his medical history comprised a surgical intervention for a duodenum ulcer, he had no significant history of collagen vascular diseases. He was administered radiotherapy for high-risk prostate cancer after 1-year hormonal therapy (T1cN0M0 stage I; TNM 7th edition). Using 10-MV photons, he received 74 Gy in 37 fractions, 7 portals, and all coplanar irradiation. Although he experienced cystitis grade 1 (Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events 4.0.) as an adverse event, we observed no other adverse event. He continued receiving hormonal therapy for 2 years because of being in a high-risk group and became prostate-specific antigen (PSA) nadir. Six months since the completion of hormonal therapy, his PSA level increased again. Despite receiving hormonal therapy again, his PSA level continued increasing gradually. After 10 months of restarting hormonal therapy, he presented with dry cough and dyspnea. Based on the radiological examination, he was diagnosed with multiple lung, bone, and lymph node metastases. To distinguish primary lung cancer, biopsy was made from lung disease by bronchoscopy and established metastasis from prostate cancer. Accordingly, we started docetaxel (75 mg/m2) every 5 weeks for hormone-resistant multiple metastases. After one cycle of docetaxel, radiotherapy for the thoracic and lumbar vertebrae was performed for back pain and lumbago. In addition, irradiation was performed using 10-MV photon beams (anterior) and 10-MV (posterior) photon beams, 30 Gy in 10 fractions, and the anterior:posterior dose weight was approximately 1:2 . Owing to a large irradiation field, we divided the radiation field into 2 parts: thoracic and lumbar vertebrae. Meanwhile, the same dose of docetaxel was concurrently restarted at the time of 18 Gy. We observed no adverse event during radiotherapy, and soon relief was achieved for back pain and lumbago. In addition, the PSA level decreased after the administration of docetaxel. On day 21, at the end of radiotherapy, the same dose of docetaxel was administrated for the third time. On day 7, after third docetaxel administration (day 28 from the end of radiotherapy), erythema appeared in an irradiated field of the thoracic and lumbar vertebra . Erythema primarily appeared on the anterior side of the body, and no skin reaction was noted on the posterior part of the thoracic irradiated area. Notably, no skin reaction was observed in the previously irradiated field for prostate cancer. In fact, conservative treatment for RRD was performed using a skin care cream demonstrated better results by improving dermatitis. Subsequently, the patient underwent fourth docetaxel treatment without corticosteroid on day 28 after the third docetaxel administration; however, a less vivid skin reaction was noted this time compared with that noted during the previous session.
This retrospective study evaluated patient characteristics, diagnosis, and treatment retrieved from electronic medical records. All procedures followed the ethical guidelines of the 1964 Helsinki Declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards. Written patient's consent to participate and ethical approval were waived for the retrospective study. Patients were informed before the start of treatment that data might be used in future investigations even if the outcome was death and all consented to the use of data.