A 61-year-old man who previously worked in a cattle farm, and had a medical history of hypertension for more than 10 years, hyperlipidemia, type 2 diabetes, rectal cancer treated with 6 rounds of chemotherapy, and brucellosis, presented to a local primary hospital. On April 12,017, he had a fever (38.5 °C), cough, expectoration, dizziness, headache and fatigue. Pneumonia was suspected by Computed Tomography (CT) test at the local primary hospital. The symptoms did not improve after cefuroxime and moxifloxacin treatment for 3 days. On April 42,017, the patient developed seizures and unconsciousness, and was then transferred and admitted to the emergency department of Peking Union Medical College Hospital (PUMCH). Laboratory tests revealed that the patient’s white blood cell count was 5.67 × 109/L with 63% neutrophils, hemoglobin was 11.91 g/L, platelet count was 16.0 × 109/L, and procalcitonin (PCT) was < 0.5 ng/mL. The patient was treated with moxifloxacin for infection, and midazolam for sedation and recurrence of convulsions. He was also transfused with platelets and put on a ventilator.
On April 52,017, further lab examinations found that brucellosis Rose Bengal Test was positive, and thus minocycline and rifampicin administration were initiated for brucellosis treatment. The patient was also diagnosed with thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) syndrome with a very low platelet count of 16.0 × 109/L for which methylprednisolone and continuous plasma exchange were commenced to treat the patient. On April 132,017, sputum culture yielded extended-spectrum β-lactamase (ESBL) positive Klebsiella pneumoniae and ESBL negative Proteus mirabilis. Microbiology tests from other specimens (cerebrospinal fluid, bone marrow, femoral vein catheter blood and jugular vein catheter blood) were all negative from April 5 to April 132,017. The patient had serious halitosis as reported by the doctor in charge, but no pathogen was isolated from the oral secretion. On April 5 and 7, three sets of blood cultures were taken but all were negative for pathogens. On April 13, the patient developed a high fever, and another set of blood cultures was taken, and was positive after incubation for 25 h (aerobic) and 51 h (anaerobic) in the BacT/Alert automated blood culturing system. Further tests identified the cultured organisms as Streptococcus mitis (aerobic bottle) and S.moorei (anaerobic bottle). Treatment was adjusted accordingly, which included replacement of venous pipeline and empirical use of vancomycin and meropenem. The patient’s body temperature and white blood cell count returned to normal levels. Unfortunately, the patient had been in a coma since admission, and on April 21, the patient died of severe TTP.