A 50-year-old Chinese man complaining of fatigue and slight abdominal pain for 1 month was admitted to Harbin Medical University Cancer Hospital (Harbin, China) on 23 June 2009. He had a history of bronchiectasis, which had not required treatment, and no family history of cancer. His physical examination was unremarkable. His levels of tumor markers, such as carbohydrate antigen (CA) 199, CA125, carcinoembryonic antigen, and α-fetoprotein, were all normal. The patient’s liver function was also normal. Dual-phase enhanced abdominal CT showed a 110 × 112 mm solid cystic lump in the right liver lobe, but no other abdominal mass . The results of the patient’s esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) and colonoscopy were unremarkable. CT-FNAC analysis revealed that the tumor was composed of spindle and epithelioid cells with high mitotic activity. Immunohistochemical staining was positive for CD117 and DOG1, but negative for CD34, S-100, and α-smooth muscle actin (SMA). GIST risk stratification is high according to the mass size, although there is no sufficient tumor area for accurate determination of mitotic rate since this is a small biopsy. The diagnosis was primary hepatic GIST.
The hepatic mass was treated by argon-helium cryosurgery in July 2009 . One month later, treatment with imatinib mesylate (400 mg once daily) was initiated, and the patient tolerated its adverse effects . By January 2011, the tumor mass in the right lobe of the liver had shrunk to 30 × 30 mm, as demonstrated in a routine CT examination . However, by July 2012, the mass had increased to 55 × 78 mm , reaching a size of 110 × 150 mm by September 2014 , when pericardial effusion also became visible . After 61 months of imatinib mesylate therapy, the patient was switched to an interventional therapy consisting of transcatheter embolization with iodized oil. After a month, the patient’s tumor lesion shrank to 96 × 138 mm . His treatment regimen was then changed to a daily dose of 50 mg of sunitinib malate; 4 weeks on, followed by 2 weeks off (a 4/2 schedule). The administration of sunitinib caused hypertension, and the patient received Plendil to lower his blood pressure.
Following treatment, the lesion became stable and only cystic changes were observed during the 30-month follow-up period . No other lesions occurred before, during, or after treatment. The patient continued to receive sunitinib. However, by October 2019, the mass had again increased to 110 × 190 mm . We conducted telephone follow-up appointments with the patient every 3 months, but learned that he had died on 20 September 2020. The final diagnosis was primary hepatic GIST with a total survival time of 135 months. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this study. The authors had access to information that could identify individual participants during or after data collection. The timeline of the patient’s diagnosis, treatment, and response is shown in .