For 2 months, a 37-year-old male demonstrated a slow-growing lesion involving the dendro-alveolar segment of the left upper maxilla (rounded mass of 4 × 4 cm, nonulcerated with normal oral mucosa) . The biopsy was consistent with a peripheral giant cell granuloma. Two months later, he newly presented with back pain, and 6 days of the lower extremity weakness. On examination, he exhibited bilateral iliopsoas/ quadriceps (4/5)/bilateral extensor hallucis/dorsiflexor (2/5) weakness, and a left Babinski response. The laboratory studies revealed a marked elevation in both the calcium-corrected and alkaline phosphatase levels.
Multiple, expansile, enhancing, and bony destructive lesions were seen at many thoracic, lumbar, and sacral spinal levels (e.g., involving mainly the neural arches, and adjacent soft tissues). The largest lesions were at the T4/T5 level; the first contributed to marked central cord compression, while an additional very large, expansile, destructive bony lesion involved the left – T4-T5 ribs, and infiltrated into the adjacent paraspinal muscles. Other similar and/or smaller lesions involved multiple spinous processes, lamina, and/or vertebral bodies (e.g., of C5-6, L2-L4, S1-S2, and the left iliac bone). There was also an accompanying dorsal thoracic scoliotic deformity convex to the right side .
Due to significant cord compression, a T4/T5 coronal hemilaminectomy was performed with medial facetectomy/ foraminotomy; care was taken to preserve the lateral two-third of the facet joints, and thus maintain stability. The soft and highly vascular T4-T5 tumor clearly compressed the thoracic cord, and infiltrated the para spinal ribs/muscle; tumor was readily debulked. The histopathology confirmed a brown tumor attributed to primary hyperparathyroidism . Up to 2 years postoperatively, the patient remained neurologically intact with continued spinal stability.
Primary hyperparathyroidism attributed to a parathyroid adenoma caused this patient’s elevated parathyroid hormone (PTH) level (e.g., 1900 ph\ml). The patient subsequently required excision of the left upper parathyroid gland, following which calcium levels normalized [-].