A 33-year-old African-American male presented to the hospital with confusion, weakness, and tremors. His symptoms started six months earlier with memory impairment followed by auditory hallucinations, bizarre behavior, and grandiose delusions, for which he received neuroleptics without improvement. He gradually developed speech difficulties, unsteady gait, and left-sided tremors and weakness. He was hospitalized multiple times without a clear diagnosis, and by the time of presentation, he was withdrawn and not engaging in meaningful activities or conversations.
He was born and raised in a rural area. His birth and developmental history were unremarkable and he had no behavioral or learning problems. He lived with his wife of nine years and their two daughters who were all in good health. He had no significant past medical or psychiatric history besides his present illness and was not on any medications at the time of presentation. He smoked cigarettes daily and marijuana occasionally but denied any history of other drug use.
On exam, he was alert and calm. He appeared mostly abulic with flat affect, psychomotor slowing, and no spontaneous speech. His answers were one to two words, appropriate but unreliable. Occasionally, his abulia remitted and he became very emotional and labile. He would start crying and express feelings of hopelessness and fear of dying, but then over the course of few minutes, he would become jovial, disinhibited, his behavior puerile, and his mood expansive. He scored 13/30 on the Montreal Cognitive Assessment test (MoCA). His deficits involved multiple domains including executive, visuospatial, and memory.
On neurologic exam, he had bilateral ptosis and a mydriatic right pupil that was poorly reactive to light and accommodation. The extraocular movements were intact. He had a mild left lower facial weakness, subtle left spastic hemiparesis, and hemibody action and postural tremor of high amplitude and moderate frequency. His reflexes were diffusely brisk, though more prominently on the left. He had a present left Babinski sign. Pinprick sensation was reduced in the left leg. His gait was spastic-hemiparetic.
Initial workup, including complete blood count and comprehensive metabolic panel, was normal. Toxicology screen was positive for oxycodone and cannabinoids. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated mild diffuse parenchymal volume loss and subtle nonspecific white matter changes (, ), without abnormal focal lesions or enhancement. A brain magnetic resonance angiogram (MRA) was normal.