A 32-year-old Japanese woman with past medical history of atopic dermatitis and bronchial asthma presented generalized eruptions four days after the delivery of her first child. Despite administration of topical steroids, generalized skin induration, lymphadenopathy, fatigue, low grade fever and night sweat emerged. A blood test showed leukocytosis with eosinophilia (red blood cell count, 4.31 × 106 /μL; white blood cell count, 10.15 × 103 /μL; neutrophils, 39.3%; lymphocytes, 5.0%; monocytes, 7.9%; eosinophils, 42.4%; basophils, 0.7%; atypical lymphocytes, 0.0%), and a high level of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH; 907 U/L). The patient was negative for HTLV-1 antibodies. An 18F-Fluorodeoxyglucose-Positron-Emission Tomographic (FDG-PET) scan revealed the accumulation of FDG in the lymph nodes of whole body and the skin . A skin biopsy from the forearm and thigh showed atypical lymphoid cells infiltration around the vessels and appendages in the middle to deep dermis and subcutis . Although reactive lymphoid cell proliferation and malignant lymphoma were considered as differential diagnosis, lymphoproliferative disorder associated with atopic dermatitis and delivery was initially suspected based on the time course of her problems. T cell receptor gene rearrangement was reported; finally she was diagnosed as PTCL, NOS. Based on immunohistochemistry, these cells were retrospectively considered to be positive for CD4 and negative for CD8 . The other immunohistochemistry results were as follows: CD3 and CD5, positive; CD68, Granzyme B and Perforin, focally positive; CD20, CD79a, CD30, CD56, ISH-EBV and TdT, negative. The patient was treated with oral steroids for approximately one month and steroid pulse therapy was administered for three days; however, she experienced repeated relapses and partial responses. Chemotherapies, including CHOEP (Cyclophosphamide, Doxorubisin, Vincristine, Etoposide, Prednisolone), GCD (Gemcitabine, Carboplatin, Dexamethasone), CHASE (Dexamethasone, Cyclophosphamide, Cytarabine, Etoposide, G-CSF), SMILE (Methotrexate, Ifosfamide, Dexamethasone, Etoposide, L-asparaginase), MA (Methotrexate, Ara-C) and Mogamulizumab were attempted; however, the lymphoma relapsed each time. Gradually her condition worsened and she died of the disease at one year and three months after the onset of symptom.
The patient was 159 cm tall, with a body weight of 61.0 kg; her BMI was 24. Brain autopsy was not performed. At autopsy, multiple purpuric nodules were seen on the body surface . The abdomen was extended with hemorrhagic ascites (2000 ml). A gross examination revealed congestion of the lower lobes of the bilateral lungs (left 255 g, right 435 g) . The spleen, which weighed 830 g, and which had a dark red color was muddy and soft, where hemorrhage was found from the inferior pole. The liver, which weighed 3340 g, had a reddish orange color, was swollen, and multiple small yellow patches were found on its cut surface. The kidney (left 195.6 g, right 164.2 g), had a whitish color, reflecting anemia. Multiple lymph nodes were swollen, including the bronchopulmonary, bilateral inguinal and para-aorta lymph nodes.
Macroscopically, middle-sized lymphoma cells with distinct nucleoli were found to have systemically infiltrated multiple organs, including heart, lung, liver, spleen, pancreas, kidney, breast, adrenal gland, uterus, uterine appendages, lower left leg skin, rib, bone marrow and lymph nodes, including those in the inguinal area . The periportal and perivenular nodular infiltration of tumor cells were observed in the fatty liver. In the lungs, alveoli were not broken and filled with air , while capillary vessels of the pulmonary alveolar septa of each lobe were filled with tumor cells . Demyelination was observed in the spinal cord without lymphoma infiltration; however, some lymphoma cells could be found in the vessels. Interestingly, immunohistochemical staining revealed that these lymphoma cells were negative for CD4 but positive for CD8 . The other immunohistochemistry results were the same as those of the first skin biopsy: CD5, positive; Granzyme B and Perforin, focally positive; CD20, CD56 and ISH-EBV, negative. Based on these findings, we made a diagnosis of systemic PTCL, NOS, and suggested that the patient’s cause of death might have been respiratory failure because the infiltration of a large number of lymphoma cells in the pulmonary capillaries might have resulted in failed oxygen exchange on the alveolar wall.