A 46-year-old Hispanic man with a past medical history of hypertension, T2D, and hyperlipidemia presented with a diabetic foot ulcer and suspected osteomyelitis, preceded by the resection of the fifth toe and an unsuccessful skin graft. An angiography revealed inadequate blood circulation in the left posterior tibial artery, which was subsequently enhanced with balloon angioplasty. Surgery planned for wound exploration was postponed due to exposed bone and macerated tissue, leading to admission for intravenous (IV) antibiotics for clinical osteomyelitis. Cultures grew methicillin resistance staph aureus (MRSA) and Enterococcus, resulting in antibiotic adjustments. However, the patient developed severe nausea and vomiting attributed to ampicillin/sulbactam. The gastroenterology team was consulted and recommended to continue antiemetic medication, encourage out of the bed to chair, give a trial of very small sips of clear liquids if tolerated, and get Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) stool antigen which turned back positive and led to a change in antibiotic. Given the lack of improvement, the gastroenterology team was again consulted and recommended to get gastric emptying studies to rule out gastroparesis as the cause of emesis, to continue metoclopramide, and to start erythromycin. Gastric emptying studies revealed a gastric emptying time of 748 min. The normal values are 45–90 min. To rule out the possible effect of calcium channel blockade with amlodipine on gastric motility, amlodipine was held, and he started carvedilol; however, no improvement was observed. After completion of triple therapy for H. Pylori, he was still experiencing nausea and vomiting with minimal response to metoclopramide and erythromycin. An upper GI scope was done, which was unremarkable ; meanwhile, the patient required parenteral nutrition.
The patient was diagnosed with severe gastroparesis based on gastric emptying studies and upper GI scope. The gastroenterology team recommended either to get a percutaneous jejunostomy as an alternative method of feeding or to get a gastric pacemaker to help with the gastroparesis.
Unfortunately, the patient suffered a mechanical fall while going to the bathroom resulting in facial trauma. He received a laceration on the submandibular region and was complaining of right-sided facial pain. Computerized tomography (CT) maxillofacial was done which confirmed the patient has a fracture of the right mandibular . CT head showed the patient has a subacute epidural interval ; with interval CT head showed the bleeding was stable in size .
Neurosurgery recommended no need for acute intervention, and to observe him for any seizures. The patient was started on levetiracetam for seizure prophylaxis and the patient was upgraded to intensive care unit (ICU) for further monitoring. Surprisingly, after the fall, the patient's nausea improved and emesis stopped. He was given a trial of oral liquids that he successfully completed. As the patient was able to tolerate an oral diet and was not complaining of nausea, metoclopramide and erythromycin were held.
The syncopal episode was likely due to orthostatic hypotension secondary to a suspected decrease in peripheral autonomic reserve, decrease in preload, and decrease in systemic vascular resistance from sepsis. The patient eventually completed 6 weeks of IV antibiotics with ampicillin/sulbactam and vancomycin. Since the fall the patient did not have any complaints of nausea or vomiting and apparently was able to tolerate the oral diet. Repeat gastric imaging or further intervention was deemed unnecessary as the patient subjectively was able to tolerate oral challenge. Eventually, the patient was discharged after the fixation of the mandibular fracture.
Improvement in gastroparesis was attributed to sudden parasympathetic surges resulting from facial trauma. The patient was eventually discharged to the community with outpatient follow-up with Ear, Nose and Throat (ENT), Gastroenterology, Cardiology, General Surgery, Plastic Surgery, and Neurosurgery. Currently, he is asymptomatic on a 1-year follow-up, denies any nausea, and is comfortable tolerating an oral diet.