A 63-year-old obese, diabetic woman with a history of previous cholecystectomy was admitted to our institution with right upper quadrant pain. Her body mass index was 36. She was positive for Factor 5 Leiden heterozygous mutation. Abdominal Ultrasonography (USG) revealed a centrally located 6-cm mass with grade 3 hepatosteatosis. Fine needle biopsy was consistent with adenocarcinoma of biliary origin, which was interpreted as intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC). Abdominal computed tomography (CT) scans revealed a large central mass invading the left (LHV), middle (MHV) and right hepatic veins (RHV) infringing upon their junction with the vena cava. An additional movie file shows this in more detail (see Additional file 1: Video S1). Her biochemistry results were normal other than a Ca19–9 level of 1199 U/ml. Positron Emission Tomography confirmed liver-only disease and a single liver mass with SUV Max: 7.5.
The operation was planned using computer assisted 3-dimensional (3D) modelling software for 3D reconstruction of the liver scan images (Myrian, Intrasense France). The IVC and the RHV, MHV and LHV junction were affected by the tumour. Therefore, resection and reconstruction of these structures were planned. The resection plane was modified to obtain the maximum volume of the FLR, including segments 5–6-7 of the right lobe (61% of total liver volume), because of the patient’s age and the degree of hepatosteatosis. It was estimated that the critical part of the parenchymal transection would be providing a safety margin while following an initially anatomical and then non-anatomical resection plane to find the junction where the RHV separated into 3 branches before invasion by the tumour. We planned to resect and reconstruct the IVC followed by a jump graft reconstruction of the 3-orifice junction to the IVC. We intended to perform the critical transection and reconstruction steps using TVE and VPV-ECMO with IHP for FLR protection. The submitted multimedia (see Additional file 1: Video S1) shows the operative plan with 3D reconstruction.
The patient was taken to the OR, but during the initial phase of anaesthesia induction, she experienced an anaphylactic reaction in the form of severe bronchoconstriction associated with increased airway pressure, profound hypoxaemia and hypercarbia. Despite all efforts with conventional medical treatment for severe bronchoconstriction and lung protective ventilation strategies, the patient did not recover until reversal of the neuromuscular blocker rocuronium with sugammadex, a reversal agent for rocuronium. The operation was cancelled to allow the patient to recover and detailed allergy tests were conducted. After comprehensive studies with the objective of determining safe anaesthetic agents, including neuromuscular blockers, the operation was performed 2 weeks later. Anaesthetic induction was maintained with thiopental, vecuronium, fentanyl and midazolam without any adverse events. The right femoral artery was cannulated with a 5 Fr central venous cannula for advanced haemodynamic monitoring of continuous cardiac output with pulse contour analysis (FloTrac system, software version 1.01; Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA). To derive more detailed haemodynamic data, including tissue oxygenation, an 8 Fr pulmonary artery catheter (CCombo, Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA) was inserted into the left internal jugular vein.
We planned to use VPV-ECMO rather than standard VV-Bypass to provide not only perfusion but also support for oxygenation and respiratory function and to avoid splanchnic congestion during the course of the procedure.
The ECMO circuit used in this case was a continuous flow centrifugal pump (JostraRotaflow®; Maquet Cardiopulmonary, Rastatt, Germany), oxygenator (JostraQuadrox®; Maquet Cardiopulmonary, Rastatt, Germany), and heat exchanger. After heparin administration (5000 IU), USG-guided right common femoral vein (RCFV) puncture was performed. A flexible J-tip guide-wire was advanced through the RCFV. Using the Seldinger technique, a 21 Fr multi-perforated venous cannula (HLS®Cannulae, Maquet®, Rastatt, Germany) was inserted over the guide-wire up to the infra-hepatic IVC. The position was confirmed with manual palpation of the catheter tip within the IVC, located just below the level of the left renal vein. Another 17 Fr cannula (Arterial ®Cannulae, Maquet®, Rastatt, Germany) was inserted over a guide-wire through the right internal jugular vein (RIJV) down to the right atrium under transesophageal echocardiography guidance. Furthermore, a 16 Fr venous cannula (Edwards Lifescience, TF016L, LLC, Irvine, CA, USA) was inserted to the portal vein (PV). The RCFV and PV cannulas served as drainage cannulas and the RIJV cannula served as a supplying cannula for the VPV-ECMO set-up. Using flow sensors, we monitored flow ratios in the draining cannulas during the procedure; maximum VPV-ECMO flow was 3.2 L/min and maximum PV flow was 0.5 L/min. PO2, PCO2, SO2, pH and lactate levels were monitored via right radial arterial blood samples. Maximum serum lactate was 2.75 mmol/Lt during the procedure.
A median laparotomy was performed. The operation started with TVE of the liver for inflow and outflow control (see Additional file 1: Video S1). An intraoperative USG examination was performed by an experienced radiologist (EU) to confirm the tumour’s relationship with vascular structures and the anticipated tumour-free FLR. The hepatoduodenal ligament was dissected, isolating the main (MPV), right (RPV) and left portal (LPV) veins, followed by left (LHA) and right hepatic artery (RHA) dissection.
Hepatoduodenal ligament dissection was completed after a 16 Fr IHP cannula was inserted from the LPV. Selective control of the left hilar pedicle by tying both the LHA and LPV revealed a demarcation line on the liver and parenchymal transection proceeded using an ultrasonic surgical aspirator (Sonastar, Misonix USA) following the MHV until the point of preoperatively planned deviation using the 3D model from the anatomical line (MHV) was reached. At this point, although we had planned to resect the IVC with the tumour, we were able to dissect and preserve it using the ultrasonic surgical aspirator. In this step, we obtained three frozen biopsies from the tissue showing a desmoplastic reaction between the IVC and liver capsula, demonstrating an invasion-free IVC.
IHP was initiated before the LHV, MHV and RHV were cut and the liver was elevated through the incision for the final critical step of parenchymal transection. The 3 right hepatic vein branches were exposed (see Additional file 1: Video S1). After the hepatectomy was completed, an 8-cm interposition cadaveric IVC graft was used for reconstruction of the three hepatic vein orifices, joining them with the patient’s preserved IVC. We first anastomosed the right hepatic vein junction with the IVC graft that matched the total diameter of the 3 RHV orifices using 4.0 prolene in an end-to-end fashion. Then, we anastomosed the graft to the RHV orifice on the IVC that was enlarged in both inferior and medial directions, finally matching the diameter of the graft. After the reconstruction was complete, we terminated IHP and removed the ECMO cannula in the MPV. During and immediately after reperfusion, we kept the femoral vein cannula in place and the ECMO system running. The RCFV and RIJV cannulae were removed after haemostasis and confirmation of haemodynamic and respiratory stability.
The total duration of the operation was 12 h. Four units of erythrocytes and 3 l of HTK solution were required for IHP, which was performed for a total of 82 min.
The patient was discharged from the ICU 48 h after the operation with gradual improvement of liver function. Pathology confirmed a 6-cm, grade 2 adenocarcinoma of biliary origin. The tumour showed lymphovascular invasion. Three hepatoduodenal lymph nodes were negative and the operation was considered an R0 resection with a less than 1-mm surgical margin in the parenchymal transection line close to the hepatic veins.
On postoperative day 5, despite anticoagulation prophylaxis, the patient experienced pulmonary embolism, which caused haemodynamic instability and required intubation, mechanical ventilation, and inotropic support. She was readmitted to the ICU. However, there was no evidence of myocardial injury as indicated by a negative cardiac troponin test. Unfractionated heparin was administered as an intravenous bolus followed by a therapeutic dose of low-molecular weight heparin. After a gradual recovery, she was ambulated and discharged after 32 days of hospitalization.
At 3 months, she experienced abdominal pain, ascites and jaundice. A triphasic CT scan showed outflow obstruction with kinking of the venous graft due to extensive liver regeneration. The patient’s condition deteriorated, with an increase in total bilirubin to 9 mg/dl and massive ascites and hydrothorax. The patient was taken to an angiography suite where a metallic stent was inserted, resulting in rapid recovery of liver function and the patient’s condition (see Additional file 1: Video S1).
At the 1-year follow up, she is symptom-free. Her Ca19–9 level is 35 U/ml. Her follow-up CT scan shows no tumour recurrence and normal liver function tests.