A previously healthy, 77-year-old female was referred to our hospital, with a lung adenocarcinoma measuring 28 mm in the right upper lobe. We therefore planned a UVATS to resect the tumor. The patient was placed in the left lateral decubitus position under general anesthesia. Then, we made a 4-cm skin incision for the main port in the sixth intercostal space at the anterior axillary line. A wound retractor (Alexis-xs; Applied Medical, Rancho Santa Margarita, CA) allowed the insertion of a flexible thoracoscope (10 mm in diameter, Olympus Optical Tokyo, Japan), endoscopic autosuturing device (GIA Universal; Covidien, Mansfield, MA or Echelon; Ethicon, Cincinnati, OH), and vessel-sealing device (Ligasure; Covidien) via the main port incision. It also allowed specimen extraction.
During operation, we found the incomplete interlobar fissure between the upper and the middle lobe and the abnormal lobulation of the upper lobe. . Therefore, we carried out the so-called modified marionette technique as follows. First, the Internal organ retractor (IOR; Aesculap, Tuttlingen, Germany) applied with a looped 1-0 nylon thread was inserted into the thoracic cavity by the clip applier (Aesculap). The clip applier also allowed the IOR to grasp the targeted lung parenchyma properly. Second, two sets of looped 1-0 nylon-threaded 18-gauge injection needles were prepared . These needles were optimally pierced through the thoracic wall separately . Third, the both ends of the 1-0 nylon thread attached to IOR were separately pulled out through the looped nylon extruded from the 18-gauge injection needles. Each thread was clamped by mosquito forceps . The looped nylon extruded from 18-gauge injection needles worked as a pivot, so that the vector of retraction of the IOR was converted into an ideal direction . This method gave the sufficient thoracoscopic views to perform surgery with safe and ease. The patient had an uneventful postoperative course and was discharged in 1 week after the operation without any wound complications.