In April 2020, a 24-year-old primigravida woman at the gestational age of 29 and 1/7 weeks with a history of ITP and splenectomy (11 years ago) was referred to our tertiary level III center. Other than the mentioned condition, she had no underlying disease. The patient was referred from another hospital due to a decreased platelet count with no response to synchronized treatment of prednisolone (5 mg/day) and intravenous immunoglobin (IVIG; 1 g/kg). In ours and the previous center, she revealed no signs or symptoms in favor of SARS-CoV-2 infection and claimed no contact with a confirmed/suspected case of COVID-19. At the time of admission, she had no cough, sore throat, dyspnea, chest pain, rhinorrhea, myalgia, or gastrointestinal symptoms. There was also no sign of elevated body temperature (37.1 °C), tachypnea (respiratory rate: 14 breaths per min), tachycardia (heart rate: 86 per min), or decreased oxygen saturation (SpO2: 95%). Laboratory investigations showed a normal leukocyte count accompanied by severe thrombocytopenia (6 × 103/mL). Moreover, hemoglobin, coagulation profile, lactate dehydrogenase level, and kidney function tests were all normal; however, she had slightly elevated liver enzymes . Unfortunately, C-reactive protein was not requested for her upon admission. Due to the lack of response to the previous treatments and after consulting with hematology service (considering her clinical and laboratory status), they decided to start methylprednisolone pulse (0.5 g/day). About 24 h later (after the second pulse), the patient presented fever (38 °C) accompanied by SpO2 90% but no other signs or symptoms. Considering this finding and regarding the pandemic, a chest computed tomography (CT) scan (with abdominal shield) was requested immediately which showed bilateral patchy ground-glass opacities and consolidations. Following these findings and after consulting with infectious diseases service, oseltamivir, lopinavir/ritonavir, chloroquine, piperacillin/tazobactam, and azithromycin were started for the patient (methylprednisolone was discontinued after the second pulse) and she was transferred to the COVID-19 ward. Also, the result of reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection on the day after. Due to the increasing pattern of liver enzymes on hospital day (HD) 9 and with the suspicion of HELLP syndrome, the pulse of methylprednisolone and platelet transfusion started for the patient after a consult with hematology service and she underwent cesarean section without any complication. A healthy male neonate with Apgar scores 9 and 10 was born with negative SARS-CoV-2 RT-PCR result. The pulse continued for the next 4 days and discontinued then (HD13). After 4 treatment-free days, the platelet count was 71,000/mL and no pregnancy- nor ITP-related complications were observed. The follow-ups after 6 months revealed no problem at all with both mother and the infant. This case belongs to a research proposal with the ethical approval code of the Medical Ethics Committee of Tehran University of Medical Sciences (IRB: IR.TUMS.VCR.1398.1082).