A 28-year-old woman underwent regular follow-ups at an antenatal clinic, without needing any medication. At 24 weeks of gestation, an intra-abdominal cystic mass, approximately 2.0 × 1.5 cm in size, was found during routine prenatal ultrasonography (US). Its size increased to 3.5 × 2.4 cm at 32 weeks of gestation, and thereafter, it ceased to grow until delivery. The amniotic fluid index at 32 weeks of gestation was 1.5 cm, and this was maintained at 1.3 cm by 36 weeks of gestation. Eventually, the male neonate was born at 38 weeks and 2 days of gestation via normal spontaneous vaginal delivery, with Apgar scores of 9 and 10 at 1 and 5 min, respectively. He had a body weight of 3500 g (50th percentile), height of 49.0 cm (45th percentile), and head circumference of 35.5 cm (55th percentile). Initial physical examination revealed a soft abdomen with no distention.
Abdominal US performed 25 h after birth showed a large cyst (4.2 × 2.3 × 4.2 cm) with echogenic material, fluid, and calcification, which originated from the retroperitoneum and was located in front of the inferior vena cava and descending aorta . Due to the echogenic shadowing of the calcific components, we decided to perform magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to rule out the possibility of a retroperitoneal teratoma. At 2 days of age, contrast-enhanced MRI of the abdomen was performed for further evaluation. Pre-contrast coronal T2-weighted MRI showed an intermediate to high signal intensity (SI) of a heterogeneous mass with a small low SI component. Further contrast-enhanced fat-saturated T1-weighted MRI of the coronal and transverse views revealed a cystic mass (4.6 × 4.5 × 5.3 cm) with an air-fluid level and multiple minute low SI components . Moreover, an increasing radiolucent cystic mass in the right lower quadrant (RLQ) began to appear 8 h after birth on serial infantography . The patient underwent emergency laparotomy performed by a pediatric surgeon on day 3 of life. Under general anesthesia, the cystic mass was exposed, and over 20 mL of air and dark brown mucinous fluid were aspirated through a syringe . The cystic mass was attached to the cecum, prompting the need for an ileocolectomy with end-to-end anastomosis. Five days post-surgery, the patient started feeding with mother’s milk, and the postoperative course was uneventful. He was discharged 10 days after the surgery without any complications.
On macroscopic examination, a cyst was identified without any macroscopic connection to the cecal lumen. The cyst contained a dark brown mucinous fluid, and the mucosal and serosal surfaces of the cecum were unremarkable . On microscopic examination, cyst wall was located at the subserosal layer of the cecal wall, composing of mucosal lining cells and submucosal connective tissues. The cyst cell lining was composed of mature, keratinized, or non-keratinized stratified squamous epithelium and focally mucin-producing ciliated stratified epithelium; however, there were no findings of gastrointestinal mucosal epithelium in the entire cyst and there was no smooth muscle outer layer in the cystic wall, except for an attached portion of the cecal wall. Transition areas between the squamous and mucin-producing ciliated epithelia were noted in some foci. Immunohistochemical examination revealed that the colonic mucosa was reactive to MUC2, while the mucin-producing ciliated epithelium of the cystic mucosa was reactive to MUC5AC . The boy has had no further symptoms and is doing well. We are scheduled to follow up at age 6 months with abdominal US.