A healthy 23-year-old Western-European female patient consulted the gynecological emergency service for vulvar pain and edema with small vulvar lesions, associated with febrile episodes up to 39.5 °C. All symptoms appeared the day prior to presentation, starting with vulvar swelling. Family history revealed no similar symptoms, sexual history was unremarkable, and no recent travel was reported. Clinical examination showed diffuse vulvar erythema and edema with several small slightly erosive papules, and one small (< 1 cm) painless inguinal lymph node. Based on the clinical examination and the patient’s symptoms, a diagnosis of primary herpes simplex virus-2 (HSV-2) infection was suspected. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) swab of the genital ulcerative lesions was performed, and the patient was discharged with antiviral treatment (valaciclovir) and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory pain medications.
One day later, she consulted the general emergency department complaining of blurred vision in both eyes, headache, persistent genital lesions, lumbar pain, and recurrent fever (39 °C). Neurological examination was normal, with the exception of bilateral decreased visual acuity. The presence of retinal hemorrhages was suspected. C-reactive protein (CRP) was 204 mg/L and leukocytes 13.9 G/L. Repetitive hemocultures, white blood cell count, protein PCR and culture of cerebrospinal fluid from a lumbar puncture, PCR samples of vulvar lesions (HSV, chlamydia, and gonococcus), and serology results (Epstein-Barr virus (EBV, syphilis, Human Immunodeficiency Virus HIV)) were all negative. Given the suspicion of retinal lesions, the patient was advised to rapidly consult an ophthalmologist. As blurred vision can be a possible side effect of valaciclovir, the antiviral treatment was switched to acyclovir, and the patient was discharged.
Four days after initial symptoms, due to ongoing worsening of the genital lesions that had progressed to multiple painful ulcerations and were accompanied by dysuria, urinary retention, and persistent blurred vision, the patient consulted the gynecological emergency service. She had not consulted an ophthalmologist in the meantime. The lesions had progressed from papules to deep ulcerations with scabs . The course of the symptoms is presented in Table .
The differential diagnosis of the genital ulcerations included HSV, syphilis, chancroid, granuloma inguinale, lymphogranuloma venereum, HIV, Lipschütz ulcer, Crohn disease, and Behçet’s disease.
The patient was admitted and required urinary catheterization. She was urgently referred to the ophthalmology department, and fundoscopy showed bilateral parafoveolar microhemorrhages, and whitish lesions of the retina . Visual acuity was 0.3 (right eye) and 0.4 (left eye). Optical coherence tomography angiography revealed superficial and deep microangiopathy of the retina . Heidelberg spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) of the paramacular lesion revealed a hyperreflectivity at the junction of the outer plexiform layer and inner nuclear layer, revealing a focal ischemia . The diagnosis of Behçet’s disease was made, and intravenous corticosteroid treatment was initiated with pulsed 500 mg/day methylprednisolone infusion for 3 days, followed by systemic oral prednisone 1 mg/kg/day with a tapering schedule. Progressive improvement of visual acuity and healing of vulvar ulcers were observed over the days following treatment initiation. Her estroprogestative pill was switched to a progestative-only pill owing to the risk of thrombosis associated with Behçet’s disease. The patient was discharged from hospital on day 4. Within 48 hours, a TNF blocking agent (intravenous infliximab 5 mg/kg/dose) was started. Visual acuity improved progressively. Infliximab was administered for a total of 4 months along with oral azathioprine up to 2 mg/kg/day. She will likely continue azathioprine for long-term maintenance, once corticosteroid tapering is completed. At the last visit, one and a half years after the initial symptoms, the patient had not experienced any relapse. At the last visit, Heidelberg SD-OCT showed atrophy of the macula. Besides, OCTA images remained unchanged, but the patient had recovered a vision of 1.0 (20/20) in both eyes.