A 57-year-old woman with a history of arterial hypertension came to the emergency service due to moderate chest pain radiated to the anterior cervical region and of an oppressive type, associated with dyspnea on moderate efforts (NYHA II). This symptomatology presented insidiously for 2 months and presented a progressive course until his hospital admission. The general physical examination showed an endomorph anatomical constitution, a Body Mass Index of 37, and no marfanoid features. The cardiovascular evaluation, an aortic diastolic murmur (III/IV), and peripheral arterial pulses were identified without alterations.
Laboratory parameters were normal but the angiotomographic study revealed an ATAA with a diameter greater than 85 mm, which extended from the aortic sinotubular junction to zone 2 of the aortic arch . Likewise, the Transthoracic Echocardiogram (TEE) reported severe aortic regurgitation with an ATAA that extended into the aortic arch, and coronary angiography did not show significant coronary lesions.
Surgical repair was immediately considered with Bentall surgery, debranching of supra-aortic vessels with EC (myocardial protection, Custodiol®), and Total Circulatory Arrest with Deep Hypothermic Cerebral Perfusion-Antegrade Bilateral (TCADHCP-AB) by extension of the dacron towards the artery axillar right.
Due to the high risk of aneurysmal rupture during the surgical opening, the onset of peripheral EC with an arterial “Y” configuration (clamped right axillary and femoral artery) was considered before median sternotomy. After opening, the aortic cross-clamp was performed and Bentall surgery was initially performed (24/26 mm valve tube), while another surgical team constructed the aortic arch graft on the table (28 mm dacron linear graft + bifurcated dacron 14 × 7 mm). Subsequently, the EC was stopped and the TCADHCP-AB (Bicarotid, Temperature 19°, 52′) was started before unclamping the right axillary arterial cannula, clamping in the Brachiocephalic Trunk (BCT), and clamping the peripheral femoral artery, to anastomosing the aortic arch graft in proximal zone 3. Once the distal aortic anastomosis was concluded, the circulatory arrest was completed and the EC (femoral and axillary “Y” unclamped) was re-entered with a cross-clamp on the aortic arch graft, to continue with the dacron Bentall-aortic arch anastomosis. The cross-clamp (188′) was removed, and the EC (246′) was completed after anastomosis of the supra-aortic vessels, 7 mm dacron-BCT, 7 mm Dacron-Left Carotid Artery (LCa.A), and bypass with interposition of dacron 7 mm between LCa.A-Left Subclavian Artery (LSA) .
The stay in postoperative intensive care was relatively long due to ventilator-associated pneumonia and no evidence of neurological injury; however, the patient was discharged successfully with an indication for permanent anticoagulation and outpatient clinic visits.