A 42-year-old male presented to the ED via emergency medical services (EMS) after being found unconscious on his porch by a neighbor. The EMS team found him minimally responsive with pinpoint pupils and emesis nearby. He was given 2 milligrams (mg) of intranasal naloxone followed by 6 mg of intravenous (IV) naloxone by EMS during transport and regained consciousness. Initially oxygen saturation was 72% and he was placed on 12 liters of supplemental oxygen via a non-rebreather with improvement to 88% by arrival to the ED.
Upon arrival, the patient was awake and noted that he had no past medical history and was not on any prescription medications. He stated he had taken a handful of alprazolam for recreational purposes earlier in the day. His only complaints were significant shortness of breath and mild diffuse abdominal pain. Initial vital signs were heart rate of 154 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 45 breaths per minute, oxygen saturation of 93% on 12 liters per minute oxygen by non-rebreather. Physical examination showed a male with vomitus on his shirt. He was tachypneic with shallow labored breathing without crackles or wheezing. His abdomen was distended and tense with mild diffuse tenderness to palpation and no external signs of trauma. He was awake and responding appropriately to questions but only in two- to three-word phrases secondary to dyspnea. Remaining physical exam was unremarkable, including peripheral pulses, pupils, and motor function.
The patient’s respiratory status continued to deteriorate and he was emergently intubated. His oxygen saturation immediately improved to 98% on the ventilator. A single dose of rocuronium (50 mg) was given for ventilator dyssynchrony, despite the increasing propofol infusion that was initiated for continued and post-intubation sedation. His abdomen remained distended and firm despite orogastric (OG) tube, Foley catheter, and improving respiratory status. Post-intubation chest radiograph showed an OG tube at the level of the diaphragm, a correctly placed endotracheal tube, and no identifiable pathology.
With his improved vital signs and increased stability post intubation, the patient was sent for a computed tomography of the abdomen. Point-of-care labs drawn prior to intubation showed significant values of pH 7.12 (reference range: 7.31–7.41) and partial pressure of carbon dioxide of 61.3 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg) (45–50 mm Hg) on venous blood gas, creatinine of 1.7 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) (0.6–1.2 mg/dL), and lactic acid of 5.5 millimoles per liter (mmol/L) (0.5–1.9 mmol/L). Other laboratory results were mostly unremarkable but included white blood cell count of 12.2 thousand/microliter (uL) (4.4–10.5 thousand/uL), glucose of 332 mg/dL (70–100mg/dL), and mildly elevated transaminases. The patient was given vancomycin, cefepime, and IV fluids for presumed severe sepsis.
Computed tomography of the abdomen revealed a large amount of pneumoperitoneum creating tension physiology in the abdominal compartment , and general surgery was consulted. Given the emergent nature of the condition, the temporal limitation with the operating room, and surgical staff availability, it was decided that the ED team would needle decompress the abdomen while the operating room was being assembled.
The patient was placed in a supine position and his abdomen sterilized with chlorhexidine. A 14 French angiocath was inserted into the anterior right lower quadrant of the abdomen until a rush of air returned. At that point, the catheter was advanced and the needle removed while air continued to flow from the peritoneal cavity. Once the abdomen was soft, a Luer lock was placed on the angiocath and the angiocath secured with an occlusive dressing. After decompression, ventilator dyssynchrony significantly improved.
With the patient stabilized, the general surgeon requested a CT of the abdomen and pelvis with oral contrast for further localization of the injury. Due to concerns for perforation, the decision was made to not advance the previously short OG tube any farther but to continue to use it to instill water-soluble contrast into the gastrointestinal tract. While the repeat imaging was not definitive, the likely site of viscous perforation was thought to be the lesser curvature of the stomach .
Ultimately the patient was found to have a 1-centimeter (cm) perforation of the lesser curvature of the stomach, which was surgically repaired. He was subsequently admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) following surgery and discharged home on hospital day seven.