A 65-year-old man with a headache and left ptosis for 1 month was admitted. He also had a left blurred vision. These symptoms gradually worsened. He declined any symptoms of abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a mass in the pituitary fossa. He denied discomforts elsewhere. He had hepatitis B antigen-positive for 6 years and did not receive antiviral treatment. His family members did not have a history of liver cirrhosis. Neurological examinations revealed left eyelid ptosis and a small left pupil. Eyeball movements in all directions were normal. The remaining physical examinations were insignificant.
The hepatitis B virus test showed a hepatitis B surface antigen level of 2813.00 COI (normal range, 0–0.9 COI). The liver enzyme test detected a glutamic pyruvic transaminase level of 46 IU/l (normal range, <40 IU/l) and a glutamyl transpeptidase level of 157 IU/l (normal range, <60 IU/l). The results of blood platelet count and coagulation function were normal. An endocrinological test revealed a normal hormone level. The results in the oncology department showed that the level of alpha-fetoprotein was 260 ng/ml (normal range, <7 ng/ml).
CT showed a pituitary mass with adjacent bone destruction . MRI revealed a tumor with enhancement in the pituitary fossa . The pituitary gland was not observed in the images. The tumor led to the enlargement of the pituitary fossa and saddle bottom subsidence. No clear boundary was observed between the tumor and the surrounding tissue. The tumor also invaded the left sphenoid sinus. After removing the tumor, the abdominal CT showed multiple inhomogeneous tumors with the portal vein invasion and multiple bilateral ilium metastasis , and single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) showed high metabolism in the bilateral iliac bone .
After completing the preoperative preparation and ruling out contraindications to surgery, we performed the tumor resection using trans-sphenoidal surgery. The tumor had a tough texture with relatively abundant blood supplement. Close adhesion between the pituitary, dura, and seller and tumor was observed. Gross total resection was performed.
The pathological results revealed that the positive markers were PCK, Hepar, and GPC-3, and the negative markers were EMA, SSTR2, PR, GH, TSH, ACTH, FSH, LH, PRL, S100, and P63 . The final diagnosis was pituitary metastasis of HCC and HCC. The postoperative images showed that the tumor was completely resected .
After the brain tumor resection, the patient’s headache subsided but still had a third cranial nerve palsy. Half a month after tumor resection, the patient was administered lenvatinib after consulting with hepatobiliary specialists. Three months after the tumor resection, he complained of pain in the liver and bilateral ilium areas. Therefore, painkillers were added. The patient was admitted due to symptoms of nausea, jaundice, and vomiting. Moreover, the patient’s weight also dropped. The abdominal MRI showed multiple tumors with obstruction of the bile duct . Unfortunately, the patient passed away at home after breakfast 3.5 months after the tumor resection, and the exact cause was unknown.