A 25-year-old lady who had been HD dependent for 4 years due to IgA nephropathy was confirmed pregnant in 2022. Her medical history included hypertension on amlodipine, hyperparathyroidism with post-subtotal parathyroidectomy, and childhood asthma. Pre-pregnancy, her body mass index (BMI) was normal at 20.9 kg/m2 . An initial ultrasound scan confirmed viable singleton intrauterine pregnancy at 9 weeks gestation. She was switched to pre-dilution HDF six-hour sessions, six times a week for improved solute clearance. Given that blood flow to the placenta is not autoregulated and can fall during dialysis sessions, HDF was preferred because of more stable haemodynamics from possibly more significant thermal losses . Her vascular access was with a left brachio-cephalic fistula, and HDF sessions used a blood flow (Qb) of 250 mL/min with ultrapure dialysate at 500 mL/min flow rate. As pregnancy is pro-thrombotic and her blood flow rate was lower than previous published reports on HDF in pregnancy, we have chosen pre-dilution HDF to achieve a higher convective volume and to reduce extracorporeal circuit clotting . In addition, we chose pre-dilution HDF as studies comparing high volume HDF in pre-dilution and post-dilution mode, using comparable convection volume exchange rates, have shown that pre-dilution mode has reduced sieving coefficients for sodium, calcium and magnesium, and thus losses of calcium and magnesium would be expected to be less with pre-dilution compared to post-dilution mode . The convective volume was fixed at 55.0 L/session, keeping the pre-dialysis serum urea concentration < 12.5 mmol/L . The dialysate composition comprised 31 mmol/L bicarbonate, 1.5 mmol/L calcium, 3.0 mmol/L potassium, and 136 mmol/L sodium, with a dialysate temperature of 35.5 °C. Anticoagulation was with unfractionated heparin.
BP was controlled with regular long-acting Nifedipine 60 mg twice daily and Methyldopa 250 mg daily. The erythropoietin dose was increased to achieve a target haemoglobin of 100 g/L. Her baseline transferrin saturation and ferritin were 56.5% and 738 ug/L, respectively. She was allowed an unrestricted, high protein diet supplemented with folic acid, and prenatal vitamins . Our patient did not require any potassium or magnesium supplementation.
Weekly segmental bioimpedance was measured with the InBody S10 (Seoul, South Korea) in a standardized manner 20 min after completing the dialysis session, after allowing time for re-equilibration and blood test results were checked to ensure optimum volume management and guide dialysis target weight setting throughout pregnancy (Online supplementary material). Pre-dialysis measurements differ from post-dialysis measurements, as patients are usually volume overloaded in the pre-dialysis state hence, bioimpedance measurements overestimate muscle mass and under estimate fat mass, due to the difference in the water content between muscle (≈ 90% water and fat tissue < 10%) .
An ultrasound scan at 18 weeks demonstrated an absence of the right umbilical artery, with a further scan at 21 weeks demonstrating bilateral increased uterine artery resistance with unilateral notching of the right uterine artery Doppler. Her dialysis sessions were lengthened to 6.5 hour, Qb was increased to 270 mL/min, and convective volume to 60 L at 20 weeks. With this change, she remained well with good BP control. The standard weekly Kt/V measured 6.71 to 7.5. At 21 weeks, she tested positive for COVID-19 infection, and was hospitalized for one week. She lost weight during her hospitalization and was not able to tolerate oral nutritional supplementation. We observed a reduction in total body ECW/TBW post COVID-19 admission from 0.391 to 22 weeks gestation to 0.379 at 26 weeks gestation . During the same period, we observed a fall in body fat mass which subsequently increased post hospital discharge (Online supplementary material). The findings from bioimpedance were consistent with a higher weight gain from her improved appetite and oral intake post infection. Using bioimpedance targets and serial measurements, we increased her dry weight by 0.9–1.7 kg per week, much higher compared to what would normally be anticipated during the second trimester pregnancy . Her weight change in the second trimester ranged from − 0.2 to 0.7 kg/ week, with a total weight gain of 2.9 kg at the end of 26 weeks.
From 30 weeks gestation, her pregnancy was subsequently complicated by labile BP with intradialytic systolic BPs up to 200 mmHg, occasionally requiring additional antihypertensive medication during dialysis. In the third trimester, with the physiological changes, we observed a higher ECW/TBW in trunk (0.383–0.402) and lower limb (0.384–0.409) compared to non-access upper limb (0.372–0.389), as expected. Her body fat mass increased during this period from 18.9 to 23.3 kg while skeletal muscle mass remained stable. Her weight gain ranged from 0.7 to 3.2 kg/ week, with a total weight gain of 12.4 kg. Data from serial bioimpedance measurements provided additional information to account for the increasing body weight, differentiating it from overhydration. Her intradialytic hypertension improved each time with up-titration of target weight guided by bioimpedance but there was also a suspicion that this could represent early signs of pre-eclampsia. Foetal size was below average, but growth velocity was sustained throughout the third trimester . She started experiencing irregular tightenings at 34 weeks+ 3 days and upon admission was found to have an escalating BP with shortness of breath and pulmonary oedema clinically, consistent with clinical features of rapidly developing pre-eclampsia, hence, a caesarean section was performed. The baby was healthy, weighing 1.9 kg with an Apgar Score of 9 at 1 min.