A 48-year-old-man was referred to the Vilnius University Hospital Santaros Klinikos due to atrial fibrillation with a rapid ventricular response, which was subsequently restored to sinus rhythm by using DC cardioversion. Of note, his electrocardiography additionally showed decreased voltage in the limb leads and non-specific repolarization abnormalities. He presented with typical symptoms and objective signs of HF, and it was known from medical history that a previous echocardiography (done in 2013) had shown biventricular dilatation and impaired left ventricular (LV) function. Despite complaining of increasing weakness, fatigue, shortness of breath, and abdominal volume, the patient did not take any cardiac medication before index hospitalization. Transthoracic echocardiography confirmed significant ventricular dilatation and systolic dysfunction (LVEF 27%) with severe reduction of global and regional longitudinal strain . Ischaemic origin of HF was excluded during the initial workup by invasive angiography, family history was negative. Past medical history was significant for the following conditions: cirrhosis (Child B class) with hepatosplenomegaly, ascites and portal hypertension, diabetes mellitus with diabetic foot, and chronic kidney disease.
Importantly, a subsequent more careful inspection revealed bronze-shaded skin, telangiectasia on the shoulders and abdomen, and slightly yellowish eyes. These special features combined with concomitant cirrhosis, diabetes, and cardiomyopathy stimulated the testing of iron metabolism markers. Laboratory tests’ results consistent with iron overload and their dynamic changes after treatment are presented in the .
In order to detect the iron accumulation in the heart cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) was performed on a 1.5 T scanner (Siemens Avanto, Erlangen, Germany) with measurement of T2* relaxation time of the heart and liver, and LV function, volumes, and mass. The morphometric, functional and T2* relaxation values are presented in . The changes in LV systolic function and liver before and after treatment are illustrated in the , Images S1a–c, S2a and b, S3a–c, and S4a, b. Cardiac magnetic resonance findings were consistent with the diagnosis of myocardial and hepatic siderosis.
Hereditary or Type I haemochromatosis (HHC) was confirmed by a genetic test, showing the potential (>90%) homozygous genotype for the C282Y mutation of the HFE gene.
During 2 weeks of hospitalization specific therapy with deferiprone and standard HF treatment was initiated, regular phlebotomies (removing about 500 mL of blood) were also scheduled. Medical treatment at different timepoints is presented in . Dietary advice included restrictions of iron intake (meaning to avoid red meat, crustaceans), as well as vitamin C and alcohol. The chelate, used for about 1 month, was discontinued due to limited availability and high cost in Lithuania. The improvement of iron metabolism markers was interpreted as a good response to regular phlebotomies, therefore, a multidisciplinary team decided to leave therapeutic phlebotomy (every 2 weeks) as a main treatment for haemochromatosis.