We presented the case of a 19 years old male from Medellin-Colombia, who was born premature (32 weeks of gestation) and showed clinical features consistent with HI, including bright yellow hyperkeratotic plates that covered his entire body. The clinical history evidenced the death of a brother of one month because of a pulmonary malformation without any family history of congenital skin pathologies. However, there is a family history of neurodegenerative diseases. There is no family history of psychological disorders, epilepsy, mental retardation, learning disabilities, Down syndrome, psychomotor development disorder, or attention deficit disorder.
During the first months of his life, he received a multidisciplinary treatment with a poor prognosis. Remained hospitalized during the first month of life, with improved hyperkeratosis, but he remained with hypersensitivity to touch, photosensitivity, and fissures in the palms and soles, developing generalized erythema with persistent peeling. At the age of 5 months, a biopsy was performed, which reported changes suggestive of congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma diagnosis, but genetic studies were not done despite the physician’s recommendations.
Throughout life, the patient presented a short size and low weight (height 1.49 m, weight 41 kg, body mass index 18.5, head circumference 54 cm). He showed signs and symptoms characteristics of HI, such as marked erythema and scaling in all body, frequent scaling of the scalp with scarring alopecia areas, the auricular pavilions had the helix and antihelix fused with the head, corneal opacity in the left eye, atrophy of the optic disc in the right eye and bilateral ectropion and sparse eyebrows on both sides, see Fig. a–c. In addition, the patient exhibited a mesosystolic heart murmur in aortic and pulmonary foci of 2/6 grade. Finally, important musculoskeletal findings included the presence of hypoplasia and contractures of the hands and feet; hypoplastic fingers deformed in flexion and atrophy of the hand muscles; equinovarus feet, with hypoplastic fingers feet with flexion contracture, see Fig. d–f.
The patient received treatment with oral retinoids (Acitretin) in his childhood, but approximately from 10 years of age, his only treatment for the skin is the use of petroleum jelly (Vaseline) throughout his body after bathing, in addition, he does not use any type of antisolar or moisturizer on the skin. He is not currently receiving any treatment for ectropion, such as artificial tears or other eye lubricants.
The main findings of the neurological examination were: When applying color vision tests (Farnsworth D-15 color test and Ishihara test), red and green vision disorder was evident, accused limitation for the mobility of fingers and toes, mild gait difficulty, left and right Achilles reflex hyporeflexia, serious alterations in fine motor skills (finger opposition movements, rapid alternating movements, coordination) of left and right superior and inferior limb and slight speech alteration. Regarding behavior, moderate levels of aggression, irritability, isolation, and apathy were identified. A complimentary assessment by a clinical psychologist also reported an intermediate level of apathy and a high level of inability to concentrate.
Executive functioning, memory, and attention were assessed using Neuropsi , a standardized neuropsychological test . The standardized score for attention and executive functions was 57, for memory it was 49, and for attention and memory, it was 45. These three neuropsychological functions, according to age and schooling, had severe alterations when compared with the general population. Anxiety and depression were assessed using the Beck Anxiety Inventory and Beck Depression Inventory . Anxiety, with a score of 9, was at the intermediate level and depression, with a score of 23, at a moderate level. The level of stress, assessed through the Stress Assessment Score , was very low (score 34). Regarding personality , the NEO FFI test was used, showing high levels of neuroticism (pth 95) and openness to experience (pth 80), low levels of extraversion (pth 1) and agreeableness, (pth 2) and normal level of consciousness (pth 50). Additionally, to evaluate the association of the neuropsychological state of this patient with physiological functions; the cortisol, serotonin, and tryptophan were determined in serum samples in the reference laboratory, Prolab-Synlab from Medellin-Colombia. The values obtained were into the reference range for each parameter, 9 µg/dL, 106.1 µg/L, and 49.7 µmol/L; respectively.
The patient has a brachycephalic cranial type which means that the anteroposterior cranial diameter is shorter than the transverse diameter and presents an euryprosopic facial type (transverse and short wide face). Almost there is a discrepancy and disharmony between the face thirds, finding an increased upper third related to high hair implantation. The analysis of the smile (generated by flexing 17 muscles located around the mouth and eyes), was unable to determine the style of the smile due to lack of elasticity in the skin that limits muscles function; however, a low smile is found according to the position of the upper lip .
The functional analysis shows a mature swallowing, temporary chewing that indicates little activity of the masseter muscles, probably related to the lack of elasticity of the skin; he does not refer pain in any of the four muscles of mastication at the time of closure and oral opening. It has a maximum diminished mouth opening of 35 mm without pain reported being the normal range of 40 to 50 mm.
At the dental level, a permanent dentition type, congenital absence of 1.8.2.8, no dental mobility, or dental anomalies of shape, size and color, were observed. Dental anomalies of position in tooth 1.2 (distoangulated) 1.4 (distal rotation), 1.3 and 2.3 ectopically erupted by perimeter of the diminished arch since the average is 72 mm, were also observed .
Regarding the jaw sagittal relation analysis among dental arches, the patient presented an Angle’s class II molar relation at 2 mm right and an Angle’s class 1 at 1 mm left. A vertical overbite of 25% and a 1 mm overjet, right and left 2 mm spee curve (an imaginary line which goes from the lower canine distal, passes through the vestibular cusps to the last molar present in the mouth), were observed, indicating immediate and effective anterior guide function without posterior sectors interference possibility, upper midline coincides with the facial one, and a lower midline deviated 2 mm left. Moreover, an oval upper and lower arch shape is observed, and in quadrant 1 and 2 a severe dental crowding .
A class 1 skeletal relationship is found in the cephalometric analysis; it has a suitable maxillo-mandibular sagittal position; however, the jaw is smaller when compared to the maxillary. In the cephalometric analyses, all vertical dimensions are very low, indicating a significant vertical growth deficiency. From a sagittal view, the very marked antegonial (facial) recess in the mandibular base related to the pulsatile activity of the facial artery, generates an abnormal shape of the lower edge of the same .
In the exome analysis using Next Generation Sequencing (NGS), we found variants in ABCA12 and HRNR that can be related to the clinical findings observed (Additional file ).