A 17 year old boy presented with progressively worsening right-sided nasal blockage of one year duration, with two episodes of epistaxis and deterioration of vision. On examination there was a mass in the right nasal cavity extending across the postnasal space on either side. Fundoscopy revealed signs of left eye compression and optic neuropathy. An initial differential diagnosis was of chordoma, angiofibroma, pyogenic granuloma and nasopharyngeal carcinoma.
CT (Computed Tomography) scan showed a hypodense mass in the nasopharynx entering into the sellar and parasellar regions with erosion of the pituitary fossa, clivus and middle cranial fossa. An MRI (Magnetic Resonance Imaging) brain sequence showed a large clival based tumour with involvement of the dura at the region of the whole clivus where the tumour had compressed the brain stem anteriorly . Cerebral angiogram revealed a nonvascular mass with blood supply coming from both maxillary arteries. A definite diagnosis of chordoma was made on histopathological examination of a biopsy taken from the nasopharyngeal mass which showed lobules of typical physaliferous cells (positive for cytokeratin, vimentin and S100) destroying the bone trabeculae .
Tumour excision was via left maxillary swing, left mandibular swing and midline tongue split followed by reassembly and filling of the defect utilizing rectus abdominus muscle. First a left maxillary swing approach via a Weber-Fergusson-Longmire incision was performed. The maxilla was swung laterally based on a cheek flap. As the access to the tumour, which was extending from skull base to first cervical vertebra, was not adequate with this approach alone, a paramedian mandibulotomy facilitating a left mandibullar swing was also performed. However a massive tongue occupying the mid part of the dissection did not allow free instrumentation. A temporary midline glossotomy was carried out to provide more exposure. This ultimately gave wide access to the whole clival mass.
The chordoma was resected using an ultrasonic aspirator set at a high frequency mode of 100 Hertz which is typically used in meningioma resections. The tip of the Dissectron ultrasonic aspirator (Satelec Medical, Bordeaux, France) was calibrated with the Omnisight Image Guided System (Radionics, Burlington, Massachusetts) so that precise removal could be performed without injury of the structures within the dural space i.e. brainstem, basilar artery and pituitary gland. Despite this there was a small dural tear at the level of the upper clivus where invasion was maximum. At the end of the surgical procedure, the defect was filled with a free rectus abdominis muscle transfer. Despite this a CSF (Cerebrospinal Fluid) fistula developed and was managed by external ventricular drainage which was converted to a low pressure ventricular peritoneal shunt fourteen days later. The CSF leak stopped two days two days after surgery and acetazolamide was continued for duration of 5 days.