A 68-year-old, right handed Chinese female of Han nationality, endured 3 years of untreated hypertension. She denied a history of smoking and diabetes. She had no family history of NIID or any other neurodegenerative disease. She was admitted to hospital, complaining of sudden aphasia and right limb weakness in the previous 4 h. In the past 7 years, the patient had recurrent aphasia and two episodes of limb hemiparesis, and was diagnosed with “transient ischemic attack” in 2012 and 2018. During hospitalization in 2012, she showed a sudden weakness in the right limb. This lasted 2 h and recovered without treatment. In 2018, the patient showed sudden aphasia and weakness in the right limb, which relived itself in 3 h. During these hospitalizations, the patient developed no mental abnormalities, but did have a fever > 38 °C. Each time, she was given anti-platelet aggregation therapy and supportive treatment such as vitamin B and C supplements. For most of the time, the patient looked after herself; she communicated well and was able to walk normally, however, in the recent 6 months, she suffered with memory loss and had issues with counting.
Upon admission to hospital, a physical examination revealed a temperature of 36.6 °C, a pulse of 90 beats/min, a breath rate of 20 times/min, and a blood pressure of 196/106 mmHg. The patient’s consciousness was normal, but she was unable to cooperate during the examination, and she also had mixed aphasia. She also had central facial and tongue paralysis on her left side. Her right limb muscle strength was 4.5/5.0. The tendon reflex of her extremities was active, meningeal irritation was negative, and the right Babinski and Chaddock signs were positive. The patient was unable to cooperate during sensory system and ataxia examinations.
On the 3rd day after admission, the patient developed new symptoms: fever and an exacerbation of right limb weakness. A physical examination revealed a temperature of 38.8 °C, and a motor examination revealed a right limb muscle strength of 3/5. Her meningeal irritation and right Babinski and Chaddock signs changed to negative. On the 5th day after admission, the patient had mental irritability and cognitive impairment. On the 20th day after admission, without any treatment which could have resulted in cognitive improvement, the patient’s limb muscle strength returned to normal, she had no mental abnormalities, but her memory and counting skills were still poor.
Computed tomography angiography (CTA) revealed no intracranial aortic stenosis or occlusion. On the 5th day after admission, a T2/Flair sequence of a skull magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan revealed abnormal signals in the white matter region of the brain, and high signal intensity in the bilateral frontal grey matter-white matter junction, by diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) . The patient had a second MRI scan on the 20th day after admission, but results from both scans were not significantly different . During the previous two hospitalizations, due to various reasons, the patient failed to complete an MRI and electroencephalogram (EEG), but cranial computed tomography (CT) scans revealed a low-density lesion in the white matter, area-brain atrophy, and leucoencephalopathy. During each hospitalization, these symptoms worsened .
Routine blood tests revealed the patient’s leukocyte count was 12.29 × 109/L (the normal range is 4.0–10.0 × 109/L), and her neutrophil percentage was 89.4% (the normal range is 50–70%). Her C-reactive protein and procalcitonin levels were normal. A cerebrospinal fluid lumbar puncture examination revealed that pressure was 160 mmH2O.The number of cells in the CSF was 4.0 × 106/L (the normal range is 4.0–10.0 × 109/L), and a cytological examination of the cerebrospinal fluid revealed 50% lymphocytes and 50% monocytes. Biochemical tests revealed her glucose level was 3.8 mmol/L, total protein was 0.75 g/L (the normal range is 0.15–0.4 g/L), and chloride was 129.9 mmol/L (the normal range is 120-130 mmol/L).
On the 20th day after admission, the patient’s serial electroencephalogram (EEGs) demonstrated a low amplitude θ wave (5–7 Hz), and a few α rhythms (8–9 Hz), but no abnormal brain waves were observed. Her skin sympathetic reflexes revealed that the amplitude of her right upper limb (194.1 μV) was lower than the left (497.2 μV). Electrophysiological tests revealed that motor nerve conduction velocity of the left median nerve (47 m/s), right median nerve (49 m/s), left ulnar nerve (47 m/s), left common peroneal nerve (41 m/s) and right common peroneal nerve (40 m/s) were slow. The sensory conduction velocities of bilateral median, ulnar, and sural nerves were normal. The following scales were completed: The mini-mental state examination (MMSE) scale was 24/30, the Montreal cognitive assessment scale (MoCA) was 21/30, the frontal lobe function assessment (FAB) was 17, and the activity of daily living scale (ADL) was 21.
A skin biopsy was performed under light microscopy. Hematoxylin-eosin staining revealed eosinophilic spherical inclusion bodies in the nuclei of epithelial cells in small sweat gland cells . Immunohistochemical staining revealed that inclusion bodies were positive for p62 and ubiquitin staining . Genetic testing revealed the patient was not a carrier of the fragile X mental retardation 1 (FMR1) premutation. Genetic examination was performed using repeat-primed PCR (RP-PCR) and GC-rich PCR (GC-PCR). We observed 102 GGC repeats in the 5’UTR of NOTCH2NLC (the normal range is < 40 ) .
During this hospitalization, the patient was given symptomatic treatment including an anti-antipsychotic (olanzapine 10 mg/daily) and nutrition support therapy, after which, her symptoms were relieved within 3 weeks. After discharge, a telephone follow-up at 3 months revealed the patient no longer had limb paralysis and mental hemiplegia as the first symptoms, and also fever, cognitive impairment and mental irritability from encephalitic attacks.