A 61-year-old Japanese man with weight 49.6 kg and height 1.68 m (body mass index (BMI) = 17.6 kg/m2) was diagnosed with stage IIIB squamous cell carcinoma of the lung in March 2009. He lost 3 kg in body weight over a period of six months. He underwent one course of systemic chemotherapy (cisplatin at 80 mg/m2 and docetaxel at 60 mg/m2 on day one). He was treated prophylactically with dexamethasone and granisetron for antiemesis just before the chemotherapy. From day three to day 10 after the initiation of chemotherapy, he had anorexia, nausea and vomiting, estimated as grade three according to the common terminology criteria for adverse event, Version 4, and lost 4 kg in weight. On day 17, he presented with epigastric pain and vomiting. Physical examination showed a distended abdomen and decreased bowel sound. Plain abdominal X-ray showed a distended stomach and duodenal gas . Contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed a distended stomach and duodenal bulb due to compression of the third portion of the duodenum, an aortomesenteric distance of 6.1 mm (normal: 10 to 28 mm) and a reduction of the aortomesenteric angle to 15.8° (normal: 25° to 60°) . These findings were highly suggestive of SMA syndrome.
An upper gastrointestinal series in the supine position showed a sharp cut-off at the third portion of the duodenum . In the prone position, the contrast medium passed through the obstructed part of the distal side of the third portion of duodenum . After inserting a nasogastric tube, more than 2700 mL turbid, green fluid was drained. His symptoms improved after nasogastric tube drainage and he remained in the prone position. The patient was given total parenteral nutrition for 10 days and tubal feeding for the following 10 days. After 20 days, his body weight increased from 45.6 to 49.0 kg and he returned to oral intake without subsequent symptoms. Subsequent chemotherapy using the same regimen was started after his body weight reached more than 50 kg. He presented with grade 2 emesis during chemotherapy but developed neither SMA syndrome nor weight loss. A total of four cycles of chemotherapy were performed, and the patient achieved a partial response.