An 83-year-old male presented with shortness of breath at rest and exertion. He had an extensive past medical and surgical history including coronary artery bypass graft surgery for coronary artery disease, Ross surgery for aortic stenosis, atrial fibrillation, sick sinus syndrome, hypertension, chronic renal insufficiency, and diabetes. In addition, he had a history of ischaemic cardiomyopathy, left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 30% status post biventricular defibrillator, and secondary MR. The patient had progressive worsening of secondary MR (severe grade) when he was hospitalized for decompensated HF a month prior. Pertinent home medications were aspirin, low-dose apixaban, metoprolol succinate, sacubitril/valsartan, spironolactone, torsemide, rosuvastatin, empagliflozin, and insulin. On index hospitalization, initial vital signs were as follows: blood pressure 100/60 mmHg, heart rate 71 b.p.m., respiratory rate 24/min, and O2 saturation 96% on 3 L of supplemental O2 via a nasal cannula. He appeared to be in respiratory distress with bilateral crackles on lung auscultation and bilateral pedal oedema. Serum creatinine was 2.3 mg/dL (reference range: 0.64–1.27 mg/dL), and venous lactic acid was 1.8 mmol/L (reference range: 0.5–2.0 mmol/L). His electrocardiogram showed ventricular paced rhythm. A coronary angiogram did not reveal new lesions. Chest X-ray was consistent with pulmonary oedema. Diuretics were administered with inadequate urine output <30 mL/hour. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed severely depressed LVEF 30% with global hypokinesis and basal to mid-inferior wall akinesis which was unchanged from previous study. left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) velocity time integral (VTI) was 7.1 cm. Severe secondary MR (Carpentier Type III) was noted with an effective regurgitant orifice area (EROA) 0.46 cm2, regurgitant volume 56 mL, vena contracta width 8.6 mm, and regurgitant fraction 40%. Mitral valve leaflets showed apical tethering with restricted motion. There was moderate tricuspid regurgitation and the Doppler-derived pulmonary artery systolic pressure (PASP) was 55 mmHg. The left atrium was severely dilated with a volume of 77.8 mL/m2. The inferior vena cava was dilated at 2.4 cm with limited respiratory variation (right atrial pressure >15 mmHg). In addition, moderate eccentric aortic valvular regurgitation was noted. Severe MR was a result of progressive dilated cardiomyopathy [LV internal systolic diameter (LVIDs) was 6.4 cm, increased from 5.5 cm a year ago], which resulted in dilation of the mitral annulus. Right heart catheterization showed a pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) of 26 mmHg with a prominent v-wave and cardiac index (CI) of 1.4 L/min/m² that improved to 1.9 L/min/m² following incremental nitroprusside challenge (up to 2.5 μg/kg/min). Milrinone infusion was initiated in addition to diuretics leading to optimization of volume status. However, the patient could not be weaned off milrinone due to hypotension. Transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE) confirmed severe secondary MR with the largest jet at the A2–P2 level (see , and ). The mitral annulus was dilated with a mild apical displacement of mitral leaflets resulting in poor central coaptation. At a heart rate of 70 b.p.m., the MV area was 8.4 cm2 by 3D planimetry. The EROA was 0.56 cm2 with a posterior leaflet length of 1.6 cm, coaptation length of 0.5 cm, and coaptation depth of 1.1 cm. In addition, multiple small fibrinous deposits were seen on the ventricular pacemaker lead in the right atrium (RA). Owing to significant comorbidities, the patient was deemed high risk for MV surgery by the heart team. The Society of Thoracic Surgeons (STS) risk score calculated a 32% risk of mortality and an 87% risk of morbidity or mortality. The decision was made to proceed with TEER using MitraClip. Due to the large coaptation depth, the anatomy of the MV was suitable for XTW MitraClip, which was the largest clip available with a wingspan of 25 mm at 180°. Under TEE and fluoroscopic guidance, XTW MitraClip was advanced across the MV after transseptal puncture and deployed on the A2 and P2 scallops. The MR grade was reduced from severe to moderate with an MV mean gradient (MG) of 2 mmHg and MV area (MVA) of 3.24 cm2 (see , ; ). Therefore, a second XT MitraClip was deployed laterally to the first clip and subsequent TEE demonstrated two mild residual MR jets that were not pansystolic with EROA of 0.25 and 0.10 cm2 (see , ; ). The final MV MG was 4 mmHg at a heart rate of 70 b.p.m. The patient was weaned off milrinone within the next 2 days, and GDMT was introduced subsequently. Medications on discharge included sacubitril/valsartan 24–26 mg twice a day, spironolactone 12.5 mg daily, empagliflozin 10 mg daily, torsemide 10 mg daily, rosuvastatin 10 mg daily, and apixaban 5 mg twice a day. He was ultimately discharged to cardiac rehab and then home. At the 30-day follow-up, he was able to participate in physical activities such as golf. Follow-up TTE showed stable MitraClip position with mild residual MR. The LVID dimension was 5.7 cm with an LVEF of 35%. The PASP and CI by Doppler echocardiography were 45 mmHg and 3.1 L/min/m², respectively. He continued to do well at the 6-month follow-up.