We present the case of a 75 year old woman with OC, first diagnosed in 2014. The patient underwent diagnostic laparoscopy with histologic confirmation of a high-grade serous adenocarcinoma of the right ovary. The tumor was not resectable due to extensive small bowel involvement. In addition, due to her clinical condition, the patient declined systemic chemotherapy with carboplatin and paclitaxel. The patient was offered local, intraabdominal chemotherapy with cisplatin and doxorubicin applied as PIPAC as an off-label procedure. The patient provided written informed consent for this treatment and for publication of this case report. We did not obtain Ethics Committee approval, since no approval is required for a singular case report.
From October 2014 to August 2016, the patient underwent 13 cycles q 5–12 weeks of PIPAC with cisplatin 7.5 mg/m2 and doxorubicin 1.5 mg/m2 at 12 mmHg. PIPAC was performed as described before (5). Briefly, both drugs were applied into the abdomen via laparoscopy using a 12 mmHg CO2 pneumoperitoneum, an aerosolizer (Capnopen®, Capnomed, Villingen, Germany), and an intravenous high-pressure injector (Arterion Mark 7, MedRad Bayer Healthcare, Berlin, Germany). A video of a PIPAC application is available in the (Additional file 1: Video S1) of the electronic version of the manuscript. Adverse events were graded according to the CTCAE version 4.0. Quality of life was measured by the standardized European Organization for the Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) QLQ-C30, version 3.0, questionnaire, a validated tool for assessing quality of life in cancer patients. Between October 2015 and May 2016, tamoxifen 20 mg once daily was taken by the patient. In May 2016 intravenous carboplatin area under the curve (AUC) 3 was added on day 2 after each PIPAC due to local progression diagnosed on a computed tomography scan.
Figure shows screenshots of video-laparoscopies during consecutive PIPACs demonstrating PC and response to PIPAC, evidenced by fibrosis and reticular sclerosis of PC nodules. Histological objective tumor response was noted by grading of tumor cell regression. Figure demonstrates histopathological specimens of the initial tumor specimen sampled during PIPAC #1 with peritoneal manifestations of serous carcinoma with large, pleomorphic nuclei and frequent mitosis and histopathological specimens taken during consecutive PIPACs with residual peritoneal tumor foci with reduced cellularity and fibroelastic connective tissue with inflammatory changes such as fibrinous exudate, fibrosis, foreign-body reaction, and hemosiderin-laden macrophages.
Intraoperative assessment of PCI during repeated PIPACs confirmed stable disease. The PCI noted by laparoscopy during the 13 PIPAC sessions was 25, 19, 10, 15, 15, 13, 14, 10, 8, 10, 15, 6, and 12. The treatment was well tolerated. CTCAE events grade 1 (abdominal pain, fever) were noted within 72 h after 7 PIPAC procedures. A CTCAE event grade 3 was observed twice at the time of PIPAC #11 and #12 (two episodes of symptomatic pleural effusions necessitating pleural puncture and drainage). There was no acute or cumulative renal, hepatic, or hematologic toxicity throughout the whole treatment period. We observed stable or declining values of creatinine, γGT, GOT/ASAT, GPT/ALAT, lactate dehydrogenase, alkaline phosphatase, C-reactive protein, bilirubin, and Quick throughout all PIPAC procedures . Serum levels of CA 125 fluctuated between 1273 and 3486 U/mL. Figure shows EORTC QLQ-C30 quality of life scores indicating a stabilization of the patient’s quality of life during the treatment period. Specifically, scores for pain, vomiting, and obstipation/diarrhea were stable throughout the treatment, suggesting that intraabdominal maintenance chemotherapy with PIPACs does not result in acute or cumulative gastrointestinal toxicity.