Our patient was a 71-year-old male with a past medical history of coronary artery disease, diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, benign prostatic hyperplasia, and obesity who presented to the emergency department (ED) with headaches and confusion. He was a poor historian secondary to altered mental status; therefore, a limited history was obtained. His wife noted that he had been acting confused over the prior 24 hours. The patient also endorsed some neck stiffness, which resolved upon presentation to the ED. No history of trauma was reported.
His vitals upon presentation to the ED included an oral temperature of 36.1º Celsius, blood pressure of 62/40 millimeters mercury, heart rate of 107 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation of 98% on room air. Initial laboratory values for this patient included an elevated white blood cell count to 14.3 K/units per liter (uL) (reference [ref] range 3.8–10. /uL), and a lactate of 5.4 millimoles (mmol) /L (ref <2.0mmol/L). The patient was suspected to have septic shock from an infection of unknown etiology. Due to continued hypotension despite intravenous fluid resuscitation, central venous access was obtained by the emergency physicians for vasopressor administration. A central venous catheter (CVC) was placed within the right internal jugular (IJ) vein under ultrasound guidance. The patient tolerated this procedure without complication, and a chest radiograph was obtained following the procedure to confirm proper line placement . At this time, the catheter was noted to be abnormally positioned, as it crossed midline from right-to-left, terminating in the left atrium.
Upon further chart review, including prior imaging, the patient was found to have an existing persistent left-sided SVC draining into the left atrium, based on a prior computed tomography of the chest . There was no evidence of a right-sided superior vena cava on the prior advanced imaging. The patient was ultimately diagnosed with ascending cholangitis, which was successfully managed with biliary drainage. He did have several other complications throughout his hospital course secondary to his other medical comorbidities, all of which were unrelated to his SVC.