A 50 year old woman, presented to Ibn Sina University Hospital with sudden onset of severe retrosternal chest pain, that appeared 3 days before her admission. She did not report any history of diabetes mellitus, hypertension, smoking, dyslipidemia or genetic predisposition to coronary artery disease.
The patient was conscious. She was no longer suffering from chest pain. Her blood pressure was 110/70 mm Hg, her heart rate was irregularly irregular at 130 b/m, oxygen saturation value 98% on room air and a temperature of 37.3 °C. A grade III diastolic rumbling murmur was audible at the apex associated to a pulmonary component of second heart sound. The rest of physical exam was normal. The electrocardiogram (ECG) showed atrial fibrillation with a fast ventricular rate with ST-segment elevation in inferior leads II, III and Avf associated with mirror reflection of ST-elevation in anterior and lateral leads . Chest X-ray found a mildly enlarged cardiomegaly with signs of pulmonary artery hypertension and biatrial enlargement . High sensitivity cardiac troponin T (hs-cTnT) on admission was, as expected, very high (>50.000 ng/ml) with a normal threshold value below 0.017ng/ml. Signs of inflammatory response were present, white blood cells counted to 13,500/mm3 in addition to C reactive protein at 180 mg/l. A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) objectivated severe mitral stenosis with a mean gradient across the mitral valve estimated at 11 mmhg and a mitral valve area of 1 cm2. The two atria were dilated with the presence of a sludge in the left atrial appendage. The right ventricle was also dilated and the pulmonary artery systolic pressure (PASP) was estimated at 51 mmHg. We also noted akinesia of the inferior wall and hypokinesia of the inferoseptal wall with a mild left ventricular dysfunction . A transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) was indicated but refused by the patient.
Coronary angiography was performed. It revealed a thrombus in the distal right coronary artery. The left and right coronary systems were clear of atherosclerotic plaques . The diagnosis of coronary artery embolism (CE) was made, based on the proposed national cerebral and cardiovascular center (NCVC) criteria for the clinical diagnosis of coronary artery embolism (CE).
She was treated with dual antiplatelet (DAPT), beta-blocker and enoxaparin was administrated in overlap with vitamin K antagonists (VKA) until reaching the therapeutic range of the international normalized ratio (INR). After evaluation of the ischemic and hemorrhagic risk, triple therapy was maintained for one week, followed by a bitherapy including VKA and Clopidogrel. The tolerability was good and no adverse events were reported. The patient was satisfied after the improvement of her clinical condition. She was advised on the necessity of anticoagulation and prophylactic measures against infectious endocarditis. She was referred after that for mitral valve replacement.