A 24-year-old male with no significant medical history presented to the emergency department (ED) with complaint of fever and chills, along with nausea and non-bloody, non-bilious vomiting. He denied recent travel or sick contacts. He was febrile and tachypneic with findings of patchy airspace disease throughout both lungs compatible with multifocal pneumonia on computed tomography of the chest without contrast. He was subsequently admitted to the hospital for three days. Nasopharyngeal swabs were positive for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) on reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). He was treated with supportive care and demonstrated clinical improvement.
His respiratory pathogen panel did not reveal any coinfection and his legionella antigen, blood cultures, respiratory cultures, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) testing were also negative. He was discharged home but subsequently presented to the ED nine days later with symptoms of bilateral lower-extremity weakness in addition to developing overflow urinary incontinence. He denied any history of trauma, pain, or similar symptoms in the past. Upon arrival, his vitals revealed a blood pressure of 111/61 millimeters of mercury, pulse 97 beats per minute, respiratory rate 16 breaths per minute, 98% oxygen saturation on room air, and temperature of 37.3° Celsius.
His neurological examination revealed bilaterally absent knee and ankle reflexes with equivocal plantar reflexes, and flaccid, lower-extremity paraplegia bilaterally, in addition to evidence of overflow urinary incontinence. His lower-extremity sensory examination and anal tone were normal. His physical examination was otherwise normal. Laboratory workup included a complete blood count, complete metabolic panel, thyroid testing, inflammatory markers, repeat nasopharyngeal RT-PCR SARS-CoV-2 testing, and urinalysis, which were found to be unexceptional with a negative SARS-CoV-2 result on hospital day one. The patient underwent MRI of the spine as well as a lumbar puncture (LP). The MRI showed a non-enhancing T2-weighted hyperintense signal abnormality spanning from the seventh through the twelfth thoracic level consistent with acute myelitis .
CSF studies from the LP were consistent with a lymphocytic pleocytosis, normal glucose and protein levels, and electrophoresis. The patient underwent further workup to rule out other causes of transverse myelitis with CSF immunoglobulin G index, CSF-specific oligoclonal bands, aquaporin-4 antibodies, B-12 level, methylmalonic acid level, as well as a workup for HIV, other infectious diseases, autoimmune disease, connective tissue disease, and multiple sclerosis. He was diagnosed with post-infectious myelitis secondary to SARS-CoV-2 infection. Treatment was initiated with intravenous (IV) methylprednisolone and supportive care with noted improvement in bilateral lower-extremity strength. Interestingly, repeat SARS-CoV-2 testing was done on hospital day four, which returned positive. Hence, it is difficult to ascertain whether the patient demonstrated post-infectious ATM as opposed to parainfectious ATM secondary to SARS-CoV-2.