A 73-year-old lady with no history of previous trauma presented to our trauma center with a history of sudden onset pain over the right thigh after a jerk while getting up from a chair. The patient gave the history of seropositiverheumatoid arthritis and osteoporosis with compression fractures of vertebrae for which she was on disease-modulating antirheumatoid drugs and bisphosphonate (Anti-resorptive) medications. The patient also received a dose of denosumab 60mg subcutaneously 2 weeks before the incident. On admission, the radiographic examination of right femur showed complete fracture at the diaphyseal level of transverse/short oblique configuration without comminution with a medial spike and concomitant hypertrophic lateral cortex (, , ). Radiograph of the spine showed multiple osteoporotic vertebral fractures with severe kyphosis . On further inquiry, the patient gave the history of pre-existing dull aching pain over the right thigh. All these features, radiographic as well as prodromal symptoms lead to a diagnosis of atypical femoral fracture as per criteria mentioned in . Patient’s blood count analysis and metabolic profile were within normal limits. Considering, AFF have been reported to occur commonly in subtrochanteric and diaphyseal region of the femur , the patient was treated with closed intramedullary nailing (, ) and antiresorptive medications were stopped. Intraoperative and post-operative recovery was uneventful, and she was mobilized non-weight bearing with walker successfully and discharged on post-operative day 2. At 6 weeks, radiograph showed good callus formation , she was started on weight-bearingwalking. The lady was walking well until 4 months later she presented to our outpatient department with dull aching pain over left thigh. The pain increased while walking and getting up from sitting position. Radiograph of contralateral left femur revealed endosteal reaction and focal area of lateral cortex hypertrophy at the isthmic region . As per scoring system given by Min et al, the fracture on the left side is scored as – Site– 2(diaphyseal); pain– 2(Mild); contralateral– 1(Complete); radiolucent line– 1(Focal change), and the total score – 6 . She was admitted and treated with prophylactic insitu intramedullary nailing . Post-operative period was uneventful and she was mobilized full weight bearing with stick support successfully and discharged on post-operative day 1. At 6 weeks follow-up, the patient was relieved of the left-sided thigh pain and radiograph showed signs of healing (, ). Right-sided complete AFF had healed well as seen in 1 year follow-up radiograph and patient walks with stick support.