A previously healthy, fully immunized, 4-year-old boy came to the Emergency Room of the Saint Anna Hospital in Como on July 21, 2016, presenting with sudden onset weakness and poor mobility in his left arm. Two days earlier, he had an upper respiratory illness with mild fever, rhinorrhoea, and cough. Past and recent clinical histories were negative for relevant diseases. At admission, physical examination of the patient showed that the child had a temperature of 38.5 °C, a heart rate of 131/min, a respiratory rate of 18/min, 98% oxygen saturation and a blood pressure of 110/70 mmHg. Respiratory, cardiovascular, and skin examinations were normal. Neurological evaluation demonstrated that the child was alert but had a stiff neck and weakness in his left arm, which was hypotonic and areflexic. The results of cranial nerve examination, including fundoscopy, and diagnoses of the right arm and bilateral leg strength were normal.
Results from a complete blood count were in the normal range, with the exception of slightly elevated white blood cell and neutrophil counts. Serum electrolytes, coagulation factors, liver enzymes, and C-reactive protein were within the normal limits. Fine bilateral perihilar infiltration was observed on a chest X-ray to give the diagnosis of probable community-acquired pneumonia of viral aetiology.
CSF examination showed a mild increase in white blood cell count (80/mm3, 41% neutrophils) with normal glucose (60 mg/dL) and slightly elevated protein (76 gm/dL) concentrations. Cultures for bacteria were negative, and molecular biology tests for detecting viral infection were negative for herpes simplex virus 1, herpes simplex virus 2, human herpesvirus 6, EV, varicella zoster virus, adenovirus, parvovirus, cytomegalovirus, and Epstein-Barr virus. Computed tomography of the head without contrast did not show abnormalities. Intravenous ceftriaxone and acyclovir were then administered.
Despite this therapy, the child’s neurological function deteriorated rapidly. Within 24 h, the muscle weakness extended to all four limbs, which exhibited greatly reduced mobility. Due to his worsening clinical prognosis, the child was transferred to the Pediatric Intensive Care Unit (PICU) of the Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
When the child was admitted to the PICU on July 22, 2016, he was alert but was diagnosed with acute flaccid paralysis based on neurological examination. Together with the muscles of the four limbs, the respiratory muscles were also clearly involved. Moreover, a deficit of the right facial nerve with dysphagia was observed. The child required intubation and mechanical ventilation for adequate gas exchange. After 11 days, tracheotomy was performed. Nutrition was assured through percutaneous endoscopic gastrotomy.
Figure – summarizes the results of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain at admission to the PICU, 3 days and about 24 h after the onset of respiratory and neurological manifestations, respectively. A focal signal alteration was found localized in the dorsal portion of the medulla oblongata, also involving the pontine tegmentum, without enhancement or diffusion restriction. Moreover, MRI of the spinal cord showed an extensive signal alteration of the cervical and dorsal spinal cord, reported as myelitis. The signal alteration was mainly localized in the central grey matter, most likely in the anterior horns. After contrast administration, a slight enhancement in some of the caudal roots was observed, without enhancement in the spinal cord.
The presence of somatosensory-evoked potentials confirmed that only the motor pathway was affected. Acute polyradiculoneuritis was excluded because there was no albumino-cytological dissociation and no antiganglioside antibodies in the CSF. There was no evidence of paraneoplasic syndrome or inflammatory disease.
Bacterial cultures of the nasopharyngeal aspirate and the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid were negative. Molecular biology tests for detecting viral infection were negative for herpes simplex virus 1, herpes simplex virus 2, human herpesvirus 6, varicella zoster virus, adenovirus, parvovirus, cytomegalovirus and EBV, but was positive for EV. Both the respiratory samples were reanalysed for the presence of EV-D68 using single-tube real-time PCR to amplify a 116 bp fragment of the 5′ non-translated region according to the method proposed by Poelman et al. . Phylogenetic analysis based on the method used by Nix et al. verified the presence of a virus belonging to clade B3 of the EV-D68 phylogenetic tree . Sequence analysis showed that the 2016 strains were closely related to sequences of the recently described subclade B3, represented in Fig. , by four sequences obtained in China. The level of nucleotide divergence was 2.1% within B3, 5.5% between B1 and B3, and 7.3% between B2 and B3. The sequence from our Italian AFM case was closely related to Dutch AFM EV-D68 cases from 2016.
Serological analysis showed no infection with herpes simplex virus, varicella zoster virus, Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Borrelia burgdorferi, Cryptococcus neoformans, or Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
Treatment with intravenous methylprednisolone (30 mg/kg) was initiated. Plasmapheresis was conducted and intravenous immunoglobulins (1 g/kg/day) were administered during the first 3 days in the PICU. Intravenous steroid therapy was suspended after 5 days and substituted with oral prednisone (2 mg/kg/day) for 4 weeks, which was then tapered over an additional 2 weeks.
Significant weakness with reduced mobility of the four limbs and difficulty swallowing persisted with very slow regression. After 4 weeks of treatment, all the signs and symptoms of AFM were significantly reduced or disappeared, although a certain degree of weakness and tingling in the four extremities were still present. Moreover, deep tendon reflexes were generally reduced. However, as expected due to the recent onset of the disease, no muscle atrophy was observed. Moreover, the results of MRI performed about 1 month after the onset of the first neurological manifestations showed that the previously reported alterations were no longer present .