A 77-year-old female presented with slurred speech, facial weakness, and left limb numbness and was admitted into our hospital. The patient had a history of hypertension and coronary heart disease, without diabetes or smoking. The patient’s hepatic function, renal function, coagulable state, and other laboratory tests were normal. Brain MRI without contrast revealed a subacute cerebral infarction near the right side of the lateral ventricle. The patient was given supportive treatment and improved. Nonetheless, an intracranial aneurysm of the left ICA was incidentally found on cranial MR angiography (MRA). Afterward, this patient underwent a diagnostic cerebral angiography and an additional therapeutic cerebral angiography.
After the second therapeutic angiography, the patient presented with right hemiplegia and aphasia when she was resuscitated from anesthesia. Neurological examination revealed mixed aphasia, left eye gaze, reduced pupillary light reflex, loss of right muscle strength (level 0/5), a positive right Babinski sign, and lack of response to painful stimuli. At first, we suspected stroke due to the clinical findings which mimicked a left middle cerebral artery (MCA) occlusion. According to the TOAST criteria, the “stroke” symptom could be classified as large artery atherosclerosis . However, the patient’s clinical findings did not match the imaging results which showed a patent left MCA. Therefore, CIE was suggested. The patient was given 200 mg methylprednisolone QD IV, 124 mL of 20% mannitol Q8H and rehydration fluids after emergent CTA and MRI examinations. 54 h later, the patient suddenly developed a generalized tonic-clonic seizure lasting about half a minute. She achieved remission after symptomatic treatment. 72 h later, the patient’s right hemiplegia and aphasia began to improve, as the muscle strength of the right lower limb increased to 3/5 and the right upper muscle strength remained at 0–1/5. Finally, after fluid restriction dehydration, short-term corticosteroid treatment, and rehydration resuscitation, all neurologic deficits achieved complete remission on a postoperative Day 6.
The first diagnostic cerebral DSA procedure was conducted to further confirm the existence of the left intracranial ICA saccular aneurysm with a size of 6.9 × 6.0 mm, with a total of 150 mL nonionic, iso-osmolar Iodixanol (Visipaque, 320 mg I/ml, Bayer Healthcare, USA) IV. It also showed extracranial moderate stenosis (approximately 50%) in the initial segment of the left ICA. The internal carotid artery and vertebral artery angiography showed the anterior, middle, and posterior cerebral arteries. One week later, the patient underwent a second angiographic treatment for aneurysm embolization under general anesthesia. On this second procedure, the 6F intracranial support catheter (Navien, RFX072–105-08MP, EV3, America) was guided over the stenotic left ICA to the extracranial distal segment of ICA (the level of first cervical vertebra) without local artery vasospasm, stenosis, or the stasis of the contrast agent. A total of 160 mL Iodixanol was injected during the second therapeutic DSA.
After the second interventional DSA procedure, an emergent head CT angiography (CTA) scan showed the left cerebral hemisphere swelling, shallowing of the sulci, and diffuse high-density in the subarachnoid space without any cerebral artery occlusion or stenosis . 4 h later, brain MRI showed diffuse swelling in the left cortex with a normal signal on T2-weighted imaging (T2WI), fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR), and mild hyperintense on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) . 20 h later, repeat brain CT showed the resolution of left cerebral hemisphere swelling and diffuse high-density . However, 28 h later, repeat non-contrasted brain MRI showed mild gyral hyperintense in the left hemisphere on T2WI, FLAIR imaging, and DWI with a normal ADC mapping . There were no indications of acute cerebral infarction.