A 4-year-old girl from HaiNing city developed an itchy, erythematous, and annular plaque on her right face for the past 2 months. The lesion was initially tiny erythema with scale. Topical clobetasol propionate ketoconazole cream was administered for 15 days without any response. The treatment was switched to pimecrolimus and hydrocortisone butyrate cream, but the lesion became lightly tender, itchy, and transforming into a “ring” erythematous plaque. The patient attended to our clinic in December 2018. Her mother denied any previous history of trauma. A remarkable antecedent was the fact that her family feeds foxes as a source of income. Before the lesion appeared, she was in close contact with the fur of a fox for almost 1 week. The rest of her medical and family history was unremarkable.
The physical examination showed a 3 cm × 5 cm erythematous annular plaque on her right face covered with scales and crusts . Regional lymph nodes were not palpable. Direct mycological examination by lesion scraping with 10% KOH showed the presence of septate hyaline hyphae. A sample was cultured on sabouraud’s dextrose agar (SDA) at 26 °C for 2 weeks that yielded white colonies peripherally radiating, centrally raised, and powdery margins . The reverse side showed colonies with a color yellow to brown . Slides from the culture showed filamentous and spiral hyphae with a grape-like arrangement of the microconidia laterally and terminally inserting at the hyphae . Based on the morphological characteristics, the isolate was identified as T. mentagrophytes. Then molecular sequencing of the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region gene was performed. Briefly, genomic DNA extracted from the culture employing Ezup Column Fungi Genomic DNA Purification Kit (Sangong Biotech, Shanghai) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Then PCR reaction was carried out to amplify the ITS Region with the following primers: ITS1 (5′TCCGTAGGTGAACCTGCGG) and ITS4 (5′-TCCTCCGCTTATTGATATGC). Amplification was performed on a Veriti (Applied Biosystem) with following conditions: denaturation at 94 °C for 5 min, followed by 30 cycles of 94 °C for 30s, 54 °C for 30s, 72 °C for 60s, and finally an extension 72 °C for 8 min. After verified by electrophoresis on 1.0% agarose gels, the PCR-amplified product was sent to Sangon Biotech (Shanghai) for sequencing. Sequence of this isolate determined in this study was aligned with reference sequences in genbank . A comparison of the ITS (648 bp) (genbank accession number MN536486) sequence with the genbank database revealed 100% similarity with T. benhamiae reference strain ATCC42873 (genbank accession number KX092365.1). The fungal culture was finally identified as T. benhamiae. The girl was diagnosed with tinea faciei caused by T. benhamiae.
In vitro susceptibility was tested following the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) M38-A2 protocol . The minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) was determined by 100% inhibition compared with the growth control. The results revealed that all the tested drugs were susceptible to the isolate. The MIC values was 4 μg/ml for fluconazole (FLZ), 1 μg/ml for itraconazole (ITC), 0.6 μg/ml for voriconazole (VRC) and posaconazole (POS), 1 μg /ml for caspofungin (CAS), and 0.015 μg/ml for terbinafine (TRB). Oral administration of terbinafine (125 mg/day) and topical sertaconazole nitrate cream (twice daily) was initiated, significant improvement of the lesions was achieved after 4 weeks of treatment. No adverse event was reported.