A 15-year-old girl was admitted to the hospital with one month history of cough, sputum, pleuritic chest pain and progressive dyspnea. She received antibiotics without improvement and after 2 weeks her symptoms aggravated; she developed chest pain and difficulty in respiration. In her past medical history, there was no significant history of recurrent infection. On admission, the patient was well developed and nourished, afebrile (36.5°C axillary), tachycardic with a pulse rate of 120 beats/min and tachypneic with respiratory rate of 30 breaths/min. She was hypotensive with blood pressure 80/60 mmHg and orthostatic changes. Cardiovascular examination was significant for jugular venous pulsations (JVP) at 6 cm, pulsus paradoxus, pericardial friction rub, and diminished heart sounds. Pulmonary examination revealed decreased breathing sounds bilaterally with dullness to percussion at the lung base. There was moderate hepatomegaly (liver was palpable 3 cm below the costal margin) with trace bipedal pitting edema.
Hematological data showed: hemoglobin 14.5 gr/dl, platelet count 202×103/µL and WBC 19.1×103/µL with lymphocyte dominancy (77% lymphocyte, 20% neutrophil, 3% monocyte). In the peripheral blood smear, 40% lymphoblast was seen. Biochemistry showed albumin 3.5 g/dl, globulin 1.8 g/dl, and lactic acid dehydrogenase 877 U/L (normal range= 90 to 310 U/L). Liver and renal functions, coagulation screen tests and blood sugar were all within normal limits. Tests for HBsAg, anti-HCV Ab, anti-HIV Ab, and EBV anticaspid IgM were negative.
Bone marrow aspiration and trephine biopsy was hypercellular with 90% blasts, erythroid and myeloid maturation arrest and no evidence of megakaryopoiesis which were sudan black and myeloperoxidase negative. Bone marrow immunophenotypic examination was positive for CD3 and CD7, but negative for CD10, CD19, CD20, and HLA DR, in favor of T-cell type of ALL-L2.
The electrocardiogram revealed diffuse low voltage QRS complexes with sinus tachycardia at 120/min. Chest radiograph revealed bilateral pleural effusions and an enlarged cardiac silhouette, suspicious to wide mediastinum. Echocardiogram showed a large pericardial effusion with diastolic collapse of the right atrium and ventricle consistent with pericardial tamponade. Pig tail catheter was inserted in the pericardium and pericardial fluid was drained and 15 ml of serosanguineous pericardial fluid was sent for cytology which was negative for malignancy. Due to persistent pericardial effusion, pericardial window was opened and biopsy was taken from the pericardium, revealing mild chronic inflammation and fibrosis.
Diagnostic plurocentesis was done and a transudate fluid was aspirated that was negative for malignancy in cytology report. The patient was treated as a case of T-cell ALL according to Lanzkowsky protocol (4th edition, 2005). One week after starting chemotherapy, when she had taken one dose of vincristin, daunomycin, methotrexate, and corticosteroid, the patient developed severe chest pain and excessive sweating. New chest radiography showed a wide mediastinum. In spiral computed tomography (CT) of chest an anterior mediastinal mass with some enhancing area and pressure effect on the superior vena cava was detected . Trans-thoracic echocardiography showed two large masses in the right atrium and moderate tricuspid regurgitation . Right bundle branch block and non-specific ST segment elevation in electrocardiogram were detected.
Mediastinotomy was done. A huge mass in the anterior mediastinum (10×8×5 cm), with severe adhesion to the aorta, very thick pericardium and inflammation between the pericardium and myocardium and two large right atrial masses (6.2, 2.5 cm) were seen. Surgical excision of the mediastinal and right atrial masses was performed and epicardial temporary pace was fixed for prevention of arrhythmia and sudden death.
Histologic sections revealed necrotic thrombus in the right atrial lesions and chronic mediastinitis in the mediastinal mass. No evidence of malignancy was seen which was due to chemotherapy effect. All workups for thrombosis risk factors were negative including: ANA, dsDNA, ACLA, P-ANCA, C-ANCA, factor five Leiden, and thrombin 20210 mutations. The levels of C3, C4, CH50, protein C, S and anti-thrombin III were also in normal ranges.
We continued chemotherapy and the patient had no evidence of disease or cardiac problem 1.5 years after the presentation.