A 48-year-old heavy smoker male driver with Fitzpatrick skin type III referred to our clinic with a tumoral mass in the right nasal ala having appeared for 18 months .
In his past medical history, he had no skin lesions or systemic problems. Physical examination revealed a well-circumscribed, dark red, smooth, and consistent tumoral mass with dilated pore and sparse telangiectasias of 28 mm in diameter in the right nasal ala . There were no abnormal skin findings, such as redness, papulopustular lesions, and telangiectasia in other parts of the face.
The histopathologic findings of the skin lesion biopsy, performed twice over a year, were nonspecific. However, histopathological assessment of the incisional skin biopsy revealed the telangiectasia of superficial dermal vessels with perivascular infiltrate of lymphocytes and a few plasma cells. Sebaceous gland hyperplasia, perifolliculitis, and Demodex mites in pilosebaceous follicles were also noticeable .
Based on the results of immuno-histochemistry staining, S-100 and vimentin were positive and mild positive, respectively. Furthermore, CD68 was positive sparsely interstitially. The diagnosis of rhinophyma was established according to the findings of clinical, histopathologic, and immuno-histochemical staining. Thereafter, the patient was informed about the disease and suggested CO2 laser treatment for the ablation of the lesion. Before laser therapy, a horizontal section biopsy of the whole lesion was performed to rule out the superimposition of malignancy on the rhinophyma .
After obtaining written informed consent, the local injection of lidocaine with epinephrine was used as anesthesia. The lesion was subjected to CO2 laser therapy with continuous mode and power of 3 W. Several passes of laser therapy were performed until the treated area was in alignment with the normal surrounding skin. Between laser passes, the debris tissue was removed by a sharp disposable curettage .
For secondary intention, the induced defect was washed with Rivanol 1/1000, repair cream was applied, and the defect was dressed for 10-14 days. The patient was followed up for 6 months and showed the complete removal of the lesion with an excellent cosmetic outcome .