A 66-year-old man was referred to our hospital for examination of swollen mediastinal lymph nodes. He was a current smoker with no significant past medical history. Computed tomography (CT) showed swelling of the lower paratracheal lymph nodes, with a maximum diameter of 48 mm; however, there were no pulmonary lesions . EBUS-TBNA of the lymph nodes was performed with a total of 3 needle aspiration procedures under deep sedation by a well-trained bronchoscopist with 10 years’ experience in EBUS-TBNA. Prophylactic antibiotics were not administered, and there were no immediate complications. The patient was discharged without complications 1 day after the procedure . Histologic examination of the specimen detected only nonspecific inflammatory changes without any malignant or granulomatous findings.
Seven days after EBUS-TBNA, the patient experienced high fever and returned to our hospital. On admission, his symptoms included wheezing, right chest pain, and rapid breathing. The blood test results indicated infection: white cell count 9000/μL, C-reactive protein 33.58 mg/dL, and procalcitonin 50.76 ng/dL. The tumor markers, squamous cell carcinoma antigen (SCC) and cytokeratin-19 fragments (Cyfla), were elevated, being 5.2 and 3.9 ng/mL, respectively. Chest CT revealed right pleural effusion, enlargement of the lower paratracheal lymph nodes, and a multiloculated mediastinal abscess with gas production . The patient was started on intravenous broad-spectrum antibiotics, which failed to improve his condition. A chest radiograph showed enlargement of the mediastinum, increased pleural effusion, and pneumonia in the right lower lung field ; therefore, he was referred for surgical debridement and drainage along with lymph node dissection with curative intent. Nine days after EBUS-TBNA, surgery was performed via right posterolateral thoracotomy under general anesthesia. The intraoperative findings included fibrinopurulent fluid in the pleural cavity and mediastinum along with inflammatory swelling of the lymph nodes that rigidly adhered to the surrounding tissues. We decided that en bloc resection of the lymph nodes was not possible, so only a portion of these lymph nodes was biopsied. The thoracic cavity was washed with saline, and then a thoracic drain was inserted. Postoperatively, the patient remained critically ill with septic shock, and intrathoracic washing through the drain was started. Broad-spectrum antibiotics were continued as Streptococcus pneumoniae was isolated from multiple culture specimens of the debridement material. The patient’s general condition gradually improved, and he was discharged on antibiotics at 24 days post-procedure.
Pathological examination of the specimen revealed squamous cell carcinoma , and the lesion was diagnosed as a mediastinal lung cancer because there were no primary cancer lesions elsewhere in the body. Thereafter, the patient received 6 courses of chemotherapy (carboplatin and nab-paclitaxel) with concurrent radiotherapy (70 Gy/35 Fr). The SCC and Cyfla levels returned to normal after chemoradiotherapy. Partial remission of the tumor was observed, and positron emission tomography showed no fluorodeoxyglucose uptake in these lesions . The patient remains healthy without any progression of the disease 24 months after chemoradiotherapy.