In June 2010, a 49-year-old female patient with morbid obesity (174 kg, 168 cm, BMI 61.6 kg/m2) was admitted to our institution to be prepared for bariatric surgery. She denied having an eating disorder but reported insomnia, fatigue, memory impairment, and extreme skin sensitivity to sun light. Other members of her family (2 sisters, mother, and grandmother) were also affected by obesity. She started to develop obesity at age 27 when she reached the weight of 135 kg (BMI 47.8 kg/m2) during pregnancy. Her blood pressure was reported to be normal until the age of 44. Despite multiple diets, she was unable to restore normal weight. She suffered from untreated hypertension and Hashimoto's thyroiditis, which had been treated with levothyroxine (Euthyrox®; Merck GmbH, Vienna, Austria), 125 µg, since 1992. In addition, she had a levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine implant (Mirena®; Bayer Austria GmbH, Vienna, Austria) for birth control and reported regular menstrual bleeding. Apart from fat pads along the collar bone and on the back of the neck (buffalo hump) as well as a moon face with telangiectasias on the cheeks , no typical features suggestive of CS such as purple striae or hirsutism were detectable. In preparation for bariatric surgery, an endocrine check-up was routinely performed in order to exclude an endocrine cause for the obesity. The diagnosis of CS was considered when no suppression of serum cortisol was observed following an administration of 1 mg dexamethasone overnight (13 µg/dl; normal: <1.8 µg/dl). Her blood pressure was 198/116 mm Hg and subsequently normalized by a triple therapy containing candesartan in combination with hydrochlorothiazide (Blopress Plus®16/12.5 mg; Blopress® 16 mg; Takeda Pharmaceutical GmbH, Vienna, Austria) and amlodipine (Norvasc® 10 mg; Pfizer Corporation Austria GmbH, Vienna, Austria). Liddle's test was performed. After an oral administration of 0.5 mg and 2.0 mg dexamethasone every 6 h for 2 days, serum cortisol was not suppressed, exhibiting concentrations of 13.5 µg/dl and 13.8 µg/dl, respectively. Also, the urinary free cortisol did not decrease during Liddle's test . In addition, the plasma concentration of the adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) was below the limit of detection, and thus an adrenal origin of the hypercortisolism conditioned by a CS was suspected. Eventually, magnet resonance tomography (MRT) revealed an adenoma (2.2 × 1.7 cm) in the left adrenal gland. In September 2010, a laparoscopic unilateral left adrenalectomy was carried out without complications at the Department of Surgery of the General Hospital. Histology confirmed the diagnosis of an adenoma. Postoperatively, substitution with hydrocortisone (Hydrocortone® 20 mg; 2-1-0; Auden Mckenzie, Middlesex, UK) was started and the patient was transferred back to our institution. Since hypertension improved, the antihypertensive therapy was reduced to candesartan (Blopress 16 mg). The diurnal cortisol concentrations sojourned in the lower range after suspending the substitution therapy for 1 day , indicating cure of the hypercortisolism.
The patient was discharged from the hospital with a substitution therapy based on hydrocortisone (Hydrocortone 20 mg; ½-½-0) which was decreased appropriately. One month after the adrenalectomy, another low-dose dexamethasone suppression test was conducted. The basal serum cortisol concentration was 7.8 µg/dl, and the plasma ACTH concentration was 30 pg/ml. Resulting from the administration of 1 mg dexamethasone overnight, a suppression of both cortisol and ACTH was observed (0.2 µg/dl and 5 pg/ml, respectively). The antihypertensive therapy was stopped 2 months after adrenalectomy since blood pressure had normalized. Normal bone density was assessed by densitometry: the T-score was between 0.2 in the lumbar spine and 0.5 in the femoral neck. Within 6 months, the patient spontaneously lost 20 kg (BMI 55 kg/m2) and subsequently underwent a laparoscopic omega-loop gastric bypass surgery at the Department of General Surgery without complications. One year later, she weighed 83 kg (BMI 29.4 kg/m2; fig. , , ) and reported no depression or insomnia and an improvement of her quality of life. Her blood pressure ranged between low and normal (90/70 mm Hg) without medication. A body-lifting operation is planned as soon as her BMI stabilizes.