A 33-year-old Caucasian male with no significant past medical history, was referred to our center in June 2010 with refractory bilateral panuveitis of 2 years’ duration. He was being treated with fluorometholone 0.1% drops every 6 hours, tropicamide 1% every 8 hours and prednisolone 50 mg per day. Best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was counting fingers at 30cm (20/3200) in both eyes. Slit lamp examination revealed multiple large keratic precipitates (KPs) and deep anterior chamber with +1 cell reaction in both eyes. There was mild posterior subcapsular (PSC) cataract in the right eye but the crystalline lens was clear in the left eye. There were 2+ cells in the anterior vitreous in both eyes. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was 15 mmHg and 13 mmHg in the right and left eyes, respectively. Due to hazy media, details were not visible but the retina seemed attached. Systemic and laboratory evaluations for uveitis including complete blood count (CBC), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP), tuberculin skin test (PPD), angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE), urine analysis, chest X-ray, HLA-B5, HLA-B51 and HLA-B27 which had been done at another center were negative. Preliminary diagnosis was panuveitis suspecting a masquerade syndrome.
Trans-septal triamcinolone acetonide was injected in the right eye and five days later diagnostic 25-gauge pars plana vitrectomy and intravitreal triamcinolone acetate (2 mg) injection was performed in his left eye. Ten days later pars plana vitrectomy and intravitreal injection of methotrexate (400microgram/0.1ml) was performed in the right eye; at the same session, intravitreal methotrexate was also injected in the left eye. Diluted and undiluted vitreous samples were processed for cytopathology. Cytospin and cytoblock preparations of specimens from the right eye disclosed a heterogenous infiltration of cells, some with medium to large hyperchromatic nuclei and scattered ghost cells . Most of the cells were lost during immunocytochemistry but still a few large cells which were immunoreactive for CD20 were present . These cytopathologic features in the right eye were suggestive of intraocular B-cell lymphoma. Cytopathologic examination of specimens from the left vitreous revealed a heterogenous infiltration of lymphoid cells among which clusters of medium to large cells with hyperchromatic nuclei were observed . The cells were strongly immunoreactive for CD20 but not for CD3 . CD3 is a cell marker specific for T-lymphocytes and since PIOL originates mainly from B-cells, a positive immune reaction for CD3 is not seen in PIOL. The cytopathologic findings in left eye were also suggestive of intraocular B-cell lymphoma and supported the previous cytopathologic diagnosis in the fellow eye.
Neuroimaging studies and neurological consultation was performed. Brain and spinal cord MRI was negative for lymphoma. During 15 months of follow up, the patient received two injections of intravitreal methotrexate (400microgram/0.1ml) in his right eye, 3 and 5 months and one in his left eye, 4 months after surgery. At final examination, BCVA was improved to 4/10 and 3/10 in the right and left eyes respectively and intraocular inflammation was well controlled.