An 82-year-old male patient was admitted to our urology department with a retroperitoneal tumor. He received a bladder diverticulectomy at our urology department about 17 years ago . The previous medical record also revealed that he underwent gastrectomy for gastric cancer at the gastrointestinal surgery department 22 years ago and partial hepatectomy for intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma at the hepato-biliary-pancreatic surgery department 2 years ago (Additional file : Fig. S1). He received all surgeries at Gunma University Hospital. After the diverticulectomy, he has undergone clean intermittent catheterization for urinary retention. Eight months after the surgery, computed tomography (CT) revealed a high-density, unenhanced retroperitoneal mass with a smooth margin near the previous diverticulectomy site . At that time, the mass was diagnosed as a non-malignant tumor (e.g., hematoma). Follow-up CT series showed that the tumor density became low, and the size occasionally grew and shrunk .
Seventeen years after the diverticulectomy, CT revealed the enhanced tumor with an irregular margin in the same location, and the size of the tumor increased gradually over time . Tumor markers were within their respective standard ranges (prostate-specific antigen: 0.58 ng/ml, carcinoembryonic antigen: 1.9 ng/ml, carbohydrate antigen 19–9: 13 U/ml, and interleukin-2R: 532 U/ml). Cystoscopy did not show any tumor on the surface of the bladder membrane, and urine cytology did not reveal neoplastic findings. However, multiparametric magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) indicated that the tumor was malignant and had invaded the seminal vesicles and rectum . Accordingly, CT-guided percutaneous biopsy was performed and revealed that the tumor was pathologically urothelial carcinoma . Significantly, the previous surgical record revealed that part of the diverticulum with urothelial membrane had remained in the body postoperatively owing to the anatomical difficulty of complete resection, suggesting that the urothelial membrane remnant in the diverticulum developed urothelial cancer. The patient underwent two courses of neoadjuvant chemotherapy (gemcitabine and carboplatin) and subsequent pelvic exenteration with pelvic lymph node dissection. We performed combined laparoscopic transanal total mesorectal excision and open transabdominal surgery for tumor resection. The pathological diagnosis was invasive urothelial carcinoma with squamous differentiation and invasion of the seminal vesicles and rectum, pT4aN0M0, Stage IIIa . The patient is currently receiving adjuvant therapy with an immune checkpoint inhibitor (nivolumab) and has had no recurrence for 3 months.