Our patient is a 67-year-old white man, who works as a teacher in a small city. He does not smoke tobacco; he has a history of arterial hypertension grade I to II and coronary heart disease. His mother died from myocardial infarction due to occlusive coronary artery disease. He was diagnosed as having CML in 2006. The treatment was initially started with imatinib (Glivec, Novartis) 400 mg administered orally once daily. Imatinib 400 to 800 mg per day was taken for 53 months. He lost major molecular response (MMR) and imatinib therapy was replaced with dasatinib 100 mg orally administered once daily and after 6 months MMR was achieved. He was also using torasemide 20 mg orally administered once daily and metoprolol succinate 50 mg orally administered once daily. In April 2015 he developed increasing dyspnea on exertion, fatigue, and peripheral edema. He consulted his family physician, and a chest X-ray was done, confirming pleural effusion. On admission his heart rate was 97 beats per minute and blood pressure was 143/90 mmHg. Fever was not present. He presented with peripheral edema and diminished breath sounds. Pleural friction rub was present. Deformity of the spine accompanied by lower back pain was noted during neurological check-up. The pleural fluid was drawn out several times via thoracentesis (1.5 to 2 liters of exudate in total) but cytological analysis excluded malignancy, a GeneXpert® tuberculosis test of a bronchial smear was also negative, therefore, the pleural effusion was suspected to be caused by congestive heart failure. A complete blood count was normal, but his creatinine levels were elevated . Over the course of the next 4 months his general condition deteriorated as he experienced multiple recurrences of pleural effusion requiring drainage of the built-up fluid . Dasatinib therapy was stopped in September 2015 after 42 months of treatment. A coronarography was done in September 2015; it did not reveal any hemodynamically important stenosis in his coronary arteries, thereby excluding coronary artery disease. An echocardiogram showed right ventricular dilation, estimated right ventricle systolic pressure of 125 mmHg, and severe tricuspid regurgitation suggesting PH.
RHC performed on 12 October 2015 revealed severe PAH with mPAP of 53 mmHg and normal left ventricle diastolic pressure . A computed tomography scan confirmed the absence of pulmonary embolism; laboratory specific tests for HIV, rheumatoid factor, and anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA) were negative and dasatinib-induced PAH was diagnosed. The 6-minute walk test (6MWT) distance was limited to 165 m . He started PAH-targeted treatment with sildenafil 20 mg × 3 orally administered and restarted CML therapy with imatinib 400 mg orally administered daily on 19 October 2015.
His condition rapidly improved, a check-up RHC done a month later showed mPAP of 34 mmHg, decreased pulmonary vascular resistance, and increased cardiac output values . His 6MWT score was 2.1 times higher . Echocardiography done in February 2016 revealed right ventricle systolic pressure of 50 mmHg; a complete blood count and biochemistry showed no abnormalities . He has been asymptomatic since, but treatment for PAH with sildenafil is still necessary. The last hematological check-up was in January 2017, he was still on imatinib 400 mg daily and had normal complete blood count and MMR (BRA-ABL was negative).