A 42-year-old manual laborer male (right hand dominant) gave history of trivial trauma to right hand thumb with hammer 2 days before presentation. He complained of mild swelling and pain since trauma. The pain was constant dull aching in nature and with mild swelling. The patient did not have any complaints of the part before the injury. There was no history of previous trauma or infection of the said area previously. His family and personal history were insignificant. On examination, there was minimal swelling of the dorsum of thenar side with no redness or rise in temperature locally. The patient had moderate tenderness and was able to do movement of the area with difficult. No sensorimotor or vascular deficit was found distally and no obvious deformity was visible.
On imaging the right hand , an expansive lytic lesion was seen involving the entire metaphyseo-diahyseal region of the first metacarpal. There was thinning of the cortex with break in cortex continuity visible at mid diaphyseal region. There was absence of any soft-tissue involvement or periosteal reaction. Proximal and distal joints were normal and rest all the bones appeared to be normal. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed with T1, T2, and short tau inversion recovery (STIR) imaging in multiple planes (, ). It showed a T2/STIR hyperintense and T1 isointense benign osteolytic lesion involving entire of the 1st metacarpal with incomplete cortical fractures involving the shaft. The periosteum, surrounding soft tissue, and articular surfaces were normal.
With the above report in mind, we went for a biopsy of the lesion. On aspiration, a reddish tinged fluid was found. All routine blood investigations including coagulation profile were normal. A closed fixation was performed with the help of an intramedullary k-wire . The patient had minimal discomfort post-operative and a 2-week follow-up radiograph of the patient showed a well healing lesion . K-wires were removed at 3 weeks and a 4 weeks follow-up X-ray showed a healing fracture with good amount of callus formation, decrease in soft-tissue swelling and intramedullary calcification. The patient was able to mobilize his thumb with almost no pain. There were no signs of infection and the k-wire wounds healed well.