In May 2016, a 65-year old woman presented at the Department of Gastroenterology with a 1-month history of altering pattern of stool, intermittent fecal incontinence and tenesmus. There was no history of rectal bleeding. Digital rectal examination revealed a hard invasion of the anal canal.
In 2012 she had been diagnosed with a left-sided invasive lobular breast carcinoma with extensive bone metastases. Immunohistochemical staining was positive for estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) and negative for human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2-neu). The tumor cells showed a low mitotic index (5%). She was treated with denosumab and hormonal therapy: first with tamoxifen, which was later on replaced by letrozole and eventually by exemestane due to progressive bone metastases. Because of progression of the primary tumor and the fear of future wound ulceration, the patient decided to undergo a left-sided mastectomy and prophylactic contralateral mastectomy in 2013.
At the initial presentation in May 2016, complete blood count, renal and liver function tests were normal, C-reactive protein was not elevated. Cancer antigen (CA) 15.3 was elevated (98 kU/l vs. 61 kU/l 8 months earlier, ref. < 30), there was a normal value of carcinoembryogenic antigen and CA 125. Left colonoscopy showed narrowing of the anal canal due to an anorectal mass and biopsies were taken. Abdominal computerized tomography (CT) revealed thickening of the anorectal wall and the soft tissues presacral and showed a few small lymph nodes in the anterior perirectal fat tissue. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan revealed diffuse wall thickening of the rectum and anal canal and infiltration of the presacral fat tissue and rectovaginal septum, more suggestive of inflammatory changes than of tumoral pathology . Except for bone metastases, no other metastatic lesions were identified on CT scan of the thorax and the abdomen. Anatomopathology revealed that the biopsies were consistent with metastatic rectal lesions of a primary lobular breast carcinoma. The immunohistochemical staining was similar to the primary breast tumor .
Before radiotherapy could be started for this new metastasis, the patient developed colonic obstruction due to the anorectal tumor, so a colostomy had to be created laparoscopically. During laparoscopy, a tumoral implant was found on the abdominal wall, later confirmed to be a metastatic lesion as well. Afterwards local radiotherapy was given to a total radiation dose of 39 Gy in 13 sessions of 3 Gy. Five months later there was a strong increase in CA 15.3 value. New imaging revealed progressive bone metastases and a thickened stomach wall. Gastroduodenoscopy confirmed an infiltrated stomach wall at the greater curvature, but biopsies could not confirm malignancy. Everolimus, an oral mTOR-inhibitor, was associated with exemestan. Another 5 months later the patient developed ascites. Medical imaging showed mesenterial metastases and CA 15.3 value kept on increasing. Hormonal therapy was stopped and chemotherapy was initiated (6 cycles of epirubicin + cyclophosphamide), which led to an important decrease in CA 15.3 value (340–29 kU/l). She now remains alive 2 months after ending chemotherapy and 15 months after the diagnosis of anorectal metastasis.