A 69 year old lady presented 11 years ago with pain of mild to moderate severity on the right side of her abdomen. This pain was intermittent, described as 'no more than a dull ache' and associated with nausea, bloating and flatulence. She also suffered from constipation and experienced partial relief of her symptoms following defeacation. She reported worsening of her symptoms after a heavy meal, and experienced occasional bouts of steatorrhea. Physical examination revealed mild right-sided abdominal tenderness only.
Apart from the above she was a healthy lady without any co morbidity and no history of previous abdominal surgery. Initial investigations included an abdominal ultrasound scan (USS), a hepatobiliary iminodiacetic acid (HIDA) scan and an oesophago-gastro-duodenoscopy (OGD), which did not reveal any abnormality. Flexible sigmoidoscopy and colonoscopy were also unremarkable. Her pain was thought to be due to a slow transit colon and she was advised to take laxatives on a regular basis, which resulted in partial and temporary relief of her symptoms. Although her condition did not impact her lifestyle significantly, her symptoms never subsided completely and almost two years following initial presentation she underwent an endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), a cream absorption test, wheat intolerance test and a CT scan of her abdomen. All of these did not reveal any abnormality and thus irritable bowel syndrome was thought to represent best her condition. She was also advised to take antispasmodics together with various combinations of laxatives and a course of Pancrelipase (Creon) tablets for presumed pancreatic insufficiency, which resulted in only temporary relief.
An opinion of a gastroenterology consultant physician was sought, resulting in another abdominal USS and OGD, as well as a barium follow through study which were all normal and thus she continued to take symptomatic treatment.
Finally, 11 years from presentation, the patient was admitted to hospital with acute small bowel obstruction and underwent a laparotomy within 24 hours of admission after adequate fluid and electrolyte replacement. At the operation a sizable mid-ileum, obstructing tumor was revealed, that was wedge resected with adequate gross margins followed by end to end hand sewn anastomosis. The rest of the laparotomy was unremarkable with no evidence of macroscopic spread of disease.
Histopathological analysis revealed a densely crowded spindle and polygonal cell tumour showing moderate nuclear pleomorphism . No mitoses were found and the tumour spread into the mucosa and outwards into the serosa. There was no lymph nodal spread. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated positive staining for CD117 (cKit) , and negative staining for broad range cytokeratins (MNF 116), CD34, desmin, S-100 and chromogranin. Although there were no mitoses, based on the size (80 × 40 × 50 mm), the tumour was classified as a GIST of intermediate malignant potential.
The patient made an uneventful recovery and remarkably, all her previous abdominal symptoms were completely resolved. A CT scan of the chest, abdomen and pelvis performed subsequently did not reveal the presence of metastatic disease. Her case was discussed in our multidisciplinary team meeting and it was decided not to proceed with any adjuvant treatment. At one year follow up our patient was a very happy lady completely free of her abdominal symptoms.