A 56-year-old Caucasian male was first seen as an outpatient with unexplained neutrophilia but otherwise normal complete blood count. He described several years of severe, progressive, refractory, sero-negative migratory arthritis of the large joints along with occasional episodes of indigestion, abdominal pain and diarrhea. At the time of his first visit his laboratory values were significant for elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) at 52 mm/hr., C-reactive protein (CRP) at 7.1 mg/dL, and neutrophilia with white blood cell (WBC) counts at 26.0 × 103/μL. Peripheral blood smear and flow cytometry were done showing no significant abnormalities without atypical cells or blasts. He had been taking celecoxib, methylprednisolone, hydroxychloroquine, and cyclobenzaprine for his arthritis and the neutrophilia was thought to be related to his steroid regimen for arthritis and tobacco smoking. He could not remember how long he had been taking steroids, but stated it was over ‘several years’. He denied alcohol use but admitted to smoking 6 cigarettes per day. He was employed previously as a truck driver. He had a history of depression and anxiety but currently was not in counseling or treated other than cyclobenzaprine. Follow up bone marrow biopsy 2 months later was performed and flow cytometry showed a small population of kappa light chained restricted B lymphocytes but an overall normal cellular marrow with no atypical cells or blasts. At that time his WBC count was 16.0 × 103/μL. He returned 1 month later with new complaints of unintentional 7.2 kg (kg) weight loss with dysphagia. His diarrhea and abdominal pain prompted an esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) and colonoscopy. EGD showed a hiatal hernia, Schatzki ring (which was dilated to 18 mm) and normal appearing duodenum. The gastric mucosa was described to have no active or chronic gastritis seen. Colonoscopy showed hemorrhoids and sigmoid diverticulosis. The small intestine had no diagnostic pathological changes, with no active or chronic enteritis. Biopsies and blood work at that time were unremarkable. Immunohistochemical stains for helicobacter pylori were negative. Histology with periodic acid-Schiff [PAS] staining was not obtained. 7 months later he was readmitted for failure to thrive and a 20.8 kg weight loss. The physical examination was remarkable for a cachectic appearing male with II/VI holo-systolic murmur, ecchymosis on upper extremities and scattered petechiae. The remainder of the exam was unremarkable and no lymphadenopathy was detected. Serologic workup showed marked thrombocytopenia with a platelet count at 24,000 and macrocytic anemia, Hg at 7.3 g/dL with MCV (mean corpuscular volume) at 107 fL. Suspicion was high for malignancy yet a repeat bone marrow biopsy was, again, unremarkable with the exception of megakaryocytes suggesting peripheral platelet sequestration as a possible cause for the thrombocytopenia. In addition, ANA (anti-nuclear antibody), Hepatitis and HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) antibodies were negative. Carotid Doppler examination revealed bilateral stenosis and a transthoracic 2D, color echocardiogram revealed no apparent vegetations. He received transfusions of platelets and packed red blood cells (pRBCs) and after a 9 day inpatient admission was discharged with a platelet count of 27,000 and Hg of 7.5 g/dL. He was readmitted 1 month later with a change in mental status according to his roommate but in the same physical state of failure to thrive with continued neutrophilia and worsening thrombocytopenia and anemia. His platelet count was critical at 4000 and Hb was 7.8 g/dL. His WBC was 14.6 × 103/μL. He again received multiunit transfusions of platelets and pRBCs and was started on a higher dose of corticosteroids and intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) for presumed underlying autoimmune disease. Psychiatry was also consulted for repeated changes in mood throughout his hospital stay and concluded he had an anxiety disorder. One evening the patient was reported to have garbled speech and decreased right hand grip. A CT (computed tomography) of the head showed subtle hyperdensity in posterior falx and medial left parietal lobe suspicious for subarachnoid hemorrhage. Follow up magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain showed multiple extensive bilateral ischemic infarctions with areas of post ischemic infarction concerning for infarctions happening at different times. MRA (magnetic resonance angiogram) of the head and neck showed high-grade stenosis of the proximal portion of the right middle cerebral artery and total occlusion of the left internal carotid artery at its origin. These findings suggested a cardiac embolic source. Given his history of esophageal strictures a transthoracic 2D Echo was selected and demonstrated mobile echogenic vegetations on the right coronary cusp of the aortic valve, on the aortic surface and on the atrial surface of the anterior mitral leaflet near the tip. Serologies were sent for workup of culture negative endocarditis given negative blood cultures to date. After extensive workup the patient was found to have all workup negative with exception of positive Tropheryma whipplei PCR (polymerase chain reaction) in the blood. A repeat EGD was performed and small bowel biopsy showed mild villous blunting, distension of lamina propria by an infiltrate of foamy histiocytes and PAS positive disease resistant stain highlighting well shaped bacteria inclusions confirming diagnosis of WD. The macrophages in the lamina propria were negative for mycobacteria by acid fast stain. The patient was started on ceftriaxone 2GM (grams) daily for 4 weeks with trimethoprim-sulfa DS (double strength) twice daily for at least 1 year. He initially improved but steadily declined and was placed in hospice. 2 months later the hospice nurse noted mental status changes in the few days prior but assured patient remained compliant on medication. The decision was made for the patient to stay in hospice where he expired within the next week. The last platelet count 93,000 the week before his death.