An 83-year-old white British woman presented to the emergency department with a 2-day history of exertional dyspnea and chest tightness. Her past medical history included permanent atrial fibrillation, hypertension, stroke, osteoarthritis, and a previous left shoulder operation. She has no family history of sudden death or cardiovascular disease. On examination, she had bibasal crepitations with a systolic a murmur loudest at the apex.
In-patient investigations include an ECG, blood tests, and a chest X-ray. She also underwent an echocardiogram, contrast echocardiogram, coronary angiogram, and cardiovascular MRI scan in addition.
History revealed that she had been previously admitted 10 days earlier with headache, vomiting, slurred speech, and left-sided facial droop. She was also found to be dyspneic, hypertensive, hypoxic with scattered wheeze, and with bibasal crepitations at the time. Her notes revealed that a bedside echocardiogram performed during that admission showed poor ejection fraction (< 20%). Furthermore, it was clear from her notes that she was treated with intravenous diuretics and glyceryl trinitrate infusion for acute pulmonary edema. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of her head performed during the same admission confirmed acute left cerebellum infarct. The patient was subsequently treated for a cerebellar ischaemic stroke with loading dose of aspirin (300 mg), and 75 mg oral aspirin after 2 weeks. An ECG at the time showed no LVH. Her previous echocardiogram in 2015 showed mildly reduced left ventricular (LV) systolic function, thickened aortic valve, moderate tricuspid regurgitation, mild to moderate mitral regurgitation, and mild pulmonary regurgitation with dilated atria. A cardiovascular MRI scan in February 2017 at a regional tertiary center, showed severely impaired biventricular function and evidence of biatrial dilatation, plus a moderate to severe atrial scar.
An ECG performed during this admission showed atrial fibrillation, with inferolateral T wave inversion (new since February 2017), and LVH (new) .
Blood results showed elevated troponin I of 95, 89 (normal < 30 ng/L) on repeat, and elevated brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) of 1175 (normal < 99 pg/mL).
A chest X-ray showed prominent upper lobe pulmonary vessels in keeping with pulmonary vascular diversion, with interstitial thickening noted along the right base in keeping with septal edema.
An echocardiogram and contrast echocardiogram showed that her left ventricular systolic function visually appeared normal and biplane ejection fraction (EF) of 59% without contrast and 61% with contrast. Importantly, it showed marked hypertrophy of the mid to apical LV, appearance consistent with apical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. The interventricular (IV) septum measured 1.3 cm (normal 0.6–1.2 cm), and the posterior wall measured 1.0 cm (normal 0.6–1.2 cm).
Coronary angiography showed that the left coronary artery main stem has eccentric shelf-type plaque with non-flow-limiting stenosis. This was discussed with a tertiary center interventional cardiologist, and it was deemed nonsignificant to cause ischemia.
Cardiovascular MRI reported findings highly suggestive of apical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. The LV apex measurement was 12.4 cm. Our patient declined a stress perfusion scan to assess ischemic burden.
She was discharged on rivaroxaban, bisoprolol, and atorvastatin. She was also referred to the cardiomyopathy outpatient clinic. Family screening was recommended.