A 55-year-old man presented with sudden onset of dizziness, diplopia, difficulty of closing eyes, and trouble of chewing after lifting heavy goods 3 days prior to admission. He had a history of mild hypertension for 1 year with treatment of amlodipine 2.5 mg/d and poorly-controlled asthma. On examination, he showed completed bilateral horizontal gaze palsy which was uncorrected by vestibuloocular reflex. Gazed-evoked upbeat nystagmus (UBN) was observed on attempted upward gaze but not on straight-ahead gaze position. In addition, he had bilateral peripheral facial paralysis with predominance on the left. Examination on other cranial nerves, including facial sensation, taste, hearing, and pharyngeal reflex, were normal. Mild ataxia was noticed on the left upper extremity when performing finger-to-nose test. His muscle strength was 5 on four limbs and he had normal pinprick sensation and brisk tendon reflexes. Brain MRI revealed hyperintensity in right middle cerebellar peduncle and bilateral dorsal pontine tegmentum on diffusion-weighted image, indicating new infarction . No periventricular white matter lesions were observed. CT angiography of vertebrobasilar artery showed no evidence of significant stenosis . CSF examination showed normal protein level and CSF analysis for oligoclonal band, myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody, and aquaporin-4 antibody were negative. Contrast-enhanced transcranial doppler showed > 50 microbubbles during the Valsava maneuver, suggesting potential cardiac right-to-left shunt. Further transoesophageal echocardiography revealed patent foramen ovale (PFO; Fig. c) with a tunnel length of 12.6 mm. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed left atrial diameter of 32 mm and left ventricular ejection fraction of 70.4%. No left ventricle hypertrophy or atrial septal aneurysm was observed. Holter monitor examination in hospital did not capture remarkable arrhythmias, i.e. atrial flutter or atrial fibrillation. Rrivaroxaban 15 mg/d was prescribed at discharge and closure of PFO was then administrated. His symptoms relieved and follow-up MRI at 6 month showed an old infarction of the same region on T1 weighted image without other evidence of demyelination.