A 19-year-old Caucasian woman was admitted to our hospital for intense leg pain with fever and a transient rash on her lower body. With the exception of the birth control pill, she was not taking any regular medication and had no relevant past medical history, but her family history revealed several cousins with inflammatory rheumatism. She had been to Spain 3 weeks before and had stayed in an amusement park. There, she had no contact with animals with the exception of mosquito bites and her close relatives were not ill. She had last had sexual intercourse 3 years before, which was protected. Her vaccination status was unknown. Our patient had been suffering from headache, myalgia, fever, and acute severe abdominal pain for a few days. She first presented to our emergency department where an abdominal computed tomography scan was performed (no abnormalities) and blood tests were conducted (including blood cultures). She was prescribed acetaminophen and was discharged. When her symptoms persisted the next day, she returned to our emergency department. Upon admission, her temperature was 38.3 °C. She presented with tachycardia and a physical examination showed asymmetric polyarthritis affecting her major joints (knees, right ankle, and shoulder), non-specific lymphadenopathy, and a non-purpuric macular eruption of her legs and lower abdomen that resolved rapidly. Results of a neurological examination were normal and she showed no meningeal signs. Blood tests revealed a high white blood count (22 g/L with 20 g/L neutrophils), a procalcitonin concentration of 36.97 μg/L (normal range < 0.10 μg/L), and a C-reactive protein concentration of 291 mg/L (normal range 0–5 mg/L). Results from renal and liver function tests were normal. A cerebrospinal fluid analysis revealed no signs of meningitis (white blood cell (WBC) count of 4/mm3; glycorrhachia and proteinorachia were normal). Empiric antibiotic treatment with ceftriaxone was started as well as symptomatic treatment involving opioid titration.
Our patient was admitted to our infectious diseases department and then transferred to our rheumatology department. Supplementary analyses were performed and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) results were negative for hepatitis A, B, C viruses; human immunodeficiency virus; Lyme disease; syphilis; Mycoplasma pneumoniae; cytomegalovirus; Epstein–Barr virus; herpes simplex virus; chicken pox virus serologies; and chikungunya virus. PCR for parvovirus B19 was positive in the blood twice but serology showed negative results for immunoglobulin M (IgM) and positive for IgG (test controlled after 1 week). A knee fluid aspiration was performed, revealing sterile inflammatory joint liquid (WBC 18,000/mm3). PCR for parvovirus B19 was positive in the joint fluid. Autoimmune blood tests showed increased or normal complement component serum levels (C3 = 1.72 g/L, limits 0.81–1.57; CH50 > 143%, limits 70–130%; C4 = 0.32 g/L, limits 0.13–0.39 g/L), slightly positive cardiolipin antibodies (44 units/mL), and positive antinuclear antibodies (1:640). No joint damage was observed on X-ray. Finally, blood culture (the first sample drawn upon arrival) was positive for serotype C meningococcus. PCR for N. meningitidis was then positive in her joint fluid, but negative in a blood sample (performed after antibiotic treatment had begun).
Our patient evolved toward apyrexia along with a decrease in systemic inflammation markers but persistent, painful arthritis. In addition, her disease evolution was complicated by deep vein thrombosis in her left leg. We continued antibiotic treatment with ceftriaxone for a total duration of 15 days. Anticoagulation therapy was also started for the phlebitis. Analgesia was difficult to obtain and our patient needed a combination of acetaminophen, opioid, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. After 3 weeks, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs were replaced with corticotherapy at 15 mg per day for 1 month before being tapered. One month after admission, opioids were stopped. Out patient was pain free, had no arthritis, and had gone back to her daily routine. Unfortunately, corticosteroids could not be discontinued because the pain returned when our patient took <7 mg of prednisone a day. Hydroxychloroquine treatment was introduced 5 months after the onset of polyarthritis. Treatments were well tolerated.