A 68-year-old female presented to the emergency room with a 3-day history of acute abdominal pain, nausea, and emesis. She had not felt well for several weeks with poor appetite, intermittent abdominal cramping, and right flank pain. Significant comorbid conditions included hypertension and hyperlipidaemia; she was an active smoker. Medical history included abdominal hysterectomy, and as a child, she underwent lumbar surgery with resection of a right paravertebral sarcoma, for which she also received chemotherapy and radiation. No medical records for this disease were available and the patient could not give additional information. As a sequela of her treatment, she had a large bulge in her right flank with significant soft tissue swelling and telangiectatic skin. She knew about the lumbar hernia, which developed few years after her surgery, but she was never symptomatic and did not desire repair.
On examination, she was tachycardic and short of breath. Her abdomen was significantly distended and tender, and there was a large bulge noted in her right flank. Her white blood count was elevated at 14 K/microL, serum sodium (132 mEq/L) and chloride (93 mEq/L) were low, and creatinine was borderline elevated (1.7 mg/dL), reflecting dehydration. Pain control was achieved and she was resuscitated with 2 liters of normal saline while oral contrast was given. CT scan showed a large, incarcerated, posterolateral abdominal hernia with free fluid and possible free air and distended bowel loops indicative of obstruction . A nasogastric tube was placed and 1500 mL of small bowel content was evacuated and she was posted for emergency surgery.
She was placed supine and the abdomen was accessed with a 5 mm Kii Fios first entry port (Applied Medical, Rancho Santa Margarita, CA) in the left upper quadrant (LUQ). Pneumoperitoneum was established and a second 5 mm trocar was placed under visual control in the left lower quadrant (LLQ). Multiple distended small bowel loops and a distended ascending and transverse colon were visualized. Superior to the proximal transverse colon and lateral and inferior to the liver, the roof of the hernia with the hepatic flexure trapped inside was seen. The small bowel segment trapped inside the hernia was reduced and found to be hemorrhagic but there was no perforation. The small bowel was eviscerated from a 4 cm minilaparotomy using her old subumbilical midline incision, and the hemorrhagic loop did not recover and seemed unsalvageable . The small bowel distally was collapsed. The healthy segments proximal and distal to the damaged loop were aligned, hold stitches were placed, and through the enterotomies for the linear stapler, the proximal small bowel was decompressed. The anastomosis was created using a GIA-75 stapler, and the damaged small bowel loop was resected together with the common enterotomy with a second transverse staple load. Pathology confirmed extensive hemorrhagic necrosis of the mucosa extending in some areas into the muscle layer. The bowel was placed back into the abdomen, the minilaparotomy was closed, and pneumoperitoneum was reestablished. Visualization was now much improved. The anastomosis was laid in the RUQ. The hernia was noted to be large, with the hepatic flexure partially trapped in it . Decision was made not to repair the hernia at this stage due to the contamination from the damaged small bowel loop, but laparoscopic hernia closure using a mesh was planned to take place within few days.
Three days later, the patient complained of increasing abdominal distension and abdominal and right flank pain. X-ray showed increased distension of small bowel loops and recurrent incarceration of bowel was suspected. At emergency laparotomy through extension of the previous incision cranially and caudally, significantly dilated small bowel loops, transverse colon, and right hemicolon were noted. These were decompressed through the nasogastric tube but no bowel was incarcerated within the hernia. A large hematoma was found in the right flank, lateral and dorsal to the ascending colon. The white line of Toldt was opened, and a portion of the hematoma was carefully suctioned out, and a pad was placed to tamponade the retroperitoneum. No acute bleeding source was identified. The ascending and transverse colon were mobilized out of the hernia. The duodenum was kocherized and the Gerota fascia was exposed. We opted not to mobilize the right kidney due to fear that a major retroperitoneal bleed could be caused from the source that had fed the hematoma and was now tamponaded. The hernia borders could be determined but no primary closure was possible. Therefore, the defect was covered using a 20 × 20 cm BIO-A mesh (Gore, Flagstaff, AZ). The mesh was placed laterally and dorsally onto the Gerota fascia as the kidney was covering this portion of the hernia and tucked under liver segment 6. Absorbable tacks were used to secure the mesh into the anterior and lateral abdominal wall. The duodenum and right colon were placed into the created mesh pocket. A 19-Blake drain was placed on top of the mesh, next to the colon.
CT scan the next day identified a 2 cm pseudoaneurysm of a side branch of a lumbar artery as source of the hematoma . This was subsequently embolized by interventional radiology . The postoperative course was complicated by Clostridium difficile-associated colitis, but ultimately, the patient recovered fully. At 6-month follow-up, she had gained weight, had continued to refrain from smoking, and had no evidence for recurrent hernia. On CT scan, the mesh covered the previous defect and no recurrent hernia developed. Tissue changes in the area of the previous radiation were still visible, and percutaneous biopsy was recommended to exclude development of a secondary malignancy, which the patient at this time declined.