A 49-year old man presented with a right abdominal pain, peaks of fever and significant weight loss. His medical history was marked by a right WT at the age of 6 weeks, treated by right nephrectomy followed by adjuvant regional radiotherapy. The precise details on the administered radiotherapy could not be found but most of the schemes applied at this time consisted of relatively large fields to intermediate doses. The complete work-up included an abdominal CT scan and a magnetic resonance imaging showing a 100-mm mass in the right flank, invading the hepatic flexure of the right colon, the segment VI of the liver and the right psoas muscle . The tumor appeared hypervascularized on the arterial phase, displaying a wash-out on the portal phase. Colonoscopy showed a tumor invading the right colon lumen, described as from extrinsic origin. Multiple biopsies were performed during colonoscopy, showing a poorly differentiated tumor of unknown origin. Tumor markers, including CEA, CA19.9 and alpha-fetoprotein, were negative. Of note, the patients had no history of liver disease, nor of alcohol consumption, serology for hepatitis A, B and C was negative and liver imaging did not show any sign of cirrhosis. Moreover, previous abdominal CT scan performed 5 years before in the context of abdominal occlusion did not reveal any liver lesion. On this basis and in the absence of any other secondary location, an exploratory laparotomy has been planned.
At surgery, an invasive tumor at the right flank was found, involving the segment VI of the liver and the hepatic colonic flexure. No plane of dissection could be observed between the tumor and the psoas muscle. Accordingly, en bloc resection including right hemicolectomy, resection of liver segments V and VI and resection of the anterior sheet of psoas muscle has been performed . Postoperative course was uneventful and patient was discharged on postoperative day 12. Pathologic examination demonstrated a poorly differentiated HCC and a margin-free (R0) resection. Arginine-positive staining confirmed the diagnosis of HCC . Of note, the liver at distance of the tumor appeared of normal structure, without any signs of cirrhosis or other liver damage. Twenty weeks after surgery, the control CT scanner showed a multifocal recurrence. At this time, the patient was proposed for whole-liver 90Yttrium intra-arterial radioembolization.