A 3-year-old Caucasian boy presented with his mother to the emergency department complaining of pain and deformity in his right arm following an unwitnessed fall whilst playing in the garden.
There was deformity of the right forearm with a small abrasion over the proximal ulna. His peripheral pulses and capillary refill time were normal. However, the patient was upset and uncooperative and therefore the neurological status of the affected limb was impossible to assess comprehensively. There was no history of previous fractures, dislocations or any medical conditions.Initial radiographs showed diaphyseal fractures of both radius and ulna . After immobilisation, further radiographs of the elbow revealed a Bado type IV Monteggia lesion – fractures of both radius and ulna with an associated anterior dislocation of the radial head .The following day, the injury was treated with manipulation of the forearm fractures under general anaesthesia . Closed reduction of the forearm fractures was unsuccessful at reducing the radiocapitellar joint (RCJ) dislocation so a 2 cm radial incision was made over the distal radius and a 2 mm titanium elastic nail (TEN) was inserted under X-ray image intensifier (XRII) guidance across the radial fracture site. Despite successful reduction of the radial fracture, the RCJ remained dislocated . A 2 mm Kirschner wire (K-wire) was then inserted across the ulnar fracture site via the olecranon apophysis , but again the RCJ was not reducible. A decision was made to carry out an open reduction of the RCJ. A posterolateral approach revealed a radial head which had buttonholed through the capsule, associated with a ruptured annular ligament. The capsule was also found interposed within the joint and these findings explained the failed attempts at closed reduction.The interposed tissue was freed from the joint, the radial head reduced and the position confirmed using XRII. Reducing the radial head in this case required placement of two McDonald retractors along the radial neck, through the buttonhole in the capsule and then at right angles to each other (one around the radial head in the axial plane and one over the radial head proximally in the sagittal plane). Using these two levers, the radial head was brought back through the buttonhole, clearing the obstructing capsular mass from the articulation. The RCJ reduced and was then stable throughout a full range of movement. The annular ligament was reconstructed and the forearm immobilised in an above elbow cast in flexion and mid-supination .Follow-up at one week showed no change in alignment of the RCJ and no neurovascular abnormalities. In particular, there was normal posterior interosseous nerve (PIN) function with extension of all fingers at the metacarpo-phalangeal joints. He remained in cast until his six week follow-up where radiographs showed normal radiocapitellar alignment and ongoing fracture healing, at which point he was fitted with a below elbow cast. Follow-up at eight weeks showed satisfactory radiographic union and maintenance of reduction and his cast was removed . He had full range of movement at his right elbow and had wire removal from both radius and ulna under general anaesthesia 12 weeks following the injury. Follow-up at five months demonstrated full range of elbow movement and no adverse symptoms.