A 20 years old female presented to us with history of difficulty in walking since childhood and pain in both hips for last two years. She had been suffering from these problems since childhood but had not taken any definitive treatment.
On examination patient was walking with waddling gait. All hip movements were painfully restricted and extension, adduction and rotational movements were not possible. 15° and 20° flexion deformities were present on right and left sides respectively. 20° and 10° Abduction deformities were present on right side and left side respectively. 3 centimeters shortening was present on left side.
On radiological examination X-ray pelvis with both hips AP view revealed proximally migrated dysplastic head of femur with dysplastic shallow empty acetabulum. Acetabular angles on both sides were 60 degree.
Operative technique:
Preoperative planning included templating to determine position of acetabulum and required length of osteotomy. The length of subtrochantric osteotomy was determined so that it would not lengthen the leg more than 3 cm to prevent sciatic nerve stretching. All necessary investigations were done and anesthetic clearance was taken. Patient was planned for Bilateral Uncemented THA in two stages. Patient was positioned in Lateral position. Hip joint was approached by a postero-lateral incision over posterior aspect of greater trochanter curved over buttock. Exposure in such cases are challenging because of distorted anatomy. Soft tissues are contracted with tight adhesions. It should be kept in mind, that femoral neuro-vascular bundle and sciatic nerve may not be present at usual anatomic positions.
After splitting gluteus maximus, external rotators were cut to reach the hip joint. True acetabulum was identified by direct palpation and using C-ARM. Acetabulum was cleared of fibrous tissues and progressively large reamers were used to enlarge the shallow acetabulum. Using power reamer it was shaped spherical and a trial implant was used to determine the coverage of the cup. Ischial and pubic bone were exposed proximally along with tear drop to get a clear idea of available bone stock. Medial wall was sufficient to re-shape a proper Acetabulum. No structural Bone Grafting was required in Acetabular reconstruction. Appropriate diameter uncemented modular acetabular prosthesis was used. Acetabulum was stable and well seated per-op with coverage of more than 90% .
A sub trochanteric femoral osteotomy of five centimeters was done to facilitate the reduction. Osteotomized segment was vertically splitted and used to re-enforce osteotomy site as a cortical strut graft. It was stabilized with cables . Excessive ante version of femoral neck was corrected by placing the prosthesis eccentrically in the medullary canal. To facilitate the reduction the proximal femur was pulled down by thorough soft tissue release . Capsule and iliopsoas tendon were released and abductors were lengthened by pi crusting. The prosthetic joint than can be reduced without undue tension . Left hip was reconstructed using similar technique after two weeks . We used acetabular Cup (Stryker) 44mm (both side), Head (Smith Nephew) 28mm (metal, both side) and femoral Stem (Smith Nephew) Size ten on Right side and Size nine on left side.