A 37-year-old male was admitted to our hospital due to a complaint of “a sudden chest pain for 2 h.” The ECG test indicated an acute anterior ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) . Meanwhile, the myocardial injury marker assessments showed elevated troponin T [9,925 ng/l; reference range (RR): 0–14 ng/l], creatine kinase-MB (191.8 ng/ml; RR: < 4.94 ng/ml), and myoglobin (306.6 ng/ml; RR: < 72 ng/ml). We proceeded to perform a transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) test. The results revealed regional wall motion abnormalities within the middle, and lower segments of the ventricular septum and the left ventricular apex, a moderate pericardial effusion, and a 62% left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF). The differential diagnosis included evolving ACS, acute pulmonary embolism (PE), myocarditis, and pericardial diseases.
The patient had a previous medical history of chronic headaches of unclear origin for more than 20 years. He intermittently took a combination of paracetamol, caffeine, and aspirin in powder form to relieve his symptoms and denied any history of drug abuse. He underwent splenectomy and partial intestinal resection due to a fall-related ruptured spleen and intestine 20 years ago. He also underwent partial liver resection 4 years before the current events due to ruptured liver from another fall injury and was noted to be prone to skin abrasions and subcutaneous ecchymosis.
The physical examination showed that the patient had slightly protruding eyes, thin skin, increased skin elasticity, obviously exposed chest and forearm subcutaneous veins, visible subcutaneous ecchymosis on the forearm and lower limbs , and an abnormally increased mobility of the little bilateral finger metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joints . A heterozygous mutation of c.1347 + 1G > A in the COL3A1 gene was also discovered and verified using PCR and Sanger sequencing, which indicated a protein sequence splicing mutation . He was then clinically diagnosed with vEDS based on the synthesis of imaging techniques, medical history, clinical manifestations, and DNA sequence analyses.
The mentioned findings prompted an emergency selective CAG via the right radial artery, which indicated a dissection located between the proximal and middle segments of the left anterior descending (LAD) branch . The results indicated a progression of the coronary artery dissection involving the left main (LM) trunk and the left circumflex branch (LCX), which caused an LCX occlusion of the proximal segment (type 4 dissection of the LCX) with the Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) flow grade 0 during CAG. Accordingly, the patient developed hemodynamic instability and immediately underwent percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) further confirmed the coronary artery dissection and guided the revascularization process. It showed a massive intramural hematoma (IMH) from the media external to the LAD stent, with the true vascular lumen of the median LCX segment being severely deformed by the dissection and the massive media layer hematoma . During the procedure, three drug-eluting stents (DESs) were placed from the LAD to the LM (the stents were Promus PREMIER™ 2.5 mm × 38 mm, 3.5 mm × 32 mm, and 4.0 mm × 24 mm, from Boston Scientific Corporation, United States, respectively). These stents were overlapped after revascularization with another stent at the LCX (the stent was Promus PREMIER™ 2.75 mm × 20 mm, Boston Scientific Corporation, United States) and inflated (12–16 atm inflation pressure) for deployment. Finally, the results indicated that hemodynamic stability was successfully achieved, and the LCX improved to the TIMI flow grade 3 . The patient was transferred to the cardiac care unit for treatment following the procedure. Dual antiplatelet therapy with 100 mg of aspirin and 75 mg of clopidogrel was administered once daily since the subject underwent a DES implantation.
To further clarify and eliminate potential non-coronary artery disease-related problems, we proceeded to perform a postoperative chest, abdominal, and pelvic enhanced CT examination. The chest CT revealed a stent in the left anterior descending coronary artery and hemopericardium . Meanwhile, the abdominal and pelvic CT showed intestinal wall swelling, hematocele, retroperitoneal hematocele, and an iliac vascular dissection . Unfortunately, the patient suffered from a sudden cardiac arrest, and all the resuscitation attempts failed. He, unfortunately, died of sudden cardiac death (SCD) on the ninth day of the index SCAD event, before the DNA analysis results were obtained. Additionally, the bedside echocardiography showed a large amount of pericardial effusion. According to the description of the doctor on duty at that time, the patient suffered from chest tightness and hypovolemic shock, and the patient died before pericardiocentesis. We speculated that possible causes of death included left ventricular rupture or coronary artery perforation after myocardial infarction (MI), as well as SCAD, accompanied by rupture and bleeding. Because in China, an autopsy is not accepted by the majority of people, because people hope that they will be able to have a complete body after death. The same as the cases reported in our article, in which the family refused autopsy. Interestingly, there have been few reports of deaths imputed to a fatal vEDS complication (, ). Further probing showed that the patient had an unremarkable family history.