A 79-year-old female with a past medical history of decompensated left-sided heart failure which resulted from severe mitral stenosis and atrial fibrillation visited our institution for regular check-up after open-heart surgery. In 2018, she underwent mitral valve replacement for severe mitral stenosis, Cox-Maze IV procedure for longstanding atrial fibrillation, extensive LA plication, and prophylactic LA appendage ligation. Because atrial tachycardia recurred after the surgery, catheter ablation was performed on the pulmonary veins and mitral isthmus in 2018. Moreover, in 2019, repeated catheter ablation was performed for recurrent atrial tachycardia which originated from pulmonary veins. Thereafter, she felt mild shortness of breath when carrying heavy objects or walking long distance (NYHA functional class II).
She was in a dry-and-warm heart failure profile without leg oedema, jugular veinous distension, or cold extremities. Cardiac auscultation revealed a grade 2/6 systolic ejection murmur in the third left intercostal space without extra heart sounds. Electrocardiography showed a normal sinus rhythm with non-specific ST depression on precordial leads. Chest radiography revealed cardiomegaly and bilateral pulmonary arterial dilatation. Interestingly, however, laboratory findings showed a disproportionally low brain natriuretic peptide concentration of only 25.4 pg/mL. Pulmonary venous stenosis was excluded by computed tomography. Although LV systolic function was preserved (see , ), transthoracic echocardiography revealed E wave dominant transmitral flow configuration . Moreover, two continuous colour jet flows across the inter-atrial septum were incidentally observed on subxiphoid view (see , ), which was consistent with residual puncture holes at catheter ablation procedures. Of note, peak pressure gradient of the left-to-right flow was measured at 23 mmHg , suggesting the existence of severely elevated LA pressure. On the other hand, the LA was not so dilated, with a LA diameter of 38.5 mm and a LA volume of only 36 mL/m2. With regard to right ventricular function, TAPSE was measured at 13.6 mm. There was no evidence of prosthetic valve dysfunction with the mean gradient across the prosthetic valve of 6.1 mmHg, and the mitral valve area was calculated as 1.7 cm2 (see , ). By Bernoulli’s equation, systolic pulmonary arterial pressure was estimated to be 43 mmHg. To further delineate haemodynamic abnormalities, she underwent transoesophageal echocardiography. Although no abnormalities in the prosthetic valve function were found (see , ), transmitral Doppler signal showed prominent E wave of 176 cm/sec followed by rudimentary A wave of only 58 cm/sec. Of note, pulmonary venous flow signal showed a significantly blunted systolic forward flow, extremely small retrograde flow reversal during atrial contraction, and prominent diastolic flow velocities, all of which indicated significantly devastated LA reservoir function with elevated LA pressure . Three-dimensional echocardiography clearly shows two inter-atrial shunt flow, and a peak pressure gradient was measured at 36 mmHg ( and see , ). Speckle-tracking strain analysis revealed LA reservoir strain was critically impaired as 12.1% (, normal value: 36–45%). Cardiac catheter examination revealed characteristic pulmonary capillary wedge pressure waveform, which consisted of a steep ascending limb of v wave with a large peak of 17 mmHg (8 mmHg above mean pressure), consistent with a stiff LA . The pulmonary-to-systemic blood flow ratio was calculated as 1.16 by Fick’s equation.
Although she was only mildly symptomatic in her daily life, cardio-pulmonary exercise testing revealed significantly impaired exercise capacity with peak VO2 of only 11.7 mL/min/kg (48% of the expected value). Although LV end-diastolic pressure or LV diastolic capacity could not be assessed during invasive haemodynamic study, integration of the non-invasive and invasive findings led to a final diagnosis of stiff LA syndrome.
One year after discharge, she remains oligosymptomatic without experiencing heart failure hospitalization.