The patient was a 44-year-old female with atraumatic left posterior shoulder pain of 7-year duration. The patient was employed as a janitor, with movements such as lifting and reaching forward exacerbating her symptoms at work. She was left-hand dominant with no history of prior medical comorbidities and was a non-smoker. There was temporary relief, yet no permanent resolution, of symptoms with anti-inflammatory medications and exercise.
Examination of the left shoulder revealed moderate atrophy of the musculature of the supraspinatus and infraspinatus fossae. Active and passive range of motion was 150° of forward flexion, 10° of external rotation, and internal rotation limited to 20°. There was no palpable mass, tenderness, nor crepitus about the shoulder girdle.
Plain radiography of the left shoulder joint was interpreted as being normal. A non-contrast magnetic resonance image (MRI) of the shoulder revealed the presence of a lesion measuring 2.5 cm in cross-sectional diameter in proximity to the superior labrum, protruding anteriorly into the subcoracoid recess. The lesion displayed lobulated complex hypointense T1- and hyperintense T2-weighted signals ( and ). The humeral head also displayed subchondral erosive changes posterolaterally. The rotator cuff was structurally intact. A repeat MRI was obtained with infusion of intravenous gadolinium contrast dye . This showed peripheral and septal enhancement of the lesion.
Differential diagnostic considerations included a complex paralabral cyst, synovial inflammation and hypertrophy, and a possible neoplasm. A decision was made to proceed with arthroscopic biopsy of the lesion. Arthroscopically, the mass was visualized as a significant amount of red, reactive synovial tissue at the anterior aspect of the glenohumeral joint, located near the rotator interval . Basket forceps were used to obtain a biopsy. There appeared to be no abnormal tissue involving the biceps brachii tendon, subacromial space, and subdeltoid space. Histologic evaluation by an experienced musculoskeletal pathologist determined that the biopsy specimen consisted of fragments of synovial membrane with thick-walled blood vessels and scattered lymphocytes . A diagnosis of synovial hemangioma was made.
At the next office visit, the patient noted continued pain in the left shoulder with activity, and excision of the mass was recommended. Due to the risk of hemorrhage that can complicate hemangioma excision, referral was made to vascular surgery for pre-operative embolization. During angiography, the vascular surgeon identified a branch of the subclavian artery extending into the lesion. A selective angiogram of the vessel was performed revealing a radiographic blush consistent with hemangioma , which was then successfully embolized with biosphere beads.
Two weeks later, a repeat shoulder arthroscopy was performed, again demonstrating the anterior hemorrhagic synovium. This time, the anterior synovium was debrided, revealing a white consolidated soft-tissue mass at the subscapularis recess extending medially under the coracoid . A complete excision through the arthroscope was deemed not possible, and thus a limited open deltopectoral approach was performed. The lesion measuring 4 cm × 3 cm × 1 cm was excised en bloc near the coracoid base. The specimen was evaluated histologically, revealing nodules of hyaline cartilage, specifically nests of mature chondrocytes with nuclear atypia set within fibrous tissue . This was consistent with synovial chondromatosis.
The patient reported subsequent improvement in pain and range of motion following the surgery and structured physical therapy. At her 6-month office visit, she denied any pain or limitation in her shoulder.