A 25-year-old man had a car accident with severe head injury, pelvic fractures, rupture of the symphysis, partial urethral rupture and traumatic bladder perforation at the bladder dome with extension to the right bladder wall. The bladder perforation was treated with primary bladder closure, while the partial urethral rupture was treated with urethral catheterization. The patient's overall health status improved progressively, however, he developed neurogenic bladder dysfunction. Thus, a suprapubic catheter for continuous bladder drainage was necessary for 1 year. One and a half years after suprapubic catheter removal, he presented with sterile microhematuria confirmed by repeated urine examinations. Cystoscopy detected a papillary tumor at the right and posterior bladder wall with extension to the bladder base. The bladder dome was tumor-free. The tumor was removed by transurethral resection (TUR). The histologic diagnosis of nephrogenic adenoma was confirmed by two independent pathologists.
Follow-up consisted of routine urine analysis, cystoscopy and cytology every 3 months. A second TUR was performed because of histologically proven recurrence. The upper urinary tract never showed any signs of tumor spread. Microhematuria occurred again 1 year after initial presentation of the tumor. Cystoscopy now found a diffuse and progressive growing exophytic tumor with extension almost throughout the entire bladder wall . Cytology revealed malignant cells suspicious for adenocarcinoma. Further histologic examination confirmed the reappearance of the nephrogenic adenoma . However, additional focal transformation to a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma was detected . Staging procedures were negative for metastatic spread. A primary tumor origin in the gastrointestinal system was excluded. A radical cystoprostatectomy with neobladder reconstruction was performed because of the diffuse and extensive growth pattern. Final histology confirmed nephrogenic adenoma with multifocal transformation to a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma with tubular growth pattern. Postoperative tumor classification was tumor present but no invasion (pT1), multifocal, no lymph nodes involved (pN0), no metastasis M0, grade 2 (G2) and resection shows no tumor (R0). The current follow-up is 4 years and the patient remains tumor-free.