A 56-year-old man was admitted to Huantai County People’s Hospital, Shandong after experiencing syncope two to three times a day for two days. He had been suffering from a headache, dizziness, a sore throat, and hyperhidrosis and then fainted. The syncopal episodes lasted about 40 to 50 seconds each, and after he regained consciousness, he felt weak. The patient had a 3-year history of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation (AF) and had received intermittent oral amiodarone.
On admission, the patient displayed AF with an average heart rate of 72 beats/minute and blood pressure (BP) of 87/61 mmHg. Physical and neurological tests showed no obvious abnormality. Electrocardiography (ECG) indicated AF rhythm, a long RR interval, and a junctional escape rhythm; transthoracic echocardiography was normal; and a 24-hour ECG Holter monitor detected AF rhythm with the longest RR interval of 1.8 seconds. A routine blood test and measurement of electrolytes, glucose, liver, kidney, thyroid function, and high-sensitivity troponin T were all negative. Cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a thickened nasopharyngeal soft tissue and posterior pharyngeal wall, bone destruction, and narrowing of the local pharyngeal crypt and eustachian tube . The diseased region (5.8 × 2.6 × 4.1 cm) was moderately enhanced after gadopentetic acid (Gd-DTPA) injection, with unclear demarcation from the surrounding structures, which conformed to the features of a tumor. Vascular imaging of cerebral arteries showed normal blood vessel branches and diameter. However, the consultation opinion of the provincial imaging research institute was that it was a pharyngeal abscess, so the patient was given amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium. On the ninth day of admission, the patient had another syncopal episode, and ECG monitoring showed AF rhythm with the longest RR interval of 3 seconds and BP of 88/60 mmHg, so a pacemaker was implanted. Five days after the operation, the patient experienced recurrent syncopal episodes associated with a pacing rhythm caused by a slow ventricular rate of AF and BP of 80/55mmHg, and he was transferred to Qilu Hospital in Shandong. Based on the results of cranial MRI and pathological tests , NPC was diagnosed. The patient underwent six courses of chemotherapy (with cisplatin and fluorouracil) and 35 sessions of radiotherapy at Qilu Hospital, after which he remained asymptomatic except for a dry pharynx and sore throat. Two years later, he died from a massive uncontrolled hemorrhage in the nasopharynx. The timeline of his symptoms is shown in Table .