A 44-year-old Peruvian woman, who had immigrated to Japan 20 years earlier, presented with postprandial upper abdominal pain of four months duration. She was found to have a gallbladder stone, which might have been the cause of her epigastralgia. Her past medical history was unremarkable except for a left renal stone. She had been pregnant three times and given birth to three children. On physical examination, there were no remarkable findings. As to laboratory tests, levels of aspartate amino transferase (AST), alanine amino transferase (ALT), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), glutamyl transferase and total bilirubin were within normal ranges. Ultrasonography showed a few strongly echoic stones but there was no gallbladder wall thickening. Neither intra- nor extra-hepatic bile ducts were dilated. Routine preoperative computed tomography (CT) revealed a series of tortuous collateral veins at the liver hilum, irregularly surrounding the gallbladder from the neck to the fundus . The extra-hepatic portal vein was occluded at the level of the spleno-portal junction . There were no evidence of hypertrophy of the left liver, splenomegaly or ascites, suggesting that she was not cirrhotic. To check the anatomy of the biliary tract, we performed magnetic resonance imaging, which confirmed discontinuity of the common bile duct. This finding was assumed to have resulted from surrounding collateral vessels rather than a bile duct stone. Our diagnosis was symptomatic cholecystitis with CTPV. After being fully informed of her options, she provided consent to undergo surgery.
We considered SILS to be feasible because the cavernous vessels were not close to Calot’s triangle, and most ran from the middle to the left side of the hepatoduodenal ligament and liver hilum. Two distended collateral veins flowed extra-hepatically to the edge of the posterior segment of the liver. We were determined that these vessels could be sacrificed during the surgical procedure.
The operation was performed under general anesthesia, starting with a trans-umbilical incision. The peritoneal cavity was entered employing the open method, and a LAP PROTECTOR (HAKKO CO.,LTD. NAGANO,JAPAN, TM) was then inserted with EZ ACCESS (HAKKO). There were three holes, for two 5 mm ports and one 12 mm port. A flexible laparoscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan, TM) and two operating forceps were used. The pneumoperitoneum was set at 8 mmHg. Suture suspension of the gallbladder was not adopted. The courses of the cavernous vessels surrounded the neck of the gallbladder . We first approached the cystic duct, with an assistant holding the neck of the gallbladder at the ventral position. Fragile cavernous vessels were encountered in this area, such that we kept the cystic duct together with these vessels. During the entire procedure, this process caused the most bleeding. Pulling the cystic duct out together with collateral vessels, employing a silk suture, we detached the cystic duct and the neck of the gallbladder from Calot’s triangle . The cystic artery was ligated and transected near the neck of the gallbladder. After confirming the common bile duct, the cystic duct was ligated and clipped. There was bile oozing from the stump of the cystic duct, which was treated by ligation. The remaining surgical procedures were carried out with little difficulty. Hematoma was removed as extensively as possible, and no intra-peritoneal drainage was applied. Total operating time was 132 minutes and blood loss was 370 grams.
The patient was quite well postoperatively, with slightly increased AST (134 U/l), ALT (109 U/l) and ALP (188 U/l) on postoperative day 1, which decreased to 53, 78 and 181, respectively, the next day. Postoperative CT revealed that two extra-hepatic meandering vessels had been sacrificed but there were no hepatic perfusion abnormalities. She was uneventfully discharged on postoperative day 2. The liver enzymes dropped within normal ranges and she was asymptomatic on her last outpatient day of postoperative day 8.