The patient is a 76-year-old man with a history of leukocytoclastic vasculitis treated with immunosuppression therapy ten years ago and has been in remission with no medication. At that time, he presented with palpable purpuric rash on both lower limbs and had no other systemic signs of vasculitis such as abdominal pain, arthralgia, proteinuria, or decreased renal function. Skin biopsy revealed leukocytoclastic vasculitis, even though immunofluorescence staining was not performed. He was treated with oral prednisolone (20 mg per day) for two weeks, followed by oral azathioprine (25 mg per day) for six months since his skin lesions were severe and progressive. He visited the dermatology outpatient clinic with a sudden-onset purpuric rash on both lower extremities. Ten days prior to his visit, he received the second dose of the BNT162b2 mRNA COVID-19 vaccine (BioNTech-Pfizer). He had no history of COVID-19 infection or other recent respiratory, urinary or gastrointestinal disease and denied any symptoms between the first dose and the second dose of the mRNA vaccine. He was afebrile, and other vital signs were unremarkable. On physical examination, hemorrhagic papulovesicular lesions distributed on both lower legs were observed . The serum creatinine level was 1.06 mg/dL (eGFR 60 mL/min/1.73 m²), and urinalysis was not performed at that time. Skin biopsy was performed and revealed leukocytoclastic vasculitis . Oral prednisolone 20 mg per day for two weeks was prescribed, and the skin lesions began to be gradually relieved.
However, on day 30 after vaccination (second dose), diffuse abdominal pain and diarrhea were reported. On day 45 after vaccination (second dose), he was referred to the Department of Nephrology for worsening peripheral edema and was hospitalized. Vital signs were unremarkable except for a blood pressure of 140/80 mmHg. Physical examination revealed 3 + pretibial pitting edema with multiple purpuric rashes on both lower limbs.
Serum creatinine increased from 1.06 to 1.42 mg/dL (eGFR decreased from 60 to 48 mL/min/1.73 m²), and serum albumin decreased from 3.8 to 2.7 g/dl. Nephrotic-range proteinuria was observed; urinalysis showed 4 + protein, 10–19 red blood cells (RBCs)/high power field (HPF), and 10–19 white blood cells (WBCs)/HPF, and the spot urine protein/creatinine ratio (UPCR) was 9.01 mg/mg. Tests for hepatitis B surface antigen and antibodies to hepatitis C virus were negative; C3 and C4 were within normal reference ranges; tests for anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-extractable nuclear antigen antibodies, anti-neutrophil cytoplasm antibodies, and anti-glomerular basement membrane antibodies were negative. The polymerase chain reaction test for COVID-19 (nasopharyngeal swab) was negative. Renal sonography revealed normal-sized kidneys with normal parenchymal echogenicity. Table summarizes clinical information.
A kidney biopsy was performed 45 days after the second dose of vaccine. In total, 27 glomeruli were identified, 4 of which showed global sclerosis, 10 glomeruli showed cellular or fibrocellular crescents, and 2 glomeruli showed segmental sclerosis. Focal severe tubular atrophy with infiltration of mononuclear cells and fibrosis in the interstitium were observed in approximately less than 10% of the cortical area. Immunofluorescence microscopy showed predominant mesangial IgA staining with partial peripheral staining, which is compatible with IgA nephritis . Electron microscopy revealed moderate amounts of mesangial deposits with podocytes, which showed focal foot process effacement .
With the diagnosis of IgA vasculitis with nephritis presenting as nephrotic syndrome, intravenous methylprednisolone 250 mg was given for three consecutive days, followed by oral prednisolone 50 mg per day with olmesartan 40 mg daily. One week later, serum creatinine decreased to 1.04 mg/dL, the UPCR was 8.07 mg/mg, and he was discharged with continued prednisolone and olmesartan. At the 2-month follow-up, the rash and edema were much improved. Serum creatinine level was 1.03 mg/dL, and the UPCR was reduced to 1.97 mg/mg. After that, prednisolone was tapered gradually over four months. Six months after the start of the patient’s treatment, his serum creatinine level was 1.0 mg/dL, the UPCR had decreased to 1 mg/mg, and the microscopic hematuria remained. The drugs were well tolerated, with no significant adverse effects.