A 6-year-old boy was referred to our hospital due to a 9-day history of fever. On day 3 of illness, a diffuse maculopapular rash appeared. He was orally treated with cefcapene pivoxil prescribed by his family pediatrician. On admission, his weight and height were 24 kg and 124 cm, respectively. He had a temperature of 38.9 °C and had a diffuse maculopapular rash. His lips, hands, and feet were erythematous. In addition, he also developed hepatosplenomegaly and had pitting edema in his feet. There was no history or findings of conjunctival injection and cervical lymphadenopathy.
His clinical course is shown in Fig. . Blood examination revealed the following: white blood cell count of 12,800/μL (neutrophils, lymphocytes, and monocytes were 88, 9, and 3%, respectively). C-reactive protein of 5.85 mg/dL; hemoglobin level of 11.7 g/dL; and platelet count of 26.6 × 104/μL. Other blood findings were as follows: serum albumin of 2.7 g/dL, total bilirubin of 0.7 mg/dL, sodium of 131 mEq/L, potassium of 3.1 mEq/L, aspartate aminotransferase of 100 IU/L, alanine aminotransferase of 87 IU/L, lactate dehydrogenase of 613 IU/L, and ferritin of 19,740 ng/mL. His urinalysis showed leukocyturia without any bacteria (10–14 white blood cells/high power field). His chest radiograph showed normal findings. Echocardiography revealed a normal ejection fraction, but perivascular echo brightness of the coronary arteries was found.
Given that his clinical symptoms did not fulfill the diagnostic criteria for classic KD, he was diagnosed with an incomplete KD according to the American Heart Association guideline . Therefore, intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG, 2 g/kg/dose), intravenous prednisolone (PSL, 2 mg/kg/day), and oral aspirin (30 mg/kg/day) were administered on the 10th day of illness. In addition to IVIG, PSL was used for his treatments to prevent coronary artery abnormalities based on the result of RAISE study . His temperature returned to normal soon after the first IVIG therapy was completed. On the 12th day of illness, however, he showed symptoms of arthritis in both knee joints, which led to a gait disturbance. sJIA was suspected based on the appearance of arthritis and an extremely high level of serum ferritin. To distinguish KD from sJIA, serum IL-6 and IL-18 levels were examined during that time. The serum levels of IL-6 and IL-18 were extremely low and high, respectively . Given the markedly elevated serum ferritin and IL-18 levels, we suspected sJIA rather than incomplete KD. However, his rheumatoid factor and anti-nuclear antibody were negative. On the 17th day of illness, the elevated serum IL-18 level persisted (44,000 pg/mL) and his arthritis worsened. On the 18th day of illness, because skin desquamation of the fingertips occurred, he was diagnosed with incomplete KD. After the PSL treatment of 2 mg/kg/day for 11 days, PSL was tapered to 1 mg/kg/day for 5 days and then 0.5 mg/kg/day for 5 days. On the 32nd day of illness, the PSL treatment was discontinued, as his joint symptoms were markedly improved. After the aspirin treatment of 30 mg/kg/day for 5 days, aspirin of 5 mg/kg/day was discontinued after 2 months of the disease onset. On the 116th day of illness, serum IL-18 level returned to normal. At 16 months after the disease onset, he had never shown any signs of joint or skin involvement and cardiac abnormalities including coronary arteries.