A 25-year-old single lady presented with complaints of constipation, recurrent vomiting, and abdominal distension. She initially noticed her abdomen becoming distended three months prior, associated with a mild occasional colicky abdominal pain. She was hesitant to seek medical attention during the initial period due to the evolving COVID-19 pandemic. However, as the symptoms gradually progressed during the last 1 week, in addition to the increasing obstructive features, she reluctantly came to the hospital for consultation.
Upon the initial presentation, she was considered a well-built, nourished lady with no cachexia or dehydration. She was clinically stable. Physical examination revealed a distended, tense abdomen without any sign of peritonism. Blood investigations were within normal range. In view of the possibility of gynaecologic pathology, tumour markers including serum cancer antigen (CA) 125, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), were performed showing normal results. Simple abdominal radiography revealed an extensive radiopaque lesion involving the abdominopelvic region with no evidence of intestinal obstruction . A computed tomography (CT) scan reported a large 24 x 21 × 12 cm complex cystic lesion from the bladder vault, inferiorly extending up to the transverse colon superiorly. It showed a thin-walled, multiseptated cyst within itself with mural wall thickening . The surrounding fat planes appeared clean without any evidence of ascites or lymphadenopathy. A diagnosis of peritoneal hydatid cyst was made, after considering the endemic region and the CT features. She was immediately posted for emergency surgery with the diagnosis of a peritoneal hydatid cyst causing obstructive symptoms. Screening for COVID-19 was done prior to surgery by using a throat swab rapid test kit.
On laparotomy, a generous midline incision was made extending from the xiphisternum to the pubic symphysis to allow for a better surgical view and access (A). Intraoperatively, there was a huge mass occupying the entire abdominal cavity, extending from the diaphragm until the pelvis (B). In view of the inability to deliver the specimen as a whole, needle aspiration was decided. A total of 2.9 L of clear-coloured fluid content was successfully aspirated. Once collapsed, we were able to trace it as having originated from the right ovary. A gynaecologist was called in intraoperatively and a thorough examination was performed. The rest of the visualised pelvic organs, including the left ovary and the uterus, were normal. Right salpingo-oophorectomy was performed and a specimen was sent for a histopathological examination (C). Specimen of the greyish-white, multiloculated cyst was retrieved macroscopically (D). The histopathological examination was consistent with mucinous cystadenoma of the ovary . The postoperative period was uneventful, and the patient was discharged well on day 5. Upon follow-up, she was well without any complications.