A 43-year-old multiparous Iranian woman, P2L2Ab1, presented to the obstetrics and gynecology department of Valiasr Hospital, Birjand, Iran in August 2023 with progressive distension of the abdomen and hypogastric pain over the previous year that had exacerbated in the past days. The pain was consistent and nonpositional. She also complained about constipation, urinary frequency, decreased appetite, and weight loss. At the initial examination, her vital signs were within normal limits. A detailed history with emphasis on gynecological condition was taken. She said that she had regular menstrual periods. The patient had no comorbidities, and there was no significant past medical history, except an ovarian dermoid cyst diagnosed 5 years previously. Since the patient was asymptotic and the cyst was smaller than 6 cm, she was not a candidate for surgery and was recommend a consistent schedule of follow-up examinations. However, she missed the appointments for an unknown reason until becoming symptomatic. The patient’s family history was insignificant in terms of any cancers or gynecological problems.
On abdominal examination, there was a palpable abdominopelvic mass in the left lower quadrant (LLQ) and hypogastric area. The mass was firm and immobile. Speculum examination revealed healthy cervix and vagina. Blood results were normal, except severe anemia (Hb: 7.5), which was treated with blood transfusion. (After transfusion of 3 units of packed cells, the patient’s Hb increased to 13.4). Serum tumor markers were assessed and reported as follows: carcinoembryonic antigen (7.1 ng/mL), alpha-fetoprotein (1 ng/mL), human epididymis protein 4 (105 pmol/L), and cancer antigen 125 (350 U/mL) (with reference ranges for CEA, AFP, HE4, and CA-125 of < 4 ng/mL, < 8 ng/mL, < 70 pmol/L, and < 35 U/mL, respectively).
Radiography was done, in which abdominal ultrasound showed large complex cystic ovarian mass, and further assessment by contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a large, 135 × 110 × 90 mm3 complex cystic lesion with fat and calcification in the pelvis with possible infiltration to lower area of the abdomen, pointing toward a possible diagnosis of ovarian mature teratoma. It should be mentioned that high-resolution CT of the lungs was normal with no signs of metastasis.
Informed written consent was obtained, and the surgery was performed the day after admission (2 August). Total abdominal hysterectomy (TAH), bilateral salpingooophorectomy (BSO), and comprehensive staging surgery (omentectomy, appendectomy, and pelvic lymph node dissection) were performed in the standard steps [Fig. : mature cystic teratoma of the ovary with metastatic nodules (stage III)]. Intra- and postoperative periods were uneventful, and the patient was discharged from the hospital on 5 August.
Regarding our high suspicion of malignancy before the surgery, an intraoperative frozen section was performed and the specimen was sent to the histopathology laboratory. The frozen section result showed malignancy. However, the pathological subtype could not be determined. Postoperative histopathological analysis and immunohistochemistry (IHC) findings were consistent with SCC malignant transformation of the MCTO [Fig. : proliferation of atypical squamous cells with keratin pearls (positive tumor protein 63 and dermoid cyst remnants with stratified squamous)]. The immunohistochemical report of epithelial markers indicated that the malignant cells were positive for P63 and CEA was positive in few tumor cells. The cells were found to be negative for CK20 and PAX8.
The patient was referred to the Iran Mehr Oncology Center for further management. Six cycles of chemotherapy with carboplatin and paclitaxel (IV) regimen every 3–4 weeks was considered for the patient. Recently, the patient has completed her chemotherapy cycles. She responded well to the treatment and experienced an uneventful clinical course with normal tumor markers during the treatment. She is currently under follow-up for any potential complications. We sculled follow-ups every 3 months for the first 2 years and every 6 months thereafter.