A 71-year-old man with a history of TEVAR for Stanford B aortic dissection and aortic aneurysm rupture 20 months ago presented at a local medical clinic with fever over 38 °C. Laboratory findings revealed elevated infectious indicators, and he was prescribed with antibiotics. However, he presented at his primary care hospital one week later without symptomatic improvement. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography at that time identified a fistula between the esophagus (A and B) and an aortic aneurysm, and upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed an esophageal ulcer (C). Therefore, he was diagnosed with AEF after TEVAR and immediately transferred to our hospital for surgical therapy. On admission, he did not have hematemesis and was hemodynamically stable. He required emergency surgery to the control the spread of infection and prevent fatal bleeding. We planned a three-step surgical approach .
The first step of the procedure on the day of admission comprised esophagectomy via a right thoracotomy at the fourth intercostal space with the patient in the left lateral position. We cut the esophagus above the AEF and diaphragm and resected part of it that also included the AEF. Intraoperative findings revealed extensive inflammation of the mediastinal tissue and leakage of infected old blood from the aortic fistula without massive bleeding (A). We placed drains in the right thoracic cavity and the mediastinum beside the aortic fistula. The patient was then placed in the supine position and the residual esophagus was brought to the left cervical region as an esophagostomy. A feeding jejunostomy tube was then placed via a small abdominal incision. He was admitted to the surgical intensive care unit thereafter, and infection control was started by abscess draining and antibiotic administration. Gross findings of the resected esophagus showed a perforation site with a maximum diameter of 1.0 cm (B).
No bacteria were identified in blood culture; however, Klebsiella pneumonia and Prevotella melaninogenic were identified in mediastinal tissue culture. Antibiotics, abscess drainage and pleural lavage were performed, however they did not completely improve the inflammatory response after the first surgery. Therefore, we removed residual infected foci as soon as the patient’s status became stabilized. The second step of the procedure was implemented one month later to remove the thoracic aortic aneurysm and artificial stent-graft and to restore the aorta in situ with a synthetic vascular prosthesis through a left thoracotomy. The prosthesis was infiltrated with rifampicin before graft replacement to prevent repeated infection. Thereafter, the inflammatory response and the general status of the patient gradually improved under antibiotics, drainage and pleural lavage. He developed strength through postoperative rehabilitation and enteral nutrition management.
Three months after the second step, the third step addressed the esophageal defect. A narrow gastric tube fashioned by laparotomy was brought up through the ante-thoracic route, and cervical esophagogastrostomy proceeded. The patient recovered uneventfully, resumed oral intake and was discharged on postoperative day 37. The patient remains free of disease and adverse events at 24 months after completing the three-step procedure.