A 66-year-old male with epigastric pain was admitted to a practitioner. He underwent a gastroscopy with biopsy, and cancer located in the lesser curvature of the gastric cardia was found. The patient was transferred to our hospital for surgical treatment. He was in good health except for mild obesity (body mass index of 27) and a history of appendectomy. Abdominal examination revealed tenderness in the epigastric fossa. However, no palpable pulsatile mass was confirmed. There was no symptom of hypertension and heart failure. Laboratory findings were unremarkable except for high hemoglobin A1c levels as 6.7% (ranging 0–6%). Ultrasonic cardiography showed no remarkable right heart load and pulmonary hypertension.
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed an irregular ulcerated lesion with fold convergence, encroachment, and poor dispensability in the lesser curvature of the cardia, which was diagnosed as submucosal or muscular proprial infiltration by gastric cancer. Histological diagnosis revealed a moderately-to-poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. Neither varices nor portal hypertensive gastropathy was remarkable.
Enhanced CT did not reveal wall thickening of the stomach and distant metastases, but several swollen lymph nodes were observed in the right cardia. In the arterial phase, dilation of the inferior mesenteric vein (IMV) and superior rectal artery (SRA) were noted, which raised suspicions of an arterioportal communication (e.g., a fistula between the branches of the inferior mesenteric artery (IMA) and the SRA ). Furthermore, wall thickening with enhancement of rectum was observed, which was hypothesized to be an intestinal edema due to APFs or rectal cancer. Colonoscopy revealed a type 2 rectal tumor located 12 cm from the anal verge. Background mucosa did not show edematous change or ulcerative and hemorrhagic lesions . The histological diagnosis of well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma was confirmed by biopsy.
Four-dimensional CT angiography demonstrated that the tortuous and dilated IMV supplied blood flow through several fistulas including the SRA, bilateral internal iliac artery (IIA), and median sacral artery . Abdominal enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed blood inflow from branches of median sacral artery to APFs by flow void at the pelvic surface of sacrum , which did not identify a nidus, an abnormal vascular mass with an arteriovenous malformation. Selective angiography showed that SRA occupied more blood inflow to APFs in comparison with the bilateral IIA and median sacral artery . The superior mesenteric artery did not contribute to the constitution of the APFs.
These abnormal vessel communications were diagnosed as APFs which used the SRA, bilateral IIA, and median sacral artery as inflow vessels and the IMV as outflow vessel. Additionally, the synchronous double cancer was diagnosed as gastric cancer (U, Less, cT2, cN1, cM0, cStageIIA) and rectal cancer (Ra, cT3, cN0, cM0, cStageII) using the Union for International Cancer Control’s classification . We were aware of intraoperative bleeding complications due to many vessels penetrating the mesorectum from the IIA and median sacral artery in a low anterior resection. Furthermore, it was possible that occult portal hypertension due to dilated IMV resulted in a hemorrhagic tendency in gastrectomy. At a first step, we planned to perform a radiological embolization of inflow vessels to APFs except for SRA. Additionally, we determined the interval time of 1 month between the first low anterior rectal resection and the sequential gastrectomy for the purpose of decreasing portal pressure.
Fistula embolization was performed for the branches of the median sacral artery and bilateral IIA using a micro coil, gelatin sponge, and n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate . Post-treatment aortography revealed hypo-perfusion of APFs. On the day following interventional radiology (IVR), the patient underwent laparoscopic low anterior resection with D3 lymphadenectomy. We reasonably assumed that the fistula was located in mesorectum because the coil was exposed to inflow vessels on the exfoliated surface of the pelvis . Intestinal reconstruction was anastomosed with the double stapling technique without additional covering colostomy. Intraoperative blood loss was 165 g. The freshly resected specimens revealed a 68 × 38 mm of type 2 tumor without erosions or ulcer on the mucosa. Pathological findings diagnosed the rectal cancer (Ra, Type2, pT3, pN0 (0/14), pStageII) .
Abdominal CT performed on postoperative day 14 showed a small fluid collection with gas around the anastomosis, which suggested an anastomotic leakage and thrombosis, which emerged in the right branch of the portal vein and remnant IMV. After intake of warfarin for 2 weeks, thrombotic size was markedly decreased, and the diameter of portal vein diminished in size compared to its preoperative state . The 1-week fasting cured the anastomosis leakage without generating a stoma. The patient underwent total gastrectomy with a Roux-en-Y reconstruction 1 month after surgery for rectal cancer. No over-swelling of portal vein system or splenectasis was found, and blood loss was 410 g. The final gastric cancer staging was U, Less, Type3, pT3, pN1a(2/37), pStageIIB .
The postoperative course was uneventful without hemorrhagic complications, and S-1 was taken internally 1 year as adjuvant chemotherapy for gastric cancer. The patient still lives without recurrence of this cancer with APF and portal vein thrombosis 2.5 years after the aforementioned surgeries.