A 27-year-old female presented with recurrent back pain. She had history of decompression and stabilization procedure one year ago after diagnosed with spinal tuberculosis. Initially, she felt back pain that intensifies with activity and relieved with rest. She noticed that the pain begun when once she heard a crack sound on her back while trying to get up from sitting position. There was no history of numbness or tingling sensation. There were no walking problems. Other functions, including micturition and defecation, were within normal limits (, , , , ).
Approximately one year ago the patient had surgery due to tuberculosis of the spine of L1–L2 and received rifampicin, isoniazide, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol. After one and a half month, she discontinued the drugs by herself. Physical examination demonstrated surgical scar. Any other past history of medical and drug history were denied. On palpation, there were mild tenderness on L1–L2 with visual analog scale (VAS) of 3–4. She could not move her back freely due to pain. Neurological examination demonstrated unremarkable findings. Series of X-ray examinations demonstrated slight kyphotic alignment of the bone, yet a broken metal rod on both sides of the bar. The L1 and L2 vertebrae shows solid fusion mass on L1 and L2. No endplate sclerosis nor disc space narrowing. Laboratory findings, including complete blood count, C-reactive protein, kidney and liver function tests, and blood coagulation tests, were within normal limits.
The patient firstly underwent lumbotomy procedure, and the images were all confirmed with fluoroscopy X-ray. The vertebrae went debridement, and finally, the bone defect were filled with 20 millions of umbilical cord-mesenchymal stem cells (UC-MSCs) combined with hydroxyapatite in 2 cc of saline. The sample of UC-MSCs was pre-characterised human UC-MSCs at passage 4, which was isolated by the multiple harvest explant methods, cryopreserved, and stored in liquid nitrogen. The sample was obtained from Stem Cell Medical Technology Service Unit, Cipto Mangunkusumo Hospital, Jakarta, Indonesia. Cryopreserved UC-MSCs were thawed rapidly and recultured in a 25 cm2 tissue culture (T25) flasks in 10 % platelet lysate containing complete medium as previously described. At 80–90% confluence, the cells were harvested and counted .