A 69-year-old female patient with no specific past medical history, including liver disease, attended our hospital with a complaint of upper abdominal discomfort for the past 7 days. Physical examination showed mild abdominal distension and tenderness in the right lower abdomen. Blood count and biochemistry results showed an elevated total leukocyte count (20,500/cm3) and elevated C-reactive protein (12.28 mg/dL). Contrast-enhanced computed tomography of the abdomen showed PVT and mesenteric vein thrombosis (MVT) and cavernous transformation at the porta hepatis, with poor contrast area of the small bowel loops . She had no risk factors for PVT, leading to a diagnosis of idiopathic PVT. She was diagnosed with intestinal necrosis due to PVT and underwent emergency surgery. The terminal 30 cm of the ileum was discolored reddish black, indicating intestinal necrosis . The necrotic area was resected and reconstructed with a functional end-to-end anastomosis. Pathological examination of the resected specimen revealed segmental whole circumferential mucosal necrosis with congested and edematous mucosa . The results of the postoperative examinations are shown in Table . There was no sign of congenital hematologic disease (protein C/S deficiency, antithrombin III deficiency), autoimmune disease (antiphospholipid antibody syndrome), or other complications such as collagen disease or vasculitis. Postoperatively, the patient’s general condition was stable and she began rehabilitation on the second postoperative day; however, she became aware of respiratory distress and developed cardiopulmonary arrest. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was performed and spontaneous circulation was restored. Echocardiography showed compression of the left ventricle by the right ventricle, and PE was strongly suspected. The circulatory system was extremely unstable, and veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation was initiated via the right femoral artery and vein. Subsequent contrast angiography of the right and left pulmonary arteries via the right internal jugular vein revealed bilateral thrombus transillumination images . Based on these findings, a diagnosis of PE was made. In addition, lower extremity echocardiography showed deep vein thrombosis formation, mainly in the left popliteal vein. Thrombolysis was relatively contraindicated in the postoperative period, and thrombus aspiration was therefore performed as much as possible, followed by anticoagulation with heparin and switching to edoxaban on day 11 after clot retrieval. The patient subsequently recovered with no neurological damage and was discharged on day 26 after the procedure. A summary of the course of treatment after hospitalization is shown in Fig. . The patient received lower extremity echocardiography at 3 months and computed tomography scan at 5 months after discharge, and resolution of the DVT/PE and no exacerbation of PVT were confirmed.