A 47-year-old woman presented with psychomotor retardation and subtle weakness, particularly on the left side. Her speech was comprehensible but slow. No cranial nerve palsy was observed, and pupillary responses were preserved. She did not complain of headache but had an abnormal palpable, growing deformity in the frontal bone.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a bilateral parasagittal meningioma invading the SMA. Bone hyperostosis with the signal intensity of the tumor beneath the scalp was shown. The overall extension area of the tumor involved both SMA cortices, completely occluded the middle 1/3 of the superior sagittal sinus area, and burst into the covered bone . Magnetic resonance venography (MRV) was performed 1 day later to assess sinus patency. No filling signal of the sinus around the tumor area was demonstrated on MRV, indicating total sinus occlusion . Mild edema was observed around the tumor margins. All laboratory test results were normal.
A craniotomy was performed to achieve near-total tumor removal. Initially, the tumor was identified as invading the outer cortex of the bone and integrating with the dura mater. A doughnut-shaped craniotomy was performed. The island of bone with the midline tumor was carefully drilled and removed. The tumor completely penetrated the sagittal sinus at the point where it originated, and no sinus wall was identified in the tumor. No venous bleeding was observed from the incision. Internal debulking was also performed, eliminating all tumor masses in the area, including those within the invaded sagittal sinus. The left-only tumor plugged the sagittal sinuses anterior and posterior to the lesion, which was still intact, and a thin layer of the capsule was left in place to avoid eloquent cortex injury. A pericranium graft was used, and skin closure was performed. We did not perform cranioplasty immediately after tumor removal because we considered the patient to be at high risk of postoperative cerebral edema.
The patient was conscious and could follow instructions during an immediate postoperative evaluation. Motor strength decreased in the right leg, but the patient could still raise it against gravity. Conversely, the strength of all other extremities was intact. Extubation was performed after 24 hours of observation. However, the patient’s motor response slowed several hours later, although she could still communicate. Motor function progressively deteriorated until she could not raise her extremities. The following day, the patient’s motor function was completely unresponsive to external stimuli. Her eyes blinked and moved spontaneously in response to voices and commands. There were no movements of any limbs or head. The patient was reintubated to prevent airway collapse and sent for computed tomography (CT) to evaluate a possible infarction or other complications. No large infarcts are other than a moderate degree of perioperative edema were observed. A brain MRI was done a day after the patient’s clinical condition became stable, and no infarction showed in diffusion-weighted imaging. A follow-up CT did not show any hemorrhage. Pathological study revealed a meningothelial meningioma (the World Health Organization grade I).
She stayed in the intensive care unit for 1 month and had spontaneous eye-opening on voice calls or light. This process seemed static until the end of the month, when her eye responses became more frequent, and some motor twitching was observed. After 1.5 months, she was transferred back for rehabilitation at a local hospital. The first recovery was observed in the right and left legs.
The recovery process accelerated afterwards. The upper extremity function returned. In a couple of weeks, the patient progressed to ambulation, recognized more people, and began communicating faster 2.5 months after the operation. She visited a clinic and was able to walk in with slight difficulty. Her response was faster than the preoperative status. Speech fluency improved, and psychomotor retardation noticeably disappeared. After all symptoms progression and clinical improvement, the patient was diagnosed with akinetic mutism. Follow-up MRI was done at 3 months, showing minimal residual along the falx cerebri . One year after the surgery, the patient fully recovered her motor, sensory, and cognitive functions.