A 67-year-old man was hospitalized after experiencing coffee ground vomiting, tarry stools, and colic abdominal pain.
The patient had severe anemia due to active GI bleeding.
The patient experienced long-term GI hemorrhage, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and renal dysfunction.
The patient’s personal and family history was unremarkable.
He was repeatedly admitted because of active GI bleeding and hypovolemic shock. Intermittent and spontaneously stopped bleeders were difficult to detect after multiple GI endoscopy, angiography, CTA, capsule endoscopy, and 99mTc-labeled RBC scan sessions. The patient received supportive treatment each time and was discharged without any signs of rebleeding.
Blood tests showed low hemoglobin and hematocrit levels.
Initially, esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) revealed gastric ulcers and suspected Dieulafoy lesions . Furthermore, small bowel endoscopy revealed several shallow ulcers with pigmented spots in the middle part of the jejunum and proximal ileum; thus, a hemorrhage of small bowel origin was suspected . EGD also revealed a duodenal diverticulum in the third portion . However, recurrent episodes of bleeding occurred, and 99mTc-labeled RBC and colon endoscopy were performed. The 99mTc-labeled RBC scan showed radioactivity in the middle ascending colon to the hepatic flexure 17.5 h after a radiotracer injection; however, since the interval between images was 5.5 h, the intermittent intestinal bleeding could have been from the proximal to ascending colon, cecum, ileum, or jejunum . Follow-up colonoscopy revealed two outpunches with dark brown content and mild oozing in the transverse colon for which bleeding was highly suspected . The patient underwent multiple imaging examinations during this period; however, he experienced recurrent GI bleeding and was admitted to the hospital. Therefore, we believed that he should be re-admitted to enable identification of the bleeder. CTA performed soon after the bleeding episode revealed a small aortic aneurysm at the renal level in contact with the fourth portion of the duodenum . A 99mTc-labeled RBC scan was performed while the patient still had bleeding symptoms and showed active bleeding at the duodenal level in the lateral view at 19 h; other anterior views showed no significant bleeding points . Subsequent confirmation using single-photon emission CT/CT scan revealed that the aortic fistula was pumping blood into the duodenum .