A 60-year-old woman was referred to our outpatient clinic because of eye pain. She was on a long-term carbohydrate-restricted diet and had been taking hypertension medication for several years. She had no history of ophthalmic disease other than high myopia. Her most recent systolic and diastolic blood pressure values were 140–180 mmHg and 100–120 mmHg, respectively; thus, 1 mg/day of a thiazide diuretic (indapamide) was prescribed along with pravastatin sodium and amlodipine besylate. She took indapamide (1 mg) for 3 days but then stopped taking it because her eyes had begun to feel dry. The next night, she experienced dimmed vision, eye pain, and photophobia upon standing up from her bed; the following day, she visited a local ophthalmologist. Her intraocular pressure (IOP) was 26 mmHg in the right eye (OD) and 29 mmHg in the left eye (OS). She was diagnosed with angle-closure glaucoma and was prescribed topical medications, which she did not apply. As the symptoms did not improve, she subsequently visited another ophthalmologist. The IOP was 24 mmHg in OD and 25 mmHg in OS. Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada disease was suspected because of the shallow anterior chamber depth (ACD). She was referred to our department on the same day.
Her best-corrected visual acuity was 20/20 with − 9.00 D sph, − 0.75 D cyl × 20 correction in OD and 20/16 with − 8.75 D sph, − 1.25 D cyl × 150 correction in OS. The IOP measured 24 mmHg and 32 mmHg in OD and OS, respectively . Pupillary reactions were normal. Slit-lamp examination revealed no inflammation in the shallow anterior chamber of either eye. A laser flare meter showed no inflammation. The axial length and ACD measured centrally by optical coherence tomography (OCT) of the cornea/anterior segment were 26.47 mm and 1.340 mm, respectively, in OD and 26.42 mm and 1.276 mm in OS . The central corneal thickness (CCT) and lens thickness (LT) were slightly thickened without any difference between OD and OS compared to the prominently swollen ciliary body and choroid. Specifically, the CCT was 527 μm for OD and 520 μm for OS, and the LT was 4.407 mm for OD and 4.427 mm for OS . The OCT of the cornea/anterior segment revealed choroidal effusion due to the forward displacement of the lens and the edematous ciliary body . A fundus examination revealed extensive, symmetrical, bilateral choroidal effusion on the temporal side . Fluorescein angiography (FA) showed granular hyperfluorescence, tortuous vessels, vascular leakage, a nonperfusion area corresponding to the site of choroidal effusion on the temporal side, and retinal folds toward the posterior pole in both eyes , whereas indocyanine green revealed no significant findings . The macula was intact on OCT, but the choroid was significantly thickened to 342 μm in OD and 316 μm in OS . Head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed no intracranial lesions but indicated edema of the entire eyeball. In other words, T1 weighted image showed a high-signal area on the surface and in the deep layers of liquid. Fluid had accumulated symmetrically on the sclera, with a high signal on both temporal sides. T2 weighted image showed a small amount of fluid accumulated in the sub-Tenon’s space; a small amount of edema was suspected around the optic nerve head . Blood tests revealed no inflammation or electrolyte abnormality and no evidence of any infectious diseases or autoantibodies.
Based on the above findings, we considered the possibility that edema of the ciliary body may have mainly contributed to the forward displacement of the lens. Administration of 0.5% tropicamide and 0.5% phenylephrine hydrochloride (Mydrin-P; Santen, Osaka, Japan) drops and 1% betamethasone three times per day was initiated; by the second day of treatment, the IOP had decreased to 14 mmHg and 15 mmHg in OD and OS, respectively. After 3 days of treatment, the ACD gradually deepened to more than 2.0 mm, and the IOP normalized . One week after the start of treatment, the CCT improved to 506 μm for OD and 503 μm for OS, and the LT improved to 4.259 mm for OD and 4.287 mm for OS . Meanwhile, the bilateral choroidal effusion on the inferotemporal side disappeared . The eye pain resolved, as did the other optical symptoms. On the seventh day of treatment, myopia was reduced to 20/20 with − 7.50 D sph in OD and 20/20 with − 6.75 D sph, − 0.75 D cyl × 120 correction in OS, and the patient was discharged. After 2.5 months, follow-up FA revealed that the vascular leakage and peripheral granular hyperfluorescence had improved, and no area of nonperfusion was observed . These findings suggest that vasodilation and circulatory deficiency were reversibly improved. The choroid returned to its normal thickness of 142 μm for OD and 136 μm for OS, as did other segments .