A 35-year-old Thai man was diagnosed as having CML in the chronic phase in February 2016 during his annual checkup at a primary hospital; the diagnosis was confirmed with a cytogenetic study, which demonstrated 46,XY,t(9;22) and was positive for the BCR-ABL fusion gene. He was therefore referred to our hospital in July 2016 to receive definitive treatment of 400 mg/day of imatinib. After receiving imatinib, his treatment response was monitored by a real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RQ-PCR) for the BCR-ABL gene using the international scale (IS) method. The results showed an optimal response was achieved at 3 and 6 months, according to the 2013 European LeukemiaNet recommendations, with RQ-PCRs for the BCR-ABL gene (IS unit) of 1.527% and 0.896%, respectively . During the treatment, he showed good compliance, and he did not use any herbs or other medications. He denied a family history with hematologic malignancies and he had no psychological problems.
In February 2017, however, he was admitted to our hospital with fever and severe pain in both knees and ankles of 5 days’ duration. A physical examination showed symmetrical oligoarthritis in his knees and ankles. A complete blood count (CBC) revealed hemoglobin (Hb) of 6.5 g/dL, hematocrit (Hct) of 20.3%, a WBC count of 16.9 × 109/L (49% neutrophils, 42% lymphocytes, 1% monocytes, 1% basophils, and 7% myeloblasts), and a platelet count of 16 × 109/L. A synovial fluid analysis of his right knee showed a clear, colorless fluid with an absence of crystals and a WBC count of 180 cells/L, with 65% neutrophils, 32% lymphocytes, and 3% blasts. A synovial fluid culture and hemoculture yielded no growth. A bone scintigraphy revealed: a symmetrical blood flow to both ankles; a symmetrical soft-tissue uptake at the knees and ankles, with a prominent early bone uptake; and a symmetrical increased uptake at the mandible, bilateral proximal humeri, both elbows, both forearms, the bilateral femoral heads, the trochanteric region of both femora, the left femoral shaft, the distal femora, the proximal tibiae, the bilateral tibial shafts, and both distal tibiae, all of which favored a bone marrow expansion which might have been related to a leukemic infiltration . The real-time quantitative-polymerase chain reaction (RQ-PCR) for BCR-ABL/ABL (IS unit) had increased to 21.26%. Testing for mutations in the BCR-ABL gene showed a negative result. A bone marrow aspiration revealed 10% myeloblasts. CML blast phase was established due to the highly suspicious evidence of extramedullary blasts at multiple bones and joints. Induction therapy with a 7 + 3 induction regimen (200 mg of cytarabine administered intravenously on days 1–7, plus 15 mg of idarubicin administered intravenously on days 1–3) was prescribed in conjunction with 600 mg of imatinib once daily before switching to 140 mg of dasatinib. His clinical symptoms, including joint pain and fever, improved, and he achieved a complete hematological remission, confirmed by a bone marrow study, 4 weeks after the induction therapy. Unfortunately, he developed dyspnea on exertion after dasatinib treatment for a month, and pleural effusion with pulmonary hypertension were suspected from the dasatinib. We therefore decided to permanently stop administering the medication.
A month later, in November 2017, he presented to our hospital with severe headaches of 1 week’s duration, a low-grade fever, nausea, vomiting, and polyuria. A physical examination revealed hepatosplenomegaly without an abnormal neurological finding. A CBC revealed Hb of 12.8 g/dL, Hct of 39.1%, a WBC count of 20.8 × 109/L (87.1% neutrophils, 9.1% lymphocytes, 2.6% monocytes, 0.7% eosinophils, 0.5% basophils, and no blasts), and a platelet count of 282 × 109/L. A computed tomography (CT) scan of his brain (non-contrast) showed several osteolytic lesions with soft tissue formation at the skull, skull base, and mandible, without intracranial lesions . A film bone survey demonstrated moth-eaten osteolytic bony destruction scattered diffusely on the pelvic bone, skull, spine, and both femurs . His laboratory chemistry revealed serum blood urea nitrogen (BUN) of 64.8 mg/dL, creatinine (Cr) of 4.1 mg/dL, albumin of 4 g/dL, globulin of 4.3 g/dL, total calcium of 17.8 mg/dL, serum parathyroid hormone (PTH) of 9.82 pg/mL (normal 15–65 pg/mL), 25-hydroxyvitamin D of 50.64 ng/mL (normal ≥ 30 ng/mL), and uric acid of 17.4 mg/dL; all other laboratory results were normal. The serum 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D and PTH-related protein (PTHrP) levels were not available as the relevant tests were not routinely provided by our hospital at that time. A bone marrow aspiration showed multiple stages of the myeloid series with 7% myeloblasts. He was treated with intravenously administered hydration (200 mL/hour of 0.9% normal saline), calcitonin (300 μg administered intravenously every 6 hours for 3 days), and imatinib (600 mg/day). However, as there was a minimal response in his high serum calcium level, we decided to add 20 mg/day of intravenously administered dexamethasone on day 8 of admission. His severe headache symptom improved gradually, and the serum calcium level decreased dramatically to the normal range within a few days. He was then discharged with a serum calcium level of 7.6 mg/dL on day 15 of admission. His hypercalcemic treatment and outcomes are illustrated at Fig. . After that, he was lost to follow-up and died a few weeks after discharge at his home with unknown cause of death. A timeline table of our patient is provided in Additional file .