The patient was a 68-year-old Japanese male, being followed up for interstitial pneumonia (IP) and got medication of nintedanib. He had undergone endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) for GC in another hospital 26 years ago. That tumor had been located in antrum, 5 × 5 mm in size, limited invasion into mucosa (T1a), and no lymphovascular invasion. Follow-up surveillance for that GC had been finished. He had other history of diabetes mellites, urinary stone, and chronic urticaria, and he got medication of omalizumab for chronic urticaria. At the time of routine follow-up for IP, computed tomography (CT) revealed a single swelling nodule in the area of No.8a LN. This swelling had not observed six months earlier. Positron emission tomography (PET) showed that 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) was taken up by this nodule (SUV max: 4.2), and it was suggested to be a malignant tumor. There was no nodule taking FDG except this tumor. The tumor was in contact with pancreas and close proximity to right gastric artery or CHA . Endoscopic ultra-sound (EUS) showed no cancer site in pancreas or bile duct, and EUS guided fine needle aspiration revealed that this nodule was adenocarcinoma suggestive of metastasis from gastrointestinal tract, but multiple diagnostic modalities, including CT, FDG-PET, ultrasonography, upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy did not detect any primary cancer. The level of cancer marker CEA and CA19-9 was not elevated. The level of CA125 was elevated (47.3 U/ml), but elevation of CA125 had been observed since the initial visit of IP, a year before resection. We concluded that this tumor might be the metastasis of GC 26 years ago and decided to perform radical resection of this tumor for accurate diagnosis and curative treatment as well.
We performed metastatic LN resection laparoscopically. Five ports were placed according to the standard laparoscopic distal gastrectomy, but arranged the 12-mm port on the surgeon’s right hand headward than usual . The intraoperative findings showed that the tumor was contact with pancreas, and it involved both right gastric artery and vein (RGAV) . We carefully separated the tumor from pancreas, and dissected RGAV. The tumor was dissected successfully with preserving the left gastric artery and vein, taking care not to damage the tumor capsule. No other swelling LN was detected during the operation. Operation time was 4 h and 13 min, and the amount of blood loss was very minimal. Amylase level of drainage fluid was not elevated in postoperative day (POD) 1. The patient was discharged on POD 10 without any postoperative complication.
The histopathological findings indicated that the tumor was 40 × 35 mm in size, encapsulated LN that was composed of poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma cells potentially originated from gastrointestinal cells . Immunostaining was positive for carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9), caudal-related homeobox transcription factor 2 (CDX2), cytokeratin 7 (CK7), and special AT-rich sequence-binding protein 2 (SATB2), negative for chromogranin A, synaptophysin, GATA binding protein 3 (GATA3), mucin 5AC (MUC5AC), somatostatin receptor 2 (SSTR2), cytokeratin 20 (CK20), thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), and calretinin . A specimen of GC resected 26 years ago was retrieved from another hospital and examined for histology, and found to be well-differentiated adenocarcinoma, which was clearly different from the histology of the LN in the present case . Therefore, the single enlarged LN along the CHA was diagnosed as CUP. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and CT, which was performed 2 and 6 months after discharge, did not show any malignant findings including the recurrence.