We present a 52-year-old man with no prior medical conditions and no regular prescription or over the counter medication. He initially presented to our general surgery department with diffuse abdominal pain, obstipation and a history of weight loss of 8 kg over eight months.
Three weeks before admission, the patient had consulted a pulmonologist because of a chronic cough. A chest X-ray and spirometry had been unremarkable, and a short course of inhaler therapy with salmeterol and fluticasone propionate resulted in complete resolution of symptoms.
On admission, blood tests showed a raised CRP (96.1 mg/l), a mild leucocytosis (13.85 × 103/mcl) and normochromic normocytic anaemia (Hb 13.7 g/dl). Empiric antibiotic therapy was started with cefuroxime and metronidazole. Coloscopy was performed, which was unremarkable. A computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen was performed, which showed pathologically enlarged retroperitoneal lymph nodes and ascites.
The patient was transferred to our oncological department on suspicion of lymphoma for further evaluation of the findings when he developed sudden-onset dyspnoea with a respiratory alkalosis (pH 7.48, pO2 56 mmHg, pCO2 25 mmHg, BE -3,3). An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed new onset negative T-waves in V1–V3 .
Echocardiography revealed a massively dilated right ventricle with reduced right ventricular function (TAPSE 1.5 cm) and an estimated systolic pulmonary artery pressure of 70 mmHg .
A computed tomography pulmonary angiogram (CTPA) was performed, which showed no signs of PAE or deep vein thrombosis (DVT), but small areas of ground-glass densities throughout both lungs and bilateral pleural effusions .
Laboratory tests showed a substantially increased NT-pro-BNP (17,126 pg/ml) when compared to the base value on admission (557.8 pg/ml) and a positive D-dimer (11.6 mg/l). Serum high-sensitivity troponin I (hsTnI) was modestly raised (123.2 pg/ml) but remained stable in subsequent controls.
Subsequently, the patient's oxygen demand increased to 8 l/min, and echocardiography continued to show right ventricular strain. Due to the patient's presentation and the sudden onset of symptoms, but again there were no signs of pulmonary artery obstruction. Moreover, there was no progression of the other pulmonary findings .
Perfusion/ventilation scintigraphy was performed, which showed diffuse subtle perfusion defects throughout both lungs, compatible with mild bronchial obstruction rather than PAE .
A diagnostic thoracocentesis to determine the cause of the pleural effusion showed a haemorrhagic exudate with 10,000/3 erythrocytes, 1819/3 leukocytes and 80% uncharacteristic mononuclear cells. A gram stain was negative.
The differential blood count and immunofixation showed no relevant or specific findings (total protein 64 g/l, IgA < 7 mg/dl, IgG 1560 mg/dl, IgM 104 mg/dl, haptoglobin 314 mg/dl, B2-MG 2530 mcg/l). ANA-and ANCA-screening was negative. T-PSA (1.88 ng/ml), CEA (3.3 ng/ml) and CA 19-9 (8.8 U/ml) were within the normal range. CRP was falling under empiric antibiotic therapy (CRP 17.6 mg/l).
The patient remained dependent on supplemental oxygen.
BNP and hsTnI showed a downward trend on the third day since symptom onset (NT-proBNP 557.8 pg/ml; hsTnI 20.4 mg/dl).
Subsequently, the patient developed flank pain, and sonography showed hydronephrosis due to obstruction of the ureter by the massive retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy. The patient had to be transferred to an external urology department. Shortly after the transfer, the patient suffered an asystolic cardiac arrest and died despite resuscitation efforts and.
The autopsy showed massive retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy due to disseminated infiltration with poorly differentiated lymphoreticular carcinoma tissue, concordant with infiltrative lymphangitis. In correlation with this finding, the lungs showed substantial angio-invasive tumour infiltration with poorly differentiated carcinoma tissue of the peripheral microvasculature . Notably, no embolic material was found in any proximal pulmonary arteries. An immunomorphological examination could not identify a primary tumour. There was no other organ involvement. Specifically, the pancreas, the gastrointestinal system, the biliary system, the prostate and the bladder were free from malignancy.
In conclusion, the pathological diagnosis was a carcinoma with unknown primary (CUP), with angio-invasion of carcinoma cells into the lung and the retroperitoneal lymph nodes, corresponding with tumour micro embolization and lymphangitis carcinomatosa.