A 72-year-old woman presented with 4 weeks of progressive, non-fluctuating, proximal muscle weakness and myalgia, after an acute manifestation of dysarthria. She complained of prominent fatigue and difficulty climbing stairs without assistance. In the family history no neurological disorders were reported. On physical examination, the patient had a moderate bilateral ptosis with positive test of eyelid fatigability, and a proximally accentuated muscle weakness in all extremities (grade 4/5 MRC in arm abductors, elbow extensors and hip flexors). Serological examination showed normal creatine kinase levels (70 U/l). Brain MRI presented no signs of cerebrovascular etiology of the acutely manifested dysarthria. Needle-EMG showed marked, pathological spontaneous activity (fibrillations and positive sharp waves) with complex, repetitive, pseudomyotonic discharges. In addition, muscle ultrasound revealed increased muscle echogenicity with prominent vascularization, suggestive of an active inflammatory myopathy. No decrement on 3Hz repetitive nerve stimulation was noted. A right deltoid muscle biopsy demonstrated endomysial CD68-immunoreactive giant cells and macrophages , leading to the diagnosis of a granulomatous myositis (GrM). Furthermore, immunoassay analysis showed a high titer of AChR-Ab (142 nmol/l) and positive results for titin-Ab and RyR-Ab. No MuSK-Ab or other myositis-associated autoantibodies were detected. Malignancy screening, including chest CT, revealed a mediastinal mass suggestive of thymoma. In the chest CT scan, no pulmonary or mediastinal evidence of sarcoidosis was noted; additionally, the serum concentrations of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) and soluble IL2 receptor (sIL2R) were normal. A video-assisted thoracoscopic thymectomy was performed, and pathological analysis disclosed a type AB, noninvasive (Masaoka stage I) thymoma. The patient was respectively diagnosed with thymoma-associated MG and GrM, and treatment with pyridostigmine, prednisone (initially 20 mg/d, increased to 60 mg/d after a week, and gradually tapered over 3 months), and azathioprine (75 mg/d) was initiated. Under the combined treatment regime, a marked improvement of her muscle strength was noted, with complete clinical remission after 3 months. Corresponding with this marked clinical improvement, repeated immunoassay analyses showed a progressive decline of AChR-Ab titer (23 nmol/l after 1 month, 7.55 nmol/l at 3 months), normalization of titin-Ab (negative at 3 months) and decline of RyR-Ab (lower reactivity in the immunoassay at 3 months).