A 42-year-old male patient was hospitalized with hematuria and high white blood cell counts. Physical examination revealed that he had a pale complexion, scattered petechiae and ecchymosis on his skin, and sternal tenderness.
Routine blood tests showed WBC 117.14 × 109/l, hemoglobin (Hb) 68 g/l, platelets (PLT) 23 × 109/l and lactic dehydrogenase (LDH) 320 IU/l. Routine urine tests were positive for urinary protein and urinary red blood cells, and the red blood cell count was 143.6/ul. Among the coagulation parameters, prothrombin time (PT) and activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) were within the normal range, D2 dimers were elevated to 18 mg/l, and a plasma protamine paracoagulation test was positive. A fecal occult blood test was positive too.
There was no abnormality in pulmonary computed tomography (CT) examination (no fluid and no infection). The sonographic findings from superficial lymph nodes showed no abnormality. Abdominal ultrasound examination showed liver cysts and kidney stones (diameter: 0.7 to 1.0 cm). Cardiac ultrasonography was normal.
A bone marrow histological evaluation showed that bone marrow hyperplasia was extremely active. Granulocytes accounted for 99% of the material and, among them, promyelocytes accounted for 91.5%. The cell body was of a different size, containing much cytoplasm and few A particles (also known as azurophilic granules). The nuclear distortion was obvious, typically of butterfly or dumbbell shape. The peroxidase (POX)-positive staining rate was 100%. According to the French-American-British (FAB) criteria, this case was classified as APL with hypogranular variant morphology (M3v) . A peripheral blood smear indicated that myeloblasts accounted for 6% and promyelocytes accounted for 92%, and the morphology was similar to what was seen in the bone marrow smear. Flow cytometry detected that the abnormal bone marrow cell population accounted for 93.6%. These abnormal bone marrow cells were positive for CD45, CD117, CD13/CD33, CD64, CD38, MPO, CD34, HLA-DR, CD2, CD4 and CD19 expression, which suggested that this case consisted of AML (B cells+ and T cells+). Fluorescence in situ by hybridization (FISH) detection showed that the fusion gene PML/RARα accounted for 94%. PCR experiments were bcr-3 subtype PML/RARα-positive and FLT3-ITD-positive and the WT1 count was 58.8% .
The chromosome analysis displayed: 44,XY, t(15;17)(q22;q21), -1,-8 [1]/ 46,XY, t(15;17)(q22;q21) [6]/46,XY [3]. Apart from the typical translocation t(15; 17)(q22;q21), which was the main abnormality in APL, one additional abnormal subclone consisted of loss of a single chromosome on chromosomes 1 and 8 respectively . This patient was diagnosed as presenting APL with hypogranular variant morphology (M3v), short (bcr-3) subtype and FLT3-ITD mutation, and was WT1-positive.
The initial treatment for this patient comprised hydroxycarbamide, low-dose cytarabine and arsenic trioxide (ATO; 10 mg/d). To avoid retinoic acid syndrome (RAS), all-trans retinoic acid was not administered at first, during the high white blood cell phase. At the same time, we improved the anemia through transfusion of red blood cells, corrected the abnormal coagulation through plasma transfusion and implemented other symptomatic supportive treatment. After four days of ATO administration, the patient complained of fever (39 °C), chest tightness and shortness of breath. An ultrasound examination showed a small amount of pleural effusion and pericardial effusion. Considering these as side effects of arsenite, we stopped using it and replaced it with idarubicin plus cytarabine/chemotherapy regimen (IA). When IA chemotherapy ended, this patient had developed dyspnea, and blood gas analysis showed type I respiratory failure (pH 7.55; PO2 59 mmHg). A pulmonary spiral computed tomography (CT) examination showed frosted glass-like changes to the lung fields and medium amounts of pleural effusion . Because of the presence of promyelocyte differentiation syndrome, the patient was placed under continuous oxygen therapy, with 80 mg/day of methylprednisolone.
After ten days of hormonal therapy, the symptoms of heart fatigue and shortness of breath showed clear improvement. CT on the lungs showed that a clear reduction of bilateral pleural effusion had occurred and that the right-side pleural effusion had basically been absorbed. One high-density patchy shadow (of dimensions 4.4 x 3.5 cm) was discovered in the left pulmonary hilar .
The patient then entered a bone marrow suppression period and contracted repeated high fever. Considering the possibility of fungal infection, we replaced the hormone treatment with voriconazole, based on broad-spectrum antibiotics. On the 17th day after IA chemotherapy ended, the patient still repeatedly presented high fever. Routine blood tests showed WBC 5.34 × 109/l, Hb 62 g/l and PLT 37 × 109/l, Pulmonary CT reexamination showed significant consolidation of lung tissue in the left lower lung lobe, and that the high-density mass had increased to a size of 4 .7 x 3.5 cm. No obvious evidence of tuberculosis, bacteria or fungi was found through pleural fluid drainage examination.
On the 26th day after the IA regimen ended, a sputum culture experiment showed the presence of mucosal infection. We replaced the voriconazole with posaconazole for patient and, at the same time, instituted oral retinoic acid therapy.
On the 44th day after chemotherapy, routine blood reexamination showed WBC 5.84 × 109/l, Hb 73 g/l and PLT 404 × 109/l. The morphology of the bone marrow presented complete remission . Pulmonary CT reexamination showed massive pleural effusion in the left lung, giving rise to total pulmonary atelectasis . In contrast, the right-side pleural effusion was completely absorbed. A tuberculosis antibody test was positive in pleural fluid and blood samples, and investigation of fungus and promyelocytes in pleural fluid was negative. Implementation of diagnostic anti-tuberculosis therapy was then planned. However, the patient suddenly died on the third day after tuberculosis antibody detection, because of massive hemoptysis.