A 28-year-old right-handed male with trauma signs on his head (a wound in his occipital region, nasal hemoliquorrhea, right-sided otohemoliquorrhea) was admitted to Yalta City Hospital after he felt down while riding a skateboard. On admission, he was Glasgow coma scale (GCS) 5 with left dilated pupil.
CT scans showed intracerebral traumatic hematoma in the left frontal lobe, 6 mm midline shift, right temporal bone fracture and a small pneumocephalus in sellar region .
Performed operation: left-sided hemicraniectomy through “trauma-flap” incision, evacuation of traumatic intracerebral hematoma in left frontal lobe. Intraoperatively an acute brain swelling occurred. Patient was transferred to ICU after the operation. One day after the operation, right-sided anisocoria occurred and a contralateral EDH with 10 mm of midline shifting was found at the control CT scans .
Patient underwent decompressive craniectomy in the right temporo-parietal region and evacuation of EDH about 100 cc in volume.
One day later there were no signs of residual hematoma on CT scans .
At the fifth day after the operation, percutaneous tracheostomy was performed. Patient was comatose 19 days after admitting to the hospital. He underwent conservative treatment of brain edema. After that control CT scans were performed .
Next day patient became apallic and 7 days later akinetic mutism was found.
At the 32nd day in the hospital, he was transferred from the intensive care unit (ICU) into the neurosurgical department.
One month later patient was awake and spoke with single separated words.
On 76th day in the hospital the CT scans were performed with 1 mm collimation for the titanium mesh implants and stereolithographic models development .
At his 2 month follow-up, he had neurological deficit of left-sided spastic hemiparesis, anosognosia, right-sided convergent strabismus.
Bilateral cranioplasty of two huge bone defects [Figures and ] with individually constructed titanium mesh was performed.
Postoperative period was uneventful and in 15 days patient was sent to rehabilitation.
CT scans in a month after the cranioplasty showed brain expansion to its original shape .