A 3.5-year old boy was admitted to our hospital and he complained of lassitude and fever. He was only child in family and they had no history of serious illness. There was no family history of cancer also his PMH was negative for any other disease. He displayed hepatosplenomegaly without lymphadenopathy.
On admission, laboratory assessment showed dramatically raising lactate dehydrogenase (4315 u/l, normal range up to 480) as well as the following blood examination: red blood cell of 4.7 × 1010/L, serum hemoglobin concentration of 12g/dl, hematocrit level of 35.3%, platelet count of 129.000/mm3 and white blood cell count of 12.7×107 with 48% of leukemic blasts in the cytoplasm. Leukemic blasts accounted for 50% of bone marrow cells which had mononuclear and typical B-cell ALL cells with L1 morphology was also revealed.
An immunophenotype analysis revealed positivity for CD19, CD10, CD22, CD20, iCD79a, CD58, HLA DR and adversely negativity for terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase and surface immunoglobulins, suggesting that the leukemic blasts had a precursor B-cell immunophenotype. A fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis revealed an positive for IGH/MYC fusion t(8;14)(q24;q32) in 42.8% corresponding to translocation between IGH(14q32) and MYC(8q24) gene regions. For therapeutic management, the patient was treated with induction therapy with prednisolone, vincristine, daunoromycin, L-asparginase along with consolidation therapy adjusted from a regime for standard risk leukemia based on to the pediatric leukemia study group BFM standard risk (SR-IR/ALL) with methotrexate and 6 mercapetopurin in 56 days. Then, re-induction therapy with dexamethasone, vincristine, doxorubicin, L-asparginase and cyclophosphamide was scheduled leading full recovery for eight months. However, the patient referred again after initial management and 8 months recovery period with fever and abdominal pain. In examination, right lower quadrant abdominal tenderness was found. Abdominal ultrasonography led to diagnosis of appendicitis with visible end loop of appendix with the diameter of 8mm and also an inflammatory mass in the right lower quadrant (phelegmon). In Abdominal CT scan: there was a calcified focus approximately measuring 6.5×5mm in RLQ associated with adjacent obvious fat stranding and non-significant mesenteric lymph nodes. These finding were suggestive of perforated appendicitis.
Based on physical examination and imaging findings and following surgical consultation, the patient was treated with antibiotic therapy but with inappropriate therapeutic result and even worsening the symptoms. In next step, surgical exploration was planned showing a huge mass in right lower quadrant abdominal zone.
Then, bone marrow aspiration was performed that revealed L3 morphology that was typical for burkitt lymphoma. A biopsy was also performed and the sample was sent for immunohistochemical chemistry (IHC) assessment that found a lymph proliferative neoplasm in favor with burkitt’s lymphoma. In addition, FISH hybridization was positive for Cmyc rearrangement. In final, by using treatment protocol for burkitt’s lymphoma (LMB 0281 protocol), recovery was achieved.