A 42-year-old, obese, Caucasian male plumber was referred for a mesenteric lymph node biopsy to rule out lymphoma. His medical comorbidities included recent type 2 diabetes, dyslipidemia, and chronic back pain. Physical examination and cross-sectional imaging confirmed abnormal lymphadenopathy limited to the small bowel mesentery. A laparoscopic procedure, converted to 10cm laparotomy, obtained an appropriate nodal excision. The patient began to exhibit increasing oxygen requirements and abdominal discomfort 48 hours after the procedure. His physical examination remained otherwise unremarkable. Computed tomography identified massive right torso soft tissue gas extending from the costal margin to inguinal canal (midline to the back) (Figure ).
Immediate antimicrobial support and operative intervention led to resection of the entire external oblique and transversus abdominus aponeuroses, rectus muscles, and a portion of the pectoralis muscle of the patient’s right torso (Figure ). The tissues displayed the classic brown dishwater appearance. The internal oblique aponeurosis and two large triangular skin flaps were left intact (Figure ). It should be noted that the small laparotomy incision was re-opened to ensure the absence of a missed bowel injury or intraperitoneal source of the contamination. A negative pressure dressing was then applied superficial to the internal oblique layer, followed by loose approximation of the large skin flaps. The patient was returned to the operating room eight hours later because minor additional debridements, washout, and dressing change were required. A total of four subsequent washouts were required. Although he initially suffered significant acute kidney injury, as well as sepsis (white blood cell = 48,000 per cubic millimeter of blood) requiring vasopressor support, these physiologic parameters improved to normal within three days. Final microbiology results confirmed Clostridium perfringens. Intravenous immunoglobulin was not required.
The final closure utilized two large pieces of biologic material (Strattice™, LifeCell Inc., New Jersey, USA) to prevent subsequent hernia formation (Figure ). This repair was particularly important inferior to the arcuate line, given that only the posterior rectus sheath remained intact throughout his hemi-torso. The biologic material was sewn to the linea alba (medial), costal rib margin (superior), right flank (lateral), pubic bone and the inguinal ligament (inferior). This provided an excellent reconstitution of the patient’s abdominal wall. The two large skin and soft tissue flaps were then closed (Figure ). This left a three-cm central area to heal by negative suction therapy and secondary intention.
This patient was discharged home 34 days after his initial excisional biopsy with no evidence of organ failure. His 12-month out-patient follow-up continues to show no obvious hernia or attenuation in his abdominal wall (Figure ).