A 29-year-old Turkish woman was referred from the in vitro fertilization clinic for the management of her diabetes and hypertriglyceridemia. Her menstrual periods had been irregular since menarche at age 12. She had four pregnancies, three of them resulted in second-trimester fetal loss and one in ectopic pregnancy.
She had first noted well-defined muscles in her arms and legs around puberty. Subcutaneous fat progressively had disappeared from her limbs, gluteal region, trunk and abdomen in a generalized pattern. Although the patient was unable to define a clear period of time when subcutaneous fat disappeared, she reported fat loss since childhood. At the age of 17, she was diagnosed with diabetes and metformin (2 g per day) monotherapy was initiated. Three years later, her triglyceride level was found to be 1900 mg/dL, and fenofibrate was started. Although metformin helped her keep glucose levels in the target range for a while, her HbA1c gradually increased above 7%. Her triglyceride levels, on the other hand, remained significantly elevated despite treatment with fenofibrate.
Physical examination revealed generalized fat loss and prominent muscles in her upper and lower extremities . Facial fat was decreased. She had well-preserved subcutaneous fat in the mons pubis area and around her external genital region. Her body mass index (BMI) was 19.2 kg/m2. She had acanthosis nigricans in the axillary regions , and the liver was palpable 2 cm below the costal margin.
Her leptin level was 0.4 ng/mL. Lab tests are presented in Table . Her genetic testing was negative for pathogenic AGPAT2 and BSCL2 variants but revealed a homozygous p.R582H (c.1745G > A) pathogenic variant of the LMNA gene. She has a brother, and her parents are alive; however, family screening could not be performed because of lack of consent.
Her fat distribution was assessed by the whole-body MRI which was acquired by using a 1.5-T MRI system with a 6 multichannel body coil (Gyroscan Intera, release 8.1; Philips Medical Systems, Best, the Netherlands), and compared to an unrelated 48-year-old female with a monoallelic LMNA p.R582H pathogenic variant. Also, whole-body MR images were compared to the images available from a 28-year-old healthy woman and a series of adult female patients with CGL1 (n = 9) and typical FPLD2 (n = 8).
The study revealed near-total loss of subcutaneous adipose tissue with preserved fat in the retroorbital area and palms and soles in our patient, resembling fat loss pattern observed in CGL1 . However, adipose tissue was very well preserved around mons pubis and external genital region , which is an unlikely finding in CGL1. Also, supraclavicular subcutaneous fat was preserved, but the amount of fat was decreased in contrast to typical FLPD2. The liver was diffusely enlarged, and hepatic steatosis was noted. On the other hand, fat loss was partial in the monoallelic LMNA p.R582H carrier which was similar to typical FPLD2, although more subcutaneous fat was observed in the upper part of the body .