A 39-year-old man underwent liver transplantation for liver cirrhosis due to alcoholic liver disease. He had no other medical history, including absence of any neuropsychiatric disorder. Postoperative immunosuppressive therapy consisted of tacrolimus (5 mg) and mycophenolate (500 mg) twice daily. Five months after taking tacrolimus, he presented with talkativeness, which gradually worsened. Three months later, he showed elated mood, grandiose delusion, talkativeness, and a decreased need for sleep, which was diagnosed of bipolar disorder. At that time, he was not taking any medication other than tacrolimus and mycophenolate mofetil. Short-term hospitalization and discharge were repeated due to poor control of these symptoms and lack of insights. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) performed 10 months after tacrolimus administration revealed a hyperintense lesion affecting the middle of the pontine tegmentum on T2 weighted images without enhancement . Blood concentration of tacrolimus was 7.2 ng/mL (therapeutic range: 5–20 ng/mL). There were no laboratory abnormalities other than a slight elevation in AST levels, including electrolytes and vitamins. The score on the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) for schizophrenia was 119. The introduction of antipsychotic drugs, such as lithium and quetiapine, controlled these symptoms for about a year. Twenty-one months later, he exhibited postural tremor in both hands, which was reduced with the administration of a beta-blocker. Two months later, he presented with memory disturbance and disorientation, which progressed with dysarthria and gait disturbance. He was hospitalized and referred for neurologic consultation. The score of PANSS score for schizophrenia was 72. On neurologic examination, he presented with drowsy mentality, kinetic tremor, intention tremor, dysdiadochokinesia, postural instability, and inability to stand in tandem. The International Cooperative Ataxia Rating Scale score was 39 . The concentration of tacrolimus was 3.5 ng/mL. Brain MRI showed the same lesion in the pontine tegmentum. No laboratory abnormalities except for the presence of albumin-cytologic dissociation protein (64 mg/dL) in the cerebrospinal fluid were detected. No anti-neuronal or paraneoplastic autoantibodies were detected. During the examination, the patient’s level of consciousness rapidly deteriorated, and electroencephalography (EEG) showed generalized high-voltage rhythmic delta waves, which were terminated by intravenous injection of lorazepam . Non-convulsive status epilepticus was diagnosed, and anticonvulsant treatment was initiated. Administration of tacrolimus was stopped in suspicion of tacrolimus-induced neurotoxicity, and the immunosuppressive regimen was changed to mycophenolate and prednisolone. Despite anticonvulsant treatment and discontinuation of tacrolimus, the ictal rhythm persisted and was eventually controlled through coma-inducing anesthesia with mechanical ventilation. Thiopental was administered, and the dose was gradually increased to achieve burst suppression in EEG, which was made 32 h later and maintained for an additional 24 h. The patient’s level of consciousness gradually improved over 2 weeks of aggressive treatment and produced normal EEG. Immunosuppressive treatment was maintained with cyclosporine instead of prednisolone. The patient was able to walk independently with mild ataxia (ataxia score 22) and showed a schizophrenia score of 61 without any psychiatric medication. The Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-IV score was 66, corresponding to intellectual disability at the time of discharge after 3 weeks of hospitalization. The patient was administered cyclosporine as an immunosuppressant without any other medication. Two months after discharge, the follow-up intelligence score was 91, corresponding to average level of intelligence. The follow-up brain MRI showed partial resolution of the lesion in the middle of the pons . The patient did not present any neurological or psychiatric sign or symptom 8 months after discharge .