A 34-year-old male baker living in Diamniadio (Dakar region) sought a consultation at a health centre near his home for fever, headache, vomiting and diarrhoea. Fever had lasted for 4 days with peaks every 48 h. The patient was suspected of malaria and was tested using an HRP-2 based RDT (detecting only P. falciparum). The test was negative for P. falciparum malaria and the patient was treated by three intravenous (IV) injection of cefotaxim (third generation of cephalosporin) at 100 mg per kg per day to cover potential bacterial infection. Owing to persisting symptoms 4 days later, he was referred to the emergency unit of the Youssou Mbargane Diop Hospital, Dakar, Senegal.
The patient had no particular previous medical history. He was born in Thies and moved to Touba at the age 12 and finally at age 23 to Diamniadio, where he has lived since. The patient claimed that he had never been out of these three areas, which are all in West Central of Senegal. Physical examination found impaired general condition but the patient was conscious. Abdomen was tender. All other physical examinations were normal. Another HRP-2 based RDT was performed and was also negative. Other laboratory tests showed anaemia (haemoglobin 11.4 g/dl), thrombocytopaenia (platelets 30 × 109/mm3), leukopaenia (3650/mm3) and lymphocytopaenia (650/mm3). Kidney function was normal as indicated by creatininaemia and uraemia (11 mg/l and 0.13 g/l, respectively). Transaminases were slightly elevated.
Blood smear evaluations in the Parasitology Laboratory of Aristide Le Dantec University Hospital showed malaria parasites in normal and enlarged red blood cells (RBCs). Some infected RBCs were oval shaped and some were fimbriated. However, Schüffner’s dots were not observed likely due to staining defect . All malaria parasite stages (rings, trophozoites, schizonts and gametocytes) were observed. These malaria parasites were identified as P. ovale and a 0.08 % parasitaemia was calculated. Parasite density was measured by determining the ratio of parasites/leucocytes on the basis of 8000 leucocytes/μl after counting 500 leucocytes. That ratio was found to be 1.1 giving a parasite density of 8800 parasites/μl of blood.
An 18S rRNA gene real-time PCR molecular assay was undertaken as previously described to confirm the P. ovale, infection . No others species of Plasmodium was detected. The parasite was then subtyped using the potra gene as target as previously described . This genotyping identified the presence of P. ovale wallikeri .
Based on clinical signs and biological findings, the patient was treated as severe malaria accordingly to the hospital’s treatment guideline. Intravenous quinine was given at admission and 24 h later. 48 h after initial treatment, oral artemether–lumefantrine was given every 6 h at six doses. On day 3 after treatment, microscopy was negative and the patient reported no further symptoms. Primaquine was not given (see “” section).