A 57-year-old male patient was admitted to China-Japan Union Hospital of Jilin University (Changchun, Jilin, China) for acute persistent chest pain for 5 h after drinking.
The patient’s symptoms started 5 h ago when he was drinking, and only alleviated a little when he was referred to the hospital.
His past medical history, including a coronary artery bypass grafting history, described a vein graft to the left anterior descending artery (LAD) 3 years ago. The patient had no history of hypertension, diabetes, alcohol abuse, liver cirrhosis, or gastrointestinal diseases, but had a 25-pack-year smoking history.
The patient had no family cardiovascular diseases.
Physical examination showed bradycardia (heart rate: 50 bpm) and hypotension (blood pressure: 90/60 mmHg) but no other abnormalities.
Laboratory assessments showed a normal red blood cell (RBC) count, normal hemoglobin level (133 g/L), and normal coagulation test results. Cardiac biomarkers were significantly increased (TnI 2.40 ng/mL, myoglobin 300 mg/L, and CK-MB 32.6 U/L).
Electrocardiography (ECG) showed ST elevations in the inferior wall leads . Emergency coronary angiography (CAG) showed a distal right coronary artery (RCA) occlusion and a thrombus (TIMI thrombus grade 5) . There was a 40%-50% [quantitative coronary analysis (QCA)] moderate stenosis of the distal left main artery. Native LAD was occluded, and there was a 90% (QCA) severe stenosis in the distal circumflex artery . The saphenous vein graft to LAD was normal . After intervention, chest pain was relieved, and ECG showed that the elevated ST segment returned to normal but with a T wave inversion.
The patient experienced nausea and vomiting and subxiphoid chest pain 6 h after the procedure. The vomitus originally included the stomach contents without blood. ECG was rechecked to rule out acute thrombus formation, but no obvious changes were observed . Twenty minutes later, the patient vomited again, and this time the vomitus was bloody (approximately 400 mL). Although optimal medical treatment was given, no obvious improvement was seen. An esopha-gogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) was performed 7 hours after the PCI. A 2.0 cm, actively bleeding mucosal tear was found in the cardia. No ulcer in the stomach or duodenum and no esophageal varices or mucosal erosion was observed .