Matteo was 3 years old (14 kg), he was prematurely born (birth weight 1650 g) and he was mechanically ventilated in the neonatal period during 10 days for pulmonary hemorrhage.
He was recently hospitalized because of subcutaneous emphysema, with signs of acute respiratory failure from RSV infection. Because of an increased need for oxygen, he was intubated and ventilated with an FiO2 of 100%, and PEEP was 3. A chest X-ray did not show pneumothorax that could be drained. Tracheal aspirate was positive for RSV and Hemophilus influenzae. A few days later, because of emergence of an alveolar syndrome associated with persistence of subcutaneous emphysema, he was transferred to our unit for possible extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO).
Upon arrival, he had an oxygenation saturation index of 9.4 as well as with the other criteria for ARDS (bilateral infiltrates on a chest radiograph and no evidence of left atrial hypertension). Respiratory parameters were an SIMV with a VT of 85 ml (6 ml/kg), the rate was 25/min, PEEP was 6 cm H2O, and FiO2 was 70%. SpO2 was 89%, mean airway pressure was 12 cm H2O, peak inspiratory pressure was 28 cm H2O, and minute volume was 2 l/min. Venous blood gas showed a pH of 7.32, and a PvCO2 of 53 Torr (7.1 kPa). Because of a slight improvement, the child was not treated by ECMO. He underwent fibroscopy to eliminate the diagnosis of foreign body inhalation, which would have explained the subcutaneous emphysema. Forty-eight hours later, because of an increase in cough, cutaneous emphysema worsened and became diffuse (cervico-thoraco-abdominal) despite the reduction in PEEP to 4 cm H2O (FiO2 60%). We decided to use NAVA to improve the synchronization of mechanical ventilation with the child's spontaneous breathing. Sedation was reduced, midazolam was decreased to 80 μg/kg/h and sufentanil to 0.3 μg/kg/h. The child became alert. Initial NAVA settings were a PEEP of 5 cm H2O, NAVA level was 1.2 cm H2O/μV, and FiO2 was 60%.
This change reduced the requirement for oxygen and normalized blood gases . The next day, the subcutaneous emphysema started to decline . Peak inspiratory pressure was between 10 and 19 cm H2O with an FiO2 of 50% for a SpO2 of 90%. The child's level of distress was scored with the modified COMFORT scale and it ranged between 11 and 14 (adequately sedated, as confirmed by the child). This clear improvement allowed us to reassign the child to the original hospital 48 hours after initiation of NAVA. NAVA was continued at the second facility, permitting extubation 3 days later.