A 69-year-old man was referred to our Thyroid Eye Clinic for progressive TED. Graves’ hyperthyroidism and atrial fibrillation had been diagnosed 8 months earlier. He had become euthyroid on methimazole 10 mg per day; additional medications were propranolol, apixaban, and ramipril for pre-existing essential hypertension. He recalled that eyelid swelling, double vision, and excessive tearing were present for the last 4 months.
On presentation, his main complaint was progressive sight loss on the left eye over the last 2 weeks. General physical examination was unremarkable except irregular pulse of 80 bpm; symmetric exophthalmos and symmetric periorbital edema were seen. Low thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) (0.006 mU/L, reference range: 0.3-4.2 mU/L) was accompanied by normal free thyroxine and free triiodothyronine levels and elevated TSH receptor antibodies (TRAb: 10.9 U/L; reference range: <1.0 U/L).
Visual acuities were 20/20 on the right and 20/50 on the left eye. By slit-lamp examination, it was found that classical TED signs, periorbital and eyelid edema, exophthalmos, conjunctival hyperemia, chemosis, and swollen caruncles were present. No signs of corneal involvement were seen; the corneal epithelium was intact on both eyes with no fluorescein staining. Pupillary reactions were intact, direct and consensual on both eyes. Proptosis by Hertel exophthalmometry was 25 mm and 27 mm right and left, respectively. By kinetic perimetry, isopters were normal on the right eye, while concentric visual field angle reduction was observed on the left eye, especially in the temporal region (30°). Color visual fields were intact on the right eye; however, on the left eye, visual field and both red and green isopters were affected, and central color vision was deteriorated. By ophthalmoscopy, the optic nerve head did not show papillary edema on either side. No signs of optic nerve atrophy were present. The vascular structures showed mild signs of arteriosclerosis and hypertension. Critical flicker-fusion frequencies (CFF) were 34 Hz on the right and 29 Hz on the left . CFF is the frequency at which flickering light can be perceived as continuous; values below 36 Hz are diagnostic of optic nerve or visual cortex dysfunction if there is no anterior segment pathology, lens opacification, vitreous body abnormality, or retinal disease. Clinical activity scores (CAS) were 7 and 8, right and left, respectively, on the 10-item CAS scale . Orbital MRI showed typical MRI features of TED with apical crowding on both sides. The diagnosis was sight-threatening DON.
MRI of the orbits has been performed in a conventional 3T MRI unit (Philips Achieva 3.0T TX, Philips Healthcare, Amsterdam, the Netherlands). Axial non-contrast 3D T1-weighted gradient echo (TR 20 ms, TE 2 ms, slice thickness 2 mm) and short tau inversion recovery (STIR) (TR 4100 ms, TE 80 ms, IT 200 ms, slice thickness 3 mm) images were acquired. The extraocular muscles, optic nerve, intraorbital parts of the globe, and the lacrimal gland were manually segmented , and volumes were calculated using InterView Fusion 3.08.009 (Mediso Budapest, Hungary). These volumes were extracted from the total orbital volume to obtain connective tissue volume.
Signal intensity on STIR images as indicator of tissue edema was measured in the coronal slice 10 mm behind the globe. Signal intensities of the full cross-sectional muscle area (including all extraocular muscles) and the entire connective tissue area were measured; mean intensities were calculated by the software package provided by the manufacturer of the MRI unit. Signal intensity ratio (SIR) was calculated dividing the signal intensity of each compartment with that of the ipsilateral buccal fat pad.
As salvage therapy, mannitol 20% 200 mL was administered daily intravenously for 4 consecutive days (days 1 through 4). Each mannitol infusion was followed by furosemide 40 mg 6 h later. Corticosteroids were started on day 4; 500 mg methylprednisolone was administered on alternate days (day 4, day 6, and day 8), followed by 500 mg methylprednisolone weekly for 3 weeks and 250 mg methylprednisolone for 6 weeks. The protocol was approved by the Regional and Institutional Ethics Committee of the University of Debrecen. Consent was obtained from the patient after a full explanation of the purpose and nature of all procedures used.
Immediate improvement of the CFF on day 2 was followed by improvement of visual acuity on day 3 . Improvement was observed in the visual field of the left eye. These changes were accompanied neither by muscle nor by connective tissue volume decrease on MRI ( and ); however, a clear drop in SIR of both the muscle and connective tissue compartments reflected the decrease of the water content of these tissues .
Improved visual acuity remained stable, and orbital decompression surgery was escaped. During the later course of the disease, orbital radiotherapy combined with i.v. glucocorticoids was effective ( and ). TSH and thyroid hormones were in the normal range during follow-up and TRAb decreased to near-normal (1.2 U/L) by day 120.