A 16 year old Sri Lankan boy presented to the National Hospital of Sri Lanka, with a 4 day history of high grade fever, arthralgia, myalgia and headache. He was obese with a Body Mass Index of 28 kg/m2. NS1 antigen positivity confirmed the diagnosis of dengue fever. On the fifth day of the illness he went into the critical phase as evidenced by fluid in the hepato-renal pouch in bedside ultrasound scan. His platelet count was 52,000/μl at the time of entering the critical phase. Other hemodynamic parameters were stable and the urine output was within the desired range. By the 18th hour of the critical phase he went into compensated shock. Initial crystalloid bolus was given according to the national guideline for the management of dengue.
His hemodynamic parameters improved after 2 hours with a blood pressure of 100/75 mmHg and the urine output more than 0.5 ml/kg/hr. Packed Cell Volume (PCV) dropped to 46% from 51%. His baseline PCV on admission was 40%. He again went into compensated shock the next hour requiring another two crystalloid boluses. After maintaining hemodynamic parameters stable for 2 hours, he went into uncompensated shock and PCV was 46%. As the PCV rise could not explain the shock by fluid leakage alone, immediate red cell transfusion was arranged. He was given another two boluses of dextran consecutively followed by another 5 ml/kg red cell transfusion as hemodynamics did not improve. He responded gradually to the above management. During this period, other causes for poor response to fluid resuscitation, including ABCS, were excluded. Bedside ultrasound scan did not show any intra-abdominal bleeding. He did not have any other overt bleeding manifestation.
His lowest platelet count was 7000/μl, and that was on the first day of the critical phase. By the end of the second day of the critical phase it rose to 12,000/μl. On the third day after entering the critical phase, he complained of right sided leg swelling and pain. Examination revealed grossly swollen erythematous right lower limb with increased warmth and tenderness. Early convalescence rash was apparent. Clinical suspicion of deep vein thrombosis was confirmed by lower limb duplex scan, which showed deep vein thrombosis involving right external iliac, common femoral and superficial femoral veins.
As the latest platelet count by the time of diagnosis of deep vein thrombosis was 12,000/μl, we were in a therapeutic dilemma. Thromboembolism deterrent (TED) stockings were applied to the unaffected limb and until anticoagulation right lower limb was kept immobile. Hematology opinion was taken, after which anticoagulation with unfractionated heparin (UFH) was decided. Coagulation studies, PT/INR, APTT were within the normal range. While awaiting repeat full blood count, intravenous UFH 500 IU/hour was started. We observed him closely for bleeding. Platelet count had risen up to 58,000/μl in the next full blood count, after which UFH dose was increased to 1000 IU/hour. APTT was 48 s and 54 s at the 6th hour and the 12th hour of UFH respectively. Warfarin was commenced the next day and therapeutic range (INR 2–3) was achieved by the sixth day of the diagnosis of DVT.
As thrombotic events are rare in severe dengue illness, we looked for other thrombophilia conditions. He did not have any significant past history to suggest thrombotic events. Thrombophilia screening which included anticardiolipin antibodies, anti beta2 glycoprotein, protein C and S levels and prothrombin gene mutation was negative. Above investigations were arranged before starting UFH, as anticoagulation would affect the results otherwise. The patient was discharged after 12 days of hospitalization. He did not have any other complication of dengue fever apart from transient liver transaminitis which resolved before discharging. He was reviewed after 6 weeks from the onset of DVT and venous duplex showed recanalization of the right sided lower limb deep veins with a normal venous flow. Warfarin was omitted at the end of 3 months.