An 18-year-old female, professional long jump athlete with no prior relevant medical history, presented to our emergency department after sustaining a twisting injury to her ankle. The injury occurred just before taking off while attempting a long jump. She complained of pain and swelling in her right ankle and foot and was unable to bear weight on the affected limb. There was prominent soft-tissue edema over the lateral aspect foot with point tenderness along the mid-foot and lateral aspect of ankle, just below lateral malleolus. The neurovascular examination showed that no impairment and compartment syndrome was were excluded. Plain radiographs of foot and ankle in anteroposterior, lateral, and Myerson 30o medial oblique views were obtained . The radiographs showed a displaced tarsal navicular fracture with loss of height of the medial arch and shortening of the medial column of the foot (classified as a Sangeorzan type II/Petrie type 4) [, ]. There was no other bony injury as confirmed by multiaxial and 3D reconstruction of CT imaging. A non-contrast 3T MRI scan confirmed the displaced navicular fracture along with complete tear of anterior talofibular ligament (ATFL) at its mid substance and calcaneofibular ligament (CFL) near its calcaneum attachment site (, ).
The patient was counseled about the need for surgical treatment. She was scheduled for the navicular fracture fixation and concomitant ligament repair within 24 h of sustaining the injury. The surgery was performed under general anesthesia. The patient was placed in the supine position and a thigh tourniquet was applied . The navicular fracture was approached through standard dorsal approach between the tibialis anterior and extensor hallucis longus tendons. The neurovascular bundle was identified and retracted laterally. Overlying joint capsule was found to be disrupted, and careful deeper dissection was done to preserve as much periosteum as possible. Primary reduction was achieved by direct manipulation and stabilized temporarily with a 1.5 mm Kirschner wire under fluoroscopy guidance. Satisfactory reduction of fracture and position of wire were confirmed, and definitive fixation was done with a 2.5-mm headless compression screw (, ).
The lateral ankle ligaments were approached through a standard lateral approach, taking care to protect the sural and superficial peroneal nerves. Careful deeper dissection was done to identify the inferior extensor retinaculum and it was separated from underlying talocrural capsule, which was found to be disrupted. The torn ends of ATFL were found at its mid substance and CFL near its calcaneum attachment site. Primary end-to-end repair of ATFL was done using No. 0 Vicryl suture in a modified Bunnell fashion. The calcaneum attachment site of CFL was identified, and a 1.4-mm Jugger Knot Soft Anchor (Biomet Inc., Warsaw, IN, USA) was inserted after preparation of bone bed and each suture limb passed through the torn ends of ligament to repair the ligament. Repair of ATFL and CFL was performed keeping the ankle and foot in neutral position. Sutures from the anchor were also used for concomitant tightening of joint capsule .
Post-operatively, the patient was kept in an ankle immobilizer for 8 weeks. Gradual weight bearing as per tolerance was allowed after 3 weeks and full weight bearing allowed at 6 weeks. Post-operative radiographs were obtained immediately following surgery and at 6 and 16 weeks after surgery . CT scan to assess fracture healing was done at 6- and 16-week interval. Sequential clinical and radiological assessment showed fracture union with the American Orthopedic Foot and Ankle Score (88/100 points) at 16 weeks follow-up (, ). The patient was satisfied with the final outcome with complaints of mild pain occasionally. She was allowed to resume her physical activity including running and jumping without any restrictions after 4 months.