A 66-year-old man was hospitalized for urinary retention and gross hematuria. Cystoscopy revealed a white lesion occupying the urethra , and blood sampling showed a high serum PSA concentration of 99 ng/mL. Imaging revealed gross irregularities in the prostate gland. Transrectal ultrasonography revealed a high-echo area surrounding the prostatic urethra, and T2-weighted MRI revealed an area with a non-uniform hyperintense signal around the prostate urethra. . Computed tomography showed para-aortic lymph node metastases . Transrectal prostate biopsy revealed an adenocarcinoma with a Gleason score of 4 + 5 in all 12 cores. Degarelix administration was started 2 weeks after admission for the treatment of metastatic prostate adenocarcinoma. Three months after admission, treatment with three courses of docetaxel and one course of cabazitaxel failed to inhibit the rapid increase in lymph node metastases despite low serum PSA levels . Seven months after admission, para-aortic lymph node biopsy and prostate re-biopsy revealed enteric-type mucinous adenocarcinoma. Lymph node biopsies of the mucinous urethral adenocarcinoma showed negative results for microsatellite instability. Four courses of gemcitabine and cisplatin were administered, following which laboratory data showed a reduction in serum CEA concentration . Eleven months after admission, three courses of FOLFIRI chemotherapy were administered because of progression of liver metastasis. FOLFIRI chemotherapy had a minimal effect, and dose reduction and treatment postponement were required because of grade 2 acute kidney injury and malaise according to Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events version 4. A course of gemcitabine–carboplatin combination therapy was administered 13 months after admission, but the patient died 1 month later because of liver metastasis. The patient and family consented to the autopsy and case report, and the autopsy was performed postmortem.
The first prostate biopsy revealed PSA-negative and CEA-positive mucinous adenocarcinoma in 10% and PSA-positive and CEA-negative normal prostate adenocarcinoma in 90% of four cores around the urethra . A second prostate biopsy revealed a marked increase in the percentage of PSA-negative and CEA-positive mucinous adenocarcinomas . This mucinous adenocarcinoma had characteristics of an enteric-type adenocarcinoma, as shown by CK7 negativity, strong CK20 positivity, AE1/3 positivity, CDX2 positivity, and EGFR positivity . At autopsy, 90% of the prostate was found to be replaced by PSA-negative and CEA-positive mucinous adenocarcinomas. Metastases were found in the bladder, lungs, liver, pancreas, left kidney, left adrenal gland, lumbar spine, and peritoneum. However, most metastatic sites showed a mixture of mucin-producing adenocarcinoma and vimentin-positive carcinosarcoma .