A 49-year-old Caucasian male with an unremarkable medical history presented to the emergency department on a local hospital due to a four-week history of malaise, fever, cough and an unintended weight loss of 7 kg. He had no recent travel history or history of drug abuse. Based on the symptoms and stethoscopic findings pneumonia was suspected and the patient was admitted to the Department of Respiratory Diseases. On admission his blood pressure was 135/67 mmHg, heart rate 125 beats per minute, temperature 36,4 °C, and with an oxygen saturation of 92% with 2 l of oxygen supplementation. On auscultation there were crackles at the right lung, but further clinical examination was unremarkable and he was at no point in acute distress.
Laboratory examination revealed elevated white blood cell count (WBC) at 20 × 109/L and C-reactive protein (CRP) at 224 mg/L along with increased liver function tests (Alanine aminotransferase at 84 U/L and Alkaline phosphatase at 256 U/L) and hypoalbuminemia at 19 g/L. Chest radiograph showed no obvious infiltrates. Pharyngeal swabs and sputum cultures were negative. Blood and urine cultures came out negative, though collected before the antibiotic treatment was commenced. The blood culture method used was BacT/Alert® an- and aerobic collection bottles incubated 5 days and later BD BACTEC Plus an- and aerobic Culture Vials incubated for 7 days. We tested for hepatitis infection; Immunoglobulin (Ig) M for hepatitis A, IgG surface antibody and surface antigen for hepatitis B, IgG for hepatitis C and IgM and IgG for hepatitis E virus (HEV). Of these HEV IgG was positive while the rest all came out negative. In addition, serology tests were negative for Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, human immunodeficiency virus, Pneumocystis jirovecii and Entamoeba histolytica. In spite of antibiotic treatment for more than a week the patient did not improve, which led to performance of a positron emission tomography-computer tomography (PET-CT) scan in search for the focus of infection. The scan revealed a massive multiloculated abscess (22x18cm) , along with cholelithiasis (1x1cm) and lymph nodes enlargement. The following ultrasound-guided abscess catheterisation resulted in drainage of 500 mL of pus and a pig-tail catheter was left in situ.
After the finding of a liver abscess the patient was transferred to the Department of Infectious Diseases, Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet. Abscess material was cultured both anaerobically and aerobically and from the latter grew Eikenella corrodens. Further blood cultures were collected but remained negative. Because of the finding of a HACEK bacterium, endocarditis was suspected. There were no valvular murmurs at the clinical examination and no other clinical signs of endocarditis, however transthoracic echocardiography showed an excrescence on the aortic valve. A subsequent transoesophageal echocardiography confirmed aortic endocarditis without valve insufficiency.
In the search for the origin of infection, a panoramic dental radiography was performed showing no signs of dental abscesses but extremely poor tooth status, leading to extraction of 10 teeth.
When diagnosed with PLA on PET-CT and after ultrasound-guided drainage, the patient was empirically treated with meropenem, ciprofloxacin and metronidazole. After recognition of the Eikenella corrodens resistance pattern, antibiotic treatment was narrowed to cefuroxime, and metronidazole was continued to cover other potential anaerobic pathogens. Due to a new onset of fevers and subsequent elevation of WBC and CRP, intravenous ciprofloxacin was reintroduced and further improvement was observed. The patient was treated with ultrasound-guided abscess aspirations six times (2–7 days intervals) and with pig-tail catheters in between in order to drain different parts of the multiloculated abscess. Antibiotic treatment and ultrasound-guided aspirations in relation to temperature and CRP level are illustrated in Fig. . In total, the patient was treated with intravenous therapy for 6 weeks to cover both liver abscess and endocarditis. After discharge, he received high-dose oral antibiotics with amoxicillin and ciprofloxacin for another 2 weeks.
The patient improved on the combination of antibiotics and continuous liver drainage, fever faded and his appetite returned. At discharge the WBC and CRP were within normal range, alanine aminotransferases was normalized. Alkaline phosphatase remained slightly elevated and he continued to have slight hypoalbuminemia 25 g/L. On follow-up in the outpatient clinic after 2 months the patient was well and asymptomatic with normalized biochemistry and almost complete regression of the liver abscess on ultrasound.