A 64 year-old male smoker was referred to our Department for the management of metastatic squamous cell carcinoma with central airway obstruction and recurrent pulmonary infections. Immunohistochemistry showed strong positive expression of PD-L1 (> 50% of tumor cells) with no EGFR or ALK genomic tumor aberrations. The patient suffered from recurrent episodes of pneumonia related to the atelectasis of right lung , and exhibited severe acute respiratory distress, and poor performance status (ECOG 3). Chest CT scan performed at the admission showed a severe stricture of the right main bronchus with atelectasis of the middle lobe and pneumonia of right lower lobe . Though Pembrolizumab was indicated as first therapeutic option, this strategy was unfeasible due to the recurrent episodes of obstructive pneumonia of right lung. Thus, after multimodal assessment the patient was scheduled for endoscopic recanalization of right main bronchus before starting ICI treatment.
The procedure was performed under general anaesthesia; the patient was intubated with a 8,5 mm rigid bronchoscope (Stortz, Tuttlingen, Germany); the right main bronchus was completely obstructed by tumor at the level of the carina . Mechanical coring with rigid bronchoscopy, debulking with forceps, and control of bleeding with Nd:YAP laser (LokkiLis Laser-Bryan Corporation, Woburn, Mass) were used to resect the tumor and to obtain the complete recanalization of the right main bronchus and of the middle and lower bronchus . A fully covered SEMS (Tracheobronxane Silmet; Novatech SA; France, size:14 mm diameter; 40 mm length) was then inserted into the right main bronchus to maintain airway patency . The day after the procedure the dyspnea disappeared, and patient was discharged three days later. In the following two weeks, patient did not show clinical signs of pneumonia and presented an improvement of performance status (ECOG 1); chest CT scan confirmed the complete resolution of atelectasis and pneumonia. Therefore, he was eligible to receive Pembrolizumab 200 mg e.v. every 21 day. At 16 weeks follow-up, the patient was still alive and no further lung infections were recorded; chest CT scan showed a local reduction of tumor size without sign of lung infection.