A 42-year old man from Switzerland on vacation in Spain was air-lifted to our hospital after being hospitalized there for 1 week. He was initially presented with sudden-onset nausea, vomiting, vertigo, blurred vision, and marked imbalance. Additionally, the patient described difficulty swallowing. A head non-enhanced CT scan revealed a well-delineated, round, and hyperdense centimetric lesion in the medulla oblongata and a subsequent MRI demonstrated a 13-mm brainstem cavernoma with haemorrhage and oedema (Supplementary Fig. 1). Neurological evaluation showed bilateral ataxia, generalized hyperreflexia with left-sided predominance, a predominantly horizontal gaze evoked nystagmus on right and left gaze, slight left labial asymmetry, uvula deviation to the right, and tongue deviation to the left. Romberg sign was positive. No other neurological deficits were noted.
Due to the symptoms’ persistence and severity 2 weeks after the initial bleed, we proposed a microsurgical excision of the cavernoma. Surgery was performed under neuromonitoring for cranial nerves IX–XII, as well as sensory and motor-evoked potentials. A 10-cm midline skin incision and a 17-mm suboccipital craniectomy was undertaken. Intradurally, a subtonsillar approach exposed the floor of the 4th ventricle and spots of underlying haemorrhage (Supplementary Fig. 2). A complete excision of the cavernoma was executed without changes in the neuromonitoring recordings (Supplementary Fig. 3).
Postoperatively, the hypoglossal improved markedly, but tongue paresis on the left was still present at 2 weeks, as was his labial asymmetry. His dysarthria, dysphagia and balance were subjectively better, but he complained of oscillopsia, mainly oriented in the vertical plane. On postoperative clinical examination, besides a still positive Romberg test, the patient showed a new-onset upbeat nystagmus (Video 1). A 2D-videonystagmography (Difra, Eupen, Belgium) showed a spontaneous upbeat nystagmus in all gaze directions, which was not suppressed by fixation . Saccades were normal, horizontal and vertical smooth pursuit was impaired, gain of the optokinetic nystagmus was reduced. Video Head Impulse Test (Synapsys, Marseilles, France) was normal for all canals.
To explore possible causes for this upbeat nystagmus, the postoperative T1 weighted MRI was rigidly co-registered (FLIRT) to a MRI atlas obtained at 11.7 T from an ex vivo specimen including 124 grey matter anatomical classes . Limits of the postoperative cavity were displayed onto the atlas, showing a bilateral (left predominant) lesion of the rostral hypoglossal and caudal prepositus nuclei, intercalated nuclei and giganto-cellular reticular nuclei, and medial longitudinal fasciculi. A left partial lesion of the motor dorsal nucleus of the vagal nerve was also present .