A 42-year-old man presented to Al Mouwassat University Hospital with lower limb weakness that developed over the last 5 days followed by upper limbs weakness accompanied by paresthesia and numbness in upper and lower limbs. The patient was dyspneic at admission with New York Heart Association (NYHA) grade III (doing less than ordinary activity) . No cognitive functions deterioration or seizures were mentioned. The review of other systems was unremarkable for any symptoms of preceding infection. Clinical examination revealed an elevated respiratory rate without affecting the patient’s ability to count to 20 on the single breath count test (SBCT), and a palpated liver span of 14 cm . Neurological examination revealed hyporeflexia and decreased strength of upper and lower limbs with medical research council (MRC) sum-score of 36/60 . Examination of Cranial nerves (CNs), sphincters function, deep sensations, and sensory innervation was normal.
Laboratory tests revealed an elevation in alanine transaminase (ALT) and aspartate transaminase (AST) on admission but normal other lab tests .
Analysis of cerebrospinal fluid revealed an albuminocyto-dissociation with WBCs of 4 /mm3, elevated total protein of (92 mg/dl), and a normal glucose level.
Summarizing clinical symptoms and CSF analysis suggested the diagnosis of GBS and implicated plasmapheresis as a modality of treatment. However, elevated liver enzymes indicated further exploration. Echography of the liver and biliary tract revealed a 14 cm liver span and grade 1 fatty liver changes with no dilation of biliary tracts in and out of the liver, the thing that cannot by itself explain serum findings. Serology tests for viral hepatitis with HBV and HCV were negative. Toxicology screening and porphyria investigation were also negative.
NCS demonstrated no sensory nor motor response after stimulating lower limbs nerves and F wave was absent. There was also a significant decrease in motor and sensory responses amplitude and absence F wave in upper limbs. These findings proved severe motor and sensory axonal injury confirming a diagnosis of AMSAN.
Despite following therapeutic plasmapheresis for five sessions, the patient developed severe dyspnea (grade IV at NYHA scale), an SBCT of 10, and a decrease in motor strength in upper and lower limbs (MRC sum-score of 18) followed by CN 7 bilateral palsy. Concomitantly, the neurological exam revealed a deterioration in cognitive abilities with visual hallucinations, disorientation to people, and opsoclonus (showed in an additional movie file [see Additional file ]) that was managed by clonazepam. Therefore; an MRI (Magnetic Resonance Imaging) was performed with normal findings , laboratory tests showed a progressive elevation in liver enzymes. After that, the patient developed a sputum-producing cough with bilateral basal consolidations on the chest X-ray suggesting nosocomial pneumonia. Later, the patient developed a severe respiratory failure resulting in a cardio-respiratory arrest despite the administration of intravenous antibiotics and mechanical ventilation. Regardless of the resuscitation trials, the respiratory failure resulting from both severe muscle involvement and infection led to his death.