A 52-year-old male, smoker (30 packs/year), with a background of coronary artery disease, hypertension, and diabetes mellitus. The patient was referred to our hospital with a history of chest pain, dyspnea, and massive right-side pleural effusion. The laboratory investigation was unremarkable except for anemia. The chest x-ray showed complete opacity on the right lower zone of the chest with right-sided pleural effusion . Thoracentesis was done and revealed hemorrhagic exudative effusion. The acid-fast bacilli stain was negative. Subsequently, the patient underwent bronchoscopy which showed compression and edema on the right middle lobe bronchus with traces of blood coming from the right lower lobe.
A chest tube was inserted and drained initially around 1 liter of bloody effusion followed by around 500-750 ml of the same nature each day. Computed tomography (CT) scan showed a right heterogeneous lung mass compressing the medial segment of the middle lobe . Furthermore, tumor markers were all within the normal range, including carbohydrate antigen 19-9, carcinoembryonic antigen, and alpha-fetoprotein.
The patient underwent a right posterolateral thoracotomy. There was a fungating mass eroding the medial segment of the middle lobe which was resected. However, there was massive bleeding coming from the base of the mass due to the erosion from the pulmonary vessels, hence middle lobectomy was performed.
A gross histopathological examination of the specimen showed a right lobectomy specimen comprising a triangular piece of lung tissue measuring 9 x 8 x 1 cm along with separate fragments of white to gray-tan, soft to firm tissue, measuring in aggregate 8.5 x 5 x 1 cm, the largest measuring 5 x 4 x3 cm . Serial sectioning of the lung tissue was unremarkable while the separate fragments revealed a white to gray tan cut surface. Fragments of right parietal and diaphragmatic pleura measuring 12 x 10.5 x 2 cm and 4.5 x 2 x 0.6 cm respectively and 6 hilar lymph nodes from stations II, IV, and VII were also sampled.
The microscopic examination revealed monophasic neoplasm comprising sheets and fascicles of spindly to ovoid cells with focal hemangiopericytoma like vascular pattern and focal necrosis. The cells revealed stippled chromatin, scattered mitoses, frequently atypical and nuclear overlapping . The immunohistochemical analysis of the tumor cells showed positivity for Vimentin, H-Caldesmon, CK-7, CD-99, CD-56, and BCL-2 . There was focal positivity for EMA. The Ki-67 proliferation index was high, approximately 90%. No immunoreactivity was seen for Pan-CK, CK-20, Napsin, TTF-1, SMA, S-100, Synaptophysin, Chromogranin, and CD-34 . Cytogenetic testing by FISH analysis revealed the tumor cells to be positive for SS18 gene rearrangement . The final report confirmed high grade primary pulmonary synovial sarcoma. The right middle lobe, parietal and diaphragmatic pleura and were free of the malignant neoplasm. No metastatic deposits were seen in the lymph nodes. FISH analysis in cytogenetic testing identified a positive SS18 gene rearrangement in the tumor cells The patient was referred to King Fahad Specialist Hospital in Dammam (KFSH-D) and two phases of radiotherapy were given. The volumetric modulated arc therapy photon type technique was used, (50 Gy/25) at the operation bed and another dose of (10/Gy5).
Two months after the operation, the patient developed a left middle cerebral artery acute infarction secondary to intracranial atherosclerotic disease and ended with a major disability. After 2 months CT chest-abdomen and pelvis (CAP) was done and showed necrotic right pulmonary and pleural-based nodules and masses extending into the right hilum and inseparable from the pericardium, with underlying rib destruction and left upper lobe nodule likely representing metastatic. After 14 months, a positron emission tomography (PET) scan revealed multiple small to large densities seen in the right lung field with SUVmax 2.0. Five months later, there was interval progression of previously noted lung nodules on the right side with newly developed necrotic right hilar lymph nodes. As the patient’s condition was poor, the patient was started on comfort care and succumbed to his disease after twenty sixth months after his initial diagnosis.