A 59-year-old woman presented at our hospital with dizziness and nausea that had gradually worsened over the previous month. Neurologic examination showed no abnormalities, but magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a well-defined mass in the left cerebellum and tentorium cerebelli measuring 31×34×42 mm in size. The T1- and T2-weighted images of the tumor were isointense, with large zones of edema surrounding the tumor; additionally, the tumor showed uneven enhancement . Diffusion-weighted imaging showed a homogeneous signal, which was diminished at the tumor boundary. Head computed tomographic angiography showed clear tumor labeling. During the operation, the tumor was found to be tough, gray-red, with a clear boundary and abundant blood supply. As it was located close to the transverse and sigmoid sinuses, only partial resection was performed. The residual tumor after the operation was treated with intensity-modulated radiation therapy (64 Gy, 32 times). Craniocerebral MRI performed 2 months later showed that the tumor was significantly smaller than before the operation . The patient’s symptoms and neurologic status also improved after surgical treatment. Regular follow-up examinations in the 2 years since have shown that the patient is free of disease, with no sign of tumor recurrence or metastasis.
Histopathologic analysis of the tumor showed an abundance of typical “staghorn” vascularization in the tissue; and there was considerable hyalinization in the blood vessel wall. A large number of fusiform tumor cells arranged in bundles were seen between blood vessels, and mitotic bodies were clearly visible (≥5 mitoses per 10 high-power fields). The extracellular matrix was composed of bright eosinophilic collagen bands ( and ), and the Ki-67 labeling index reached 20% in local hot spots. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed positivity for cluster of differentiation (CD)34 , CD99, signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)6 , and B cell lymphoma (BCL)-2 ; and negative staining for smooth muscle actin and desmin.