A 51-year-old Japanese woman with no medical history was administered oral imatinib 400 mg daily for GIST. Ten weeks later, imatinib was discontinued because of facial edema. On this occasion, chest radiography showed no abnormal findings (Figure ). However, 2 weeks after discontinuation of imatinib treatment, she developed fever, dry cough, and dyspnea on exertion. Because her symptoms had remained unchanged for a month, she was referred to the respiratory medicine department in our hospital. She had taken no other drugs or alternative medicines.
The patient was a non-smoker. On admission, her oxygen saturation was 94% in room air, and body temperature was 36.2°C. Respiratory sounds were normal. Neither facial nor leg edema was observed. Arterial blood gas analysis in room air revealed a pH of 7.401; PaO2, 80.7 torr; and PaCO2, 40.1 torr. White blood cell count was 8,600/mm3 with 80.1% neutrophils, 11.8% lymphocytes, 5.4% monocytes, 2.6% eosinophils, and 0.1% basophiles. C-reactive protein was negative (<0.30 mg/dL). Levels of lactate dehydrogenase activity were slightly elevated (273 IU/L). Serum Krebs von den Lungen-6 (KL-6) and surfactant protein (SP)-D levels were normal (477 U/mL and 97.9 ng/mL, respectively). Anti-nuclear antibody and other autoantibodies to specific antigens were all negative. Pneumococcal and Legionella urinary antigens were negative. Cultures of blood and sputum to detect bacteria, fungi, and mycobacteria were all negative. Results of serological tests for Mycoplasma pneumoniae and Chlamydophilapneumoniae were negative; test results for β-d-glucan and cytomegalovirus antigen were also negative. The result of a drug lymphocyte-stimulating test (DLST) against imatinib was negative (Table ).
Chest radiography on admission revealed bilateral reticular shadows in both mid and lower lung fields (Figure ). Chest high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) scans revealed diffuse interstitial infiltrates in both lungs, predominantly along the bronchovascular bundles extending to subpleural regions (Figure ). Examination of bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid of the right B4 bronchus showed an elevated total cell count (4.35 × 105 cells/mL) including 8% macrophages, 4% neutrophils, 71% lymphocytes, and 10% eosinophils. The CD4/CD8 ratio of lymphocyte subsets was 1.29 (Table ). Cultures of BAL fluid were negative for fungal, bacterial, or mycobacterial pathogens. Cytological findings of BAL fluid showed a large number of lymphocytes, but no malignancies (Figure ). Lung specimens of the right B2b bronchus obtained by transbronchial lung biopsy showed mixed intra-alveolar and interstitial changes, with loose fibrous plugs and giant cells in intra-alveolar regions, and fibroblasts and lymphocytes in interstitial tissue, which was suggestive of a hypersensitivity pneumonitis pattern (Figure , ).
Although the result of DLST against imatinib was negative, drug-induced ILD caused by imatinib was suspected, because no other cause was evident. High-dose methylprednisolone (1 g/day intravenously for 3 days) was administered, followed by oral prednisolone (40 mg/day), which was then tapered off gradually. This resulted in an immediate improvement in clinical condition and a gradual improvement in chest radiographic findings (Figure , ). She underwent total gastrectomy and partial hepatectomy for the treatment of GIST one year after the initiation of the corticosteroid treatment with no recurrence of ILD.