A 52-year-old gentleman with no medical history presented with a 1-day history of left-sided neck and shoulder ache. The patient’s father died at the age of 68, and the cause was felt to be due to some form of cardiomyopathy. His sister also passed away at a young age in her sleep, with a presumed diagnosis of epilepsy. In terms of clinical observations, the pulse rate was 40 b.p.m., and the blood pressure was 149/104 mmHg. Clinical examination was unremarkable.
A 12-lead ECG revealed atrial fibrillation with narrow QRS complexes (116 ms) associated with a junctional escape rhythm, suggestive of CHB . Blood tests revealed elevated high-sensitivity troponin-I titres of 47.8 and 52.6 ng/L (upper limit is 19.8 ng/L). Connective tissue, autoimmune, and extensive virology screen were negative. A TTE revealed dilated diastolic internal diameter of 6.4 cm with a biplane LVEF of 26%. The infero-septal wall was akinetic, and the antero-lateral and antero-septal walls were hypokinetic (see , ). The right ventricle (RV) was mildly dilated with a basal diameter of 4.4 cm. A coronary angiogram was performed in view of the impaired LV function, which showed normal coronary arteries. Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) showed a dilated LV with severely impaired function (LVEF 26%), with mild central mitral regurgitation. There was late gadolinium enhancement in the mid section of the infero-septal and antero-lateral walls, suggestive of scarring . The RV was normal in size, but its function was severely impaired.
Our patient was commenced on 12.5 mg carvedilol twice daily, sacubitril/valsartan 24/26 mg twice daily, 25 mg eplerenone once daily (OD), and 10 mg dapagliflozin OD. Oral anticoagulation was initiated for stroke prophylaxis. As our patient presented with CHB, there was a Class I indication for permanent pacing. Due to a strong suspicion of LMNA cardiomyopathy, a primary prevention ICD was recommended by the multidisciplinary team. Given that the patients underlying QRS was narrow, we elected to pace via the His bundle (HB) to preserve physiological pacing. Using a left subclavian extra-thoracic approach, an active single coil ICD lead was implanted in the right ventricular septum. A select-secure lead was used to map the location of the HB using a Medtronic C315 sheath. A clear HB signal was seen, with an H-V interval of <60 ms. Pace-mapping demonstrated selective capture of HB, but at the cost of high pacing thresholds. By positioning the lead more distally, a non-selective capture was obtained at more acceptable outputs . The paced QRS of 119 ms and the time to onset of global longitudinal strain were consistent with conduction system capture, resulting in coordinated activation of the left ventricle. On discharge, our patient had a 4-month pacing check, annual clinical follow up, and 2-year TTE. A year after discharge, genetic testing confirmed mutations in the LMNA and DSP gene.
Two years after initial presentation, the patient presented to our local hospital following an appropriate ICD shock secondary to sustained ventricular tachycardia (VT). The patient was commenced on amiodarone, had the carvedilol dose up-titrated, and discharged after 72 h of monitoring. Our patient had no further episodes of VT to date, and on 3-year follow up, conduction system pacing is maintained at acceptable pacing output (see , ). A repeat TTE showed that LV function had not deteriorated. The RV size and function had returned to normal (see , ).