A 25-year-old, 19 weeks primigravid female, without any prior health issues, family history of venous thromboembolism recent travel presented with a unilateral, right leg swelling. Ultrasound venography revealed an extensive deep vein thrombosis (DVT) extending from her right posterior tibial vein into the right external iliac vein. She was commenced on subcutaneous low-molecular weight heparin (enoxaparin 1.5 mg/kg once daily) for treatment of her DVT. 3 weeks later, she presented with sudden onset breathlessness and chest discomfort. Upon climbing a flight of stairs, she experienced severe dizziness. Physical examination revealed unresolving right leg swelling, normal heart, and breath sounds. Her blood pressure was 110/70 mmHg with a regular pulse of 85 beats per minute. Her oxygen saturation was 95% on room air. Her electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with an S1Q3T3 pattern. Transthoracic echocardiography was performed which revealed a grossly dilated right ventricle with good contractility. Left ventricular ejection fraction was normal but the ventricular septum was flattened due to elevated right ventricular pressures. The estimated pulmonary artery systolic pressure (PASP) based on echocardiography was 51 mmHg, consistent with moderate pulmonary hypertension. The clinical suspicion of PE was high and therefore she was counselled to undergo computed tomography pulmonary angiography which confirmed the presence of saddle and bilateral PE. N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide levels were elevated at 276 pg/mL (normal < 125 pg/mL).
She was admitted urgently and a multi-disciplinary discussion with the patient and her family was held. The diagnosis of intermediate-high risk PE according to the European Society of Cardiology PE risk stratification scheme was explained. Of greater concern was that PE developed despite compliance with 3 weeks of therapeutic enoxaparin therapy for a proven DVT. The risk-benefit of the following treatment options were discussed in detail: (see , )
Conservative therapy with continued enoxaparin therapy with potential escalation to systemic thrombolysis in the event of further haemodynamic decompensation.
Pre-emptive systemic thrombolysis using either a half- or full-dose regime to reduce PE clot burden, although this is not recommended in guidelines for normotensive PE.
Catheter-directed thrombolysis which would involve smaller doses of intrapulmonary thrombolytics but also limited radiation exposure to introduce the catheters into the pulmonary arteries.
Suction thrombectomy which would not require any thrombolytics and is associated with minimal blood loss, but would also require radiation exposure to perform the procedure.
Surgical embolectomy which would involve open chest surgery and cardiopulmonary bypass.
Extra-corporeal membrane oxygenation which would provide circulatory support, in the event of haemodynamic decompensation, as a bridge to reperfusion therapies.
Based on shared decision-making between the patient, her family, and the multi-disciplinary pulmonary embolism response team (PERT), she elected to undergo semi-emergent suction thrombectomy. Upon admission to the high-dependency care unit, she was switched from enoxaparin to unfractionated heparin infusion. It was then realized that she required 1600 IU/h (38 400 IU/day) of unfractionated heparin to achieve an activated partial thromboplastin time of 70 s. Thus, heparin resistance may explain failure of enoxaparin to treat her DVT and prevent her subsequent PE. A pre-procedural obstetric assessment and antenatal scan confirmed the foetus as well.
In the cardiac catheterization laboratory, her abdomen, pelvis, and left thigh were draped with lead skirts to minimize radiation exposure to the foetus. A single right common femoral venous access was achieved under ultrasonic guidance with a micropuncture set. Ultrasonography also confirmed that the right femoral vein and inferior vena cava were free from thrombus. The access site was progressively dilated until a 28 French sheath (Intri, Inari Medical, CA, USA) could be positioned in the inferior vena cava. Direct contrast pulmonary angiography was avoided to minimize radiation dose and as such no contrast was used throughout the procedure. Less than 3 min of low-dose fluoroscopy was used to position the guidewire distally within the left and right pulmonary arteries. Suction thrombectomy was performed by applying aspiration to large bore catheters (T20 curve and T24 catheters, Inari Medical, CA, USA) and gradually withdrawing these catheters into the main pulmonary artery (PA). At least 3 runs were made in each pulmonary artery. Large volumes of clots were aspirated, with the aspirated blood passed through a micro-filter (FlowSaver, Inari Medical, CA, USA) before being re-infused via the femoral sheath . Post-thrombectomy, pulmonary arterial pressures had normalized to 33/12 mmHg (mean PA pressure of 21 mmHg) compared to 50/14 mmHg (mean PA pressure of 30 mmHg) at the start of the procedure. Oxygen saturation was 99% without the need for supplementary oxygen. Blood loss was estimated at less than 100 mLs. A figure of eight subcutaneous suture was placed at the access site to achieve hemostasis after catheter removal. This suture was removed the next day without any access site complications. Post-thrombectomy, the repeat obstetric scan remained normal with a viable, non-distressed fetus. A repeat echocardiogram 5 days later before discharge demonstrated normal right heart size and function and normal estimated PASP of only 32 mmHg. Her cardio-respiratory symptoms had resolved completely. Given her non-resolving DVT with enoxaparin, she was anticoagulated with 5 mg warfarin for the remainder of her pregnancy, aiming for a target International Normalized ratio of between 2.0 and 3.0. Maternal use of warfarin from week 6 to week 12 of gestation is associated with a risk of warfarin embryopathy due to impaired fetal synthesis of Vitamin K-dependent proteins crucial for bone and cartilage formation. Given that the pregnancy was already entering the 20th week of gestation, the obstetrician assessed the risk of fetal harm from warfarin to be low. A thrombophilia screen was performed which was negative. She delivered a healthy baby 4 months later at full term. She remained asymptomatic and free from recurrent venous thromboembolism or pulmonary hypertension at her last follow-up more than 7 months post-partum, still on warfarin.