On June 11, 2021, a 20-year-old man was hospitalized for intermittent melena and hematochezia that had persisted for > 3 mo.
For three months before hospitalization, the patient experienced intermittent melena between 50 and 200 g, up to twice daily, accompanied by dizziness and fatigue. He was admitted to the department of hematology of our hospital, and the laboratory testing revealed severe anemia (hemoglobin, 5.7 g/dL), with microcytic and hypochromic anemia. Thus, iron deficiency anemia was diagnosed. The treatment with blood transfusion and ferrous gluconate syrup improved the anemia-related symptoms and the hemoglobin levels increased to 6.0 g/dL. For diagnosis and treatment, he was admitted to our department 2 mo ago. His hemoglobin level was 6.2 g/dL, and the fecal occult blood test was positive. The gastroscopy, colonoscopy and contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) examination suggested no specific abnormalities. Hence, small bowel endoscopy was recommended to determine the cause of bleeding, but the patient refused and was discharged. Nonetheless, the melena relapsed 9 d ago, averaging about 300 g each time, accompanied by dizziness and aggravated fatigue. He was sent to a nearby hospital and had a hemoglobin level of only 3.4 g/dL. After a blood transfusion, the symptoms of anemia were improved. Four days ago, the melena relapsed again, and the situation appeared to have significantly deteriorated and he returned to the department of gastroenterology of our hospital.
The patient had no past medical history.
The patient did not present previous personal and family medical history.
At admission, his heart rate was 92 beats/min and his blood pressure was 12.1/6.9 kPa. He was pale, and the other physical examinations were normal.
The laboratory testing revealed moderated microcytic and hypochromic anemia (hemoglobin: 6.95 g/dL). The fecal occult blood test was positive. The liver and kidney function, coagulation function, carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen 19-9, and cancer antigen 125 were normal.
Endoscopy re-examination: Gastroscopy showed that the corpus had a spot of flushing and erosion, but there was no bleeding, and the stomach cavity was clean. The colonoscopy revealed dark red blood at the end of the ileum. After flushing with normal saline, there were no abnormalities in the mucosa, but dark red blood continued to gradually drip down from the ileum, indicating small intestinal bleeding. CECT re-examination (SOMATOM Definition Flash, Siemens, Germany) showed a lesion in the ileum that was enhanced in the arterial and venous phases .
Peroral double-balloon enteroscopy (DBE): Mild inflammation of the upper jejunum was detected. Transanal DBE reached the upper segment of the ileum. In the middle and lower segments, the mucosa was rough and eroded, and the villi were absent. A submucosal lesion approximately 1.2 cm × 1.0 cm was found at about 340 cm proximal to the ileocecal valve with ulcer formation . The surrounding mucosa was flushed, presented with edema, was hard in texture, easy to bleed, and had numerous thickened blood vessels supplying the tumor. The endoscopic diagnosis was: (1) Ileal submucosal bulge (stromal tumor? vascular malformation?); and (2) Ileal inflammation.