Approval by the local ethics committees (NCT04610411) and the national agency for therapeutic products (Swissmedic; EUDAMED reference number: 19-02-027424)) for using the technology as a medical device within a clinical trial was obtained.
A standard two-level lumbar fusion case was chosen for the first-in-man application on a 57-year-old patient with severe refractory lumbar back and left leg pain due to L5 nerve root radiculopathy. MR and CT images showed degenerative spondylolisthesis at L4/5 with facet joint effusions, consecutive spinal stenosis, and bilateral foraminal stenosis. Advanced degeneration was also detected at the level L5/S1 with almost completely collapsed disc height, intervertebral osteochondrosis (Modic Type 1), and facet joint osteoarthritis. Indication for fusion from L4 to S1 was given . The patient gave informed consent to be treated with AR-based holographic surgical navigation.
Preoperative lumbar CT data with a slice thickness of 1 mm (SOMATOM Edge Plus, Siemens Healthcare GmbH, Erlangen, Germany) were acquired, from which a 3D triangular surface model of each vertebra was generated using commercial segmentation software (Mimics 19.0, Materialise NV, Leuven, Belgium). An in-house developed surgical planning software was used to plan pedicles screw insertion points and trajectories in 3D. The screws were visualized as cylindrical primitives, which were manually placed on the 3D vertebra models by a surgeon. The trajectories were planned along the anatomic pedicle axis, with the entry point at the intersection between the transverse process and superior articular facet . The insertion points and trajectories were then parameterized as 3D locations and direction vectors, and used as navigation information.
The surgical planning data was stored locally on the Hololens device, which was then prepared for surgery following a validated cleaning procedure. A trackable pointer and a clamp for fixation of a marker on a drill sleeve guide were additively manufactured using biocompatible polyamide PA2200 and sterilized in our institution using steam pressure . The surgical procedure was performed under general anesthesia with the patient in the prone position. The dorsal structures of the spine, such as the spinous process, lamina, and transverse process, were exposed from the midline in a subperiosteal manner as usual.
After exposure, the pre-calibrated HoloLens device was placed on the surgeon's head. The surgeon controlled the navigation process with gestures and voice commands . The pointing instrument was equipped with a sterile fiducial marker (Clear Guide Medical, Baltimore, MD, USA) and used to generate a digital representation of the intraoperative bony anatomy. To this end, the surgeon carefully followed the contours of the spinous process, lamina, and transverse process with the tracked pointer. Marker tracking was implemented using the Aruco library, which was adopted work with Hololens 2. After acquisition of the 3D point cloud of the bony surface, a previously validated and published registration method was applied to superimpose the surgery plan with the intraoperative anatomy. The registration result was presented in-situ as a 3D hologram of the preoperative 3D vertebra model with the planned screw trajectory and entry point for validation and approval . Registration was done separately for each vertebra.