A 51-year-old woman with a previous history of hypertension, dyslipidaemia, cigarette smoking, and cerebral infarction due to vertebral artery dissection presented with inferolateral ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction . Urgent coronary angiography demonstrated a diffuse narrowing in the proximal left circumflex coronary artery (LCX) with Thrombolysis In Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) flow grade 2. A radiolucent luminal flap which runs parallel to the vessel wall was observed and Type 1 SCAD was diagnosed. After insertion of a SION blue (Asahi Intecc Co., Aichi, Japan) wire with the intention of performing intracoronary imaging, the artery flow collapsed to TIMI 0. An immediate PCI was undertaken with implantation of everolimus-eluting stent (SYNERGY 3.5 × 38 mm, Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA), and the angiography revealed a mild stenosis at distal of the stent without impairment of coronary flow (, S2). Optical coherence tomography disclosed a circular haematoma with the presence of a false double lumen at the stent distal segment and an intimal tear at the distal left main coronary artery (LMCA) . A conservative approach was decided owing to patient stability without evidence of ongoing ischaemia and normal TIMI flow.
Thirty minutes later, she started to complain of chest pain and the electrocardiogram revealed ST-segment elevation in leads I, aVL, and V2–3 . Coronary angiography demonstrated a double lumen morphology at the proximal potion of the left anterior descending (LAD) with TIMI2 distal flow suggesting the extension of coronary dissection and a total occlusion of the second diagonal brunch . Optical coherence tomography imaging revealed that the true arterial lumen was compressed by the FL between the proximal and middle portion of the LAD . The dissection began from the point where the small intimal tear was found in the final OCT pullback of the first procedure. Since the guidewire was in the FL, attempt to select the TL by using SION blue (Asahi Intecc Co.) was performed. After unsuccessful attempts, intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) was used to guide the wire into the TL . Optical coherence tomography evaluation after rewiring showed that the guidewire had been successfully placed in the TL and everolimus-eluting stent (SYNERGY 4.0 × 32 mm, Boston Scientific) was implanted from the body of the LMCA to the proximal LAD. Because of the residual stenosis at the ostial LCX, everolimus-eluting stent (SYNERGY 3.5 × 12 mm, Boston Scientific) was implanted followed by a kissing balloon inflation. Although angiography revealed a residual dissection at the distal end of the stent, the patient was asymptomatic with normalized ST-segment elevation and normal LAD flow (, S5). A conservative medical approach with dual antiplatelet therapy was decided and the patients were transferred to the coronary care unit. Echocardiography immediately after the procedure revealed hypokinesis at the anterolateral and inferolateral segments with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 37%, but it improved to 50% at Day 3. In the absence of in-hospital complications, she was discharged at Day 9. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) was performed 1 month later to screen fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD). Although no stenosis was observed in the renal arteries, FMD was suspected by an irregularity of the right internal carotid artery and an aneurysm at the right vertebral artery (, S6).