A 2-year-and-5-month-old Oromo boy presented to the emergency department with complaints of abdominal cramp and distension for 5 days. He had a history of vomiting of ingested matters and blood mixed mucoid diarrhea of the same duration. There was a history of low grade fever for 4 days. The boy did not have urinary compliant and trauma to the abdomen. He did not take any drugs for the current compliant. He was from a rural area in Ethiopia, with frequent day to day contact with cattle. His parents were farmers by occupation and were illiterate. The family did not report neonatal history of prematurity, delayed passage of meconium, any chronic constipation, and diarrhea.
He weighed 11.8 kg with normal anthropometry ranges.
On examination, the child was irritable and vital signs were as follows: pulse rate (PR) of 130 beats per minute; blood pressure (BP) of 90/60 mmHg; respiratory rate (RR) of 26 breaths per minute; and temperature (T) of 38.8 °C. The abdomen was distended, moving with breathing, and tympanic to percussion. He had generalized abdominal tenderness more on the lower quadrants. Bowel sounds were active and there was no finding on digital rectal examination. The rest of physical examination was unremarkable.
Blood investigations were as follows: hemoglobin 14.5 g/dl, white blood cell (WBC) total counts 35,000/mm3; differential count: neutrophils 79%, lymphocytes 11%, eosinophils 10%. Renal and liver function and serum electrolyte tests were normal. Stool examination was non-revealing.
Ultrasonography of the abdomen revealed small amount of peritoneal fluid collection in the paracolic gutter with floating debris and dilated edematous bowel . X-ray was not taken for the patient.
With diagnosis of generalized peritonitis, the patient was resuscitated with intravenous fluids and nasogastric tube inserted for decompression, as well as urethral catheterization to monitor urine output.
After written informed consent was obtained from the child’s parents, the boy underwent emergency laparotomy for suspected peritonitis. On exploration, there was minimal fecal contamination more on pelvic peritoneum, which was irrigated and suctioned. Upon inspection, both small and large bowel were inflamed and edematous. There was a single perforation of approximately 2.0 cm size in the anterior part of upper one-third of rectum and the edge of peritoneum was necrotic . After a thorough peritoneal lavage, a biopsy was taken from the edge of the perforation, and the necrotic edge debrided. The perforated rectum was repaired primarily and sigmoid divided diversion colostomy was carried out. Abdominal cavity washed with warm saline and closed in layer.
In the immediate postoperative period, the patient was treated with ceftriaxone (70 mg/kg/day intravenous every 12 hours) and metronidazole (30 mg/kg/day intravenous every 8 hours). Blood culture did not show the presence of any organism.
The postoperative period was uneventful. The patient was discharged on the 14th postoperative day with vital signs of PR 112 beats per minute, T 37.1 °C, and RR 26 breaths per minute. Pathology result showed scanty tissue with sheets of neutrophils and necrotic area, with conclusion of rectum with only necrotic tissue and sheets of neutrophils.
The patient was admitted for colostomy reversal after four visits in follow-up clinic and colostomy reversed and patient was discharged improved. He was appointed to pediatric surgery follow-up clinic, followed for more months, and was finally discharged from follow-up.