A 45 year-old woman was referred to our cornea clinic for evaluation of corneal edema in her right eye with only light perception vision. Slit lamp biomicroscopy revealed corneal stromal edema with old hyalinized keratic precipitates (KPs). The anterior chamber (AC) was quiet and a mature cataract together with iris pigment loss was observed . B-scan ultrasonography revealed an attached retina and a clear vitreous body. Central corneal thickness measured by ultrasound pachymetry was 685μ.
The patient was scheduled for a triple-DMEK procedure two months after presentation and the donor graft was prepared by a reverse big bubble technique as previously described by Zarei-Ghanavati et al The operation was uneventful and the donor was completely attached to the recipient cornea at the end of surgery.
On the first postoperative day, uncorrected visual acuity (UCVA) was 20/40. The cornea was clear with an attached descemet's membrane (DM) while intraocular pressure (IOP) was within normal limits. A regimen of topical antibiotic and corticosteroid was administered.
Three days after surgery, UCVA dropped to 20/200. Although the transplanted DM was completely attached, it showed some folds with inward rolling of its edge. Moderate corneal edema and striae on the posterior stroma were also observed. Two days later, partial detachment of DM developed [Figure and ] and the patient underwent AC bubbling. On postoperative day 7, the patient developed diffuse KPs on the donor and recipient endothelium ; the cornea was still edematous, partial DM detachment was present and IOP was normal.
Diagnostic AC tap was performed and aqueous fluid was sent for PCR analysis for HSV-1, HSV-2, and cytomegalovirus (CMV). Systemic acyclovir (400 mg, 5 times a day) was prescribed and the topical corticosteroid dosage was increased.
Two days later, the patient presented with significant improvement in vision (UCVA, 20/30). The PCR sample analysis was positive for HSV-1. The dramatic response to treatment was documented on slit lamp examination. The cornea was clear, the KPs disappeared and the DM was completely attached to the cornea; however, there were still some folds on the DM sparing the visual axis .
Three months after surgery, UCVA remained 20/30 with best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of 20/25. The cornea was completely clear and DM was totally attached with some visually insignificant folds . The patient received a prophylactic dose of acyclovir (400 mg, two times a day) with a diagnosis of HSV endotheliitis.