A 27-year-old Caucasian male with a past medical history of hypertension presented to the emergency room (ER) for evaluation of a cardiac arrest. He had a one-month history of unexplained progressive fatigue and decreased oral intake. He experienced a witnessed collapse at home from a seated position, and emergency medical services (EMS) were called. No bystander cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) was given prior to EMS arrival, and ECG in the field found the patient to be in acute ventricular fibrillation. He was defibrillated emergently which resulted in immediate asystole. CPR was performed, and return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) was achieved. The rhythm strip at this time revealed significant ST segment elevations in V1–V2, AVL, and AVR; Q waves in V1–V2; as well as diffuse ST depressions in II, III, AVF, and V3–V6 . These findings were relayed to the coordinating ER, and a STEMI protocol to allow for urgent cardiac catherization was initiated.
On route to the hospital, the patient again developed acute asystole. CPR was initiated and was in process at arrival to the ER. On exam, the patient was pale, cold, markedly cachectic, and severely volume depleted. Central venous access could not be achieved, and peripheral venous access allowed for the infusion of medications and resuscitation fluids but not for withdrawal of blood for laboratory testing due to marked venous collapse.
Advanced cardiovascular life support (ACLS) was continued for approximately 40 min. During this time, it was noted that asystole consistently converted spontaneously to ventricular tachycardia/fibrillation, and defibrillation would consistently result in asystole. The patient received epinephrine, vasopressin, bicarbonate, and normal saline during this period. ROSC was achieved, and all vasopressin, dopamine, and norepinephrine were required to maintain a perfusing blood pressure. At this time, an initial in-hospital ECG was acquired .
Given the findings and presentation, the patient was then taken emergently to the cardiac catheterization lab for coronary angiography. Blood samples for laboratory testing were then drawn from femoral access catheters, and coronary angiography was performed. The coronary arteries were found to be fully patent. Echocardiography revealed normal cardiac systolic function without wall motion abnormalities or pericardial effusion.
A right femoral angiogram revealed an extremely small right common femoral artery, which was nearly completely occluded by the utilized 6-french catheter. Distal pulses were absent, and the patient’s foot was cold to touch. The catheter was removed promptly, and the patient was transferred to the coronary care unit (CCU) for initiation of therapeutic hypothermia and further care.
Upon arrival to the CCU, laboratory testing began to reveal several marked laboratory abnormalities including profound hyperkalemia with a serum potassium of 9.8 mEq/L and disseminated intravascular coagulation (INR of >5, D-dimer >20 μg/mL, and fibrinogen <60 mg/dL). Emergent hemodialysis to correct his metabolic abnormalities was performed, and fresh frozen plasma was administered to correct his coagulopathy. After hemodialysis, his ECG normalized .
The remainder of his hospitalization was complicated by aspiration pneumonia, shock liver, acute kidney injury, and mild anoxic brain injury all due to prolonged resuscitation. However, he slowly recovered with supportive care. The etiology of his severe volume depletion and profound renal failure was never identified. He was transferred from the hospital to a rehabilitation facility with a need for intermittent scheduled hemodialysis and eventually discharged home.