A 49 year-old Caucasian woman with psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis, multivessel coronary artery disease, hypertension, subclinical hypothyroidism, and diabetes mellitus presented with bilateral lower extremity weakness and severe anemia. Regarding her history of psoriasis, she initially developed diffuse psoriatic plaques and axial psoriatic arthritis at age 19. Her first severe psoriasis flare occurred at age 29. Chart review did not reveal recorded Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI) scores but there was documentation of erythema and pustular psoriasis measured over 70% of her body surface area with elevated white blood cell count. Despite treatment with prednisone and acitretin, after 1 year she developed severe cutaneous flares of pustular psoriasis measuring up to 90% of total body surface area with spared regions in her legs, necessitating multiple hospitalizations. Her treatment was escalated to Geockerman therapy, methotrexate, and topical steroids, in addition to prednisone and acitretin. In subsequent years, her chronic psoriatic skin manifestations involved roughly 30% of her total body surface area, meeting criteria for severe psoriasis, and these skin manifestations were managed primarily with topical steroids. Plain films ultimately revealed active inflammatory spondylitis. Despite recommendations to start disease modifying therapy, the patient declined further treatment.
Six years prior to the most recent presentation, the patient was diagnosed with metabolic syndrome. Risk factors measured at the time of diagnosis included a peak hemoglobin A1c level of 11.6%, body mass index of 36, triglycerides of 310, high density lipoprotein (HDL) of 34, and systolic blood pressures routinely measured between 140 and 160. For her modifiable risk factors of diabetes, dyslipidemia, and hypertension, she was prescribed insulin, statins, and antihypertensive agents, respectively. Her family history was notable for ischemic stroke in her mother though of unknown etiology and age. There were no known inflammatory disorders in the family. Three months prior to the most recent presentation, the patient was hospitalized for a non-ST elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI). Cardiac catheterization revealed severe right coronary artery (RCA) disease and in-stent thrombosis of a pre-existing stent within the left circumflex artery placed 6 years prior. She underwent re-stenting for her left circumflex artery and RCA and was subsequently treated with a dual antiplatelet therapy regimen with aspirin and clopidogrel.
Subsequently, she presented with subacute bilateral lower extremity weakness and confusion. Her brain MRI revealed acute bilateral watershed infarcts, in addition to subacute left parietal and frontal gyrus infarcts. CT angiography of the head and neck revealed diffuse atherosclerotic plaques in the aortic arch and carotid bulbs, occlusion of the left internal carotid artery (ICA), and narrowing of the bilateral M1 segments of the middle cerebral artery (MCA). . There was reconstitution of flow in the left cavernous and supraclinoid segments of the ICA via an intact Circle of Willis. In addition to the bilateral MCA narrowing, there was mild narrowing of the right carotid artery and a single diminutive A1 segment which perfused bilateral anterior cerebral arteries (ACA) vessels.
There were no known preceding hemodynamic changes or systemic illnesses. Possible etiologies of her multifocal infarcts included severe atherosclerosis and related artery-artery thromboembolic events, cardioembolic events, hypercoagulable state, infection, or vasculitis. Cardiac rhythm telemetry did not reveal atrial fibrillation. Transthoracic echocardiogram revealed normal left ventricular function, normal left and right atrial size, no thrombus, and no intra- or extra-cardiac shunt. Subsequent transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) again did not reveal thrombus or valvular lesions. The TEE also demonstrated atheromatous plaque in the proximal descending aorta greater than 4 mm in thickness. Laboratory studies included hemoglobin (Hg) of 4.2 g/dL, an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate > 100 mm/hr. (normal 0–15 mm/hr) and lipoprotein (a) 133 nmol/L (normal < 75 nmol/L) but were otherwise unrevealing . The cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) did not have infectious or inflammatory properties. Workup of anemia was consistent with alpha thalassemia and severe iron deficiency, also supported by peripheral blood smear.
Despite aggressive medical management, the patient clinically deteriorated. Repeat imaging revealed marked interval infarct progression involving multiple vascular territories . She underwent a left-sided decompressive hemicraniectomy as a life sustaining maneuver, and concomitant brain biopsy did not demonstrate evidence of vasculitis or infection. Clinical course was further complicated by sepsis, renal failure, and an acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis drug reaction to iodine contrast. In accordance with the patient’s prior wishes, she was transitioned to comfort-focused care and her family agreed to an autopsy.
The autopsy revealed eccentric, firm, yellow plaques involving all proximal intracranial vessels, consistent with severe atherosclerosis. There was an occlusive thrombus of the right ACA as well as diffuse arteriolar microthrombi. Elements of acute and chronic ischemic changes were seen on histology, including extensive ischemic neuronal necrosis. Diffuse, severe atherosclerosis was determined to be the cause of fatal burden of ischemic stroke .