In April 2020, a 79-year-old man with a medical history of hypertension and dyslipidemia was referred to Niigata City General Hospital (Niigata, Japan) after complaining of anorexia, weight loss, abdominal pain, and low-grade fever for approximately half a year. He had no family history of malignancy. Physical examination indicated mild emaciation. A blood test at the first visit revealed anemia (hemoglobin: 10.1 g/dl), leukocytosis (13,050/µl), and elevated C-reactive protein (3.46 mg/dl). Computed tomography (CT) scans revealed an 18 mm right atrial mass, a 9 cm left renal mass with a renal vein tumor thrombus, para-aortic lymphadenopathy, and multiple small lung nodules . Four days later, the patient underwent resection of the right atrial mass to prevent cardiac events associated with tumor embolism. Pathological examination showed metastatic carcinoma consisting of large, atypical cells attached to the endocardium and infiltrated the myocardium . However, the histology of the tumor could not be identified, even with various immunohistochemical examinations. Therefore, the patient underwent a needle biopsy of the left renal mass, which was thought to be the primary lesion, 11 days after surgery. Pathological examination of the needle biopsy specimen revealed a tumor tissue with high atypia and partial papillary growth . The immune profiles of atrial metastasis and renal biopsy specimens were as follows: positive for CK AE1/3, CK20, CK5/6, CK7, E-cadherin, GATA-3, PAX8, p63, vimentin, and 34βE12; negative for EMA, HMB45, KIT, and Melan-A; positive for CD10 in the atrial metastasis but negative in the renal biopsy specimen. Based on these results, the patient was diagnosed with collecting duct carcinoma (CDC). The clinical stage of the tumor was T3aN2M1, according to the Union for International Cancer Control 8th edition of the Tumor Node Metastasis Classification . Immunotherapy with nivolumab (NIVO) and ipilimumab (IPI) was administered every three weeks at 240 mg and 1 mg/kg, respectively. After the second administration of NIVO and IPI, CT scans showed a mild reduction in all lesions noted in the previous CT scan. However, new bone metastases were observed . After four doses of NIVO and IPI, NIVO was administered at a dose of 240 mg every two weeks. A CT scan performed six months after the start of immunotherapy showed further reduction of all lesions, except for the bone metastases, which were unchanged. Another CT scan performed ten months after the start of immunotherapy showed that all lesions were stable . Following the CT scan, the patient experienced repeated bladder tamponade owing to left renal bleeding. Therefore, he underwent a left nephrectomy and para-aortic lymph node dissection.
The nephrectomy specimen showed a 7.2 × 6.7 × 4.5 cm tan necrotic tumor, infiltrating the renal parenchyma with extension to the renal vein, continuous with papillary tumors present in the renal pelvis . Histological examination revealed two forms of cancer: sarcomatoid UC infiltrating the renal parenchyma and high-grade UC in the renal pelvis . The sarcomatoid and conventional UC components were present at a ratio of approximately 70% and 30%, respectively. The sarcomatoid component of the tumor was composed of eosinophilic spindle-shaped cells with poor epithelial connections, extensive necrosis, and partial papillary growth. Immunohistochemistry revealed that the sarcomatoid and conventional UC components had completely different immune profiles. The sarcomatoid component was positive for CD10, weakly positive for CAM5.2, partially weakly positive for GATA-3, and negative for p63 and CK AE1/AE3 . PD-L1 was strongly expressed in the sarcomatoid component, but not in the conventional UC component . A small number of immune cells, mainly composed of CD8-positive T-cells, had infiltrated both the sarcomatoid and conventional UC components of the tumor. Besides, a significant accumulation of immune cells, including T cells and B cells, around the conventional UC components of the tumor was observed . There were no metastases in the 11 removed lymph nodes. The final diagnosis was UC with sarcomatoid variant (pT3N0M1).
The patient was treated with denosumab for bone metastasis after surgery, and a CT scan performed two months later revealed newly emerging multiple lung metastases. Two cycles of chemotherapy with gemcitabine and cisplatin resulted in progressive disease. Pembrolizumab was administered at a dose of 200 mg every three weeks thereafter. However, a CT scan performed three months later revealed further progression of cancer, and the patient died 19 months after his first admission.