A 39-year-old man presented with three episodes of acute-onset aphasia and dysphagia over 2 d in June 2021.
The patient was vaccinated with an inactivated SARS-CoV-2 vaccine (Beijing Institute of Biological Products Co., Ltd., Beijing, China). He received the first dose of the vaccine 2 mo before admission and the second dose 39 d before admission. Two days before admission, the patient reported aphasia and dysphagia for 1 h. Later that night, he had a second episode with similar symptoms as well as dyspnea, which lasted for approximately 1 h. Asyndesis, dysphagia, and dyspnea developed over 3 h on the morning of admission, which prompted his visit to our emergency department.
He had eczema and renal calculus for many years, and his eczema recurred after the second vaccine. He denied any history of major trauma or toxin exposure.
He has three brothers, one with pes cavus and another with pes cavus and CMT. His parents denied any history of hereditary diseases. His mother had died of myocardial infarction.
Physical examination showed that the patient was alert and had demonstrated weakness in chewing and swallowing, difficulty in tongue thrusting, difficulty in lifting the soft palate, diminished tendon reflexes of the limbs, mild atrophy of the muscles of the hands and distal leg, and bilateral pes cavus. There were no other positive neurological signs.
Blood analysis after admission showed that erythrocyte sedimentation rate, serum creatinine, electrolyte, glycosylated hemoglobin, and D-dimer levels were within normal limits. Laboratory tests showed slightly increased white blood cell count (11.75 × 109/L; reference range: 3.5–9.5 × 109/L), hepatitis B surface antigen levels (73.05 IU/mL; reference range: 0–0.03 IU/mL), antistreptolysin-O titers (218.00 IU/mL; reference range: 0–200 IU/mL), and total cholesterol levels (5.64 mmol/L; reference range: < 5.2 mmol/L).
Initial head computed tomography (CT) showed no obvious abnormalities . Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) on day 2 showed bilateral, symmetrical, and restricted diffusion , with T2 hyperintensities in the corpus callosum and supratentorial white matter. The neostigmine test, repetitive nerve stimulation, chest CT, carotid artery Doppler ultrasound, echocardiography, transcranial Doppler, CT angiography , and electroencephalography showed no obvious abnormalities. Contrast-enhanced transcranial Doppler revealed a small, natural, or consecutive right-to-left shunt. Transesophageal echocardiography also showed a small intracardiac right-to-left shunt. A 24-h dynamic electrocardiogram showed accidental atrial premature beats, paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia, and paroxysmal ST-segment change.