The patient was a 65-year-old man who presented with a 1-year history of the right lower extremity weakness and pain, and chronic low back pain. Three months before admission to our hospital, the right lower extremity weakness worsened. He had a gait disorder at the time of presentation due to pain in the right lateral thigh and right lower extremity weakness. The patient had no significant medical history and did not take medications.
The femoral nerve stretching test was positive on his right leg. Both lower extremity tendon reflexes were intact; however, weakness in the right lower extremities (iliopsoas muscle MMT4 and quadriceps femoris MMT4) was observed. Hyposensation (fine touch 7/10) was observed in the right lateral thigh. The Japanese Orthopedic Association score was 13 points (3–4–6–0).
X-ray images showed a decrease in the intervertebral space of L4/5 and L5/S. On the other side, in the intervertebral space of L3/4, maintaining the intervertebral disc heights, and instability was unclear . MRI of the lumbar spine revealed a rounded lesion (size, 10 mm × 12 mm × 10 mm) from the right L3/4 facet joint that appeared hypointense on T1- and T2-weighted MRI ( and ). The lesion occupied the right side of the spinal canal to the right intervertebral foramen of L3/4, and exclusion of L3 and L4 nerve roots was observed. By CT imaging, the lesion was well delineated to be completely calcified ( and ).
The patient’s most remarkable symptom was pain in the right lateral thigh and weakness of the right lower extremity, and we diagnosed radiculopathy due to a calcified JFC. The patient underwent total cyst removal with facetectomy of the right L3/4 facet, and L3 to L4 posterior fusion . Facetectomy was essential for reliable decompression of nerve roots. The cyst wall was fragile and adhered to the surrounding tissue and easily teared, making it difficult to remove as a mass. Finally, the cyst was resected completely, and the cyst contents and wall were submitted as pathological specimens. Intraoperatively, the lesion was compressing the thecal sac and noted to consist of a paste like material that was not ossification.
On the 1st day after the operation, rehabilitation started with a hard lumbar corset. The post-operative hospital course was unremarkable. The right lateral thigh pain was improved, and weakness gradually recovered. Twelve days after surgery, the patient was discharged.
A pathological image (H&E, × 400) was provided and showed bleeding, fibrin clots, and tissue with myxomatous degeneration as the contents . In addition to von Kossa staining, it provided acidic exudate with uniform fine granular calcification . The cyst wall was fibrotic connective tissue with the formation of granulation tissue . Histologic analysis identified that the lesion was a simple pseudocyst, containing calcified material.