This is a 21 year-old Native American woman, without known medical disease or immunodeficiency. She had recurrent dysuria for about four months. She was treated with multiple courses of antibiotics for urinary tract infections. Two months later, she developed hematuria and abdominal CT was performed and showed bilateral hydronephrosis with unspecific etiology. She was admitted to a local hospital and underwent bilateral ureteral stents placement and discharged on antibiotics. Three weeks later, she was transferred to our facility complaining of severe back pain, fever and flank pain. Her previous surgical history is significant for right salpingectomy after tubal pregnancy two years ago. On physical exam, she had high temperature 102°F. The right costovertebral angle was tender. There were two nontender skin nodules on the lateral side of the right thigh and posterior calf.
Her laboratory data showed: White blood cell count 13,200; Hemoglobin 11.5; Platelets 340,000; Erythrocyte sedimentation rate 103; Serum Sodium 133; Serum Creatinine 0.5; Albumin 2.8, liver enzymes were normal. Urine analysis showed WBC > 100, RBC > 100, and protein 1+. Routine urine culture and blood cultures had no growth. HIV test was negative. TB skin test was nonreactive.
Abdominal CT showed new 3.8 cm low density lesion in the anterior cortex of the right kidney without hydronephrosis , right paraspinous muscle abscess extending from L2 to S3 with some bony destruction , left gluteus medius muscle abscess, and multiple small lesions in the pleural space , one of them is attached to the pericardium . Chest x-ray showed diffuse nodular infiltrates.
She underwent CT guided needle aspiration of the paraspinal abscess. The smear for acid fast bacilli was negative, but AFB culture grew Mycobacterium tuberculosis on day 16. Meanwhile, in the setting of this metastatic pattern, patient underwent multiple diagnostic tests. A punch skin biopsy of the cutaneous nodules showed multiple areas of fat necrosis with noncaseating granulomas, negative for AFB staining. A video-assisted thoracoscopic lung biopsy showed caseating granulomas with many acid fast bacilli. Miliary tuberculosis was confirmed on day 14. Later on, Mycobacterium tuberculosis was isolated from many specimens: urine, skin tissue, muscle abscess, bronchoalveolar lavage and the lung tissue. It was sensitive to all antimycobacterial agents. Patient was started on 4 drug regimen. She had CT – guided placement of a drainage catheter into the paraspinous muscle abscess, then was removed after one week. She had her ureteral stents exchanged. She was afebrile upon discharge on day 28 and continued to improve.