A 15-year-old male was brought to the emergency department after sustaining a gunshot wound to the head. Non-contrast computed tomography (CT) scan of the head demonstrated a trajectory entering the right inferior temporal bone, entering the anterior portion of the middle cranial fossa, traversing the anterior right temporal lobe, entering the right orbital cavity, and exiting through the ethmoid sinus and ultimately the left orbital cavity. There was a right temporal tip contusion along the ballistics path, with associated extra-axial and subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH). The Sylvian fissures were not involved in the ballistic trajectory .
The patient was taken emergently to the operating room for a right-sided decompressive craniectomy and debridement of the right temporal region. The patient started to follow commands, was moving in all extremities, and was extubated by hospital day 3. He underwent repair of his ruptured left globe and persisted with complete vision loss in the right eye.
Initial CT angiogram (CTA) within 24 h of his admission showed no vascular injury; however, a repeat CTA was performed 5 days later for vascular surveillance for TICA, which showed interval development of a right middle cerebral artery (MCA) bifurcation aneurysm. The same scanner produced both CTAs with 420 slices at 0.6 mm thickness, including three dimensional reconstructions. A subsequent diagnostic cerebral angiogram (DCA) confirmed the presence of a 4 × 3 mm right MCA bifurcation aneurysm, and also identified a 2 mm right internal carotid artery (ICA) terminus aneurysm, as well as severe vasospasm of the proximal ICA and MCA vessels .
The patient was taken to surgery for clipping of the right MCA and right ICA terminus TICAs. Direct clipping of the lacerations in the vessels was successful, although bypass was prepared for, depending on the intraoperative findings . Due to the severe vasospasm, patient was treated with intracisternal papaverine. Sixty milligrams of papaverine diluted in 2cc of saline is injected into the intracisternal space over the affected vessels. Papaverine is a vasodilator which relaxes the smooth muscles of vessels. Adventitial dissection was performed allowing for better penetration of papaverine and removal of any possible sites of constriction. The surgical cavity is then irrigated and final hemostasis obtained.
The end-tidal CO2 was kept constant and cerebral blood flow (CBF) measurements were then obtained before and after performing the therapeutic maneuvers using the Charbel Micro-Flowprobe® (Transonic). Measurements were taken at the distal ICA just before the ICA terminus as well as the A1 and M1 segment arteries just after the ICA terminus. This instrument relies on transit-time ultrasound volume flowmetry to obtain blood flow measurements in mL/min. The measurements demonstrated improvement in flow after the therapeutic maneuvers .
The patient returned to the intensive care unit. Repeat catheter angiogram was performed on hospital day 10 and confirmed that the two previously treated aneurysms were excluded from the circulation. Previously-identified vasospasm of the right supraclinoid ICA, M1, and A1 segments was improved. Two-month follow-up DCA demonstrated substantial improvement in the distal ICA caliber and improvement in the M1 irregularity. Several distal dilated vessels in the anterior temporal region were identified as suspicious for pseudoaneurysms, but have largely resolved on the 2-month catheter angiogram. Two weeks after the initial presentation, the patient was neurologically intact, with the exception of bilateral blindness related to the ballistics path, and was discharged to inpatient rehabilitation center.