A 30 year old female presented with complaints of pain in right upper abdomen and awareness of lump in right flank. History of loss of weight and appetite was present. There was no history of hematuria. On per abdominal examination a large lump of approx. size 15 × 12 cm was present in right upper quadrant and reaching up to right iliac fossa.
Contrast enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed a large heterogeneously enhancing mass lesion of size 16.5 cm × 10.5 cm × 10 cm in hepato-renal space [(a) and (b)]. The lesion showed large area of central necrosis with thick nodular peripheral enhancement. Superiorly the lesion was seen to infiltrate most of the contiguous right lobe of liver (segment VI, VII and VIII). Inferiorly it was seen to involve upper pole of right kidney with sharp distinct margins. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) abdomen showed findings similar to CT scan with a large enhancing mass lesion in right lobe of liver with extension into right retro peritoneum and infiltrating into right kidney.
The case was discussed in multi-disciplinary tumor board meeting. A pre-operative diagnosis of locally advanced RCC with liver infiltration was made and surgical intervention with en bloc right nephrectomy and hepatectomy was planned. A reversed L incision was given from the skin to peritoneum and abdominal cavity was exposed. A 3 × 2cm size peritoneal nodule was noted near mesoappendix, it was dissected and sent for frozen section. Intra-op frozen report of the peritoneal nodule was positive for malignancy. There was no evidence of any other peritoneal or omental nodule. Considering the young age, good performance status of the patient and a single isolated peritoneal metastasis, decision of cyto-reductive surgery in the form of simultaneous nephrectomy with right hepatectomy was taken. The posterior peritoneum was opened and the lower pole of right kidney was mobilized. Right renal artery was dissected and ligated. As the mobilisation of right lobe of liver was restricted, parenchymal transection was done first. The liver parenchyma was transected using a Cavitron Ultrasonic Surgical Aspirator (CUSA) and harmonic. CVP was kept low (approx. 4 mmHg). Vascular inflow occlusion (Pringle Maneuver) was not used. The right hepatic vein was clamped, divided and ligated with prolene suture. Retroperitoneal dissection of the upper kidney was done. Right renal vein and artery were divided with an Echelon white stapler. Right ureter was ligated and divided and the combined right nephrectomy and hepatectomy was completed.
Macroscopic examination revealed a 25 cm × 15 cm × 10 cm size soft to firm mass lesion, arising from the upper pole of right kidney [(a) & (b)]. Areas of cystic degeneration and necrosis were present. There was no breach in the renal capsule however the tumor was extending superiorly and was infiltrating the right liver (segment VI, VII, VII). Fat planes with IVC, right colon and duodenum were maintained. Multiple enlarged lymph nodes were present in para-caval region, largest measuring 2 cm × 2cm. Patient received intensive care monitoring for two days and recovered well. She was started orally on post-operative day (POD) 2 and drain was removed on POD 5. She was discharged on POD 6. The patient recovered without any hepatic or urinary complications. Post recovery she received chemotherapy and is free of local recurrence or other systemic metastasis at 12 months of follow up.
Microscopic examination revealed grade IV clear cell RCC, originating from upper pole of right kidney. Tumor was extending into renal sinus, right adrenal gland and liver. Lypmhovascular invasion was present [(a) & (b)]. Eight lymph nodes were dissected, all of them were involved with tumor (Final stage pT4N1M1).