A 35-year-old Greek female patient, gravida four and para two, presented to our breast unit department due to a non-palpable breast lesion which was revealed via ultrasonic examination, with malignant ultrasonographical features. Her personal medical history and her psychosocial history were uneventful and Pap Smear tests were up to date and all negative. She was non-smoker and consumed alcohol only in social occasions. Her body mass index (BMI) was 30, 48 Kg/m . Because of her mother’s breast cancer history (diagnosed with breast cancer at the age of 50, but never tested for BRCA), the patient was followed up via transvaginal ultrasonography and breast ultrasonic examination every six months since 2004.
Upon arrival, physical examination of her breasts did not reveal any palpable mass. Breast ultrasonography showed a hypoechoic lesion of 0,9 × 0,8 cm located in the lower inner quadrant, while breast magnetic resonance imaging confirmed the suspicious and possible malignant finding on her right breast (MRM BIRADS IV) . The chest x-ray test was normal. Her laboratory workup was all normal.
Under general anesthesia, a total excision of the lesion (which had been marked via a hook wire) was performed by a gynecologist specialized in breast surgery with 6 years’ experience in breast surgical procedures. The normal tissue of the breast, the nipple and the areola were conserved. The excised mass was almost 1 cm in diameter. The contralateral breast was normal. Ultrasound guided biopsy was not performed because BIRADS IV was overestimated (not necessarily malignancy). There were no peri-operative complications and the breast healed well. Post-operatively, the patient was followed up in the breast ward. She was administered antibiotics, fluids and painkillers intravenously. Histology confirmed the ultrasonic diagnosis, revealing a central low grade invasive ductal carcinoma and a peripheral in situ ductal breast carcinoma grade III . The margins of the resected surgical specimen were negative for cancer cells.
After almost a month from the first operation, the patient underwent a new surgical excision of unilateral right axillary lymphadenectomy of the first and second lymph nodes level. Twenty-two excised axillary lymph nodes were negative for metastasizing breast disease (0/22). Immunohistochemical analysis in cellular level showed ER (clone 6F11) stain positive in 100% of tumor cells, PR (clone 636) stain positive in 2% of tumor cells, Ki-67 (clone M1B1) stain positive in 60% of tumor cells and c-erb-2 (clone CB11)/HER 2 showing 3+ positive for cancer. Subsequently, the patient underwent treatment via chemotherapy, radiotherapy, herceptin and hormone therapy for the invasive ductal carcinoma Grade III (TNM staging: T1N0MO).
Gene evaluation for genetic mutations showed a BRCA 1 mutation; gene BRCA1 analysis was positive for mutations predisposing for breast or ovarian malignancy. More specifically the mutation p.Gly1738Arg (HGVS nomenclature)/ G1738R (BIC nomenclature) was detected. Thus, a prophylactic bilateral mastectomy was performed and followed by a successful plastic reconstructive surgery done by an experienced plastic surgeon, allowing for optimal aesthetic results.
A year after the first operation, the patient underwent a prophylactic laparoscopic bilateral salpingoophorectomy and uterine diagnostic curettage at the age of 37. Before surgery, blood tests including tumor markers were all in normal levels (CEA: 1,3 ng/ml, CA15-3: 6U/ml, CA125: 8U/ml, CA19-9: 30 U/ml, AFP: 1,2 IU/ml). The chest x-ray test was normal and the preoperative magnetic resonance imaging of the upper and lower abdomen did not detect any pathological finding. The histological diagnosis of the surgical specimens was suggestive of a unilateral invasive high grade salpingeal cancer, mostly intraepithelial and minimal invasive (0, 1 cm) serous carcinoma of one salpinx. Immunochemical analysis was positive for P53 and Ki67 . No other pathologic finding was detected.
A further surgical evaluation was decided by the oncology council. Thus, the patient underwent an open total abdominal hysterectomy, omentectomy and bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy by a gynecologist specialized in gynecologic oncology under general anesthesia. Postoperatively, the patient was followed up in a gynecology ward. She was administered antibiotics, fluids and painkillers intravenously. After a hospitalization of 5 days, she was discharged on the 6th postoperative day, in good condition. She was prescribed tinzaparin (u) for 8 days and cefuroxime (u) peros for 7 days. The patient was compliant with the therapeutic program which was well tolerated with no significant side effects. Histology was totally normal without any other pathological findings. Bone scanning was normal and did not reveal areas of increased radionucleide uptake. Similarly, the hip and pelvis x-ray were normal.
The patient is in excellent clinical condition and she is followed up via ultrasonography of upper and lower abdomen and breast magnetic resonance imaging every 6 months, without any pathological finding after the last surgery.