The patient provided consent for publication of this case report.
The patient was a 52-year-old Japanese woman, gravida 2, para 2, who sought medical attention at our hospital because of lower abdominal pain. The patient had a past history of uterine leiomyoma and duodenal ulcer, the latter having been managed conservatively with medication. A huge uterine mass was detected by abdominal computed tomography (CT). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed the presence of a 27-cm mass in the uterus, indicative of a leiomyoma . No tumor was detected in the inferior vena cava, iliac vein, or ovarian vein . The patient was scheduled for surgery for removal of the uterine tumor. However, during routine preoperative follow-up, a 78 × 47-mm mass was identified in the right atrium of her heart on echocardiography . Other features of the echocardiography included a respiratory variation of the diameter of the inferior vena cava of 12 mm, and a left ventricular ejection fraction of 64%, both of which were within normal range. Systemic enhanced CT revealed a 75-mm mass in the right atrium , with no evidence of lung metastases. Under a preoperative diagnosis of metastatic lesion or cardiac myxoid tumor, intracardiac mass resection and tricuspid annuloplasty were performed as the first-stage surgery. After surgery for the cardiac mass, gonadotropin releasing hormone agonist therapy was administered for 6 months for the management of the uterine mass. With no change in the tumor size, total abdominal hysterectomy was performed as a second-stage surgery. The diagnosis was confirmed as uterine IVL, with an isolated metastasis to the right atrium. There has been no recurrence of the tumor over the period of 15 months following surgery, with no requirement for anti-estrogen therapy during this period.
An ovoid, gray-white colored mass, with a tough texture, was removed (78 × 58 × 55 mm in size). The mass was adherent to the wall of the right atrium via a pedicle . Histologically, the tumor consisted of spindle-shaped cells, with eosinophilic cytoplasm, lacked atypia, and was accompanied by a myxoid change. The pedicle adhering to the right atrium was richly microvascularized . Immunohistochemical staining was positive for α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA), desmin (focal), and estrogen receptor (ER), but negative for progesterone receptor (PgR) and CD10 .
Macroscopically, the uterus was enlarged and the cut surface showed a white solid mass with a “worm-like” appearance . Histopathologic examination revealed multiple benign leiomyomatous tissues within the vascular vessels . Immunohistochemical stains were positive for α-SMA, desmin (focal), ER, and PgR, but negative for CD10 . Peritoneal cytology was negative for malignancy.