A 55-year-old female patient from Southeast Ethiopia, presented to Goba referral hospital with complaints of right flank pain and swelling on the right lumbar region. The pain was a dull ache and not associated with urinary complaints like dysuria, frequency, urgency or hematuria. She had no cough and chest pain.
The patient reported that she had been visiting more than three hospitals with complaints of right flank pain for the last eight years and had been taking an ultrasound, magnetic resonance imaging, renal function test, and urine analysis. However, the patient reported that the results of these investigations were normal, and she was only treated with different types of anti-pain medications. Four years later, the patient noticed that swelling on the right lumbar region, and the swelling had increased gradually and was associated with pain. She had no history of flank trauma, surgery, chronic constipation, and other abdominal infections. In addition, the patient had no history of chronic cough, difficulty of urination, and history of diabetes mellitus.
On admission, the patient was clinically active and had normal vital signs. On abdominal examination, there was round protruding swelling immediately beneath the 12th rib of the right upper flank region . The swelling was palpable and bowel sound was heard in the region. The swelling was easily reducible and protruded when the patient was coughing or straining. The opposite side lumbar region was normal, and chest examination was clear and normal. The hematological and urine analysis laboratory findings were normal. The ultrasound picture revealed the bowel contents within the hernial sac. Otherwise, all visceral organs were normal.
With the diagnosis of primary acquired superior lumbar hernia, the patient underwent open surgery. The open approach was designed due to the absence of laparoscopy services in the hospital. The defect was reduced back and repaired using a retro-muscular or sublay prolene mesh (15 cm by 7.5 cm) as this can maintain the maximum overlap of healthy tissue with the implanted mesh material. The patient was discharged at postoperative day four and followed up for four months. The patient had no recurrence of swelling at four months of follow-up.