The patient was an 80-year-old Japanese man diagnosed as having symptoms suggestive of PSP with predominant postural instability (PSP-PI). The clinical course of the case is shown in Figure . At the age of 75 years, he developed depressed mood, insomnia, psychomotor retardation, feelings of guilt, and suicidal ideation and experienced a loss of interest, energy, and appetite. He was diagnosed with major depressive disorder in accordance with the DSM, 5th Edition criteria at his first psychiatric visit. He was initially treated with 100 mg/day of sertraline, which provided inadequate efficacy, and was subsequently referred to our hospital. At the age of 76 years, his medication was replaced with 30 mg/day of mirtazapine. This and all subsequently prescribed drugs were given with the consent of the patient and his wife. However, he developed anxiety, agitation, and palilalia, in which he repeated words, such as “umm, umm, umm.” One month later, mirtazapine was switched to 60 mg/day of duloxetine. The following month, his suicidal ideation worsened, and the patient was hospitalized for the first time.
His total score on the 17-item Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HAM-D) on admission was 24. Subsequently, 6 mg/day of aripiprazole was added to duloxetine. Although the patient's palilalia improved, his depressive symptoms persisted. Aripiprazole was increased to 24 mg/day. He developed gait disturbances, which comprised small steps, bradykinesia, and falls. These symptoms resolved when aripiprazole was stopped. His depression was not relieved by 30 mg/day of escitalopram or by 100 mg/day of milnacipran. His total scores on the 17-item HAM-D fluctuated between 20 and 22. When 40 mg/day of duloxetine was resumed, his energy and appetite improved; however, his palilalia recurred. Subsequently, he was treated with 100 mg/day of sertraline and 3 mg/day of aripiprazole. His palilalia disappeared, his depressed mood, anorexia, and insomnia improved, and his feelings of guilt and hopelessness decreased. However, he sometimes complained that he was unable to open his eyes, even when his eyes were open. Additionally, apathy and bradyphrenia appeared around the same time. His Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score was 28. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed mild atrophy of the medial temporal lobe, and 123I-meta-iodobenzylguanidine myocardial scintigraphy revealed that his heart-to-mediastinum ratio had not reduced (3.40 and 3.62 for the early and delayed phases, respectively). He was discharged 15 months after admission. His total score on the 17-item HAM-D at discharge was 19.
The patient occasionally experienced palilalia and difficulty in opening his eyes. At the age of 77 years, he became unable to operate a personal computer, and at 78 years of age, his gait became slower with smaller steps, and he repeatedly fell. Apathy and difficulty in opening his eyes also worsened, and he was bedridden almost every day. He was re-hospitalized at the age of 80 years.
He had difficulty in opening his eyes (i.e., eyelid opening apraxia). In addition, he repeatedly complained that he was unable to open his eyes, even when his eyes were open. Upward gaze palsy was also noted. These features fulfilled the lowest level of certainty for ocular motor dysfunction (O3). Repeated unprovoked falls occurred within 3 years after onset of PSP-related features, which fulfilled the highest level of certainty for postural instability (P1). We observed gait disturbances, which included small steps and limited arm swing. His neck was slumped and tilted slightly forward, and he exhibited bilateral trunk and limb rigidity. These features fulfilled the lowest level of certainty for akinesia (A3). His scores for the MMSE and Frontal Assessment Battery were 28 and 13, respectively. He showed palilalia, apathy, and bradyphrenia, which fulfilled the mid-level of certainty for cognitive dysfunction (C2). Brain MRI revealed predominant midbrain atrophy , which fulfilled imaging finding 1 (IF1). Furthermore,123I-ioflupane single-photon emission tomography showed decreases in the bilateral putaminal specific binding ratios (3.13 and 3.09 for the right and left, respectively; Figure ), which fulfilled imaging finding 2 (IF2). He was diagnosed as having symptoms suggestive of PSP-PI in accordance with the Movement Disorder Society clinical diagnostic criteria for PSP (MDS-PSP) and the Multiple Allocations eXtinction rules.
Although sertraline and aripiprazole were discontinued, gait disturbances and rigidity persisted. Moreover, his palilalia (e.g., “umm, umm, umm”) subsequently worsened with anxiety and agitation. He also repeatedly stated “ouch, ouch, ouch” when he fell. We observed that his difficulty in opening his eyes partially responded to botulinum toxin therapy. However, he repeatedly complained that he was unable to open his eyes. Thus, 100 mg/day of sertraline and 3 mg/day of aripiprazole were resumed, and his palilalia, difficulty in opening his eyes, anxiety, and agitation improved. He was discharged 2 months after his second admission.