A 52-year-old, Caucasian man of Greek origin was admitted to our hospital reporting low-grade fever for the previous 7 days, and fatigue. His past medical history was unremarkable. Clinical examination revealed a low-grade hepatomegaly (1 to 2cm) and two palpable lymph nodes at the left lateral neck with a soft constitution, movable and mildly sensitive when palpated.
The results of the laboratory tests carried out on admission are shown in Table . Direct and indirect antiglobulin tests were negative; C-reactive protein (CRP) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) were 37.2mg/L and 30mm/hour, respectively. Immunologic tests and urine analysis were normal. Blood and urine cultures and the Mantoux test were negative. Serologic findings including brucella, rickettsia and coxsiella burnetii, borrelia burgdorferi, Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), herpes virus zoster, toxoplasma, coxsackie, mycoplasma pneumoniae, hepatitis B virus, hepatitis A virus, adenovirus, echo virus, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and herpes virus type 6 using ELISA were all normal. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for EBV and antistreptolysin titer was negative. Positive results were HSV type 1 IgG; 5.9 (Positive > 1.1); HSV type 2 IgG; 0.1 (Positive > 1.1) and HSV type 1 IgM; 4.6 (Positive > 1.1); HSV type 2; 0.5 (Positive > 1.1).
Electrocardiogram (ECG) and chest X-ray were normal. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed low-grade hepatomegaly. Neck ultrasonography showed two lymph nodes on the left side of the neck to be 32mm and 26mm in diameter, with a central hematosis of inflammatory etiology.
During the first four days the patient was in good condition with low-grade fever in the afternoons and the laboratory values indicated a fall in inflammation indexes. During the fifth day of hospitalization, acute leukocytosis along with a remarkable lymphocytosis was noted. The peripheral blood smear revealed the presence of atypical activated lymphocytes, containing significantly elevated cytotoxic/suppressor (CD8) T cells and helper (CD4) T cells. Simultaneously, we noticed a daily rise of liver enzymes and a gradual decrease in bilirubin values. Despite the laboratory findings of cholestatic hepatitis and acute lymphocytic crisis no change in his clinical condition occurred.
To exclude the possibility of a lymphoproliferative syndrome we carried out further diagnostic tests. A liver biopsy revealed widening of some of the portal spaces with moderate inflammatory infiltration mainly from lymphocytes partially altered with diffuse parenchyma. Some of the lobar intrahepatic ducts presented with mild degenerative changes and some inflammation. The parenchyma revealed inflammatory infiltration of sinusoids from lymphocytes and slight proliferation of the Kupffer cells with some focal necrosis and apoptosis. Coagulative necrosis surrounded by hepatocytes, with typical viral inclusions of HSV were also noted. There was also a small number of lymphohistiocytic and rare epithelial-like granulomas plus an increase in the mitotic activity of hepatic cells and Kupffer cells, changes suggestive of viral hepatitis. Bone marrow aspiration, which was performed on the sixth day of hospitalization, showed poor maturation of red blood cells and increased lymphocytes. Bone marrow biopsy revealed the presence of multiple granulomatic bodies, which were surrounded by a moderate number of small T-reactive lymphocytes. The number of B-lymphocytes was significantly decreased and flow cytometry of the marrow indicated a decrease of the CD4 level and a rise of the CD8 level. Also, the monoclonal test of lymphocytes after a molecular study of a bone sample did not trace rearrangement of the T-cell receptor. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) scanning showed a low-grade hepatomegaly. DNA examination of the bone sample using PCR for HSV, Epstein–Barr virus and cytomegalovirus were negative. We did not perform PCR for the viruses above from the liver sample because of the inadequate quantity that was aspirated. Considering all these mentioned above, while the possibility of a lymphoproliferative syndrome was excluded, we concluded that the patient had HSV hepatitis, from which an acute lymphocytic syndrome followed.
After 15 days of hospitalization the patient was in good condition without any medication. He had no fever and he reported a sense of weakness at the bottom of his limbs as in chronic fatigue syndrome after a viral infection. Neurological examination results were normal. From this point gradual improvement in the laboratory findings was observed. One week after discharge, he reported a mild sense of weakness and the laboratory findings were as shown in Table . One month after the first follow-up visit, his weakness had totally gone and the laboratory findings are shown in Table . CRP was 49 mg/L Two months later, the patient is free of symptoms and is fully active. HSV type 1 IgG was 3.5 (positive >1.1); HSV type 1 IgM was 0.4 (positive >1.1).