A 74-year-old, white male of Greek origin, was admitted in our hospital in December 2008 in order to be treated for a large mass located in the head of the pancreas. The patient had been originally subjected to a routine blood check up, which revealed mildly elevated transaminase levels. He was then referred for an abdominal U/S and eventually for a CT scan on an outpatient basis. Both revealed a large, well circumscribed mass of 6.8 cm in diameter, which seemed to be in direct contact with the head of the pancreas and the inferior vena cava . A subsequent MRI of the abdomen showed the mass to measure about 7.3 cm, to have irregular borders and to be located posterolaterally to the pancreatic head. The inferior vena cava was located directly behind the mass, and seemed to be slightly displaced by the tumor. The portal vein was located directly above the mass. Both these vessels did not appear to be directly invaded by the mass.
Endoscopic ultrasound scan was performed which allowed FNA of the mass. The cytology revealed cells morphologically and immunogistologically indicative of a neuroendocrine pancreatic neoplasm. Subsequently, the patient was referred to our hospital for further surgical and possible antiproliferative therapy.
On physical examination the patient was found to manifest periodic choreo - athetosic movements that had appeared in the 3 months that preceded the diagnosis of his pancreatic tumor, to together with polyarthralgia of his limbs’ large joints. The rest of his neurological clinical examination as well as an MRI of the brain were normal. Serum amylase, bilirubin and transaminase levels and all serum tumor markers were within normal range.
The patient underwent surgical resection of the tumor by means of a modified Whipple’s procedure and Roux-n-Y reconstruction of the gastrointestinal tract . His recovery was uneventful and he was discharged from the hospital 10 days after the operation.
Pathological examination of the surgical specimen revealed a large pancreatic tumor, located in the head of the pancreas, measuring 12 × 9 × 6 cm. Microscopical examination showed a malignant neoplasm with morphological features of a mixed acinar-endocrine pancreatic tumor. The tumor was multilobular, well circumscribed and fully encapsulated. Numerous neoplastic emboli were present in the vascular and lymphatic channels of the adjacent pancreatic as well as peripancreatic fatty tissue and in the vessels of the outer muscular layer of the duodenum, which was resected en bloc with the tumor. Moreover, 9 out of 10 resected lymph nodes harboured metastases of the neoplasm. Immumohistochemistry revealed intense positivity for chromogranin (25%), mild to intense positivity for synaptophysin (20%), negativity for NSE, C56, CK7, positivity for α1-antitrypsin (80%), expression of Ki-67 in 80% and no expression of p53.
The patient remains well 3 months after his operation, with no evidence of recurrence. He also has a complete remission of his neurological symptoms.