A 38-year-old Japanese woman presented with lightheadedness. Her medical history was significant for malignant lymphoma at the age of 18 years. Laboratory analysis revealed anemia (hemoglobin, 6.7 g/dL), and enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a mass in the small intestine measuring about 6 cm in diameter, with swelling of 2 regional lymph nodes . The patient underwent a double-balloon small intestine endoscopy, which revealed a submucosal tumor accompanied by an ulcer . Examination of the biopsy specimen with immunostaining was negative for malignant lymphoma and GIST, and a very poorly differentiated cancer of the small intestine was suspected. The use of positron emission tomography–CT (PET–CT) confirmed an abnormal accumulation of F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose in the tumor and lymph nodes . We conferred the diagnosis of a primary malignant tumor of the small intestine with lymph node metastasis. She was admitted and underwent a laparotomy for partial resection of the small intestine with lymph node dissection. The tumor was located in the jejunum and was an ulcerative lesion, measuring 5.8 × 3.9 cm. Gross examination revealed a white, solid tumor with a clear boundary . The tumor was located between the muscularis mucosa and the muscularis propria of the small intestine . There was a fibrous septum separating the sheet-like epithelial cells from a network of eosinophilic cells and an oval-shaped bundle of spindle-like tumor cells. The tumor demonstrated a pseudorosette pattern around several blood vessels and displayed a pseudopapillary growth pattern. Throughout the neoplasm, the tumor cells were associated with numerous osteoclast-type giant cells. On immunohistochemical examination , the tumor cells stained positive for the anticytokeratin antibodies AE1 and AE3 (on part of the surface layer) and for S-100, and partially positive for the neural cell adhesion molecule (CD56) and synaptophysin. The cells stained negative for anticytokeratin (CAM 5.2), lymphocyte common antigen (CD45), desmin, α-smooth muscle actin (ɑ-SMA), c-kit, CD34, HMB-45, melan-A, chromogranin A, CD1a, and CD21. The osteoclast-type giant cells were positive for CD68. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using an EWSR1 probe revealed a split signal in the tumor cells: seemingly an EWSR1 gene fusion . Taken together, these results yielded a diagnosis of CCSLTGT. Metastases were found in 3 of 20 lymph nodes.
About 3 years later, follow-up CT revealed a single liver metastasis . The results of gadoxetic acid-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (EOB-MRI) and PET–CT were also suggestive of liver metastasis . Consequently, the patient underwent a laparoscopic partial liver resection. Histopathologic examination revealed that the liver metastasis was consistent with CCSLTGT . It has now been 3 years since this procedure, and follow-up CT every 3 to 6 months has shown no evidence of recurrence.