A 29-year-old Indonesian woman was admitted to Dr. Kariadi General Hospital with confirmed COVID-19 for 5 days. She was gravida 2 para 1 abortus 0 (G2P1A0), pregnant 39 weeks, and presented with gross hematuria, dry cough, fever, dyspnea, nausea, anosmia, and fatigue. She is a housewife and had no history of previous illnesses or trouble during her first pregnancy. She also routinely visited antenatal care monthly. There was no history of hematological abnormalities in her family. There were no imminent delivery signs. On admission, she was fully conscious, her vital signs were blood pressure of 109/77 mmHg, heart rate 89 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 28 breaths per minute, body temperature of 37.8 °C, and 100% blood saturation level with nasal cannula of O2 2 L per minute. Her baby’s estimated weight is 4.000 g with a heart rate of 142 beats per minute, and there were no signs of fetal distress.
Her chest X-ray showed bronchopneumonia on both sides of the lung . Her blood tests on admission revealed: hemoglobin (Hb) 10 g/dL; white blood cell count (WBC) 5.8 × 109/L with neutrophil–lymphocyte ratio (NLR) of 11; lymphocyte 696 cells/µL, platelet count 2 × 109/L; P/F (PaO2/FiO2) ratio 200; C-reactive protein (CRP) 7.77 mg/L; procalcitonin 0.35 ng/mL; prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) 54.9 (36.8) seconds; d-dimer level, 1.400 ng/mL; fibrinogen level 333 mg/dL; urinalysis showed proteinuria 2+, gross hematuria, and pyuria; renal, electrolyte, and liver functions were within normal limits; peripheral blood smear revealed that there were spherocytes , which may indicate an autoimmune hemolytic process, and her virology serological markers were negative for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), cytomegalovirus, and hepatitis B and C.
The patient was initially treated for COVID-19 with remdesivir 100 mg daily, moxifloxacin 400 mg daily, dexamethasone 6 mg daily, tranexamic acid 500 mg three times per day, N-acetylcysteine, vitamin C, D3, and zinc, and she was given 8 units platelet transfusion and 1 unit concentrate. After the transfusion, the platelet count decreased even further to 3 × 109/L and was followed by moderate anemia Hb 9.1 g/dL caused by gross hematuria. On the third day, her condition deteriorated with dyspnea, and hematuria worsened; she was oxygenated with a high-flow nasal cannula (HFNC) 60 L per minute, and fetal distress signs were found. A very high-risk emergency delivery with cesarean section was performed, and platelet, fresh frozen plasma transfusions, and tranexamic acid were administered to control the bleeding. Periprocedurally, there was approximately 1 L of bleeding, and afterward, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU). Her baby’s weight was 4.280 g, with an APGAR score of 8.
In ICU, she had overt disseminated intravascular coagulation with hematemesis, melena, and hematuria; her Hb level dropped to 5.8 g/dL, and the d-dimer level increased to more than 5000 mg/dL. During ICU hospitalization, she developed severe acute respiratory distress syndrome with a P/F ratio of 97, and she was on mechanical ventilation support. Antinuclear antibody (ANA) and anti-double-stranded DNA tests were negative, blood and urine culture was sterile, and direct Coombs’ test was positive. Bilirubin total/indirect/direct bilirubin was elevated at 4.6, 2.9, and 1.7 mg/dL, respectively. Reticulocyte count was 1.9%, d-dimer level was elevated to 5580 mg/dL, and serial chest X-ray showed pulmonary edema and worsened bronchopneumonia. Convalescent plasma, dexamethasone injection 5 mg twice per day, eltrombopag 50 mg daily, and diuretic were administered on day 5. On the seventh day, her condition was improved, the bleeding stopped, and the P/F ratio improved to 160. However, there were still no signs of platelet and hemoglobin level recovery, dexamethasone dosage was increased to 40 mg daily, and hydroxychloroquine 200 mg was administered daily due to the possibility of the diagnosis of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) with negative ANA test.
On the 11th day, her condition was improved and the bleeding has stopped with a platelet count of 5 × 109/L with a no longer prolonged aPTT, and chest X-ray showed improvement. The HFNC flow was then tapered off, and she was transferred to the general ward. Because there was no improvement in platelet count with current treatment, we substituted dexamethasone with methylprednisolone 125 mg twice daily and added cyclosporin 50 mg twice daily. From the abdominal ultrasonography, there were no abnormalities. Surprisingly, on the 13th day, platelet count was dramatically increased to 39 × 109/L. Afterward, for the remaining days of her hospitalization, the patient was stable, and she was discharged on the 19th day with a platelet count of 45 × 109/L . She received transfusion of a total of 2 units of platelet concentrate, 16 units of platelet, 5 units of leukodepleted packed red cells, 4 units of fresh frozen plasma, and 2 units of convalescent plasma. On follow-up, her ANA profile result was negative. There were no adverse events reported due to all of the medications. After 2 months of COVID-19 seroconversion, she was in a healthy condition, her hemoglobin and platelet levels returned to normal range, and all the medications were ceased. In conclusion, she was diagnosed with secondary Evans syndrome.