A 34-year-old-male patient, smoking 40 packs yearly and alcoholic was referred to our department of rheumatology, complaining of polyarthralgia which started 3 years ago and involving large and small joints. He reported the presence of pelvic pain mostly located at both hip joints and in the two ankles. His pain was constant, but worsened in long distance walking. The quality of pain was vague and its severity was rated as 4 on the visual analog scale. He did not have any systemic disease and was not taking any medication. There was no history of trauma, morning stiffness, weight loss, fever and pain; nor any sign of arthritis. He reported a history of past trauma causing a fracture on the right wrist. There was no visible gait abnormality or postural deviations. Inspection of pelvis showed bilateral symmetry of muscle bulk and there were no scars or bruises.
On physical exam, the range of motion of all joints was normal with no restriction. Musculoskeletal examination has not objectified synovitis except a swelling at the right Achilles tendon. Neurologic examination revealed no abnormality. Sacroiliac joint tests were also normal. No sign of cutaneous connective tissue involvement noted. The laboratory, all findings for complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, rheumatoid factor, serum electrolytes, alkaline phosphatase, calcium, phosphate and thyroid function tests were normal. On radiologic examination, numerous, symmetric, well defined, sclerotic lesions were identified on the shoulder , wrist , ankles, pelvis, and on the spine.
The size of the lesions varied from 2 to 9 millimeters. These spots are located on spongious bone tissue, and in the inner bone cortex located bilaterally in the epiphyses and metaphyses. Computed tomography scan of the pelvis and lumbar spine has not objectified lumbar spinal stenosis. Computed tomography of the ankles has objective sclerotic foci in the tibia and calcaneum of variable size .
With these clinical and radiologic findings, we concluded the diagnosis of OPK. Management with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and opioid analgesics resulted in improved pain managment. Currently, he continues to require pain medications to maintain his daily activities. Because of the familial nature of the disease, his family members were also evaluated. His mother was found to have the same lesions without any symptoms while his father, his brother and his sister were lesionfree.