Our patient was a 13-yr-old girl who was referred to our hospital because of acute abdominal pain. She had a fever for two weeks before being referred to us. Her menarche had begun one year before her referral. She had suffered from severe dysmenorrhea until then, and her last menstrual cycle had been two days before coming to the hospital. Her abdominal pain had increased during her last menstruation. The patient had a fever, chills, abdominal pain, and nausea at the time of admission to the hospital. She did not have a vaginal discharge with bad odor and had no particular problems in her medical history. Generalized abdominal tenderness was diagnosed in the physical examination, but mild vaginal bleeding and right lateral vaginal wall bulging were found in her vaginal and transrectal examinations. She underwent laboratory tests including leukocytosis (18,000 mm), platelet (441,000), hemoglobin (10.7), C-reactive protein (3+), normal liver and kidney function tests, and normal coagulate profile tests. Her abdominal ultrasound images showed uterus didelphys with a mixed-pattern cystic mass measuring 72 65 62 mm close to the right ovary plus a solid cystic mass measuring 100 58 mm in the right adnexa. The right kidney was not observed.
We decided to do abdominal and pelvic computed tomography scan to evaluate the cystic mass which was reported in abdominal ultrasound imaging. We had planned to do the surgery in an appropriate condition. This meant with patient's intestinal preparation after evaluating computed tomography results, and in the presence of an expert general surgeon. However, a few hours after the admission, we had to do an emergency surgery on the same night because she had a high fever, increased ESR and CRP, and a possible risk of septic shock. We administered many antibiotics before the emergency surgery because of the acute abdominal pain.
During the first surgery, we did a physical examination while she was under anesthesia. The hymen was normal and intact. But a buldge was found in the right side of her vagina during the rectoabdominal examination. This was confirmed by vaginal examination with a speculum. The right longitudinal septum was revealed with a closed end. At first, we cut the closed end of the hemilateral obstruction of the vagina and then the vaginal septum was resected with an electrocautery device. Afterward, a 200-cc pus was drained out, and this sample was sent to a laboratory for culture and antibiogram.
The patient's abdomen was opened with a midline incision. There was a severe adhesion of the intestine and omentum to the abdominal wall. Since no intestinal preparation had been done and there was a high risk of intestinal rupture, the general surgeon decided that it would be better to end this surgery and prepare the patient for another abdominal surgery in better conditions.
Abdominopelvic-computed tomography scan (with and without contrast which was done after the first surgery) confirmed the ultrasound imaging findings of uterus didelphys with multi-cystic mass with severe development in the right adnexa. A remarkable right hematocolpus hematosalpynx was seen that was due to longitudinal vaginal septum and hemivaginal obstruction. The right kidney was not observed . Her problem was detected as HWW syndrome infected with pyocolpos.
We did the second laparotomy in less than 48 hr after the first surgery with the same incision in the presence of an expert surgeon. Our patient had severe intestinal adhesion and perforated appendix fistulated to the right fallopian tube beside distal small intestinal obstruction. We saw pelvic inflammatory mass beside endometriosis. We did an appendectomy, right salpingectomy, entrolysis, and abscess drainage. Cefepim (Maxipim) and cloxacillin (Jaber-ibn-Hayyan pharmaceutical co) were administrated intravenously as specific infectious disease drugs until seven days after the surgery according to the specimen culture. We ordered continuous low-dosage contraceptive drugs for preventing the progression of endometriosis. Our patient was discharged from the hospital after seven days with a good condition.