A 68-year-old man underwent penetrating keratoplasty for aphakic bullous keratopathy and corneal scarring. He had no history of herpetic disease. The donor cornea originated from a 71-year-old female who died due to chronic pulmonary disease. The time interval between death and transfer of the corneoscleral button into organ culture medium was 36 h. The endothelial count was 2400cell/mm2 with mild polymegethism and pleomorphism. A 8.5 mm Hessberg–Barron trephine was used to prepare the donor cornea and a 8 mm trephine for the recipient. After placement of the donor onto the aphakic eye a large dendritic-geographic epithelial ulcer was noted . The graft was removed, all surgical instruments were changed and the surgical staff regowned. Fortunately, a second donor corneoscleral disc was available, which was then used to complete the operation instead of resuturing the patient’s own cornea back into place. The second donor originated from a 69-year-old male who died from a myocardial infarction. The time interval between death and transfer of the corneoscleral button into organ culture medium was 40 h. The endothelial count was 2600cell/mm2 with some variation in cell size and shape.
Perioperative intravenous aciclovir was administered intravenously (5 mg/kg). Postoperatively, the patient was commenced on systemic and local antiviral therapy for 1 week (valaciclovir 1 g three times a day, acyclovir ointment five times per day) and local antibiotic treatment (chloramphenicol four times a day). Topical steroids were withheld for 48 h. At 1 week the graft was clear and had re-epithelialized. Long term prophylactic acyclovir 400 mg twice a day was commenced but 6 months later the patient developed a geographic corneal ulcer involving the graft-host interface with keratic precipitates and corneal oedema (central corneal thickness 710 μm). The patient was treated with acyclovir 400 mg and topical aciclovir both five times a day for 2 weeks with resolution of the ulcer and residual scarring. Although the patient had HSV IgG serum antibodies, evidence of HSV-1 DNA was not detected in the first donor cornea or following sampling of the corneal ulcer via PCR and culture methods.