A 72 years-old man came to our ENT Clinic to perform a pre-operative evaluation of laryngeal morphology and motility for total thyroidectomy surgery. Patient was affected by high blood pressure pharmacologically treated and had no history of smoking or alcohol abuse. So, during the examination, flexible laryngoscopy showed a submucosal bulging and non-bleeding neoformation, about 2–3 cm in diameter, at the base of the tongue extending from the left beyond the midline. Its overlying mucosa had a rich vascular network . Glosso-epiglottic valleculae were normo-explorable. Larynx was normal for both for motility and morphology. At the oropharyngoscopy this lesion was not visible, the motility of the tongue was preserved such as the oropharyngeal reflexes. No palpable neck lymphadenopathy was detected. The patient didn't report related symptoms such as dysphagia or dyspnea, the sense of taste was also preserved.
Neck computed tomography (CT) with contrast medium was performed: a suspected malignant lesion on the left hemisection of the tongue base, with non-homogeneous contrast enhancement was detected (maximum size of 4 cm × 4 cm × 3 cm approximately). No abnormalities or lymphadenopathies were detected on CT scan.
In order to better study this lesion before surgery, also a neck magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with paramagnetic contrast medium was performed. The exam showed an oval neoformation in the left half of the tongue base, between the genioglossus and hyoglossus muscles, with regular margins, that moved back the epiglottis and caudally the left glosso-epiglottic vallecula and caused an asymmetrical narrowing of oropharyngeal lumen. Moreover, on MRI, the lesion showed homogeneous intensity - predominantly medium-low intensity with hypointense and hyperintense areas - at T1 and - predominantly high intensity with hypointense areas - at T2 and STIR (Short-TI Inversion Recovery), restricted diffusion on DWI (diffusion-weighted imaging), high ADC (Apparent diffusion coefficient), and progressive enhancement post contrast medium (maximum size 3.6 cm × 3.1 cm × 2.8 cm) .
Based on these features, a schwannoma on the left half of the tongue base was hypothesized by radiologist.
Thus, the patient underwent surgery under general anesthesia: due to the hypervascularization of the lesion, left lingual artery ligation and tracheotomy were performed. In particular, the tracheotomy was performed to secure the airways. Then, a senior head and neck surgeon performed a complete excision of this neoformation: after placement of the Jennings Mouth Gag, the surgeon performed transverse incision of bilateral genioglossus and palatoglossus muscles for greater freedom of movement and therefore better exposure of the base of the tongue. At the same time, the maximum protrusion of the tongue was obtained by a traction point on the body of the tongue with a silk stitch. Once the lesion on the tongue base was visualized, a partial glossectomy was performed transorally using Thunderbeat®. No bleeding or other peri-operative complications occurred. A nasogastric tube was placed and removed on 5th day after surgery. The tracheotomy cannula was removed on the 6th day.
Histopathologic analysis revealed that the lesion was a cavernous hemangioma of the base of tongue (measuring 4.3 × 3.5 × 2.5 cm) covered by pluristratified squamous epithelium with regular architecture and multiple medium and large vessels, most often ectasic and congested, sometimes cystically dilated, in the chorion. Immunohistochemical positivity for CD31 and CD34 confirms the vascular nature of the lesion. Resection margins were free .
In the post-operative, patient underwent follow-up and today, one year after surgery, he doesn't show sign of disease relapse .