A 29-year-old Saudi woman presented to our Emergency Room with a five-day history of epigastric and lower abdominal pain associated with lower abdominal and pelvic fullness that she attributed to fibroids. The pain was intermittent, colicky in nature and associated with nausea and vomiting. She denied any history of fever and there had been no change in her bowel habits or urinary symptoms. For several months she had been followed up regularly at the gynecology clinic due to the lower abdominal heaviness and distension. Her gynecological history revealed a nulliparous woman with no vaginal bleeding. Her medical history was significant for epilepsy since childhood, which was well controlled by medication, and a laparoscopic appendectomy one year ago. On examination, she was alert and conscious. Her vital signs were stable. Her abdomen was distended with a palpable pelvic-abdominal mass that was hard, non-tender and slightly mobile. Her liver and spleen were within the normal range and she had normal bowel sounds. No lymph nodes were enlarged and digital rectal examination revealed no abnormalities.
A computed tomography (CT) scan of her abdomen and pelvis showed a pelvic/abdominal mass adjacent to the distal small bowel loops separate from the uterus and ovaries, heterogeneously enhancing, measuring roughly 65 × 99 mm with multiple areas of necrosis . A CT scan of her chest showed indeterminate multiple bilateral subpleural 2 mm to 4 mm lung nodules, too small to biopsy.
The case was discussed by the multidisciplinary tumor board and the advice was to confirm the diagnosis to eliminate the possibility of an ovarian origin of the tumor because of its very close proximity.
Surgical exploration was indicated due to the finding of a large mass that was composed of a cystic and also a large solid component that needed to be investigated to eliminate the possibility of lymphoma or tuberculosis, which is quite common in our population. However, there was some radiological confusion about the origin of this mass and to some colleagues it was necessary to confirm it with a histological biopsy. For this reason, our patient underwent diagnostic laparoscopy, which showed a moderate amount of ascetic fluid with a large mass in the lower abdomen. When a biopsy was attempted, a large vein on the mass ruptured and bleeding made visualization extremely difficult. Therefore, the procedure was converted to an open one through a small lower midline incision. A 10 × 10 cm mass arising from the terminal ileum, occupying the pelvis and reaching to the umbilical area was found.
The uterus, ovaries and the urinary bladder were not involved. After a minimal dissection the tumor was excised with 10 cm free margins of small bowel and primary side-to-side anastomosis was performed. Our patient tolerated the procedure very well and her recovery period was unremarkable. She was discharged home on the seventh post-operative day. She was reviewed on an out-patient basis by our colleagues in radio-oncology and due to the radical nature of the surgery she was not offered any adjuvant treatment. She is still being followed up by our surgical oncology team and has shown no evidence of local or distant metastasis based on clinical and CT scan results after 24 months of follow-up.
Gross pathology revealed a segment of small bowel measuring 17 × 2 cm. It was adherent to a portion of ascending colon. An 8 × 7 × 3 cm white solid mass with a homogeneous cut surface was bulging from the serosal side of the small bowel; it was 4 cm away from the proximal resection margin. The tumor was adherent to the large bowel but not infiltrating it grossly. Few lymph nodes were identified within the mesenteric fat. Microscopy showed that the tumor was composed of cellular spindle cells with a mild to moderate degree of pleomorphism arising from the small bowel wall and mainly involving the submucosa, muscularis propria and serosa. Focal mucosal erosion was identified. The tumor cells showed a moderate amount of eosinophilic cytoplasm, evenly distributed nuclear chromatin and a few conspicuous nuclei . The mitotic count was one to two per 10 high-power fields. A metastatic focus was identified within a single mesenteric lymph node .
Immunohistochemical testing results showed that the tumor was positive for S100, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), B cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl 2), and vimentin . CD99 tests were negative and CDl17 tests were positive , in addition to calretinin (focal) and synaptophysin (focal), and CD56 (few cells). The specimen tested negative for CD34, CAM5.2, cytokeratin 7, 20, and 5/6 , cytokeratin AE1/AE3, neuron-specific enolase (NSE), CD31, desmin , chromogranin, smooth muscle actin (SMA), HMB45, factor 8, Ber/EB4, and melan-A.
A cytogenetic study of the specimen was conducted on a formalin fixed paraffin embedded tumor sample. The result of a real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) procedure for synovial sarcoma-associated fusion transcript (SYT-SSX1 and SYT-SSX2) was negative.
Our patient was seen periodically in our surgical oncology clinic and she has remained disease free for 24 months with no clinical or radiological evidence of local recurrence.