A 50-year-old male patient was admitted to our department because of multiple renal tumors bilaterally, incidentally discovered during abdominal ultrasonography for screening purposes.
The patient had a free previous medical history.
The patient had no previous medical history.
His family history was unremarkable.
The patient’s temperature was 36.7°C, heart rate was 78 beats per minute, respiratory rate was 16 breaths per minute, blood pressure was 128/88 mmHg, and oxygen saturation in room air was 96%. Clinical physical examination revealed no abnormalities.
The results of routine blood tests, routine urine tests and urinary sediment examination, routine fecal tests and occult blood test, blood biochemistry, immune indexes, and infection indexes were in the normal range. Electrocardiogram, chest X-ray, and arterial blood gas were also normal. Preoperative blood urea nitrogen (BUN) was 4.4 mmol/L and serum creatinine value was 86 μmol/L. Preoperative glomerular filtration rate (GFR) was 36.2 mL/min in the left kidney and 37.86 mL/min in the right kidney.
To investigate the findings of bilateral renal tumors, the patient underwent contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination. Contrast CT/MRI scan showed the following. (1) A 2.0 cm × 1.9 cm × 1.9 cm in size, solid mass at the lower pole of the right kidney, well-defined margins, and exophytic. MRI, T2-weighted image identifying expansile, heterogeneous signal intensity, with a distinct pseudocapsule, heterogeneous delay enhancement,and perirenal fat invasion were not identified. (2) A 1.4 cm × 1.3 cm × 1.1 cm in size, solid mass at the lower pole of the right kidney, with circumscribed enhancing lesions. MRI, T2-weighted image presented a homogeneous intense hyposignal that was considerably less intense than the renal cortex. (3) A 2.2 cm × 1.9 cm × 2.4 cm in size, cyst mass at the upper pole of the right kidney, well-defined margins, and exophytic. And (4) A 3.3 cm × 3.2 cm × 2.9 cm in size, solid mass in the middle of the left kidney, well-defined margins, exophytic, T2-weighted image showing intermediate signal intensity enhanced to the same degree as the renal cortex, slight homogeneous delayed enhancement . There were no abnormally enlarged retroperitoneal lymph nodes, without perinephric tissues or renal vein invasion.