A 75-year-old man visited our hospital because of exacerbation of lower extremity edema that he had noticed 3 months before admission. He had received annual medical checks and had no specific medical history. His body weight had increased by 10 kg over the past 5 months, and his systemic edema was remarkable. Urinary protein was 9.9 g/day, no microscopic hematuria was detected, and his serum creatinine was 1.15 mg/dL on admission. The serum protein fractions showed an M peak at a high level and serum IgM was 1657 mg/dL. Protein electrophoresis showed IgM κ type M proteinemia. Although his monoclonal IgM was increased, bone marrow biopsy showed normal findings, with no infiltration of abnormal lymphocytes, in plasma cells, or chromosomal abnormalities, suggesting that this was a case of IgM monoclonal gammopathy rather than primary macroglobulinemia.
Because the patient did not agree to our proposal initially, a renal biopsy was performed 3 months after his first admission to elucidate the cause of his nephrotic syndrome. Thus, the etiology of his nephrosis was initially unknown due to the lack of renal biopsy. Considering his background, the possibility of membranous nephropathy was high; consequently, we administered 30 mg of oral prednisolone first. Three months after his first admission, the patient agreed to receive a renal biopsy.
Under light microscopy, the biopsy sample largely consisted of renal cortex and contained 34 glomeruli. Marked enlargement of the mesangial region and strong periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)-positive deposits were observed on the glomerular basement membrane and mesangial matrix . Periodic acid-methenamine-silver (PAM) staining lead to strong silver staining of the spicula in the glomerular basement membrane and mesangial matrix area , but only weak DFS staining and scarce positive blue-green birefringence under polarized light microscope was observed . The immunofluorescence analysis showed that IgM and κ chains were clearly deposited on the glomerulus, and mild deposits were found in the mesangial region. No significant deposition of other globulins was observed; we considered this to be a case of monoclonal deposition of IgM-κ chain .
Electron microscopy showed deposition of fibrillar materials in the subepithelial and subepithelial regions of the mesangial and glomerular basement membranes. Deposition of fibrillar substances approximately 20 nm in diameter was also observed in the subendothelial and subepithelial layers of the mesangial and glomerular basement membrane by electron microscopy . Based on the results of DFS staining and electron microscopy, the patient was diagnosed with FGN. This diagnosis was confirmed 6 months after his first admission because renal biopsy could not be performed at first admission. Further, it took approximately 2 months to receive the electron microscopy result. Since urinary protein did not improve after administration of oral prednisolone only, 150 mg of mizoribine was added as a drug for nephrosis. Temporary urinary protein decreased to approximately 4 g/gCr, but a significant increase in serum creatinine subsequently occurred. A daily dose of 100 mg of oral cyclophosphamide was started on the 180th day to halt disease progression of FGN and suppress the production of monoclonal IgM, resulting in a reduction of the increase in serum creatinine and a decrease in urinary protein. One month after initiation, the daily dose of cyclophosphamide was decreased to 50 mg and continued for 2 weeks. Soon after, the patient decided to cease administration of oral cyclophosphamide and oral prednisolone; the cumulative dose of cyclophosphamide was approximately 3.7 g. Although cyclophosphamide might have had a positive effect on renal prognosis, the progression of renal dysfunction could not be halted, and hemodialysis was initiated on the 230th day. The patient had melena caused by intestinal bleeding, the etiology of which was amyloidosis, but a diagnosis of AHL was not confirmed in the intestinal tissue. There was no symptom of nerve conduction from amyloidosis. The melena was not observed at the time of hemodialysis initiation, but occurred 2 years after hemodialysis initiation. In addition, the patient contracted liver cirrhosis and was troubled by ascites. Due to the severe intestinal bleeding and liver cirrhosis, his blood pressure decreased and finally he could not receive hemodialysis. The patient died from multiple organ failure at another hospital approximately 2 years after hemodialysis initiation. A cardiac echocardiogram performed 1 month before his death did not show evidence of cardiac amyloidosis, such as shaggy heart and cardiac wall thickening. Therefore, multiple organ failure was presumed to be mainly caused by the liver dysfunction.
Based on the several new insights into FGN recently reported, we decided to reassess the renal biopsy. Even though DFS staining was weak positive, Congo red staining was positive, leading us to believe that this was a case of congophilic FGN. To confirm the diagnosis, the renal tissue was evaluated by LMD/MS and the Scaffold database, and a minimum of 4 mass spectra as described previously . Notably, the presence of massive monoclonal heavy chain components (constant region), light chain components (constant region), serum amyloid P components, and apolipoprotein E (Apo E) components indicated that this was a case of heavy-and-light-chain amyloidosis . No DNAJB9 component was detected. Although a blue-green birefringence under polarized light microscope in DFS staining was scarce , that in Congo red staining was positive .