A 74 year-old Caucasian multiparous female with a history of ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) of the breast presented with significant postmenopausal bleeding, requiring blood transfusion, and a rapidly enlarging pelvic mass. DCIS was diagnosed 6 months prior to presentation and treated by unilateral total mastectomy and Tamoxifen which was transitioned to anastrozole at the onset of postmenopausal bleeding. She had a known history of uterine leiomyomas and no family history of uterine malignancy. Abdominal imaging by ultrasound and computerized tomography (CT) revealed a 15 cm heterogeneous mass located centrally within the anterior mid body of the uterus . The patient underwent total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy.
The uterus with attached bilateral fallopian tubes and ovaries weighed 635 g. Grossly, the uterus contained a 15.5 cm well-demarcated intramural mass. The cut surface was white-tan to yellow with regions of necrosis. One section per centimeter of tumor was evaluated. Microscopically, the tumor was a cellular spindle cell neoplasm with anastomosing fascicles interrupted by thick-walled blood vessels or fibrous regions . A wispy or delicate hyaline extracellular matrix was seen throughout the tumor . The tumor cells had moderate eosinophilic cytoplasm, round to ovoid nuclei with fine chromatin and small nucleoli. The cells exhibited uniformly mild cytologic atypia. The mitotic index was no greater than 2 figures per 10 high power fields. Ischemic/hyaline-type necrosis was present, but no evidence of tumor cell/coagulative necrosis was identified. Immunohistochemically, the tumor strongly and diffusely expressed desmin and h-caldesmon and exhibited patchy, strong expression of CD10. Aside from two benign endometrial polyps, the remainder of the specimen was unremarkable. The intramural mass was classified as a cellular leiomyoma. The patient’s post-operative course was uneventful, and six months after surgery she remains asymptomatic without recurrence. She elected to discontinue all hormonal modulator therapy.
At the time of grossing, a sample of tumor was submitted for chromosomal karyotyping and RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) according to a previously described protocol . In brief, mRNA isolation, cDNA synthesis and library preparation utilized Illumina TruSeq Library Preparation Kit version 2 according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Sequencing was performed by the Illumina HiSeq 2500. A customized bioinformatics pipeline for RNA-Seq analysis known as MAP-RSeq was used to assess fusions and gene expression . RNA-Seq gene expression analysis compared gene expression by the tumor to normal uterine tissue from the Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEX) database .
A conventional karyotype showed complex chromosomal abnormalities, which included numerous structural and numeric abnormalities: 45–46, X,der(3)t(1;3)(q21;q26), t(5;15)(q31;q22) add (6)(q25), ins(10;?)(q22;?),ins (11)(p15q21q23),+ 0-1mar[cp20]. RNA-Seq revealed a gene fusion involving KAT6B (10q22.2) and KANSL1 (17q21.31). The fusion joined exon 3 of KAT6B to exon 11 of KANSL1. RT-PCR generated the expected fragment size of 165 bp and Sanger sequencing confirmed the fusion . Gene expression analysis of MED12, HMGA1 and HMGA2 revealed overexpression of HMGA2 and HMGA1 and normal expression of MED12 relative to normal uterine tissue .