The patient was a 71-year-old housewife (Weight = 50 kg, Height = 150 cm, BMI = 22.2 kg/m2) who was suffering from chronic bronchitis in middle and lower lobes of her lungs for 30 years with 2-3 acute exacerbations per year. Her HR and SpO2% at restwere85beats/min and 86.6%, respectively. The patient complained of dyspnea, difficulty in walking and inability to perform daily activities. Her main symptoms include shortness of breath, cough, sputum production and periodic acute exacerbations of chronic bronchitis. The patient had no history of smoking, diabetes, hyperlipidemia andischemic heart disease. There was no sign of heart disease in her cardiac examination (ecchocardiography and radionuclide scan) which hadbeen performedseveral times. The patient was frequently referred to Rasool-e-Akram Hospital’s Respiratory Clinic to control her symptoms (shortness of breath, increased cough and sputum) in the two lastyears and received the necessary medications.
Six months ago, she was referred to Rasool-e-Akram Hospital’s Sports Medicine Clinic because of her musculoskeletal disorders such as general muscle weakness and inability to do activities of daily living (ADL); especially walking and difficulties in sitting, standing, praying etc. She reported leg fatigue and a moderate pain in her low back in the first visit [Visual Analog Scale = 5]. Also, after a careful examination a marked weakness of the quadriceps muscles [grade three in manual muscle testing] was revealed. Since the patient lived alone, she was very concerned about the loss of her independence to do ADL. In the initial assessment, she was able to walk 320 m in six minute walk tests but desaturated to 75.6% on room air and felt severely breathless. In pre-intervention spirometry, her forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) was 56.8 % and the ratio of FEV1 to FVC (FEV1/FVC) was 70.0% which suggested a moderate degree of COPD.
After consulting with her physician and a number of sports medicine professors, it was decided fora general exercise program to beapplied to improve her physical condition; obviously, this protocol should be designed in a way which does not exacerbate her COPD symptoms. A downhill treadmill walking as an eccentric exercise therapy protocol was designed which was done under the physician’s supervision three days per week for four months with the aim of improving her functional ability and QoL. The case gave a written consent to participate in a 16-week eccentric exercise therapy program. The initial assessment was done in April 2014 and the post intervention assessmentwas done four months later after completion of the training. The outcome measures considered in this study were functional tests including “The Timed up & go test” (TUG), “six-minute walk test” (6 MWT) and “stair climbing test”(SCT), thigh Girth measurement (both of the patient’s thigh areas at 10, 15 and 20 cm above upper pole of the patella),and St. george’s respiratory questionnaire (SGRQ) for evaluation QoL. SGRQ is an originally designed and validated 50-item COPD-specific questionnaire with subscale scores in three parts: symptoms, activity, and impact of disease on daily life. The questions were scored from zero to 100 and expressed as a percentage, the higher the percentage of scores, the lower the quality of patients’ life. The questionnaire was translated into Persian and Tafti et al. assessed its validity and reliability and demonstrated its suitability for culture and society of Iran.
The eccentric exercise therapy protocol was a downhill treadmill walking with the speed of one Km/hour and the negative slope of 5 degrees in the early stages of exercise therapy to enhance the patient compliance with the training process and also prevent muscle fatigue and possible reduction of O2 saturation level. Training wasgiven for less than 10 minutes in the initial stages which progressed to 45 minutes/day in the final session, three days a week for a period of 16 weeks.
Before starting downhill walking on treadmill, a 5-minute slow walking was done for the patient warm up. shows the details of progressive eccentric exercise program during treatment session along with the patient’s initial pulse rate and O2 saturation level and the average of these parameters during exercise therapy.
The exercise program was under the sports medicine’s supervision. It should be noted that the necessary emergency equipment such as oxygen and CPR system was available in exercise therapy room. During exercise therapy, HR and O2 saturation werecontrolled by a digital pulse oximeter device (Acare, Oxismarter I, Acare Technology Co., Taiwan) at regular intervals (every 3 minutes). Patient’s cooperation during exercise therapy was excellent. In the initial days of training, the patient was afraid of dyspnea occurring during exercise.
In the first ten sessions, the duration of the exercise was less than 10 minutes and exercise therapy was in three sets with a 90 - 120 second rest between them. The negative slope of the treadmill facilitated the patient’s walking and increased her confidence . In addition, the patient’s oxygen saturation and HR did not differ much compared to rest as seen in the . After the 10th session, the speed of walking slightly increased to 1.3 without any change in the treadmill gradient. Also, the exercise therapy was performed in a continuous mode in 10 minutes without any complaints of fatigue and fear of dyspnea. This encouraged the patient to continue the training seriously. After the 20th session, the negative slope of the treadmill changed to -7.5 and the duration of walking increased to 30 minutes.
During exercise therapy sessions, the patient had no complaints of shortness of breath but had fatigue in her legs in the early 10 sessions; in the later stage of exercise therapy, the patient could easily go more than 30 minutes on the treadmill. She felt a sense of lightness in her walking due to increasing muscle strength in her lower extremities.
After 20 sessions, the patient found a significant difference in her physical abilities, the patient stated that she could easily walk and do her ADL alone without any help. Above all, she hadnever experienced shortness of breath in walking and doing physical activities. This improvement was incredible and inconceivable for the patient herself. As seen in , there were no significant differences between HR and O2 saturation before and the mean of mentioned parameters during exercise therapy.
The medications, the patient was taking during training, including Seretide diskus , Amlodipine, Levofloxacine, Montelukast and Omeprazole. At the end of the exercise program, the patient had no low back pain (0 according to VAS), no weakness and fatigue in her legs and her QoL hadimproved considerably. The improvement of measured outcomes was observed in the .