The patient was a 76-year-old woman with a history of left renal thromboembolism, hypertension, atrial fibrillation, hyperthyroidism, stroke, and AAA. Two years before admission, she had undergone EVAR with a stent graft for infrarenal aortic aneurysm, which led to right ostial RAO. Her left kidney was already atrophic due to previous renal thromboembolism, causing her to develop dialysis-dependent renal failure immediately after EVAR. Twenty-two days after EVAR, she underwent successful PTRA and stenting, and hemodialysis was discontinued . However, 2 years after EVAR, she developed acute onset of leg edema, anuria, and hypertension for 2 days, and thus went to the hospital. She was found to have significant worsening of renal function, with a serum creatinine level of 2.4 mg/dL, which had increased from a recent baseline level of 1.0 mg/dL. Acute kidney injury (AKI) due to renal artery in-stent restenosis was suspected, and she was admitted to the hospital. On day 2 of hospitalization, renal artery angiography demonstrated that the right renal artery could not be visualized, thereby confirming the diagnosis of AKI due to right renal artery in-stent occlusion. On the same day, PTRA for the right renal artery was attempted; however, it was unsuccessful as the guide wire could not pass through the ostium of the renal artery . Given that her renal function did not improve and anuria persisted, hemodialysis was initiated on the same day. She was transferred to our hospital for preparation of regular hemodialysis on day 9 of hospitalization.
On admission, she had a blood pressure of 202/109 mmHg, heart rate of 76 beats/min, and respiratory rate of 16 breaths/min. During examination, no extremity edema was noted, and no bruit was detected on abdominal auscultation. Her laboratory results at the time of admission were as follows: serum creatinine level, 9.5 mg/dL; estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), 3.5 mL/min/1.73 m2; serum albumin level, 3.2 g/dL; serum potassium level, 3.8 mEq/L; serum calcium level, 8.6 mg/dL; serum phosphate level, 4.7 mg/dL; and hemoglobin level, 10.1 g/dL.
Anuric AKI persisted after she was transferred to our hospital. In addition to RAO, we suspected contrast-induced nephropathy or cholesterol emboli as a differential diagnosis. However, these were unlikely as she developed AKI before contrast medium was administered and before the intravascular catheter procedure was performed; moreover, there were no signs of peripheral atheroembolism. Her high plasma renin activity (10.7 ng/mL/h, with a plasma aldosterone level of 140 pg/mL), which was tested to determine the cause of hypertension, raised the suspicion that she had a minimally but significantly perfused right kidney. Doppler ultrasonography revealed a renal interlobular artery flow inside the right kidney, indicating that the perfusion of the kidney was sustained, at least at a low level. Renal mercaptoacetyltriglycine (MAG-3) scintigraphy revealed that the right kidney had stained slowly and MAG-3 had not washed out even at 66 min post-injection. The absence of MAG-3 washout meant that the function of the kidney decreased severely, which did not rule out contrast induced AKI, but at least indicated that while renal perfusion was sustained, it was not sufficient to sustain the GFR . Although we initially planned to create an arteriovenous fistula for vascular access for permanent hemodialysis, the results of these renal imaging studies led us to reconsider that the AKI may be reversible if the renal artery was revascularized. However, a second attempt of PTRA was considered challenging, given that the renal artery was almost completely occluded. With no prior experience performing hepatorenal bypass, a transplant surgeon on our team considered kidney AutoTx to be a feasible alternative; therefore, kidney AutoTx was performed on day 25 of hospitalization. The renal artery and vein were anastomosed to the external iliac artery and vein, respectively. Cold and warm ischemia time of the right kidney were 84 and 7 min, respectively. After declamping the external iliac artery, the kidney perfused well, except for the upper one-fifth portion, which appeared to be perfused by an upper polar renal artery. Hence, we decided to anastomose the upper polar renal artery to the inferior epigastric artery; this successfully perfused the upper kidney region. Intraoperatively, the patient started passing urine. For the first 24 h postoperatively, her urine output was 2.2 L, and hemodialysis was discontinued . Her serum creatinine level decreased to 1.02 mg/dL by postoperative day 22, which was almost equivalent to her baseline creatinine level. Her hypertension improved, and the dose of nifedipine was successfully reduced. Her 0-h kidney biopsy during the surgery showed only mild tubular injury and no tubular necrosis. Of 24 glomeruli, 11 showed global glomerular sclerosis, and the remaining 13 exhibited no acute changes. Mild arteriosclerosis with only one cholesterol embolism was observed. Thus, no histological changes were noted that could account for prolonged ischemia leading to anuric AKI . The patient was discharged on day 42 of hospitalization, and her kidney function remained stable for 2 years, with a creatinine level of 1.03 mg/dL. Four months after surgery, a repeat renal MAG-3 scintigraphy showed that the transplanted right kidney at the right iliac fossa stained smoothly, and MAG-3 washed out 15 min after injection, indicating that renal perfusion and glomerular filtration has recovered .