A 37-year-old male presented to a tertiary care hospital with LUTS and right flank pain for the past 2 months with a history of hypertension and obstructive uropathy. Initially, he presented with LUTS without evidence of urinary tract infection and was managed for nonspecific cystitis. Later, he presented with severe LUTS; however, cystoscopy and biopsy was negative for GUTB. The histopathology showed portions of bladder mucosa covered by transitional cell epithelium of 3–4 layers thick surface, umbrella cells and subepithelial tissue infiltrated with moderately increased chronic inflammatory cells predominantly small mature lymphocytes mixed B and T types on immunochemistry .
Later, he presented with obstructive uropathy secondary to distal ureteric stricture. He empirically received treatment for GUTB and his obstructed kidneys were drained by percutaneous nephrostomy. His CT KUB showed bilateral gross hydroureteronephrosis with grossly thick-walled urinary bladder and presacral soft tissue infiltration . He underwent insertion of double J stent at cystoscopy and bladder biopsy. He also underwent bilateral ureteric reimplantation and double J stent removal.
His ureteral histopathology report indicated diffuse infiltration by malignant lymphoid cells with necrosis in the ureter and fibro adipose tissue . He was diagnosed with DLBCL according to WHO classification of lymphoid neoplasm. His PET scan indicated stage 4 disease with skeletal involvement. He was treated by RCHOP six cycles of chemotherapy and subsequent PET scan indicated no evidence of recurrence. Later, the patient presented with headache and vomiting. Increased numbers of lymphocytes were seen in cytospin preparation. CSF was negative for malignancy but his magnetic resonance imaging revealed brain lesions. His CT head suggested CNS lymphoma and he was given IV steroids to reduce intracranial pressure. The patient was discharged in stable condition and was suggested PET CT to rule out any systematic disease for further management.
Later, the patient presented with febrile neutropenia and right arm cellulitis. IV antibiotics were administered to him but he passed away on the fifth day of admission.