An 80-year-old woman with a medical history of cerebral infarction, ovarian cancer, and breast cancer noted sudden right eye ptosis and abduction. She visited her local ophthalmology department for a check-up and was placed under follow-up. One week later, she had a gradually worsening headache and was taken by ambulance to a local hospital. Magnetic resonance angiography revealed a 2-mm aneurysm in the C4 portion of the right internal carotid artery (ICA); however, the relationship between the aneurysm and her symptoms was unclear [ and ]. Follow-up magnetic resonance imaging revealed an increase in the size of the aneurysm to 10 mm within two weeks [ and ]; the patient was referred to our hospital for further evaluation. Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging revealed a contrast-enhanced lesion from the right cavernous sinus to the orbital apex, which was suspected of communicating with the sphenoid sinus [ and ].
Moreover, the cavernous portion of the right ICA was dilated with wall irregularities caused by vascular invasion [ and ]. Laboratory examination revealed elevated β-d-glucan (33.1 pg/mL); white blood cell counts and C-reactive protein levels were within normal ranges. The patient was diagnosed with an invasive fungal sinus infection with a fungal ICA aneurysm and was hospitalized for medical treatment. She started steroid treatment with intravenous hydrocortisone followed by oral prednisolone, as well as antifungal treatment with voriconazole. Although she was afebrile and her β-d-glucan levels lowered after medical treatment, the size of the aneurysm was enlarged, and its shape changed [ and ]. We considered surgical treatments. A balloon occlusion test was not performed due to her mild cognitive impairment and restlessness. Parent artery occlusion with extracranial to intracranial bypass seemed too invasive for her general condition. We, therefore, planned an endovascular treatment using flow diverting stent to maintain distal cerebral perfusion. She started dual antiplatelet therapy with daily aspirin (100 mg) and clopidogrel (75 mg). Three weeks later, on hospital day 47, she received a flow-diverting stent (Pipeline Flex with Shield Technology 4 × 35 mm, Medtronic) and had an O’Kelly-Marotta grading scale of B2. Her ptosis and eye movement gradually improved after flow-diverting stent placement, and she was discharged to a rehabilitation hospital with a modified Rankin Scale of 4, which was the same score as at admission. Her symptoms almost completely recovered six months after the surgery. Follow-up angiograms at six months and one year showed a partial decrease in aneurysm size, with O’Kelly-Marotta grading scales of B2 and B3, respectively [ and ]. The patient finished antifungals at one year, and steroid treatment was tapered off over two years. She is currently in a nursing home with no complications.