A 24-year-old male presented with photophobia since birth. No family history for colour vision defects or retinal dystrophies was reported. Myopia with an refractive error of − 5.50 D (right eye) and − 6.50 D (left eye) and astigmatism were found in the patient (III:2) at the age of 8 months along with nystagmus but devoid of strabismus. Glasses were given at the age of 1 year. Difficulties distinguishing colours were noticed by his parents at the age of 3 years. Achromatopsia was the first suspected diagnosis. At the age of 4 years occlusion therapy alternating in both eyes for 2 months was attempted to treat amblyopia but was unsuccessfull. A best-corrected visual acuity of 20/200 was measured with Snellen charts at the age of 6 years. No brain injuries were detected by magnetic resonance imaging. Visual evoked potential flash and B-scan ultrasonography performed normal for both eyes. At the age of 11 years a visual acuity of 20/250 was measured. At the latest exam at the age of 24 years, full-field light- and dark-adapted electroretinogram (ERG) recordings were performed according to the International Society for Clinical Electrophysiology of Vision (ISCEV) standard protocol . Subnormal amplitudes under scotopic conditions and extinct responses under photopic conditions were observed in both eyes of the patient (III:2) in comparison to normal controls . A visual acuity of 20/400 was measured for both eyes with a myopic correction of − 12.00 D (right eye) and − 11.50 D (left eye). Anterior segment, pupillary reflexes and intraocular pressure revealed no abnormalities. Eye fundus examination revealed normal retinal vessels, optic nerve heads showing tilted optic discs with myopic conus and the maculae had elapsed reflex without waxy reflex . Spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) performed with Spectralis OCT (Heidelberg Engineering) showed normal retinal architecture with thinned photoreceptor layer . Colour vision test evaluated with the Farnsworth D-15 Colour Test revealed protan-deutan confusion errors .
Mutation screening of OPN1LW/OPN1MW gene cluster in the patient (III:2) was performed as previously described . Genotyping PCRs with genomic DNA from the patient (III:2, see Fig. for a pedigree of the genetically investigated family members) revealed absence of the LCR and promoter regions of both OPN1LW and OPN1MW genes – indicative for a large deletion – but presence of the 3′ parts of the OPN1MW gene, namely exons 4, 5 and 6. Upon fine sequence tag site content mapping, the deletion was finally bridged with a PCR amplicon performed with primers BCM#27_F (5′- TCGACCCAGAATTAACCTCTCT -3′) and BCM#27BPR (5’-TCTAAAAATGGACAAGGATTAACCA -3′) which was sequenced with Sanger to determine the exact breakpoints in patient III:2 . The deletion, NC_000023.11:g.154,118,184_154,191,311del, encompasses 73,128 bp with the centromeric breakpoint located in the intergenic region between MECP2 and OPN1LW and the telomeric breakpoint within intron 3 of OPN1MW .
A sequence alignment of the breakpoint junction sequence in the patient (III:2) with the corresponding non-mutant sequence sections from his grandfather (I:1) revealed an overlapping stretch of 13 bp between the centromeric and the telomeric breakpoint sequences shared by two Alu elements. The sequence remnants embedded within the deletion breakpoints resembled the junction of two Alu elements; (1) a fossil right Alu momomer (FRAM) element at the centromeric breakpoint of the deletion, and (2) an AluJo element in intron 3 of OPN1MW at the telomeric breakpoint of the deletion . Microsatellite marker analysis revealed that the X-chromosome present in the patient (III:2) had been transmitted from his maternal grandfather (I:1, Fig. ). Segregation analysis performed by means of breakpoint PCR amplification showed that neither the patient’s grandfather (I:1) nor the mother (II:1) carry the deletion . The CARE guidelines were followed in reporting this case.