A 54-year-old man presented with a 7-day history of head and neck pain and numbness in both lower limbs for 7 days. In the 10 days before admission, the patient presented with blurred vision, occasional blindness in both eyes and mild neck pain. Three days after the onset of symptoms, the patient developed headache, progressive neck pain, numbness in both lower limbs, and numbness in the tips of both fingers. There is no limb weakness, no fever and night sweats, no bladder and bowel dysfunction. The patient denied any recent weight loss, furuncles, coughs, odontogenic lesions, and presented to a local hospital. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed high signal intensity on T2WI of C2-C7 segments and mixed signals behind the right intracranial ventricle. For further diagnosis and treatment, he was admitted to our hospital.
The patient's clinical examination revealed an audible blowing murmur in the precordial area, normal limb muscle strength (5/5) and bilaterally diminished acupuncture sensation below the T12 dermatome. Proprioception was intact. Meningeal irritation was negative. cranial nerves were not involved. Laboratory test results showed: complete blood count (WBC 11.35*109/L, NEUT 8.28*109/L), ESR 20.00 mm/h, cerebrospinal fluid leukocyte 101*106/L, LDH 45.35U /L, protein levels did not rise and glucose levels did not fall. Intracranial pressure was 210 mmH2O. MRI showed patchy long T1 and long T2 signals in the right parietal lobe, left frontal lobe and bilateral occipital lobes . MRI showed diffuse edema of spinal cord C1-T1 with an enhanced signal on T2WI . The patient was initially considered to have a central nervous system infection. It was necessary to differentiate between a nervous system tumor and a nervous system demyelinating disease. Contrast-enhanced MRI showed multiple ring-enhancing lesions in the brain and ring-enhancing images of C4-C5 in the spinal cord . Magnetic resonance spectroscopy indicated nerve cell destruction, hypoxia and necrosis. And tumor was excluded . Echocardiography reported thickened, roughened mitral valve leaflets, possible vegetations, mitral valve prolapse, and severe mitral regurgitation . Test results for other infections were negative. Streptococcus anginosus was obtained from blood culture on the 8th day of admission. The patient was diagnosed with a central system infection caused by subacute infective endocarditis. According to the drug susceptibility results, intravenous ceftriaxone combined with linezolid anti-infective treatment continued for 24 days until the patient was discharged from the hospital. After discharge, the patient was adjusted to oral linezolid and cefixime anti-infective treatment.
During hospitalization, the patient developed nausea and vomiting. The vomit was stomach contents, not projectile vomiting. Emergency head computer tomography showed bleeding in the left occipital lobe . This was considered secondary intracerebral hemorrhage due to bacterial invasion of blood vessels. After monitoring blood pressure and micro pumping nimodipine to relieve vasospasm, the patient did not experience similar symptoms.
One month after discharge from the hospital, the re-examination of the MRI of the brain and spinal cord showed that the range of lesions was smaller than before . The contrast-enhanced MRI improved. The patient's blurred vision and head and neck pain improved compared with before, but left lower limb numbness remained.