A 56-year-old Chinese woman with no previous history of ON, myelitis or comorbidities, complained of five days of right-sided headache and progressive visual loss initially only affecting the right eye but involving the left on the fifth day. The best-corrected visual acuity of her right eye at presentation was light perception and 6/7.5 on the left. There was right relative afferent pupillary defect with right disc swelling. The left disc was normal. Automated perimetry (24–2 threshold, Swedish Interactive Threshold Algorithm-standard strategy, Zeiss Carl Opthalmic Systems-Humphrey Division, Dublin, CA ) could not be done in the patient’s right eye. The test in her left eye was negative for any visual field defects (reliability indices-fixation losses: seven out of 16, false positive errors: 12%, false negative errors: 6%). A detailed ophthalmic examination was performed which included slit lamp examination of the anterior segment, dilated fundal examination, intraocular pressure measurement as well as fluorescein staining for corneal abnormalities. The ocular examination was negative for punctate epithelial erosions, uveitis, pars planitis or retinal vasculitis. There was no clinical evidence of transverse myelitis, and the patient declined spinal imaging due to financial constraints. Serological investigations revealed raised levels of the following autoimmune antibodies: anti-nuclear antibody, rheumatoid factor, anti-Ro antibody as well as NMO-IgG antibody. Neuroimaging showed swelling, edema and enhancement of the orbital segment of the right optic nerve with marked enhancement and stranding in the intraconal fat. There was also enhancement of the left optic sheath and intraconal fat posterior to the globe. No periventricular white matter plaques were found (Figure
). A spinal tap showed normal levels of protein and inflammatory cells and oligoclonal bands were absent.
The patient had sicca symptoms for 12 years and the result of her Schirmer’s test was less than five mm in both eyes; thus fulfilling the international criteria for diagnosis of SS.
A diagnosis of NMOSD and primary SS was made. The patient was started on intravenous methylprednisolone (one mg/kg body weight/day) for five days. As there was no improvement in the vision of the patient’s right eye, plasmapheresis was initiated for the patient on the sixth day. Despite undergoing four cycles of plasma exchange, vision in the patient’s right eye was unchanged and the visual acuity of her left eye was 6/7.5. The right disc showed resolution of disc swelling after three months with subsequent temporal pallor.