Our case was a 68-year-old Caucasian man with a history of hypertension. The patient was brought to the emergency department due to epilepsy. A CT scan revealed a brain tumor in the left temporal region. The patient was urgently taken to the operating theater due to hydrocephaly. The final pathological specimen of the brain tumor revealed a metastatic melanoma.
Complete skin examination did not reveal any primary skin lesions. The history of the patient revealed that, 2 years ago, a scabby lesion was discovered on his right ear. The lesion was subsequently widely excised. The lesion was initially thought to be a basal cell carcinoma. After repetitive consultations and pathological specimen examination, it was revealed that the lesion was a melanoma, which was retrospectively staged as T3N0M0, stage IIa. Thus, the patient was put on observation. After the brain surgery, the patient underwent 10 fractions of whole-brain radiotherapy and received 30 Gy of radiation. Initial postoperative MRI of the brain did not show any recurrence, while upper abdomen MRI revealed a large lesion with perspiration arterial strain, without extracorporeal infiltration. The apparent diffusion coefficient sequence of the neoplasm showed low signal intensity, while the diffusion-weighted imaging, showed an intermediate signal intensity . Given the progression, the oncologist ordered a positron emission tomography (PET) scan, which revealed metastatic spread to the gallbladder (SUVmax 9,9).
As such, following the multidisciplinary team's discussion, according to the European society for medical oncology guidelines and due to the patient's good performance status, LC was decided. Patient blood testing revealed a white cell count of 5.89 × 109/L, hemoglobin 13.1, AST 12 U/L, ALT 14 U/L, BIL 0,34, and GGT 57 U/L.
LC was performed under general anesthesia. The postoperative period was uneventful, and the patient was discharged 2 days later in good condition. After the final specimen examination, the results were positive for melanoma, while immunohistochemical staining showed strong positivity for HMB-45, MART-1, and S-100 protein. Molecular testing revealed no BRAF mutations.
According to the oncological multidisciplinary team recommendations, further treatment for resected stage IV metastatic melanoma was decided after the patient was discharged from the hospital. He received nivolumab 240 mg Q2W for 6 months (12 cycles). Restaging imaging at 12 months with CT CAP and brain MRI revealed CNS recurrence of the resected left temporal lobe lesion, and stereotactic radiosurgery with γ Knife was decided in the MDT meeting, which was performed successfully. He continued treatment with nivolumab and is currently still on treatment. He has received 20 cycles and no evidence of metastatic disease was noted at his last restaging visit until today.