A 37-year-old male patient, with no previous medical illnesses, was brought by the ambulance to the emergency department (ED) after being involved in a motor vehicle accident. At the scene, he was found at the roadside with his car rolled-over his trunk. Upon presentation to the ED, the trauma team was activated and their instructions were followed, accordingly. The patient had a patent airway, stable vital signs, no active bleeding and a Glasgow come score of 13/15. His abdomen was distended with no peritoneal signs (e.g., rigidity). In addition, the bedside focused assessment sonography for trauma (FAST) revealed free fluid in the hepato-renal and spleno- renal areas, while his laboratory findings were unremarkable. He underwent a pan contrast-enhanced computed tomography for trauma (Pan-CT), according to the local guidelines, which revealed multiple right-sided ribs fracture and a grade IV/V liver laceration .
Notably, an eccentric filling defect, measured 1.4*1.5 centimeters, was seen inside the inferior vena cava just proximal to the atrio-caval junction with a free distal passage of contrast which was consistent with IVC-Th, which was confirmed by echocardiogram. On the other hand, the liver laceration was managed conservatively (i.e., intensive care with optimization of nutrition and volume status).
A multidisciplinary meeting was done, including the attending trauma surgeon, the vascular surgeon, the hematologist, the intensivist, the interventional radiologist with the patient and his relatives, discussing the available various options, in which a decision was made to undergo a trial of angio-jet thrombolysis with possible insertion of IVC filter. The angio-jet thrombolysis was successfully completed with resolution of approximately 80% of the IVC-Th .
Postoperatively, the patient stayed in the intensive care unit, he developed gross hematuria and his renal function tests deteriorated. He was diagnosed as acute tubular necrosis (ATN) on top of contrast nephropathy and was kept on continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) for three weeks until improvement of his renal function tests.
Two weeks later, a follow-up CT revealed no evidence of persistent IVC-Th and, therefore, no need for any further intervention. Eventually, he was discharged home in a good condition and was kept on therapeutic dose of low-molecular weight heparin for three months. He was followed up for one year in the out-patient clinics of trauma surgery, nephrology and hematology, in which his renal function tests remained unremarkable thereafter with no further anticoagulants required.
Why should an emergency physician be aware of this? The incidence of IVC-Th is not estimated, due to its rarity and the limited available data, post-traumatic venous thrombosis, mainly IVC-Th has both diagnostic and therapeutic dilemmas with no consensus on diagnostic criteria, follow-up plan and period, use and duration of anticoagulants. Accordingly, physicians should be alert of this medical emergency in patients presenting to the ED with blunt abdominal, crushing injuries and formulate a management plan to prevent the patient deterioration and complications.