A 68-year-old man was hospitalized for exacerbation of recurring hypoglycemic episodes 18 months after the onset of these episode. He had been diagnosed with an abdominal SFT 17 years before the onset of hypoglycemia, and the SFT had already been very large at that time. The tumor was non-resectable, refractory to chemotherapies and had slowly increased in size, reaching volume of 2750 cm3, as measured using ITK-SNAP software , 8 years after the initial diagnosis.
Half a year before the hypoglycemic episodes manifested, another tumor, adjacent to the left kidney, had been newly identified. Fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) scanning, performed 15 months after the onset of the hypoglycemic episodes, revealed much higher 18F-FDG uptake (standardized uptake value (SUV) max: 29) in the left peri-renal tumor than in the original tumor (SUVmax: 6.6) . Therefore, we considered that the peri-renal tumor was unlikely to be a metastasis from the SFT, although approximately 26 and 45% of SFT cases reportedly develop metastasis during 5- and 10-year follow-up periods, respectively .
His hypoglycemia generally manifested in the early morning or between meals. He took no glucose-lowering agents. The fasting plasma insulin level (0.2 μU/mL), compared to the plasma glucose concentration (48 mg/dL), was well suppressed and no pancreatic tumors were detected on detailed CT scans, likely excluding a diagnosis of insulinoma. As shown in Table , serum levels of counter regulatory hormones, such as adrenaline, cortisol and growth hormone, were not suppressed. The serum IGF-1 level was within the normal range. All serum liver enzyme levels were also within their normal ranges. During the current hospitalization, IGF-2 western immunoblot analysis of the patient’s serum showed a broad band between 11 and 18 kDa, showing a large amount of big IGF-2 . Its intensity was 15.6 times higher than that in a serum of a healthy subject (analyzed by ImageJ, NIH). These findings collectively indicated that big IGF-2 production was the cause of the hypoglycemia. Overnight continuous glucose infusion was started to prevent fasting hypoglycemia, following light snacks before bed, which had started a few months prior to hospital admission . We considered the possibility that the newly-identified peri-renal tumor was responsible for the production of big IGF-2 and performed transcatheter arterial embolization of the arteries feeding the peri-renal tumor. However, the embolization exerted no preventive effects against hypoglycemia. Both the SFT and the peri-renal tumor continued to grow, reaching volumes of 10,000 cm3 and 438 cm3, respectively at 20 months after the onset of hypoglycemia . The patient developed worsening lower limb edema due to enlargement of the preexisting SFT and his general condition deteriorated. Twenty-one months after the onset of the hypoglycemic episodes, he died of heart failure.
Contrary to our expectation, western immunoblot analysis of tumor extracts obtained from his autopsy specimens showed that big IGF-2 had been produced only by the preexisting SFT, not by the peri-renal tumor . In addition, histological findings revealed the SFT to be composed of proliferative spindle cells with a component of collagen fibers . The tumor cells were immunohistochemically positive for CD34 , bcl2 and STAT6 , typical immunohistochemical markers of SFT. On the other hand, the peri-renal tumor was morphologically composed of two components: a lesion comprised of proliferating mature adipocytes with fibrous tissues (well-differentiated liposarcoma) and a lesion comprised of proliferative spindle cell areas with no specific differentiation, regarded as an undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma . Other than the endothelial cells, nearly all components were CD34-negative . Taking these observations together, we diagnosed the peri-renal tumor as a dedifferentiated liposarcoma, but not a metastasis from the SFT. Ki67-positive cell ratios of the SFT and the liposarcoma were less than 1% and approximately 15%, respectively, reflecting the rapid growth of the peri-renal liposarcoma .