A 82-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital because of right sciatic nerve palsy and a mass in the right posterior thigh. Symptoms of sciatica had begun 6 months ago and then she visited another hospital and X-ray and MRI of the lumbar spine was performed. These showed slight canal stenosis of the lumbar spine. Although she was treated conservatively with medications, the symptoms worsened and sciatic nerve palsy resulted 3 weeks before visit to our hospital. Physical examination revealed a soft tissue mass of posterior thigh with pain and a drop foot with concomitant sensory loss. The patella tendon reflex was normal but Achilles tendon reflex was negative. The sensory exam and reflexes and manual muscle testing in the left leg were normal. All routine blood tests were normal. She had undergone partial gastrectomy 2 years ago. Resection was complete and TNM stage was T2b, N0, M0. The size of tumor was 8.5 x 8 cm and histological examination revealed the tumor was a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with no regional lymph node metastasis. She didn’t receive adjuvant chemotherapy because of her age and her choice. Current Plain radiographs showed a radiolucent area in the posterior thigh without calcification and no changes in the femur. MRI showed the mass with low signal intensity on T1-weighted images and heterogeneous high intensity on T2-weighted images and homogeneous high intensity on T1- weighted images with gadolinium enhancement was originated from sciatic nerve. We planed the surgical resection because her general condition was good and we confirmed local disease only, no evidence of another site of metastasis by CT. Surgical resection of the sciatic nerve mass was based on the assumption that the diagnosis was soft tissue sarcoma. Segmental resection of the sciatic nerve was performed because of complete paralysis and adequate margin. Intraoperative Macroscopic findings revealed the sciatic nerve was tightly surrounded by the mass and the mass strongly compressed the peripheral muscles. Histological examination showed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma which was the same as her primary site adenocarcinoma and invaded the sciatic nerve. Based on these findings, we diagnosed sciatic nerve palsy due to intraneural metastasis of gastric carcinoma. She can now walk with a short leg brace and cane. She is free of recurrence in the posterior thigh without chemotherapy and radiation and remains metastasis free after 1 year follow-up.