A 37-year-old male patient with a background of hypertension was admitted to our emergency department with sudden dizziness and left limb weakness. Non-jet vomiting occurred before transfer to our hospital for further management, and the vomitus was gastric content. He reported no trauma, fever, or coma, he was a non-smoker, and he had no history of drug use or cardiac events. The patient was immediately subjected to a non-contrast computed tomography (CT) scan of the brain, which revealed hemorrhage in the occipital and parietal lobes. The diagnosis of intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) was made. He developed sudden onset chest tightness, shortness of breath, and occasional chest pain behind the sternum around 48 h after emergency hematoma evacuation. The pain was stuffy in nature and did not radiate to other places. His symptoms continued to worsen gradually, until breath sounds were observed when the patient was sitting up. There were no severe symptoms of dyspnea, cough, hemoptysis or sputum (a characteristic pink frothy sputum is often produced).
The patient’s medical history was only hypertension; he had not been treated regularly, and the blood pressure control was unknown. There was no other history of illness or medication.
The patient had warm extremities with hemodynamically stable blood pressure maintained at 128/73 mmHg and a heart rate of 77 beats per minute (bpm) on initial assessment. He was breathing smoothly on room air with clear lungs. His cardiac examination was normal and did not show any murmurs or gallops.
The physical examination was unremarkable, except for the low left limb muscle tension and the third limb muscle strength. The physical examination was carried out when the patient suffered from chest tightness. On further examination, his heart rate was faster than 100 bpm and his blood pressure had risen to 150/90 mmHg; other general conditions were stable. However, when the patient was breathing in a sitting position, auscultation revealed abnormal breath sounds, which manifested as obvious bilateral bubbling rales in the lower part of the lungs.
The serum level of creatine kinase (CK) was 837 U/L (reference range, 38-174 U/L), that of CK isoenzyme was 26 U/L (reference range, 2-25 U/L), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) was 269 U/L (reference range, 109-245 U/L) and hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase (HBDH) was 249 U/L (reference range, 72-182 U/L) at admission; other blood values were within the normal range. When the symptoms of chest tightness worsened, the patient’s blood was immediately checked for any sign of heart failure (HF). The laboratory examination showed the concentration of N-terminal pro b-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) was 493 pg/mL (reference range, < 85 pg/mL). Myocardial enzyme levels, including cTnI, did not exhibit normal values after serial determination: the cTnI level was increased to 0.175 ng/mL in the resting state (reference range, < 0.06 ng/mL), the CK level was 660 U/L, the CK-MB level was 26 U/L, LDH was 298 U/L, and HBDH was 271 U/L. Repeated measurements 5 d later showed the values had decreased: CPK, 49 U/L; CK-MB, 12 U/L; LDH, 231 U/L; and HBDH, 187 U/L .
On admission, the emergency cerebral CT image revealed cerebral hemorrhage in the occipital and parietal lobes , while the initial 12-lead ECG revealed a normal sinus rhythm and a regular rate within the normal range; however, T wave inversions and ST segment in leads V5 and V6 were already observed.
We made another ECG at the onset of chest tightness. It is notable that the ECG demonstrated extensive depression of the ST segment and T wave inversion, suggestive of myocardial injury. At this time, there was a prolongation of the corrected QT interval (QTc, 487 ms) . But at this time, the chest radiograph showed no bilateral patchy opacities that are typical of pulmonary edema and consistent with the breath sounds when the patient was in a sitting position .
In sum, the working hypothesis of a non-ST elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) could be established. Further cardiological investigations, including coronary arteries with CT angiogram (CTA) of the coronary arteries, were needed to make a definite diagnosis. Considering the patient was in acute stage of ICH, coronary angiography was not timely completed.
A coronary CTA and echocardiogram (ECHO) were made at 72 h after the initial symptoms when the patient’s chest discomfort disappeared. The ECHO revealed normal sized chambers with an ejection fraction of 60% and showed no significant valvular abnormality or any wall motion abnormality . Coronary arteries did not reveal any sign of obstruction or significant narrowing . Another 12-lead ECG was made 11 d after the patient’s symptoms improved, by this time, the patient had returned to the same state as at admission with the recovery of ICH, but the QTc interval was now prolonged (QTc, 424 ms).