A 57-year-old male was admitted to Beijing Chaoyang Hospital due to intermittent chest pain for 4 days. He had a history of hypertension for 5 years and smoking for about 30 years. The electrocardiogram (ECG) showed ST-segment depression (< 0.1 mV) in lead V2–V5. Except for the level of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C, 3.58 mmol/L), other laboratory exams were all unremarkable. He was diagnosed with unstable angina pectoris and planned to receive CAG. Before the selective CAG, the pulse of right RA was routinely examined. Interestingly, the RA was weak but pulsatile at the routine puncture site in the anterior region of the forearm, and the course of the RA could not be palpated clearly. Meanwhile, the pulsation of the RA was strong at the dorsal lateral side of the wrist, approximately 2 to 3 cm cephalad to the anatomic snuffbox (AS) and the course of the vessel was palpable. Ultrasonography with color Doppler was then performed and the existence and course of SRA was confirmed. It went down subcutaneously to the dorsal lateral side of the forearm, and finally into the AS, which was consistent with the pulsation before. We marked the course of the SRA and the puncture site of the distal RA under the guidance of ultrasonography .
Puncture of the distal RA in the AS was performed using a Terumo angiocatheter needle and a 6 Fr Terumo introducer sheath was then inserted into the vessel . CAG revealed a severe stenosis (80–90%) in the proximal to middle segment of the left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD, Fig. ). In order to evaluate the lesion more accurately, intravenous ultrasound (IVUS, Boston Scientific, USA) was performed. After intracoronary injection of 200 mg of nitroglycerine, IVUS images were acquired by automated mechanical pullback devices with a continuous pull back speed of 0.5 mm/s . The results of the IVUS showed that the lumen area of the LAD lesion was 5.19 mm2 and the plaque load was 76% . A 4.0 × 30 mm drug-eluting stent (DES, Resolute Integrity, Medtronic, USA) was then implanted into proximal to middle segment of the LAD. After the stent was postdilated at nominal pressure with a 4.5 × 15 mm and a 5.0 × 15 mm noncompliant balloon (NCSprinter, Medtronic, USA), the final angiographic appearance and the IVUS images were satisfactory . The 6Fr Terumo sheath was removed from the distal RA immediately after the procedure and the puncture site was compressed with bandage and gauze for about 6 h . The total time of the procedure was 65 min, with the arterial puncture time (time from puncture of the distal RA in the AS to sheath insertion) was 3 min. The total amount of contrast was 110 ml. The patient was discharged the next day after the procedure, the distal RA was palpable in the puncture site and the course of SRA was also palpable. One month after the procedure, the patient was followed up in the outpatient department, the pulsation of the distal RA in the AS and the course of SRA were both palpable.