A 44-year-old female patient was in the 36th week of her second pregnancy. She was admitted to the Emergency Department of Okmeydani Training and Research Hospital of Health Sciences University with the complaint of bloody vomiting for 2 days. In her deepened anamnesis, it was learned that she had black defecation for 1.5 months and epigastric pain since the beginning of pregnancy. It was also learned that the patient was receiving antihypertensive treatment for hypertension known before pregnancy and was using insulin for gestational diabetes mellitus. The hemoglobin level was found to be 6.4 mg/dL and the patient was admitted to the Internal Medicine Department with gastrointestinal system (GIS) bleeding. Because she was pregnant, she was asked to consult with our Obstetrics and Gynecology clinic. After evaluation with ultrasound (US) and Non-Stress Test (NST), fetal heartbeat (FHB) positive pregnancy compatible with 36 weeks was found and no obstetric pathology was not considered. Endoscopy for GIS bleeding revealed bleeding from Forrest 1A ulcer lesion in the gastric cardia and bleeding was stopped by sclerotherapy .
A total of 4 units of erythrocyte suspensions were transfused and the patient was discharged after clinical and laboratory follow-up. One week after discharge, the patient was re-admitted to the Emergency Department with the complaint of deterioration in her general condition and bloody vomiting. After the interventions performed, fresh blood came from the nasogastric catheter and the bleeding could not be stopped by endoscopy, the emergency surgery decision was taken by the General Surgery team, we were informed because the patient was pregnant and a joint operation plan was made. The operation was started with a median incision above and below the umbilicus and a 2455 g female baby was delivered, live and coming foot first, with a 1st minute APGAR score of 8, by cesarean section. The patient was then transferred to the general surgery team with the abdomen open. Subtotal Gastrectomy and Liver Wedge Resection were performed. The patient was discharged after having no problems in post-operative follow-up. Her baby was discharged after 10 days of follow-up in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit. When the pathology report resulted in undifferentiated carcinoma (CerbB2 negative) and liver serosal surface tumor infiltration, the patient was referred to Medical Oncology and chemotherapy and radiotherapy sessions were initiated. During this 6-month period, the treatment is on going.