We report the case of a 45-year-old African woman without a particular medical history who presented with intermittent decrease of visual acuity and headache. Cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a solid adenohypophysis mass of 2 × 1.5 × 1 cm with suprasellar extension but no invasive growth. This mass showed contrast enhancing in T1-weighted MRI scans . Laboratory tests used to explore pituitary disorders showed normal levels of pituitary hormones, including follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) (N > 20 IU/L), luteinizing hormone (LH) (N > 10 IU/L), prolactin (N < 20 μg/L), corticotropin and thyrotropin. The diagnosis of nonfunctioning pituitary macroadenoma was suspected, and the tumour was completely resected via transsphenoidal surgery. No adjuvant therapy was administered. Postoperatively, the patient developed panhypopituitarism which has been managed by hormone substitution. In fact, laboratory tests showed marked low levels of FSH (5 IU/L), LH (2 IU/L), prolactin (0.04 μg/L), corticotropin (10 nmol/L), thyrotropin (0.01 μU/mL) and somatotropin. Otherwise, currently there is neither clinical nor radiological evidence of a recurrent tumor after a three-month follow-up period.
Microscopic findings consisted of a solid spindle cell neoplasm with increased cellularity. Tumour cells were spindled to epithelioids organized in interlacing fascicles. The tumour cells had eosinophilic and oncocytic cytoplasm . Nuclear atypia and pleomorphism were absent. Mitotic count was estimated to 1 per 10 high-power field. There were neither microvascular proliferations nor necrosis.
An immunohistochemical study showed that most tumour cells expressed S-100 protein . Vimentin and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) were similarly expressed by tumor cells . There was no staining either with low-molecular-weight cytokeratin or with anterior pituitary hormones, including somatotropin, corticotropin, thyrotropin, FSH, LH and prolactin . Tumour cells expressed the thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) antigen . Glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and CD68 were not expressed. Therefore, the diagnoses of glial tumour and granular cell tumour were ruled out. In light of these histological and immunohistochemical findings, the diagnosis of SCO was strongly suspected. Ultrastructural examination showed neoplastic cells filled with mitochondria and well-formed desmosomes. These findings supported the diagnosis of SCO.