A 32-days old male infant born at term 38 weeks of gestation to consanguineous parents with uneventful pregnancy with Apgar score was 8 and 9 at 1 and 5 minutes respectively with a birth weight of 2.8 kg, presented to the hepatology clinic with infantile cholestasis for investigations.
His initial assessment revealed normal anthropometric measurements, vital signs, and body system review apart from the presence of jaundice. His stool color was yellowish with dark urine.
Workup of cholestasis showed high total bilirubin (T.Bil) of 103 mmol/L, high direct bilirubin of 83 mmol/L, alanine transaminase (ALT) level of 138 U/L, aspartate transaminase (AST) level of 76 U/L, and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) of 590 U/L. He had a normal gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) level of 28 U/L and a normal prothrombin time (PT) of 13 seconds. His serum albumin, bile acid, tandem metabolic screening, thyroid profile, renal functions, electrolytes, abdominal ultrasonography, and HIDA scan were normal. His vitamin D level was low, 18 ng/mL (normal range 30-100).
One week later, the patient developed severe bronchiolitis necessitating mechanical ventilation associated with acute liver failure and worsening cholestasis. There was a severe derangement of synthetic liver functions in the form of PT >28 seconds, and hypoalbuminemia of 22 g/L with worsening excretory functions of the liver T.Bil was 303.5 mmol/L, D.Bil was 204 mmol/L, and ALP was 849 U/L). His hepatocytes enzymes increased markedly, ALT was 3200 U/L and AST was 1420 U/L. His GGT was 30 U/L and his serum bile acids were 10 mmol/L (within normal range). A liver biopsy was requested but refused by the parents.
The condition was associated with hypoglycemia despite appropriate glucose infusion rate, metabolic acidosis, and electrolyte disturbance in the form of hyponatremia (sodium 127 mmol/L) while potassium was on the high normal limit (K 5.2 mmol/L). A full septic workup was done and came out to be negative.
Based on all the previous findings, adrenal insufficiency was highly suspected, and a stress dose of hydrocortisone and fludrocortisone was started followed by maintenance therapy with dramatic improvement of the patient’s general condition and he was weaned from the ventilator. His cholestasis and liver functions started to improve.
Hormonal examination was unfortunately requested while the patient was on replacement steroid therapy which made interpretation of results unreliable regarding the cortisol level . The patient was discharged home with regular follow-up with the pediatric hepatology and endocrinology clinics.
On follow-up, the patient was thriving well with no attacks of hypoglycemia with complete resolution of cholestasis on hydrocortisone and fludrocortisone only without any other liver-supportive medications .
It was of notice that ACTH level in 3 consecutive clinic visits was not suppressed despite cortisol therapy (23 mg/m2/day) which suggested the possibility of ACTH resistance and accordingly genetic testing for familial glucocorticoid Deficiency type1 (FGD1) was requested.
Molecular genetic analysis of the patient revealed a novel homozygous mutation c.763_764delAT (p. Met255ValfsX17) in MC2R which is compatible with the clinical diagnosis of familial glucocorticoid deficiency type1 .
Screening of the patient’s family for the detected gene mutation revealed that both parents are heterozygous carriers for such mutation proving the autosomal recessive inheritance of the disease . The patient had one affected cousin who was tested and was found to be homozygous for the same mutation of our index case. The parents of the cousin were heterozygous. Other siblings of the patient and those of his affected cousin were apparently normal but were not genetically tested due to financial constrains .
Genetic counseling about the disease nature and future pregnancies disease risk was carried for the 2 families. Parents were educated about daily disease management and sick days management protocol. The patient is currently 5 years follow-up with normal development and adequate control of his illness. His cousin is 6 months old and moved to follow in another hospital near his home with good condition.