The patient was a 15-year-old, right-handed girl who has experienced progressive involuntary movement of her left upper extremity for 5 years. At the age of 10 years, she suddenly developed jerky movements on her left upper limb accompanied by ipsilateral handshaking without triggers. The tremor worsened with activity and seriously affected her fine motor function. She was subsequently sent to a local hospital. Physical examinations showed increased muscular tension and reduced muscular strength (grade 4/5) of the patient’s left upper limbs. Computed tomography (CT) images suggested a recent hemorrhage in the right thalamus, and a typical manifestation of “puff of smoke” sign was revealed on CT angiography (CTA) . With the exclusion of other underlying diseases and considering the above imaging manifestations, the patient was subsequently diagnosed with MMD. After the hemorrhage was stabilized, a local neurosurgeon performed an indirect revascularization surgery to eliminate the symptoms and decrease future rebleed risk. However, the tremor intensified a year later, accompanied by intermittent dystonic wrist supination and involuntary fist clenching (Video ). Additionally, she experienced left lower limb weakness, resulting in slight gait instability (Video ). Disease progression gradually impaired her daily functioning even with adequate and continuous medication including clonazepam, and baclofen. Five years later, she was admitted in our hospital for her refractory symptoms. After confirming her diagnosis through magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and CTA, the movement disorder specialist described the symptoms above as dystonia movements. More specifically, the patient was diagnosed with acquired dystonia caused by MMD with stroke.
Our multidisciplinary DBS team discussed and agreed on a treatment strategy of unilateral VIM/VOA radiofrequency thalamotomy and GPi-DBS. Surgical implantation of the right posteroventral GPi electrode (Mode G101A, PINS Medical, Beijing, China) and unilateral thalamotomy were performed during one operation, with informed consent provided by patient’s guardians for both surgery and video recordings. They acknowledged and fully understood the potential perioperative risks, specifically intracranial hemorrhage. Thalamotomy was performed before electrode implantation, leading to an immediate satisfactory outcome (Videos and ). The dystonia severity improvement scores based on the Burke–Fahn–Marsden Dystonia Rating Scale (BFMDRS) were 12 points (52.2%) and 5 points (55.6%) in motor and disability scores, respectively, at 1.5-year follow-up visit , indicating long-term symptom remission. Additionally, the muscle tone and strength of her left upper limb returned to normal after the surgery. Although slight weakness and tremor of her left hand were still observed, her daily functioning was not affected. At the last follow-up visit, stimulation parameters were optimized as follows: frequency, 160 Hz; pulse width, 60 μsec; amplitude, 3.15 V; and electrode configuration, C+3-. Adverse events were not observed.