The proband is a 62 year-old-man and has no siblings. His parents were non-consanguineous, both of Italian origin. The father did not suffer from any neurological disorder, while the mother, at the age of 75, received the diagnosis of tremor dominant PD, which was responsive to levodopa. Her main clinical features were rest and postural tremor, involving especially the right upper limb, and hypophonia. She did not show ataxia nor symptoms of autonomic dysfunction during disease, until she died four years later.
No neurological signs or symptoms were reported by the patient until the age of 54, when he began complaining of sialorrhea. Two years later, erectile dysfunction appeared; no other signs or symptoms of dysautonomia, including orthostatic hypotension, urinary incontinence and constipation, appeared in course of disease, thus making unlikely the hypothesis of Multiple System Atrophy type C. Subsequently, a mild dysphagia of solid food was noticed, shortly followed by cerebellar dysarthria and rapidly progressing postural instability, which led to recurrent falls and deambulation loss by the age of 61.
Current clinical examination revealed scanning speech, ocular dysmetria and slow saccades; no nystagmus nor limitation in extraocular movements were observed. Pyramidal tract signs, including limbs hyperreflexia, bilateral extensor plantar responses and ankle clonus, were present. No tremor nor bradykinesia were detected. The patient showed unsteadiness in standing position. He was able to walk without support only for a few steps, revealing spastic-ataxic gait, with tendency to fall backward. The remaining neurological examination, including trophism, strength and sensory testing, were normal.
Severity of cerebellar ataxia was evaluated by using the Scale for the Assessment and Rating of Ataxia (SARA) and the International Cooperative Ataxia Rating Scale (ICARS) at 59 (respectively 18/40 and 44/100) and 61 (respectively 25/40 and 61/100) years old.
Cerebellar atrophy and mild brainstem atrophy were detected at brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) . 2-[18F]fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose (2-[18F]FDG) Positron Emission Tomography (PET) imaging displayed diffuse hypometabolism of the left cerebellar hemisphere. Nerve conduction studies were normal, while needle examination showed mild signs of bilateral chronic neurogenic damage at the level of tibialis anterior muscles. Tests of cardiovascular and sudomotor function, including heart-rate variability and sympathetic skin responses (SRR) (Additional file ), excluded autonomic dysfunction. No autoantibodies associated with paraneoplastic neurologic syndromes (antibodies anti-Hu, Yo, Ri, amphiphysin, Ma2-Ta, CV2, SOX1, ZIC4, GAD26) were detected by wide-spectrum antibody assay on serum.
After excluding pathological repeat expansions in SCA1–2–3-6-7-8-10-12-17, ATN1 (DRPLA) and FXN (Friedrich Ataxia), Whole Exome Sequencing revealed a heterozygous c.1024C > T, p.R342W mutation in TGM6 (NM_198994). Nucleotide change was confirmed by Sanger sequencing . The identified variant (rs150566697) is rare (gnomAD MAF 0.02%) and replaces a highly conserved arginine in the functional Transglutaminase Core Domain . The variant is predicted to be damaging by Combined Annotation Dependent Depletion (CADD), Mutation Taster, Sorting Intolerant From Tolerant (SIFT), PolyPhen2, Functional Analysis Through Hidden Markov Models (FATHMM), Mutation Assessor and MutPred2 (Additional file ). DNA from parents was not available. The variant was not detected in five first degree asymptomatic cousins, respectively of 54, 54, 51, 48 and 46 years old.
To investigate the impact of p.R342W on TG6 function, we expressed plasmids encoding the TG6-R342W mutant in HEK293T cells, together with wild-type TG6 (TG6-WT) and TG6-R111C mutant, a known TGM6 pathogenic variant. TG6-R111C mutant was selected as positive control because it produced a significant lowering of TG6 activity if compared with other variants and altered TG6 subcellular localization, as reported in a previous work . Immunoblotting analysis and quantification of enzymatic activity showed that the transamidase activity of TG6-R342W and TG6-R111C mutants was significantly decreased by 76 and 68% respectively, compared to TG6-WT .