A 36-year-old white Kuwaiti man presented with a 2-day history of headache and vomiting. The headache was localized to his left temporal area, continuous and pressing in nature. It was exacerbated by movement of his head, and associated with two episodes of vomiting. On physical examination, he was vitally stable; a neurological examination showed mild right-sided arm and leg weakness (4/5) with mild right-upper facial nerve palsy. Sensory and fundus examinations were normal, and examination of the other systems was unremarkable.
Laboratory testing which including a complete blood count, renal function test, liver function test, serum electrolyte, inflammatory markers such as erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C- reactive protein, viral serology, including human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and blood cultures did not yield any abnormalities. An initial computed tomography (CT) of his brain showed an ill-defined left temporoparietal hypodensity with a faint central hyperdensity with mass effect and midline shift . Due to the high suspicion of cerebral venous/arterial thrombosis, MRI of his brain as well as magnetic resonance venography (MRV) and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) were performed. Imaging showed a mass involving his left thalamus, midbrain, and pons. The lesion resulted in mild fullness of the ipsilateral lateral ventricle due to compression of left foramen of Monro with midline shift . MRV and MRA were unremarkable . After reviewing his past medical history, he reported heavy cigarette smoking with recurrent episodes of painful mouth and genital ulcers which were treated with low-dose steroids for the last 10 years. His family history was unremarkable for chronic or inherited disease and there was no obvious precipitating factor for his current condition. After consulting the neurologist, the space-occupying lesion in his brain was suspected to be a brain tumor and a brain biopsy was advised; however, the patient refused and preferred medical treatment instead.
The patient was treated with methylprednisolone, 1 gram once daily, for 7 days followed by high-dose prednisone, 60mg per day, and the lesion slowly regressed over the next month . His symptoms improved dramatically and the lesion was undetectable on follow-up brain MRI after 3 months of therapy indicating that the lesion was most likely inflammatory in origin. Even though brain lymphoma can present in a similar manner and respond to steroid therapy, the classic history of recurrent oral and genital ulcers, the clinical context and the significant response to steroids, indicated that the mass is more likely to be related to neuro-Behcet’s disease.