A 56-year-old Chinese female patient (III23) was admitted to Zhongshan Hospital for constant black stools occurring for 2 mo.
The patient had recurrent epistaxis for years and noticed black stool for the prior 2 mo without abdominal pain or other gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms.
The patient also suffered from fatigue and shortness of breath and was diagnosed with idiopathic pulmonary hypertension and right heart failure in a local hospital 4 mo prior to presentation.
Several individuals in the patient’s family had symptoms of epistaxis and GI bleeding as shown in Figure . The patient’s elder brother (III22) experienced GI bleeding. Her son (IV3) experienced only epistaxis. Another 5 members in this family experienced symptoms of epistaxis (II2, II5, III4, III7, and IV1). During the follow-up, a niece (IV1) was found to experience pulmonary hypertension in addition to epistaxis and died 2 years after being diagnosed with pulmonary hypertension.
Physical examination upon admission revealed a body temperature of 37 °C, heart rate of 82 beats/min, respiratory rate of 20 breaths/min, and blood pressure of 100/70 mmHg. The skin examination showed a mild cyanosis. Cardiovascular examination revealed an expanded heart border to the right, and systolic murmur was detected at the tricuspid valve area. The abdomen was bilateral and soft. Percussion pain presented in the liver and spleen area.
A routine blood test identified hypochromic and microcytic erythrocytes with a low level of hemoglobin (58 g/L; normal range: 110-150 g/L). It also revealed abnormalities in total protein (53 g/L; normal range: 61-83 g/L), albumin (33 g/L; normal range: 35-50 g/L), and transglutaminase (63 U/L; normal range: < 47 U/L). Stool occult blood test was positive.
Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan showed dilated hepatic arteries , diffuse parenchymal telangiectasia, and early filling of hepatic veins on the arterial phase , which suggested a diagnosis of HHT. Barium X-ray examination for the upper GI tract indicated antral gastritis and duodenitis.
Since the patient experienced epistaxis and hepatic arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) were revealed on the abdominal CT scan, HHT was highly suspected. HHT is a dominant hereditary disease and is primarily caused by mutations in ENG (type 1 HHT), ALK1 (type 2 HHT), and SMAD4. Therefore, we subsequently performed gene testing in several individuals in this family, including the patient (III23), her elder brother (III22), a sister (III24), her son (IV3), a nephew (IV4), and a niece (IV2).
We amplified the ALK1 gene using the primers as shown in Table and sent the PCR DNA products for Sanger sequencing. The DNA sequencing showed that a missense mutation, c.1121G>A, in exon 8 of ALK1 occurred in the patient (III23), her son (IV3), and elder brother (III22). They all experienced symptoms of HHT, indicating type 2 HHT in this family . This mutation did not occur in the other 3 family members (III24, IV2, and IV4) who did not experience HHT symptoms . The c.1121G>A mutation contributed to a translational change from arginine to glutamine at amino acid position 374 (R374Q) of the ALK1 protein. These results indicated that the c.1121G>A mutation might contribute to the pathogenesis of type 2 HHT in this family.
To address this question, we performed biochemical studies to investigate the effect of the c.1121G>A mutation on the biological function of ALK1. First, we detected the mutant protein expression in cultured cells. The western blot showed no significant difference in ALK1 protein levels between the wildtype (WT) and R374Q groups . The immunofluorescence assay also showed that the mutant ALK1 protein could be detected in cells, and it was mainly located at cell membranes similar to the WT ALK1 protein . These results indicated that the c.1121G>A mutation exerted no influence on protein expression or subcellular distribution.
Previous computer modeling studies demonstrated that the substitution of arginine to glutamine at amino acid position 374 (p.R374Q) could disturb H-bonding schemes of the intracellular kinase domain of ALK1. Therefore, we assumed that the R374Q mutation could affect the kinase activity of ALK1. ALK1 is one of the components of TGF-β receptor that can phosphorylate Smad1 once activated and mediate signal reactions associated with vascular angiogenesis. We detected the phosphorylation level of Smad1 in 293T, HepG2, and Hela cell lines. The results showed that the phosphorylation of Smad1 was significantly reduced in the mutant group compared to the WT group . To further verify the inhibitory effect of the R374Q mutation on the kinase activity of ALK1, we introduced a Smad1-responsive transcriptional reporter, BRE4-luciferase reporter plasmid, to 293T, HepG2, and Hela cell lines. When transfecting WT ALK1 into those cells, we observed robust gene expression of the BRE4-luciferase. When the R374Q mutant was overexpressed, the expression of the BRE4-luciferase was significantly reduced compared to the WT group . Hence, the R374Q mutation impeded the kinase activity of ALK1.
Telangiectasis is a pathologic change in HHT that is characterized by abnormal vascular dilation. It may occur when fiber generation in vessel walls is decreased. Previous studies suggested that ALK1/Smad1 played an important role in organ fibrosis such as in the liver and kidney. Hence, we investigated whether the R374Q mutation affected profibrotic activity. The result showed that the R374Q mutant significantly abrogated the protein expression of a fibrogenic factor, collagen-1 , indicating that the R374Q mutant could inhibit fiber generation during vascular formation.