A 56-year-old male was admitted to our Institute with a sudden headache and dizziness accompanied by nausea and vomiting. The patient had been in good health until this event, except for a history of skin thickening, a Raynaud's phenomenon with acrocyanosis to the fingers from 1 year and arthralgia from 3 years. Other sclerotic lesions were observed on the knees and elbows.
On admission, his blood pressure, pulse, body temperature, and respiration were normal. The neurological examination showed dysmetria, nystagmus, and dizziness. There were neither sensory nor motor deficits and cranial nerves abnormality. The results of the routine hematologic tests showed only neutrophilic leukocytosis with relative lymphocytopenia. The initial brain computerized tomography (CT) scan and the subsequent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a lesion with fluid collection, measuring 1.5 × 3.5 cm in the right cerebellar hemisphere . The CT of the total body did not detect lesions of the internal organs. A right suboccipital craniotomy was performed, the fluid collection was free-hand evacuated, and the wall of the lesion was resected . The bacteriological exams of the fluid collection and of the blood cultures were negative. The echocardiogram showed no pathological lesions. The histopathological diagnosis of the wall of the lesion deposed for ischemic necrosis caused by a vasculitis . The post-operative MRI showed no residual lesions .
Further investigations tested positive for antinuclear antibody (ANA) >1:160 and Scl-70 (16.3 UA/mL), whereas other tests for rheumatology and infectious diseases tested negative (antiphospholipid anticentromere and anticardiolipin antibodies, Lupus-like anticoagulant, anti-DNA autoantibodies, perinuclear antineutrophil antibodies (P-ANCA), cytoplasmic antineutrophil antibodies (C-ANCA), Anti-Smith antibodies (Anti-Sm), Anti-Sjögren’s-syndrome-related antigen A/B (Anti-SSA/B), Antibodies against antigen Ro52 (Anti-Ro52), antibodies histidyl-tRNA synthetase Jo-1 (Anti-Jo1), major centromere autoantigen B (CENP-B), Nucleosomes, Ribosomal P- Protein, Anti-Ribonuclear Protein (Anti-U1RNP), Histones, Protein S Factor V Leiden, Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBs-Ag), Hepatitis C Core antibodies (HCV-Ab), antibodies Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV-Ab), Veneral Disease Research Laboratory). In addition to this, it was found an increase of circulating immune complexes (38 μg/ml), α1-acid-glycoprotein (208 mg/dl) and C-reactive protein (0.80 mg/dl). The capillaroscopy in the periungual area showed slight disorganization of the capillary architecture, numerous giant capillaries and microhemorrhages, moderate capillary loss, and few ramified capillaries with initial neoangiogenesis. The skin biopsy confirmed a focal extension of dermal collagen in the subcutaneous tissue. All these conditions were compatible with a scleroderma pattern. The patient was sent to our rheumatology reference center to start a specific therapy. At 1-year follow-up there were no other complications.