A 4-year-old child was circumcised at the age of 3 years, and after that, he bled profusely. At that time, he was far away from the hospital, and they decided to wait, and the bleeding stopped spontaneously. His parents noticed the urine wasn't coming out the proper way and they brought him to the hospital after 4 months. At that time, there were no emergency conditions like urinary obstruction, and they came as outpatients of the pediatric surgery department. There is no drug history or other family medical or genetic problems. Their social economy is very poor, and there is no governmental support.
On physical examination of the patient, the glans was normal. Neither edema nor erythema was detected, but there was an opening near the glans in the distal urethra at the subcoronal level. The catheter advanced freely from the urethral meatus, there was no meatal stenosis or urethral stenosis. The subcoronal urethral fistula was large enough to see the urethral catheter advance from the meatus to the bladder (see ).
The urine analysis, culture, and other blood tests taken for pre-operative check-ups were normal, and the patient was prepared for elective surgery by a pediatric surgeon. Under general anesthesia with endotracheal intubation, in the decubitus dorsalis position, after sterile staining and covering with povidone-iodine, a 6 French urethral catheter was placed into the bladder from the meatus and fixed with a glans suspension suture. An incision and dissection were performed to reveal the fistula tract all around by placing marker sutures from the edges of the fistula (Picture 2).
After free mobilization, the fistula opening was repaired with a 6/0 PDS (polydioxanone) simple suture. In addition, a second layer was created over the urethral fistula repair suture line with a dartos flap , and then the skin was closed with 4/0 Vicryl (polyglactin) .
The urethral catheter was removed on the 7th postoperative day. During voiding, it was tested that the fistula was closed and the large calibrated urine flow was coming from the meatus . The patient was followed up care every six weeks, and there was no urethral stenosis in the next six months after the operation.