A 7-year old girl with HIV-infection presented at the ART clinic of a hospital in rural Mopani District, South Africa, with enlargement of both breasts since one month. She had been initiated on ART four months before and was taking a regimen of abacavir, lamivudine and efavirenz. She reported that the growth of her breasts occurred a few weeks earlier, approximately ten to twelve weeks after the start of ART. The breasts were slightly tender but otherwise painless, and the breasts had stabilized in size. She did not experience milky discharge from the nipple nor had she or her mother observed any signs that could be associated with early puberty such as menstruation, acne and pubic or axillar hair growth. Except from the breast enlargement she felt well and did not have any other complaints. She did not take any drugs of abuse or medication other than ART and co-trimoxazole prophylaxis with correct doses for her body weight.
Physical examination revealed bilateral glandular breast tissue, which could easily be distinguished from fat tissue through palpation. The breast gland tissue was about 4-5 cm in diameter, Tanner stadium 3, with the left breast being more prominent than the right. There was no discharge observed from the nipple. There were no signs of lipodystrophy or puberty, in particular no pubic or axillar hair growth. The body mass index (BMI) was 13.3 and BMI for age was below the 15th percentile. On clinical examination the thyroid gland was not enlarged.
Blood tests were performed for liver and kidney function and results were within the normal range. Blood hormone levels were all in the normal range as well and were as follows: thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) 5.12 mIU/L; testosterone < 0.35 nmol/L; cortisol 129 nmol/L; follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) < 2 IU/L; luteinizing hormone (LH) < 0.5 IU/L; estradiol < 92.0 ρmol/L; prolactin 6.6 μg/L. The CD4 cell count was 302 cells/mm3 compared to 330 cells/mm3 at ART initiation; viral load was 174 copies/mm3. Baseline viral load was not available in accordance with South African treatment guidelines.
A clinical diagnosis of medication-induced gynecomastia was considered and efavirenz was replaced with nevirapine in her ART regimen (no history of previous nevirapine exposure). At two weeks follow-up the breast size was reduced by half to 2–3 cm in diameter and 4 weeks later the gynecomastia had resolved completely.