A 51-year-old woman from Afghanistan, with a chief complaint of inability to chew, was referred by a dentist to the department of oral and maxillofacial surgery at Ayatollah Taleghani hospital in Tehran, Iran. The patient mentioned that she had undergone a surgical procedure in childhood due to a right zygomatic and mandibular infection. The patient’s maximum mouth opening (MMO) gradually diminished after the surgery, until she was eventually unable to open her mouth (MMO = 3 - 4 mm). The patient did not mention any specific past medical complications, and she did not have any unusual habits. There were no abnormal findings on laboratory tests.
On extra oral examination, the middle one-third of the face was asymmetric . The midline of the chin was deviated 7 mm to the left, and the right malar eminence was flat and displaced downward and inward. The right eye was about 5 mm lower than the left, with a canted occlusal plane. The right mandibular condyle had less movement than the left, and the left condyle could only move in the horizontal plane. Computed tomography (CT) and panoramic x-rays showed a hyperplastic right coronoid process . Interference between the right coronoid process and the zygomatic arch due to downward and inward displacement of the zygomatic bone was observed on the three-dimensional CT scans and panoramic x-ray views.
The patient underwent a surgical procedure under general anesthesia. The treatment plan for this surgery was coronoidectomy of both sides via an intraoral approach and osteotomy of the right zygomatic arch through an Al-Kayat and Bramley preauricular incision. First, a 1 cm incision was created in the anterior right ramus. The right coronoid process was cut and excised, and a left coronoidectomy was performed similarly. We were able to open the patient’s mouth approximately 20 mm after bilateral coronoidectomy. This was followed by cutting a 5 × 5 mm segment of the zygomatic arch, which interfered with the movement of the coronoid process, through a preauricular approach. We used a temporal muscle interposition flap in the arch-splitting site to prevent bone formation or recurrent zygomatico-coronoid interference. We were able to open the mouth approximately 40 mm after the zygomatic arch osteotomy . Active and passive physiotherapy was performed during the follow-up period. No relapse was observed after about three months.