In 2012, a 60-year-old woman came to our attention with left breast cancer. In her clinical history, there were no autoimmune and vascular diseases, or diabetes. She had a moderately differentiated (grade 2) ductal carcinoma, with high expression of estrogen and progesterone receptors. She was treated with BCS on her external superior mammary quadrant and sentinel lymph node biopsy (stage pT1c pN0sn Er+ PR+ Her 2+), followed by radiotherapy and adjuvant letrozole. In February 2012, she received adjuvant radiotherapy to the whole residual breast with three-dimensional (3D) conformal technique, 6 MV photons, and multileaf collimator customized beams with a standard fractionation of 2 Gy (50 Gy total), followed by a 10 Gy boost with a 12 MeV electron beam to the tumor bed.
During the treatment, she did not develop any acute skin reaction. Ten months later, the patient returned to our attention when complaining of hemorrhagic skin of the central-inferior quadrant of the irradiated breast, which was surrounded by multiple and frail telangiectasias. During the first 3 weeks, the lesion began to enlarge, and ultimately consisted of a big hemorrhagic morula, surrounded by several pustules, and outlined by an edematous circular edge . Two weeks later, the burst pustules released hemosiderinic products onto the skin. Two months later, the initially involved area became pale and avascular, and was covered by a transparent epithelial coat surrounded by multiple frail and thin telangiectasias . These phenomena recurred every 4 to 6 months, involving at least the entire irradiated breast. The breast was severely retracted and distorted with edema of the subcutaneous plane and induration in the central part near the nipple area, with peripheral telangiectasias . We decided to review the RT treatment plan for possible errors in the radiation planning and delivery, and to check for possible under-estimated high hot spot (highest skin dose) areas, which could explain this phenomenon. However, the execution of the RT treatment was correct; in the evaluation plan the configuration of the isodoses, the dose/fraction, and the effective total dose administered were accurate. In the revision of the plan, only 105% little hot spot areas in the upper external part of the breast were recorded, while the area of the boost was in the superior external quadrant, outside the involved fibrotic breast.
To exclude a local relapse and to avoid a pressed trauma to the affected breast by the mammography, a breast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was prescribed. Breast MRI showed no relapse and a contrast enhancement of the dermal-epidermal surface with thickening of the skin contour as shown in . To exclude the suspicion of an active autoimmune connective-tissue skin syndrome, the patient underwent patch biopsy of the involved area. The biopsy revealed findings of chronic inflammatory diseases, such as panniculitis and chronic radiodermatitis, characterized by fibrosis and dermo-epidermal strippings, telangiectasias with thin and frail vessels . At this point, we hypothesized the possible role of polymorphisms in genes involved in DNA repair mechanisms. We therefore tested for SNPs in genes of interest on a peripheral blood sample using polymerase chain reaction and pyrosequencing. The tested genes were GSTP1 (A313G), XRCC1 (G28152A), XRCC3 (A4541G and C18067T), RAD51 (G135C), CYP3A4*1B, and CYP19A1 (C268T and G410T). The result showed heterozygous mutations in XRCC1 G28152A (T/C) and XRCC3 C18067T (A/G), homozygous mutation in GSTP1 A313G (G/G), and wild-type XRCC3 A4541G (A/A) and RAD51 G135C (G/G).
The patient was informed that she was a carrier of these genetic alterations, and that they could be responsible for the late toxicity and worse cosmetic outcome after radiotherapy. She was observed with close follow-up and delivery of the necessary topical medications with the aim of curing the radiation-induced skin damage. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of the case details and images in this paper.