A 73-year-old man with a 75-pack-year history of cigarette smoking and asbestos exposure between the ages of 30 and 40 years had been admitted to undergo an extrapleural pneumonectomy due to MPM in the right pleural cavity. However, only a cytoreduction pleurectomy was performed on 30 September 2003 , because of the aggressiveness of the local tumor. The lesion remained mainly in the mediastino-hilar region adjacent to the carina, esophagus, and the right main bronchus. Histologically, the tumor was epithelioid type with T4N0, stage IV (IMIG staging). Then, postoperative intrathoracic chemothermotherapy using carboplatin (CBDCA, 450mg intrapleurally, one course) was administered, followed by systemic chemotherapy using gemcitabine (GEM, 0.8mg/m2, biweekly, 6 courses). Chest computed tomography (CT) in December 2003 showed that the effect of these postoperative therapies on the residual tumor was stable disease (SD).
In May 2004, the patient felt increasing chest pain with poor general condition. Chest CT showed local relapse broadly in the right pleural cavity causing airway narrowing . However, he refused further chemo-radiation therapy, and in June 2004, without consulting with the physicians, he orally self-administered a mushroom extract containing Agaricus blazei Murill Kyowa (ABMK) , in addition to alternative parasympathetic nerve stimulation therapy in another hospital. This is a modified acupuncture modality providing possible immune-modulation . After experiencing high fever for about 2 weeks, his general condition distinctly improved. Four months after these therapies, the relapsed bulky tumor in the pleural cavity had significantly decreased, and finally completely disappeared on chest CT . Then, the patient continued this self-treatment with neither symptoms nor radiological evidence of tumor relapse in May 2007. Tumor disappearance was completely achieved during a 29-month follow-up.
Unfortunately, local relapse was detected on chest CT in August 2007. In November 2008, although the relapsed tumor was again growing slowly, the patient was alive while continuing this self-treatment.