A 47-year-old man was referred to the cardiology department with a history of hypertension and chest pain for further evaluation of his condition. Eight months ago, he suffered from dyspnea (Functional Class III), cough and phlegm, night sweats without fever. In addition, during the past two months, exacerbation of the edema symptoms (grade III), there was also positive history of anorexia, severe weakness and fatigue, weight loss and chest pain. Moreover, the patient had a previous history of pulmonary valve disease of childhood. Furthermore, he had no known risk factors except for congenital valvular heart disease, which was ignored from childhood. Plus, there was no history of smoking, narcotic medication, and alcohol. He was under treatment with amlodipine, losartan, spironolactone, carvedilol, furosemide, atorvastatin, and aspirin. On physical examination, heart rate 85 beats/min, respiratory rate 20 beats/min and his blood pressure was 130/80 mmHg. On inspection, the jugular vein pressure and lung were normal. Furthermore, cardiac auscultation demonstrated a continuous systolic murmur (grade 4/6) was best heard in the second left intercostal space. Plus, there were no peripheral stigmata of infective endocarditis, but on abdominal examination, there were splenomegaly and hepatomegaly.
The echocardiography revealed the normal sinus rhythm, normal axis and incomplete right bundle branch block. Laboratory investigations indicated WBC = 10,100 micL,POLY = 77%,Hemoglobin = 10.1 g/dl,MCV = 80 ft.,Platelet = 207,000/mm3,CRP = 77 mg/L, ESR = 90 mm/h,Urine analysis normal, Renal function test normal,FBS = 90 mg/dl, TG = 86 mg/dl,Cholesterol = 108 mg/dl, LDL = 60 mg/dl,HDL = 27 mg/dl, AST = 43 U/L,ALT = 28 U/L.
Blood culture yielded streptococcus sp. sensitive to ampicillin, ceftriaxone, and vancomycin. All results for HBS Antigen, HCV Antibody, HIV antibody, PPD, Wright, 2 mercaptomethanol reductions were negative. Also serum complement concentration, ANA (anti-nuclear antibody), Anti-double strand DNA were in normal limit.
Chest X ray findings showed increased bronchovascular markings. In Color Doppler ultrasound of the lower extremities, there was no deep vein thrombosis (DVT)
Left ventricle (LV): LV size is moderate enlarged with normal systolic function. There is mild left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) Right ventricle (RV): RV size is moderate enlarged with mild to moderate systolic dysfunction. There is severe RVH. D-shaped septum consistent with pressure overload. Left atrium (LA): LA size is normal. Right atrium (RA): RA size is mild to moderate enlarged. Mitral valve (MV): MV is normal with no mitral regurgitation (MR). There is no mitral stenosis (MS). Aortic valve (AV): AV is thickened and calcified with no aortic insufficiency (AI) there is no aortic stenosis (AS). Tricuspid valve (TV): TV is normal with moderate tricuspid regurgitation (TR). There is no tricuspid stenosis (TS). Pulmonary valve (PV): PV is thick and dome shaped with no pulmonary insufficiency (PI). There is severe pulmonary valve stenosis (PVS). Inferior vena cava (IVC): IVC size is normal and more than 50% respiratory collapse. Pericardium: Pericardium is normal with trivial pericardial effusion.
Echocardiographic diagnosis in the first TTE was severe PS (PPG = 110 mmHg).
LV: LV size is moderate enlarged with normal systolic function. There is mild LVH RV: RV size is moderate enlarged with mild to moderate systolic dysfunction. There is severe right ventricular hypertrophy (RVH). D-shaped septum consistent with pressure overload. LA: LA size is mild to moderate enlarged. RA: RA size is moderate enlarged. MV:MV is thickened with no MR. there is no MS. AV: AV is thickened and calcified with no AI there is no AS. TV: TV is thickened with moderate TR. There are no TS. PV: PV is thick and dome shaped with mild to moderate PI. There is severe PS. Interventricular septum (IVS): IVS has no VSD Interatrial septum (IAS): IAS is thickened there is small size PFO, by contrast study. IVC: IVC size is normal and more than 50% respiratory collapse. Pericardium: Pericardium is normal with trivial pericardial effusion. Left arterial appendage (LAA): LAA is normal with no thrombus. LAA velocity: 94.8 cmls Aorta: descending, abdominal aorta and aortic arch have normal size and flow.
Diagnosis with TEE was severe PS(PPG = 110) with large mobile mass(1.5*1.8 cm) on arterial side of PV and another very large mobile mass (2.5*0.9 cm) was attached to the luminal of main of PA at the distal part (5 cm above pulmonic valve) at jet site of PS .
The diagnosis of pulmonary endarteritis and endocarditis was made according to the lung CT scan and pulmonary and coronary artery CT angiography findings . Antibiotic therapy was continued for 1 week in hospital, and the patient was referred for pulmonary valve replacement with complete resection of large vegetations. We empirically started vancomycin 1 g q 12 h and meropenem 1 g q 8 h due to extracardiac complication (pulmonary septic embolism) and after 48 h when antibiogram results was reported we didn’t change antibiotic therapy. During 2 weeks after surgical management and antibiotic therapy, blood culture (2 blood sample with 1 h interval) repeated every 4 days until negative blood culture obtained(Totally 4 times blood culture was positive).
Surgery was performed and a large 3*2 cm highly mobile strand like vegetation was seen adherent to the arterial wall about 5 cm above PV annulus. This was completely removed from the arterial wall with no residue and sent for culture and pathologic inspection. Then the pulmonary valve was inspected and found to be severely calcified and with multiple vegetations adherent to the deformed and stenotic leaflets, so the valve was resected and sent for culture and pathologic inspection. Then pulmonary valve was replaced with a #23 On-X valve. Then the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) was repaired.After negative blood culture, antibiotic therapy lasted for 6 weeks. He discharged after 3 weeks with a good condition while antibiotic therapy continued outpatient. In addition,the clinical course of pulmonary septic emboli after surgery,this was that in the first week of treatment he became afebrile, the patient’s pulmonary symptoms recovered gradually, leukocytosis and ESR decreased and chest X ray resolved slowly over 6–8 weeks.
ESR(40 mm/h) and CRP (37 mg/L)returned to normal values after the operation. He was discharged on 21th post-operative day with better echocardiography findings (Acceptable gradient of mechanical prosthesis PV (PVMG: 14 mmHg, PVPG: 20 mmHg), mild turbulence of rRVOT), normal diastolic function) and was asymptomatic at 3-months of follow-up and was clinically in good condition.