An 87-year-old man presented with a 1-week history of episodic, sharp and non-radiating epigastric pain. He also had abdominal bloating, anorexia, vomiting and loose stools. Three years previously, he had a laparotomy for perforated jejunal diverticula that required segmental jejunal resection and primary end-to-end anastomosis. The resection was of a 45 cm length of jejunum that contained two inflamed and perforated diverticula but the adjacent and distal 45 cm segment of jejunum containing non-inflamed diverticula was left alone. The man's other background history was of colonic diverticula disease, right inguinal hernia repair and transurethral resection of the prostate. On examination, his abdomen was distended with tenderness and guarding in the right upper quadrant but without overt peritonism as he had a soft abdomen without rebound tenderness. His pulse was regular at 117 beats per minute, blood pressure was 130/90 mmHg, and he was apyrexial. His C-reactive protein level was raised at 46 mg/L whilst his white blood cell count was within the normal limits at 7.7 × 109/L. His renal and liver function tests were normal. Erect chest X-ray did not reveal free air under the diaphragm. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen showed evidence of a localised perforation of the small bowel with multiple dilated loops of small bowel surrounding an area of marked soft tissue stranding with multiple small locules of gas, which appeared to connect to a loop of small bowel . The CT finding, together with the presence of jejunal diverticula, was most consistent with the diagnosis of a second perforation of the jejunal diverticula.
It was felt most appropriate to treat the man conservatively as he remained stable and without features of peritonism, and so a nasogastric (NG) tube was inserted to decompress the small bowel together with administration of intravenous fluids, ciprofloxacin and metronidazole. He made a good symptomatic recovery and was discharged on the fourth day after admission on a course of oral antibiotics and has remained well since.