We report on a 9-year-old girl with acute onset of persistent diplopia seventeen days after a mostly asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection. The main symptom reported during the course of the disease was headache, but there was no meningismus. The diagnosis was confirmed using a molecular nasopharyngeal swab that detected the presence of SARS-CoV-2 RNA by real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The test resulted negative after 10 days from the beginning of the infection.
An intercurrent episode of fever (temperature 38.5 °C) lasting 72 hours was reported one week before the onset of the eye disorder. The patient’s parents noticed the sudden onset of convergent strabismus of the right eye while the child was using her mobile phone. She had no pain with eye movements or other neurologic symptoms such as weakness, ataxia, paresthesia and hyporeflexia or anosmia/ageusia.
The first clinical examination at the Pediatric Department Child Neurology Unit revealed complete and isolated failure of abduction of the right eye. The horizontal diplopia, persisted in the primary gaze and was exacerbated by distant fixation . Ocular motility was full, the pupillary response was preserved and there was no evidence of ptosis, proptosis, chemosis or significant ocular exudate, or fatiguing weakness. The remaining neurological examination and the rest of the physical examination were unremarkable.
On ophthalmologic examination her best-corrected visual acuity was normal in both eyes, no afferent pupillary defect nor nystagmus was observed. The colour vision (Hishihara plates), slit lamp examination and visual field were normal in both eyes. Ocular motility examination revealed an incomitant esotropia (convergent squint) with limitation of abduction in the right eye and abnormal position of the head when turned to the right shoulder. Horizontal binocular vision with image separation was typically worse at long distance than at near distance, and worse for right gaze. The fundus of the eye was normal.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain was performed with contrast-enhanced multiplanar reconstruction study, revealing normal findings.
Lumbar puncture showed a normal opening pressure and normal cerebro-spinal fluid (CSF) components. The search for the main neurotropic viruses including the analysis for SARS-CoV-2 RNA as well as for oligoclonal bands was negative.
Routine blood tests were normal including complete blood count, coagulation, inflammatory markers, liver and kidney function.
The patient was discharged after 48 hours of observation with no change in double vision.
After the collegial discussion of the case no treatment was undertaken.
At one week follow-up, the patient reported the persistence of diplopia with a fluctuating course. Patching of the good eye was advised and performed. At 2-month follow-up, the patient had improved binocular vision and reduced eye deviation.