A 33-year-old white man with a 5-day history of fever, was hospitalized on May 2004. He also reported epigastralgia and pain in the right leg. He had an history of femoral deep venous thrombosis ten years before. His mother and his brother had an history of deep venous thrombosis and his father died because of pulmonary embolism. Physical examination revealed fever (temperature range 38°C–38°5C), asthenia, headache, anorexia and epigastralgia. His right leg was enlarged and painful. Tibiopopliteal deep venous thrombosis was confirmed by Doppler ultrasonography. At the time of hospital admission, his WBC was 6,000 cells/mm3, with 2,100 neutrophils/mm3 and 2,820 lymphocytes/mm3, with 9% of hyperbasophilic lymphocytes. His platelet count was 120,000/mm3 and his hemoglobin level was 141 g/l. The C-reactive protein level was 52 mg/l. Liver function tests revealed an ALT level of 65 UI/l, an AST level of 64 UI/l, an LDH level of 891 UI/l, a PAL level of 61 UI/l and a γ-GT level of 41 UI/l. Blood cultures were sterile. The results of serological tests for HIV ELISA, hepatitis A IgM, hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis C virus, Q fever, and toxoplasma were negative. VCA and EBNA IgG antibodies were positive suggesting past immunization. Serological test for CMV ELISA was strongly positive for IgM antibodies. The result of a CMV pp65 antigenemia assay, based on the direct detection of the CMV pp65 phosphoprotein was positive. A second serological test for CMV taken two weeks after the first one showed seroconversion with appearance of IgG. No pathological values for prothrombin time ratio, activated partial thromboplastin time, plasma antithrombin III, protein C and S activity were found. Results of tests for anticardiolipin antibodies, lupus anticoagulant and prothrombin 20210 were negative. Antinuclear antibodies were negative and complement was normal. Factor V Leiden heterozygous mutation was found. Anticoagulant treatment was introduced. Tthe patient became asymptomatic and was discharged from the hospital.