A 23-year-old African-American man with past medical history of G6PD-deficiency and obesity presented with dyspnea and pleuritic chest pain that improved upon leaning forward and scant hemoptysis of two weeks duration. He was notably hypertensive to the 220/110 s mmHg and tachycardic to the 120 s, but had a preserved respiratory rate and oxygen saturation. Physical exam was remarkable for bilateral diffuse wheezing throughout all lung fields. Other parts of the exam including cardiovascular, nasopharynx, skin and musculoskeletal systems were unremarkable. Additional pertinent history was remarkable only for marijuana smoking. Electrocardiogram was unremarkable except for left atrial enlargement. Chest X-ray revealed bilateral pulmonary infiltrates, cardiomegaly, and mediastinal enlargement suggestive of bulky hilar adenopathy. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest with contrast was performed which was negative for pulmonary embolism, but revealed bilateral centrilobular opacities, hilar/mediastinal lymphadenopathy, and a trivial pericardial effusion . Initial laboratory diagnostics were significant for acute kidney injury with a serum creatinine of 2.03 (mg/dL), trace proteinuria, troponin elevation to 0.232 (ng/mL), and a D-Dimer of 1.3 (mcg/mL). Complete blood count revealed no leukocytosis, but concomitant eosinophilia, with no evidence of anemia. The patient was subsequently admitted to the medicine wards and a therapeutic regimen of antihypertensive agents as well as intravenous ceftriaxone and azithromycin for presumed community acquired pneumonia was initiated.
Additional diagnostic evaluation demonstrated marked elevation of CRP (80 mg/L) and ESR (67 mm/hr). Pheochromocytoma screening with serum catecholamines and metanephrines was negative. An echocardiogram revealed an ejection fraction of 40%, moderate concentric left ventricular hypertrophy, and trivial pericardial effusion without evidence of tamponade or pulmonary artery hypertension. Despite continuation of antibiotics for pneumonia and adjunctive heart failure management, the patient’s clinical status failed to improve. In the setting of an unremarkable infectious workup and concern for an autoimmune etiology, the patient was started on oral prednisone 60 mg daily. The patient remained symptomatic, experiencing episodic chest pain and shortness of breath, with blood pressure lability. Repeat chest X-ray showed worsening bilateral infiltrates. Subsequently, ANA resulted weakly positive (1:160) with a homogenous pattern and rheumatoid factor (RF) returned negative.
On the fifth day of admission, antibiotics were discontinued in light of negative cultures and lack of significant clinical improvement. The patient’s blood pressure was noted to be slightly improved with addition of prednisone however remained poorly controlled on multiple medications . Autoimmune panel including ANCA (MPO/p-ANCA, and PR3/c-ANCA), anti-double-stranded DNA antibody, anti-Smith antibody, C3 and C4 complements, anti-histone antibody, as well as other autoimmune related factors and infectious serologies returned negative or within normal limits . Renal ultrasound and renal artery duplex were performed which did not reveal any evidence of hydronephrosis or renal artery stenosis, respectively. A repeat high-resolution chest CT scan was obtained, both in supine and prone positions, to help differentiate early interstitial lung disease from intra-alveolar processes, which showed persistent intra-alveolar opacities without any change on prone position . Over the course of the following days, the patient reported improvement in his symptomatology and his blood pressure improved, therefore he was taken off prednisone on the sixth day. Pulmonary function testing was performed in the setting of bilateral hilar adenopathy and fixed infiltrates, which revealed a mixed obstructive and restrictive pattern. He eventually underwent lung biopsy by video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) with right medial lobe wedge resection and was subsequently discharged with instructions to follow up with rheumatology for planned initiation of rituximab. The histopathological results of his lung biopsy demonstrated extensive intra-alveolar hemorrhage with linear polymorphonuclear (PMN) cell collections in alveolar septa and capillaritis without any evidence of granulomatous changes, indicative of microscopic polyangiitis . Immunohistochemistry on lung biopsy samples was not performed and renal biopsy was deferred to outpatient rheumatology.
Unfortunately, the patient was lost to follow up, failing to attend any of the scheduled appointments. He was subsequently readmitted six months later with similar symptoms, and once again found to be in hypertensive emergency, complicated by acute decompensated heart failure. Repeat echocardiogram revealed a further decline in his ejection fraction to 25% and a trivial pericardial effusion. Rheumatology was consulted and recommended pulse steroid therapy with methylprednisolone 250 mg four times a day for three days, which led to significant improvement in symptoms and blood pressure. Repeat ANCA and autoimmune serological workup remained negative. Following initiation of pulse steroid therapy, he underwent renal biopsy. The biopsy contained forty glomeruli, six of which were globally sclerotic. One glomerulus had segmental sclerosis. There were changes suggestive of microangiopathic injury in some arteries and glomeruli, such as bloodless glomeruli and mild intimal myxoid changes in arteries, with associated acute tubular injury. Focal tubular atrophy and interstitial fibrosis were estimated to involve approximately 10% of the cortex. No evidence of crescents or granulomatous changes were observed. Immunofluorescence was unremarkable, with only non-specific linear glomerular and tubular basement membrane staining for IgG, kappa, lambda, and albumin, indicative of pauci-immunity. Electron microscopy demonstrated segmental effacement of podocyte foot processes (40%) with vacuolation and microvillous transformation of the podocyte cytoplasm, ischemic-type capillary wall wrinkling, and subendothelial electron lucent widening . He was subsequently discharged on a steroid taper with plans for outpatient rituximab. Despite extensive education about his condition he was once again lost to follow up and missed appropriate treatment.
Over the course of the next year, he was readmitted on multiple occasions and eventually progressed to dialysis-dependent end-stage renal disease. His two most recent admissions were characterized by pancreatitis with pancreatic pseudoaneurysm complicated by retroperitoneal hematoma and cardiac tamponade, respectively. With respect to his pancreatitis, he presented in the context of acute onset abdominal pain with associated nausea and vomiting. Laboratory diagnostics demonstrated an elevated lipase (3400), normal triglycerides, and a negative IgG4 serology. Abdominal CT was significant for peripancreatic fat stranding and inflammatory changes without evidence of gallstones or biliary ductal dilation. He denied recent alcohol use. Pancreatitis course was further complicated by retroperitoneal hematoma, which was found to be secondary to a 7 mm pancreatic pseudoaneurysm rupture, as revealed on repeat abdominal CT angiography . He was managed conservatively and subsequently discharged. One month later he presented with dyspnea, chest pain and nausea, and was found to have large pericardial effusion with an acute decrease in ejection fraction to 10% . He underwent pericardiocentesis with removal of one liter of serosanguineous fluid. Fluid analysis was indicative of hemorrhagic etiology and negative for malignancy. On review of most recent outpatient records, the patient has been maintained on high-dose suppressive steroid therapy with plans for initiation of Rituximab or Cyclophosphamide.