During July 2018, a 26-year old, previously healthy male had been struck by the propeller of a passing motorboat while snorkeling on the shore of the Balearic island of Mallorca, Spain. He suffered complete amputation injury at the level of the proximal tibia and fibula as well as multi-fragment distal femur fracture of his left lower extremity . Due to retrograde amnesia the patient was not able to provide more detailed information concerning the accident occurrence. At the local hospital, the lower leg showed extensive soft-tissue damage and had to be amputated. The open, multi-fragment distal femur fracture was reduced and stabilized with an external fixator. Postoperatively, the patient was transferred to an intensive care unit. Seven days after the injury, on August 02, 2018 the patient was presented to our center by inter-hospital air transfer. On admission he was febrile with a temperature of 38.5 °C. Laboratory studies revealed a normal white blood cell count of 7.3 × 109/l (reference .8–11.0 × 109/l), anemia with hemoglobin level of 10.0 g/dl (reference .0–17.5 g/dl) and elevated C-reactive protein of 253 mg/l (reference < 5 mg/l). Chest radiograph and urine analysis showed no abnormalities and four sets of blood culture showed no growth of bacteria. Initially the amputation stump and the wound on the thigh showed no clinical signs of infection. Blood cultures were collected before empiric antimicrobial therapy was initiated with ampicillin/sulbactam. Two days later clinical examination revealed a warm, tender and erythematous amputation stump; hence a wound infection was suspected. On August 04, 2018 surgical revision revealed a putrid infection of the amputation stump with necrosis of the subcutaneous tissue and the muscles. Due to the advanced infection, a rigorous and aggressive debridement of skin, subcutaneous tissue, fascia, muscle and bone was performed. The amputation stump was temporarily closed with a vacuum assisted closure-therapy. The external fixator was removed, and the pin sites and the wound were cut out. Subsequently, the multi-fragmented distal femur fracture was reduced and stabilized with a new external fixator. During the surgery several microbiological samples were submitted for microbiologic examination. Culture incubation of a wound swab readily grew bacteria that were identified as V. harveyi by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization/time-of-flight mass spectrometry fingerprinting using a biotyper instrument (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). The wound culture was monomicrobial without growth of any other pathogens. Minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs) were determined by gradient diffusion (Etest®, bioMérieux, Marcy-l’Étoile, France; MIC Test Strip, Liofilchem, Roseto degli Abruzzi, Italy). According to non-species related EUCAST breakpoints, the isolate was classified as susceptible to meropenem (MIC 0.004 mg/mL), ciprofloxacin (0.125 mg/mL) and ceftriaxone (0.032 mg/mL) and resistant to ampicillin (32 mg/mL) .
Thus, antibiotic treatment was transitioned to ceftriaxone and ciprofloxacin. Throughout the following days, the patient repeatedly had to undergo surgical debridement, but the infection could eventually be controlled. Sixteen days after the first surgical revision the amputation stump could be closed, and the multi-fragment distal femur fracture was stabilized with a 9-hole NCB distal femur plate . On September 04, 2018, antibiotic treatment was stopped, and the patient was discharged to a rehabilitation facility.
Whole genome sequencing of the isolate was retrospectively performed with an Illumina NextSeq instrument using 2 × 150 bp paired-end chemistry (SRA accession PRJNA576306). Reads were assembled with shovill 1.0.4 and spades 3.13.1 into a draft genome with 107 contigs larger than 200 bp (N50 409272, L50 4) and a total length of 6.1 million bp. An average nucleotide identity of 98.6 to 98.8 with genomes of V. harveyi strains 345, ATCC 33843, CAIM 1792, NCTC 12970, VHJR4 and QT520 confirmed the species identification . RAST-annotation and analysis with the SEED-viewer showed a nearly identical profile of the investigated V. harveyi strains in the virulence, disease and defense subsystem category. An additional blast-search against the virulence factor database did not reveal additional atypical virulence factors (e. g. toxins) in our isolate. In agreement with phenotypic testing resistance gene profiling identified a class A beta-lactamase showing 100% amino acid identity to the beta-lactamase of V. harveyi CAIM 1792 (GenBank® accession number EMR34292.1).