A 49-year-old premenopausal nulliparous Caucasian woman was admitted with the complaints of abdominal distention and constipation. She indicated that she had been defecating once every 7 to 10 days, frequently with the help of a laxative, and had had serious abdominal pain intermittently since childhood. She had undergone an exploratory laparotomy for ileus 1 year ago. The related surgery report stated that her colon had been extensively dilated and elongated, and there had been massive fecal impactions obstructing her colon. The impactions had been disintegrated and removed, and no other pathology had been observed in the surgery.
Some laboratory and screening tests were carried out for differential diagnosis of the patient. Laboratory test results were nonspecific and tumor markers were within normal ranges. Anal manometry confirmed the presence of basal waves and rectosphincteric reflex. A barium enema showed dilation of her entire colon. Her colonic transit time was found to be prolonged. Her mucosal structure had a normal appearance at colonoscopy and there were no extra pathological findings in defecography. Informed consent was obtained and she underwent a subtotal colectomy including ileorectal anastomosis due to chronic constipation. Significant elongation and dilation of her colon were observed in the surgery. There were diffuse nodular and polypoid tumor formations in the colonic mesoderm. Since no early and late surgical complications occurred, she was discharged from our hospital at postoperative day 5 with surgical recovery.
The resection material was composed of distal ileum, cecum, ascending colon, transverse colon and sigmoid colon. Multiple nodular formations with a hard elastic consistency were observed in the mesenteric adipose tissue (Figure ). They had a maximum size of 10 × 4 × 2.5cm; they were spherical-ovoid or irregular in shape, combined with each other and attached to her bowel wall by thin fibrous bands. The cut surface had a fibrous structure and appeared gray-white in color. Colonic mucosa was normal, however, her bowel walls were hardened and partially thickened (about 1.5cm). Her parietal and pelvic peritoneum, mesoderm of the small intestine, uterus and ovaries were macroscopically normal. There were disorganized, irregular, partly dissociated smooth muscle bundles in the muscularis propria (Figure ). Lesions in the mesenteric adipose tissue were composed of fusiform cells (with eosinophilic cytoplasm and ovoid-fusiform nucleus) that formed bundles crossing each other (Figure ). The margins of the lesions were irregular. Mitosis, nuclear atypia, necrosis and Ki-67 ratio were evaluated to differentiate her case from a leiomyosarcoma (LMS). Mitosis, nuclear atypia and necrosis were not observed and her Ki-67 ratio was 1%. To differentiate her case from a gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST), we evaluated actin, desmin, S100, CD117 and CD34. Actin and desmin were positive (Figure ), whereas S100, CD117 and CD34 were negative in our patient. We also evaluated estrogen and progesterone receptors in order to support DPL diagnosis. Both receptors were positive (Figure ). The morphological appearance and the results of immunohistochemical studies were compatible with DPL.