A 38-year-old obese (body mass index 40.3) man was presented to the emergency department (ED) with atraumatic progressive bilateral lower extremity weakness and numbness resulting in the inability to ambulate. Physical examination was notable for the loss of motor and sensation from L3-S1, weak rectal tone, and saddle anesthesia. A CT of the lumbar spine without contrast was initially obtained and revealed facet arthropathy and hypertrophy with a mild disk bulge at L4-L5 .
MRI was unable to be obtained due to the patient’s large body habitus. Four hours after arrival, a CT myelogram was then attempted with a 20 gauge (G) needle resulting in intermittent CSF return, but myelogram was not performed due to lack of free flow of CSF .
Despite lack of radiologic confirmation in the setting of high clinical suspicion for CES, the patient underwent an emergent L2-S1 laminectomy 6 h after arrival to the ED. Significant epidural lipomatosis and ligamentum flavum hypertrophy were identified as the compressive source. Two small punctures in the dura were noted to be minimally draining CSF at the level of L4-5 and were addressed with DuraSeal® (Integra Life Sciences). No further drainage was seen and the integrity of the dura was confirmed with the Valsalva maneuver. The patient tolerated the procedure well and was made head of bed flat for 24 h.
On post-operative day 2, the patient failed to demonstrate improvement in sensory or motor function. His surgical dressing was noted to be saturated with clear serous fluid. Notably, the patient denied headaches and other traditional symptoms related to a CSF leak. He was transferred to an outpatient imaging center for an open MRI which demonstrated a large homogeneous fluid collection measuring 9.7 × 4.1 × 3.6 cm causing significant thecal sac and cauda equina compression . The patient returned to the operating room due to failure of clinical improvement and the two small dural defects were identified as the source of the compressive collection of CSF. The defects were repaired using 5-0 nylon (Ethicon) followed by DuraSeal® (Integra Life Sciences). Postoperatively, motor and sensory function improved and bladder function returned before being discharged on post-operative day 7.
At follow-up 4 months postoperatively, the patient regained bowel and bladder function with only occasional need for self-catheterization. He regained motor strength and sensory distribution from L2-S1 while using an ankle foot orthosis on the right lower extremity due to tibialis anterior weakness.