This is a 62-year-old male with history of dilated bi-ventricular non-ischaemic cardiomyopathy with left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 19%, right ventricular EF of 31%, left ventricular end diastolic dimension of 7.5 cm, bicuspid aortic valve complicated by endocarditis, status post-mechanical AVR 15 years ago and bioprosthetic AVR 5 years ago, permanent pacemaker placement for complete heart block 3 years ago, and right middle cerebral artery stroke. He was recently found to have a left bundle branch block and underwent cardiac resynchronization therapy-defibrillator upgrade. A follow-up cardiac MRI revealed advanced non-ischaemic dilated cardiomyopathy without infiltrative disease. He was continued on aggressive guideline-directed medical therapy for advanced heart failure (HF).
He was admitted with progressive shortness of breath with minimal exertion, lower extremity oedema, weight gain, fatigue, and weakness. He was diagnosed with acute on chronic systolic HF exacerbation. Patient denied fever or chills. Transthoracic echocardiogram revealed EF of <20% with bi-ventricular enlargement; no valvular abnormalities were noted. Initial laboratory values were within normal limits except leucocytosis of 14.7 (4.5–11.0 × 109/L), transaminitis with AST of 486 (8–33 U/L), ALT of 686 (7–56 U/L), troponin 0.214 (0.0–0.04 ng/mL), brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) 3115 (normal < 100 pg/mL), and C-reactive protein of 15 (normal < 0.5 mg/dL). Patient was borderline hypotensive and right heart catheterization demonstrated right atrial pressures of 18 mmHg, pulmonary artery pressures of 58/29/39 mmHg, and pulmonary capillary wedge pressure of 28 mmHg, with estimated Fick cardiac index of 1.7. He was found to be in cardiogenic shock with Forrester classification IV with cold and wet physiology. He was admitted to Intensive Care for inotropic support and i.v. diuresis.
He was in American College of Cardiology (ACC) stage D and New York Heart Association (NYHA) class IV. We initiated evaluation for advanced heart failure therapies and the patient was listed for heart transplantation as United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS) status 4. On Day 2 after listing, he decompensated further and became febrile. A repeat echocardiogram revealed a large (1.3 × 1.1 cm) echodensity on the bioprosthetic aortic valve (see ) and severe aortic insufficiency (AI). Blood cultures grew Cutibacterium acnes. He was started on vancomycin and ceftriaxone and his UNOS status was deactivated to status 7. He was in cardiogenic and septic shock requiring inotropes and vasopressors. Temporary MCS options were limited due to his severe AI and active endocarditis precluded him from intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP), veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA-ECMO), or Impella placement. Despite high Society of Thoracic Surgery (STS) risk, we proceeded with urgent AVR. At the time of surgery, the patient was found to have large vegetation on the two leaflets of the bioprosthetic aortic valve . His root was debrided for all visible foreign material and a 23 mm Carpentier-Edwards Perimount Magna Ease bioprosthetic aortic valve was placed followed by Impella 5.5 via right subclavian artery cutdown. Impella was necessary due to patient’s persistent cardiogenic shock with inability to wean off of cardiac bypass despite being on maximal inotropic and vasopressor support. Impella 5.5 via subclavian access was chosen over IABP/VA-ECMO as it enabled early mobilization of the patient. Patient was extubated and mobilized within 24 h from surgery. He was continued on i.v. antibiotics for a total of 3 weeks. Tissue cultures of aortic valve were consistent with blood cultures of C. acnes. His repeat blood cultures were persistently negative and he was deemed sterile prior to being reactivated on the heart transplant list as UNOS status 2. He underwent successful OHT within a week from relisting ( and ).
He was initiated on our institutional approved immunosuppression protocol. For pre-induction, he received mycophenolate and methylprednisolone followed by tacrolimus, mycophenolate, and prednisone for maintenance. He did not receive any antibody induction with basiliximab or thymoglobulin. He did not develop any recurrent infections and progressed well post-OHT. He was discharged from hospital in 2 weeks. Post-OHT work-up remained negative for infection or rejection. He has recovered completely from the multiple surgeries and continues to enjoy good health as noted at his 6- and 12-month OHT follow-up visit.