A 66 year old male patient who had received a renal transplant seven years earlier because of IgA nephropathy in his native kidneys was referred to us by his nephrologist. His graft had functioned well and his creatinine was stable at 130 μmol/l with an immunosuppressive regimen of cyclosporine, azathioprine, and prednisolone that he had received since his surgery. Over the past 6 months he reported a 6 kg weight loss and increasing nausea. He had also noted loose, darkish stools several times daily and significant night sweats but no fever. He denied having travelled outside of Germany in the past year. His nephrologists had noted small contracted native kidneys, an unremarkable graft and normal remaining abdominal structures in an ultrasound study. A gastroscopy, chest x-ray and urological evaluation were unremarkable. All tests conducted for infectious diseases were negative. The haemoglobin and hematocrit, liver enzymes, thyroid hormone levels and serum proteins were normal. His creatinine was unchanged and the C-reactive protein was 4 mg/dl. His nephrologists, who suspected an intestinal malignancy in this transplanted patient, referred him to our service for colonoscopy and further evaluation.
The physical examination, including neurological examination was unremarkable. The blood pressure was 120/80 mmHg, the heart rate was 70/min. Our laboratory studies confirmed the ambulatory results. The cyclosporine level was in the therapeutic range. Serologic testing showed no signs of acute infection with adenovirus, Epstein-Barr Virus, Chlamydia pneumoniae, or Borrelia. PCR for CMV-DNA was negative. A colonoscopy was performed but was only successful to the level of the proximal sigmoid colon. The examination was terminated because of pain and definite resistance the gastroenterologist could not pass. Other than scattered diverticuli, the mucosa was normal. We next scheduled a radiocontrast to visualize the colon. In this study a constricting lesion was encountered in the cecum which the radiologist identified as a typical sign of colon cancer . A computerized tomography was performed which showed a concentric wall thickening of the ascending colon about 3 cm above the cecum, which according to the radiologist, was consistent with the diagnosis of colon cancer . All other abdominal organs were unremarkable otherwise or consistent with the earlier ultrasound examination. Before surgery another attempt at colonoscopy was scheduled. To our surprise, the second colonoscopy, performed with additional analgesia and sedation, revealed, a completely normal examination including the cecum. To address the obvious discrepancy between this result and the prior radiological findings we consulted another radiologist. She noticed that the radiocontrast study was performed with the patient lying prone . Moreover, she pointed out the proximity of the ascending colon to the renal graft as shown in the computerized tomography, performed in the supine position . She suggested that with the patient in this position, the graft could squash the colon in such a fashion that the instilled radiocontrast agent would produce a constricting tumor-like image. With these new insights we were forced to start from scratch and to look for a different diagnosis explaining the patient's symptoms. During his hospital stay we had observed that the patient, although unremarkable in the general neurological examination, appeared slow and sometimes inappropriate. In a mini-mental examination we found a significant reduction in cognitive function. The neurologist also found no localizing signs, but additional psychomotor testing verified rapidly progressive early dementia. A magnetic resonance imaging study of the brain was performed, revealing an infiltrating, destructive, multilocular lesion in the frontal lobe, . The process was consistent with a malignant tumor and less suggestive of an infectious process. The patient was transferred to the neurosurgical section where a brain biopsy secured the diagnosis of glioblastoma multiforme. Radiation therapy was started but over the course of the next few days the patient's general status deteriorated rapidly and he became progressively more somnolent. Radiation had to be stopped and 6 weeks after initial admission the patient died.