A 76-year-old Lithuanian man with symptoms of abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting was urgently admitted to the Department of Esophageal, Gastric, and Endocrine Surgery, on the 1st of October 2022.
The patient has a medical history of type 2 diabetes mellitus, glaucoma, arterial hypertension, chronic atrial fibrillation, benign prostatic hyperplasia, gout, heart failure, bronchial asthma, and ischemic heart disease.
Upon examination, the abdomen revealed scarring from previous surgeries in 2010 for acute diverticulitis and in 2012 for colostomy closure, with tenderness near the umbilicus and on the right side, without other significant findings. Abdominal and pelvic computed tomography (CT) scans indicated signs of small bowel obstruction. Initially, conservative treatment with a nasogastric tube was administered. However, due to the lack of a positive response, the patient underwent urgent surgery, which included laparotomy, release of the small bowel loop, adhesiolysis with bowel wall suture of strangled site, and Douglas cavity drainage. The post-operative diagnosis was mechanical ileus.
Due to postoperative peritonitis-induced disruption of homeostasis and respiratory function insufficiency (RFI), with a persistent requirement for mechanical ventilation (MV), the patient was transferred to the Central Reanimation Unit (CRU). In the CRU, correction of electrolyte imbalance, continuation of infusion therapy, and empirical antibiotic treatment with Cefuroxime and Metronidazole were maintained since the day of surgery, along with prophylaxis of thromboembolism and stress gastric ulcer. Following stabilization of the patient's condition, observation of positive changes in inflammatory markers and absence of clinical signs of peritonitis, the patient was subsequently transferred to the Colon and Perineal Surgery Unit (CPSU) for further treatment.
Laboratory blood tests were conducted to evaluate the patient's nutritional status, monitoring hypoproteinemia of 50.3 g/l, and hypoalbuminemia of 24.5 g/l . As part of the treatment plan, a semi-pureed food (SPF) diet was prescribed, supplemented with two bottles of the specialized mix Diasip (manufactured and registered by N. V. Nutricia, Netherlands) and 500 ml of 10 % Aminoven (manufactured and registered by Fresenius Kabi AB, Sweden) administered intravenously daily.
Five days after the first surgery, the patient developed a fever up to 40 °C, and abdominal pain emerged. Following an abdominal X-ray examination, a positive dynamics of bowel obstruction was observed. As the mentioned symptoms progressed, an abdominal and pelvic CT scan revealed stercoral peritonitis. The patient underwent an urgent relaparotomy, during which a conglomerate of the small intestine with a perforated strangulated loop, located 20 cm proximal to the perforation, was removed, leaving only 70 cm of remaining small bowel. Peritoneal lavage and drainage were performed, and an end-ileostomy was created. A preliminary diagnosis of short bowel syndrome (SBS) was established.
Due to postoperative RFI, sepsis and septic shock, the patient was transferred to CRU. Noradrenaline was administered for perfusion support, along with MV, infusion therapy, prophylaxis for stress ulcers and thromboembolism, correction of electrolyte imbalance, and empirical antibiotic treatment with Meropenem and Vancomycin. Following a gradual reduction in vasoconstrictor support and stabilization of hemodynamics, the patient was transferred to the CPSU, maintaining an ongoing oxygen therapy requirement of 6 l/min. As the treatment progressed, the patient's condition improved, and abdominal ultrasound revealed no signs of intestinal eventration.
Approximately 1 week after the second surgery, with SBS and serum total protein levels at 45.3 g/l and albumin at 18.3 g/l, falling below the lower limit of normal , the patient received nutritional support. Following catheterization of the right internal jugular vein, full parenteral nutrition (FPN) was initiated, involving SmofKabiven Central (manufactured and registered by Fresenius Kabi AB, Sweden) infusion emulsion, as well as micronutrients and vitamin concentrates of Soluvit (manufactured and registered and produced Fresenius Kabi, France), Addaven, and Vitalipid (both manufactured and registered by Fresenius Kabi AB, Sweden). To maintain the trophicity of intestinal villi, the patient continued with an oral SPF diet. For further enhancement of the nutritional status, the patient was admitted to the Nutritional Unit for symptomatic treatment and FPN from December 5, 2022, until January 31, 2023, in preparation for the upcoming restorative intestinal surgery.
In a stable condition, following the correction of hypoproteinemia (increased from 63.0 g/l to 65.5 g/l) and hypoalbuminemia (elevated from 27.0 g/l to 32.8 g/l) , a laparotomy was performed to close the ileostomy. FPN was continued for 2 weeks postoperatively, extending the total duration to 4 months.
After the restoration of intestinal integrity and a return to a normal diet, the patient’s parenteral nutrition was discontinued, and his nutritional status was corrected (total protein 54.8 g/l and albumin 25.1 g/l) . Subsequently, the patient was discharged home for further outpatient treatment under the care of a family doctor.