A 57-year-old female patient presented to our clinic complaining of pain in the medial aspect of the left knee. The pain is progressive and increases with standing. There is no history of trauma, locking, or wasting of the knee. On physical examination, there is tenderness over the left medial tibial plateau and varus deformity of the left knee. Lachman, anterior drawer test, posterior drawer test, and McMurray tests are negative. Radiographs show medial joint space narrowing and varus deformity of 9.4°, with a medial proximal tibial angle (mMPTA) of 85.1° . The patient was scheduled for an open-wedge HTO with a diagnosis of medial compartment arthrosis.
Under general anesthesia, prophylactic antibiotic was given intravenously and a tourniquet was applied and inflated to 300 mmHg for 120 min. The first stage of the operation was an arthroscopic examination. A degenerative medial meniscus tear was found and debridement was performed. There was Outerbridge Grade 3 chondral damage in the medial compartment. The quality of the lateral compartment cartilage was sufficient for a valgus osteotomy. After diagnostic arthroscopy, a longitudinal incision was made over the proximal tibia, the sMCL was split and an osteotomy was made with a saw from the medial cortex to the proximal tibiofibular joint. The osteotomy was then opened. A 12° correction was performed and the osteotomy was fixed with a locking plate. An autologous bone graft harvested from the left iliac crest was used to fill the gap.
Knee flexion exercises using a continuous passive motion device were initiated on the 1st day after surgery. The patient was mobilized with double crutches on the same day. For 6 weeks after the operation, the patient was mobilized without weight-bearing. Post-operative radiographs are shown in . After the 6th post-operative week, the patient was mobilized with a crutch and partial weight-bearing. The telemetric radiograph in in the sixth post-operative week showed 1.7° valgus and no union in the osteotomy line. In the 10th week after the operation, imaging of the patient shows remarkable callus tissue in the lateral hinge of the tibia. A telemetric radiograph taken on the 14th week after the operation shows a 4.9° valgus and callus on the lateral hinge .
The patient applied with a complaint of inability to walk at the 8th month post-operation. There is no history of trauma, locking, or wasting in the knee. Physical examination revealed negative results for the Lachman, anterior drawer, and McMurray tests. The patient has a 15° flexion contracture. Valgus and varus stress tests were negative. Telemetric images from the 8th month after the first surgery show an 8.3° valgus deformity . Callus tissue is present in the lateral hinge of the tibia, and atrophic union has occurred in the osteotomy line.
On evaluation in the 1st year after the first surgery, the patient reported difficulty walking. The patient is able to mobilize with the aid of double crutches. Physical examination revealed a 15° flexion contracture and a negative varus/valgus stress test. Telemetric radiographs showed a 19.8° valgus deformity of the mechanical axis and a mMPTA of 97° . Based on these findings, it was decided that revision surgery was necessary for the patient.
Under general anesthesia, prophylactic antibiotics were administered intravenously, and a tourniquet was applied and inflated to 300 mmHg for 120 min. The left lower extremity was draped appropriately. The plate and screws were removed using the old posteromedial incision. An oblique osteotomy was performed from the diaphysis, approximately 18 cm proximal to the left fibula type. A butterfly fragment occurred as a complication during the oblique osteotomy. The proximal tibiofibular joint was targeted, and appropriate Kirschner wires were inserted under fluoroscopy guidance. A hemi-osteotomy was then performed by targeting the proximal tibiofibular joint from the medial aspect of the proximal tibia using a suitable saw. The osteotomy was terminated in the middle of the tibial metaphysis. A triangular bone fragment was removed from the osteotomy line. The lateral osteotomy was planned to join the medial osteotomy and form an inverted V shape. Kirschner wires were applied and the lateral osteotomy was performed. The opening gap of the lateral osteotomy line was checked and opened laterally with an osteotomy angle ruler. A correction of approximately 13° was made, resulting in an improvement of the leg’s mechanical axis. The bone block taken from the medial side was inserted into the lateral osteotomy opening. A proximal lateral tibia anatomical plate was then placed on the lateral side, and a HTO plate was placed on the medial side . The layers were properly sealed, and a drain was inserted.
The patient was mobilized using an immobilizer and double crutches without weight-bearing for 6 weeks. Partial loading was permitted at the end of the 6th week. The telemetric radiograph taken 6 weeks after the second operation showed a mechanical axis of 3.7° valgus and an mMTPA angle of 87.6° . No flexion contracture was observed during examination. Union had not yet occurred in the osteotomy line. Mobilization with a single crutch was allowed after the sixth post-operative week. At the 6th week after surgery, X-rays revealed that the fibula had not yet healed, hypertrophic callus tissue was visible, but the patient did not exhibit any symptoms. Our patient exhibited complete union of the osteotomy line during the 3rd month after the second surgery (12th post-operative week).
In the first post-operative year, the telemetric radiographs show a 2.1° valgus. The fibula osteotomy healed with hypertrophic callus during this period and the patient did not experience any related symptoms. There is no flexion contracture, and the joint range of motion is full and painless. The patient can be mobilized without any external support. The mMTPA was measured at 89.6° .