On December 11, 2017, a 22-year-old Chinese unmarried male patient reported a history of male-male oral sex during high school. In June 2017, he underwent a peri-anal abscess operation at another hospital. No other history of anal sex, surgery, blood transfusion, dust exposure, or recent bird or poultry exposure was reported. Repeated coughing began more than a month prior, with a small amount of white sputum. He simultaneously began to experience shortness of breath after light activities, which was gradually aggravated. Two days before admission, the patient had a low fever, followed by no fever with cold and chills, and significantly aggravated dyspnoea, and he could not tolerate fast walking. An examination upon admission showed a white blood cell count of 6.9 × 109/l, a neutrophil ratio of 83.8%, a lymphocyte ratio of 10.2%, a serum lactic dehydrogenase (LDH) level of 363 u/l, and a high-sensitivity C-reactive protein level of 77.00 mg/l. Arterial blood gas analysis showed a partial pressure of oxygen (PO2) of 62 mmHg, pressure of carbon dioxide (PCO2) of 33 mmHg and a pH of 7.43 without oxygen. An enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was negative for HIV, and the results of other tests showed negative results for cytomegalovirus IgM antibody, positive results for cytomegalovirus IgG antibody, a CD4+ T-cell absolute value of 7.70/μl, a CD8+ T-cell value of 296.29/μl, a (1–3)-β-D-glucan level of 283 pg/ml, negative galactomannan and cryptococcal latex agglutination tests, an IgG level of 16.10 g/l, an IgM level of 1.36 g/l, an IgA level of 4.02 g/l, and an IgE level of 192.0 IU/ml. White Candida albicans growth was observed twice on sputum smear microscopy, and the sputum culture showed C. albicans growth once. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed diffuse ground glass-like lesions in both lungs . The patient was initially treated with piperacillin tazobactam sodium injection + azithromycin injection + fluconazole injection + methylprednisolone injection, and his cough and shortness of breath improved slightly. PJP was suspected, and alveolar lavage was performed. The cellular proportions in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) were 62% phagocytic cells, 6% neutrophils, 30% lymphocytes, and 2% eosinophils. The centrifugal precipitate smear of the lavage fluid was stained with Wright’s stain and hexamine silver, and P. jirovecii cysts were observed under a light microscope . PJP was diagnosed, and the treatment was changed to sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim (SMZ-TMP) + clindamycin injection + methylprednisolone injection to treat the PJP. Serum HIV antibody retests were performed using latex agglutination tests and western blotting; however, neither test detected the antibody . Two weeks after receiving anti-P. jirovecii treatment, the patient’s symptoms were mostly relieved, and chest CT revealed that the lung disease was mostly absorbed . Although the HIV antibody test results were negative or undetermined in three repeated examinations, because the patient was colonised with P. jirovecii and he was young and had low CD4+ T-cell levels, HIV infection could not be ruled out, and plasma HIV RNA testing was performed. Surprisingly, the results showed that the patient’s viral load was 32,4000 cp/ml, and the retest result also showed a high load of 17,5000 cp/ml; thus, HIV infection was confirmed. After the diagnosis, highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) was started with Dolutegravir + Truvada (FTC + TDF). After being hospitalised and observed for 1 week, the patient was discharged. At the time of discharge, the patient had no positive symptoms or signs other than a few scattered rashes on his body.