A 46-year-old Caucasian female patient from Turkey presented with complaints of three-month old back and chest wall pain. The prescibed nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAID) had alleviated the symptoms; however, skin lesions especially on the soles of the feet erupted during the same period. The patient complained of intermittent fatigue. Past medical history was significant for epilepsy and four sinus surgeries. The family history was noncontributory.
Physical examination was unremarkable except for skin lesions noted on soles of both feet, extremities and the face. The lesions were interpreted as pustular psoriasis by dermatology .
Laboratory investigation obtained for differential diagnosis included complete blood count, routine biochemistry, 24-hour urine for protein, protein and immunoglobulin electrophoresis, Rheumatoid factor, anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-DNA, complements, immunoglobulins, tumor markers, hepatitis serologies, group agglutinations tests and were all within normal limits. There was no Bence-Jones proteinuria and the patient was HLAB27 negative. Among the hormone tests (FSH, LH, DHEAS, estradiol, progesteron, insulin) requested, prolactin levels were found to be elevated (50.48 ng/ml, normal range: 4.8-23.3). ACTH basale level was <10 (normal range: 10-46) and cortisol level was 11.26 (normal range: 5-25 μg/dl). Cortisol response to insulin was normal. A throat culture obtained secondary to postnazal discharge only revealed normal flora. The cultures of the bacteriological specimes obtained from the plantar lesions remained without growth. The chest X-ray was normal. An abdominal ultrasound demonstrated grade 2 hepatosteatosis. A bone densitometry revealed osteopenia of the hip.
Cervical X-rays demonstrated only straightening of the cervical lordosis and nonspecific degenerative changes. A lumbosacral X-ray obtained showed degenerative changes of the facets. The sacroiliac, feet and heel graphies were all within normal limits. Bone scan revealed focal area of increased activity in mid-sternal region. A thoracic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) study demonstrated a lesion characterized with bone marrow edema and proliferation of soft tissue in the upper 1/3 of the sternum. Clinical and radiological findings led to the diagnosis of the SAPHO syndrome. A brain MRI was requested secondary to the elevated prolactin level which was compatible with empty sella syndrome with bowl-like widening of the sella, decreased gland height and spread inside the sella. The patient was additionally diagnosed with "adrenal deficiency" under stress. The patient was prescribed difluortolone 2 valerate- chlorquinaldole 10 mg creme for skin lesions and a NSAID (Diclofenac 75 mg BID) for pain. Despite improvement of pain control, the skin lesions continued to demonstrate waxing-and-waning course . For adrenal deficiency, the patient was started on hyrocortisone 15 mg p.o. daily and Prednol 20 mg IV p.r.n. as stress dose. ACTH and cortisol levels were to be monitored at monthly intervals.
After six months, the patient had less chest wall pain with NSAID. The skin lesions continued to demonstrate waxing-and-waning course. There are no signs or laboratory values of suspected systemic involvement.