A 72-year-old woman with worsening effort angina CCS Class III was admitted to our hospital. The patient had some risk factors for coronary artery disease, including hypertension and hyperlipidaemia. Her medical conditions had been well controlled with an angiotensin II receptor blocker, and a statin. The physical examination revealed the following: blood pressure, 130/80 mmHg, and heart rate, 80 b.p.m. There was no cardiac murmur and pulmonary rales. Blood tests showed serum creatinine of 0.72 mg/dL, haemoglobin of 13.1 gm/dL, and troponin level to be as low as 50–100 ng/L. Although the electrocardiogram showed no remarkable ST-segment changes, and echocardiography showed normal wall motion with preserved left ventricular systolic function, computed tomography coronary angiography disclosed significant coronary stenosis at proximal RCA. Coronary angiography performed after loading dual antiplatelet therapy with prasugrel and aspirin, revealed severe calcified stenosis of the proximal RCA . We planned to treat the severely calcified RCA using RA. Left radial artery access was gained using a 7 Fr Glide Sheath® (Terumo, Japan), and a 7 Fr Judkins Right 4.0 guide catheter was used to intubate the RCA. A 0.014″ guidewire (SION blue®, Asahi Intecc, Japan) was successfully passed through the stenotic lesion with the support of a microcatheter (Corsair Pro®, Asahi Intecc, Japan). Pull-back intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) (Boston Scientific, USA) showed a circumferential calcified lesion in the proximal RCA. We then switched the Rota wire® floppy (Boston Scientific, USA) to perform RA . After RA was performed with a 1.75 mm burr at 180 000 rpm, heart block and significant bradycardia occurred . Immediately trans-coronary pacing was provided via a Rota wire placed far distal to the RCA and used for back-up pacing during RA. The cathode of an external pacemaker was attached to the distal external end of the guide wire using a crocodile clip . The anode was attached to the needle which was inserted under the skin of the anaesthetized groin . Pacing was instituted at 60 beats per minute, with the output set at 8 V for back-up pacing during RA . Additional RA of Rota burr 2.0 mm was performed, and we safely modified the calcified lesion . The heart block had occurred only during RA, and the patient recovered from the heart block soon after RA. After successfully debulking the calcified lesion, we predilated with Wolverine 2.75/15 mm (Boston Scientific, USA) and delivered a drug-eluting stent (DES): Synergy XD 3.0/16 mm (Boston Scientific, USA). The DES was implanted at the proximal RCA under nominal pressure. Finally, we optimized the stent deployment with using a non-compliant balloon: NC Emerge 3.25/12 mm (Boston Scientific, USA). Final IVUS and angiography showed good stent apposition and expansion . Pacing was not required during balloon angioplasty and stent implantation, and permanent pacemaker implantation was not required after the procedure.
The patient was discharged 2 days after the procedure without any complications. The maintenance dose of prasugrel and aspirin was administered for 6 months, and then prasugrel as a single antiplatelet therapy was continued. At the 6-month follow-up visit, the patients had no clinical symptom or cardiac events. The electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm and echocardiography showed no regional wall motion abnormality.