A 45-year-old primigravid 20-week gestation female presented in early 2023 with multiple episodes of bloody, watery diarrhea (15 times per day) and tenesmus for the past three weeks. She reported poor appetite and 15 kg weight loss during her pregnancy, with her baseline weight being 73 kg and presenting at 58 kg. She also complained of lower back and abdominal pain, and vomiting. Examination revealed a palpable rectal mass 7 cm above the anal verge. Past surgical history is significant for a gastric bypass sleeve surgery 7 years prior, and breast augmentation two years earlier. Medications included Aspirin, Pexalon, and Duphaston. Pregnancy was obtained after successful in vitro fertilization. Family history was also significant for grandfather with lung cancer. Investigations done included physical examination, labs, and radiologic and pathological studies. Laboratory studies revealed an Hb level of 8.9 gm/dL, hematocrit (HCT) 27%, and mean corpuscular volume of 82.6 fL. Additionally, the patient had reduced serum calcium and creatinine levels of 1.98 and 31.7 mmol/L, respectively, and very elevated CA19-9 of 235.0 U/ml and CEA of 617.2 ng/mL. Liver function tests were normal apart from reduced total protein (48.7 gm/L), albumin (28.3 gm/L) and alanine aminotransaminase (7.0 U/L).
Radiological studies included magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of abdomen and pelvis without contrast, and sigmoidoscopy with biopsy .
Sigmoidoscopy without preparation was done and revealed a low rectal tumor with ulceration, 5 cm proximal to the anal verge. The rest of the colon was not assessed; however, small hemorrhoids were noted on the anal canal. A biopsy was taken which confirmed the presence of a moderately differentiated, myoinvasive adenocarcinoma.
Magnetic resonance imaging obtained shortly after showed an exophytic mid-part rectal tumor measuring 5.2 × 4 × 3.6 cm with central necrosis at the right wall extending to mesorectal fat and fascia. The tumor's placement was indenting the cervix and displacing it to the right. Magnetic resonance imaging also revealed multiple enlarged mesorectal lymph nodes measuring 7–12 mm on the lateral side and one in contact with mesorectal fascia, as well as three liver metastatic lesions. Additionally, a small hyperintense area was noted on the center of the lesion, about 10 cm proximal to the anal verge .
Given the urgency and complexity of the case, a proposed initial patient management plan was assessed by the Gynecology and Surgery team. A joint meeting was held with the family on and they were informed about the diagnosis and prognosis and given the following options with regards to proceeding with treatment.
Terminate the pregnancy and start chemotherapy.
Wait until fetus viability, proceed with delivery followed by administration of systemic chemotherapy.
Continue the pregnancy and start chemotherapy.
Given that delay of management will have definitive deleterious effects on disease control and the patient's survival, the second option was discarded. And since exposing the fetus to chemotherapy has a high risk of definitive tetragonality, the family decided to continue with the first option—terminating the pregnancy and starting the patient of chemotherapy. Agreeing to move forward with this decision was in accordance with the Ethical Committee.
After the pregnancy was terminated, a whole-body positron emission tomography/computed tomographic (CT) scan with contrast was done under the indication of identifying further metastases. The report concluded multiple hypermetabolic nodal, peritoneal, and hepatic deposits alongside the hypermetabolic primary rectal tumor. Additionally, another hypermetabolic necrotic mass was appreciated involving the distal aspect of the descending colon with adjacent mesentery.
As such, another coloscopy was done that revealed an obstructing rectosigmoid mass at 15 cm that could not be passed.
A decision was made to remove part of the sigmoid colon out for loop colostomy.
The patient is currently receiving chemotherapy and is responding.