A 72-year-old lady was referred to the emergency department with chest pain occurring during her twelfth cycle of carfilzomib infusions (56 mg/m2 received on Days 1, 2, 8, 6, 15, and 16 of every 28-day cycle) as a treatment for her multiple myeloma. She had been receiving this therapy for the preceding 12 months but reported 3 months of similar intermittent chest pain. She described her pain as localized, central chest tightness with radiation to her right arm and the right side of her neck. The pain would typically last 5–10 min before spontaneously resolving. This could occur at rest or with exertion and did not have diurnal variation. She also described associated dyspnoea on exertion for the preceding 3 months without orthopnoea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea, or leg swelling. She had no traditional cardiac risk factors but was referred for cardiovascular assessment given the nature of her presentation. Clinical examination revealed a slim, normotensive woman with a normal cardiopulmonary exam.
Intercurrent medications included dexamethasone, thalidomide, and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole in addition to carfilzomib as part of her treatment for multiple myeloma. She was on no other regular medications.
The differential diagnosis at this time included obstructive coronary artery disease, disorders of coronary vasomotion including microvascular and/or vasospastic angina, congestive cardiac failure, and pulmonary emboli.
An electrocardiogram while pain free in the emergency department demonstrated sinus rhythm at a rate of 70 b.p.m. There was poor R wave progression and ischaemic T wave inversion through the anterior leads without conduction abnormalities . High sensitivity troponin T was 8 ng/L (reference range <16 ng/L). A transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated normal left ventricular size and function with no regional wall motion abnormalities. There was no evidence of pulmonary hypertension or valvular disease. She was discharged from the emergency department and organized to see a cardiologist as an outpatient for further assessment.
Given the clinical presentation and electrocardiogram (ECG) abnormalities, her cardiologist organized for invasive coronary angiography. The angiogram demonstrated minor irregularities within the coronary vessels but no obstructive stenosis to account for the clinical presentation. Invasive physiological testing for disorders of coronary vasomotion was performed using incremental doses of 2, 20, and 100 μg of acetylcholine manually infused over a period of 3 min into the left coronary artery via the angiographic catheter. Vasoreactivity testing revealed diffuse epicardial coronary spasm with dynamic sub-total occlusion of the mid-distal left anterior descending artery . This was associated with >2 mm ST-segment depression on ECG monitoring with reproduction of the chest pain that triggered the initial presentation. Intra-coronary glyceryl trinitrate (GTN) was used to relieve the spasm. The diagnosis of vasospastic angina was made as per international guidelines and the proteasome inhibitor, carfilzomib, was implicated as a likely trigger given no alternative agent or lifestyle factor could be identified to account for the symptoms and findings.
The management of vasospastic angina typically requires the removal of any offending agents with the addition of anti-spasmodic agents as required. Carfilzomib was withheld and therapy to enhance endothelial function (Rosuvastatin 10 mg daily) and reduce vasospasm (Amlodipine 5 mg daily) was commenced. Cardiology and haematology teams made a joint plan to not re-challenge the patient with carfilzomib and alternative therapy with lenalidomide, ixazomib, and dexamethasone was used (as per haematological guidelines) to manage her progressive multiple myeloma. At 4-week follow-up post-angiography, she ceased the amlodipine due to intolerable facial flushing and ankle oedema.
Repeat ECG as an outpatient 6 weeks post-angiography demonstrated resolution of the anterior ECG changes. At 6-month post-angiography follow-up, she remains angina free in the community without taking regular anti-anginal therapy. Given the timing of symptom resolution and the demonstration of reversible epicardial spasm with carfilzomib, her presentation was most consistent with a proteasome inhibitor-induced coronary endothelial impairment and spasm. Her multiple myeloma is proving increasingly difficult to manage and next-line treatments are being considered.