A 64-year-old Japanese man with no evidence of tuberous sclerosis was discovered to have a space-occupying lesion in the liver during a follow-up examination for cecal cancer. After ileocecal cancer surgery, no signs of metastasis were detected on imaging examinations, and tumor markers were not detected. No infectious diseases, such as schistosomiasis, were detected, and the patient did not use oral hormonal agents. Physical examination of the patient’s abdomen revealed normal active bowel sounds, no tenderness or rebound tenderness of the epigastrium, and no hepatomegaly or splenomegaly. Results of tests for antibodies against hepatitis B surface antigen and hepatitis C virus were negative. Tumor marker levels, such as α-fetoprotein, protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist II, carcinoembryonic antigen, and carbohydrate antigen 19-9, were within the normal ranges. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed a 25-mm low-density tumor with a high-density area in segment 2 (S2) of the liver. Gd-EOB-DTPA MRI also showed a slight T2 hyperintensity and T1 hypointensity 22 × 12-mm tumor in S2 of the liver. Heterogeneous high signal intensity was markedly seen in the arterial phase of the dynamic Gd-EOB-DTPA MRI , with multiple central filiform vessels and capsule enhancement. The signal intensity was relatively reduced in the portal venous phase (PVP) , but it was slightly higher than that in the surrounding liver parenchyma with an enhanced vascular signal visible in the lesion . The signal intensity of the tumor was lower at the parenchymal phase than at the surrounding liver parenchyma . A lack of Gd-EOB-DTPA uptake was noted in the hepatobiliary phase (HBP) at 20 minutes postinjection .
With a clinical diagnosis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and hepatic adenoma, a partial hepatectomy of S2 was performed. The resected specimen showed a tumor of 25 mm in diameter. The cut surface of the resected liver showed a relatively firm, whitish-gray nodule, which was well circumscribed from the surrounding hepatic parenchyma. Some very small, yellowish areas were embedded at the periphery. No distinct necrotic areas were noted . A hematoxylin and eosin-stained section showed growth of eosinophilic ovoid cells and spindle cells with focal admixture of mature adipocytes . A number of vascular channels were intermingled. Irregular dilation and thickening of the vascular wall were occasionally observed. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed eosinophilic ovoid cells positive for HMB-45 and Melan-A. In contrast, spindle cells were positive for desmin . Vigorous staining of CD34 exhibited a dense vascular network of the tumor . Moreover, the tumor cells were focally positive for S100 . In some cases, useful information has been obtained by transmission electron microscopy after tissue collection. We investigated the reembedding of formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded specimens with epon resin. HAMLs, each composed of an intimate mixture of numerous abnormal blood vessels with fat, spindle, and/or epithelioid cells of various sizes, were found on electron microscopic examination. Capillary endothelial cells with Weibel-Palade bodies showed abnormal thickening of the subendothelial spaces containing collagen fibrils in a homogeneous matrix, fibroblast-like cells, and nonspecific vesicular structures. These findings suggest secondary vascular damage; the thickened vessels may not be a primary, integral part of HAML . Smooth muscle cells showed abundant accumulation of glycogen and myofilaments with a few dense granules . Myofilaments were typically dispersed at the periphery of the cell along the cytoplasmic membranes . Some epithelioid cells contained concentric membranous endoplasmic reticulum, numerous mitochondria, and cytoplasmic glycogen granules . In adipocytic cells, the cytoplasm was occupied by homogeneous osmophilic lipid vacuoles that were not membrane-bound. Occasional cells were multivacuolar . Cytoplasmic myelin figures and melanosomes were present in epithelioid cells . We diagnosed type I mixed type HAML. The patient was alive with no tumor recurrence or metastasis at the 1-year follow-up.