A 55-year-old Korean man with HCC associated with liver cirrhosis secondary to chronic hepatitis B virus infection was admitted because of hematemesis and epigastric pain. He had undergone five sessions of transhepatic arterial chemoembolization therapy in the past 12 months. Three weeks previously, he had received radiation therapy due to bone metastasis at the level of the 11th thoracic vertebra with spinal cord compression and then, one week previously, sorafenib was started at a dose of 400mg twice daily. At that time, our patient’s Child-Pugh’s classification was A and Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance score was 2.
On admission, his blood pressure was 120/80mmHg and pulse rate was 74 beats per minute. Digital rectal examination was negative and a small amount of fresh blood was drained via a nasogastric tube. Laboratory data included the following: hemoglobin 15.3g/dL, platelet 26,000/mm3, total bilirubin 12.2mg/dL, albumin 4.1g/dL, aspartate aminotransferase 192U/L, alanine aminotransferase 181U/L, alkaline phosphatase 301IU/L, gamma glutamyltransferase 137U/L, amylase 58U/L, lipase 26U/L and a prothrombin time of 16.7 seconds. Child-Pugh’s classification was B.
Abdominal computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a thrombus in the posterior branch of right portal vein and dilatation of intrahepatic bile duct adjacent to a partially lipiodolized nodule in the portal-venous phase. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed fresh blood emerging from major duodenal papilla . Endoscopic retrograde cholangiography revealed an amorphous filling defect throughout the common bile duct . Blood clots were removed by balloon sweeping and a nasobiliary drainage tube was placed.
After discontinuation of sorafenib administration, with a regular irrigation of saline via nasobiliary tube, our patient became hemodynamically stable and total bilirubin level decreased to 4.6mg/dL. He was discharged and no further bleeding has been detected as of eight months after the episode.