A 9-year-old clinically asymptomatic female patient was referred to paediatric cardiology for an irregular heart rate noted at an incidental well-child visit. An initial electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a prolonged QTc and runs of non-sustained bidirectional ventricular tachycardia , and she was admitted for further evaluation.
There was no family history of arrhythmogenic disorders, congenital heart disease, or sudden death. The only reported malformation in her mother and maternal grandmother was syndactyly. Physical examination revealed short stature, low set ears, mild micrognathia, wide spaced eyes, and dental abnormalities . She also had left iris heterochromia with half the iris blue and half green. Vitals including a heart rate, blood pressure, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation were appropriate for age. Examination of the cardiovascular system revealed an irregular pulse rate and normal first and second heart sound. There were no additional cardiac sounds, murmurs, rub, or gallop noted. Examination of the respiratory, abdominal, and neurologic system were unremarkable. Initial investigations revealed a baseline ECG with a prolonged QTc of 485 ms and bidirectional VT on ECG and Holter with a ventricular ectopy (VE) burden of 40%. Laboratory testing included a complete blood count with differential, a comprehensive metabolic panel, cardiac enzymes (troponin and CK-MB), and thyroid function tests were within normal limits. Further exercise stress testing showed no significant increase in ectopy from baseline at higher heart rates. A transthoracic echocardiogram and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging showed a structurally normal heart with no evidence of ventricular dysfunction.
Genetic testing (GeneDx, Gaithersburg MD, ) revealed a de novo mutation in the KCNJ2 gene, D71N. This was described as likely pathogenic for both CPVT and LTQ7/ATS. In addition, the CPVT panel showed a G552W mutation in the SCN5A gene determined as a variation of uncertain significance (VUS).
After an inpatient investigative evaluation, sotalol was trialled with a maximum administered dose of 150 mg/m2/day with no effect. We had initiated Sotalol for its combined beta blockage and Class III effects and monitored the QTc closely while on the medication. A significant reduction in VE from 40% to under 10% was obtained with a combination of propafenone (300 mg/m2/day) and metoprolol (3 mg/kg/day) during the first admission. Close outpatient follow-up at 8–12 week intervals was performed, and the burden of ectopy on Holter monitoring progressively increased to up to 40% despite increasing doses of both medications. The patient was not experiencing any symptoms at this point; however, due to the long-term effects of VE on ventricular function we were attempting to reduce this burden to under 10%. Nine months later she was readmitted, and propafenone and metoprolol were stopped. She was then started on flecainide and nadolol both of which were titrated to achieve a discharge dose of flecainide (4 mg/kg/day) and nadolol (0.75 mg/kg/day) with a marked reduction in ectopy burden to 3%.
As she was clinically asymptomatic and had no phenotypic evidence of CPVT, no restrictions to her physical activity were imposed, and she was counselled as being a relatively low risk for SCD. She continues to do well and remains asymptomatic on close outpatient follow-up. Her most recent ECG showed a QTc of 472 ms, a normal echocardiogram, and a 24 h Holter with a VE burden of 1.8%. Most of the recorded ectopy occurs as single PVCs with a few couplets and triplets and one 5 beat run of slow VT at 128 b.p.m. A recent exercise stress test showed no increase in ectopy from baseline during exercise. Electrocardiograms performed on immediate family members (parents and siblings) were normal. Further variant specific gene testing was performed, and the KCNJ2 mutation was negative in all immediate family members. However, the SCN5A variant was present in the father.