A 21-year-old male was admitted to our Institute for a family and personal history of sporadic MA; associated episodes of migraine without aura (MWA) were also reported. Frequency for MWA was 2–3 episodes per month, whereas that of MA was of a total of three episodes over the previous ten years. The patient had reported a first episode of visual, followed by aphasic, followed by sensory aura, accompanied by headache, when he was 10; at that time no examinations were performed. Since then, two further episodes of MA had occurred: the aura presented in the form of visual symptoms, followed by aphasia (with the features of posterior aphasia), followed by hemi-paresthesia (starting from one hand and then spreading to the whole upper limb, and in only one occasion to the lower limb), with full recovery of neurological symptoms within 24 h. Psychological stress was reported as possible trigger. Only the third episode was associated with right hemiparesis, of mild degree (he was able to walk without assistance during aura) so that he was admitted to the emergency room and then hospitalized since an acute vascular accident was hypothesized. Neurological symptoms gradually disappeared a few hours after hospitalization. All instrumental examinations were performed on the day after admission, when both aura symptoms and headache had subsided. Supra-aortic vessel Doppler-sonography and transcranial Doppler-sonography were normal. EEG, performed on the day after admission after the aura had subsided, revealed slowing of activity, with delta waves, prominent on parieto-occipital areas and only involving the left hemisphere (contralateral to the neurological symptoms). Brain MRI, including angio-MRI and DTI, was normal. The neurological examination was normal outside the episodes of MWA. Due to the low frequency of the aura episodes, which were never associated with severe functional deficits, no prophylactic treatment was advised.
Data from six consanguineous individuals were collected . All provided informed consent for genetic analysis. The 23-year-old brother of the proband reported a first episode of MA at 16, characterized by visual aura followed by hemi-paresthesia, dysgraphia and aphasia; the full aura symptoms resolved within one hour. Brain MRI and angio-MRI were normal. Since then he had been experiencing further episodes of aura, with similar features, with a frequency of about one episode per year.
The 54-year-old proband’s mother reported episodes of migraine with visual and sensory aura since age 23, together with sporadic episodes of MWA, with a frequency of less than one episode per year, and a tendency to improve in frequency in more recent years (she had had no episodes over the last 4 years). Her mother, not available for genetic analysis, had reported transient episodes of “limb paresthesias” followed by headache in her young adulthood. The 59-year-old father did not report episodes of headache and his genetic screening was negative.
Since diagnosis, the patient, his brother and his mother have been followed – up yearly for at least five years; the disease course and clinical manifestations still remain unchanged in the proband and his brother, while the mother has not experienced further episodes since then and thus over the last 9 years None of the three affected members needed prophylactic migraine treatment due to the low frequency of both aura and headache episodes; attacks were treated with NSAIDs.