A 26-year-old Gravida III Abortion II lady with an unknown date but stated to be amenorrheic for about eight months came with a complaint of worsening lower abdominal pain of 1-week duration. The abdominal pain dated back 5 months which was severe at the beginning and predominantly in the lower abdomen. At that time, she was seen at a private clinic where she was evaluated and ultrasound scanning was done. She was told to be pregnant with an average gestational age of 18 weeks and 4 days, making her gestational age at presentation to be 37 weeks 6 days. The exact site of the pregnancy was missed in the initial ultrasound and considered as a normal intra-uterine pregnancy. Since then, she had similar complaints for which she visited the local health centre repeatedly. The patient was reaffirmed to have a normal pregnancy and no subsequent ultrasound scan was done.
A week before her admission, she started to have abdominal pain associated with each fetal movement which was severe enough to interfere with her day-to-day activity. The patient reported no vaginal bleeding and she had vital signs within the normal range on physical examination.
The patient was immediately taken for ultrasound evaluation which was done by a senior consultant radiologist and showed an enlarged empty uterus with placenta separately identified and a live fetus in the abdominal cavity. The head of the fetus was lying in the splenic hilum, pushing the spleen into the thoracic cavity . The placenta filled the whole abdomen and was attached to the right adnexa. Except for tortuously dilated right uterine vessels which may suggest that the placenta was getting its supply from it, no other feeding arteries were seen. The placenta was clearly separate from the bowel walls ( and ). There was deformity of the foot but details were difficult to make out due to the reduced amniotic fluid. Then the diagnosis of term abdominal pregnancy was made.
The patient was counselled on the diagnosis, the need for surgical intervention, and the possible complications. Her preoperative hemoglobin was determined, which was 12 mg/dL. Four units of blood were prepared prior to the surgery and space was reserved in the neonatal and adult intensive care unit for possible fetal and maternal complications. After providing written consent, the patient was taken to the operating theater.
During laparotomy, the abdominal pregnancy was apparent with the fetal foot visualized upon entry with intact membrane , and a live female neonate weighing 2,060 g and an Apgar score of 8 and 9 in the first and fifth minutes, respectively, was extracted. There was an abnormality on the feet; both feet were dorsiflexed with the abduction of the forefoot . Gestational age by Ballard score was estimated to be 36–38 weeks, corresponding to the GA calculated from the second-trimester estimation. The placenta had attachment to the broad ligament and the right adnexa with a narrow pedicle . There was also fine adhesion with the right ovary. The placenta was evacuated manually, including the right ovary, as it was adherent. The blood supply was from the tubal branch of the uterine artery which was carefully ligated before evacuation of the placenta. The uterus was about 14-week size and intact with no evidence for site of perforation or rupture. There was no defect seen on the fallopian tube, however, the tube was distorted and it was in close proximity with the placenta, suggesting secondary abdominal pregnancy possibly from a tubal abortion. The contralateral ovary and tube looked healthy. The estimated blood loss from the procedure was 400 mL. The mother did not require a blood transfusion in the immediate postoperative period or during her stay in the hospital despite the preparation for massive transfusion. The mother was transferred to the recovery room and later into the puerperium room under close follow-up for possible bleeding and changes in vital signs. The mother had stable vital signs in the course of her hospital stay. Her postoperative hemoglobin was 11 mg/dL and she was discharged with her neonate after 4 days.