An 8-year-old boy with reading difficulties was referred to our hospital. His mother reported that he struggled with chunking letters when reading, while accurately differentiating between similar Hiragana letters.
The patient was born at term via emergency cesarean section due to pregnancy-induced hypertension, with a birth weight of 2628 g and Apgar scores of 10 (at 1 min and 5 min). His mother had finished junior college and did not have diabetes mellitus. On day 2, he was admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit for poor feeding, apnea, and hypoglycemia (25 mg/dL), and was treated with oxygen and intravenous glucose. On day 3, he experienced neonatal seizures and was administered midazolam for 1 wk. No signs of infection or inborn metabolic errors were observed. Diffusion-weighted imaging on day 4 revealed cortical and subcortical hyperintensities in the bilateral occipital, parietal, and temporal lobes , which diminished on day 12. The patient was discharged after 2 wk.
His developmental milestones were mildly delayed during infancy; he walked, uttered single words, and said two-word sentences at 18, 16, and 27 mo, respectively. His head circumference during youth was within the normal range and his intelligence quotient on the Tanaka-Binet Intelligence Scale at the age of 4 years was 76. He received temporary educational support for simple calculations and clock reading in the first grade, but required no educational support in the second grade, although he received private tutoring after school. His reading problems emerged in the third grade, where he struggled with longer sentences. He had no difficulties solving simple calculations for his age and could solve mathematical problems when the words were read aloud.
No other relevant history was noted.
No dyslexia or other psychological problems were reported within the family.
Ophthalmological examination showed that his vision was spared . Neurological examination showed some soft neurological signs, which were otherwise normal. He had no dysarthria.
Laboratory test values were within normal limits, including those for thyroid function.
Magnetic resonance imaging scans obtained at 8 years of age showed mild volume loss in the parieto-temporal region compared with the frontal region, with minimal cortical changes . Fluid-attenuated inversion images obtained at 8 years of age showed a high-intensity area in the white matter of the bilateral parieto-temporo-occipital lobes, which included the periventricular region at the trigone of the lateral ventricles and centrum semiovale . Coronal T2-weighted imaging showed ulegyria in the bilateral parieto-temporal regions .