We report the case of a 9-year-old male patient with a history of recurrent pulmonary infections and multiple operations to correct congenital heart defects . The patient was diagnosed with Fallot’s Tetralogy at birth, and had a Blalock-Taussig surgery 3 days after birth, correction of pulmonary atresia at age 2 and correction of Ventricular Septal Defect (VSD), associated with enlargment of the right ventricle’s outflow tract and insertion of an RV-PA conduit at age 4. Ten months after the last surgical intervention, the patient was admitted to the Emergency Department presenting with dyspnea and respiratory insufficiency, and was admitted due to suspicion of pneumonia. CT scan didn't show pulmonary involvement, but revealed dilation of the RV-PA conduit , and the patient was taken to surgery. Vegetations consistent with mycotic pseudoaneurysm were found in the outflow tract of the right ventricle, and the conduit was excised. Empirical antifungal treatment was started with micafungin for 4 days, with no clinical improvement, followed by fluconazole for 4 days. After this 8-day period, cultures from a sample of pleural fluid and of fragment of the conduit removed in surgery were positive for Trichosporon asahii. Both samples were cultured on Sabouraud dextrose agar and blood agar medium, but the time of positivity was not described, and susceptibility test was not performed for either samples. Species was identified using VITEK ® identification system with specific cards for fungi and yeasts identification, but unfortunately no images of the colonies were taken. After this, Voriconazole was started and kept for 28 days and the patient responded well.
One month later, he presented with clinical deterioration, and a new CT scan showed images compatible with pulmonary necrosis in the upper segment of the right lower pulmonary lobe . The patient went under thoracotomy with segmentectomy of the middle lobe of the right lung. During the procedure, a pulmonary abscess was identified in the medium lobe. Biopsy showed the presence of septate hyphae with dichotomous branching, suggesting aspergillosis. After 17 days of admission, the patient was released with his usual drug regimen (Digoxin and Furosemide) along with Voriconazole for 30 days.
Four years later, at the age of 9, he was readmitted to our service presenting intermittent fever associated with nocturnal diaphoresis, dry cough, anxiety, anorexia and chest pain with a respiratory distress pattern. He was admitted for investigation, and a CT scan once again evidenced vegetation in the RV-PA conduit . Once more, cultures were positive for T. asahii, this time two blood samples cultured on Sabouraud and blood agar medium, which tested positive after 7 and 8 days, respectively. Again, VITEK® was used for identification and susceptibility testing was not performed. Antifungal treatment was once again started with Voriconazole and the patient was sent into surgery to exchange the RV-PA conduit. Voriconazole therapy was kept for two months. The drug was suspended when blood cultures were negative for T. asahii. The patient progressed well, with no other episodes of fever or other complaints.