A 70-year-old male was bedridden due a cerebral infarction suffered 1 year previously. A PEG was placed because of feeding problems, and a push-type, 20-Fr gastrostomy tube (Neofeed PEG kit; Top Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) was inserted through the anterior abdominal wall under electronic gastroscopy assistance (Olympus GIF 260; Olympus Corporation, Tokyo, Japan).
CT examination after the placement of gastrostomy tube shows no abnormal findings around the gastrostomy site. An alimentation through the PEG tube was started the next day. About 13 days after PEG feeding was started, infection with erythema of skin being 60 mm in diameterat the PEG site and slight pus drainage from clearance gap between the PEG tube and skin was noted. However, the abscess formation could not be detected. Bacterial culture of the pus revealed Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Antibiotics to which the organism was sensitive were administered, the area was disinfected with povidone-iodine (Isodine, Meiji Seika Farma, Tokyo, Japan) and pus was carefully aspirated. Infected wound led to temporary improvement after this treatment. Thus alimentation using the PEG tube was continued. However, on day 16 after PEG placement, the patient had massive bleeding from the PEG site and developed a decreased level of consciousness and hypotension.Peripheral blood tests showed a decrease in hemoglobin from 10 mg/dL to 6 mg/dL. Hemorrhagic shock from the PEG site was diagnosed, and an emergency contrast-enhanced CT was performed. CT showed a 5-mm, nodular, enhanced mass in the right abdominal wall near the PEG tube, and an abdominal wall pseudoaneurysm due to infection was diagnosed . Temporary hemostasis was achieved by strong bilateral compression of the bumper of the abdominal wall and the gastric wall. However, color Doppler ultrasonography 24 h later showed blood flow in the pseudoaneurysm, so bumper compression had not achieved thrombosis .Therefore, the infectious pseudoaneurysm was directly punctured with a 21-G needle under ultrasound-guidance, and 0.4 mL of an NBCA-lipiodol mixture (1:1) was manually injected . The mixture in the infectious pseudoaneurysm hardened immediately, and color Doppler ultrasonography showed loss of the blood flow signal in the infectious pseudoaneurysm. Unenhanced CT was performed on the next day after treatment, and a high-density area in the infectious pseudoaneurysm due to lipiodol accumulation was visualized . One week after percutaneous injection therapy, color Doppler ultrasonography still showed that the infectious pseudoaneurysm was thrombosed without a blood flow signal . Use of the PEG tube was resumed 2 weeks after treatment, re-bleeding did not occur, the patient’s general condition improved, and he was discharged home. All ultrasonographic procedures were performed with an Xario scanner (Toshiba Medical Systems Corporation, Tochigi, Japan) and a 3.5-7.5 MHz transducer. This retrospective study was approved by ethical committee, and written informed consent was obtained from the patient before all procedures.