A 73-year-old female presented to her local hospital with a 2-month history of worsening exertional dyspnoea and chest tightness. She did not report any presyncope, syncope or leg swelling. Her past medical history was significant for dyslipidemia, atrioventricular nodal reentry tachycardia which had been successfully ablated and asthma. She had a previous incidentally diagnosed right coronary artery (RCA) to coronary sinus (CS) fistula. She was on no cardiovascular medications.
Her cardiac examinations was significant for an elevated jugular venous pressure, and a grade II of VI holosystolic murmur heard best at the right and left lower sternal borders. Electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm without evidence of ischaemia, and chest radiograph revealed a mildly enlarged cardiac silhouette. Her troponin I and N-terminal pro B-type natriuretic peptide were within normal parameters. A persantine myocardial perfusion imaging did not reveal any inducible ischaemia. A coronary angiogram confirmed there was no significant coronary artherosclerosis. She continued to have angina with minimal effort. A repeat echocardiogram identified a small pericardical effusion and high-velocity jet at the outflow of the CS, suggestive of ostial stenosis. A cardiac CTA was then performed, which showed the large RCA fistula communicating with the CS; the posterior interventricular artery originated from the RCA beyond the connection to the CS and was of normal calibre . The coronary veins were noted to be dilated in the whole coronary tree. The CS was significantly dilated (up to 39 by 48 mm in diameter), with a relatively stenotic connection to the right atrium (4.5 mm).
It was proposed that the stenosed ostium of the CS was playing a significant role in her anginal symptoms by increasing coronary venous pressure, thus decreasing coronary perfusion pressure globally, rather than symptoms from RCA ischaemia alone due to the fistula, which she had tolerated well previously. Medical therapy was initiated with a calcium channel blocker, with only slight improvement in symptoms. An operation for ligation of the fistula, bypass graft to the posterior interventricular artery and repair of the CS ostium was discussed. After multidisciplinary review, a transcatheter approach to treat the CS ostial stenosis was chosen as a first step, given her deconditioned state and her preference for a less invasive option.
Under general anaesthesia and with transesophageal echocardiographic (TEE) guidance, access was obtained in the right femoral vein and left femoral artery. She had normal pulmonary pressures, with a mean pulmonary arterial pressure of 22 mmHg and pulmonary capillary wedge pressure of 14 mmHg. There was a left-to-right shunt, with pulmonary to systemic flow ratio calculated at 1.3.
Angiography of the RCA to CS fistula showed no obvious venous effluence from the CS. The CS ostium was engaged under TEE guidance , using a curved 8F sheath and an exchange-length Glidewire through a 4F angled catheter. The catheter was advanced in the CS, and the wire exchanged for an extra-stiff wire, over which a Multitrak catheter was advanced. The initial CS pressure was 58/36, mean 40 mmHg ; at that time, aortic pressure was 104/50. The coronary ostium was dilated serially with an 8 mm × 20 Mustang balloon and then 12 mm × 20 mm and 14 mm × 20 mm Atlas non-compliant balloons, with manual inflation. The final pressure in the CS was 11 mmHg , with no gradient to the right atrial pressure. Angiography in the RCA showed faster transient of contrast to the CS and right atrium.
The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient reported relief from angina and was able to ambulate around the ward without symptoms the day after the procedure. At 3 months of follow-up, she remained symptom free. Transthoracic echocardiogram showed a stable CS to RA gradient.