A 10-year-old girl presented to our emergency with pain, swelling, and inability to move her left elbow and wrist following a fall while playing. On examination, she had swelling around the elbow and wrist, with a puncture wound in the anterior aspect about 2 cm proximal to the cubital fossa with tenderness in the supracondylar region of humerus and distal end of radius, restricted, and painful movements at elbow and wrist . Radiographs revealed a modified Gartland Type 2 SCH fracture with distal radius and ulna fracture . On a working diagnosis of Gustilo-Anderson Type-1 open SCH fracture with distal radius and ulna fracture, the child was promptly taken up for wound irrigation, debridement, and closed pinning of the supracondylar fracture with two percutaneous K-wires from lateral condyle . The distal radius and ulna fractures were managed by closed reduction and pinning for radius and conservative treatment for ulna. Post-operative period was uneventful, and she was discharged with above elbow slab immobilization.
Two weeks later, the child returned for follow-up with a painful swelling over the front of the left elbow. A pulsatile mass was seen over the cubital fossa of the left elbow measuring around 3 cm × 2 cm swelling and inability to move with reduced volume of the radial pulse as compared to the opposite side. There were no distal neurological deficits in the upper limb. Capillary refill time was <3 s with normal turgor of the pulp and no skin discoloration. The patient was evaluated with color Doppler and computed tomography (CT) angiogram to confirm the location and size of the swelling. CT angiogram showed a well-defined saccular outpouching with smooth surface seen arising from the posteromedial wall of distal brachial artery, 1 cm proximal to its bifurcation suggestive of pseudoaneurysm of the left distal brachial artery. The aneurysmal sac was measured 3.5 × 1.9 cm with neck of 9–10 mm. There was no evidence of thrombus within the outpouching. The aneurysmal sac was located medial to brachial vessels with no obvious perianeurysmal leak was noted .
A plastic surgery consultation was obtained following which excision of the pseudoaneurysm was performed by the plastic surgery team. Intraoperatively, perivascular adhesions and inflammation were noted. There was no evidence of any K-wire tip protruding or piercing the artery. After excision, the arterial gap of 4.5 cm was reconstructed with a great saphenous vein graft . The child made an uneventful recovery with the fracture uniting in 6 weeks and the child returning to pre-fracture level of activity by 3 months .