We report a case of a left-handed 22-year-old male with no prior medical history who attended our institution’s orthopedic surgery outpatient clinics complaining of the right shoulder pain, snapping, poor cosmetic appearance, and limited range of motion (ROM). At the time of consult, he was a student and was interested in volleyball. Symptoms began 2 years earlier. Asymmetry of the shoulders was noticed by his relatives. Pain and limitation in ROM restricted his participation in sports. On examination, asymmetrical appearance of scapulae was noted, with prominence of the right scapula, resembling winging of the scapula. No tenderness was elicited. ROM was restricted by at least 20° in internal and external rotation, and abduction, and by 30° in forward flexion of the right shoulder when compared to left. Integrity of rotator cuff tendons as well as biceps were preserved with respect to their testing. Ipsilateral elbow, wrist, and hand examinations were unremarkable. Neurovascular examination was unremarkable. No apparent abnormalities were detected on plain radiographs and further advanced imaging with computed tomography scan was performed. A right ventral bony mass was detected measuring 1.8 × 2 cm . Analgesia was prescribed for the patient as required and was referred to physical therapy. Pre-operative magnetic resonance imaging also done to delineate the mass and its cartilaginous cap. On follow-up at 3 months, the patient’s symptoms had not improved, and surgical intervention was advised. He underwent minimally invasive open surgical excision. Patient was discharged on post-operative day one and was then followed up at 2 and 6 months. The diagnosis of osteochondroma was confirmed by histopathology .
The patient was placed in prone position after general anesthesia and intubation. The entire left upper limb and the ipsilateral thoracic back up to the spinous process was subjected to asepsis and antisepsis. The hand was inserted through the square drape which covered all sides of the scapula and it was placed over his back in the chicken wing position. The medial border of the scapula was prominent and the edge of the ventral scapular osteochondroma was palpable . Marking of the osteochondroma was done over the middle part of medial border of the scapula. A 5 cm skin incision was made directly over the medial border of the scapula. The following were done sequentially: Fat was dissected, the trapezius fascia was exposed and incised with a snip, and the trapezius muscle was split in line with its fibers . The infraspinatus fascia was incised with a snip and the muscle was split in line with its fibers. The medial border of the scapula was exposed and the osteochondroma was adequately visualized. Using an osteotome, the osteochondroma was excised in line with the ventral surface of scapula . Complete osteotomy was done. No sharp edges were noted from the bed of the osteochondroma. The osteochondroma specimen was sent for histopathology. Thorough irrigation of the wound was done with normal saline. Bone wax was applied over the bed of the osteochondroma to minimize the risk of recurrence. Closure of fascia and then the subcutaneous tissue was done. Meticulous hemostasis applied throughout the procedure. Skin was closed with absorbable sutures in subcuticular fashion and a dressing applied . Arm sling was applied for pain control for the first 3 days and then active ROM exercises were started under supervision of a physiotherapist.
During serial follow-up, the wound healed uneventfully. The patient’s last visit to the clinic was 6-week postoperatively. The patient reported resolution of the pain and crepitations. On examination, the patient demonstrated full shoulder ROM. The patient was advised to undergo strengthening exercises and follow-up to observe any signs or symptoms of recurrence.