A 43-year-old man with severe lower abdominal pain was admitted to our hospital our hospital for medical treatment. He had an 8-year history of ulcerative proctitis, a form of UC. When the diagnosis of UC was made, he was administered a maintenance oral dose of 5-ASA, and no other immunosuppressive drugs (i.e., azathioprine and TNF inhibitors) were prescribed. Ten months before the onset of the sudden abdominal pain, a deep rectal ulcer was detected on endoscopy. An endoscopic examination revealed a grade 3 ulcer according to the Mayo endoscopic subscore . Inflammation of the mucosa near the ulcer was slight and diagnosed as grade 1. On biopsy performed at the same time, there was no malignancy or cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection. The posology of 5-ASA was increased; he began taking a daily suppository of 5-ASA and Budesonide. Three months before the onset of the sudden abdominal pain, another endoscopic biopsy from the ulcer and pathological analysis were performed. Similar to the last time, the ulcer was diagnosed as grade 3, and there was no malignancy. Five days prior to the onset of the sudden abdominal pain, a daily dose of 40 mg of oral prednisolone was prescribed for the ulcer, as we clinically diagnosed that it did not respond to 5-ASA and Budesonide. Laboratory investigations revealed a slightly elevated C-reactive protein level, an elevated white blood cell count, no increase in tumor markers (carcinoembryonic antigen = 0.4 ng/mL, carbohydrate antigen 19–9 = 8.1 U/mL, carbohydrate antigen 125 = 14.4 U/mL), and CMV C 7-antigen. Preoperative investigation of soluble interleukin-2 receptor was not done. On the day of admission, the patient complained of severe lower abdominal pain. He had rebound tenderness with muscular defense. There was no fever, and laboratory tests showed non-elevated values for C-reactive protein (0.16 mg/L) and white blood cell count (7700/μL). Abdominal X-ray showed colon distension. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis revealed intraperitoneal free air and an abnormal colon distension . The pelvic CT scan also suggested a perforation of the rectum but did not clearly reveal the presence of the lymphoma . These results indicated that the patient had a perforation rectal ulcer secondary to active UC. A subtotal colectomy with end ileostomy was performed. During the surgery, a fistula was discovered at the rectosigmoid region . Pathological examination of the resected rectum revealed atypical lymphocyte infiltration in all of the layers of the rectal wall. Inflammation of the rectal mucosa in the non-perforated part was mild and evaluated as grades 1–2 according to Matt’s histological classification. There was no inflammation of the colonic mucosa . Immunohistochemical staining was positive for the following: cluster of differentiation 20 (CD 20) markers, cluster of differentiation 10 (CD 10) markers, B-cell lymphoma 6 (BCL-6) proteins and multiple myeloma oncogene 1 (MUM-1)-stained atypical lymphocytes . From these results, the pathological findings revealed that rectal perforation was related to DLBCL with UC. The stained specimen on immunohistochemistry was also positive for EBV .
A postoperative fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography revealed an abnormal uptake in the postero-inferior area of the liver surface (S 7) and in the residual rectum margin. The standardized uptake value max (SUV max) of the liver region was 7.2, and the SUV max of the residual rectum was 11.1. Consequently, the patient was evaluated as having stage IV lymphoma according to the Lugano classification and was treated with R-CHOP chemotherapy (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisolone) 2 months after the surgery. Six courses of chemotherapy were effective in correcting the abnormal uptake in the liver region without any complications. However, the abnormal uptake in the residual rectal wall slightly persisted after the six courses (SUV max = 3.6). Ileal pouch-anal anastomosis was performed 9 months after the primary surgery, and a histopathological examination of the residual rectum was done. There was no evidence of residual tumor, especially in the remnant rectal margin. The diverted ileostomy was closed, and he was disease-free. No recurrence was noted upon re-evaluation two years after his first surgery.