A 50-year-old female patient with an eight-plus-year history of hypertension (140–180/80–103 mmHg) and body mass index (BMI) of 36.3 kg/m2 was admitted to our ward due to pain during right knee joint movement for more than a year and aggravation for more than 4 months. The patient had no malignancy or venous thromboembolism (VTE) history; she had ipsilateral varicose veins and no use of anticoagulants or hormones. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed a degree II-III injury of the posterior horn of the medial meniscus of the right knee. On May 17, 2019, knee arthroscopy in the right knee cavity was performed under lumbar anaesthesia. The patient was operated on in a suspended-leg position. The tourniquet pressure was 260 mmHg, the perfusion pressure in the joint cavity was 70 mmHg, the tourniquet time was 25 min, and the bleeding volume was approximately 5 mL. She received postoperative fluid replenishment and pain relief and underwent physical therapy involving straight leg-raises and ankle pumping exercises. The patient did not receive any pharmacologic thromboembolic prophylaxis. She left the bed and walked on the first postoperative day, and she experienced sudden chest tightness, polypnea and fainting after going to the bathroom the morning of the second postoperative day. She received emergency medical care, including electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring (peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2): 92%, P: 98 times/min, R: 20 times/min, Bp: 103/51 mmHg). Lung auscultation revealed moist rales in both lungs. No abnormalities were detected in the blood examination (N-terminal-pro-hormone brain natriuretic peptide (NT-pro BNP): 896.40 ng/L, oxygen saturation of arterial blood (SaO2):85%, partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PCO2): 36 mmHg, D fragments of fibrin protein (D-dimer): 14.77 μg/mL, pH: 7.452, fibrin degradation product (FDP): 54.97 μg/ml, creatine kinase myocardial band (CK-MB): 7.4 μg/L, and high-sensitivity troponin T (hs -TnT): 0.16 μg/L). Doppler ultrasounds of the extremities showed normal blood flow, with no evidence of DVT or obstruction. Computed tomography (CT) angiography showed multiple scattered embolisms in both pulmonary artery branches . After emergency interventional thrombolytic therapy, the emboli in the pulmonary trunk and branches was significantly improved , and the symptoms of chest tightness and respiratory distress were significantly relieved, with an SpO2 of 96% and a BP of 112/75 mmHg. Postoperative medication (5 days) consisted of low-molecular weight heparin 0.6 mL ih q 12 h, 400,000 units of urokinase, and 0.9% NS 100 mL iv gtt q 12 h. After 2 h of immobilization of both lower limbs, the patient received physical therapy including knee range of motion, ankle pump and strength exercises targeting the anterior and posterior muscle groups. Pulmonary CTA was performed again on the 6th day after drug thrombolysis therapy and indicated that the pulmonary thrombi in both lungs were significantly reduced compared to those in the previous examination, with partial revascularization and clear pulmonary vascular lines . The patient was discharged after evidence of improvement and received rivaroxaban 20 mg qd orally for 3 months, with monthly follow-up outpatient visits.