A previously healthy 31-year-old Indian man presented to the emergency room with confusion and altered consciousness. Five days prior to onset of neurological symptoms he developed slight fever (<38 °C), sore throat and headache. His past medical history was unremarkable except for a recent stay in India for 2 months. Neurological examination disclosed a wide-based and unsteady gait and reduced level of consciousness. Diffuse papules and enanthema were also observed and spontaneously disappeared few days later. A slight increase of erythrocyte and leukocyte cell counts (13.000 cells/μL), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (30 mm/h) and C-reactive protein (48 mg/l) was noted on basic laboratory test. The patient was initially treated with acyclovir and ceftriaxone for a presumptive diagnosis of infectious encephalitis. A cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed total protein level of 53 mg/dl, 179 cells/μL (90% mononuclear) in absence of oligoclonal IgG bands. On brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) and T2 diffuse hyperintensities involving thalamus, basal ganglia, internal capsule, mesial temporal lobes and brainstem associated with small hyperintensities in the subcortical, periventricular and cortical regions were noted in absence of contrast enhancement . Diffusion weighted images showed a mild restrictive pattern of the sopratentorial lesions affecting the left and right thalamus, the posterior limb of the internal capsule of both sides, the splenium and the posterior profile of the left trigonum. These lesions also presented medium-high apparent diffusion coefficient values and central core of low apparent diffusion coefficient, suggesting an inflammatory process. Whole spinal cord MRI was normal. A comprehensive workup for viral encephalitis and atypical infections including polymerase chain reaction for Human immunodeficiency virus, Enterovirus, Herpes simplex 1–2-6, Epstein-Barr, Cytomegalovirus, Varicella Zoster, Toxoplasma, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Treponema pallidum, Bartonella henselae, Human Parechovirus, West Nile, Dengue, Chikungunya, and Japanese encephalitis resulted negative and also cultures for bacteria and fungi. An extensive autoimmune screening including anti-nuclear antibodies, complement levels, thyroid function and antibodies, autoantibodies to synaptic receptors and neuronal cell surface proteins was also negative. The criteria for collagen diseases, vasculitis, Behçet and Hashimoto encephalopathy were not satisfied. No neuropil staining was observed on tissue-based screening with immunohistochemistry on rat sections. Testing for MOG-Abs with a live cell-based assay with recombinant full-length MOG expressed in HEK293 cells , identified MOG-Abs both in the serum (titer of 1:5120) and in the CSF (titer 1:8). Staining of rat brain tissue with serum and CSF samples resulted in a specific myelin staining already described for MOG-Abs as shown in Fig. . The patient was treated with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) 0.5 g/kg/day for 5 days with an almost complete clinical recovery in a few days. On control MRI examination after 2 weeks a dramatic improvement of pre-existing lesion was observed . Only the persistence of slight unsteady gait was noted at the last clinical evaluation 2 weeks after the onset.