Our patient is a 6 years-old girl with relapsed adrenal neuroblastoma, INSS-stage 4, unfavorable histology and without information in regard to amplification of MYCN gene (MYCN-amplification). The [123I]-MIBG study showed abnormal radiotracer uptake in the left adrenal and liver. Neoadjuvant polychemotherapy with vincristine, etoposide, carboplatin and ifosfamide was effective and, after 6 courses, left adrenalectomy was performed. She was in complete remission after intense multimodal therapy. After 3 months receiving 13-cis-retinoic acid as post-consolidation chemotherapy, it was detected a hypodense mass on the left renal superior pole, which had not been observed in previous scans. The patient underwent a successful left nephrectomy and then a second-line cisplatin-based chemotherapy was started. After 3 courses, she presented febrile neutropenia and broad-spectrum antibiotics were prescribed. Regardless of the treatment, the patient exhibited persistent fever, not responsive to antibiotics, abdominal pain and hepatosplenomegaly. Preemptive amphotericin was then started and abdominal ultrasonography (US) was carried out. Candida sp. was identified in blood specimen culture. Abdominal US showed focal, nonhomogeneous, hypoechoic nodular splenic lesions, with diameter up to 2 cm, which might be either tumor or Candida-induced abscesses. At that point, [18F]FDG-PET/CT was performed since abdominal US and computed tomography (CT) failed to distinguish between tumor and infectious lesion.
Before [18F]FDG-PET/CT scanning, the patient was submitted to a fasting period of at least 6 h. Her blood glucose level (82 mg/dL or 4,5 mmol/L) was checked prior to intravenous injection of the radiopharmaceutical. The patient received an intravenous injection of 0,10 mCi/Kg of 2-deoxy-2-(18F)fluoro-D-glucose (18F-FDG), a glucose analogue. Data acquisition was performed by an integrated PET/CT system on a combined 64-slice CT/LYSO PET scanner (Discovery 690; GE Medical Systems, Milwaukee, WI, USA) within 50 min after injection. Data acquisition was obtained as follow: the patient was placed in a supine position on the scan with her arms raised above her head. A low dose CT scanning was performed first from the vertex to the feet, and, at this moment, scanning was performed with 90 kV, 10–120 mAs (smart mA) and 3.75 mm section thickness. Slice thickness was matched to PET section thickness. Immediately after CT scanning, a PET emission scan covering the same transverse field of view was obtained during normal breathing. Acquisition time was 2 min per table position with 10-slice overlap at the field of view (FOV) borders. PET image data sets were reconstructed iteratively (4 iterations and 24 subsets) by applying the CT data for attenuation correction. Fused images were displayed on a workstation using dedicated software. The [18F]FDG-PET/CT images were examined and interpreted by two experienced nuclear physicians and one radiologist. Based on the normal biodistribution of 18F-FDG, lesions were identified as foci with increased tracer and evaluated semi-quantitatively by the measure of maximum standardized uptake values corrected by lean body mass (SUVmax). For comparison, a prior abdominal diagnostic CT scan was used.
The reconstructed PET images showed focal hypermetabolic areas in spleen (highest was SUVmax = 3.2), corresponding to the hypointense images previously detected in CT, suggesting the presence of inflammatory processes . Although unlikely, we could not exclude the possibility of tumor lesions, due to previous diagnoses. Other PET findings were mild/moderate hypermetabolism in nostril and right maxillary sinus, indicating nasopharyngeal inflammatory process . The images also showed the absence of the kidney and adrenal gland at left side, which were previously removed.
An increased pathological uptake of [18F]FDG was observed in all splenic areas previously identified by US. [18F]FDG-PET/CT revealed small splenic abscesses that were suggestive of disseminated candidiasis. Hence, it was very important to distinguish splenic lesions due to tumor from lesions caused by Candida infection. [18F]FDG-PET was used to determine the exact localization of the lesions and to establish the best surgical approach. She was further treated with splenectomy as she was a candidate for autologous bone marrow transplantation. Histological analysis of the spleen confirmed the diagnosis of candidiasis by showing only chronic inflammatory process without tumor cells. Nowadays, the child remains in complete remission 3 years after diagnosis.