A 73-year-old man presented with a 4-month history of bloody stools and weight loss. He had no previous relevant medical history. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pelvis showed a T3N1 tumour of the rectum, 5 cm above the proximal margin of the anal sphincter.
Endoscopic biopsy confirmed a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma. Abdominal ultra-sound and chest x-ray excluded the presence of distant metastases, setting the stage at IIIB.
The patient was referred to an oncology multi-disciplinary team, who made the decision to start pre-operative chemoradiotherapy after one cycle of induction chemotherapy with 2,500 mg/12h capecitabine within the framework of a national study. Written informed consent of patients was obtained for the treatments and for the scientific use of the clinical data according to Declarations of Helsinki.
After 10 days of chemotherapy the patient developed severe nausea, headaches, flushing and general weakness. Physical examination showed only tenderness in the upper abdomen. Laboratory tests showed leukocytosis with relative neutrophilia and hypophosphatemia; other results were normal.
Capecitabine was discontinued. Despite symptomatic therapy (with proton pump inhibitors, antiemetics, parenteral nutrition, analgesia and empiric antibiotics) his clinical condition and laboratory results worsened on the fifth day.
Computed tomography (CT) scan showed a thrombus in the superior mesenteric artery approximately 5 cm distal of the aorta; dilated jejunal, ileal and colonic loops with absence of contrast enhancement in the intestinal wall.
The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit, where he received fluid infusion, vasoactive support with noradrenaline, repeated transfusions of thrombocytes, and fresh frozen plasma; the metabolic acidosis was corrected.
After the patient had been declared stable enough for surgery, a laparotomy was performed and the small bowel, except for the proximal 50 cm of it, along with the right colon were resected despite the rectal tumour. A jejunal-transverse anastomosis was constructed. An attempt at revascularization was not considered due to the clearly necrotic appearance of the affected intestine. Histological examination of the resected gut showed gangrene and multiple thrombi in the vessel walls.
In the intensive care unit he developed sepsis, multi-organ failure (with hemodynamic instability, respiratory insufficiency, hepatic and renal failure, coagulopathy) and fistulae as enteric contents started to leak from the laparotomy wound and through two surgical drains.
The decision was made not to operate but to manage the patient conservatively. The patient’s condition improved; he was hemodynamically stable, he no longer needed oxygen, his organ function was restored and his fever subsided.
On the nineteenth post-operative day, the patient was extubated and he began physiotherapy.
Additional imaging showed enterocutaneous fistulae among the jejunal loops, skin and enterocolic anastomosis, as well as a pancreatic pseudocyst.
The multidisciplinary team composed of radiation therapists, an oncologic surgeon and an anaesthesist specializing in artificial nutrition decided to continue specific oncologic treatment and simultaneously treat gastrointestinal failure with parenteral nutrition.
The rectal carcinoma was treated with short-course pre-operative radiotherapy (5 x 5 Gy) and surgery, during which the fistulae were excised and jejuno-colic re-anastomosis was done. Rectal cancer was treated with total mesorectal excision and permanent colostomy. Post-operatively, the patient developed a paracolic hematoma and a presacral abscess which was drained when he was well enough to be transferred to the regular ward.
The patient remained on home parenteral nutrition (HPN) because of short bowel syndrome. No complications arose during oncologic treatment and the patient is to date in good health and without any signs of recurrence.