A 29 year-old female was referred to the department of otorhinolaryngology head and neck surgery of the China–Japan union hospital of Jilin University, with a complaint of a slowly-growing mass in the neck region.
The physical examination showed that the mass was located approximately 2 cm below the lower margin of left mandible and adjacent to the anterior margin of sternocleidomastoid muscle. The mass was tough and unfixed without pressing pain.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a subcutaneous nodule in left neck with intermediate signal at both T1 and T2. MRI revealed a well-defined round-like mass (diameter ~ 1.5 cm) located on the superficial surface of sternocleidomastoid muscle. The mass presented inhomogeneous intermediate signal at T2 similar with Antoni A as well as Antoni B area. All the information above suggested a high possibility of schwannoma .
Based on the clinical examination and imaging information, a surgery was performed subsequently. Patient was informed about provisional diagnosis, treatment options and potential postoperative complications. And the written consent was obtained from the patient as well. The treatment plan was approved by the institutional review board and ethics committee of our hospital.
External resection was performed under local anesthesia through a small incision. During the operation, a round-like tumor was observed. The tumor was smooth, well-encapsulated and well-defined with surrounding tissues. The upper and lower poles of the mass adhered to the nerve . The mass was removed by sharp dissection with the integrity of the capsule . And the nerve was accompanied by external jugular vein.
Thereafter, the histopathological study described a benign cluster of spindle cells without mitosis, atypia or necrosis, but with some verocay bodies. The cells showed intense immunoreactivity for protein S-100. All characteristics were consistent with the diagnosis of schwannoma.
The patient developed immediate ipsilateral numbness of both auricle and peripheral skin due to traction of the nerve postoperatively. As to the superfacial mass of neck, we firstly took abnormal lymph node into account for that schwannoma originated from the trunk of the greater auricular nerve had not been reported previously. However, radiologists considered the possibility of schwannoma via MRI features. Therefore, we thought that the mass may originate from small sensory nerve fibers. Auricular numbness was not explained to the patient, nor was it reflected in the informed consent form before surgery. We explained to the patient about the causes of auricular numbness, and patient understood our explanation.
The local healing of the patient was good, and the suture was removed on the seventh day. Then the patient was followed-up regularly (every 3–6 months) .