An 81-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital to treat anastomotic stenosis of the sigmoid colon for closure of a transverse colostomy. Two years ago, the Hartmann operation and drainage were performed at another hospital due to perforated diverticulitis of the sigmoid colon.
Obstruction of the sigmoid colostomy occurred, and a transverse colostomy was performed. One year after the first surgery, high anterior resection was performed, but anastomotic stenosis causing obstruction occurred.
Endoscopic dilation was impossible because the guidewire could not be passed .
MCA was planned due to the patient’s history of multiple operations and the expectation of the patient would develop severe intraabdominal adhesions.
The protocol used for MCA was approved by the Ethics Committee for Biomedical Research of the International University of Health and Welfare Hospital, and the patient was provided an informed consent (Approval No. 13-B-90).
Both the parent magnet (diameter, 17.5 mm; thickness, 5 mm) and daughter magnet (diameter, 17.5 mm; thickness, 5 mm) were cylinders .
The magnets were constructed of samarium-cobalt.
The daughter magnet was placed on the oral side of the transverse colostomy using an ileus tube, and the parent magnet was placed on the anal side by colonoscopy.
The two magnets were accidentally adsorbed in the side-to-side direction .
The magnet position could not be changed. The two magnets were expected to move and adsorb in the end-to-end direction naturally die to bowel movements. Furthermore, side-to-side anastomosis has a small adsorption area, so the risk of injury to other organs is considered to be lower than it would be for end-to-end anastomosis if the situation will not change. The magnet position was confirmed on X-ray each day, but adsorption in the side-to-side direction continued.
The magnets that had adsorbed in the side-to-side direction dropped from the anus 5 days after treatment, and anastomosis was confirmed by colonoscopy .
An ileus tube was placed from the transverse colostomy beyond the anastomosis to prevent restenosis. Two more ileus tubes were placed every 4 days, and three ileus tubes were finally placed beyond the anastomosis .
Endoscopic dilation was planned 14 days after treatment, but colonoscopy showed that the anastomosis diameter was wider than expected, and endoscopic dilation was therefore not necessary. No complications were observed in this patient’s postoperative course.
Finally, closure of the patient’s colostomy was successfully performed.