A 61-year-old Caucasian male army veteran had been treated as an outpatient for the last 2 years for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), alcohol dependence, and depression not otherwise specified (NOS). Before this, he had been symptomatic, but did not present for treatment. He was admitted to a residential PTSD/alcohol dual diagnosis treatment program. His medications upon admission were fluoxetine 20 mg every morning for depression, nortriptyline 25 mg at bedtime for sleep and depression, quetiapine 50 mg at bedtime and every 6 hours as needed for anxiety, prazosin 1 mg at bedtime for nightmares, pramipexole 0.5 mg at bedtime for restless legs syndrome, terazosin 5 mg at bedtime for benign prostatic hypertrophy, atenolol 50 mg daily, and spironolactone 50 mg daily, for hypertension. He had been on all these medications for at least 6 months, with no reported adverse effects. He had smoked 2 packs of cigarettes per day for the past year, and had previously smoked four packs per day, for about 30 years. The patient's diagnosis of restless legs syndrome was made before any treatment he received for mental illness, and was not thought to be a medication adverse effect. His laboratory studies were negative and he did not have anemia (his hemoglobin level was 13.5 just before his enrolment in the treatment program).
The patient ceased using alcohol 1 month before entering the treatment program. He denied using any alcohol throughout the duration of the residential program, and no such evidence was found to the contrary by his health care providers. Three weeks before completion of the program, he was prescribed varenicline for smoking cessation, at the manufacturer recommended titration. This was prescribed by a provider at the treatment program. Subsequently, the patient reduced his smoking to two cigarettes per day.
Upon starting varenicline, he reported experiencing visual hallucinations. This was unusual to him as he reports that he had never experienced visual or other hallucinations in the past. On increasing the medication to 1 mg twice daily, his visual hallucinations became more frequent and more vivid. He reported seeing ropes dangling in the air and birds flying around the room. Nineteen days after the commencement of varenicline, he was discharged to home. Initially, he had not reported his symptoms to his providers or family, fearing that they would think he was "crazy". On the trip home, his wife noticed his behavior had changed. She reported that on the drive home he was leaning over as though avoiding something and it appeared to his wife that he was "seeing things". His wife reported that he was also reaching out in the air as if to grasp something.
Upon arrival at home, he read through the drug information provided by the pharmacy and noted that hallucinations could be a side effect. He immediately discontinued varenicline, without consulting his physician, and the hallucinations reduced, and resolved over a period of 3 days. He reported these symptoms to his regular mental health physician provider at his next office visit. According to DSM-IV-TR criteria, a diagnosis of Psychotic Disorder Not Otherwise Specified would be appropriate . No further investigations were performed at this time as he was asymptomatic.
On applying the Naranjo causality scale, a score of 6 was obtained, indicating a probable adverse drug reaction to varenicline . It is important to note that we took into consideration that this patient was on pramipexole, a dopamine agonist, which could have contributed to his symptoms. However, the patient had been using this medication for many months and had not reported signs or symptoms of psychosis.