A 66-year-old male, last seen 5 days ago by his son, was found on the floor (with the knee on the ground) by the son as he did not hear from him for a few days. The son called the ambulance crew, who brought the patient to Accident and Emergency (A and E) on 26 January 2023. The patient remembered falling and hitting his head but was unsure of the exact day or time. He denied any recent illness and mentioned that he had been as per his baseline. However, he did mention that he has had episodes of occasional drowsiness.
The patient lived by himself in a house and had no mobility issues. He was an ex-smoker and had stopped cigarettes 20 years ago. He drank greater than 14 units of alcohol per week. He had been diagnosed with atrial fibrillation 14 years ago but was not taking any regular medications.
On initial assessment in A and E, he was alert but occasionally drowsy, and in respiratory distress. He has had multiple bruises on B/L knees. His vitals were unstable with a SpO2 of 94% maintained in 4 l O2, BP 100/70 mmHg, and heart rate of 110 beats per minute. His Glasgow Coma Scale was 15/15 and his CT head and ECG were unremarkable. On knee examination, there was bilateral grazing and bruising as shown in the Figure . Blood investigation showed the patient had AKI due to rhabdomyolysis secondary to long lie and sepsis, so he was admitted to intensive therapy unit on 26 January 2023 for more than a month where he was treated with IV antibiotics and underwent dialysis. He was stepped down from intensive therapy unit and admitted to the renal ward on 03 March 2023.
Bruising in the bilateral knee was referred to plastic surgery which was diagnosed as a grade 3 and grade 4 pressure sore in the right and left knee, respectively . The pressure ulcer was managed by plastic surgeon and the team adhering to the principles to remove all pressure, keep the ulcer clean, prevent further injury, and regular dressing by tissue viability nurses.
On 17 March 2023 the patient was discharged from the hospital to a care home after his condition improved. His pressure ulcer has been healing well with healthy granulation tissue around the wound site. Community nurses were involved in regular dressing changes for pressure ulcers. The patient believes the excessive intake of alcohol led to this condition.