An 83-year-old man was referred to our clinic in May 2019 for the complaint about intermittent left flank pain that had persisted for 1 week. Despite the denial of fevers, dysuria, hematuria, frequency or urgency, he admitted to visiting local clinics and receiving medical therapies. Besides, this patient had medium hypertension and nephrolithiasis treated with left open ureterolithotomy and two URSLs.
Though routine urinalysis revealed 40 WBC/ul and 48 RBC/ul, the result of urine culture was negative. As revealed by non-contrast abdominal CT scan, there were two left lower ureteral stones diametered 8 mm and 7 mm respectively with mild hydronephrosis, as shown in Fig. a. In addition, kidney, ureter, bladder (KUB) plain film indicated two lower ureteral stones, as show in Fig. b. In spite of this, both preoperative physical examination and laboratory study revealed no abnormality. After the identification of left ureteral stones, semi-rigid URSL with holmium laser was adopted. The surgery was performed by a surgeon with more than 5 years of specialist experience.
As preparation for the operation, the general anesthesia was conducted for 47 min. With the patient was left in the lithotomy position, a 6/7.5-Fr semi-rigid ureteroscope (Storz, Germany) with 220 μm holmium laser was applied to smash the stones. Upon close examination, an ureteral stricture was found beneath the stones, and the semi-rigid ureteroscope passed it carefully with the guidance of a guide wire. For improved visibility, a hand-pump irrigation was carried out by an assistant. The process of smashing stone continued until the visible fragments were ≤ 3 mm in diameter, with most of them extracted into the bladder using a basket. Finally, two 5Fr Double-J stents were placed due to the ureteral stricture and an urethral catheter was indwelled.
The patient displayed slight left flank pain and continuous hematuria after the surgery, which was considered as a complication of Double-J stents. Normal blood tests indicated severe droppings of hemoglobin from 103 g/dL to 61 g/dL 2 days after operation. Low dose abdominal CT-scan revealed mild left hydronephrosis with blood clots, while no remains of stones were observed in the ureter, as shown in Fig. a. KUB showed two ureteral stents in the left urinary tract, as shown in Fig. b. Due to the continuous gross hematuria and droppings of hemoglobin, various conservative therapies, including blood transfusion (600 ml of red blood cells in total), antibiotics (sulbenicillin) and bed rest, were carried out. After 10 days of observation in hospital, the patient was discharged with a slight hematuria and stable hemoglobin level (84 g/dL). Over the course of observation, creatinine and other laboratory tests invariably showed compliance with the specified limits. Moreover, the patient was instructed to remove his two Double-J stents in 4 weeks.
Two days later, he presented himself to our emergency department with aggravating left flank pain and severe gross hematuria. Four thousand seven hundred eighty-three RBC/ul and 364WBC/ul were detected through urinalysis. Blood test revealed low hemoglobin level at 54 g/dL. According to the multi-detector computed tomography angiography and three-dimensional construction of renal arteries, there was an AVF and contrast leakage into calices in the left kidney, as shown in Fig. a and Fig. b. Then, the findings were confirmed by emergent digital subtraction angiography, as shown in Fig. a. Additionally, the AVF was embolized with two platinum coils to stop bleeding, as shown in Fig. b. In the meantime, blood transfusion was conducted until the hemoglobin levels reached 70 g/dL. Hematuria was resolved in 3 days and two Double-J stents were removed 1 month later. During the 12-month follow-up, no hematuria or flank pain recurred.