An 81-year-old Japanese man visited our hospital due to pain in the left maxillary nerve area (We defined the day of this visit as day 1).
The symptom had first occurred 12 d prior, and it was continuous, prickly, and persistent. He tried to keep the affected part cooled, but the symptom did not improve. On the other hand, he had no recent loss of appetite or body weight, nor night sweats.
The patient’s medical history included a splenectomy due to traffic injury, an old right cerebral infarction from when he was 74-years-old, hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and constipation. He was given 15 mg of mosapride, 75 mg of clopidogrel, 20 mg of esomeprazole magnesium, 4 mg of benidipine, 5 mg of linagliptin, 1500 mg of metformin, and 24 µg of lubiprostone on a regular basis.
The patient had no history of smoking or drinking alcohol. He did not undergo regular medical exams. The patient had previously been a carpenter, but was no longer employed. He had no food or drug allergies. He did not need any assistance for everyday life activities. He had a family of six, and presented no family history of malignant disease.
The patient was 165 cm tall and weighed 60 kg. His vital signs were normal, with blood pressure of 137/82 mmHg, heart rate of 75 regular beats/min, body temperature of 36.1 °C, oxygen saturation of 98% in ambient air, and respiratory rate of 16/min; his Glasgow Coma Scale score was 15 points (E4V5M6). Nothing else abnormal was detected upon physical examination, including skin or neurological findings.
A routine laboratory examination revealed increased values for white blood cells, proportions of monocyte and basophil, calcium, lactate dehydrogenase, plasma glucose, glycated hemoglobin, C-reactive protein, erythropoietin, immunoglobulin G, immunoglobulin A, fibrinogen, d-dimer and decreased values of red blood cells, hemoglobin, hematocrit, proportion of neutrophil, lymphocyte, eosinophil, platelets, sodium, albumin, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, zinc, thyroid stimulating hormone, free triiodothyronine, and free thyroxine. On the other hand, other tests had normal results, including biochemistry, urine qualitative and sediment, and two fecal occult blood tests .
A plain head computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a 3 cm × 3.1 cm × 3 cm sized left MS in the patient, completely filled with mass, with a partially high-density area confirmed inside .
The patient was referred to an otolaryngologist. At this point, the otolaryngologist suspected a diagnosis of malignant melanoma. On the other hand, she also considered a biopsy under general anesthesia to be very risky due to the patient’s advanced age. Therefore, she made an appointment for a follow-up CT 2 mo later. Following this, left diplopia and ptosis occurred on day 25, and they persisted, so the patient visited our hospital on day 31. A physical examination confirmed left ptosis . Additionally, when we opened his eyes passively, hyperexophoria of the left eye was confirmed . A follow-up CT performed on the same day revealed the growth of the left MS mass, together with oppression and involvement of the orbital base, and the destruction of the anterior, internal, and external walls. An MS biopsy was performed on day 50, after a 7-d washout period. The hematoxylin and eosin stain pathological findings revealed the following: (1) Aggregates of large, atypical lymphocytes with irregular nuclei with uneven chromatin, and small to large nucleoli evident in a necrotic background; (2) Some cells showed multilobulated nuclei; and (3) Mitosis and apoptotic bodies were conspicuous . Immunohistochemical staining revealed positive results for cluster of differentiation (CD) 20-positive cells, bcl-6-positive cells, and MUM1-positive cells . It also revealed negative results for the T cell markers CD3, CD7, and CD45RO. A genetic test was not performed. Here, we excluded the possibility for T cell origin, as well as for the sinus/nasal origin, and established a definitive diagnosis of DLBCL, non-germinal center B-cell-like (GCB) originating from the left MS.
We prepared systemic chemotherapy with rituximab plus cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone (R-CHOP), but the patient was admitted on day 62 due to rapid deterioration of his condition. During the physical examination, he could not open his left eye due to the circumocular swelling . In addition, multiple skin tumors were confirmed on the chest and abdomen of the patient . A plain CT scan revealed the following: Growth of the left MS mass, together with oppression and involvement of the orbital base, destruction of the anterior, internal, and external walls, and protuberance outside ; multiple tumors (0.5-1.5 cm in size) in both lungs ; multiple subcutaneous tumors and chest wall tumors ; abdominal paraaortic lymph node swelling (3 cm in size) and left kidney nodule (1-2 cm in size) . He was referred to a dermatologist on the same day, and a skin biopsy was later performed on day 70. The histopathological images of the biopsy specimen from the skin mass were found to be the same as those of the left MS mass . The measured value of the soluble interleukin-2 receptor on day 77 was 8063 U/mL, and BRAFV600E mutation was negative.