A 43-year-old Mexican Hispanic man arrived in our hospital with a chronic headache. His neurological examination was unremarkable. The imaging workup showed a giant basilar artery aneurysm, dimensions 32 mm × 20 mm , and that the lesion was located at an angled portion of the vessel. For the management of this aneurysm, we decided to place a stent at the aneurysm neck in order to: 1) straighten the shape of the parent vessel; 2) promote a shift in the pattern of the inflow into the sac and the outflow from the lesion; and 3) foster the thrombosis of the aneurysm.
The lesion was reached through a left vertebral approach with a 6F guiding catheter (Envoy, Cordis, Miami Lakes, FL). The medical periprocedural management at that time (1997) was empirical, as no rules for anticoagulation or antiplatelet treatment had been defined for intracranial stents. The vascular neurologist advised that the patient be placed under full anticoagulation without any antiplatelet drug. A 3.5 mm × 12 mm balloon-expandable stent (BES) (AVE Medtronic; Advanced Vascular Engineering, Santa Rosa, CA) was advanced and deployed at the neck of the lesion .
When trying to retrieve the balloon, the stent slipped backwards and its distal end tilted towards the sac. . We therefore decided to carefully slip the stent forward into the aneurysm by inflating the balloon again and pushing the stent distally until the whole of it was floating within the aneurysm . A 3.5 mm × 18 mm BES was advanced into the lesion and subsequently deployed within the parent artery to cover the full length of the diseased portion of the vessel, including the aneurysm neck In the immediate post-procedural angiographic runs, we observed a sluggish intra-aneurysmal vortex motion and a correction of the shape of the parent vessel to a 45-degree angle was conducted. The neurological status of the patient was unchanged and he was then discharged to the neurosurgical ward.
A control digital subtraction angiography (DSA) performed four hours later to counter clinical deterioration showed thrombosis of the aneurysm along the basilar artery . Rapid recanalization of the vessel was obtained through a mechanical procedure (balloon angioplasty) with the use of antiplatelet treatment (ticlopidine 250 mg and aspirin 100 mg) . The patient subsequently recovered and this episode left a pontine stroke as a sequela .
At ten years after the operation, the patient has a minor paresis, with a modified Rankin Scale of 2. A new imaging follow-up with DSA and three-dimensional reconstruction has been performed, which showed that the aneurysm remains occluded (no recanalization), the parent vessel is still patent, and no in-stent stenosis is present . The clinical evolution of the patient is described in Table 1.