A 65-year-old female patient was referred to our echocardiography lab for echocardiographic evaluation. She complains of mild dyspnea. The patient’s medical journey began 40 years ago when she was diagnosed with severe mitral valve stenosis and underwent a close mitral valve commissurotomy. Six years later, in 1987, she underwent a second cardiac operation (1st redo operation), during which a mono-leaflet valve (Björk–Shiley tilting-disk valve #27) was implanted. The patient was doing well till approximately two years ago, developing dyspnea and fatigue, leading to a further diagnosis of torrential tricuspid valve regurgitation. In response, she underwent a 2nd redo operation, and a mechanical bileaflet (St. Jude Medical bileaflet valve #31) was implanted. As the mono-leaflet mitral valve had a normal function in the pre-pump intra-operative transesophageal echocardiography (IO TEE), the surgeon performed MV-visiting and cleansing (removing the minimal pannus) and did not replace the mono-leaflet with a bileaflet one. The patient was highly concerned about redoing the intervention, so a bileaflet mechanical valve was chosen instead of bioprosthesis for treating tricuspid valve disease.
On this routine follow-up visit, about one year after her last surgery, the patient was referred for a comprehensive assessment of mechanical valves due to mild dyspnea. The echocardiography showed the normal mono-leaflet motion and hemodynamic assessment of the mitral valve (MG = 3.8mmHg, E velocity = 1.9 m/s, PHT = 64msec) and bileaflet tricuspid valve (MG = 5.3mmHg, E velocity = 2.2 m/s) with no evidence of paravalvular leakage in transthoracic echocardiography. In movie 1, the normal bileaflet motion of the TV occluders and the normal mono-leaflet motion of the MV occluder were presented. Movie 2 showed the cinefluoroscopic views, allowing a more detailed assessment of the mechanical valves. The relatively deep excursion of the single occluder into the left ventricle is the clue to diagnosing the mono leaflet mitral valve prosthesis. Before reaching this conclusion, one should be sure that there is no evidence of fixed occluder of a bileaflet mechanical prosthesis. As bileaflet mitral prosthesis is routinely implanted in an anti-anatomic position , the two occluders and their parallel motion are best apprehended in an apical two-chamber or off-axis short-axis view. Movie 3 and 4 represent the normal motion of the leaflet tricuspid valve and mono-leaflet mitral valve separately. For comparison, the echocardiography of another patient with a fixed lateral occlude was provided in Movie 5. Color doppler study of mitral and tricuspid prosthesis are shown in Movie 6 and 7.