A 65-year-old Chinese man was admitted to the local hospital on December 28, 2017, with a 1-month history of cough and lymph node swellings that had grown gradually. On the basis of a left-side axillary lymph node biopsy specimen, he was diagnosed with AITL , and then the patient came to our department for treatment. We performed a detailed physical examination but only found bilateral cervical multiple lymphadenopathy without fever, cough, chest tightness, and edema. His laboratory test abnormal findings were as follows: red blood cell count, 3.76 × 1012/L; hemoglobin, 7.5 g/dl; aspartate transaminase/alanine transaminase ratio, 2.12 (normal range 0.2 to 2.0); albumin, 26.6 g/L; prothrombin time, 12.8 seconds; prothrombin normalized ratio, 1.17; D-dimer stock solution, 1989 ng/ml (normal range, 0 to 500 ng/ml). A bone marrow aspiration smear showed no abnormal cells.
The patient’s cervical enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination revealed bilateral cervical multiple lymphadenopathy, one of which was about 22 × 18 mm. Computed tomography (CT) of his chest revealed bilateral axillary and mediastinal lymphadenopathy, one of which was about 13 × 18 mm in the mediastinum; nodules in the upper and middle lobes of the right lung; pneumonitis of bilateral lower lobes; bilateral pleural effusion; and bilateral pleural thickening . Abdominal enhanced CT revealed para-aortic and parasplenic lymphadenopathy, one of which was about 16 mm . Pelvic CT revealed pelvic and bilateral groin lymphadenopathy, one of which was about 13 × 10 mm. Histopathological study was performed again and indicated AITL, which showed small to medium-sized lymphocytes, transparent cytoplasm, and vascular hyperplasia in the lymph nodes . The results of immunohistochemistry were as follows: CD34+, CD4+, CD38+, Bcl-6+, CD21+, CD20+, CD23+, CD5+, CD10−, PD-1+, and Ki-67 (50%). On the basis of these findings, a diagnosis of AITL was made, and the staging of lymphoma was IIIA. The patient underwent eight cycles of chemotherapy with CHOP from January 12, 2018, to June 21, 2018, and grade I leukopenia occurred during chemotherapy. No other obvious severe treatment-related toxicities were noted. To evaluate the therapeutic effects, positron emission tomography was performed after six cycles of chemotherapy, which showed that there was still hypermetabolic lymphadenopathy in the cervical region. We were considering whether radiotherapy should be started after six chemotherapy cycles or after eight cycles. After discussing this with our team, we planned TOMO radiotherapy (planning target volume–clinical target volume 40 Gy/20 fractions) to the head and neck lymphatic drainage area after completing the two remaining chemotherapy cycles. The patient only underwent 18 fractions from August 2, 2018, because of poor tolerance.
Two months after treatment, the patient’s leukopenia normalized. His cervical enhanced MRI examination revealed bilateral cervical lymphadenopathy, with the bigger one being about 9 × 6 mm. His chest CT scan revealed bilateral axillary and mediastinal small lymph nodes. His abdominal enhanced CT and pelvic enhanced CT revealed that his para-aortic and parasplenic lymphadenopathy was significantly reduced. Eight months later, on April 22, 2019, the patient was reexamined in our hospital. His cervical enhanced MRI examination revealed bilateral cervical small lymph nodes. His chest enhanced CT scan revealed several mediastinal small lymph nodes . His abdominal enhanced CT and pelvic CT revealed no obvious lymphadenopathy . The patient was reexamined in our hospital on June 18, 2020. On the basis of MRI and CT findings, no recurrence of lymphadenopathy was recognized, and laboratory examinations also found no obvious abnormal indicators. The remnant of the tumor continued to regress, and the patient did not develop obvious severe treatment-induced toxicities.