A 71-year-old female with a past medical history of hypertension was admitted to our hospital due to hyperkinesia in her right extremities for two days. She had a sudden onset of involuntary flailing movements of her right upper extremity, unexpected grasping of her right hand, and abrupt kicks with her right lower extremity. These involuntary movements in the right upper and lower extremities were persistent, unsynchronized, variable and worsened when intentionally carrying out tasks (See Video 1 in the online ). The patient had mild dysarthria throughout the entire course of the illness, which abruptly deteriorated to complete aphasia with a decrease in muscle strength of her right upper extremity to level 3 for a duration of 10 min—during this time, her hemichorea continued. Her speech and muscle strength subsequently returned to normal, and she did not experience any further episodes. The results of a brain computed tomography (CT) scan showed unremarkable findings. Laboratory examinations and her medical history ruled out infectious, toxic, and metabolic causes of encephalopathy. Brain magnetic resonance images (MRI) illustrated an acute ischemic lesion in the left temporal cortex , and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) of the head demonstrated severe stenosis in the left M1 branch . The computed tomography perfusion (CTP) scan during the symptomatic phase showed delayed perfusion in the left parietal cortex and corona radiata in the time-to-peak (TTP) measure .
The patient was given aspirin and atorvastatin separately, with a dosage of 100 mg and 20 mg, respectively, once a day and received 100 ml of butylphthalide injection twice daily. Despite being prescribed oral haloperidol at a dose of 2 mg twice daily for 3 days, she did not experience any relief of symptoms. Given no improvement, the dose of haloperidol was up-titrated to three times daily—4 mg in the morning, 2 mg in the afternoon, and 2 mg in the evening. Ten days after the initiation of antithrombotic therapy and pharmacological management of movement disorders mentioned above, she was discharged with significant improvement in hemichorea. The patient provided informed consent and has agreed to the publication of this case report.