A 71-year-old Tunisian woman presented to our emergency department with atraumatic pain in her neck and shoulders, and fever that had evolved over 4 weeks. Her medical history was significant for arterial hypertension and calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate deposition (CPDD) disease managed by non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. She had no medical family history, and she had not undergone any surgical intervention. She also sustained, 6 months ago, an infective endocarditis due to methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) that was successfully managed with medical treatment (an adapted 2-month antibiotherapy). Infective endocarditis was diagnosed by suggestive findings on transesophageal echocardiogram (irregular 10–15 mm vegetations attached to the aortic and mitral valves) and isolation of MRSA on two consecutive blood cultures. Since she had a moderate aortic and mitral regurgitation, no operative treatment was necessary according to our cardiothoracic surgery team. She was given intravenously administered antibiotics using a combination of vancomycin at 30 mg/kg per day for 8 weeks and gentamicin at 3 mg/kg per day for 5 days. No other blood cultures were performed since she was afebrile from the third week of antibiotherapy with a negative C-reactive protein (CRP) at the last week of antibiotherapy .
At the current presentation, a physical examination revealed a painful and tender swelling over her right SCJ, and the overlying skin was stretched and shiny without any productive sinus. Her rectal temperature was 39 °C. There was a moderate decrease in her right shoulder’s range of motion. Her cardiac auscultation did not reveal any added sounds or other abnormalities. Laboratory investigations showed an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 107 mm at the end of 1 hour, and a CRP at 222 mg/l.
Computed tomography (CT) scans revealed a destruction of the medial extremities of her two clavicles and bilateral collections in the soft tissues around the SCJs . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an osteolysis of both sternal and clavicular margins of her SCJs, with a subchondral edema and soft tissue collections (larger on the right side; Figs. and ).
Fine-needle aspiration of her right SCJ fluid was performed as well as synovial biopsy. Blood and joint fluid culture were positive for MRSA. Histologic examination was significant for pyogenic SA.
Intravenous antibiotherapy using an association of teicoplanin and ciprofloxacin was administrated for 1 month, followed by orally administered antibiotherapy combining pristinamycin and ciprofloxacin for 2 months.
We noticed a complete resolution of her fever and the swelling without any biological or clinical signs of recurrence at the last follow-up of 12 months.