A 76-year-old man presented with dyspnea, lightheadedness, and near-syncope with exertion. His medical history was notable for hypertension, atrial fibrillation, and coronary artery disease. He previously underwent stenting of the proximal left anterior descending artery and dual-chamber pacemaker implantation for high-grade atrioventricular block. His medications included clopidogrel 75 mg daily, lovastatin 20 mg daily, metoprolol succinate 50 mg daily, hydrochlorothiazide 25 mg daily, and coumadin 2 mg daily. On physical examination, his heart rate was 64 b.p.m., and blood pressure was 162/84 mmHg without orthostatic change. A 2/6 holosystolic murmur was noted in the left lower sternal border. The electrocardiogram showed ventricular pacing with underlying atrial flutter. The pacemaker was programmed VVIR (Ventricular Rate Modulated Pacing) with a lower rate limit of 60 and an upper sensor rate limit of 135. Chest radiography was unremarkable. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction of 60%, a CO of 5.7 L/min, a cardiac index (CI) of 2.75 L/min/m2, a mildly increased ventricular septal thickness (18 mm), a medial E/e′ of 15, mild right ventricular (RV) enlargement with a mildly reduced systolic function, severe biatrial enlargement with an indexed left atrial volume of 56 mL/m2, mild mitral regurgitation, moderate tricuspid regurgitation, an estimated right atrial (RA) pressure of 14 mmHg, and an estimated RV systolic pressure of 72 mmHg. There was no dynamic LV obstruction. Cardiopulmonary exercise testing revealed a peak oxygen consumption of 10.9 mL/kg/min with a hypotensive blood pressure response to exercise (70/× mmHg) persisting long into the recovery phase.
At cardiac catheterization, the mean pulmonary artery pressure was 41 mmHg, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) was 20 mmHg, mean RA pressure was 18 mmHg, and systolic blood pressure (SBP) was 140 mmHg. There was no pressure gradient from the LV apex to the aorta . Cardiac output and CI were low-normal at 4.9 L/min and 2.4 L/min/m2, respectively. Mixed venous oxygen saturation was low at 50%, pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) was elevated at 4.3 WU, and the systemic vascular resistance (SVR) was normal at 16.8 WU. During low-level exercise (30 W), PCWP increased to 30 mmHg, mean PA pressure increased to 50 mmHg, PVR increased to 6 WU, SVR decreased to 10 WU, and mixed venous oxygen saturation decreased to 15%. Cardiac output and CI dropped to 3.8 L/min and 1.8 L/min/m2, respectively, resulting in a drop in SBP to 85 mmHg. There was no LV outflow gradient during exercise . The heart rate increased from 68 b.p.m. at rest to 105 b.p.m. at peak exercise. The heart rate response was limited due to beta-blocker therapy. Coronary angiography did not reveal any significant stenosis. Right ventricular endomyocardial biopsy was performed, showing mild interstitial fibrosis and mild hypertrophy , with no evidence of infiltrative or storage diseases, including amyloid.
Based on the findings of the invasive hemodynamic test and the endomyocardial biopsy, the diagnosis of HFpEF with combined pre- and post-capillary PH was made. The patient was prescribed sildenafil 20 mg three times daily to unload the RV and improve LV filling and CO. The pacemaker settings were also adjusted to optimize heart rate response with exercise by decreasing the upper sensor rate limit from 135 to 120 and changing the activity threshold from Medium/High to Medium/Low. Symptoms were noted to improve almost immediately, with no recurrent dizziness on activity. Six months later, repeat cardiopulmonary exercise testing showed improvement in the peak oxygen consumption to 14.5 mL/kg/min. Five years later, repeat transthoracic echocardiography showed a LV ejection fraction of 55%, a medial E/e′ of 10.8, normal RV size and function, moderate mitral regurgitation, moderate tricuspid regurgitation, and an estimated RV systolic pressure of 45 mmHg. Twelve years following the initiation of sildenafil (at age 88), the patient continues to do well without exertional dizziness or orthostatic intolerance.