A 57-year-old non-smoking woman presented to our hospital with dyspnea in July 2017. Physical examination and laboratory test results showed no significant abnormalities. The chest Computer tomography (CT) scan revealed a 3.2 cm × 3.9 cm solid nodule in the left upper lung (LUL, Fig. a) and a 2.3 × 1.6 cm ground glass nodule in the left lower lobe (LLL, Fig. f). The patient consequently underwent a LUL resection, a left lower lobe wedge resection, and VATS lymphadenectomy on July 27, 2017. Invasive adenocarcinoma in the LUL lesion was confirmed by the histopathologic examination, with mixed solid and cribriform patterns . The results of Immunohistochemistry and fluorescent in situ hybridization revealed that ALK rearrangement was positive. EGFR mutation was not detected by using the amplification refractory mutation system–polymerase chain reaction (ARMS-PCR, Fig. e). The LLL nodule also diagnosed as invasive adenocarcinoma, with predominant papillary patterns and EGFR mutation-positive , whereas ALK rearrangement was negative . In addition, the results of 4/7/10/11 lymph nodes pathology confirmed tumor metastasis. NGS–based analysis displayed an ALK rearrangement (EML4 exon 13–ALK exon 20 in LUL nodule, abundance 6.42%, Fig. k) and EGFR 19 exon deletion in LLL lesion (c.2240_2248delTAAGAGAAG, p.L747_A750delinsS, abundance 15.58%, Fig. l). According to the 8th edition American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) and American College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice (ACCP, 3rd edition), the lesions in LUL and LLL were defined as multiple primary adenocarcinomas. Therefore, the tumor classification should be determined separately (LUL: pT2a, LLL: pT1c). Considering the status of lymph node metastasis as N2, the patient was treated as stage 3A non-small cell lung cancer. Initially, the first-line chemotherapy with pemetrexed and nedaplatin (pemetrexed 750 mg/m2 with nedaplatin 110 mg/m2) was carried out on August 26, 2017. After 6 cycles, the CT scan showed no signs of recurrence and lymphadenectasis. Then the patient received chest radiotherapy with a dose of 54 Gy in 27 fractions. The pulmonary lesions were well controlled. Until February 11, 2019, the patient developed headache, dizziness and thoracodynia. Brain MRI detected a cranial lesion in the right occipital lobe (maximum diameter, 13 mm, Fig. a) and CT scan detected a bone destruction in the right posterior 12th rib , which indicated tumor metastasis. Based on the molecular finding, the patient was delivered the EGFR TKI gefitinib (250 mg daily) at the first. However, the headache and thoracodynia were improved after first month of target therapy. The brain lesion increased to 16 mm and bone destruction worsened . The therapeutic outcome was considered as progressive disease (PD) and Gefitinib therapy was stopped. As the tumor was positive for ALK rearrangement, the patient was started on crizotinib 250 mg orally twice daily in April 2019. A local tomotherpy was administered to control the brain metastatic lesion contemporary, while no radiotherapy was given to the rib lesion. Three months after the initiation of crizotinib therapy, imaging examinations revealed obvious decreasing of the size of the brain metastases . Furthermore, the rib lesion almost disappeared and showed bony restoration , which was evaluated as partial remission. At the last follow-up (Dec.20, 2019), no evidence of disease progression was found and she still received crizotinib therapy. The treatment of the case suggested that the brain and rib metastasis tumor were both probably driven by ALK gene rather than EGFR. Therefore, we were very interested in the status of the driven gene in the lymph node metastasis of this case. Several tests were performed on metastatic lymph nodes, such as Immunohistochemistry, FISH and ARMS-PCR, and the results showed that all of the metastatic lymph nodes revealed a cribriform growth pattern . The pattern suggested that the positive genetic alterations was ALK rearrangement rather than EGFR mutation . The histomorphology and oncogene alteration of metastatic carcinoma in lymph nodes are consistent with those in the LUL.