A 56-year-old Asian woman was admitted to our hospital for bile-duct dilatation in the left lateral sector, left paramedian sector, and the right paramedian sector. First, an endoscopic nasobiliary drainage tube was inserted into the left hepatic duct, and then a percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage tube was inserted into the right paramedian sectoral biliary duct from the tributary of segment 8. Simultaneous cholangiography from the percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage and endoscopic nasobiliary drainage tubes revealed drainage of the right lateral sectoral branch into the common hepatic duct and the aberrant drainage of segment 5 into the right lateral sectoral branch. Ductal narrowing was observed in the left hepatic duct, the right paramedian sectoral duct, and the confluence of the right lateral sectoral duct and was assumed to be due to hilar cholangiocarcinoma . No other anomaly was observed.
In view of the biliary anatomy, resection of segments 1 to 4 and 8 (that is, a left trisectionectomy preserving segment 5) was considered, but the portal branch of segment 5 originated from the root of the right paramedian branch, which precluded preservation of the portal pedicle of segment 5 for a curative operation. Consequently, a conventional left hepatic trisectionectomy was planned for curative surgery in this case, and preoperative portal vein embolization of the left portal vein and the right paramedian sectoral branch was performed to increase the parenchymal volume of the right lateral sector.
Finally, a left hepatic trisectionectomy was successfully performed. During dissection of the liver parenchyma, the aberrant biliary duct of segment 5 (B5) was isolated and divided. Biliary reconstruction was performed by using a hepatico-jejunostomy with a retrograde transhepatic biliary drainage tube. The pathologic investigation of the specimen confirmed hilar cholangiocarcinoma, with negative surgical margins. The postoperative cholangiography from the retrograde transhepatic biliary drainage tube is shown in Figure . The patient was discharged on postoperative day 42 without biliary complications and is alive without recurrence 4 years after the operation.