A 57-year-old male with a past medical history of IV methamphetamine abuse, hepatitis C, and hypertension presented to the ED for tenderness along the right anterior chest. His symptoms started about a week prior to presentation with an audible pop and subsequent pain that he felt in his right sternoclavicular area. Symptoms had been progressively worsening in severity, without radiation, and no aggravating or alleviating factors. He tried taking acetaminophen and ibuprofen without much relief. He denied any associated symptoms including shortness of breath, fevers, or nausea and vomiting. He also denied history of direct injection to this joint or any other type of direct trauma. Social history was notable for homelessness, poor medication compliance, marijuana use, and a history of IV substance use 10 years prior, but he denied recent drug or alcohol use.
Upon presentation, vital signs were notable for temperature of 97.2° Fahrenheit, blood pressure 128/76 millimeters (mm) of mercury, heart rate 87 beats per minute, respiratory rate 16 breaths per minute, and room air oxygen saturation of 98%. Physical examination was notable for tender, raised right SCJ without any fluctuance, as seen in . Labs were notable for white blood cell count of 12.3 × 109/liter (L) (reference range 4.5 to 11.0 × 109/L); platelets of 639 × 109/L (150 to 400 × 109/L); erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 120 mm/hour (hr) (0 to 15 mm/hr), and C-reactive protein of 34 milligrams (mg)/L (8–10 mg/L). A rapid point-of-care ultrasound revealed a fluid collection and capsular distention along the SCJ concerning for septic arthritis. Orthopedics was consulted.
While waiting for orthopedics evaluation, computed tomography (CT) was performed for confirmation, which revealed SCJ effusion, bony erosions in the clavicle and adjacent sternal manubrium, and associated extensive soft tissue inflammation, concerning for septic arthritis and osteomyelitis . Orthopedics was unable to aspirate the joint and, thus, interventional radiology was consulted for joint aspiration and biopsy. Due to absence of septic signs, the patient was not immediately started on antibiotics. Post biopsy, the patient was started on piperacillin/tazobactam and admitted for further management. Joint aspirate cultures were positive for Gram positive cocci in chains, and antibiotics was changed to ceftriaxone as per infectious disease recommendation. The patient was subsequently taken to the operating room for right medial clavicle excision and SCJ debridement and irrigation. He remained afebrile in the post-operative period. Tissue cultures were positive for Streptococcus pneumoniae. He was discharged within a week with outpatient follow-up with infectious disease and orthopedics.