A 49-year-old male with high serum PSA level (4.83 ng/mL) was diagnosed with prostate cancer with Gleason score 4 + 3 in October, 201X. Further examination showed no invasion or metastasis. The physician in charge recommended performing radical treatment with surgical intervention or radiation. The patient decided to be treated with radiation combined with neoadjuvant hormonal therapy. CAB along with oral intake of anti-androgen medicine and LH-RH analogue injection were instigated from March, 201X + 1. CAB was continued for 8 months and the serum PSA level reduced to <0.01 ng/mL. However, he suffered from EjD and still wanted to procreate in the future. Therefore, the LH-RH analogue injection and oral intake of anti-androgen medicine was discontinued in October and November, 201X + 1, respectively. He was transferred to our clinic for the purpose of sperm preservation in February, 201X + 2.
His physical examination revealed normal bilateral testes size (15 mL), normal vas deference and absence of varicoceles. The results of his biochemistry tests showed luteinizing hormone 0.19 mIU/mL, follicular stimulating hormone 2.85 mIU/mL, prolactine 6.39 ng/mL, total testosterone 0.10 ng/mL, and PSA 0.02 ng/mL His genotype was 46, XY and partial defect of Y gene (AZFc, gr/gr) was observed.
Since a cycle of spermatogenesis takes approximately 75 days, CAB was discontinued for 4 months. However his EjD did not recover. Subsequently, left micro-TESE for sperm preservation was performed in March, 201X + 2. Most of the seminiferous tubules were meandering, but were thin. A few spermatozoa with low motility were observed and estimated as Johnsen’s score count 8 . Thus several seminiferous tubules were removed to obtain sufficient spermatozoa to freeze. Finally, 10 sperm storage tubes each containing 50 to 200 spermatozoa were frozen. There were no post-operative complications.
After 2 months CAB from April, 201X + 2, he had received a total of 78 Gy radiation at a local hospital. His spermatozoa had been preserved until they would be required for fertility treatment.