A 25-year-old Indian man presented with a large abdominal mass that had been increasing in size for 2 months. He complained of significant weight loss. There was no history of similar complaints or any intervention in the past. The remaining medical history, family history, and psychosocial history were unremarkable. On examination, his abdomen was hugely distended and overlying skin was unremarkable. A firm-to-hard mass could be palpated in the right lumbar, right iliac, and umbilical regions. A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a large 18 cm-sized mass in his transverse colon, suggestive of gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST; Fig. ).
A wide local excision was performed, and the specimen was sent for histopathology. On gross examination the tumor was large and globular, measuring 20 × 18 × 10 cm, and was seen to be arising from the wall of the intestine. Cut surface showed the presence of solid gray-white areas along with areas of hemorrhage and cystic change .
Histopathology sections showed sheets and fascicles of elongated to spindle-shaped tumor cells, showing a moderate degree of pleomorphism and atypia. The individual tumor cells had elongated hyperchromatic nuclei and a mild to moderate amount of cytoplasm. Mitosis, including atypical forms, was seen. Focal areas of tumor necrosis were seen. The tumor reached up to serosal resected margin .
On morphology, a diagnosis of malignant GIST seemed to be likely, and immunohistochemistry (IHC) for CD-117, Dog-1, and CD34 was applied for confirmation. However, to our surprise, these markers came out negative. Further, the morphology was reviewed and a differential diagnosis of leiomyosarcoma and MPNST was taken into consideration, for which an IHC panel comprising smooth muscle actin (SMA) and S-100 was put up. The tumor cells showed positivity for S-100 and were negative for SMA, thus ruling out leiomyosarcoma. Again, this led to two differentials, one being gastrointestinal autonomic tumor (GANT) and the other being MPNST. However, GANT is positive for CD-117 and may be negative for S-100; even when it shows S-100 positivity, it is uniformly positive. Moreover, the patchy positivity of S-100, as was seen in our case, is characteristic of MPNST .
Hence, a final diagnosis of MPNST of the transverse colon was given. The resected margins as well as resected lymph nodes were free of the tumor. However, a peritoneal metastatic tumor deposit was identified grossly, and confirmed on histopathology, signifying an advanced stage tumor, with higher stage of the neoplasm and poorer prognosis of our patient.
Postoperatively, he was discharged and advised to review with medical and radiation oncologists. He came back for the reversal of the stoma and restoration of bowel continuity. Postoperative contrast-enhanced CT (CECT) of his abdomen did not show any evidence of residual or recurrent tumor. Further, he was operated on for dismantling of the colostomy fistula, resection of 5 cm of the colon confirmed (by frozen section) to have margins negative for tumour, and colocolic anastomosis. His postoperative recovery was uneventful. The final histopathology confirmed the absence of any residual disease, thus eliminating the need for adjuvant therapy.
He has been followed up for 6 months, and is presently doing well (Additional file : Case timeline).