A 41-year-old man with no known previous significant medical history was seen in our Emergency Department (ED) with epigastric pain, haematemesis, and confusion arisen after having consumed Levosulpiride for a mild upper gastrointestinal discomfort. In the ED, the patient’s condition rapidly worsened with dyspnoea and oxygen desaturation, consistent with rales at physical examination. Moreover, despite a blood pressure as high as 163/127 mmHg the patient presented with signs of peripheral vasoconstriction. An arterial blood gas test showed respiratory acidosis (pH 6.8) and a PaO2/FiO2 ratio of 150 mmHg. In the view of this, the patient underwent endotracheal intubation and ventilation with elevated support pressure. An ECG showed sinus tachycardia (130 b.p.m.) with ST-segment elevation in anterior and lateral leads ; a transthoracic echocardiography showed akinesia of all middle and apical segments of the left ventricle, with severe reduction of left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) (20%), moderate mitral regurgitation, and normal right ventricular function. Due to haematemesis at presentation, the patient underwent a thoracic and abdominal computed tomography scan, that did not demonstrate active pulmonary or gastric bleeding, but it demonstrated a mass in the left adrenal gland, suggestive of a pheochromocytoma.
The patient underwent an emergency coronary angiography that showed normal coronary arteries (Video 1, right coronary artery angiography; Videos 2 and 3, left coronary artery angiography), and a left ventricular angiography which showed apical ballooning with severe reduction of LVEF due to akinesia of all middle and apical segments (, ). Of note, LVEDP was very high (28 mmHg) and systolic pressure was the same at the level of both the left ventricular apex and the aorta (153 mmHg), thus excluding left ventricular outflow tract obstruction.
After careful evaluation of the clinical condition, a low dose of intravenous (i.v.) Labetalol (10 mg) was administered to the patient to treat the adrenergic crisis; however, the drug was administered while the patient was in the catheterization laboratory to provide immediate mechanical circulatory support if needed. Blood pressure showed a minor decline in the next 10 min, but showed a sudden and precipitous drop to 50/20 mmHg within the following 2 min and was refractory to i.v. Epinephrine. Subsequently, ventricular fibrillation (VF) occurred; chest compressions were commenced immediately along with six direct current (DC)-shocks being administered with a defibrillator in due time. In addition, intravenous bolus doses of Epinephrine and Amiodarone in keeping with advanced cardiac support protocol were administered. Eventually, wide QRS pulseless electrical activity (PEA) developed.
With almost uninterrupted chest compressions, a micro-axial percutaneous left ventricular assist device (pLVAD), Impella CP®, was implanted via the left femoral artery to unload the left ventricle and promote left ventricular output (: Impella® placement into the left ventricle, please note the absence of heart contraction). As the device was placed in the left ventricle, ROSC was achieved, as demonstrated by immediate pulse pressure restoration (; : please note the present albeit severely impaired heart contraction). In less than a minute, supply of circulatory support up to 3 L/min was established (low flow total time 27 min), with gradual improvement in blood pressure. The respiratory status also gradually improved, allowing reduction of support pressure. Post-ROSC care included temperature management with a target temperature of 36°C, maintained for 24 h.
Tapering of epinephrine was successfully accomplished 24 h later. Thereafter, treatment with Doxazosine, Metoprolol, Amlodipine, and ultimately Urapidil was required in view of hypertension.
On the 4th day after admission, while the ECG showed deep negative T-waves in anterior and lateral leads and a long QT interval consistent with Takotsubo cardiomyopathy , an echocardiogram demonstrated an improvement of left ventricular function (LVEF 45%) and a reduction of mitral regurgitation. Thus, the Impella® device was removed.
The remainder of the patient’s stay in the hospital was complicated by transient renal failure and sepsis. A diagnosis of pheochromocytoma was confirmed by elevated metanephrine (18 306 μg/24 h, normal value 64–302 μg/24 h) and normetanephrine (3626 μg/24 h, normal value 110–527 μg/24 h) urinary concentration. On the 42nd day after admission, the patient, who was neurologically intact, underwent an uncomplicated left-sided laparoscopic adrenalectomy (histological examination confirmed the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma), and was discharged from the hospital 4 days later. Normal left ventricular function (left ventricular end-diastolic volume 78 mL/m2, LVEF 55%) was demonstrated at the 1-month follow-up echocardiogram.