A 63-year-old male presented to our otorhinolaryngology clinic with headache, left nasal obstruction and recurrent epistaxis. The patient complained of headache, dizziness and left nasal obstruction for 3 years. However, a recurrent epistaxis occurring three to four times a day for a week, was the reason he was referred to our hospital for medical treatment. The patient had no tumor history, and also no kidney tumor by general physical checkup. Nasal endoscopy examination showed a tumor completely occupying the left nasal cavity. CT scan of the paranasal sinuses was performed. The CT scan showed a soft tissue mass in the left nasal cavity and choana, with some bone compression but no invasive bone destruction . A biopsy was performed and tissue was obtained in multiple pieces measuring in total 1.5X1X0.6 cm. Microscopically, the tumor consisted of glands and follicles, with focal micropapillary pattern, lined by cells with abundant clear or eosinophilic cytoplasm . The cells were uniform, cuboidal to polyhedral and the nuclei were slightly irregular to shrunken with coarse chromatin. Several intranuclear inclusions could be seen [Fig. ]. Some nuclei were in a linear arrangement away from the basal aspect of the cells, usually in the center of cytoplasm or more apical, with a classic feature of clear cell papillary renal cell carcinoma . No necrosis, mitotic activity, or perineural invasion was identified in the tumor. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells showed strong cytoplasmic expression for CK7 , S-100 , vimentin , EMA , nuclear expression for SOX10 , focal membranous for CA9 , and were negative for thyroglobulin, actin, calponin, PAX8, CD10, CK20, CDX2, CD117, DOG-1 and SMA. Based on the histological and immunophenotypical findings, a diagnosis of sinonasal renal cell-like carcinoma was rendered. Later, surgery was performed under general anesthesia, followed by adjuvant radiation therapy. The patient is well with no disease progression at 6 months of follow up. The patient had a renal CT scan both at the time or following the initial diagnosis. No evidence of renal carcinoma was found.