We present the case of a 39-year-old pregnant patient (160 cm; 62 kg; body mass index 24.22 kg/m2) who suffered from middle left partial cerebral artery infarction. Pregnancy was first detected in the emergency room by blood test, but cranial computer tomography was performed in the emergency condition. Aspirin was started immediately after diagnosis of cerebral infarction. The patient reported dyspnoea classified as New York Heart Association (NYHA) III. During the diagnostic workup echocardiography revealed severe MS, consequently the stroke was interpreted as cardio-embolic and anticoagulation was started. Electrocardiogram showed a sinus rhythm and rhythm monitoring revealed no evidence of atrial arrhythmia.
In physical examination the patient presented regular rate and rhythm with a loud S1 and a mid-diastolic murmur with a point of maximal impulse at 5th left intercostal space in midclavicular line.
When referred to our department to evaluate further treatment options, the gestational age (GA) was 6 weeks and the patient still showed right-sided hypaesthesia, hypalgesia and mild hemiparesis as residual deficits. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) and transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) confirmed the severe rheumatic MS with doming of the anterior mitral leaflet and a mitral valvular area (MVA) of 0.79 cm2 assessed in TOE by planimetry . The mean gradient (Pmean) was 15.9 mmHg, the left atrium showed a dilatation of 47 mm without thrombus (TTE, Figure ). Valve anatomy was suitable for PTMC, corresponding to a Wilkins score of 6., Systolic pulmonary pressure was not increased (26 mmHg), left ventricular function was good.
The case was discussed within our local heart team and the specialists for radiology, neurology, and gynaecology. All members agreed the predicted deterioration over the course of pregnancy, when due to physiological haemodynamic changes the increased cardiac output raises the transmitral gradient and left atrial pressure. Interventional therapy was indicated due to the distinctive symptoms and PTMC was considered to be the best treatment option. The procedure was planned with TOE-guidance only, but X-ray protective aprons were used to protect the uterus in case of needed fluoroscopy.
PTMC was performed under general anaesthesia. Heparin was used with an ACT >250 s during the whole procedure. After right venous femoral access, a SL-1 wire (St. Jude Medical, Minnesota, USA) was introduced to the superior vena cava. The sheath was advanced over the wire and trans-septal puncture was successfully performed . After trans-septal access was established, an Inoue 28 mm balloon (Toray Inc., Japan, Tokyo) was positioned in the mitral valve and single dilatation was performed under 3D-TOE guidance . The Pmean decreased from 14 to 8 mmHg and MVA increased from 0.7 to 1.3 cm2 . A new mild mitral regurgitation (MR) was observed and the procedure was terminated with sufficient reduction of the transvalvular gradient. No fluoroscopy was necessary during the procedure. The patient was discharged on the 2nd day after the procedure. No complication was observed during the hospital stay. Pre-discharge TTE confirmed a moderate MS (Pmean 6 mmHg, MVA 1.3 cm2) and mild MR (VC 4 mm). The patient had a high risk for thromboembolic events and received full-dose low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) twice daily during the first trimester, while the use of Vitamin K antagonist (VKA) was advised for the second and third trimester and then indefinitely after pregnancy.
Follow-up consultations including TTE were performed every 2 months. Pmean and MVA remained stable during the whole follow-up period. The MR was still mild and left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was normal. During the second trimester, when loading conditions are the greatest, the patient negated limitations of physical activity (NYHA I) and echocardiography showed stable results with a Pmean of 9 mmHg and MVA of 1.3 cm2. The pregnancy as well as the delivery proceeded without any complications. Residual neurological deficits were still present but regressive.