A 3-year-old female child presented with abdominal mass and gradual distension for 2 months. Her medical and family history was insignificant. Physical examination revealed an active, irritable child weighing 13 kg. The abdomen was soft-distended, with a non-tender palpable mass at the left flank and pelvis, crossing midline without any lymphadenopathy. The rest of the systemic examination was unremarkable.
Complete blood count, chemistry profile, urinalysis and 24-h urinary vanillylmandelic acid, and chest radiograph were unremarkable. Ultrasound and tri-phasic computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis were suggestive of the ectopic position of the right kidney in front of the lumbosacral junction with a huge retroperitoneal left hemi abdomen mass measuring 14 cm by 13 cm. The tumor arose from the left renal moiety compatible with a large Wilms tumor with multiple bi-lobar metastatic hepatic lesions . Technetium-99m diethylene triamine penta-acetic acid (Tc-99m DTPA) showed the estimated glomerular filtration rate of 80 ml/min. An ultrasound-guided trucut biopsy of the renal mass revealed spindle cell neoplasm with the possible differentials of clear cell sarcoma and a mesenchymal component of Wilms tumor.
After the initial workup and diagnosis, patient was discussed in a multidisciplinary tumor board and given neoadjuvant chemotherapy – actinomycin, vincristine, and doxorubicin for six cycles according to Children’s Cancer and Leukemia (CCLG) Umbrella Protocol followed by reassessment scan and surgery for local control. A reassessment scan showed a significant response to chemotherapy with a decreased residual tumor size of 10 cm by 9 cm .
The patient was explored through the left supraumbilical transverse incision, and after colonic mobilization left renal mass was seen adhered to the tail of the pancreas, spleen, and diaphragm. On further dissection, crossed fused renal ectopia with the right ectopic kidney attached to the lower pole of the left renal mass was identified, and the collecting system of the left kidney (mass) was draining into the pelvis of the right kidney with the duplex system. However, separate pelvis, ureter, and vasculature of the right kidney were identified and well preserved. Hence, the mass was completely resected with clear margins after ligation of renal vessels and ureter without complication. The child remained well postoperatively and was discharged on the 3rd post-operative day. Histopathology revealed residual Wilms tumor with more than 90% therapy-induced necrosis and remaining epithelial and blastemal components . On risk stratification, it was metastatic stage IV Wilms tumor, local disease stage I with low-risk group A and given adjuvant chemotherapy for 2 weeks followed by reassessment scan for surgical control of liver metastasis. On the follow-up scan, there was progressive disease (increase in the size and number of hepatic lesions), and treatment escalated to high-risk chemotherapy (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and etoposide) for four cycles and planned radiotherapy (External beam radiation therapy) for liver metastasis. However, after 4 months of follow-up, the parents did not continue further treatment, and the patient was lost to follow-up.