This is a retrospective chart review of a patient who developed a foreign body granuloma-associated scleritis following pterygium surgery with autologous conjunctival graft due to synthetic fiber entrapment underneath the graft.
A 76-year-old male with a nasal pterygium was submitted to excision followed by autologous conjunctival graft harvested from the superior bulbar conjunctiva and applied with fibrin glue (Tissucol®). There were no intraoperative complications. A fixed combination of gentamicin (3 mg/mL) plus dexamethasone (1 mg/mL) drops 6 times a day was prescribed in the first 2 weeks after the procedure, followed by gradual weaning. One week after surgery, the expected inflammation and chemosis were observed, with the graft being well positioned anatomically. The patient was then rescheduled for an appointment 1 month after surgery. At this time, slit-lamp examination demonstrated an epithelial defect with focal thinning and whitening of the conjunctival flap and sclera underneath associated with hyperemia and sentinel vessels surrounding the area . The only complaints referred were foreign body sensation and slight discomfort. Remaining ocular examination was unremarkable, with best-corrected visual acuity of 20/20, and no signs of intraocular inflammation. A white synthetic fiber from the surgical field was identified, trapped between the graft and the sclera.
After 3 days, a second surgical intervention was performed, with removal of the foreign body, debridement of the necrotic material, and reconstruction with a new 3 × 3 mm conjunctival graft applied with fibrin glue. Four days after surgery we observed that focal tissue melting with consumption of the graft continued to occur. The patient was admitted to our department and started oral prednisolone 1 mg/kg per day, maintained until amniotic membrane (AM) graft was performed 4 days later. Scleral and systemic workup was performed to exclude autoimmune and infectious causes.
The AM was placed over the scleral melting in a sandwich technique, with 2 layers placed with stromal side down, and another one with epithelium facing down. AM was secured with 8/0 absorbable sutures . Oral prednisolone was continued and tapered on a weekly basis, along with topical antibiotic. One week after surgery, slit-lamp examination revealed AM integration with decrease of scleral vascularization and interruption of the scleral melting. In week 3 there was complete integration of the AM, with no epithelial defect or signs of active inflammation . Histological examination of the excised tissue revealed giant cells and necrosis consistent with foreign body granuloma.