A 39-year-old male was seen in an orthopedic clinic with a background of a left hamstring tendon ACL transtibial primary reconstruction in 2012. He was otherwise fit and well, with no other past medical history, and remained very physically active, having returned to football and long-distance running following his primary ACL surgery. On the contralateral side, in 2019, he also had an ACL reconstruction and a medial partial meniscectomy. At the same time, he reported that his left knee felt unstable, and a rupture of his reconstructed ACL graft was confirmed on an MRI. This was managed non-operatively until the development of activity-related knee pain and intermittent knee swelling, which prompted a referral for a new orthopedic opinion in December 2022.
On examination, range of motion was 4–120°, with evidence of quadriceps wasting. There was pain on palpation of the medial tibiofemoral compartment, with palpable osteophytes. There was a varus deformity of 8°, which was partially correctable to 5°. There was no patellofemoral-related pain. The knee was unstable in the sagittal plane, with Lachman and anterior drawer tests in Grade II.
Radiographs demonstrated medial tibiofemoral compartment arthrosis, Ahlback grade 3 (i.e., complete loss of joint space with 1–5 mm of bone loss), with anterior subluxation of the tibia secondary to ACL deficiency. Joint space in the lateral and patellofemoral compartments was preserved . An MRI scan confirmed these findings .
The treatment options were discussed with the patient, including non-operative management (analgesia, physiotherapy, injections, or an off-loader brace), and operative management, which included a medial UKA with or without ACL reconstruction, or a total knee replacement. On balance, in view of the patient’s young age and high activity level, the patient decided to proceed with a medial fixed-bearing UKA plus revision ACL reconstruction.
A medial parapatellar incision was used to access the existing tibial screw, which was removed, and the tunnel was reamed to 8 mm. The femoral screw, which had been placed using a transtibial technique, was difficult to locate, and the operating surgeon elected to retain it. Tibial osteophytes were removed from the anterior tibia and femoral notch. A cementless Smith and Nephew Journey II UK medial partial knee replacement was performed according to the manufacturers’ operative technique.
Once the trial implants were in situ, the revision ACL reconstruction was performed under direct vision. A freshfrozen allograft, 8 mm in diameter when folded, Was prepared under tension using Fibrewire whip sutures, 8 mm in diameter. A new 8 mm femoral tunnel was formed through the anteromedial arthroscopic portal, placed in the 2 o ’ clock position , and reamed to depth. The allograft was then passed and secured on the femoral side with a 20 mm Smith and Nephew closed-loop endobutton. Following graft cycling , tibial fixation was performed using a 10×30 mm Smith and Nephew RCI interference screw plus a staple. The final medial partial knee replacement components were then cemented in situ, and the wound was closed in a standard manner. Full range of motion and weight-bearing were permitted in a hinged-knee brace immediately post-operatively, with a standard physiotherapy-led ACL rehabilitation protocol on discharge from the hospital.
Knee and osteoarthritis outcome scores and Oxford Knee Scores were collected pre-operatively, and at 6 months postoperatively, and can be seen in . On clinical review at 6 months, the patient reported that his knee was pain free during daily activities with no symptoms of instability. The range of motion was 0–125°, Lachman’s 3 mm, with a negative pivot shift. The post-operative radiograph can be seen in . A return to football is expected 1 year post-operatively .