A 31-year-old Caucasian woman was booked into our hospital for her first pregnancy. An ultrasound scan at 19 weeks confirmed a normal fetal anatomy and a large simple septate cyst arising from the pelvis measuring 11 cm. Neither of the ovaries was seen, so it was difficult to determine the origin of the cyst. The cyst was not complex and was reported to be a simple cyst with a single thin septum. Although both ovaries were not visualized, which is not unusual at 19 weeks, because of the relationship of the cyst with the uterus and the cyst being in the pouch of Douglas, it was suggested to be of probable ovarian origin. The overall morphological features of the mass did not indicate malignancy. In view of the large size and septation of the cyst, the surgical option to remove the cyst by the laparoscopic technique was discussed with the patient, which she agreed to.
She was admitted at 20 weeks' gestation. She was asymptomatic and the height of the fundus at 20 weeks corresponded to 26 weeks' gestation. After induction of general endotracheal anaesthesia, a nasogastric tube was passed to remove any gaseous distension of the stomach. The uterine fundus was palpated and a Verres needle was inserted through the Palmer's point. After insufflation with CO2 to a pressure of 20 mmHg, a 5 mm cannula was placed through the same site. A 10 mm infra-umbilical port was inserted. Two secondary ports, 5 mm each, were inserted under direct vision, the right and left lateral ports at the level of the umbilicus. Normally, right and left ports are inserted but it was impossible to reach the left side from the right port, therefore a further left port was inserted between the left lateral port and the Palmer's point port. The two left port placements facilitated exposure of the ovarian cyst, adhesiolysis of the bowel from the left adnexa, avoided potential injury to the gravid uterus and minimized uterine manipulation.
At laparoscopy, the gravid uterus was seen with normal right ovary with no ascites, smooth peritoneal surface, normal upper abdomen and no cyst could be seen. The left adnexa was obscured by congenital adhesions of the sigmoid colon and omentum. These are normally congenital adhesions from the sigmoid colon to the sidewall around the pelvic brim. Transvaginal ultrasound was therefore performed at this stage. The ultrasound scan confirmed an 11 cm simple cyst with thin septum in the pouch of Douglas behind the uterus. The bowel adhesions to the left adnexa were divided. The cyst was still not visible so the operating table was tilted towards the right which deflected the uterine fundus away from the midline. At this point, a small part of the left ovarian cyst was visualized between the pelvic side wall and the gravid uterus. The cyst was aspirated with a Verres needle avoiding intraperitoneal spill and 300 ml of serous fluid was drained initially. Once the cyst had shrunk, the ovary was pulled out from the pouch of Douglas. The remaining cyst was then completely aspirated (nearly 500 ml of more fluid). The pouch of Douglas was visualized, and looked normal. The ovarian cystectomy was performed by dissecting away the cyst wall from the ovarian tissue by stripping and sharp scissors dissection. The remaining ovarian tissue was refashioned with 3/0 PDS by purse string suture burying the ovarian edges. The pouch of Douglas and peritoneal cavity were washed with Ringer's lactate. The intra-abdominal pressure was maintained below 12 mmHg throughout the procedure. Theatre occupancy time for the whole procedure was 120 minutes. No tocolytics were used as there is no evidence for any role of tocolytics at this gestational age. Prophylactic antibiotics were administered. The fetal heart was auscultated before and after the procedure.
Her postoperative recovery was uncomplicated and she was discharged home the following day. She was readmitted 12 days later due to anxiety and constipation resulting in some spasmodic abdominal cramps. She settled with reassurance, simple analgesia and laxatives. The patient was reviewed in the clinic 2 weeks later and discharged to routine antenatal care. Her subsequent antenatal course was uncomplicated. Histology of the cyst wall confirmed a mucinous cyst adenoma. She was admitted at 39 weeks in spontaneous labour and due to non-progress of labour, she had an emergency lower segment caesarean section. At operation, both her ovaries were normal and mobile. The baby was male and weighed 3.7 kg, with Apgar score 7 at 1 minute and 9 at 5 minutes.