A 29 year old male from Piliyandala, Sri Lanka was admitted with a four day history of high fever, arthralgia and myalgia during the mid 2011 epidemic of dengue fever. He had no eye complaints or other neurological symptoms on admission. There were no bleeding manifestations and urine output was satisfactory. He had no significant past medical history. His physical examination was unremarkable on admission apart from a body temperature of 39 degrees Celsius. His full blood count revealed a total white blood cell count of 7000/mm3 with 59% lymphocytes, hemoglobin 17.1 g/dl, PCV 51%, platelet count of 82,000/mm3 and elevated liver transaminases - ALT 83U/l and AST 82 U/l. The platelet count dropped to a nadir of 40,000/mm3 before convalescence. However the patient did not develop any clinical features of significant plasma leakage, shock or bleeding. The chest X-ray was normal. Dengue infection was confirmed with positive Dengue IgM antibodies capture enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (MAC-ELISA). He was managed with intravenous fluids according to 2009 WHO dengue guidelines. On the 3rd day at hospital he complained of new onset binocular diplopia which worsened on right gaze. Comprehensive neurological assessment failed to detect any other abnormality except for the convergent squint with right sided lateral rectus palsy causing diplopia maximal on gazing to right without fatiguability or nystagmus. All other eye movements, both optic fundi, visual acuity and colour perception were all unremarkable. The fever settled on day 8 of the illness and subsequently the platelet counts rapidly rose to normal levels. However the diplopia persisted.
Hess screen confirmed paralysis of right lateral rectus . Contrast enhanced computed tomography (CECT) and a subsequent MRI of the brain with thin orbital slices were unremarkable. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 10 mm in the 1st hour. Serology was negative for anti nuclear antibodies, ANCA, HIV antibodies, Japanese Encephalitis IgM antibodies, Herpes simplex antibodies and Varicella antibodies. C3 and C4 complement levels were within normal limits. Cerebrospinal fluid studies were unremarkable. Nerve conduction studies and electromyography including repetitive nerve stimulation of limb muscles and orbicularis oculi were normal. He was managed expectantly for the abducens nerve palsy and reassured and reviewed monthly without pharmacotherapy. The abducens palsy which was still persistent on clinical evaluation at 3 weeks post discharge had resolved completely when the patient presented after 3 months subsequent to two defaulted visits to obtain his medical certificate.