Our patient was a 2-year-and-6-month-old Yemeni girl diagnosed with neonatal diabetes at 20 days of age on intensive insulin therapy who presented with chronic diarrhea and liver dysfunction for further evaluation. She was born at term, with a birth weight of 2000 g, and an unremarkable peinatal history, from a healthy consanguineous parent (Additional file : Figure S1).
At the age of 18 months, she developed chronic diarrhea with greasy frequent stool. At the age of 22 months, she was admitted with diabetic ketoacidosis and acute liver dysfunction that resolved spontaneously. She had 3 previous hospital admissions with diabetic ketoacidosis. At the age of 2 years and 6 months, she presented at King Abdul-Aziz Hospital for the first time with a case of neonatal diabetes, chronic diarrhea with dehydration, and liver dysfunction for further evaluation and management. During her admission, she continued to have loose, greasy, pale stool. She exhibited appropriate development for her age.
Physical examination revealed that her height and weight were at the 3rd percentile; she was normocephalic. She had no facial dysmorphism and a normal eye exam. She also had hepatomegaly with a span of 10 cm with no splenomegaly. No apparent skeletal deformities were noted.
Initial laboratory tests revealed microcytic hypochromic anemia Hb 9.2 g/dl (10.9–13.8 g/dl), normal blood gas, normal kidney function, normal C-peptide levels, negative diabetes-associated autoantibodies, and uncontrolled glycemic control with an HbA1C of 11%. She had primary hypothyroidism: TSH 9.5 μIU/L (0.27–4.2 μIU/L) and FT4 13 pmol/L (12–22 pmol/L). She was administered 25 mcg of l-thyroxine daily. We investigated common causes of chronic diarrhea, but these causes were excluded. Stool fecal elastase was not tested as it is not available at our hospital. However, given the clinical picture, we highly suspected an exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. Regarding hepatic dysfunction, her liver function test revealed a high AST of 166 U/L (normal range, 15–37 U/L), ALT of 107 U/L (normal range, 12–78 U/L), total bilirubin of 3 Umol/L (normal range 0–17 Umol/L), and a normal coagulation profile. Viral infection, autoimmune hepatitis and metabolic problems were all excluded. Abdominal ultrasound revealed diffuse coarse hepatomegaly (10.6 cm) and a small hyperechoic pancreas.
The clinical diagnosis of WRS was suspected given the presence of neonatal diabetes, recurrent episodes of acute liver failure, and chronic diarrhea most likely caused by an exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. Genomic DNA was extracted from her peripheral blood sample using a standard method. A skeletal survey of the skull, ribs, spine, pelvis, long bones (humerus and femur) showed no evidence of bone anomalies.
Within less than one week following febrile illness, her clinical condition rapidly deteriorated as she developed septic shock with multisystem organ failure, including respiratory failure, hypotension, acute renal failure and fulminant liver failure with disseminated intravascular coagulation and pancytopenia. Her liver function deteriorated as follows: AST peaked to > 20,000 U/L (15–37 U/L), ALT peaked to 8944 U/L (12–78 U/L), a high total bilirubin of 140 Umol/L (0–17 Umol/L), a high direct bilirubin of 94 Umol/L, albumin was reduced to 23 g/L (40.2–47.6 g/L) and a high ammonia level of 283 Umol/L (11–32 Umol/L) with disseminated intravascular coagulation.
A multidisciplinary meeting involving the pediatric intensivist, pediatric endocrinologist, and pediatric gastroenterologist was held to determine the best management plan for this child’s complex case, and the consensus was to arrange for a transfer for a possible life-saving liver transplantation. Her parents were continually involved in the decision-making.
Needless to say, all necessary measures were implemented in our pediatric intensive care unit, including mechanical ventilation, inotropic support, renal dialysis, fresh frozen plasma, vitamin K and broad-spectrum antibiotics. Unfortunately, she went into asystole and died within 2 weeks of her admission.
Three weeks post mortem, we received the clinical exome sequencing analysis report.
Exome sequencing analysis identified that the patient harbored a novel biallelic frameshift variant (c.137_del GCCTCGGGGCGGCCGCTGCTCCCACCTCAGCGACG, p.Gly46AlafsTER19 [AHAE1] in the EIF2AK3 gene (OMIM # 60432). Genomic DNA from the specimen was enriched for the complete coding regions and splice junctions of the genes on the used panel. The products were sequenced using an Illumina Miseq instrument with 2 × 150 paired-end reads. The sequence was aligned to reference sequences based on the human genome build GRCh37/UCSC hg 19. Capillary sequencing was used to confirm relevant variants with clinical or uncertain significance. All sequence alterations were described according to the Human Genome Variation Society (HGVS). Data analysis was performed using gene-specific filtering sequencing analysis.
A follow-up appointment was arranged with the parents to disclose the genetic testing results and provide further counseling and support. Unfortunately, we couldn’t perform mutation analysis testing on the parents due to their low socioeconomic status. Furthermore, the parents are from Yemen which makes commuting to our hospital in Jeddah quite difficult.