A 71-year-old woman without any significant medical history presented to the emergency room (ER) of our hospital with slight drowsiness. The hepatitis B surface (HBs) antigen and elevated transaminase levels were detected on a blood examination, revealing chronic hepatitis. The patient contracted the HB virus while receiving transfusion during a cesarean section. Head computed tomography (CT) revealed a subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) with a right temporal hematoma and an aneurysm on the right M1-M2 bifurcation . The SAH was believed to be caused by a right middle cerebral artery (MCA) aneurysm that was classified as World Federation of Neurosurgical Societies Grading of SAH (WFNS) Grade II and CT Fisher Group III. We maintained her systolic blood pressure (SBP) under 120 mmHg and mildly sedated the patient in the ER. Subsequently, a procedure to clip the ruptured aneurysm was performed. After the craniotomy and dural incisions, subdural and massive temporal hematomas with severe brain swelling were detected. Massive bleeding occurred before we could properly reach the aneurysm, implying that the aneurysm reruptured before or during the operation. A temporary clip was quickly set on the right M1 trunk. Following this, a permanent clip was appropriately applied to the aneurysmal neck to close it . The removal of the temporary clip took 15 min. One day after surgery, the follow-up CT showed low density in almost the entire right MCA territory, suggesting an infarction. One month after surgery, the patient gradually recovered through rehabilitation, although she had hypoalbuminemia due to malabsorption and cirrhosis.
On day 38, she suddenly developed high fever (40.3 °C) at midnight. However, the following morning, i.e., on postoperative day (POD) 39 , her blood test showed acceptable levels of white blood cell (WBC) and C-reactive protein (CRP) (5250 cells/μL and 2.72 mg/dL, respectively) . As her fever reduced, it was believed that the fever was caused by central nervous system (CNS) damage. We immediately completed a general culture workup of the sputum, urine, and blood to understand the origin of the fever. Thus, we intentionally postponed antibiotic administration till the culture workup was completed. However, her SBP gradually declined to 70 mmHg on POD 40. A on-call doctor started vasopressor drugs administration and stabilized her SBP to approximately 100 mmHg. Though WBC and CRP levels were 8810 cells/μL and 6.56 mg/dL, respectively , the number of platelets was extremely low (less than 10000/μL) and the fibrin/fibrinogen degradation product (FDP) level was 62.1 μg/mL, suggesting disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). Although the spinal tap showed no evidence of meningitis, two sets of blood culture revealed the existence of gram-negative rod bacteria, strongly indicating a septic shock. Although we inserted a central venous catheter (CVC) in a sterile manner, the central line catheter seemed to be contaminated by traces from stools or urine . Thus, we immediately removed the catheter and started treatment with cefepime, a fourth-generation cephem type antibiotic. Only two hours after antibiotic administration, her SBP reduced dramatically and she became unresponsive to high dose vasopressor (epinephrine). The patient died at 11:00 a.m. on POD 40, one and a half days after fever onset. After her death, the causative agent was confirmed to be Klebsiella pneumoniae, as observed by blood culture and catheter analyses. These findings imply that CRBSI might have occurred, inducing a rapid decline in the patient’s condition and resulting in death in a stroke patient with additional organ failure.