A 72-year-old Chinese female (non-smoker), who has suffered from blood hypertension for over 30 years, chronic bronchitis for over 20 years, and diabetes for 6 years, was admitted to our hospital due to a productive cough for three weeks followed by severe symptoms for another week.
Respiratory sounds were weak and coarser in the right lung field. Laboratory examination revealed a high percentage of monocytes, a low level of hemoglobinn and a low mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration. A hypermetabolic mass in the upper lobe of the right lung as well as the enlargement of right hilar and subcarinal lymph nodes were determined by F-FDG PET-CTA, suggesting lung cancer and lymph node metastases. The tumor was measured as 2.8 × 2.2 × 3 cm and ulcerated.
Routine histologic sections stained with hematoxylin-eosin showed that tumor cells grew infiltrative in fibrous interstitium and arranged in sheets and syncytial pattern with marked pleomorphism. Neoplastic cells presented vacuolar nucleus with prominent nucleoli and a marked lymphocytes infiltration . Considering the high similarity of histology features between LELC and nasopharyngeal lymphoepithelioma, we first confirmed the absence of a primary lesion in the nasopharynx. Subsequent immunohistochemistry staining was performed on formalin-fixed paraffin sections to confirm the diagnosis. In line with previous LELC reports [, ], the tumor cells were strongly positive for CK5/6 and P40 , excluding the large-cell lymphoma. Besides, the tumor cells showed negative immunostaining of Napsin A, TTF1, CD56, CgA, and Syn, further excluding the possibilities of lung adenocarcinoma and neuroendocrine carcinoma [, ].
In addition, latent membrane protein (LMP1) expression of the Epstein-Barr virus was positive in tumor cells . Chemiluminescence analysis of EB virus antibodies showed that EBV-EA IgA and EBV-VCA IgG were both positive, confirming EBV infection in this patient. The patient was formerly infected by cytomegalovirus (CMV), so the CMV-Ab IgG was positive as well.
Microscopic examination further excluded the vessel invasion, nerve invasion, and pleural invasion. No metastasis was found at the resection margin of the bronchus or in group 7 lymph nodes, but in the bronchial lymph nodes. The patient’s vital signs were stable without apparent productive cough, chest pain, chest tightness and other subjective discomforts after thoracoscopic-assisted radical resection of right lung cancer (right upper lobe lobectomy and lymph node dissection) and resection of middle lobe of right lung.