A 35-year-old right-handed woman presented to her local health office with a 6-month history of a painful lump on her left forearm. The pain was not affected by elbow movement, but the patient complained of tingling radiating from the lump to the dorsum of her hand. Her past medical history was unremarkable, and she reported no constitutional symptoms. Clinically the lump, which measured 2.0 cm × 1.0 cm, did not display any suspicious features. The primary care physician assumed that it was a lipoma and removed it under local anesthetic. The pathology report showed a heterogeneous proliferation of spindle cells with abundant mitotic figures suggestive of an MPNST. Regretfully, despite numerous attempts the health office was unable to contact the patient.
Three months later, the patient presented to our clinic with a painful, rapidly growing mass arising from her previous surgical site. At this point, the mass measured 7.0 × 5.5 cm was firmly attached to the deeper tissues. The overlying skin was stretched, appearing thin and shiny, but there were no enlarged lymph nodes and normal distal neurovascular function ( and ).
A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan demonstrated a hyperintense fusiform mass on the T2-weighted image signal with peripheral enhancement post-gadolinium administration. The mass that did not seem to involve the fascia appeared to originate from the lateral antebrachial cutaneous nerve, consistent with MPNST .
A chest computerized tomography scan showed no evidence of pulmonary metastases.
At a multidisciplinary team meeting with the patient, we used a shared-decision model, agreeing that surgical excision was the most appropriate course of action. The patient gave informed consent for the use of her anonymized images in this case report. Operating under a tourniquet (without exsanguination) to produce a bloodless field, we made an elliptical incision approximately 2 cm from the lesion’s margins and sharply dissected it off the underlying muscle. Proximally, the tumor had penetrated the fascia and was adherent to the muscle bellies of the brachioradialis and extensor carpi radialis longus. To effect complete excision of the tumour, we dissected deep into the muscle bellies sacrificing approximately 50% of the muscles while leaving their tendinous origins intact. Extensor carpi radialis brevis was not involved and therefore left undisturbed. Both median and radial nerves were exposed and protected throughout the procedure. At the end of the operation, the base of the wound appeared healthy and was temporarily covered with a vacuum-assisted device .
Histology confirmed a high grade, poorly differentiated spindle cell tumor with invasion into the dermis and the underlying skeletal muscle. The mass was partially encapsulated with a peripheral attachment to surrounding nerve bundles. The circumferential and deep margins had a minimum clearance of 2 mm. Immunohistochemistry was positive for the S100 protein with focal staining, and the appearance was consistent with MPNST.
Fourteen days later, we returned to the operating theatre, debrided the wound bed to encourage bleeding, and placed a split skin graft over the defect. We applied a wrist drop splint for 1 month to encourage maximum “take” of the skin graft. Gentle physiotherapy and occupational therapy were then commenced to regain movement and strength in the upper limb. Three months later, following advice from the radiation oncologist, we referred the patient for external beam radiation therapy (Total 64 Gy–50Gy/25 fractions and 14Gy/7 fractions). The patient who shows no evidence of local recurrence (LR) is reviewed annually using surveillance MRI imaging.
Five years after surgery, the patient reports minimal discomfort while using her arm and has returned to work as an administrative assistant. Physical examination demonstrated an excellent range of wrist and elbow movement .
Her Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand score and EuroQoL 5 Dimensions scores were 12.5 and 0.799 respectively, implying excellent function.