A 27-year-old woman was admitted to an outside hospital’s emergency department due to a headache and vomiting. She had no previous medical history or family history of cancer. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a mass on the right cerebellum that involved the transverse venous sinus . She underwent a partial resection, and the histological diagnosis highlighted a medulloblastoma. Following the diagnosis, the patient was referred to our center. The revised histological findings suggested the possibility of a high-grade glioneuronal tumor (HGG), which was later confirmed after a total secondary resection. Proton beam therapy (PBT) was administered at the surgical site with a total planned dose of 54 Grays (Gy) in 25 sessions, along with concomitant (75 mg/mq/day during PBT) and adjuvant (200 mg/mq/day for five days per month for six months) oral temozolomide. Subsequent MRIs showed complete remission of the disease. After 18 months from the suspension of treatment, a cerebral MRI revealed a local relapse at the surgical site . During the diagnostic workup, two metastatic lung lesions (the larger in the upper lingula segment) were discovered with suspicion of a lesion in the right iliac bone (, ). The iliac bone biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of HGG, with 40% PD-1 expression on lymphocytes and 30% PD-L1 expression on neoplastic cells . Subsequently, immunotherapy with intravenous nivolumab (3 mg/kg/day) was started every two weeks and continued for two years without any reported toxicity. The patient achieved complete remission in all sites , which was confirmed by a biopsy of the lesion in the right iliac bone, which showed only inflammatory tissue without evidence of neoplastic infiltration. After six months of discontinuing therapy, CT and a positron emission tomography (PET) scan revealed a relapse in the lung lesion and in the right iliac bone lesion (, ). A biopsy of this bone mass and a review of the previous cerebellar lesion allowed for a reevaluation of the entire case. Morphological features were similar in the primary and metastatic lesions: the tumor consisted of sheets of epithelioid cells with abundant eosinophilic to clear cytoplasm, large nuclei, and prominent nucleoli and showed a marked lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate at the periphery . Mitoses were brisk (three mitoses/mm2), and the Ki67 proliferation index was approximately 15%. Although myxoid stroma and blood-filled cystic spaces were not prominent features, the expression of CD99 (membranous), GLUT-1 with a prominent paranuclear/Golgi pattern, focal EMA, and focal GFAP and synaptophysin raised a suspicion of an unusual mesenchymal tumor . A next-generation sequencing (NGS) panel (Archer Custom Fusion Plex Kit, Integrated DNA Technologies, IA) identified the presence of the EWSR1::CREM fusion transcript on both the primary tumor and the metastasis, confirming the diagnosis of metastatic intracranial mesenchymal tumor FET::CREB fusion-positive. .
In accordance with these findings, fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) demonstrated the rearrangement of EWSR1.
Additionally, a blood test for cancer predisposition syndromes was conducted using the Twist Custom Panel, which includes assessments for CTNNB1, SMO, PIK3CA, PTEN, ID1, FGFR1, ARID1A, SMARCA4, CHD7, KDM4C, MYC, MYCN, MSH2, TP53, SUFU, PTCH1, PTCH2, ARID1B, and ERBB2 alterations, and no pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants were identified. Based on the previous clinical response to nivolumab, we decided to start a rechallenge treatment. After two cycles, nivolumab was prematurely discontinued due to the development of grade 2 immuno-mediated pneumonia, leading to a decrease in the patient’s performance status (ECOG 2) and iliac bone and lung disease progression. Consequently, PBT was performed on the right iliac bone lesion (with a total planned dose of 59.4 Gy in 48 sessions) with a complete surgical removal of the lung lesion. Thereafter, the patient received consolidation therapy with eight cycles of temozolomide plus irinotecan, achieving a complete remission of the disease.
She is currently still in complete remission with an optimal quality of life, nine years after diagnosis and two years after discontinuation of therapy .