The authors present the case of a 65-year-old female patient with a predominantly tremoric form of idiopathic Parkinson's disease, with symptoms developing throughout an 11-year period. No relevant psychiatric history could be found, namely personal or family history of obsessive-compulsive disorder, except for a mild and medically compensated form of reactive depression.
The patient underwent bilateral subthalamic nucleus (STN) stimulation surgery in October 2011, under fluoroscopic control, and no intercurrences were registered. As usual in our department, the implanted pulse generator (IPG) was placed in a left subclavicular pouch and sutured to the underlying muscle fascia tissue. No proximal stitches, namely galeal fixation, were part of the procedure. Functional results were quite favorable (UPDRS III: Preoperative score of 47, postoperative score of 7) allowing for a significant reduction in medical therapy. The patient was discharged with no evidence of surgical complication, and the usual written suggestions to avoid extreme exertion and contact sports.
Repeated medical visits included surgical wound inspection, and no sign of skin manipulation could be found. Four months after surgery, the patient started to display signs of recurrent disease, with an increasingly smaller response to stimulation. Over the following 3 months, the clinical condition eventually resumed preoperative status - by May 2012, on medication, UPDRS III score was 43 regardless of stimulation, which raised suspicion toward hardware failure. X-ray studies of the system displayed “twisted” extensor leads and an evident disconnection between these and the distally migrated electrode lead connections . Proximally to the slightly rotated IPG, the extensors seemed to “curl”, however, the electrode leads were spared . A change in electrode impedance was also identified, with persistent abnormally high readings.
The patient denied any active or passive hardware mobilization. She also denied feeling any tenderness throughout the extension path, except for a retroauricular “tightening” sensation. No other plausible physical causative factor could be identified, namely IPG rotation induced by upper limb movement.
She underwent revision surgery in June 2012, which clearly confirmed the radiologic findings: Cranially, the leads were no longer in contact inside the connector, and upon pectoral pouch opening extensor leads were clearly twisted and curling around the IPG . A total of 17 full rotations were necessary for those to straighten fully. Electrode function was confirmed and the damaged extensor leads were replaced. Similar functional results as those previously obtained were achieved.