A 64-year-old man was admitted to our institute with a history of severe headache, an unsteady gait, and occasional urinary incontinence. These symptoms began 2 days prior to admission, and the patient had previously been healthy without medical concerns. He denied a previous history of consuming raw pork meat. On examination, the patient was alert but disoriented with respect to time and place. No significant pathological reflex was detected, and papilledema was absent. His lower extremities were hypotonic, and the strength of both legs, particularly in the proximal musculature, was diminished. A computed tomographic (CT) scan of the brain showed marked ventricular dilatation but no intraparenchymal lesions or intraventricular cysticercal lesions . In addition, no subcutaneous nodules were found. The peripheral blood findings revealed a leukocyte count of 8700/mm3 (eosinophils 3%) and a hemoglobin level of 12.8 mg/dL, although the hematological findings were unremarkable. Motor examination showed normal strength in both upper extremities but reduced strength in both lower extremities (Grade 4/5 on the Medical Research Council [MRC] scale). Under a diagnosis of acute hydrocephalus, lumbar tapping was attempted repeatedly, but cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was not obtained despite adequate lumbar puncture. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the thoraco-lumbar spine revealed multiple cystic contrast-enhancing intraspinal lesions extending from C7 to S1 . Ventriculoperitoneal shunting and microsurgical removal of the lesions following laminectomy from T12 to L1 and L3 to L4 were performed under general anesthesia. During surgery, lesions of a mixed solid and cystic nature were detected. Subsequent pathological findings showed fibrosis, local calcification, and chronic inflammation associated with the cysticercosis cyst walls.
Postoperatively, an anticysticercal agent (Albendazole, Zentel® 400 mg, manufactured by Smith Kline Beecham Pharmaceuticals) and an oral steroid were administered for 6 weeks. During the early postoperative period, the patient remained awake, alert, and oriented, although his muscle strength and occasional urinary incontinence were not improved. After the 6-month follow-up period, these symptoms remained, and the patient was unable to ambulate without assistance despite improvements in ventricular dilation .