A 16-year-old boy suddenly experienced cardiopulmonary arrest while playing soccer, received cardiopulmonary resuscitation and automated external defibrillator (AED) treatment by a bystander and was brought to our hospital after return of spontaneous circulation.
The patient had low exercise tolerance since childhood and was admitted to another hospital at age 12 due to the symptom of chest pain while playing soccer. Transthoracic echocardiographic imaging showed normal left ventricular diffuse wall motion [ejection fraction (EF) = 57%], and formation of a trabeculation with suspected non-compaction at the left ventricular apex. The results of treadmill exercise test were negative and follow-up was performed without treatment. The patient became a high school student and noticed an angina attack twice during exercise, but symptoms were quickly ameliorated by bed rest only. In May 2018, an AED was used by a schoolteacher who suddenly collapsed during soccer. After the third AED operation, return of spontaneous circulation was noted and the patient was brought to our hospital for emergency treatment. On admission, significantly reduced consciousness (Glasgow coma scale; E1V1M2) was noted, and therapeutic hypothermia under ventilator management was promptly introduced for protection of the brain.
The initial workup was 103.2 pg/mL (<18.4) for B-type natriuretic peptide and 0.09 ng/mL (0.00–0.03) for Troponin I. Atrial blood gas analysis were pH 7.233 (7.35–7.45), pCO2 39.0 mmHg (35–48), pO2 101.0 mmHg (83–108), and Lac 93.0 mg/dL (4.5–14.4). Chest X-ray revealed the presence of cardiac enlargement (CTR 58%) and pulmonary oedema. Head computed tomography (CT) indicated unclear medullary boundary on the basilar side and hypoxic encephalopathy was suspected. A 12-lead electrocardiogram indicated sinus rhythm, 2-mm ST depression in the anterolateral leads and borderline QTc (441 ms) . Transthoracic echocardiographic imaging showed decreased left ventricular diffuse wall motion (EF = 34%), and formation of a trabeculation with suspected non-compaction at the left ventricular apex. As a result of AED analysis, initial waveform indicated ventricular fibrillation .
When midazolam administration was discontinued on hospital Day 1 for the purpose of assessment of consciousness level, an improvement to GCS E4VtM6 was noted. Therefore, the rewarming period was shortened from 48 to 20 h, the artificial respiration was ceased on hospital Day 2, and the patient was discharged from the intensive care unit on hospital Day 4.
Selective coronary angiography revealed left coronary artery (LCA) defect from the ostium and return of blood flow from the right coronary artery via collateral circulation on hospital Day 7 . Right coronary artery was well developed, there were no angiectopia or stenosis, and collateral circulation was observed from a posterior descending artery branch to the periphery of the left anterior descending artery (LAD), from a posterolateral branch to the diagonal branch, and from an atrioventricular node branch to left circumflex artery (LCX). Furthermore, a solitary conus branch with a different ostium directly above the right coronary ostium allowed circulation of blood flow to LAD/LCX via Vieussens’ arterial ring. The left main trunk had a blind end at the junction of both . As a result of collateral circulation, there was no significant stenosis in LAD and LCX revealed by contrast-enhancement.
Coronary angiography CT showed a lack of LCA ostium and no traffic between the left pulmonary artery on hospital Day 9 . Therefore, LMCAA was diagnosed in the patient. Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy revealed drug-induced blood flow imbalance in the apex and posterior wall and viability of the same site on hospital Day 10. Off-pump coronary artery bypass grafting with two branches (left internal mammary artery–LAD, right internal mammary artery–D1) was performed for the purpose of revascularization on hospital Day 15. Postoperative course was favourable, and coronary angiography CT on postoperative Day 13 revealed favourable bypass graft patency . Transthoracic echocardiographic imaging on postoperative Day 17 showed dramatically improved left ventricular diffuse wall motion (EF = 59%). After cardiac rehabilitation, the patient was discharged in an ambulatory state on postoperative Day 50. A wearable cardioverter-defibrillator (WCD) was used for approximately 3 months, but no obvious chest symptoms or ventricular arrhythmia were observed, and the patient is currently showing good progress without implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) implantation.