A 67-year-old male presented complaining of a right linear inguinal crease pustule that had persisted for 2 weeks. The pertinent vital signs were a temperature of 36.4 °C, and a weight of 91.6 kg. The patient was a current smoker with a 1/2 pack per day habit for the past 55 years. Past medical history was unremarkable with a history of right inguinal hernia repair and vasectomy. The patient was not taking any medications or over the counter supplements. His family history was unremarkable. The abdominal exam was remarkable for a small inguinal hernia and a 1-cm healed ulcer in the right inguinal area.
Four months later, the patient returned complaining of increased urinary frequency, hematuria, and scrotal pain lasting several days. There was no history of chills, nausea, vomiting, costovertebral angle (CVA) tenderness, or abdominal pain. His temperature was 38.0 °C. Urinalysis revealed + 1 blood, + 1 leukocyte, WBC > 182 HPF, RBC > 61 HPF, and positive for bacteria. Urine culture was positive for Escherichia coli and ciprofloxacin was subsequently prescribed. An ultrasound of the scrotum was not performed. The patient’s symptoms had resolved three weeks later at follow-up; however, the patient’s weight had decreased by 5.4 kg. A urinalysis again demonstrated 22 WBC/HPF and RBCs, and the follow-up culture was negative. Other labs were obtained, including CBC, CMP, and PSA, which were unremarkable.
Two months later, the patient returned complaining of posterior scrotum abscess drainage. He was afebrile with no palpable testicular mass or tenderness. However, there was thickening and serosanguinous drainage over the right testicle. The patient was treated with trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole and cephalexin and was referred to urology for his scrotal abscess. Later, computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis with contrast revealed a distended appendix (> 1.3 cm) and a fistula located between the appendix, urinary bladder, right scrotum, and right groin . The patient was referred for colorectal surgery.
Subsequently, a shave biopsy of a scrotal abscess lesion revealed granulated tissue. Cystoscopy showed a large mass in the anterior right bladder wall. Transurethral resection of the bladder tumor (TURBT) revealed the presence of urothelial mucosa consistent with chronic inflammation. A bone scan did not reveal evidence of metastatic disease.
The patient then underwent a laparoscopic appendectomy, where an abundance of mucin was observed. This was followed by a right hemicolectomy, partial omentectomy, and lymph node dissection. Microscopic examination of the appendix revealed a mucinous adenocarcinoma that had invaded through the muscularis propria into the subserosa without lymphovascular invasion. The tumor was staged as pT3b pN0 M0 G2 . After discharge, the patient was referred to oncology and FOLFOX regimen (levoleucovorin, fluorouracil, and oxaliplatin) was recommended.