A Caucasian 50-year-old man, in a stable relationship and employed, was considered for HCV treatment at our center. In 1996, during a hospitalization for jaundice, he received a diagnosis of acute hepatitis B/hepatitis D virus (HDV) infection. At that time, an HCV infection genotype 1a was also diagnosed, which had never been treated. The patient had a hystory of previous use of injected heroin and inhaled cocain, and he was in opiate substitution therapy (OST) with buprenorphine. Except for this, he did not use other drugs. He smoked tobacco, reported a previous alcohol abuse, and at the first assessment he stated that he drank 1–2 drinks a day. His medical history was notable for a sinus tachycardia and he underwent inguinal hernioplasty and appendectomy. No liver disease was documented in his family history.
His serological profile at admission to our center was HBsAg-negative, HBV core antibody (anti-HBc)-positive, HBV surface antibody (anti-HBs)-negative, and hepatitis D virus antibody (anti-HDV)-positive.
On presentation, he did not report any symptoms and denied previous episodes of ascites, hematemesis, melena, hepatic encephalopathy, and vomiting. A physical examination excluded signs of hepatic decompensation; in particular, it did not reveal ascites, splenomegaly, leg swelling, jaundice, and spider angiomas. The remainder of the examination was normal.
In the HCV pre-treatment assessment, he had F0–F1 fibrosis stage (Metavir score) evaluated by transient elastography (median liver stiffness 6.9 kPa) and an abdominal ultrasound excluded the presence of HCC and signs of portal hypertension. Laboratory analysis showed that alanine aminotransferase (ALT) was 51 IU/L, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) was 52 IU/L, and glucose 108 mg/dL. The count of white cells and platelets, and levels of hemoglobin, creatinine, alpha-fetoprotein, and electrolytes were normal; liver function tests were normal. HCV VL was 7,014,213 IU/ml and no HCV resistance-associated substitutions were found. His FIB-4 score was 2.13. Other laboratory test results are shown in Table ; data regarding the HBV VL were not available.
In October 2017, he started once daily sofosbuvir/velpatasvir (400/100 mg) without ribavirin (RBV) for 12 weeks. HCV ribonucleic acid (RNA) was 37 IU/ml at week 4, below the limit of quantification (< 12 IU/ml) at week 8 and undetectable at the end of treatment (EOT) . The detection of HBV DNA showed active viral replication and values of 16, 20, and 14 IU/ml were found at weeks 4, 8, and 12, respectively, of DAA treatment. Of note, the HBsAg and hepatitis B virus e antigen (HBeAg) remained negative despite evidence of ongoing HBV replication. The sequencing analysis of the HBV reverse transcriptase (RT)/S regions revealed the presence of the HBV genotype D3 and the absence of amino acid substitutions conferring resistance to any anti-HBV drugs. In contrast, by analyzing the S region, two relevant mutations, P120S and T126I, localized in the major hydrophilic region, an immune-active HBsAg domain, were found. He reached a sustained virological response (SVR) for HCV at 12 and 24 weeks after the EOT. An abdomen ultrasound performed at week 24 after the EOT showed hepatic steatosis but excluded the presence of nodular lesions. At the same time-point, non-invasive measurement of liver fibrosis, through transient elastography, confirmed the starting fibrosis stage (median liver stiffness 5.0 kPa, F0/F1 Metavir stage). At weeks 4 and 12 after the EOT, the HBV VL, in the absence of antiviral therapy, was < 10 IU/ml and 12 IU/ml, respectively, but returned below the limit of quantification at weeks 16, 20, and 24 after the EOT. A search for HDV RNA, performed at week 8 after the EOT, was negative. HBsAg and HBeAg remained negative despite the HBVr at all tested time-points; however, starting from week 12 after the EOT, the anti-HBs and hepatitis B virus e antibody (anti-HBe) titers spontaneously developed.