A 57 year old White British woman with CKD stage five was referred to the regional joint renal genetics clinic after her sister was noted to have a family history of renal disease during work up as a potential live kidney donor. The patient had been under nephrological follow up since adolescence, when she was incidentally discovered to have mild renal impairment . An intravenous pyelogram performed at the time showed that both kidneys were small with decreased cortical thickness and the most likely diagnosis was felt to be chronic pyelonephritis. Ultrasound scanning confirmed small kidneys with no overt renal cysts observed; urinalysis was consistently bland. She had also been investigated for symptoms of marked tiredness as a teenager and was found to be anaemic with a haemoglobin value of approximately 90 g/L. This was felt to be out of keeping with her level of kidney function at the time and remained unexplained despite extensive investigation. She developed gout in her twenties and her serum uric acid level was measured at 550 μmol/L; treatment with allopurinol was initiated. She remained under renal follow up and her kidney function continued to slowly deteriorate. Her haemoglobin level remained stable at around 100 g/L after initial treatment with iron and later an erythropoiesis-stimulating agent (ESA). When she was aged 37 years, one of the nephrology team noted that her mother had recently commenced haemodialysis. As both mother and daughter had presented with slowly progressive CKD, bland urinary sediment and small kidneys on renal imaging, the most likely diagnosis was now felt to be ADTKD.
A detailed family history revealed that the patient’s maternal grandmother had been told she had small kidneys but no further clinical details were available . The patient’s mother was identified as having mild CKD and hypertension at the age of 65 years during a routine health screen; renal ultrasound scanning at the time showed two small kidneys. Her renal function continued to decline and she commenced haemodialysis at the age of 70 years, before passing away 5 years later due to infective endocarditis. The patient’s siblings were all reported as being healthy.
By the time the patient was reviewed in the renal genetics clinic, her estimated glomerular filtration rate had fallen to 12 and she was hoping to undergo imminent pre-emptive live renal transplantation with her sister as the donor. Given her clinical diagnosis of ADTKD, hyperuricaemia and history of young-onset anaemia, urgent next generation sequencing was performed using the Illumina TruSight One sequencing kit and the data was analysed to search for pathogenic variants in HNF1B (NM_000458.2), REN (NM_000537.3) and UMOD (NM_003361.2). The full coding regions (+/−five base pairs) of all three genes were sequenced to a depth of 20 fold or more, with analytical sensitivity of 98.3%–100% (95% confidence intervals). This identified a heterozygous and likely pathogenic variant in the REN gene: c.49 T > C, p.(Trp17Arg); no abnormalities were detected in HNF1B or UMOD . Although this sequence change has not previously been reported in the published literature, missense pathogenic mutations in the same region of REN have been described and associated with a similar phenotype. [, , ] The c.49 T > C variant alters a highly conserved nucleotide and weakly conserved amino acid in the aspartic peptidase domain of renin. Although in silico analyses are inconsistent and classify the variant from tolerated to possibly damaging, it has not been reported in the Exome Aggregation Consortium, Exome Sequencing Project or 1000 Genomes Project and is therefore very rare. [–] Functional studies have shown that a mutation in the adjacent amino acid, p.(Leu16Arg), prevents prorenin and renin biosynthesis and secretion. Therefore, it was considered highly likely that the REN: c.49 T > C, p.(Trp17Arg) variant was the cause of disease in this patient. Unpublished observations presented by Vincent Morinière and colleagues at the 43rd Annual Meeting and Scientific Exposition of the American Society of Nephrology in 2010 include discovery of the same p.(Trp17Arg) REN mutation in an individual with chronic tubulointerstitial nephritis and hyperuricaemia with a family history of both tubulointerstitial kidney disease and gout, providing further evidence for the pathogenicity of this variant.
The patient’s sister commenced work up as a live kidney donor aged 53 years. She was normotensive with bland urinalysis and a serum creatinine of 72 μmol/L. Her serum urate level was also within normal limits at 250 μmol/L. Renal ultrasound scanning suggested a slight size discrepancy between the right and left kidneys of approximately 1.6 cm; she went on to have magnetic resonance angiography of the kidney, which showed no evidence of narrowing or dilatation of the renal arteries. Urgent REN genetic testing excluded the c.49 T > C pathogenic variant identified in her sister . This allowed pre-emptive live donor transplantation with a 0:0:0 HLA mismatch to take place shortly afterwards. The patient’s serum creatinine was 124 μmol/L one month post-transplant and 139 μmol/L when last checked; her haemoglobin levels have remained approximately 100 g/L despite stopping treatment with an ESA at the time of the transplant.