A 59-year-old man was followed-up for achondroplasia and scoliosis in our hospital’s orthopedic department. The patient was transferred to our hospital complaining of upper abdominal pain and vomiting. On admission to our hospital, his vital signs were as follows: body temperature, 36.7 ℃, blood pressure 116/77 mmHg, and pulse rate 83 beats/min. Physical examination revealed upper abdominal tenderness. Laboratory investigations revealed mild anemia (hemoglobin 10.7 g/dL) and slightly elevated inflammatory response (white blood cell count 8700/μL and C-reactive protein 2.03 mg/dL). Hepatobiliary enzymes were elevated as follows: aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 917 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 777 U/L, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 1411 U/L, and γ-glutamyltransferase (γ-GTP) 554 U/L. Total bilirubin (T.Bil) and direct bilirubin (D.Bil) levels were 1.2 mg/dL and 0.8 mg/dL, respectively. Computed tomography (CT) revealed diffuse thickening of the gallbladder wall and high-density images of the gallbladder and common bile duct, suggesting gallbladder hemorrhage . On hospital day 2, he had worsening abdominal pain, and laboratory investigations showed more elevated hepatobiliary enzymes (AST 2925 U/L, ALT 966 U/L, ALP 1252 U/L, and γ-GTP 596 U/L) and T.Bil level (2.0 mg/dL). Hb levels did not change significantly (10.8 g/dL). Contrast-enhanced CT showed diffuse thickening of the gallbladder wall, high-density imaging of the gallbladder, and dilatation of the common bile duct (13 mm), but no evidence of extravasation within the gallbladder or significant inflammation of the connective tissue surrounding the gallbladder. There were no obvious findings of gallstones, cholecystitis, tumors, or aneurysms . The patient was diagnosed with bile duct obstruction due to gallbladder hemorrhage. As there was no evidence of massive bleeding, and his general condition was relatively stable, we performed endoscopic nasobiliary drainage (ENBD) to reduce jaundice. During the procedure, no active bleeding from the papilla of Vater was observed, and bile discharge was confirmed. Cholangiography showed bile duct dilatation (13 mm), but no obvious contrast defect in the gallbladder or bile duct . The ENBD tube was successfully inserted and the procedure was completed . After the treatment, approximately 300–400 ml of bile was drained per day, and the abdominal pain was significantly relieved, and the liver enzyme and total bilirubin levels improved. There was no bleeding in drainage bag and no significant decrease in Hb levels was observed (10.2 g/dL). Therefore, we performed laparoscopic cholecystectomy on hospital day 5 to ensure hemostasis and make a definitive diagnosis, including the cause of the gallbladder hemorrhage, especially to exclude malignant lesions. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy was performed using four ports in the usual manner. Intraoperatively, the gallbladder appeared slightly distended; however, there were no obvious signs of inflammation . The cystic duct and artery were identified and carefully divided using the critical view of the safety technique, and cholecystectomy was completed. The gross appearance of the surgically resected specimen showed small 12 lesions on the gallbladder mucosa that were black and slightly elevated. The size of the lesions ranged from 3 to 12 mm . Histopathologically, these slightly elevated lesions consisted of dilated muscular arteries in the gallbladder wall, with ulceration of the overlying mucosa. In such lesions, fibrinoid degeneration of the media and focal loss of the internal and external elastic laminae were observed in the bulging nodular muscular arteries . The inflammatory cell infiltration was unremarkable. Based on these findings, the histopathological diagnosis of SAM was confirmed. The patient was discharged without any postoperative complications on hospital day 12. Predischarge magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) and contrast-enhanced CT revealed no other lesions in the intracranial or abdominal visceral vessels. Serial follow-ups with CT imaging every 6 months after surgery also showed no new lesions for 3 years.