The patient was a 75-year-old Japanese male who had prostate cancer with bone metastasis and high serum PSA level (7040 ng/ml, reference range < 4 ng/dL) that responded well to luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LH-RH) agonist for 8 months. Abdominal CT scan revealed no evidence of prostate cancer progression. He was referred to our department due to a 4-week history of epigastric discomfort. Physical examination was not remarkable. Laboratory work-up was not significant except for elevated ALP, LDH and PSA levels, which were improved compared to values before hormone therapy .
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) was performed and revealed a slightly depressed, discolored lesion with sharp margin against non-atrophic mucosa on the anterior wall of the middle gastric body . Magnifying endoscopy (ME) with blue laser imaging (BLI) and linked color imaging (LCI) demonstrated a sparse and partially absent microsurface pattern with irregular microvessels in the depressed area. These findings are compatible with UD-EGC. Biopsy showed moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma and immunohistochemistry with PSA was negative. Contrasted computed tomography demonstrated absence of significantly enlarged perigastric lymph nodes and also there were no new sites of metastatic disease. Thus, we initially diagnosed it as a primary early gastric cancer. Considering his prostate cancer and estimated prognosis of several years, endoscopic submucosal dissection was performed. En bloc resection was successfully achieved without complication. Histopathologic findings from the resected specimen were remarkable for moderately to poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, which predominantly existed in the superficial layer of the submucosa. Atrophy of the gastric fundic glands, which were replaced with fibrous tissue, were observed focally near the tumor infiltration site . As metastasis was suspected, immunochemical staining was performed. The tumor was negative for PSA, cytokeratin (CK) 7, CK 20, and positive for PSAP . Consequently, the lesion was finally confirmed as a metastatic gastric lesion of the prostate cancer.
At the time when the pathological diagnosis of the gastric metastases was made, patient’s extragastric lesions were responding to endocrine therapy, and because of this we did not change his systemic treatment for prostate cancer.