A 45-year-old female patient was admitted to the hospital because of over 1 mo of intermittent abdominal pain and 4 d of dark yellow urine and jaundice. The patient suffered from unexplained intermittent epigastric pain 1 mo ago, accompanied by nausea, vomiting, acid regurgitation, and heartburn, without chills or fever. Then, the dark yellow urine appeared 4 d ago and progressively worsened, without clay-colored stools. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) in another hospital suggested: (1) Stones in the retroduodenal segment of the common bile duct causing dilation of the bile duct above stone incarceration; and (2) Multiple stones in the gallbladder resulting in cholecystitis. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) in another hospital showed: (1) Stones at the junction of the common hepatic duct and gallbladder? and (2) Multiple stones in the gallbladder leading to cholecystitis.
This patient had a history of post-cesarean complications for over 20 years.
She also had a history of arterial hypertension for 10 years and therefore had been taking oral felodipine.
This patient had a history of post-cesarean complications for over 20 years. Additionally, she also had a history of arterial hypertension for 10 years and therefore had been taking oral felodipine.
Physical examination revealed clear consciousness, stable vital signs, old surgical scars in the abdomen, soft whole abdomen, epigastric tenderness (+), no rebound tenderness, no palpable enlargement of the liver, spleen or subcostal area and negative Murphy sign.
The major test results were shown as follows: The routine blood test demonstrated leukocytes of 5.93 × 109/L and a neutrophil percentage of 76.5%. Comprehensive metabolic panel results exhibited 136 mmol/L sodium ↓, 56 μmol/L creatinine, 37 U/L creatine kinase ↓, and 3.36 mmol/L potassium ↓. The liver function test showed 171.8 μmol/L total bilirubin ↑, 138.9 μmol/L direct bilirubin ↑, 36.3 g/L albumin ↓, 165 U/L alanine aminotransferase ↑, and 106 U/L aspartate aminotransferase ↑. After admission, the patient was diagnosed with the following diseases: (1) Acute calculous cholecystitis; (2) Choledocholithiasis? (3) Mirizzi syndrome? and (4) Obstructive jaundice.
The patient was given symptomatic treatment such as acid suppression, anti-inflammation medications, fluid infusion, and stabilization of water and electrolytes. The patient underwent endoscopic sphincterotomy and balloon dilation under endoscopic retrograde cholangiography at our endoscopy center 2 d later, because she presented with jaundice and abnormal bilirubin and liver enzymes, suggesting extrahepatic biliary obstruction, with ERCP indications. Intraoperatively, villous papillary openings were observed, and the bile ducts were successfully super selected with an incision knife and guide wire and contrasted. The bile ducts were visualized. X-rays exhibited that the upper segment of the common bile duct was dilated with a diameter of about 1.4 cm, accompanied by dendritic dilation of the common hepatic duct and intrahepatic bile duct. In addition, it was also observed that an oval filling defect shadow existed at the junction of the cystic duct and common hepatic duct and moved, up to about 1.2 cm, and that the junction of the cystic duct was narrowed. The main pancreatic duct was not visualized, and the gallbladder was visualized with multiple filling defect shadows . Endoscopic sphincterotomy was conducted along the guide wire with an incision diameter of approximately 0.5 cm. After dilation with a columnar balloon of 1.0 cm in diameter, the stone impacted in the cystic duct partially went out into the lumen of the common bile duct under the direct view of the SpyGlass choledochoscope, and then electrohydraulic lithotripsy was performed under direct view . After lithotripsy, the stones were repeatedly removed from the common bile duct with the Dormia basket and retrieval balloon . The filling defect shadow disappeared on the control ERCP . Then, a naso-biliary drainage tube was placed, and the biliary obstruction was completely resolved. Additionally, a pancreatic duct stent was placed prophylactically. The patient was postoperatively diagnosed with acute calculous cholecystitis complicated by Mirizzi syndrome (type I) with cystic duct stones and obstructive jaundice. After the operation, her liver function indicators such as bilirubin gradually decreased. However, the patient developed transient hyperamylasemia of 697 μ/L at 4 h post-operatively, without abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and other symptoms. After the patient was treated with symptomatic treatments including fasting, fluids and anti-inflammation medications, the blood amylase gradually decreased to normal, and the patient was discharged from the hospital on the 5th d after the operation.