A healthy 32-year-old Asian man was involved in a major road traffic accident. On admission, a pelvic X-ray showed an unstable fracture of his left pelvis (AO classification type C1-3) and fractures of the lumbar transverse processes . He was in hemorrhagic shock due to retroperitoneal bleeding. No injuries were observed in his head or chest. An experienced radiologist performed emergency TAE of his internal iliac artery using a hemostatic gelatin sponge (Spongel) to control the bleeding. However, embolization of his bilateral internal iliac arteries was needed to control the bleeding successfully.
Over the course of seven days, skin erosions on both buttocks advanced to necrosis . Computed tomography (CT) showed left gluteal muscle damage and a massive bilateral collection of fluid and gas between the gluteal muscles and subcutaneous soft tissue . Our patient also developed sepsis. Emergency surgical debridement was undertaken, and a massive amount of brownish pus was drained from the subcutaneous cavity. His left gluteal muscle seemed to be severely damaged, and some areas of his bilateral gluteal muscles also appeared to be necrotic. A variety of bacteria (Citrobacter, Enterobacter, Enterococcus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa) was grown from a culture of the pus. On day 11, a tracheostomy was performed. Several debridements were subsequently performed, and we removed almost all of his bilateral gluteal muscles. This exposed his left fractured iliac bone, which was suspected of having a deep-bone infection . As a result of the debridement, an extensive soft-tissue defect was created in his buttocks and extended into his thighs. Additionally, left lower limb paresis became obvious as our patient’s level of consciousness improved. Both sensory and motor function were almost completely lost in his left leg.
Based on our patient’s condition, sacrificing his paralyzed left limb was considered the only option for achieving a satisfactory outcome. In particular, it would allow the extensive soft-tissue defect to be appropriately covered, and good ambulatory function was anticipated based on the use of a prosthesis. Therefore, we suggested hemipelvectomy and the use of a pedicled fillet flap from the sacrificed left limb for treatment of the soft-tissue defect. Our patient and his family agreed to this procedure. On day 95, we performed the surgical procedure with urologists and plastic surgeons, attempting reconstruction with the lower leg pedicled fillet flap subsequent to the hemipelvectomy. An incision was placed to harvest a vascularized fillet flap containing all the muscles and skin of the left upper leg, the gastrocnemius and the soleus muscles, and a medial pedis flap. The pedicle of the flap included the femoral, popliteal and posterior tibial arteries. Next, we performed the left hemipelvectomy, and then removed all of the bones of his left lower limb . Consequently, the bilateral gluteal defects were almost filled using the pedicled fillet flap . The remaining skin defect was covered with a split-thickness skin graft harvested from his amputated lower limb. The operation took 12 hours.
After the operation, several minor surgeries were needed to promote wound-healing. Six months after surgery, the wound was completely healed , and our patient was transferred to another hospital for rehabilitation. At 24 months post-surgery, he had successfully returned to his previous office work wearing a prosthetic left leg.