A 40-year-old female operated and diagnosed case of the right parietal anaplastic astrocytoma presented to us with recurrence of symptoms after being lost to follow-up after the first surgery performed 1 year back. The latest magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a recurrence in the parietal region that was reaching up to the ventricular surface. Apart from the parietal lesion, a fresh signal change could be observed in the right MTL suggestive of a separate temporal glioma [-]. The surgical options included excision of parietal recurrence through the previous incision and removal of temporal glioma through a separate temporal approach or excision of both the lesions through PTVa using the previous incision . It was decided to excise both the lesions through PTVa only. Apart from the advantage of targeting both lesions through a single approach, there was an added advantage of lesser chances of developing visual field deficits through PTVa. The preservation of temporal neocortex was another added advantage.
The patient was positioned prone with head turned slightly toward the right side. Through the scalp incision, the previous parietal craniotomy flap was raised. The parietal tumor was completely resected. At the end of the resection of parietal tumor, the ventricular cavity was entered as the tumor was extending till and bulging into ventricles. The retraction was applied using the Leyla retractor system so as to get a view of the atrium and the temporal horn. The normal anatomical landmarks, including thalamus, choroid plexus, fimbriae, and body of fornix, were identified. There was no continuity between the parietal and medial temporal tumors confirming the two being concurrent tumors. The enlarged hippocampus was seen along its entire length, except the region of amygdala, that was not in the line of vision. The orientation of hippocampus/parahippocampus was along its anteroposterior axis . The choroid plexus at the posterior limit of resection was reflected medially and fimbriae were dissected to expose the hippocampal fissure [ and ]. The posterior disconnection was then performed at the posterior-most extent of the tumor. As the hippocampus/parahippocampus was bulky, the tumor was debulked using a Cavitron ultrasonic aspirator. The tumor decompression was done both superior and inferior to the hippocampal fissure to remove completely both hippocampus and parahippocampal gyri, taking care not to breach the arachnoid medially. The dissection was advanced gradually anteriorly. As the tumor was debulked, the choroid plexus just anterior to the already removed hippocampus was reflected medially and the fimbriae were dissected to expose the immediate anterior part of the hippocampal fissure and further tumor debunking was done both superior and inferior to the hippocampal fissure. In this manner, the hippocampus/parahippocampus with the tumor was completely removed except for a tumor involving the amygdala that was hidden from view and was inaccessible through this approach . Hemostasis was achieved. The patient made an uneventful recovery without any postoperative deficits. Postoperative imaging revealed complete excision of the parietal tumor and near-total excision of the medial temporal tumor with a residual tumor only in the region of superomedial amygdala [-].