An active 56-year-old male deep-sea diver with bilateral shoulder pain and dysfunction was referred for management of multifocal osteonecrosis involving the left knee and bilateral femoral and humeral heads. Prior treatment included a left total knee replacement, a failed core decompression of both femoral heads, and finally a staged bilateral total hip replacement. Pre-operative clinical examination and functional scores for the shoulders are summarized in .
Grashey and axillary lateral plain films showed bilateral osteonecrosis of the humeral head (Cruess Stage III on the right and Cruess Stage II on the left) . The acromiohumeral index and the critical shoulder angle were 7.5 mm and 43° on right and 10 mm and 42° on left. The glenohumeral joint space was maintained and there were no signs of degenerative glenoid arthritis. Magnetic resonance imaging confirmed the diagnosis and also revealed bilateral rotator cuff tearing . The right shoulder had a medium size tear according to DeOrio and Cofield (22 mm in the anteroposterior dimension) with 28 mm of supraspinatus tendon retraction (Patte Stage 2) and a partial tear of the infraspinatus. Fatty infiltration was Fuchs Stage-2 in the supraspinatus and infraspinatus, and there was no fatty infiltration in the subscapularis muscle. The left shoulder had a small rotator cuff tear (7.5 mm in the anteroposterior dimension) with Patte Stage 1 retraction, no fatty atrophy, and no involvement of the infraspinatus.
The patient had failed many months of conservative treatment including oral anti-inflammatories and a home exercise program. His pain and dysfunction was progressive and a single-stage bilateral, subscapularis-sparing stemless shoulder hemiarthroplasty with a ceramic humeral head and concomitant rotator cuff repair was proposed. Clinical decision-making included: (1) Avoid total shoulder arthroplasty in a very active, young, male patient to mitigate the potential of early or mid-term glenoid component failure; (2) attempt to preserve native glenoid cartilage using a ceramic humeral head (pyrocarbon is not currently available in Chile); (3) perform a single-stage bilateral procedure as was the patient’s preference to reduce the total recovery time given his prior extensive surgical history; (4) use a subscapularis-preserving approach to facilitate early functional recovery; and (5) a concomitant rotator cuff repair to restore the rotator cuff force balance.