The patient was a 40-year-old woman diagnosed as having left renal cell carcinoma (cT3aN2M1) and adrenal gland metastasis. She was surgically treatment, having radical left nephrectomy in October 2009. There was no history of chronic kidney disease, valvular heart diseases, liver cirrhosis and other disorders. The resected tumor was pathologically diagnosed as collecting duct carcinoma, G3 INFβ, v(+), ly(+) 7 cm pT2. In April 2010, follow-up computerized tomography (CT) revealed newly bronchial lymph node metastasis, and she received initially 30 Gy radiation therapy for lymph node metastasis to prevent bronchial stenosis. After the radiation therapy, she complained of epigastralgia, so we performed esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD). However it revealed no abnormality (Figure ).
Temsirolimus (15 mg/day) was started in June 2012. Her blood test results at various follow-ups showed mild stable anemia (hemoglobin of 10.1–10.7 g/dl), but other laboratory parameters were normal on all occasions, including her chemistry panel and liver function tests.
Eight weeks after starting targeted therapy, the patient was admitted to the Department of Gastroenterology for worsening fatigue, pallor, and hematemesis. A complete blood count showed a marked drop in her hemoglobin level from 10.1 g/dl 4 days earlier to 2.9 g/dl. Her prothrombin time and activated partial thrombin time were normal. She had made no dosage changes to any of her medications, and had not started/stopped any medication during targeted therapy.
EGD revealed diffuse mucosal bleeding of the antrum (Figure A). Endoscopy showed diffuse reddish spots that resembled gastric antral vascular ectasia (GAVE) extending from the pylorus into the antrum. High-resolution magnifying endoscopy (ME) revealed that the mucosa was friable, and oozing bleeding occurred from ectatic vessel rupture (Figure B). In the background mucosa, brownish subepithelial capillaries were clearly visualized by ME with narrow-band imaging, and congestive and dilated subepithelial capillaries were seen in the background mucosa (Figure C). These findings represented a major change from the EGD performed before targeted therapy. Pathologic examination revealed interstitial fibrosis and extensive edema with capillary and venous dilatation in the submucosa extending into the mucosa.
This complication was most likely an adverse reaction to temsirolimus, because the patient had no underlying medical conditions associated with GAVE and had no evidence of GAVE on EGD before starting temsirolimus.
Treatment with a proton-pump inhibitor was started, and follow-up with repeat endoscopic hemostasis with argon plasma coagulation (APC) was performed once to twice weekly (Additional file
). The patient required four to six units of packed red blood cells every day, and the need for blood transfusion gradually decreased with the hemostasis treatment. After three sessions of APC, the patient did not need the blood transfusions, and the improvement of GAVE like lesions.
Overall, the patient required a total of four sessions of endoscopic hemostasis and 38 units of transfused blood for severe anemia during these 2 weeks.
Four weeks after discontinuing temsirolimus, the patient’s symptoms resolved and she was discharged in good clinical condition 60 days after hospital admission. One month after hospital discharge, significant improvement was seen in the gastric erythema and GAVE like lesions (Figure ).