A 55-year-old woman with neither contributory medical history nor previous head trauma presented with bilateral chemosis, pulsatile tinnitus, exophthalmia, and 6th cranial nerve palsy. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) and time-of-flight (TOF) angiography suggested CSDAVF [ and ], and cerebral DSA revealed the CSDAVF fed by branches of the internal carotid artery and external carotid artery. DSA also revealed that the CSDAVF had multiple shunted pouches located in bilateral compartments of the CS and draining into bilateral SOVs, inferior petrosal sinuses (IPSs), and superficial middle cerebral veins (SMCVs) [-]. The patient was diagnosed with CSDAVF, classified as Cognard Grade II a + b and Barrow type D, and we decided to perform SSSO as TVE. Under general anesthesia, we placed a 6-Fr guiding catheter in the left internal jugular vein through the right femoral vein, in which a 4-Fr catheter had been introduced coaxially with intravenous administration of heparin during endovascular treatment. Heparin had to be given to maintain in the activated clotting time between 250 and 300 s. First, a microcatheter was advanced over the microguidewire into the CS through left IPS, and we performed SSSO of shunt pouches located in the left anteromedial compartment of the CS using coils. TVE was performed to avoid leaving a dangerous drainage route into the superior petrosal sinus and SMCV . Second, SSSO of shunt pouches located in the right anterolateral compartment of the CS by coils was performed through right IPS . Finally, TVE of the drainage route into the right SOV and inter-CS through the left IPS . SSSO was successfully performed [-]. Immediately after SSSO, the drainage route into the left SOV was seen to be deteriorated, while that into the right SOV only slightly remained. As a result, bilateral neuro-ophthalmic symptoms improved without new cranial nerve palsy and slight remnant right chemosis. No anticoagulant therapy was given postoperatively to promote thrombosis. Postoperative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed increased signal intensity in bilateral SOVs on ASL. The imaging parameters of ASL were as follows: Repetition time, 4596 ms; echo time, 10.7 ms; inversion time, 1525 ms; slice thickness, 4 mm; gap, 0 mm; field of view, 240 mm; bandwidth, 62.5 kHz; matrix size, 512 (point) × 6 (arms); 2 NEX; 30 slice; total acquisition time, 2 min 27 s. ASL images were created using a 3DASL in Functool of Optima MR450w HD (GE Healthcare, Milwaukee, USA) 1.5T for perfusion image analysis. On the other hand, TOF angiography showed dilatation of bilateral SOVs had improved and CSDAVF was obliterated [ and ]. One month after SSSO, bilateral neuro-ophthalmic symptoms had worsened, especially on the right side. In contrast, TOF angiography could confirm obliteration of the CSDAVF and improvement of bilateral dilated SOVs. Venous-ASL showed increased signal intensity in bilateral SOVs had improved compared to the one immediately after SSSO, although signal intensity remained slightly in the right SOV [ and ]. We considered that bilateral paradoxical worsening of neuro-ophthalmic symptoms had occurred and decided to continue follow-up. However, 2 months after SSSO, only right neuro-ophthalmic symptoms had kept worsening, while those on the left had resolved. Venous-ASL showed that signal hyperintensity in the right SOV had worsened. Dilatation of only the right SOV and hyperintense signal in the right CS on TOF angiography was also confirmed [ and ], and we therefore performed DSA to judge whether true worsening had occurred. DSA revealed recurrence of CSDAVF with a drainage route only into the right SOV [-]. We performed TVE of the drainage route of the CS into the right SOV via the right IPS . Finally, CSDAVF was obliterated completely on both DSA and venous-ASL [ and ]. The postoperative course was uneventful, and neuro-ophthalmic symptoms resolved completely without new cranial nerve palsy.