A 49 years old, premenopausal female, having a body mass index of 28.8, Para 2 + 0, with no known comorbid, presented in Breast Surgery clinic in July 2022, with a complaint of pain in the lateral upper and lower quadrants of the right breast for 15 days. She had an intra-uterine contraceptive device in place for four years and had no significant family history of malignancy. She had a previous surgical history of cholecystectomy and a right forearm implant after a road traffic accident. Patient had no significant psychosocial history.
Her general and physical was unremarkable. Breast examination did not show presence of any underlying lump. Diagnostic mammography was offered which showed an asymmetric irregular density in the right upper outer quadrant with no evidence of architectural distortion, skin thickening, or nipple retraction bilaterally (BIRADSCATEGORY-0) but, as heterogeneously dense breast parenchyma was demonstrated bilaterally, an Ultrasound was advised.
On the US of the bilateral breast and axilla , the right breast had a well-defined hypoechoic solid nodule of 1.5 × 1.2 × 1.3 cm with internal vascularity at 10 o'clock position in correspondence to the site of pain, with the right axilla showing few subcentimetric benign-appearing lymph nodes with intact fatty hila (BIRADS CATEGORY-IV B). The left breast was normal on the US with the left axilla showing few subcentimeter benign-appearing lymph nodes with intact fatty hila (BIRADS CATEGORY-I). Based on the US findings, a right breast biopsy was recommended.
Core biopsy of right breast 9 o'clock lesion showed a biphasic tumor predominantly of cribriform architecture consisting of ductal and myoepithelial cells (containing myxoid and hyalinized globules). Immunohistochemical staining of the specimen highlighted p63 and CD117 whereas (Estrogen Receptor), as well as GATA3, came out to be negative. These features were consistent with adenoid cystic carcinoma. Metastatic workup including computed tomography chest, whole abdomen, pelvis, and whole-body bone scintigraphy, turned out to be negative making the clinical stage of T1N0M0. The patient subsequently underwent right breast wire localized wide local excision and sentinel lymph node biopsy . The procedure was conducted by the highly skilled surgeon of our tertiary care hospital with a working experience of 10 years (she has done MBBS, FCPS general surgery, FCPS breast surgery, FACS). The histopathological report revealed a tumor size of 2.1 × 1.6 × 1.3 cm, unifocal with margins and skin being tumor free, without any evidence of ductal carcinoma in situ or lobular carcinoma in situ . Five sentinel lymph nodes were taken out, none of which was involved by the tumor. Thus, it was pathologically staged II-A i.e. pT2N0M0 .
She recovered well, her case was discussed in multi-disciplinary tumor board. She was referred to Radiation Oncology for adjuvant radiotherapy on account of breast conservation. Subsequently, she received 26 Fractions of radiation to right breast, comprising of 36 Gy (Gy). She has since then been kept on surveillance and on subsequent three and six months follow up patient is doing well, with satisfactory local and systemic examination findings.