A 59-year-old woman presenting with a tumour mass located in D11 with partial invasion of D10 causing middle back pain one year before.
There was no family history of bone lesions or bone tumours. There were no general symptoms, such as an increase in temperature or loss of weight or appetite.
Clinical examination results showed localized pain increasing with compression. A systemic examination was performed and tested negative. Laboratory studies were not helpful. X-rays revealed an osteolytic lesion eroding the anterior cortex, the superior endplate involving the upper vertebra . The CT-scan and MRI confirmed the subtotal substitution of the vertebral body. A CT-scan performed about one year before confirmed similar results. The bone scan indicated a slight increase in local uptake and no sign of bone metastasis, the condition was confirmed by a total-body CT-SCAN. While X-rays and CT-scans of the chest were normal.
The mass was angiographically quite avascular suggesting a low grade lesion, according to the FDG-PET which demonstrated low metabolic activity and no signs of dissemination. As a tumour was suspected a CT-guided needle-biopsy was performed under local anesthesia through the left pedicle.
Histopathological tests showed a mitotically inactive spindle cell tumour, however, no definite diagnosis could be performed as material was scant and the immunohistochemical findings were inconsistent.
Hemangiopericytoma and paraganglioma were excluded because of low vascular grade; a metastasis from renal carcinoma, before hypothesized was excluded because contrasted with angiography and FDG-PER-FDG pattern. Having an uncertain diagnosis, a tumour mass has to be treated as a primitive tumour with therapeutic intent thus an en-block vertebral resection was proposed. The patient was informed about the high surgical and post-surgical risks and would not accept undergoing the procedure, so therefore a less dangerous palliative surgical procedure was chosen. During the first surgical operation a laminectomy and a posterior stabilization were performed without carrying out a biopsy, so that the tumour would not spread to the posterior access.
Curettage and stabilization with a titanium cage, cement and anterior plate was performed about two months later by intercostals-lateral approach.
Postoperative inpatient time followed without any problems and the patient was discharged after ten days in order to start rehabilitation.
Histopathological features were done on the curetted material, and pin-pointed the localization of ectopic thymomas so that a meticulous immunohistochemical test panel was applied to confirm the hypothesis.
An indirect immunoperoxidase staining was performed on 2 μm formalin fixed paraffin embedded sections by a streptavidin-biotin enhanced immunoperoxidase technique (Super Sensitive MultiLink, Novocastra, Menarini Florence, Italy) in an automated auto-stainer (Bond Max , Menarini) using monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies directed to the following antigens: CD99 (clone MIC2, UCS Diagn. Rome, Italy), chromogranin A (clone DAK-A3, Dako, Milan, Italy), Smooth Muscle Actin (clone 1A4, Dako) without any retrieval pre-treatments, HMB45 (clone HMB45 Dako), Synaptophysin (clone SY38, Dako), CD31 (clone JC/70A, Dako), CD34 (clone QBEND, Novocastra, Menarini, Florence, Italy), pan-cytokeratin (clone AE1/AE3, Novocastra), keratin 19 (clone RCK108, Dako), keratin 7 (clone OVTL12/30, Dako), Vimentin (clone V9, Dako), CD56 (clone BC56C04, UCS), EMA (clone E-29, Dako), Bcl2 (clone 124, Dako), CD20 (clone L26, Menarini), CD1a (clone 010, Dako), CD68 (clone KP1, Dako) after pre-treatment of the sections in a thermostatic bath at 96° C for 40 min in a pH 6 citrate buffer, CD5 (clone 4C7, Menarini) after pre-treatment of the sections in a thermostatic bath at 96° C for 40 min in a pH 8 EDTA buffer, S100 (polyclonal, Menarini), Calponin (polyclonal, UCS), pan-cytokeratin (MNF116, Dako), keratin 8 (35βH11, Dako), collagen IV (CIV94, Zymed, Histoline, Milan, Italy) after enzymatic pre-treatment. Diaminobenzidine (Menarini) was used as chromogenic substrate.