A 53-year-old Sri Lankan woman, with diabetes mellitus for 8 years, presented with intermittent fever of 5 months’ duration with a rash. She had lived in Dubai for the last 3 years. Her fever was associated with constitutional symptoms, loss of appetite, and loss of weight. The rash initially started on her trunk and spread to her upper and lower limbs and later to her face within a few days. The rash was erythematous and involved more than 90% of her skin and started to exfoliate after 1 week. She also developed progressive proximal muscle weakness with arthralgia and myalgia and had been bedbound for the last 1 month. There was no history of a photosensitive rash, oral ulcers, Raynaud phenomenon, or arthritis. She had been treated with antibiotics, fluids, and a high protein diet without a response. Following a trial of a small dose of steroids (0.5 mg/kg per day) for 2 weeks, the erythroderma had resolved. She was sent back to her home country, Sri Lanka, afterwards.
On admission to our unit she had extensive poikiloderma involving more than 90% of her skin with her face relatively spared. She had an early heliotrope rash, shawl sign and Gottron papules . Her proximal muscle power was grade 3 with distal muscle power of 4. Her cranial nerves and eye movements were normal. Respiratory, cardiovascular, and abdominal examinations were normal.
Whole blood count, liver function tests, and renal function tests were normal except for a normochromic normocytic anemia and marginally low albumin . Inflammatory markers were elevated with an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 110 in first hour and C-reactive protein (CRP) was 45 mg/L (< 6). Creatine phosphokinase was high at 630 U/L (26–140) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) was 712 U/L (225–450). Electromyography showed short, polyphasic, small motor unit potentials with early recruitment. A muscle biopsy from her quadriceps revealed features of inflammatory myopathy including muscle tissue showing focal perivascular atrophy, and some degenerating and necrotic muscle fibers with mild chronic inflammatory cell infiltrates. A skin biopsy from her right upper arm and abdomen revealed a thin epidermis, basal vacuolar degeneration, and mild perivascular lymphatic infiltrates. The papillary dermis showed edema, colloid bodies, pigmentary incontinence, and foci suggestive of mucinous change. Thyroid function tests were normal and she was negative for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Autoimmune antibodies were negative including antinuclear antibodies (ANA) and double-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid (DS-DNA). Out of myositis-specific autoantibodies, anti-Jo-1 was negative and antibodies to signal recognition particle and antibodies to Mi-2 were not done. An ultrasound scan of her abdomen and contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of her chest, abdomen, and pelvis did not reveal malignancy. Upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy was normal. Cancer antigen (CA) 125, CA 19-9, and carcinoembryonic antibody were within reference ranges. Two-dimensional echocardiography did not show evidence of cardiomyopathy.
Due to dysphagia, she was commenced on nasogastric feeds. Physiotherapy was started and early mobilization initiated. Following the diagnosis of dermatomyositis, orally administered prednisolone 1 mg/kg per day was started with methotrexate 10 mg once a week. Calcium supplementations and alendronate were started as bone prophylaxis against osteoporosis. She improved clinically with resolution of skin lesions and improving muscle power. She was discharged home from our unit on orally administered prednisolone and methotrexate with a plan to tail off steroids gradually.