A 60-year-old woman (gravida1, para1) was referred to our hospital because of recurrence of ovarian SCC in January 2018. She presented with lower abdominal discomfort and transvaginal ultrasonography revealed a 142*115 mm heterogeneous, solid cyst mass in May 2017. Preoperative tumor markers were cancer antigen 125 (CA125): 37 U/ml (< 35) and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA): 6.18 ng/ml (< 5). Total hysterectomy plus bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy plus omentectomy and iliac lymph node dissection was performed in local hospital due to the malignancy in frozen-section. Pathologic examination indicated right OMCT with malignant transformation into well differentiated SCC; metastases were not found in any other excised specimen. The patient was diagnosed as stage IA according to FIGO classification.
Subsequently, 6 cycles of bleomycin, etoposide and cisplatin was provided (etoposide 0.1 g d1–5, cisplatin 40 mg d2–3, bleomycin 15thousand IU d1–3), and 1 cycle of external beam radiation therapy (EBRT) (DT: 50Gy/25F) as well. During radiotherapy, a mass with diameter of 2 cm on right lower abdominal wall was touched. A biopsy specimen showed well differentiated SCC, ovary origin considered. Then she came to our hospital.
Positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) showed the elevated uptake of 18F-Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) in right abdominal wall muscle, ileocecus and multiple soft tissue masses around both iliac vessels. Elevated tumor marker antigens were human epididymis protein 4 (HE4): 78 pmol/L (< 74.3) and CEA: 6.2 ng/ml (< 5). Other laboratory examinations were within normal values. The patient was human papillomavirus (HPV) negative according to her regular medical examination.
Adhesiolysis, right abdominal wall mass excision, prosthetics, enterectomy, enterostomy and partial cystectomy were performed by laparoscope. 3 tumor masses were detected at the right abdominal wall, ileocecal junction and rectum with a diameter of 3 cm, 7 cm and 4 cm, respectively. Pathologic examination demonstrated metastatic squamous cell carcinoma in ileocecus, rectum and abdominal wall muscle. Immunohistochemically, these cells were diffusely positive for p16, p63, CK-h, Vim and EMA, partly positive for Ki-67 and p53, but negative for CK7. .
The whole exome sequencing identified 396 somatic mutation events in this case. Two hundred and thirty-nine (60.4%) were nonsynonymous single nucleotide variation (SNV) and thirty-four were disruptive insertion-deletion events. There were mutations in 7 known driver genes including TP53, CDKN2A, ATR, PTCH1, MCM-7, RAG-1 and SPTAN-1. Mutations in MET, MYC and JAK2 were all synonymous SNV. Exonic mutation in PIK3CA, KMT2A, GNAQ and SMARCA4 were not found in this case.
The copy number variation (CNV) was shown in Table . Gene amplification in MYC and EGFR which was reported in previous study were also found in this case. Besides, MET gene copy number was elevated with copy number of six which indicated the patient may benefit from c-MET small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as crizotinib. .
After the operation, the patient was offered platinum–based chemotherapy for 4 cycles (carboplatin AUC5, docetaxel 75 mg/m2 intravenously). The patient was followed up every 3 months. The patient recovered well, and no side effect was observed during follow-up. PET-CT scan in July 2019 showed no abnormally elevated uptake of FDG. Up till now, there has been no evidence of tumor recurrence.