The patient was a 51-year-old male who was hospitalized due to fever for 10 days. The highest body temperature was approximately 39.0 ℃, and the fever had no obvious regularity, accompanied by head pain when fever was present. On examination, it was noted that there was an eschar over the right inguinal area, and several yellow bean-sized lymph nodes were palpable over the right inguinal area, with mild tenderness. Routine blood tests suggested a white blood cell count of 12.52 *109/L, with 0% eosinophils. Meanwhile, metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS) technology was used to detect pathogenic microbial DNA in blood, and as a result, 11,260 Orientia tsutsugamushi-specific sequences were detected. The patient was given intravenous treatment with doxycycline, and the patient was discharged after the resolution of symptoms of infection and continued oral doxycycline treatment as directed after discharge.
On the third day after discharge, also on the 15th day of presentation with febrile symptoms, the patient developed dysarthria, accompanied by salivation, weakness with closed eyes, and no limb weakness or numbness. Examination revealed that the patient had bilateral peripheral facial palsy, unclear articulation, dysphagia, pharyngeal reflexes were present, tendon reflexes of both lower limbs were reduced, and muscle strength of the four limbs was normal. The patient’s vital signs were uneventful, afebrile, conscious, bilateral pupils of consistent size, sensitive to light reflexes, and negative for signs of meningeal stimulation. Sensory and cerebellar examination was normal. CSF protein quantification was 2.04 g/L, white blood cell count was 6 *106/L, CSF pressure, sugar and chloride were within normal ranges, and no pathogenic sequences were detected by mNGS of CSF. Serum anti-sulfatide IgM and IgG antibodies (western blot) were positive. CSF anti-sulfatide antibody IgG (western blot) was positive. Nerve conduction studies showed slowing of NCV in the peripheral nerves of all four limbs, mild prolongation of motor nerve conduction latencies, low distal SNAP amplitude, and marked prolongation of the F-wave latency in both median and tibial nerves in electrophysiological findings, suggesting demyelination. The patient was given intravenous administration of immunoglobulin (IVIG) therapy (0.4 g/kg/day) for 5 days, and after treatment, the patient’s neurological deficit improved significantly, and no significant sequelae were left at the follow-up visits.