We present the case according to the CARE reporting checklist (; available at ).
A 74-year-old male patient with left neck swelling for one month, without tenderness, and without fever or other symptoms was admitted to Union Hospital affiliated to Tongji Medical College of Huazhong University of Science and Technology in July 2021. A CT-scan of the neck showed a 66 mm×54 mm round soft tissue mass shadow in the left neck , supraclavicular area and superior mediastinum, with multiple enlarged lymph nodes around, and the trachea, thyroid and esophagus were pushed to the right, with local tracheal narrowing. Further contrast-enhanced CT scans showed ring enhancement , and a lack of clear demarcation between the mass and the esophageal wall. In addition, tumor markers were normal.
It is noteworthy that the patient was diagnosed with rectal mucinous adenocarcinoma 30 months ago and subsequently underwent surgery. And there was no special treatment after surgery. Meanwhile, the patient was diagnosed with prostate adenocarcinoma on biopsy (Gleason 3 + 4 = 7) and then received castration therapy. The patient reported no family history of tumors.
More specifically, the surgical pathology confirmed a diagnosis of rectal mucinous adenocarcinoma , while the tumor invaded through the muscularis propria and into the adipose tissue outside the intestinal wall (pT3), without tumor vascular thrombus or perineural invasion around the tumor, with negative surgical margins. There was no evidence of lymph node involvement (14 lymph nodes were resected), while there was one peri-intestinal cancer nodule. Mismatch repair deficiency (dMMR) was confirmed by immunohistochemical staining for the mismatch repair proteins MSH2, MSH6, MLH1 and PMS2. Immunohistochemistry showed complete loss of MSH2 and MSH6 expression but normal MLH1 and PMS2 expression . Germline MSH2 gene mutation (c.2459-12A>G) was detected by next generation sequencing (NGS). NGS result of MSH2 also showed that tumor tissues had higher mutation abundance than the control (84% vs 48%, respectively) . This genetic variant was located within an intron and did not generally affect the function of protein. It was not represented in the large population databases (1000 Genomes, gnomAD, and ExAC), indicating that this mutation was a rare variant. In addition, the ClinVar database contained six records for the variant, where the pathogenicity was recorded as likely pathogenic of three records and uncertain significance of three remaining records (–). In summary, MSH2 gene mutation (c.2459-12A>G) was classified as likely pathogenic according to American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics guidelines (ACMG, 2015). Moreover, gene mutations strongly associated with treatment and prognosis in rectal cancer were also detected by NGS, including KRAS (p. G12D), PIK3CA (p. E545G) and TP53 (p. R248W). Moreover, NGS test of rectal mucinous adenocarcinoma indicated high TMB (68.79 mutations/Mb) and mutations in other mismatch repair related genes (ATM, CDK12, FANCA and MRE11).
The pathological diagnosis of prostate biopsy revealed prostate adenocarcinoma with Gleason 3 + 4 . Similarly, dMMR was also confirmed by immunohistochemical staining. Immunohistochemistry showed complete loss of MSH2 and MSH6 expression but normal MLH1 and PMS2 expression . The deficiency of mismatch repair function has several important consequences, such as gain of growth advantage, increase in the point mutation rate, MSI-H and abnormal MMR protein expression by IHC. In summary, we reached consensus that the prostate adenocarcinoma and rectal mucinous adenocarcinoma were associated with Lynch syndrome.
After comprehensive consideration of the patient’s history and status, the patient underwent biopsy of the left neck mass. Microscopically, tumor cells displayed striking atypia and epithelioid morphology, infiltrating into skeletal muscle, without lymph node structure detected . In addition, the lack of differentiation of the immunohistochemical phenotype led to difficulty in understanding the tumor cell of origin. For more details, see . Furthermore, NGS, including genes and mutations associated with soft tissue sarcoma typing (57 genes, 236 types of gene fusions and 14 gene mutations), was performed. TP53 mutation (p. Arg175His) was detected, but we were still unable to determine the tumor cell of origin. As expected, dMMR was also confirmed by immunohistochemical staining, consistent with the phenotypes of rectal mucinous adenocarcinoma and prostate adenocarcinoma . In addition, the result of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) microsatellite instability (MSI) testing of sarcoma showed high-level microsatellite instability (MSI-H). For more details, see .
In summary, taking into account HE morphology, immunohistochemical phenotype, NGS result, MSI result, medical history and germline MSH2 gene mutation (c.2459-12A>G), the pathological diagnosis of left neck biopsy tissue was Lynch syndrome-related undifferentiated sarcoma with epithelioid morphology.
Among the differential diagnoses, the diagnosis of metastatic cancer of the left neck was ruled out due to a lack of expression of epithelial markers (PCK, CK8/18, CK7, CK20, Villin, CDX2, PSAP, etc.). Lack of expression of malignant melanoma markers (S100, SOX10, HMB45, MelanA, etc.) made it impossible to make the diagnosis of malignant melanoma. Similarly, the absence of detection of lymphatic and hematopoietic system markers (LCA, CD3, CD20, CD38, CD138, MUM1, Kappa, Lambda, MPO, CD43, CD117, etc.) was unable to support the diagnosis of lymphatic and hematopoietic cancer. In addition, the diagnosis of sarcoma with certain differentiation was hard to make due to the absence of lineage-specific markers (Desmin, ERG, CD34, or corresponding fusion genes and mutant genes). In addition, it was unreasonable to make a diagnosis of sporadic undifferentiated sarcoma, which barely demonstrated immunohistochemical absence of MMR proteins and had no pathogenic or likely pathogenic germline gene mutations.
The patient has been receiving 15 cycles of immunotherapy (sintilimab, 200 mg i.v. every three weeks) combined with oral chemotherapy (tegafur, gimeracil and oteracil potassium capsules) and well tolerated. Reassuringly, significant regression of the left neck tumor was observed after two cycles of treatment, and the curative effect was evaluated as partial response (PR) according to the RECIST criteria and then maintained the state of PR during a follow-up of 14 months, which further supported our diagnosis . The timeline scheme of the major clinical event of the patient is represented in .