A 46-year-old Han Chinese female patient was admitted to Fengjie County People’s Hospital (Chongqing, China) with the complaint of intermittent abdominal pain for 2 days in November 2020. No special personal medical and psychosocial history, no family history of genetic disorders, and 2 daughters born in natural birth. She was weak, anorexic and anemic with episodes of nausea and vomiting. Physical examination revealed tenderness over the left kidney and left lower abdominal. A giant mass ~ 10 × 10 cm was palpated in the left abdomen. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan revealed destruction of the bilateral renal structures, possible hamartoma, hemorrhage of the left renal lesion , and fluids in the pelvic cavities. In addition, multiple abnormally enhanced foci were observed in the liver, which were suspected to be hamartoma . Subsequently, the patient underwent a biopsy of the liver lesion under CT localization , and the pathology indicated angiomyolipoma .
Emergency transcatheter renal arterial embolization and hepatic arterial embolization were performed under local anesthesia. The interventional procedure is shown below. The catheter sheath (RS*A50K10SQ, TERUMO) was inserted into the right femoral artery percutaneously, and the catheter and microcatheter (MC-PE27131, TERUMO) were implanted into the tumor-supplying branch of the left renal artery under a guide wire (RF*GA35153M, TERUMO). Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) showed that the tumor area of the left kidney had developed, and a small amount of contrast agent had spilled . Under X-ray fluoroscopy, the suspension of lipiodol and bleomycin (1:1, 14 ml) was slowly injected into the artery feeding left renal tumor. Then, a polyvinyl alcohol foam embolization of microparticles (350–560 μm cook, 1.5 vial) was slowly injected into the artery. DSA showed that the left renal tumor was not redeveloped and that lipiodol deposition in the tumor was obvious . Then, the catheter and microcatheter were implanted into the common hepatic artery, and DSA showed the development of a tumor in segment V of the liver . The embolization of the liver lesion was the same as the previous steps. DSA showed that the intrahepatic tumor was not redeveloped and that lipiodol was well deposited . The patient recovered well after the operation, and the abdominal pain was relieved.
The patient was readmitted to the hospital due to “fever and chills” 3 months later. Contrast-enhanced CT of the abdomen showed a left renal hamartoma abscess and perirenal infection. The patient underwent transabdominal abscess puncture and catheter drainage, which resulted in the discharge of brown, foul-smelling pus . Bacterial culture of pus suggested Escherichia coli. The patient then received abscess flushing and anti-infective treatment with piperacillin/tazobactam.
Two more transcatheter renal arterial embolizations and hepatic arterial embolizations were performed on the patient in March 2021 and June 2021. The interventional surgery procedure was the same as before. Efficacy was evaluated as partial remission (PR) for the kidney foci and stable disease (SD) for the liver foci (March 2021, June 2021 and June 2022) compared to CT on November 2020. The images of the patient’s successive evaluations during the treatment are shown in Fig. A–I. The maximum tumor diameter for both the kidney foci and liver foci during the patient’s treatment appeared to decrease significantly during the treatment, as shown in Fig. . Written informed consent was obtained from this patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images.