A 65-year-old male was admitted to our hospital because of right upper quadrant abdominal pain, jaundice and fever for 2 days. He denied history of any systemic disease. He had no history of previous abdominal surgery. At initial presentation, his body temperature was 38.6°C, blood pressure was 142/82 mmHg, pulse rate was 92/min, and respiratory rate was 22/min. Physical examination revealed jaundice, and tenderness with light palpation at the right upper quadrant of abdomen. Murphy's sign was positive. There was no palpable mass and Courvoisier's sign was negative. The bowel sound was normal in peristalsis and no abdominal bruit was found on auscultation.
Laboratory studies demonstrated a white blood count of 10,800/mm3 (normal, 4,500 to 10,000/mm3), a hemoglobin level of 15.3 g/dL (normal 14-18 g/dL), and a platelet count of 22.3 × 104 /mm3 (normal, 13-40 × 104 /mm3). The liver profile showed total bilirubin = 4.3 mg/dL (normal, 0.2-1.2 mg/dL), direct bilirubin = 3.2 mg/dL (normal, 0-0.4 mg/dL), alanine aminotransferase = 108 IU/L (normal, 4-44 IU/L), aspartate aminotransferase = 103 IU/L (normal, 8-38 IU/L), and alkaline phosphatatse = 327 IU/L (normal, 104-338IU/L). The serum levels of amylase and lipase were 166 U/L (normal, 43-116 U/L) and 208 U/L (normal, 13-60 U/L) respectively. Blood cultures were negative for aerobic and anaerobic organisms. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed a distended gallbladder with thickened wall and filled with stones. A small amount of ascites was detected in the Morison's pouch. The common bile duct (CBD) was mildly dilated with some hyperechoic spots, indicating sandy CBD stones.
Because acute calculous cholecystitis and cholangitis were impressed on clinical grounds, he underwent cholecystectomy and choledocholithotomy via a right upper quadrant laparotomy. At operation, an inflamed gallbladder with fibrin coating on the edematous wall was found. The Calot's triangle showed dense adhesion and the CBD was distended. The CBD was explored to remove sandy stones, debris and sticky bile. A temporary T-tube choledochostomy was created and Penrose drains were set in the Morison's pouch.
The patient recovered well after the operation without fever episodes or jaundice. He was discharged on the 14th postoperative days. However, on the 19th day after operation, he suffered from sudden onset of hematemesis and massive fresh blood drainage from the T-tube choledochostomy. Hypovolemic shock developed thereafter. He was sent to emergent department of our institution. Laboratory examination revealed a decreased hemoglobin level of 7.0 g/dL and an increased total bilirubin level of 2.1 mg/dL. Because hemobilia was highly suspected a contrast enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen was arranged emergently, revealing a round and hyperdense lesion abutting the T-tube choledochostomy . The reconstructive CT image further demonstrated a saccular mass protruding from the proper hepatic artery . The angiography disclosed a contrast-filled lesion arising from proper hepatic artery, which suggested a pseudoaneurysm formation . The contrast drained into the T-tube choledochostomy directly , indicating that pseudoaneurysm was the cause of hemobilia in our patient. He underwent emergent selective microcoils embolization to occlude the feeding artery of the pseudoaneurysm and the bleeding ceased thereafter . He recovered uneventfully with normal liver profile after a three-month period of follow up.