A 7-year-old boy was admitted to our hospital on April 2, 2018, with a complaint of paralysis in both lower extremities lasting for 4 days. Physical examination revealed that he could not move his lower extremities or control urination and defecation. His tendon reflex had disappeared completely in the lower extremities. Some enlarged lymph nodes were found in the neck region. The chest coronal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a dumbbell-shaped mass in the thoracic cavity between T3 and T5 that measured up to 5 cm in diameter . Horizontal MRI indicated that the mass extended to the spinal canal and paravertebral region through an enlarged intervertebral foramen. The spinal cord was compressed and obviously displaced . The mass was considered an extradural and paravertebral dumbbell-shaped neurilemmoma. On April 3, 2018, the patient underwent surgery for excision of the lesions using a posterior approach. Under general anesthesia, he was intubated with a double-lumen endotracheal tube and was placed in the right semilateral position. Initially, laminectomy was performed from the lower T3 to the upper T5 by making a vertical linear skin incision from T3-T5. An encapsulated yellowish tumor attached to the dura mater was observed through the left intervertebral foramen between T3 and T4. The mass was connected to the root of the third intercostal nerve, which was ligated and sheared. Subsequently, the chest surgeon induced the collapse of the lung and inserted a thoracoscope through the fourth left intercostal space of the clavicular midline. The mass was observed to protrude from the parietal pleura of the third left intercostal space. Therefore, two thoracic portals were added along the fifth intercostal space of the anterior chest wall. Under the thoracoscope, we separated the mass along with the capsule, carefully confirming the sympathetic nerve. As a result, the mass partially crumbled, but we were able to extract it from the pleural cavity. A chest tube was placed direct under vision, the lung was re-expanded, and the other three portals were closed. The duration of the operation was 3 h.
Histopathological examination of the excised tumor revealed numerous lymphoid follicles with hyperplastic germinal centers. There was massive and prominent infiltration of eosinophils with a few areas that were occupied by eosinophilic microabscesses , which indicates the eosinophilic hyperplastic lymphogranuloma (Kimura’s disease). The results of laboratory examination were obtained after the operation due to the rapid progression of neurologic deficit and showed that the red blood cell count was 4.09 × 1012/L, hemoglobin was 111 g/L, the white blood cell count was 13.77 × 109/L, platelets were 280 × 109/L and the absolute eosinophil count was 5.78 × 109/L, and there was 42% eosinophilia. Serum immunoglobulin E (IgE) was increased to 572 IU/mL (normal < 250). The other results, including blood urea nitrogen (6.83 mmol/L), serum creatinine level (53.2 μmol/L), and urinalysis, were normal. Immunohistological staining was later performed, showing negative staining for CD1a, S-100, and CD34 and positive staining for CD31, Fli and Ki-67. These results confirmed the diagnosis of Kimura’s disease.
The patient, therefore, was started on 40 mg/day prednisone and responded well after 1 week. The eosinophilia and IgE were stabilized with 5 mg of prednisolone. Two weeks later, the patient could move his lower extremities in the bed. One month later, he could walk with his mother’s help. At the 6-month follow-up, the patient was symptom-free and did not demonstrate any sign of recurrence . At the 9-month follow-up, the patient had developed a recurrent mass in the cervical vertebral canal with the tapering of medication. However, the patient refused further treatment, and further information is not available.