The patient was a 39-year-old nulliparous woman who had a history of laparoscopy for bilateral ovarian cystectomy 10 years prior; the cyst wall was intact without spillage. The pathological examination showed that the left mass was serous cystadenoma, and the right mass was benign struma ovarii. She was then followed up with periodic ultrasonic examinations, which showed no evidence of structural disease during the 8-year follow-up. However, a routine ultrasound examination revealed an irregular multilocular cystic-solid mass (measuring 31 × 26 × 24 mm) with heterogeneous echogenicity in the left ovary region approximately 2 years ago.
The patient was admitted to our hospital at the 39th week of pregnancy for elective caesarean section due to a funnel-shaped pelvis. The obstetric condition was stable without pain or vaginal bleeding, and the thyroid function examination in early pregnancy showed no obvious abnormality. During the first trimester, ultrasound re-examination showed that the mass was approximately 39 × 37 × 26 mm with anechoic cyst fluid separated by thick septa, and a patchy irregular hypoechoic area (29 × 11 × 5 mm) between the cervix and the rectum was observed. In addition, a solid hypoechoic area whose diameter was approximately 22 mm with rich blood flow signals could be detected in the Douglas pouch. Since there was not a very strong suspicion of malignancy and the clinical presentation was continuously uneventful, gynaecological experts recommended that surgery should be postponed until delivery, and rigorous monitoring should be performed unless there is a very clear indication, such as torsion or a very strong suspicion of malignancy. In the third trimester, ultrasound examination revealed that there were two papillary projections with smooth contours and moderate vascularization on the internal cyst wall of the left ovarian cyst. The other mass had no significant changes. The serum CA125 value gradually decreased from 124.7 U/mL in the first trimester to 25.91 U/mL in the third trimester, and the CA72-4 value increased from 14.77 U/mL in the second trimester to 21.14 U/mL in the third trimester; the level of human epididymis protein-4 (HE-4) was normal. The thyroid status was unknown during pregnancy since the diagnosis of struma ovarii was not suspected. Close periodical clinical and sonographic evaluations were performed to detect changes in the size and features of the masses.
After the delivery of a live, healthy female newborn weighing 2970 g through caesarean section, the pelvic organs were inspected thoroughly in a clockwise manner. There was no obvious ascites or fluid in the pouch of Douglas. Intraoperative exploration of the upper abdomen, including the liver, stomach, spleen, etc., and the contralateral ovary revealed a healthy appearance without gelatinous cysts. The left ovarian mass was multicystic and oval in shape. It was removed from the abdomen without any spillage of contents, and the cyst wall was smooth without papillary structures and separated by thick fibrous septa. In addition, multiple nodules that presented with smooth surfaces and gelatinous compositions were identified on her right fallopian tube, uterus, urinary bladder, pelvic wall and wall of the sigmoid colon. There were no macroscopically enlarged lymph nodes. Frozen section were then assessed because the extraovarian disseminated nodules were considered malignant . In the pathological report, thyroid follicles of various sizes were observed in the excised tissues, presenting as nodular goitre changes. The operation was successful with resection of the whole visible mass and no lymph nodes. Five days later, permanent pathology reported that the mass of the left ovary consisted of densely packed monotonous thyroid follicles, morphologically mimicking follicular adenoma. The thyroid follicles had mild normal-appearing epithelial morphology and were consistent with struma ovarii . Furthermore, the other part was considered to be the result of disseminated implantation of an ovarian goitre.
The recovery of the patient was uneventful, and the patient was discharged from the hospital 6 days after the operation. Thyroid function tests performed postoperatively showed values within normal limits. It was also recommended that transvaginal ultrasound should be regularly performed to monitor the adnexal mass during the patient’s outpatient follow-up visits.