An 8-year-old boy (weighing 34 kg) was found to be torticollis at age 1. He was diagnosed with osseous torticollis in our hospital, and was scheduled for elective orthopedic surgery.
The boy has tonsil hypertrophy and sleep dyspnea in supine position and was scheduled for tonsillectomy in local hospital 1 year ago. The surgery was cancelled because of failed tracheal intubation. No special birth history was documented. No other dysplasia were reported.
Sinus arrhythmia by wandering pacemaker with sinoatrial node; incomplete right bundle branch block.
Carotid artery and vertebral artery ultrasound: no left common carotid artery was found (suspected with congenital variation).
Atlanto-occipital fusion; congenital skull base depression; atlantoaxial joint dislocation; cervical spine developmental malformations (C2-3 block vertebrae; C6 left appendage hypoplasia; C6-7 invisible cleft); sub tonsillar hernia.
Modified Mallampati test was III ~ IV. The mouth opening degree (less than 3 fingers) and head and neck movement (60-120 degree) were limited. No significant narrowing of tracheal lumen and airway tortuosity were noticed in preoperative radiological findings . The Colorado Pediatric Airway Score (COPUR score) with prediction points was 11 (C, points 1; O, points 2: with limited mouth opening, 20-40 mm; P, points 4: past failed intubation history; U, points 2: partially visible uvula; R, points 2: limited range of cervical motion, 60-120 degree). The glottic view prediction was 3, and the COPUR prediction points of 11 was indicative of “difficult intubation, fiberoptic less traumatic” . No mandible/maxilla deformity or other hypoplasia were noted. Therefore, though with expected intubation difficulty, intubation was attempted under full preparation with difficult airway management tools. An experienced anesthesiologist with two assistant anesthesiologists were in charge of this case.
The patient’s periphery oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 100% breathing room air, in supine position. Dexamethasone was given to prevent postoperative nausea and vomiting, as well as airway edema. After sedated with propofol (with fractioned dose of 80 mg) following preoxygenation, sufficient facemask ventilation was confirmed. The spontaneous breathing was retained to ensure the absent of difficult intubation condition. The patient’s epiglottis was revealed during sedation. However, after administering 10 mg atracurium and 10 μg sufentanyl, the facemask ventilation suddenly became impossible. A reinforced endotracheal tube (I.D. of 6.0 mm) was tried under glidescope but failed. The SpO2 dropped to 60. Direct laryngoscopy with medium sized Macintosh blade was tried again by another attending anesthesiologist after optimizing ventilation maneuvers. A reinforced endotracheal tube with sealing cuff (I.D. of 5.5 mm) was placed successfully. The whole intubation duration was approximately 12 min.
After prone position was made by orthopedic surgeons with continuous cervical traction (Mayfield®, Integra LifeScience. Inc., US), orthopedic surgery was performed, including the exploration anteriorly of the wedged C2 and C3-4 intervertebral disk, the fixation posteriorly of occipital-C4 pedicle with iliac bone graft, and correction of cervical torticollis. The surgical duration was 334 min and the hemodynamic status was stable during the whole procedure. A total of 1700 ml crystalloid solution was infused, with intraoperative blood loss of 200 ml, and autologous blood transfusion of 100 ml washed red blood cells. The boy was transferred to the ICU with continuous sedation and analgesia without extubation.
Extubation was normally performed on post-operative day 1 in fear of prolonged intubation related complications such as ventilator associated pneumonia or airway complication. After positive result of cuff-leak test, ICU doctors postponed the extubation and invited anesthesiologists for consultation the next day. On postoperative day 2, anesthesiologist and ICU doctors performed cuff leak test. The result was still positive. Considering the success of the first intubation, extubation was attempted with preparation of re-intubation. The patient suffocated immediately after extubation despite complete consciousness and with normal blood-gas analysis results. Inspiratory stridor and cyanosis was noted soon after. Dexamethasone was administered to reduce airway edema and other possible intubation related damage. The patient’s heart rate (HR) dropped from 125 bmp to 80 bpm during re-intubation. Epiglottis and laryngeal edema were revealed by video laryngoscope, but the glottis could not be visualized. Tracheal re-intubation finally succeeded 17 min later under propofol sedation.
CT scanning was made on postoperative day 9 which revealed airway edema comparing with preoperative findings . The extended intubation duration and long-term sedation would lead to ventilator associated pneumonia and complicated airway management. After Fiber-optical bronchoscope (FOB) inspection showing alleviated airway edema on postoperative day 9, and the potential existence of deep cervical fascial space from CT imaging, a proposal of attempted extubation in the operating room and tracheotomy as the alternative plan was made by multidisciplinary consultation including orthopedics, anesthesiologists, otolaryngologists, and ICU physicians. On postoperative day 10 in the operating room, the patient was extubated after fully suction of the sputum and sufficient oxygenation. However, inspiratory dyspnea soon ensued. The patient was put in left lateral head-up position with facemask oxygenation and placement of oropharyngeal airway device. Dyspnea was not alleviated and cyanosis appeared 5 min after extubation. SpO2 dropped to 60% with HR of 70 bmp. Considering the existence of upper airway obstruction, re-intubation was performed immediately using glidescopy under propofol sedation. Tracheotomy was successfully performed under general anaesthesia with orthopedists’ assistance with better positioning the head and neck. The patient returned to ICU with vital signs stable and was weaning from mechanical ventilator the next day. Five days after tracheotomy, CT examination showed the still existence of the upper airway edema . Ten days later, the patient was transferred to the orthopedic ward.
One month after the first operation, the tracheostomy tube was blocked and no discomfort was complaint. Four days later, the tracheostomy casing was removed. The boy was discharged from hospital 3 days later. Three year follow-up revealed satisfactory orthopedic results.