A 9-year-old white boy (weight 32 kg), known to have multiple allergies, asthma, and a history of anaphylaxis to dairy products and nuts, developed generalized body rash, dyspnea, and confusion after inadvertently ingesting a school meal containing a dairy product. He was promptly given 300 μg intramuscular adrenaline via a fixed-dose autoinjector, as well as 600 μg of salbutamol via metered-dose inhaler (six puffs) by his teacher in the community.
Upon ambulance arrival, he was drowsy, cyanosed, and had marked generalized body swelling. Observations suggested a shocked state: heart rate 120 beats/minute, respiratory rate 40 breaths/minute, air oxygen saturation 85 to 90%, loud respiratory wheeze, use of accessory muscles, and impalpable peripheral pulses. Further adrenaline was administered 300 μg intramuscularly without significant improvement, and this was followed by a bolus of 25 μg adrenaline administered intravenously. Twenty minutes into the event, on the presumption of refractory anaphylactic shock, an intravenous adrenaline infusion was commenced at 10 μg per minute. His blood pressure was not measured during the event or on the journey to the hospital.
In our emergency department, he was extremely agitated with repeated vomiting, but only had minimal respiratory distress. Oxygen saturation was difficult to record due to poor peripheral perfusion and clamminess, despite a blood pressure of 207/187 mmHg and heart rate of 160 beats/minute. Adrenaline toxicity was suspected and the adrenaline infusion was immediately ceased. He also received two separate doses of 2 mg intravenously administered ondansetron for the vomiting with little effect. Serial 12-lead electrocardiograms showed sinus tachycardia without other changes, and a normal chest X-ray excluded other causes.
Within 30 minutes his blood pressure returned to normal and he developed further respiratory symptoms (wheeze and dyspnea). The rapid improvement in his blood pressure, agitation, and vomiting following cessation of the adrenaline infusion supported the diagnosis of adrenaline overdose. In view of his asthma, he was given intravenously administered hydrocortisone and rescue nebulizers (salbutamol and ipratropium) to control his respiratory symptoms. He was admitted to our hospital, observed for 24 hours and discharged home with no further sequelae.