A 5-year-old female patient presented with a 2-year history of lower thoracic pain for evaluation of progressively worsening symptoms in 1997. She had been living in Robat-Karim, a rural area of Tehran, Iran. She had also been experiencing difficulty in walking and intermittent low-grade fever for 8 months. In the meantime, the patient had shown poor clinical response to analgesic drugs. Despite the lack of any reliable history of prior contact with tuberculosis, her grandfather had died from an undetermined lung disease with a clinical history of chronic productive cough.
On physical examination, the patient was febrile with a hunched posture, and her back pain aggravated with any applied movement. There was also a warm, soft-tissue swelling on her frontal scalp measuring about 2 cm in diameter with no accompanying erythema. The growth indices and neurologic evaluation were normal. The laboratory tests revealed leukocytosis (white blood cell count, 11,000/cm3) with a predominance of lymphocytes (55%). Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was elevated (122 mm/h). Other laboratory test results were negative, including thyroid-function, Wright, Coomb’s Wright, and 2-mercaptoethanol tests.
On lateral thoracic and lumbar radiographs, near-complete anterior wedging of the T7 vertebral body was evident along with partial collapse of the L2 vertebral body .
Thoracolumbar magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed complete anterior wedging of the T7 vertebral body. Prevertebral soft tissue and epidural changes extended from T5 to T8 levels. MR images also showed partial loss of height in the L2 vertebral body.
Bone radiographs showed small, scattered lytic lesions with an indistinct margin in the frontal bone, right scapula, left iliac, and pubic bones of both the right and left sides . On brain computed tomography (CT), there were multiple lytic lesions on the frontal bone with a distinctive margin. The brain parenchyma was intact.
On the chest CT scan, the lung parenchyma and mediastinum appeared normal. Whole-body bone scintigraphy revealed increased tracer uptake in the skull, right scapula, mid-thoracic vertebrae, and left hemipelvic and right pubic bones.
With respect to the clinical and radiological features, the patient was initially diagnosed as having Langerhans cell histiocytosis, but histopathologic examination of the scalp and skull lesions revealed multiple granulomas of varying sizes containing caseous necrosis along with epithelioid and giant Langerhans cells. The findings were indicative of chronic granulomatous inflammation and compatible with tuberculosis . The definite diagnosis of tuberculosis was confirmed with a polymerase chain reaction of the specimen by detecting the Mycobacterium tuberculosis genome.
The patient underwent 8 months of anti-tuberculous treatment, including isoniazid, pyrazinamide, and rifampin. An excellent outcome was obtained in a short period with a mild kyphotic deformity that was persistent at the long course of follow-up (as long as 15 years) .