A 2-year-old male with no significant past medical history presented to the ED for cough, congestion, rhinorrhea, and intermittent fever for 3-day duration. The patient had no recent travel, was fully immunized, and was on no medications. His parents report multiple loose, brown, non-bloody episodes of diarrhea for the past 1 day with associated decreased oral intake. Other associated symptoms included non-specific bilateral flank pain, abdominal pain, and body aches. After multiple episodes of vomiting throughout the night and discovery of a temperature of 100.3 °F at home, the family brought the patient to the ED. Vitals on arrival were as follows: 98.2 °F (ibuprofen noted to be given prior to arrival), heart rate 90 beats/min, respiratory rate 25 breaths/min, and an oxygen saturation of 100% on room air. Physical exam revealed a well-appearing male in no acute distress. His nose exhibited clear rhinorrhea. Examination of the posterior pharynx revealed mild erythema with a clear post-nasal drip. His abdominal exam revealed diffuse non-specific tenderness, however, without distention or any surgical signs. Chest radiography revealed bilateral perihilar peribronchial cuffing. A point of care glucose was 194. Urinalysis revealed a specific gravity of 1.008, pH 6.5, ketones 40 mg/dL, 11–24 white blood cells/hpf, +nitrites, 2+ leukocyte esterase, and 2+ bacteria. Influenza and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) detection by PCR was negative. He received intravenous fluids, was able to tolerate liquids/food in the ED, and was discharged home on trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (Septra) for a urinary tract infection.
Over the next few days, the family noted increasing abdominal pain and localized right flank pain with associated chills and nausea. Six days after his initial ED visit, the family reported he appeared to be shaking and had a decreased activity level, prompting a second visit to the ED. Vitals on arrival were as follows: 102.9 °F, heart rate 110 beats/min, respiratory rate 28 breaths/min, and an oxygen saturation of 100% on room air. On physical exam, his extremities felt cold without cyanosis, however, with a capillary refill of 3–5 s. He had voluntary guarding to the right upper and lower quadrants. His right flank exhibited costovertebral angle tenderness. His remaining physical exam including examination of his skin and genitourinary region was unremarkable. Code sepsis was activated based on vitals and physical exam. A total of 20 cc/kg fluid resuscitation was initiated, and a blood culture was drawn. Laboratory evaluation was notable for a white blood cell count (WBC) of 22.5 (5–15 bil/L), lactic acid of 2.3 (0.5–2.2 mmol/L), sodium of 131 (138–145 mmol/L), potassium 3.3 (3.5–5.2 mmol/L), chloride 92 (98–110 mmol/L), carbon dioxide 22 (20–29 mmol/L), glucose of 112 (60–99 mg/dL), C-reactive protein (CRP) of 23.9 (0.0–0.8 mg/dL), and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 79 (0–15 mm/h). All remaining laboratory evaluation was unremarkable, including a hepatic function panel. Abdominal radiography was also negative for the acute process.
An ultrasound of the appendix was performed with unsuccessful visualization of the appendix. Given his positive urinalysis and clinical deterioration, suspicion arose for possible acute pyelonephritis, for which a complete ultrasound of the abdomen was done , revealing a hypoechoic avascular area within the right upper quadrant. This complex fluid collection appeared to have an intimate relationship with the liver parenchyma. Subsequent CT of the abdomen/pelvis with intravenous contrast revealed a retrocecal dilated appendix coursing cranially with adjacent inflammatory changes. Additionally, a focus of air and fluid was seen within the posterior right hepatic lobe measuring 9.0 × 5.3 × 6.3 cm. These findings were suggestive of an intrahepatic abscess, possibly the result of acute appendicitis. The patient was started on intravenous piperacillin/tazobactam (100 mg/kg/dose q8h) for both a urinary tract infection and acute appendicitis with development of a hepatic abscess. He was transferred to a tertiary care facility with pediatric general surgery capabilities.
On day 2, the urine culture that was obtained by catheterization grew 10,000–50,000 CFU/mL of Escherichia coli. In addition, he underwent ultrasound-guided placement of a 10 French pigtail catheter into the intrahepatic abscess with resulting 100 mL of purulent drainage removed. By day 3, the patient was clinically improving with resolution of fever and nausea. Gram stain of the abscess fluid revealed Gram-positive cocci/Gram-positive bacilli consistent with a polymicrobial infection. Deep wound culture grew Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Anaerobic culture grew Bacteroides fragilis and Peptostreptococcus with susceptibilities to piperacillin/tazobactam. A PICC line was placed for outpatient antibiotic infusions. His percutaneous drain was removed on day 7 and repeat imaging demonstrated resolution of the intrahepatic abscess. He was discharged on day 8 with outpatient pediatric infectious disease and general surgery follow-up and continued antibiotic therapy for 4 weeks with weekly outpatient laboratory evaluation. After completion of his antibiotic course, the patient returned for an elective laparoscopic appendectomy. At his most recent post-operative visit, the patient is doing well.