Written informed consent was obtained for publication of this report.
A 13-year-old male patient was scheduled for elective insertion of a continuous
ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD) catheter. The admission height and weight were
135 cm and 31 kg, respectively. The patient was born at 40 weeks by normal vaginal
delivery and was admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit for 10 days because of
sepsis. MD was diagnosed at 12 months of age and then JS was diagnosed during
outpatient observation. The patient started hemodialysis due to end-stage renal
disease at the age of 8 years and was hospitalized at age 10 years with intracranial
hemorrhage due to high blood pressure. The patient was admitted at age 11 years for
uncontrolled hypertension and a change in the permanent catheter, but
hyperkalemia-induced cardiac arrest occurred. The patient returned to spontaneous
circulation after 1 h of cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) and was transferred to
the intensive care unit (ICU) to receive post-CPR care for 2 weeks. Subsequently,
the patient was hospitalized and discharged repeatedly due to heart, lung, and
kidney problems. He underwent regular hemodialysis; however, hemoglobin level and
blood pressure continued to fall and could not be controlled. Therefore, the patient
was scheduled to switch to peritoneal dialysis.
In terms of mental status, the patient was stuporous during pre-anesthetic assessment
(Glasgow coma scale [GCS] score 11). He was bed-ridden, with a
percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tube that was inserted in the surgical ICU
(SICU). Hypotension was managed by infusion of norepinephrine (0.07–0.19
µg/kg/min). His mean blood pressure (MBP) and his heart rate (HR) were
controlled at 90–106 mmHg and 95–107 beats/min, respectively, and
checked every 30 min. His breathing was shallow; however, 100% oxygen saturation was
maintained on room air. We reviewed all of the records, including previous hospital
charts, but the patient had never undergone surgery, and we found no accurate
information about his airway. The patient’s jaw was small, his mouth was
slightly protruding, and he had a short neck with reduced cervical mobility. His
airway could not be evaluated properly due to the poor opening of his mouth because
of the rigidity of his jaw; thus, we decided to perform a reassessment at the time
of anesthesia induction on the day of surgery. Three anesthesiologists decided to
participate in induction because this was a rare case that we had not previously
experienced in our hospital. We decided to have the following instruments in place
for airway management: oral airway (size 1 and 2), stylets, a Macintosh direct
laryngoscope (curved blade sizes 2 and 3), a video-laryngoscope (McGrath, Aircraft
Medical, UK and C-MAC, Karl Storz, Germany), a fiberoptic bronchoscope (Olympus
Optical, Japan), and a supraglottic airway device (SAD; I-gel, Intersurgical Ltd.,
UK). We selected an endotracheal tube (ETT) according to age based on height and
weight and prepared 5.0- and 5.5-mm tubes with cuffs.
Blood sugar before leaving for the operating room was 132 mg/dl. In the operating
room, routine standard monitors were attached (noninvasive blood pressure
[NIBP], electrocardiography, pulse oximetry); the initial NIBP and
HR were 120/90 mmHg and 105 beats/min, respectively, with a norepinephrine infusion
of 0.07 µg/kg/min. Invasive blood pressure monitoring was not performed and
the surgery time was expected to be short; thus, the operation proceeded after
preparing for left radial artery cannulation, if necessary. The degree of
neuromuscular blockade, assessed using train-of-four (TOF) stimulation, was
monitored using an IntelliVue NMT monitor (Philips, the Netherlands), and bispectral
index (BIS) monitoring (Covidien, USA) was performed to assess the depth of
anesthesia. The initial BIS was 71. Anesthesia was started with propofol (1 mg/kg),
remifentanil (0.05 µg/kg/min), and rocuronium (0.4 mg/kg) following
preoxygenation. Intravenous propofol and remifentanil infusions were started at
77–102 µg/kg/min and 0.05–0.1 µg/kg/min,
respectively, to maintain anesthesia (BIS 40–60). The patient’s jaw
was small; however, his palate was not malformed, his tongue did not protrude, and
mask ventilation was well maintained. A third-year anesthesiology resident tried to
insert an I-gel of size 2.5, which was selected according to the patient’s
weight. The resident began to insert the I-gel along the hard palate with one hand
pressing down on the patient’s chin. Resistance was felt while inserting the
I-gel, thus he gently pushed the I-gel using the deep rotation method and connected
the I-gel to the ventilator. However, air continued to leak, and a sufficient tidal
volume was not attained. The attending anesthesiologist determined that the I-gel
did not fit properly, and removed and inserted it again using the jaw thrust method
with the help of another attending anesthesiologist. Nevertheless, air continued to
leak, and the I-gel was removed, as it had become malpositioned. The trachea was
secured with a 5.0-mm ETT without difficulty using a McGrath (blade size 2) by the
attending anesthesiologist, and the Cormack-Lehane grade was 1. A pilot balloon was
inflated with room air to a cuff pressure of 18 cmH2O as measured by a
manometer (VBM, Germany). Lung sounds had decreased on the left side and coarse
breath sounds were auscultated over both lower lung fields. The ETT was fixed at 15
cm from the lower incisor teeth. Mechanical ventilation was performed with a 50:50
air/oxygen mixture, a tidal volume of 6–8 ml/kg, a respiratory rate of
16–18 breaths/min, a maximum peak airway pressure of 11–14
cmH2O, and an inspiratory/expiratory time ratio of 1:2. End-tidal
carbon dioxide and oxygen saturation were maintained at 35–39 mmHg and 100%
during the surgery, respectively. The operation lasted 45 min, and the
patient’s hemodynamics were stable during the procedure. The MBP and HR were
controlled at 73–103 mmHg and 105–130 beats/min, respectively, with
a norepinephrine (0.03–0.07 µg/kg/min) infusion. The TOF count was
maintained at 1–2 during surgery, and there was no additional injection of
muscle relaxants. No additional opioids were used other than remifentanil. At the
end of the operation, the patient’s spontaneous breathing returned and the
BIS and TOF ratio were 73 and 76%, respectively; however, the respiration rate was
< 10 times/min. The pediatrician wanted to observe the patient’s
breathing pattern more carefully; thus, after injecting 3 mg midazolam, the patient
was transferred to the SICU with the ETT. In the SICU, the patient’s mental
state was stuporous (GCS score 6), and a ventilator was applied with the following
settings: synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation mode with a
FiO2 of 0.25, tidal volume of 6 ml/kg, respiratory rate of 20
breaths/min, and pressure support of 13 cmH2O. The MBP and HR were
maintained at 105–111 mmHg and 124–137 beats/min, respectively, with
a norepinephrine (0.07 µg/kg/min) infusion. The trachea was extubated at 1
hour after the patient arrived in the ICU, and no irregular respiratory patterns
were observed. The patient exhibited 100% oxygen saturation with a 2-L oxygen flow
applied by nasal cannula. According to the venous blood gas analysis, the venous pH
was 7.30, PCO2 53 mmHg, PO2 47 mmHg, base excess 0.3 mmol/L,
SO2 78%, glucose 130 mg/L, and lactate 0.3 mmol/L.