A 29-year-old young woman, who was 4 months later the end of her first pregnancy and during lactation, complained of a persistent mild pain in her right upper quadrant abdomen for 3 days. No fever, jaundice and weight loss. She had history of cholecystolithiasis, denied history of biliary colics and acute pancreatitis. She was Hepatitis B virus carrier, denied hypertension/pregnancy hypertension and history of diabetes, No surgery and injury history. No smoking and history of alcohol and drug use. Her menarche age was 13 years old, last menstrual period (LMP): 2015.07.05. Her marriage age was 28 years old. Natural birth of her first child. She denied the history of hypertension, diabetes, and tumors.
Her Body Mass Index (BMI) was 26.3 (height, 163 cm; weight, 70 kg), but her waist circumference was not obtained. Physical examinations suspected positive Murphy sign. Laboratory examinations results showed white blood cell count and amylase was normal. Tumor makers of carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (CA199), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) were within the normal limits.
Initially, she was arranged to perform an upper abdominal ultrasound (US) examination. Results demonstrated a hypoechoic mass with irregular shaped, ill-defined and no blood signals in the retroperitoneal space with uncertain origin , and some stones with acoustic shadowing in mild thickened wall gall bladder. Then, the CT scans with contrast enhancement was performed to identify the etiology of this mass detected on US examination. CT reports suggested a cystic SPN of pancreatic head or a retroperitoneal mass with bleeding. Finally, in order to further investigate the etiology of mass, she was recommended to perform MRI with contrast enhancement and Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP).
CT (SIEMENS, Sensation, 64-rows) and MR (Philips Medical systems, Achieva, 1.5 T) images showed a lobulated, partly ill-defined cystic lesion located in the pancreatic head. The maximum cross-sectional size of lesion was 3.9 cm and 5.2 cm, the maximum cross diameter of three dimensions of lesion was 5.7 cm. The cystic wall and septa was thin, even thickness, about 1.5 mm. Spotted calcification within cystic wall was found on non-contrast CT images. The lesion was demonstrated as predominantly homogeneous hyperattenuation on CT (CT value = 60HU) and homogeneous high signal without decreased signal on fat suppression sequence on T1WI, and slightly high signal compared to normal pancreas on T2WI, and hypo-intense signal on DWI (b = 1000). After contrast administration, no solid component of lesion was detected, and the cystic wall and septa of lesion was showed a gradually enhancement from mild to moderate degree over time both on CT and MR images. Lesion was adjacent to the celiac axis, splenic artery, and the portal vein. Enlarged lymph nodes in the peripheral of the lesion and the retroperitoneal space were not found. Thickened wall gall bladder with some stones but without enlargement and exudation was seen. No communication between lesion and the main duct was found on MRCP images and the main pancreatic duct and common bile duct were not dilated .
She was arranged a surgery after 7 days of her admission into hospital. Intraoperative findings showed the tumor was ill-defined in head of pancreas and protruded from pancreantic head to the retroperitoneum predominantly. The tumor was adhesion with the adjacent splenic artery. Partial pancreatectomy for this pancreatic head tumor and lymphadenectomy, cholecystectomy, splenic artery resection were finally performed.
The lesion was pathologically confirmed as a branch type IPMN after surgical resection. Macroscopic findings of resected tumor showed that it was a cystic mass with papillary projections into the duct lumen, smooth inner lining, ill-defined, filled with dark brown liquid and some mucoid material. Microscopic findings demonstrated the inner of cystic mass most are composed of papillae lined by tall columnar mucin-producing epithelial cells, occasional goblet-type cells. The columnar epithelial cells had granular eosinophilic cytoplasm and mild degree of architectural/cytologic atypia. Some cystic wall mucosal epithelium was absent. Hemorrhage, slit-like cholesterol clefts and focal calcification were seen. The interstitium showed more acute and chronic inflammatory cells infiltration and fibrinoid exudation . Immunohistochemical analysis showed forinhibin-a (−), CK19 (+), CA199 (+), Ki67 (10%+).
She had a complication of pancreatic leakage after surgery, and was successfully discharged after treatments. The placement of peritoneal drainage pipe was not removed. One month latter, because of the obstrution of peritoneal drainage pipe, pancreatic leakage was recurrent and aslo successfully dismissed after a period of hospitalization. According to her follow-up imaging studies and her normal level of tumor makers, she was free from recurrence for 2 years after surgery.