We present the case of a 7-year-old Caucasian girl, from the second gestation and parturition, a daughter of healthy unrelated parents. The child was born in a good general condition, with birth weight of 3780 g and 51-cm body length. Gestational, perinatal and family histories were unremarkable.
At the age of 2 years, the patient has been hospitalized for the first time in our clinic due to anemia, leucopenia, hepatosplenomegaly and more than a 6-month history of recurrent lymphadenopathy. Moreover, the girl had a history of a non-specific whole-body intermittent skin rash and recurrent fever (<39 °C), both starting at 4 months of age and recurring at irregular intervals. The presence of skin lesions was independent of the fever. Erythematous maculo-micropapular lesions appeared in variable locations and persisted up to several weeks. Moreover, the patient periodically suffered from arthralgia with inability to move, accompanying swelling and increased warmth of affected joints.
Physical examination revealed elevated body temperature (up to 38 °C), skin pallor, livedo reticularis, eczematous dermatitis, multiple enlarged peripheral lymph nodes, persistent front fontanelle (2 cm × 3 cm), systolic murmur (3/6 in Levine scale) and hepatosplenomegaly. Moreover, the patient presented with pruritic erythematous plaques, macules and linear scratch-like rash on the face, chest, abdomen and limbs .
A few potential diagnoses were considered on the differential, among them an infection, metabolic or autoimmune disease, proliferative processes and immunodeficiency syndrome. Extensive laboratory workup revealed leukopenia with lymphopenia (WBC = 2.41 × 109/l; LYMPH = 0.74 × 109/l), without accompanying disorders of lymphocyte subpopulations, microcytic anemia (HB = 8.2 g/dl; MCV = 59.4 fl), anisocytosis and anisochromia on manual blood smear, slightly elevated level of C-reactive protein (9.28 mg/l), lowered concentration of iron without other iron irregularities, deficiency of class M and G3 immunoglobulins, and vitamin D3 deficiency. Abdominal ultrasound scan (USS) documented enlargement of the liver (30 mm below the right costal arch) and spleen (length 118 mm, with age-specific reference range up to 95 mm), with normal echogenicity of both organs. Peripheral lymph node USS revealed presence of suspicious (hypoechogenic, up to 20 mm in diameter, without a marked sinus) supraclavicular, infraclavicular and axillary lymph nodes. Histopathological examination of one of the left supraclavicular lymph nodes showed reactive changes with neutrophilic infiltration. Examination of skin biopsy specimen demonstrated presence of multiple granulomas composed of giant cells and epithelial cells at the border of the skin and subcutaneous tissue, raising a suspicion of sarcoidosis or erythema annulare. However, further diagnostic process was interrupted since the patient and her family went abroad for a few years. Medical documentation from this period, provided by a foreign clinic, is incomplete. Apparently, the patient was diagnosed with a sporadic sarcoidosis, and treated with methotrexate and prednisone. However, the therapy did not produce a satisfactory outcome; furthermore, during therapy the patient developed anterior uveitis and hydrocephalus that required shunting.
Four years later, the patient was readmitted to our clinic. Her general condition has deteriorated, her mobility was decreased, and she presented with severe symmetrical knee and ankle arthritis without erosive and destructive changes in the joints. Tenosynovitis and synovitis were excluded. While the severity of eczematous dermatitis decreased, multiple subcutaneous nodules emerged on both upper and lower limbs, as well as on the torso; the skin lesions responded well to escalation of glucocorticoid dose. The intervals with normal body temperature were shorter than before, and any attempt to reduce the glucocorticoid dose resulted in recurrence of the fever. Furthermore, the patient presented with recurrent diarrhea and concomitant abdominal pain. Other abnormalities found on physical examination included Cushinoid physique, left eye amblyopia persisted after the episode of uveitis, neurological deficits, non-active hydrocephalus, non-neuromuscular weakness in the upper and lower limbs, short stature (<3 pc) and genu valgum . While neurological and psychomotor development of the patient was normal before she reached 2 years of age, a plethora of neurological disorders emerged when she stayed abroad, following manifestation of hydrocephalus. Laboratory workup documented further progression of anemia, leukopenia and lymphopenia, extremely low concentration of main class immunoglobulins, inability to produce specific antibodies, and elevated percentage of CD3 + TCRγδ + CD4-CD8- cells. Also a slight although progressive increase in inflammatory marker levels was demonstrated. Due to presence of gastrointestinal disorders, the patient was subjected to endoscopic examination which, however, revealed no abnormalities. The evidence from brain MRI suggested the presence of chronic meningoencephalitis.
The results of the abovementioned tests raised a suspicion of common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) or an autoinflammatory syndrome with secondary immunodeficiency resulting from prolonged methotrexate and corticosteroid therapy.
As the symptoms were not controlled adequately with previous treatments, cyclosporine (3 mg/kg/day) and intravenous human immunoglobulins at a supplementation dose (0.4 g/kg/month) were added to the therapeutic protocol. Systemic corticosteroid therapy was continued with the intention to gradually taper down the dose. Modification of therapeutic protocol resulted in a partial response: reduction of body temperature, improvement of mobility, attenuation of arthralgia and neurological symptoms, and nearly complete regression of the changes found previously on brain MRI. However, an evident steroid dependence was observed, as each attempt to taper down the dose resulted in the recurrence of the symptoms. Furthermore, the features of iatrogenic Cushing’s syndrome exacerbated. Taken all together, this clinical presentation suggested that biological treatment should be taken into consideration.
Owing ambiguous clinical presentation and high likelihood of a primary immunodeficiency syndrome, the patient was qualified for molecular testing with next-generation sequencing (NGS) method. The tests identified three heterozygous anomalies in NOD2 gene: two substitutions, including one within the 8th intron (2798 + 158C > T; 802C > T;), and one insertion (3016_3017insC). 802C > T is a proline to serine substitution in locus 268. Insertion of cytosine (3016_3017insC) between nucleotide 3016 and 3017 of NOD2 gene results in a frameshift change causing premature termination of the protein chain (Leu1007ProfsTer2). Based on the abovementioned findings, the patient was diagnosed with NOD2-associated autoinflammatory disease, which justified switching her to a biological treatment. Patient’s parents decided to continue the treatment in a clinic abroad, whereby adalimumab therapy was implemented. Corticosteroids have not been completely discontinued, but tapered down to 1 mg/m2/day, which resulted in a gradual regression of iatrogenic Cushing syndrome. Patient’s quality of life improved, she began attending school, but still needs a psychological support and physiotherapy. Also, immunoglobulin supplementation is continued at 4-week intervals. Finally, genetic counseling was recommended to the patient’s parents. Both parents tested negatively for mutations in NOD2 gene.