A 57 year old previously well Sinhalese Sri Lankan female who was referred to the Diabetic clinic in a Teaching Hospital, had a past history of intermittent epigastric discomfort for the past nine years which was initially attributed to and treated for upper gastrointestinal symptoms. The abdominal pain was intermittent, burning in nature and radiated to the back, associated with steatorrhea and subjective weight loss. She had no past history of consumption of alcohol or cassava, gall stone disease or hepatitis, and no family history of pancreatic disease or diabetes mellitus.
Her initial blood sugar values were in normal range, but on routine follow up she was detected with poor glycemic control with an elevated fasting plasma sugar level of 128mgdl-1 and HbA1c of 14.6% and, was started on oral hypoglycemics. Later she was changed on to biphasic insulin four years ago due to poor glycemic control, and her current insulin regimen is 10U mane and 5U vesper. Interestingly she does not have a history of clinical presentation similar to ketoacidiosis even with poor glycemic control. She has no osmotic symptoms, and no clinical evidence of macrovascular or microvascular complications of diabetes, though she has not had any nephrology or ophthalmology referral so far. Until now she was managed for chronic pancreatitis medically by 30,000 IU of pancreatic enzyme supplements daily, along with other micronutrients, and surgically by annual Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangio Pancreatography (ERCP) and stenting for which she has a good response to pain.
On examination she was emaciated, with a Body Mass Index (BMI) of 18.1kgm-2, mildly pale, not icteric, no peripheral stigmata of chronic liver disease, and no features of hemochromatosis.
On X-ray abdomen the pancreas was diffusely calcified, involving the head, body and tail, and changes similar to chronic pancreatitis [Figures and ]. Ultrasonography (USS) and Computed Tomography (CT) scanning of the abdomen showed pancreatic atrophy and the typical “Bag of stones” appearance.
Full Blood count revealed hypochromic microcytic anaemia with a Haemoglobin of 11.5 g/dl, and iron deficiency anaemia was confirmed by iron studies with a Transferrin saturation of 13% (20-50%). Alkaline Phosphate was marginally elevated (218 IU/l), and serum protein was low. Thyroid Function tests were normal with a Thyroid Stimulatimg Hormone (TSH) of 3.53micIU/ml. Lipid profile showed low levels. Urinalysis showed marginal microalbuminuria with a urine albumin:creatinine ratio of 30.39.
Carbohydrate Antigen (CA19-9) was 13U/ml. C-Peptide level was 0.5 nmol/l (normal 0.5- 1.15). Based on these findings, the diagnosis of FCDP was made. Treatment was based on glycaemic control, management of pain, exocrine and endocrine functions of the pancreas. On follow up the patient showed clinical improvement with a BMI of 19.7kgm-2, good glycaemic control, and is currently free of pain.