A 78-year-old Caucasian woman presented with a complaint of a swelling in her right mandibular molar teeth area that was painful at mastication. The swelling had arisen 4 months previously and had grown quickly. On extraoral examination she presented a right facial swelling and the skin of her face was healthy. Her regional lymph nodes were not palpable. On intraoral examination she showed poor oral hygiene. A 45×30×20mm sessile, lobular, soft tissue mass was evident in her right posterior mandibular gingiva . The mucosal covering of the lesion looked rosy-purple with a focal area of ulceration. The lesion was painful and bleeding on palpation with a parenchymatous consistency. At orthopantomography two premolar residual roots were observed in the area of the lesion with no other significant findings.
A 30-year-old Caucasian man presented with a complaint of a swelling in his left hard palate region which had arisen approximately 2 months previously after contact with hot food. The lesion was not painful but was responsible for discomfort on swallowing and phonation. On extraoral examination facial skin lesions or swellings were not highlighted and his regional lymph nodes were not palpable. An intraoral examination showed a sessile and detected lesion of hard palate in correspondence with left maxillary lateral incisor, left maxillary canine and left maxillary first premolar. The lesion was characterized by a diameter of 10mm and the mucosa which covered it looked eutrophic . The lesion was not painful on palpation and it had a hard consistency. He showed good level of oral hygiene. The adjacent teeth did not have carious or periodontal lesions and they responded positively to the vitality test. At orthopantomography no signs of pathology were found.
In both cases we decided to proceed with a surgical approach characterized by complete excision of lesions and application of L-PRF membranes in order to improve and accelerate tissue healing.
Prior antibiotic therapy with amoxicillin clavulanate (2g 1 hour before operation) infiltrative anesthesia (mepivacaine 30mg/mL and epinephrine 0.01mg/mL) was performed. Full thickness incisions were realized by Bard-Parker blades number 15 and they included at least 2 mm of healthy tissue. The lesions strongly adhered to the floor below. They were lifted by Prichard’s periosteal spatulas and surgical tweezers . At the same time blood samples (40cc per patient) were collected in test tubes without anticoagulant to obtain the L-PRF. L-PRF protocol is realized with the Intra-Spin L-PRF which provides blood centrifugation at 2700 revolutions per minute (rpm) for 12 minutes. Centrifugation determines the formation of the clot and the activation of the growth factors. After centrifugation L-PRF clots were collected together with some red blood cells from the test tubes using sterile scissors. L-PRF clots were compressed between two sterile gauzes to obtain manageable membranes useful to cover the wounds. The L-PRF membranes were stabilized with horizontal mattress and single sutures in Vicryl 3/0 removed after 7 days. After the surgery, the patients were encouraged to take, in case of pain, acetaminophen (1g/8 hours) or ibuprofen (600mg/8 hours) and a collutory with chlorhexidine 0.20% was prescribed for 7 days. Tissue healing was clinically evaluated after 1, 3, 7, 14 and 30 postoperative days . Healing was quick and without dehiscences. Therefore, complete excision of the lesion was performed and the entire specimen submitted for histopathological examination . Histological reports highlighted giant-cell epulis for the first case and fibro-osseous epulis for the second case. No recurrences were observed after 2 years of semi-annual follow up .