A 35-year-old female who was training for a downhill running race was running at high-speed down a hill when she tripped over a log of wood and fell forward. She subsequently complained of severe pain in her right hip and was unable to mobilize. When brought to the local hospital, plain radiograph showed a right posterior hip dislocation associated with a femoral head fracture . Manipulation and reduction (M and R) were attempted, approximately within 6 h to injury, to relocate the right hip and subsequent post M and R radiographs showed iatrogenic fracture of the femoral neck . She was subsequently transferred to our center for further care. On arrival, it was 48 h from the time of her injury. An urgent computed tomographic scan was done which showed a fracture-dislocation of the right hip . She underwent an open surgical dislocation of the hip and internal fixation of the femoral head that same day.
As per a standard Ganz’s osteotomy , with the patient placed in a lateral position and through Hardinge approach, we performed a trochanteric osteotomy flipping the osteotomized trochanteric fragment anteriorly. Ganz’s osteotomy was preferred as it allowed for full exposure of the femoral head conferring advantages in fracture reduction and compared to the anterior and posterior approach had the lowest risk of avascular necrosis . This approach allowed for Z-shaped anterosuperior capsulotomy to dislocate the femoral head for visualization and fixation of the fracture. The fracture line ran inferior to the fovea separating a main superior and grossly comminuted inferior fragment ( and ). The largest femoral head fragment was fixed to the femoral neck with two 6.5mm Depuy Synthes (Depuy Synthes, Warsaw, IN) headless compression screws and the remaining femoral head fragments were reconstructed using4.5mm headless compression screws. The femoral head was then reduced within the acetabulum and the trochanteric flip osteotomy was fixed usingheadless and cortical screws .
Post-operative X-rays of the hip demonstrated good reduction of the femoral head and neck fracture. Rehabilitation was started immediately after surgery. She was kept on non-weight-bearing of the operated limb for 6 weeks with gradual increase in weight-bearing thereafter with eventual full weight-bearing status at 3 months post-surgery.
Four months after surgery, the patient complained of persistent right hip pain with ambulation and was unable to wean off her crutches. Plain radiographs showed avascular necrosis of the femoral head with progressive shrink and collapse , resulting in prominent compression screws abutting against the acetabulum. Given the clinical picture, we counseled the patient for the removal of implants and conversion to the right total hip arthroplasty .The patient underwent surgery uneventfully. Rehabilitation was started immediately in the post-operative period. At 12 months following surgery, plain radiographs were satisfactory and the patient could ambulate freely without pain.
Informed consent was obtained from the patient for this case write up.