We report the case of an 80 years-old man who presented to the Department of Endocrinology-Diabetology and Nutrition in 2020 with epigastric pain, associated with postprandial vomiting, and important weight loss. The patient also reported Menard triad approximately 2 months before admission. The patient had no previous medical history. The patient also presented hypertensive peaks and was on Amlodipine medication in the last 2 months. Clinical examination did not reveal any significant abnormality. Biochemical parameters revealed diabetes mellitus, probably secondary to the PGL, that required insulin treatment.
Abdominal sonography and ultrasound endoscopy revealed a heterogeneous hyperechoic mass attached to the descending portion of the duodenum and aorta. The CT scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis showed a right retroperitoneal para-aortic process with regular and well-defined borders, rising early and heterogeneously after contrast injection, measuring 72 × 57 mm and extending over 69 mm. It represses and laminates the IVC, which remains permeable . The adrenal glands were normal.
Urinary catecholamine levels were significantly elevated; Metanephrine (MN) at 59,13 μmol/24 h (normal value (NV)):<2,5 μmol/24 h, 23× the upper normal limit, Liquid Chromatography coupled to tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and normetanephrine (NMN) at 46 μmol/24 h (NV: <1,5 μmol/24 h, 30× the upper normal limit, LC-MS/MS). MRI did not show other localization in the neck and base of the skull .
Surgery was performed after 2 weeks of α-adrenergic receptor blockage by doxazosin at the dose of 4 mg/24 h. After the stabilization of the blood pressure, the patient was transferred to the Surgical Oncology Department. The tumor was resected using a laparotomy by upper midline incision was made given the large size of the tumor. Intraoperatively, a retroperitoneal mass was found abutting the pancreatic uncus and the third portion of the duodenum. It also infiltrated the infrarenal IVC. Heparinized saline was used during the procedure to prevent vein thrombosis. Initially, surgeons clamped the IVC to perform reconstruction and adrenal and kidney veins to prevent catecholaminergic discharge. A complete resection of the mass with circumferential resection of the infrarenal IVC was performed and a polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) graft was used to replace the IVC. To avoid a bifurcated reconstruction, tailoring of the graft with the remaining IVC was completed. The distal anastomosis was achieved end-to-end under the renal veins. Vascular reconstruction was performed by vascular surgeons.
Doxazosin was replaced after surgery by Calcium Channel Blockers for three days, then the patient was weaned from antihypertensive treatment. Blood pressure monitoring was normal. The postoperative course was uneventful. Insulin therapy was stopped one week later considering the optimal glycemic control obtained after surgery.
The histopathological examination confirmed the diagnosis and showed Nesting (“Zellballen” architecture) and trabecular pattern of tumoral cells within a prominent vascular network. Tumor nests were surrounded by sustentacular cells. Tumor cells were large, provided with a rounded nucleus, fine chromatin, inconspicuous nucleoli, and abundant, slightly eosinophilic cytoplasm. Immunohistochemistry staining showed diffuse expression of Synaptophysin, chromogranin, CD56, and sustentacular cells showed expression of PS100 .
Urinary catecholamine levels were normal: Metanephrine was at 0,98 nmol/l (NV:<2,5 μmol/24 h, LC-MS/MS), and Normetanephrine was at 4,01 nmol/l (NV: <1,5 μmol/24 h, LC-MS/MS) two weeks after surgery. At the 3-month follow-up, blood pressure was on target and HbA1c was 5,8 % without treatment. Given the moderate elevation of normetanephrine at 1,5× the upper normal limit, urinary catecholamine levels were assessed 6 months later and were normal. The patients didn't exhibit any sign of recurrence during 3 years of follow-up until 2023.