The patient is a 12-year-old boy with a history of mild to moderate episodic eczema that is well controlled on topical corticosteroids. He is also diagnosed with a seizure disorder and developmental delay and decreased communication ability. He was referred for re-assessment of multiple episodes of vomiting when he consumed walnut.
At age 3, he experienced two episodes of recurrent emesis four hours after consuming walnuts and at another time eating a cookie ( his mother is ensure if it contained a nut). On review of his initial assessment ( at the age of three), it is not clear if he ever consumed walnut, pecan, Brazil nut, and hazelnut but he consumed peanut, almond, pistachio and cashew without concern at least a few times a month. At that first visit he was assessed for Ig-E mediated allergies with skin prick testing. SPT demonstrated no reaction to walnut, pecan, hazelnut, and Brazil nut extracts. The family was advised to introduce these tree nuts into his diet and continue pistachio, cashew, hazelnut, peanut and almonds. Due to fear, his mom never introduced them at home, and he only consumed peanut and almonds.
At age 6, he was referred to our clinic for re-assessment of his walnut allergy. Skin prick testing to walnut extract was negative. IgE testing was also performed which showed walnut IgE < 0.35 kU/L, and serum IgE 58 µg/L. He was advised to introduce walnut at home along with all other tree nuts and to keep on eating peanut and almond.
Between the ages of 6 to 12, he experienced up to 4 episodes of emesis after consuming walnuts, all occurring within thirty to sixty minutes after ingestion. In retrospect, the reactions occurring less than 1 h may be attributed to recall bias. They did not require emergency care, and there were no cutaneous, cardiorespiratory, or other gastrointestinal signs and symptoms. His mom also stated that macadamia and pine nut may have caused similar but milder symptoms. Due to his various reactions, mom never introduced hazelnut, and pecan and stopped giving him cashew, pistachio and hazelnut.
At the age of 12, he was reassessed by our clinic for walnut and tree nut allergy. Due to negative skin prick testing to walnut, pecan, hazelnut, brazil and pine nuts an open OFC to walnut was suggested to confirm that he did not have an Ig-E mediated reaction and was in keeping with oral food challenges to rule-out immediate-type food allergy Oral food challenge for FPIES protocol was not performed. With repeated negative testing and with his history of developmental delay we wanted to ensure that he was not experiencing food aversion or mom was not experiencing anxiety. The oral challenge was preceded by repeat skin prick testing to fresh walnut which was again negative.
For the OFC, the patient consumed a cumulative 9 g of walnut ingested in increasing amounts over one hour. He was clinically well after 1 h and was discharged home. Two hours after ingestion, he began to experience repetitive vomiting. Mom noted him to be pale and lethargic. As he continued to have emesis, he was sent to emergency by ambulance. He did not have any cutaneous or cardiorespiratory signs and symptoms, nor did he have any diarrhea. His vital signs remained stable on assessments apart from tachycardia. He received ondansetron and antihistamine medications, as well as oral rehydration therapy, with good effect and was discharged home.
After discussion with his mom, due to his developmental concerns and our concern for developing food aversion, it was decided to avoid walnut, pecan, macadamia and pine nuts currently with annual follow-up to reassess when these tree nuts could be re-challenged. We advise mom to keep peanuts and almonds in his diet approximately 3 times per week. We discussed with mom the pros- and cons- of re-introducing cashew, pistachio and hazelnut. These nuts he had previously tolerated and never had a reaction to, but mom wanted to hold off from introducing these nuts currently. We reviewed the limitation concerning natural history and cross-reactivity in FPIES. We also reviewed the risk of an acute episode is dehydration and not anaphylaxis and the importance of hydration and the use of anti-emetics.