A 35 years old (height, 159 cm; weight, 85 kg; gravida 3, para 1) pregnant woman with SAS presented to our hospital and was scheduled to undergo elective CS under epidural anesthesia at 36 weeks of gestation. An echocardiographic examination at 34 weeks of gestation revealed that the diameter of the beginning portion of the aorta (under the aortic valve) was narrowed by about 17 mm. The diameter of the ascending aorta was normal, the average pressure gradient was 40 mmHg, and the ejection fraction was 67%.
In the operation room, her baseline vital signs were as follows: heart rate (HR), 82 bpm with normal sinus rhythm; noninvasive blood pressure (BP), 130/76 mmHg; and oxygen saturation (SpO2), 96%. Supplemental oxygen was administrated by a face mask at the rate of 3 L/min. Traditional epidural puncture was performed at the L1–2 and L3–4 interspaces in the left lateral position, and a catheter was inserted to a depth of 4 cm into the epidural space at the cranial and caudal ends of the surgical field. The patient was then placed supine in a left-tilt position; 3 mL of 2% lidocaine was injected as a test dose, and another 7 mL was injected 5 min later through the cranial catheter. Additionally, 3 mL of 1.5% lidocaine was injected through the caudal catheter. At 20 min after the lidocaine injection, the sensory block had reached T6. The patient had no discomfort, and her hemodynamic parameters were stable. The operating bed was adjusted from the left-tilt to horizontal position, and the operation was allowed. Two minutes later, the patient reported chest distress and difficulty breathing (HR, 110 bpm; BP, 80/69 mmHg; SpO2, 96%), and 3 mg of intravenous ephedrine was promptly administered. The patient immediately lost consciousness with no response (HR and BP were depressed to 40 bpm and 53/15 mmHg, respectively). The lowest BP at the time was not measured because the noninvasive BP measurement interval was set to 1 min. The obstetricians sped up the surgery, and in another 2 min, a 2750-g male newborn was delivered with an Apgar score of 10 at both 1 and 5 min. Spontaneous circulation of the patient was returned immediately after delivery, and stable vital signs returned with no other treatment. The postoperative course was uneventful. The mother and neonate recovered uneventfully and were discharged 4 days later.