A 35-year-old achondroplasia male patient visited the emergency room with right hemiplegia (motor grade II) and aphasia within 6 hours after onset. He had a clinical history of moderate mitral valve stenosis and near bedridden state due to severe inguinal hernia for the last 3 years . Initial vital signs were stable and routine laboratory findings were non-specific. The National Institute of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) was 14. Initial non-contrast computed tomography (CT) showed no definite low density, but angiography demonstrated the total occlusion of the left internal cerebral artery because of acute thrombosis . We decided to perform the mechanical thrombectomy immediately after careful consideration of the anatomical characteristics of only 130 cm tall patient. The CT angiogram in the emergency room was checked the diameters of the non-occluded MCA, ICA, and CCA, and we measured as 3.0mm, 4.2mm, and 8.2mm, respectively . Experientially, it was not different from other patients, and we planned to use devices of general size.
After groin puncture of the right femoral artery, a 65 cm 8-F Super arrow-flex sheath (Arrow international Inc., PA, USA) was placed in the left common carotid artery combined with 100cm 5-F Davis diagnostic catheter (Jungsung medical, Korea) coaxially. An angiogram obtained subsequent to a left internal carotid artery (ICA) injection confirmed the occlusion of distal ICA with thrombus . A 95 cm 8-F Flow gate 2 ™ balloon guiding catheter (BGC) (Concentric medical, CA, USA) was navigated in the cervical ICA. An AXS Catalyst ™ 6 (CAT 6), distal access catheter (Stryker neurovascular, CA, USA), and a 0.027 inch Excelsior XT-27 microcatheter (Stryker neurovascular) were advanced into the proximal aspect of the thrombus in the distal ICA and past the thrombus in the middle cerebral artery (MCA), respectively, guided by the 0.014 inch Synchro-14 microwire (Stryker neurovascular). The 6 × 25 mm Trevo XP provue retriever (Concentric medical) was deployed across the thrombus via the microcatheter. After waiting for about 3 minutes, the BGC was inflated to arrest the flow and the Trevo, microcatheter and CAT 6 were drawn slowly through the BGC while aspirating the BGC and CAT 6 with a 50 ml syringes. After removing these thrombectomy devices with solumbra technique, the BGC was deflated again and angiography was performed to confirm the recanalization of the ICA.
The first attempt was unsuccessful, but the second attempt led to complete recanalization with Thrombolysis In Cerebral Infarction (TICI) 3 in the same way . The procedure took 37 minutes from puncture to recanalization and some thrombi were obtained from the syringe aspirating the distal access catheter (CAT6) .
There were no complications related to the procedure and the next day, the patient showed improvement in neurological symptoms from NIHSS 14 to 5 and his right arm and leg strength from grade II to IV. On post-procedure day 3, the brain CT angiogram confirmed that left ICA was well maintained after reperfusion . Dual antiplatelet therapy (aspirin 100 mg and clopidogrel 75 mg) was continued after the procedure. A few weeks later, he was transferred to another department due to the underlying problems, but his improved neurologic status and MR angiography were well sustained even at 3 months follow-up .