A 41-year-old female patient was presented with ovarian cyst assessed by physical examination was admitted to Guangzhou Panyu Central in August 2009. There was no dysmenorrhea, abdominal distension, abdominal pain, bowel habit change, nausea, and vomiting. The past medical, family and psychosocial history were unremarkable. In the bimanual gynecological examination, the uterus was normal in size and texture while an adnexal mass with indistinct margin can be felt. Transvaginal ultrasonography revealed tumor in the right ovary measuring 74×63 mm with a solid compartment. An elevated serum CA-125 levels (1428 U/mL [normal range, <35 U/mL]) were observed. The patient underwent ovarian cancer cytoreduction (R0; included hysterectomy, bilateral adnexectomy, omentectomy, resection of anterior bladder tumor and anterior rectal tumor, and dissection of pelvic lymph node) and received adjuvant platinum-based chemotherapy. Postoperative pathological findings were well-differentiated serous papillary adenocarcinoma of bilateral ovaries, invasion of cancer nests in the fibro-adipose tissue of the greater omentum, fibrous and adipose tissue of the bladder surface mass, prerectal mass, and fibrous and adipose tissue of the right external iliac lymph node with metastases. In April 2016 (6 years after the end of the first course of platinum-containing chemotherapy), CA-125 levels were elevated (258 U/mL), and CT imaging showed metastases of the abdomen. The patient underwent a second tumor debulking surgery in another hospital. Paclitaxel (210 mg) + carboplatin (450 mg) intravenous chemotherapy was administered for 6 cycles after the second cytoreduction . The patient’s CA-125 levels were descended to normal range after the chemotherapy . In April 2017 (one year after the second surgery) the patient had relapse again which was supported by the elevated levels of CA-125 (144 U/mL) and mediastinal retroperitoneal lymph node and right pleural recurrence were identified in the follow-up PET-CT scans. A biopsy of the right pleural nodule confirmed a metastasis of well-differentiated serous papillary adenocarcinoma of the ovary. The patient received different treatment regimens as summarized in .
From May 2017 to November 2017, patient received combination of paclitaxel + carboplatin and gemcitabine + cisplatin in different doses, which caused grade IV myelosuppression that persisted even after dose reduction. Hence, the patient received docetaxel + cisplatin at different doses till February 2018. As the tumor progressed rapidly, genetic testing of tumor showed no mutation in BRCA1 and BRCA2 while UGT1AI*6, UGT1A1*28, UGT1A1-3156 gene polymorphism was detected. Further, irinotecan and bevacizumab were administered intravenously once in 3 weeks for 7 cycles from April 2018 to October 2018. With the patient’s request targeted therapy (olaparib alone or in combination with bevacizumab) was given from January 2019 to October 2019. As the tumor progressed even with targeted therapy, patient received doxorubicin, cisplatin and bevacizumab in different combinations and doses from November 2019 to June 2020. Post which a progressive increase in creatinine levels was observed indicating renal impairment , hence chemotherapy was discontinued. Since October 2020, patient received chemotherapy-free regimen (niraparib, anlotinib and megestrol). represents magnetic resonance images (CT) of lungs and liver showing metastasis. After 11 months of PFS, disease re-progression, and the patient was switched to niraparib combined with letrozole from October 2021. By data cut-off (May 30, 2022), patient was still on treatment. Computed tomography (CT) showed no signs of recurrence.