A 12-year-old boy, previously healthy, with excellent academic performance, presented to the Pediatric Emergency Department of our hospital, with a 7-day history of moderate to severe headache with frontal localization, without vomiting, altered level of consciousness, abnormal movements, or seizures. The headache was constant, aggravated by physical activity with no relieving factors.
The patient had no visual symptoms, vertigo, or tinnitus. There was no history of fever, recent febrile illness, or medication intake including herbal medications. Other neurological symptoms were negative. Other body systems symptomatology was unremarkable.
The patient had a past medical history of chronic headache that have occurred on and off over the past 7 months. The headache did not affect his activities of daily living, and he does not have any sinister symptoms. There was no history of head trauma. His birth weight was normal, and his head circumference was normal. No family history of epilepsy or chronic headache.
Physical examination revealed a conscious nonobese child. His body weight was 45 kg (above the 50th centile). His eye examination showed no diplopia and no evidence of abducens nerve palsy. Visual acuity was 20/20 in both eyes with normal color vision, pupillary light responses, and normal fundus examination . The remaining neurological and systemic reviews were normal.
His laboratory investigations revealed normal complete blood count, renal functions, liver functions, thyroid profile, anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-double-stranded DNA, and vitamin A and D levels.
His brain imaging using computed brain tomography was normal, with no evidence of space-occupied lesions. Brain and orbit magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with contrast showed some evidence of elevated ICP, slight vertical tortuosity of both optic nerves and slightly prominent CSF around optic nerves, no flattening of the posterior sclera (–). There were no parenchymal abnormalities or areas of enhancement, normal spinal cord anatomy, and no abnormal signal intensity. Magnetic resonance venography (MRV) showed no venous sinus thrombosis.
He underwent lumber puncture which was notable for an opening pressure of 450 mmH2O. CSF cytology, chemistry, and cultures were normal with white blood cells being only 3/mm3, no red blood cells, the protein was 40 mg/dl, and glucose being 35 mmol/l. The viral panel for neurotrophic viruses including herpes simplex viruses 1 & 2, cytomegalovirus, Epstein Barr virus, and neurotrophic enteroviruses, were negative. His CSF IgG index was 0.5 (normal range 0.3-0.6), there were no oligoclonal bands, normal autoimmune serology, aquaporin 4 antibodies titer 1:10 (negative), and myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibodies were negative.
After draining 30 ml of CSF, acetazolamide was commenced based on clinical case profiling and assimilation. It was started at 10 mg/kg/day and escalated. Nonpharmacologic intervention, including dietary advice and regular physical exercise, was also commenced. The patient lost 5 kg and his weight became 40 kg on the 50th centile.
After 2 months of acetazolamide therapy, the patient showed a reduction in headache frequency and severity and an improved quality of life. Repeated lumbar puncture revealed normal opening pressure with normal CSF parameters. His most recent clinic visit revealed no visual symptoms or the development of papilledema with a resolution of MRI findings.