A 54-year-old woman was transferred to our neurosurgical intensive care from another hospital after surviving a high-speed automobile collision 2 days earlier. Computed tomograms revealed diffuse axonal injury of the brain along with concomitant craniovertebral fractures, including fractures over the right occipital condyle, seventh cervical vertebrae foramen transversarium anterior wall, and seventh cervical right lateral mass – lamina junction. Furthermore, fractures involving both scapulae, second to sixth ribs, and fifth dorsal vertebrae were observed in addition to bilateral pulmonary contusions and left hemothorax. Over the scalp, she had large degloving injuries with grease and road dirt sticking to the wounds. Debridement and primary closure of the degloved scalp tissues were initially performed by the treating neurosurgeon. The patient was stabilized in intensive care and closely monitored for her cranial, cervical, and pulmonary injuries. Taylor’s brace and Philadelphia collar were applied after her relatives preferred conservative management.
After the amelioration of life-threatening medical conditions, a plastic surgical referral was received for managing the necrosed degloved skin over her left forehead. Proper counseling of different options for forehead reconstruction followed. Finally, we decided to perform smaller surgeries under minimal anesthesia, while strictly maintaining her spinal immobilization with a collar and brace. Under sedation and local anesthesia, necrotic areas were debrided along the demarcation margins, resulting in a 10 cm × 6.5 cm forehead and scalp defect, including 9 cm × 5 cm area of barren skull bones without any periosteal cover . Outer vault of the skull was trephined at least 1 cm apart until punctate bleeding was visible from the underlying diploe . Thereafter, platelet-rich plasma (PRP) was obtained by centrifuging venous blood and injected along the margins of the wound. Finally, a bi-layered polyurethane biomaterial acting as a tissue scaffold (Biodegradable Temporising Matrix; PolyNovo Ltd., Australia) was placed over the defect and sutured in place . The patient remained comfortable during the entire procedure, barely feeling any pain or discomfort, and was discharged the next day. She was followed up weekly when gradual tissue regeneration was visible within the scaffold . PRP was injected in small aliquots around the wound under topical anesthesia in the clinic.