A 17-year-old male patient with type 1 diabetes mellitus for 5 years developed increasingly worrisome HbA1c due to lack of adherence to the therapy (above 9%, max 11%). The attending physician observed an unexplained increase in serum transaminases, high ferritin and triglycerides, and hepatomegaly . No other signs of diabetic microangiopathic complications were observed and there were no signs of pubertal delay, growth failure, cushingoid features, or obesity. There was also no sign of neutropenia, splenomegaly, high lactate. Frequent controls, psychotherapeutic interventions, and extensive information for the patient and his family did not improve HbA1c.
On ultrasound, the liver appeared coarse and hepatomegaly was persistently observed. Body mass index (BMI) was 20.7 kg/m2 (percentile 25–50). There was no family history of liver disease or metabolic disorders, no alcohol or tobacco use, and no drug consumption.
Viral, autoimmune, and metabolic liver diseases were excluded. Biliary disease, coeliac disease, Wilson’s disease, hereditary hemochromatosis, drug-induced hepatotoxicity, and cystic fibrosis were ruled out. To exclude other causes of persistently elevated transaminases, a percutaneous liver biopsy was performed in analgosedation for histological and electron microscopic evaluation .
For histology, routine biopsies were stained according to standards for pediatric liver histology including PAS (Periodic acid-Schiff) to improve glycogen visualization. Histology revealed mixed macrovesicular steatosis in 10–20% of all hepatocytes, glycogenated nuclei consistent with morphological signs of glycogenosis type 1 or Mauriac syndrome . No signs of malignancy, fibrosis, or inflammation were present in histological staining.
For electron microscopy the tissue was embedded in epon and then cut using an ultramicrotome (Leica Microsystems, Germany). Thereafter, 55 nm cuts were transferred to Copper Nets (Plano, Germany) and leaded as described by Reynolds . During this process, the glycogen is removed from the tissue, but indirect signs of glycogen storage can be observed.
On electron microscopic evaluation, hepatocytes were found with polymorph, autophagic mitochondria, fat droplets, intracellular collagen fibers, and indirect signs of glycogenated nuclei . Interestingly, despite a lack of signs of fibrosis in Goldner staining, electron microscopy revealed signs of intracellular collagen synthesis.
In our patient insulin therapy was switched to an insulin pump and adherence was monitored closely. HbA1c decreased in parallel to the serum transaminases, ferritin, and triglycerides, back to normal values within 1 month . After 6 months, liver size also declined slowly in sonography. Patient consent was obtained.