The patient was a 66-year-old Japanese man of normal intelligence who had a normal social life and for whom an anomaly had not previously been observed. His height was 161cm, body weight was 50kg, and body mass index was 19.3. He visited a hospital for chief complaints of persistent nasal discharge and fever, and was diagnosed with meningitis and admitted. Because his meningitis repeated, he was transferred to our hospital. On admission, he was conscious and alert, and no neurological deficit was noted other than spontaneous cerebrospinal fluid rhinorrhea and a stiff neck. Regarding his facial form, the distance between his bilateral eyeballs appeared large compared to his facial width. When they were actually measured, his inner and outer canthal distances were 35 and 9mm, respectively, and his canthal index (defined by the inner to outer inter-canthal ratio × 100) was 38.5, based on which his condition was judged as ocular hypertelorism. In addition, strabismus of his right eyeball was noted, and this had been present since infancy. On funduscopy, evaluation was impossible due to a bilateral cataract. No other anomaly was noted. Although a cerebrospinal fluid culture test was negative on admission, the cell count was 1167/μL (monocytes: 292, polycytes: 875); protein level, 413mg/dL (normal value: 10 to 40); and glucose level, 45mg/dL (normal value: 50 to 75), showing the features of bacterial meningitis. An isodense mass protruding through a part of the ethmoid bone of his right anterior skull base was noted in the coronal section on computed tomography (CT) , and a bone defect was present in the corresponding region on bone window CT . A round bone defect with a 10mm diameter was noted in the ethmoid bone of his right anterior skull base on three-dimensional CT , and an isodense mass protruding through the ethmoid bone and a partial cystic component were also observed on magnetic resonance imaging . Based on the presence of a bony defect in the lateral lamina of the ethmoid bone, the patient was diagnosed with transethmoidal-type basal encephalocele. Spinal drainage and antibiotic administration were performed as initial treatment, and surgery was performed after the meningitis had improved. Right frontotemporal craniotomy was applied, and the epidural space of his anterior skull base was removed. Brain tissue and its cystic component protruded into his paranasal sinus through the defective region of the ethmoid bone . Dura mater was absent in the defective bone region. After resecting the protruding brain tissue, the defective dura mater region was patched with an unvascularized temporal fascia flap . The ethmoid bone defect was closed with a small bone fragment prepared by partially dividing the inner table in the frontotemporal craniotomy. The postoperative course was uneventful, and his spontaneous cerebrospinal fluid rhinorrhea was resolved. On pathological examination, the resected specimen was confirmed to be normal brain.