A 65-year-old, male.
Facial nerve palsy.
The patient noticed a sudden right facial palsy. CT at a local hospital revealed a hyperdense area in the right lateral pons, and the patient was referred to our hospital with suspected SAH.
Right facial nerve palsy was observed. The patient had no headache, Kernig’s sign, and nuchal rigidity. Lumbar puncture showed that a cerebrospinal pressure of 10 cmH2O and CSF was colorless and clear.
No aneurysm was obviously identifiable on MRI. A spherical, space-occupying lesion appearing hyperintense on T2WI and FLAIR and isointense on T2*WI was observed in the right lateral pons . DSA conducted the same day showed an aneurysm measuring 8.3 mm in maximum diameter in the lateral pontomesencephalic segment (S2) of the SCA. The caudal and rostral trunks of the SCA bifurcated from the aneurysm .
Cranial CT findings were considered indicative of an aneurysm, and lumbar puncture results eliminated the possibility of subarachnoid hemorrhage. Because the maximum aneurysm diameter exceeded 8.3 mm and the patient had suddenly developed peripheral facial nerve palsy, a possible mass effect of the aneurysm could not be ruled out, although this association was unclear, and treatment for an enlarging aneurysm was considered indicated. Occlusion of the parent vessel at a site upstream of the aneurysm or occlusion of the vessels bifurcating from the aneurysm was considered as treatment options. However, given the risk of ischemic complications, the decision was made to place an LVIS with the aim of obtaining flow diversion while sparing both the parent vessel and the vessels bifurcating from the aneurysm.
The cerebral endovascular treatment, including the off-label use of LVIS, was approved by the review board at Fukuoka Neurosurgical Hospital, and consent was obtained from the patient after he had been provided with a full explanation of the significance and purpose of the treatment and its risks and complications. Publication of this case report was approved by the hospital review board, and consent was obtained from the patient and his family.
The right femoral artery was punctured and a 6-Fr short sheath was put in place. A 6-Fr Roadmaster (Goodman, Aichi, Japan) was introduced into the V2 portion of the left vertebral artery. A SHOURYU HR 4 mm × 10 mm balloon catheter (Kaneka Medix, Osaka, Japan) was placed in the V3 portion of the left vertebral artery in case of rupture. A Headway 21 (MicroVention/Terumo, Tustin, CA, USA) was inserted, and introduced into the right proximal SCA using a Radifocus guide wire M (GT WIRE) 90° (MicroVention/Terumo). After confirming the aneurysm and the course of the parent vessel, the Headway 21 was introduced into the SCA caudal trunk distal to the aneurysm, which was in the direction of progression of the Headway 21. However, selection of the SCA caudal trunk proved impossible with the GT WIRE 90° because of the curve of microwire tip is very strong, so the aneurysm was secured with a CHIKAI 0.014-inch (Asahi Intecc, Aichi, Japan) with the tip shaped into a double angle, and the Headway 21 was introduced . A 3.5 mm × 17 mm LVIS was deployed from the Headway 21 so as to cover the neck of the aneurysm. To obtain the flow diversion effect of LVIS, LVIS was deployed from 6 mm distal to 6 mm proximal to the aneurysm so that the effective length of the LVIS fully covered the aneurysm neck. As an eclipse sign was clearly evident on confirmatory contrast enhancement, the procedure was concluded .
No postprocedure neurological abnormalities were evident, and the patient was, therefore, discharged with a modified Rankin Scale score (mRS) of 0. Cerebral angiography conducted 6 months after the procedure showed that perfusion in the SCA caudal trunk and rostral trunk was preserved while complete obliteration of the O’Kelly-Marotta grading scale (OKM) grade D aneurysm was observed .