A 50-year-old female patient developed shortness of breath, fatigue, and edema of both lower extremities 3 weeks before presentation. Two weeks after the onset of symptoms, she visited a local hospital and underwent transthoracic color Doppler echocardiography, which revealed a large pericardial effusion. She also underwent ultrasound-guided pericardiocentesis, and > 1200 mL of dark red pericardial fluid was aspirated. She received oral diuretics, including furosemide, and spironolactone, with no significant relief of symptoms.
The patient was referred to our hospital 1 week later. Physical examination revealed a body temperature of 36.6 °C, heart rate of 112 beats per minute, regular heart rhythm, respiration rate of 32 breaths per minute, distal blood oxygen saturation of 91%, blood pressure of 124/70 mmHg, jugular vein distention, decreased breath sounds over the lower lung lobes bilaterally, distant heart sounds, mild edema of both lower extremities, and venous pressure (measured at the elbow) of 41 cmH2O.
No significant hematological or biochemical abnormalities were found (an albumin level of 29 g/L, slightly lower than the normal of 35 g/L); the carbohydrate antigen level was 125: 863 U/mL; test results were negative for other markers, including alpha-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, ferritin, and human chorionic gonadotropin. Electrocardiography tracing suggested a sinus rhythm and low voltage in the limb leads. Transthoracic color Doppler echocardiography revealed a 4-mm thickening of the anterior pericardial wall, a 6-mm thickening of the posterior pericardial wall, a small pericardial effusion in a 64 × 14-mm uneven hyperechoic area along the lateral wall of the left ventricle , mild mitral valve regurgitation, mild tricuspid valve regurgitation, normal left ventricular systolic function (left ventricular ejection fraction, 53%; left ventricular fractional shortening (FS), 31%), left ventricular diastolic function E/A > 1, and diagram of mitral annular velocity measured using Doppler Tissue Imaging (TDI): e: 11 cm/s, a: 8 cm/s, e/a > 1.
Chest computed tomography (CT) examinations suggested prominent thickening of the pericardium (25 mm), uneven thickening of the left and right lateral walls, multiple pericardial calcifications along the left lateral wall , and a small amount of bilateral pleural effusion. The patient had no history of asbestos exposure or tuberculosis. Since a preliminary diagnosis of tuberculous constrictive pericarditis was considered, we performed a chest exploration and partial pericardiectomy through a midline incision. Post-operative findings suggested brittle and grayish-white pericardial masses with rich blood supply and pericardial calcification located in the left pericardium adjacent to the phrenic nerve along the left ventricle and embedded in the myocardium. After partial pericardiectomy, the patient’s central venous pressure dropped from 26 cm H2O to 7 cm H2O. The symptoms of fatigue and shortness of breath improved after surgery. Hematoxylin and eosin staining revealed papillary, micropapillary, and glandular clusters of epithelioid tumor cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm and vesicular nuclei, focal calcifications, and few mitotic figures. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) results revealed the following: cytokeratin (CK) (++); calretinin (++); CK5/6 (++); WT-1 (++); D2-40 (+); BerEP4 (−); EMA (−); napsin-A (−); thyroid transcription factor-1 (−); and Ki67 (hotspots 60%) . The final pathological diagnosis was confirmed to be primary malignant epithelioid pericardial mesothelioma. After surgery, the patient continued to receive oral diuretics (torsemide 20 mg/day and spironolactone 25 mg/day). Six weeks after surgery, the patient experienced re-aggravation of symptoms of cardiac insufficiency and abandoned chemotherapy and radiation therapy. Nine months after the surgery, the patient died of heart failure.