We present the case of a 53-year-old married and asymptomatic man who received a confirmatory positive HIV diagnosis in 2016. The different tests performed, the methods used, and the corresponding time point are summarised in .
After a consultation, he was determined to be HIV-positive following an HIV test request using rapid diagnostic tests: Determine HIV 1/2 (Abbott Molecular Inc, Des Plaines, Illinois, United Sates), Hexagon HIV 1/2 (Human Biochemica, Wiesbaden, Germany), and OraQuick (OraSure Technologies, Inc, Petchabun, Thailand); included in the Cameroon screening algorithm as per the World Health Organization HIV testing guidelines. However, his wife tested HIV-seronegative. Not convinced of his status, he sought another test in a laboratory with a more advanced technique. The laboratory tested his sample collected in July 2016; the results were positive using the ImmunoComb® II HIV 1 & 2 BiSpot (Orgenics Ltd, Yavne, Israel) and VIDAS® HIV Duo Ultra (bioMérieux, Marcy-l’Etoile, France) tests. A few months later, in another laboratory, an HIV-positive status was obtained on a sample collected in February 2017 using the ImmunoComb® II HIV 1 & 2 BiSpot (Orgenics Ltd, Yavne, Israel) and the Elecsys® HIV combi PT electrochemiluminescence immunoassay techniques (Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Mannheim, Germany) .
About two weeks later, he presented at one of Cameroon’s national reference laboratories in Yaoundé for serotyping and viral load testing. Unfortunately, the serotyping test was indeterminate, and the viral load test was < 390 copies/mL by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (BioCentric Inc, Collingswood, New Jersey, United States), while the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, Genscreen HIV1/2 (Bio-Rad Diagnostics Ltd, Hercules, California, United States), was positive on this same sample. About six weeks later, the viral load test was repeated in France with a more sensitive reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction cobas® 8800 assay (Roche Diagnostics Ltd, New South Wales, Australia), and the result was < 20 copies/mL (which corresponds to the lower limit of the detection of this test).
Following these results, new samples were ordered by the consultant and sent to France again; the Elecsys® HIV combi PT electrochemiluminescence immunoassay and INNO-LIA HIV 1/2 Score assay (Fujirebio Diagnostics Inc, Malvem, Pennsylvania, United States) were performed on two samples collected over a three-month interval; the first gave an indeterminate result and the second was concluded as a negative result.
This result comforted the patient in his doubt about his HIV status, but on a new sample collected in July 2019, the VIDAS® HIV Duo Ultra enzyme-linked fluorescent assay (bioMérieux, France), and Geenius™ HIV1/2 assay (Geenius™ Diagnostic, Inc, Redmond, Washington, United States) were still positive. His viral load was < 40 copies/mL, the Western blot was negative, and serotyping was indeterminate. The patient remained asymptomatic with a normal immunological status (CD4 T-Cells: 1380 cells/mm3, CD8 T-cells: 661 cells/mm3). HIV proviral DNA was not detectable in a sample collected on 02 October 2019. About 10 months later, serological tests were still HIV-positive, with a CD4 count of 945 cells/mm3.
In January 2021, he was sent to the Chantal Biya International Research Centre for the Prevention and Management of HIV/AIDs, Yaoundé, for viral load testing using the Abbott m2000rt RealTime HIV-1 assay (Abbott Molecular Inc, Des Plaines, Illinois, United Sates), and the result was ‘target-not-detected’. Of note, on this same sample, Determine and OraQuick were positive, while serotyping remained indeterminate. As of October 2021, his viral load remained ‘target-not-detected’, and he is still asymptomatic. Noteworthy, he stated that he did not have any chronic diseases, nor had he engaged in any HIV-related risk behaviour. Furthermore, his serological tests were negative for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) and hepatitis C virus antibodies using rapid tests.