The patient was a 43-year-old Japanese man who had shown a high zinc sulfate value in turbidity test in a health checkup 4 years previously. He was examined by a local doctor who pointed out hypergammaglobulinemia and anemia. He had taken colchicine and febuxostat to treat gout 3 years previously. After presenting mild hematuria and proteinuria 2 years previously, he was referred to our hospital for further examination and treatment. The patient’s height was 170 cm, and his body weight was 85 kg. His blood pressure was 129/83 mmHg, his pulse was 95 beats/minute, and his body temperature was 36.2 °C. He sometimes experienced night sweat. A physical examination revealed diffuse lymphadenopathy, an enlarged spleen and papulae of the body trunk. The laboratory data are shown in Table . There was no monoclonal peak on immunoelectrophoresis in serum and urine tests. Renal ultrasound showed that the kidneys were of normal size, with normal renal arterial resistive indices. Computed tomography of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis showed cervical, axillary, and paraaortic lymphadenopathies and splenomegaly.
An excisional submental lymph node biopsy showed diffuse interfollicular plasma cell infiltration . Immunohistochemistry revealed neither interfollicular plasmacytosis nor laterality of the κ or λ light chains. IgG4-positive cells were detected, but the IgG4/IgG ratio was < 0.1. A skin biopsy of a papule on the patient’s back showed plasma cells in the perivascular area . The patient was diagnosed with MCD, plasma cell variant.
Kidney biopsy revealed 2 instances of global sclerosis in 19 glomeruli. Hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining showed that there was no inflammatory cell infiltration in the glomeruli . Periodic acid Schiff (PAS) staining showed no signs of mesangial proliferation, crescents, or adhesion . Periodic acid methenamine silver (PAM) staining showed the appearance of bubbling in the glomerular basement membranes . Masson-Trichrome (MT) staining demonstrated the absence of immune complex deposits in the glomeruli . Immunofluorescence showed the focal granular deposition of IgG and C3 along the glomerular basement membranes . The IgG deposits were predominantly composed of IgG1 and IgG2, but not IgG4, suggesting secondary MN rather than primary MN . Anti-phospholipase A2 receptor antibodies were not measured. There was no big difference in staining between κ and λ chains . Direct fast scarlet staining was negative. Electron microscopy revealed electron dense deposits within and outside the glomerular basement membranes . Based on these results, the patient was diagnosed with secondary MN.
The patient was initially treated with prednisolone alone; however, his biochemical abnormalities did not improve. Thus, intravenous tocilizumab (700 mg every 2 weeks) was started. After treatment with tocilizumab, the patient’s C-reactive protein (CRP) elevation, anemia, and polyclonal gammopathy improved . Furthermore, his urinary protein level declined from 1.58 g/gCr to 0.13 g/gCr. The prednisolone dose was gradually tapered, then discontinued. He has been stable without a recurrence of proteinuria for more than 6 months.