A 27-year-old man presented with adenoid hyperplasia and bilateral palatal tonsillar hyperplasia. Bilateral tonsillectomy was performed for adenoid hyperplasia. Abdominal ultrasonography (AUS) and enhanced computed tomography (CT) performed as part of the preoperative examination revealed the presence of a 15-cm tumor in the spleen. The patient was obese (height, 164.8 cm; weight, 128.8 kg; body mass index, 47.4 kg/m2) and did not have tuberous sclerosis (TS). His laboratory findings were within the normal range (white blood cell count, 8800/µL; red blood cell count, 433 × 104/µL; hemoglobin, 12.7 g/dL; platelet count, 17.4 × 104/µL; glycated hemoglobin, 6.3%; and C-reactive protein, 0.32 mg/dL).
AUS showed a solid tumor of approximately 14 cm in the spleen, and the tumor was found to be in contact with the pancreatic tail, left kidney, and stomach. The edges were smooth; the inside was uneven with mixed high- and low-echoic masses . Enhanced CT revealed a solid tumor of approximately 14 cm with a clear border on the ventral side of the spleen, which was continuous with the spleen. The inside mainly contained fat components around the blood vessels, and the solid part was imaged incrementally. The splenic artery supplied blood to the tumor. A dilated blood vessel, thought to be a vein draining into the splenic vein, was found on the caudal side of the tumor. Only hemangioma was seen in the liver, and no other findings were noted in the pancreas, liver, or kidney . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) could not be performed because of the patient’s claustrophobia.
The tumor was primarily located in the spleen and could not be adequately diagnosed. However, it was large, and the possibilities of rupture and malignancy could not be ruled out. Hence, we opted for a surgical resection.
Partial resection of the spleen was performed. The abdomen was opened using an upper abdominal L-shaped incision. A giant tumor of approximately 13 cm with a smooth surface was observed in the upper left quadrant of the abdomen . The tumor was confirmed to be continuous with the upper spleen, and there was no invasion of the other organs. The vein draining the tumor encircling the left kidney was ligated and dissected. ECHELON FLEX® 60 powered stapler (Ethicon Inc., Somerville, NJ, USA) was used to perform a partial resection of the spleen, including the tumor . Since we managed to preserve the splenic arteries and veins, no vascular treatment was performed at the splenic hilum. Before splitting the splenic parenchyma, it was pressed and thinned with the operator's finger for 5 min and then dissected using an automatic suturing device once. The operative time was 173 min. The volume of blood loss was 300 mL. The postoperative course was good, with no effect on the platelets, and the patient was discharged on the 7th postoperative day.
The excised specimen was a smooth, extremely soft tumor measuring 123 × 120 × 82 mm. The cleaved surface of the tumor was reddish brown, and a distressing yellow color was observed . Pathological examination indicated mature adipocyte proliferation and increased number of blood vessels of various sizes. Additionally, spindle-shaped cell proliferation foci were found between the adipocytes and the surrounding blood vessels. Profuse leakage of erythrocytes from the blood vessels, hemosiderin deposition, and small round cell infiltration were also observed . Immunostaining exposed that the spindle-shaped cells were weakly positive for smooth muscle antibody (SMA), and were identified as smooth muscle cells . The adipocytes and spindle cells were negative for HMB 45, Melan A, MDM, and CDK4. However, some parts of the cells were positive for estrogen and progesterone receptors. Vascular endothelial cells were positive for CD31 and CD34 and negative for CD8. Based on the above-mentioned findings, the tumor was diagnosed as primary angiomyolipoma of the spleen.
Four years postoperatively, the patient has not faced any hematological problems, including those involving the platelets, and no new tumors have been identified in the spleen or other organs.