A 9-year-old previously healthy male developed a 2-day history of right eye periocular swelling, foreign body sensation, and watery discharge. He also endorsed intermittent diplopia, which was resolved on presentation, and was unsure if it was binocular or monocular. He had an unremarkable birth and family history. Review of systems revealed a spontaneously resolved fever prior to presentation, measured via a single axillary temperature of 39°C. He was initially seen at a rural community hospital where he received a single dose of IV antibiotics for concern of preseptal cellulitis. He continued to worsen despite IV antibiotics which prompted a CT scan that showed an extracranial sphenoid wing mass with erosion of the temporal and sphenoid bone. Given the orbital location and appearance of the mass was suspicious for a noninfectious etiology, the patient was then transported to a pediatric tertiary care hospital for neurosurgical and ophthalmology assessment.
His initial ophthalmic exam was notable for visual acuity of 20/20 in both eyes. Pertinent positive findings included right-sided mild periocular edema, right eyelid tenderness, decreased right palpebral fissure height, and proptosis . Hertel exophthalmometer measurements were 19 mm OD and 13 mm OS with a base of 97 mm. His posterior segment showed mild nasal elevation of the right optic disc without vessel obscuration and mild tortuosity of the peripheral vessels . Pertinent negative findings included no relative afferent pupillary defect, normal intraocular pressure, no color vision deficit, full extraocular movements, no strabismus, normal anterior segment, and normal 30-2 Humphrey visual field in the right eye.
His investigations showed a normal leukocyte count (8.1*109 cells/L, reference range 4.2–11.5 *109 cells/L), hemoglobin (115 g/L, reference range 105–135 g/L), potassium (4.0 mmol/L, reference range 3.5–5.1 mmol/L), and uric acid (160 μmol/L, reference range 96–296 μmol/L). His C-reactive protein was elevated (91.8 mg/L, reference range <10.0 mg/L). There was concern for a malignant etiology given the bony erosion on imaging, rapid onset, elevated C-reactive protein in the absence of leukocytosis. The patient then underwent an MRI of the head and spine with contrast which showed a right-sided soft tissue mass (5.4 × 6.8 × 7.0 cm) centered on the sphenoid bone with extension into the right orbit (a). The right lateral rectus muscle and optic nerve were displaced with radiographic evidence of proptosis. The mass showed low-intermediate signal on T1, mild hyperintensity on T2 with some foci of higher signal, and restricted diffusion throughout the lesion. Given the wide differential diagnosis at this point, systemic imaging was obtained to look for any additional lesions. MRI of the spine showed multiple bilateral solid kidney lesions and diffused hyperintense T2 signal and enhancement in the vertebral bodies of L1 and S1, left sacroiliac joint, and right iliac crest.
A bone marrow aspirate was taken from the iliac crest which showed >90% B lymphoblasts. A lumbar puncture was negative for blast cells, flow cytometry was positive for CD19 and variable for CD10 and CD20, and cytogenetics showed the dup(1q) abnormality. Overall, his investigations were consistent with a diagnosis of precursor B cell ALL (pre B-ALL). He was considered high risk given ocular and intracranial involvement. The patient was enrolled and treated on Children’s Oncology Group (COG) protocol AALL1732, a Phase 3 randomized trial of Inotuzumab Ozogamicin for newly diagnosed high-risk B-ALL . In short, this trial aims to determine if addition of two blocks of inotuzumab ozogamicin to COG-modified Berlin-Frankfurt-Munster (BFM) chemotherapy, a standardized efficacious regimen, will improve outcomes in children and young adults with B-ALL . Repeat MRI head following induction showed a marked interval decrease in size of the sphenoidal mass and complete resolution of the intracranial and intra-axial extension (b). There was decreased mass effect of the right lateral rectus muscle but persistent mild radiographic proptosis. Eleven months after presentation, while still on chemotherapy, he has had no significant adverse events and on MRI the sphenoid mass continued to improve measuring 3.9 × 1.7 × 1.7 cm from 5.4 × 6.8 × 7.0 cm on presentation.