A 54-year-old woman was followed up by the gynecological department of the previous hospital due to a history of left ovarian endometrial adenocarcinoma. She also had a history of partial excision for GDC and PD in her childhood, but there was no detail of the surgical record. A follow-up computed tomography (CT) examination revealed a cystic nodular lesion beside the crus . At first, we believed this nodule to be a metastatic lymph node due to some malignant tumors. However, we could retrospectively recognize that it was the GDC and the GDC was connected to the pancreas . In addition, PD, dilatation of the main pancreatic duct and cystic formation , and a 16-mm mass with poor contrast effect on the pancreatic body were detected ; therefore, PDAC with lymph node metastasis was suspected. Laboratory findings also showed rising carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9; 207.0 U/mL), Duke pancreatic monoclonal antibody type 2 (DUPAN-2; 230.0 U/mL) and s-pancreas-1 antigen (SPan-1; 65.0 U/mL) except for carcinoembryonic antigen (2.0 ng/mL). Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) showed a cystic lesion protruding outside the ventral pancreas, continuous with the bifurcated main pancreatic duct . Observing that the nodular lesion was connected to the pancreatic duct, we recognized that the nodular lesion beside the crus was not a metastatic lymph node, but a GDC . We considered performing endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration to clarify the histopathological diagnosis. However, we abandoned it due to the possibility of rupture of the pancreatic cystic formation and dissemination of tumor cells. On the other hand, pancreatography and pancreatic juice cytology via papilla of Vater were also avoided because cannulation and pancreatography might increase the intraductal pressure. From these examinations, she was diagnosed with PDAC in pancreas body, T1N0M0 Stage IA. As neoadjuvant chemotherapy for PDAC, she received two courses of nab-paclitaxel and gemcitabine therapy. A CT examination after neoadjuvant chemotherapy revealed that the GDC shrank due to drainage of the content and the fistula between the GDC and the pancreas could be observed . Shrinkage of the tumor and mitigation of cystic formation of the main pancreatic duct were also observed . In addition, CA19-9, DUPAN-2, and Span-1 decreased to within normal limits; therefore, we planned to perform a distal pancreatectomy as a radical resection for PDAC with a concomitant resection of the PD and GDC. We performed the distal pancreatectomy with D2 lymphadenectomy and extracted the PD and GDC. Massive adhesion due to repeated laparotomy was observed; thus, we had to perform adhesiotomy before resection. It was considered that the severe inflammation and adhesion between the stomach and the pancreas were induced by the pancreatic cystic formation, but we could not find the cystic lesion during the operation. We employed a linear stapler for pancreas parenchymal transection. The operating time and blood loss were 237 min and 188 mL, respectively. Macroscopic findings of the resected specimen revealed that a hard tumor 15 × 11 mm in size was located at the pancreas body . Histopathological examination revealed that the tumor was composed of moderately differentiated invasive PDAC, and carcinoma in situ and high-grade pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia surrounded the tumor . Tumor cells were almost viable; therefore, the therapeutic effect of neoadjuvant chemotherapy was evaluated as grade 1b. There were on-section lymph node metastases and lymphatic ductal invasion. The histopathological diagnosis was T1N1M0, stage IIB. With regard to GDC, glandular fossa epithelium and gastric fundic gland were observed on the luminal side of the cyst, and mucosal muscle plate and muscle layer were observed in the deep part of the cyst . The fistula between the GDC and pancreas was observed . However, histopathological examination could not find the pancreatic cystic lesion that had shrunk after neoadjuvant chemotherapy. The anatomical features of this case are summarized in Fig. . The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and she was discharged on postoperative day 25. We performed eight courses of adjuvant S-1 monotherapy and she has been followed up without recurrence for 1 year.