A 30-year-old man without any documented previous medical history presented with two gunshot wounds to the anterior left thoracoabdominal region and the right back. He was primarily stabilized with intravenous fluids. Physical examination findings included blood pressure (109/66 mmHg), pulse (95/min), abdomen tender but non-peritonitic, and a normal chest X-ray. Due to the criminal nature of the incident, the calibre of the rifle is unknown. The direction of the lesion is showing an oblique, upwards pointing kinetic motion, which could feature a stab or a shot, if the attacker was kneeling. After transferral to our trauma unit, his haemodynamic parameters were still stable, chest examination and heart sounds were negative, but the E-FAST scan showed free fluid in the abdomen (arterial blood gas pH 7.18, lactate 3.5 mmol/L, base excess 5.3 mmol/L, haemoglobin 11 g/dL, HCO3 17 mmol/L). Therefore, he underwent a damage control laparotomy which included a right nephrectomy and liver packing. This was followed by two re-look laparotomies before his abdomen was closed. At the first relook laparotomy a subxiphoid pericardial window was done due to concern of missile trajectory but was noted to be negative with no blood or pericardial effusion to be seen. In hindsight a pericardial window with or without partial lower sternotomy or a transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE), if available, could have been better options to assess cardiac injuries. The patient underwent a complex post-operative course which included: an acute kidney injury requiring haemodialysis, a persistent bile leak requiring endoscopic retrograde cholangiogram with placement of a common bile duct stent, sepsis requiring prolonged antibiotics and a pulmonary embolism requiring anticoagulation. During this time, no cardiac injury was suspected due to a normal cardiac examination and imaging including an E-FAST ultrasound and a computed tomography . The patient was discharged home on therapeutic anticoagulation with warfarin with a plan for close follow-up as an outpatient.
Eight days after discharge (39 days after gunshot), the patient represented to the emergency department with colicky abdominal pain, non-productive cough, Grade III dyspnoea associated with fever, and an International Normalized Ratio (INR) >10.00 (white cell count 24.5/µL, haemoglobin 6.6 g/dL). An intrahepatic collection suggestive of a liver abscess and small bilateral pleural effusions were observed. Blood products were transfused, the patient was started empirically on antibiotics and warfarin was omitted.
Eight days into his re-admission, the patient developed respiratory distress and clinical signs of a cardiac tamponade prompting a chest X-ray and an ECHO. The X-ray showed bilateral pleural effusions and cardiomegaly . The ECHO showed a large circumferential pericardial effusion measuring approximately 19 mm (diastole) at the apex. A 2 cm defect/ruptured aneurysm was seen in the lateral free wall of the right ventricle . The electrocardiogram (ECG) was normal with no ischaemic signs or deep Q waves.
With a diagnosis of cardiac tamponade, the patient was scheduled for emergency surgery within 24 h. His ventricular function was moderate (ejection fraction 45%). The patient was put on a femoro-femoral bypass and a full sternotomy incision was performed. Access was complicated by Grade 2 pericardial adhesions. He was cooled to 28°C and bypass perfusion time was 132 min. The aortic cross-clamp was applied and the heart arrested with antegrade cold blood cardioplegia. Cross-clamp time was 41 min. When opening the pericardium a significant bloody pericardial effusion was noted. The RVA could be detected on the lateral wall . A significant bile collection in the sub-diaphragmatic area was encountered. The abdomen was not re-opened but a closed suction drain was placed in the subdiaphragmatic position with the diaphragmatic defect closed over by the trauma surgeons. The RVA was identified and its margins were excised until viable tissue was noted. The defect was thought to be too large for primary closure and thus a bovine pericardial patch was used to close the defect using a 4/0 Prolene suture . Strips of bovine pericardium were used for reinforcement by placating the suture lines. Routine sternal closure was performed after pericardial and mediastinal drain placement and the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit in a stable condition.
Post-operative stay in the intensive care unit and in the general ward was uneventful and the patient’s recovery was satisfactory. He was discharged home on therapeutic anticoagulation and a follow-up ECHO was scheduled. Unfortunately, the patient did not show up for this appointment.
The excised tissue of the RVA measured 25 × 10 × 3 mm and was sent for histology which revealed a true aneurysm consisting of all three cardiac wall layers, supporting the hypothesis of a non-traumatic aetiology. The specimen showed fibrosis, haemorrhage with organization, haemosiderin deposition, fibrin, and dystrophic calcification—all signs of granulation tissue, supporting the hypothesis of a traumatic aetiology. Histology further revealed focal endarteritis obliterans, which might have added to weakening of the myocardium and ultimate formation of the fistula.