A 39-year-old woman was referred to our hospital for further evaluation of a hepatic mass, which was discovered incidentally 6 years ago in the local hospital during physical examination for anemia and fatigue. At that time, the tumor was about 16 × 14.5 × 14 cm in size and was diagnosed as hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). TACE was performed twice by injecting 20 mL iodized oil with 5-fluorouracil (500 mg), epirubicin (30 mg), and hydroxycamptothecin (10 mg) through the hepatic artery, followed by injection of gelatin sponge particles. Post-TACE CT scan revealed densely deposited lipiodol inside the tumor . After that, the patient did not receive any further treatment and still suffered from anemia and fatigue for the recent years. She had no history of liver cirrhosis or chronic hepatitis virus infection, and her menses is normal without excess of menstrual blood loss. Twelve years ago, the patient was diagnosed with retroperitoneal tumor, which was about 8 × 6 × 5 cm in size and was removed completely. Pathological examination confired the diagnosis of retroperitoneal paraganglioma, with no lymph node metastasis. The patient was followed up for 5 years with no distant metastasis or anemia, then she was lost to follow-up until liver metastasis was detected.
On admission, CT scan revealed a huge solid hypodense mass in the liver , almost the same size (15 × 14 × 14 cm) as 5 years ago. The lesion showed a strong heterogeneous enhancement in the arterial phase and was hypodense during the portal phase . Angiography demonstrated a round hypervascular mass with many feeding arteries . Laboratory tests revealed that hemoglobin was 74.2 g/L (normal range 110–160 g/L), hematocrit was 25.8% (normal range 33–51%), mean corpuscular volume was 77 fL (normal range 82–95 fL), mean corpuscular hemoglobin was 22.1 pg (normal range 27–31 pg), lactate dehydrogenase was 86 U/L (normal range 135-225 U/L), and superoxide dismutase was 92 U/ml (normal range 129-216 U/ml). Serum tumor marker of alpha-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, and carbohydrate antigen 19–9 were all within normal ranges. Colonoscopy was performed and revealed normal mucosa from the rectum to the cecum. Ultrasound-guided biopsy of the liver tumor was undertaken. Histological examination of the liver biopsy specimens revealed nests of uniform neoplastic cells with vacuolated and eosinophilic cytoplasm embedded in fibrous septa with capillary vessels . Immunohistochemical examination showed that the tumor was strongly stained positive for chromogranin A (CgA) and synaptophysin (Syn), but negative for calretinin (CR). The Ki-67 labeling index was <1%. The histology of the liver tumor was in accordance with the primary retroperitoneal paraganglioma, and the diagnosis of hepatic metastatic paraganglioma was confirmed. Therefore, according to the AJCC cancer staging manual (8th edition), the staging of the primary retroperitoneal paraganglioma should be T2N0M1b. Because the tumor remained stable, the patient refused to receive radiotherapy and other treatment and was followed up for another 1 years without evidence of deterioration (Additional file : Figure S1).