An 18-year-old Japanese woman experienced a sudden onset of abdominal pain and vomiting, and was therefore transported to the out-patient emergency ward at our institution. She was a student with no employment history. Her height was 156 cm and weight was 55 kg. Her consciousness was normal and there were no neurological abnormalities. She had been receiving antihistamines for atopic dermatitis but had no other conditions, such as neuropathy or hematuria, which would lead us to suspect neuritis or vasculitis. She had no history of tobacco smoking or alcohol consumption. Moreover, there was nothing of note in her family history.
On physical examination, palpation revealed a flat abdomen with tenderness in the upper umbilical region, and no signs of peritoneal irritation. Her temperature was 36.3 °C, blood pressure was 159/123 mmHg, pulse was 85 beats/minute, and oxygen saturation was 99% on room air. Her blood laboratory findings revealed a white blood cell count of 8600/mm3 and a C-reactive protein level of 0.12 mg/dL, which was not suggestive of an inflammatory process. However, an increased D-dimer level of 4.36 μg/mL was noted. Her renal and liver functions were normal (blood urea nitrogen 9 mg/dL, creatinine 0.4 mg/dL, aspartate aminotransferase 31 U/L, and alanine aminotransferase 21 U/L). An abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan showed emphysema of the wall of her small intestine with poor contrast enhancement that corresponded to the area of tenderness . However, the contrast CT revealed heterogeneous contrast enhancement, leading to a suspicion of renal infarction . Necrosis of the small intestine was suspected based on the imaging findings, and urgent surgery was performed.
Laparotomy revealed an area of necrosis 20 cm in length, which was approximately 100 cm away from the Treitz ligament of the jejunum. There were no findings of strangulation, which precluded the identification of the cause of the necrosis . Since there was no palpable pulse over the arteries surrounding the necrotized intestine, the necrotized regions were resected and the small intestine reconstructed to maintain a palpable pulse.
After surgery, a thrombotic lesion was suspected and anticoagulant therapy with heparin sodium at 20,000 U/day was started. However, pathological findings showed active vasculitis associated with fibrinoid necrosis, as well as destruction, fibrogenesis, and luminal stenosis of the elastic lamina in the muscular arteries. Our patient was therefore diagnosed as having PAN-induced necrosis of the small intestine . Other postoperative investigations included a blood test, which showed that she was negative for proteinase 3-antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) and hepatitis B surface antigen, but weakly positive for myeloperoxidase (MPO)-ANCA (5.3 U/mL; normal range, 0.0–3.4 U/mL). A postoperative angiograph of her renal arteries demonstrated multiple aneurysms in the renal arterioles. Postoperative urine analysis was positive for proteinuria. Anticoagulant therapy was discontinued, and she was administered 40 mg of prednisolone daily starting on postoperative day 11. Since she continued to improve, the dose of prednisolone was reduced. It has been a year since the surgery, and she is receiving prednisolone at 5 mg a day without recurrence.