Our patient was a 6-year-old boy, who was the second child of a non-consanguineous Thai couple. There was no family history of OI or other bone disorders. He was born at term with a birth weight of 3600 g (60th centile). His early development was normal. He sustained the first fracture of his right arm at the age of three months from a minor trauma. Since then he had multiple fractures of various bones including both humeri, femora, tibiae, ulnae and radii, leading to a diagnosis of OI Sillence type III. Intravenous bisphosphonate was initiated at the age of 8 months; however, the fractures continued to occur once every few months and required many surgeries. At the age of 5 years, after he was free from fractures for 9 months, bisphosphonate was discontinued. His mental development was appropriate. He was able to walk until the age of six years, when a nonunion and muscle wasting of lower extremities occurred. Physical examination revealed deformities of both upper and lower extremities. However, no blue sclerae or dentinogenesis imperfecta was observed. Investigations revealed normal serum calcium, phosphorus and alkaline phosphatase levels. Plain radiographs of his long bones at the age of nine are shown in Fig. .
After informed consent was obtained, genomic DNA was extracted from leukocytes using a Puregene blood kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Sixteen known OI genes, BMP1, COL1A1, COL1A2, CREB3L1, CRTAP, FKBP10, IFITM5, LEPRE1, PLOD2, PPIB, SERPINF1, SERPINH1, SP7, TMEM38B, WNT1, and MBTPS2, were amplified from 200 ng of genomic DNA using the Truseq Amplicon Sequencing kit (Illumina, San Diego, CA). 286 amplicons which covered all the 226 exons (28 kb) of the target genes were sequenced by Miseq (Illumina, San Diego, CA) using 2x250 paired-end reads. All reads were aligned against the University of California Santa Cruz human genome assembly hg19 using Burrows-Wheeler Alignment software . SNVs and Indel were detected by Miseq reporter software. Finally, possible disease causing variants were confirmed by PCR and Sanger sequencing. Segregation analysis was subsequently performed.
The targeted gene panel study using next generation sequencing of the proband revealed compound heterozygous mutations, c.796_797delTT (p.Phe266Argfs*25) and c.2108-2A > G in the BMP1 gene (NM_006129.4). PCR followed by Sanger sequencing using genomic DNA of leukocytes from the patient and his parents confirmed that the patient was compound heterozygous for the mutations, while his father had c.796_797delTT (p. Phe266Argfs*25) and his mother had c.2108-2A > G . Both mutations have never been previously described in Human Gene Mutation Database or the Exome Aggregation Consortium database .