A 53-year-old male with diabetes mellitus and documented peripheral neuropathy presented with left foot pain and deformity. He had a previous Lisfranc injury treated with open reduction and internal fixation three years before presentation. The fixation construct failed and the patient developed Charcot arthropathy of the midfoot . He also presented with stage III posterior tibial tendon insufficiency with a rigid hindfoot valgus deformity and forefoot abduction. The patient was indicated for hardware removal, medial column arthrodesis, and subtalar arthrodesis to correct the flatfoot deformity and a triple hemisection Achilles tenotomy for Equinus deformity. Past surgical history included lumbar spine decompression and fusion a few years prior. The patient had a weight of 149 kg and a height of 188 cm resulting in a BMI of 42.
In the OR, the patient was positioned supine on a regular operating table with a “bump” made of rolled up two sheets was placed under his right hip to externally rotate his operative leg. A left thigh tourniquet was placed and inflated to 350 mmHg for 120 min. No epidural or regional block was used. The duration of surgery was 3 h and 53 min. The procedure was performed in the following sequences 1) Complex hard ware removal (broken implant), 2) Precutaneous Achilles tendon lengthening, 3) Fusion of the 1st metatarsal with the medial cuneiform, 4) Fusion of the medial cuneiform with navicular bone, 5) Fusion of the navicular with the talus, 6) Fusion of the subtalar joint 96. The procedure went uneventful. The patient was extubated and tolerated the procedure during surgery very well.
In the immediate postoperative period, the patient complained of 10/10 pain to the right (contralateral) hip and posterior gluteal compartment radiating to the right lower extremity. The patient was more comfortable with the bed at 45 ͦ compared to lying flat. An emergent CT scan was obtained to rule out a fracture of the femoral neck or proximal femur and it was negative and did not show any other abnormality around the pelvis area. Due to his prior history of lumbar spine surgery, degenerative changes in the lower lumbar spine with marked narrowing of disc space, and sclerosis of endplates and osteophytes were seen on CT, a presumptive diagnosis of a herniated disc and/or compression of the sciatic nerve was made. An urgent MRI was also ordered that night; however, the patient was unable to lay supine due to pain and the only way to obtain the MRI was under anesthesia. Due to his recent prolonged surgery, a decision was reached not to anesthetize the patient a second time for the MRI. The provisional diagnosis of radicular pain and sciatica was the prevailing diagnosis at that time. Please note that the diagnosis of the gluteal compartment syndrome was missed on the day of surgery. The patient experienced uncontrolled pain the night after surgery that did not respond to narcotic pain medication. He stated that the pain in his right lower back and buttocks was more severe than the pain in his left ankle from recent surgery.
On POD 1, the patient continued to complain of radicular pain in the right L5, S1, and sciatic nerve distribution. On physical exam, he had grade 5/5 motor power strength with ankle dorsiflexion, plantar flexion, Extensor Hallucis longus, Flexor Hallucis Longus, knee extension, and knee flexion. The sensation was normal in the L1 to S1 nerve distribution. Dorsalis pedis and posterior tibialis pulses were palpable and symmetric in the left foot. The palpation of the right gluteal compartment was tense. The patient was also much more comfortable laying at 45° than supine in the bed. He was sent for an MRI of the lumbar spine and right hip. The MRI did not show a lumbar disc herniation but did reveal increased signal in the gluteal compartment (gluteus maximus, medius, and minimus) on the right side .
Systemic blood work obtained on POD 2 included an elevated creatine kinase at 49,688 and a BUN/Cr at 44/1.5. The patient was treated with IV fluids and diagnosed with right gluteal compartment syndrome. Due to the prolonged misdiagnosis in the first 36 h post-op, the decision was made not to decompress the gluteal compartment to avoid operating on possibly necrosed muscle which would increase the risk for massive infection or significant fibrosis.
The patient was observed and treated without surgical decompression. His pain decreased gradually on each post-op day moving forward. Creatine kinase trended down to 12,064 on POD 5, and to 6702 on POD 6. His BUN/Cr improved to 25/1.0 on POD 6. After walking with physical therapy, the patient was discharged home on POD 6. At three months post-op, the patient was walking without a limp, had no proximal weakness, and had no changes in his peripheral neurologic examination compared to his preoperative baseline.
Non-weight-bearing to left lower extremity and weight-bearing as tolerated to the right lower extremity. Physical therapy was scheduled to improve muscle recovery and regain strength. The patient was given forms with information on diabetic foot care, pain medicine instructions, walker use, fall prevention, and home safety. Outpatient clinic visits were scheduled every two weeks to monitor the patient’s recovery.