A 38-year-old female presented with progressive left chest and abdominal wall swelling for two years and had associated chest heaviness, exertional dyspnea, and intermittent fever for two months. She was hemodynamically stable with regular bowel and bladder habits. Upon examination, around 12 × 10 cm (length x width) of mass was noted, with well-defined borders and margins fixed to the chest wall. Her blood parameters, liver function tests, and kidney function tests were within normal limits. Her chest x-ray revealed homogenous opacity in the left middle and lower zone. At the same time, contrast-enhanced computed tomography of the thorax and abdomen showed a large lobulated lytic lesion involving the left ninth rib measuring 13.34 × 8.92 × 10.71 cm (anteroposterior/transverse/craniocaudal diameter). The mass abuts the diaphragm, spleen, stomach, pancreas, and overlying chest and upper abdomen muscles without invasion. It has well-defined margins and harbors a “ring and arc” type of calcification, suggesting a chondroid matrix [Fig. a and b]. A further 3D rendered image shows lytic destruction of the anterior body of the left ninth rib with associated widening of the intervening intercostal space by the soft tissue mass and scalloping of the adjacent surfaces of the eighth and tenth ribs [Fig. c and d].
The true-cut biopsy from the mass confirmed chondrosarcoma grade 2. A 3D-composite mesh was designed based on computed tomography using virtual surgical planning and computer-assisted design and manufacturing technology. Syngo. via - an integrated imaging software of Siemens Healthineers, was used to process chest and abdomen CT images acquired by a 256-slice multidetector computed tomography (MDCT) scanner [Somatom Drive (Siemens Healthineers- Erlangen, Germany)]. Cinematic volume rendering technology (cVRT) is a unique application of Syngo. via was used to get interactive 3D visualization of multi-modal imaging data. So, using cVRT, a 3D image of the chest and abdominal wall was made. Based on this, the 3D model was designed to allow precise surgical planning. Access to the chest and abdomen was through a subcostal incision.
Under general anesthesia and single lung ventilation, an oblique incision was made, and superior and inferior flaps were created. A 2-cm margin from the tumor site was established. Posteriorly, the eighth, ninth, and tenth ribs were resected, followed by wide local excision and excision of the tumor over the abdomen and the chest wall. At the site of the diaphragm, a 2.5 cm marginal portion of the diaphragm was also resected, and the tumor was removed entirely in toto, followed by diaphragmatic closure primarily [Fig. a, b and c]. Single lung ventilation was preferred in certain places during dissection to obtain an appropriate plane and avoid inadvertent parenchymal injury. A chest tube was placed, followed by reconstruction of the chest and abdominal wall. A 3D-composite mesh was placed over the defect, and edges were sutured to the intercostal muscle with prolene 3 − 0 interrupted [Figs. d and a]. Raised flaps were approximated, followed by skin closure. She was extubated after 6 h. The postoperative course was uneventful, with a drain removed on day 6, followed by discharge on day 10. Histopathology confirmed chondrosarcoma grade 2 with negative margins. Postoperative follow-up at one, three, six, and twelve months was uneventful, with no recurrence/residual lesion or chest discomfort, and the surgical site healed well by primary intention at 12 months [Fig. b and c].