A 62-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital with a 3-day history of abdominal pain. Her medical history included multiple myeloma that was in complete remission, but for which she received pomalidomide and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.
On presentation, her vital signs were as follows: Glasgow Coma Scale, 15 (E4 V5 M6); body temperature, 36.4°C; blood pressure, 175/90 mmHg; heart rate, 63 b.p.m.; and respiratory rate, 22 breaths/min. Abdominal examination revealed tenderness of the epigastrium and left abdomen, but without swelling or guarding. Skin and other examinations were unremarkable.
Abdominal non-contrast CT was unremarkable at admission. Laboratory testing revealed the following: white blood cell count, 2,100/μL; platelet count, 127,000/μL; aspartate transaminase, 24 IU/L; alanine transaminase, 23 IU/L; amylase, 77/L; and C-reactive protein, 0.12 mg/dL. No coagulopathy was observed.
The initial examination and investigation therefore failed to uncover a clear cause for her symptoms. She was admitted to hospital for observation because the pain was severe and did not improve despite receiving acetaminophen and buprenorphine.
The day after hospitalization, several hours after the first CT, a contrast-enhanced CT was undertaken because the pain deteriorated. This showed PFS of the CA and SMA . On day 3, thrombocytopenia (platelet count 17,000 μg/dL) were observed. On day 4, an eruption appeared around the abdomen, but without blistering. On day 5, elevated aspartate transaminase (3,248 IU/L) and alanine transaminase (1,732 IU/L) were observed, and fever developed with neutropenia (neutrophil count, 324/μL). Therefore, we started therapy with meropenem, linezolid, and caspofungin. Following this, the skin eruption spread over the face, body trunk, and limbs, and some blisters also erupted. Although these were not characteristic of a typical Varicella rash, we suspected DVI and started acyclovir. On day 7, the patient’s body temperature normalized and she reported that the abdominal pain had improved. On day 10, VZV antigen and antibody tests were positive, confirming the diagnosis of DVI. The skin eruptions began crusting on the same day. On day 14, acyclovir therapy was stopped and blood tests showed that the patient’s liver enzymes had normalized. On day 21, although the abdominal pain had disappeared, the patient reported feeling “strangeness” in the area where the pain had been, so we carried out a non-contrast CT. Although PFS remained, it had improved . All the patient’s laboratory data were normal on day 35, and she was discharged. On day 41, upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed no abnormal findings. Follow-up CT at the same time also showed that PFS had almost disappeared .