We present an eleven-year-old African-American female patient with multiple craniofacial anomalies that we speculate to have occurred during blastogenesis. She demonstrates duplication of both bony and soft tissue midline facial and cranial structures. Facial abnormalities include turribrachycephaly, flattened midface, hypertelorism, cleft palate, bilateral cleft lower lip, supernumerary teeth, macrostomia, short neck with limited range of movement and two separate, fully formed, independently moving tongues – double tongue . The mouth could not be opened for examination due to severe retrognathia, ankylosis of the TMJ and fibrosis of the masseters.
The patient demonstrates severe intellectual disability; she is nonverbal and does not follow commands but does point to things she wants. Cranial nerves are difficult to assess on examination. Visual acuity could not be reliably tested. However, she is able to recognize people and objects. Cranial nerves III-VII are unremarkable, CNVIII demonstrates profound hearing loss, and cranial nerves X, XI, XII are normal except for volitional independent control of both tongues.
The patient has a thoracic scoliosis of 55 degrees. Her height is in the 3rd percentile, weight in the 10th and head circumference in the 25th percentile. She has thin lower legs, small narrow feet, and tight left heel cord. She moves all extremities spontaneously but strength can not be reliably tested. Spasticity of both lower extremities is also present, with reflexes of 2-3+ in both upper and lower extremities. She is unable to bear weight on her legs, but does crawl, scoot and support herself when sitting. She is able to assist with dressing by holding her arms up and spreading her legs for diaper changes.
The patient was born to a previously healthy 34-year-old G4P3 mother with a pregnancy complicated by failure of maternal weight gain and polyhydramnios noted during the last 2 weeks of gestation. Her mother denies medication use, drug or alcohol abuse. Early ultrasound did not reveal any abnormalities due to a large fibroid causing poor visualization of fetal parts. An ultrasound in the third trimester showed no gross deformities, but an absent lower lip. Three healthy older siblings show no similar abnormalities. Her parents are not consanguineous and there is no family history of malformations. The child was born via cesarean section due to fetal bradycardia at full term. Apgar scores were 4/7 and she was noted to have a mass in the anterior lower jaw, filling the oral cavity and extending into the posterior fossa. The mass prevented intubation but she responded to suctioning and chest compressions. She remained hypercapnic with a pCO2 of 81 necessitating a tracheostomy at 2 days of age. The intraoral mass was biopsied at this time and found to be a mature teratoma. A gastrostomy tube was placed soon after for feeding. Severe reflux necessitated a Nissen fundoplication after G tube placement.
An incomplete resection of the oropharyngeal tumor was performed at 15 months of age. The tumor originated on the posterior aspect of the mandible and extended posteriorly to the pharynx and superiorly into the nasal cavity to the level of the crista galli. It was completely intraoral; only retrognathia and cleft lip were visible exteriorly. Intra-operatively, the tumor was found to have prevented fusion of the palatal shelves, creating a cleft palate. It had also grown inferiorly, creating two completely separate tongues extending back to the foramen cecum; the double tongue, however, was not surgically corrected to monitor recurrence of the teratoma. Resection of the tumor necessitated removal of the alveolar ridge of the mandible and most of the nasal septum. Posteriorly, the dissection was stopped at the level of the cranial base to prevent surgical entry into the cranial cavity with the risk of subsequent CSF leak or infection. The final pathology of the tumor was mature teratoma. Residual tumor was left behind in the posterior fossa in the region of the clival encephalocele.
The past medical history is remarkable for multiple surgical interventions. Volvulus at age 7 required partial ileal and colon resection leading to short gut syndrome. She has also had soft tissue release and anterior tibial transfer performed on the left foot for a tight heel cord. The patient has a history of self-mutilation, including hand biting, scratching and hair pulling when she is upset, requiring frequent restraints. She has been home schooled due to infection risk.
Head MRI reveals duplication of multiple midline structures: two sellas and two pituitary glands, a duplicate ventricular system, two basilar arteries and a midline third cerebral peduncle [Figures – and , ]. Her imaging is also notable for agenesis of the corpus callosum and a clival encephalocele with an adjacent midline nasopharyngeal tumor consistent with residual teratoma . The craniocervical junction appeared abnormal with a widened C1 arch, C2 body duplication and two odontoid processes .
Karyotype from teratoma demonstrated normal chromosomes with 60:40 X inactivation. Telomeres were normal. A microarray based comparative genomic hybridization analysis of 3,397 loci using olignonucleotide probes was normal (Nimble Gen 135K).