A 54-year-old woman visited our hospital with a complaint of blurred vision in both eyes for 1 month. Six weeks ago, she had flu-like symptoms, which lasted for approximately 1 week. There was no other past medical history, travel history, or contact with animals such as cats or dogs.
The best-corrected visual acuity was 20/63 in the right eye and 20/32 in the left eye. Anterior segment examination yielded unremarkable results, and the intraocular pressure was 18 mmHg in both eyes. Ocular movement and the pupils were normal without diplopia or relative afferent pupillary defect, and the patient did not complain of ocular pain. The results of the color vision test using Ishihara’s plates were normal for both eyes. Fundus photography revealed swollen optic discs with blurred margins and macular exudates in both eyes . Spectral-domain optical coherence tomography revealed intraretinal edema in the temporal peripapillary area and subretinal fluid with neurosensory retinal detachment in the macular area . Fluorescein angiography showed leakage at the disc with no evidence of retinal vasculitis or late staining of the venous walls . The Humphrey visual field 24 – 2 test showed only mild blind spot enlargement without scotoma or defects in either eye . Blood pressure was measured to check for malignant hypertension, and the result was 136/82, which is not malignant hypertension. Brain and orbital magnetic resonance imaging, which were performed to confirm the presence/absence of optic nerve diseases such as optic neuritis and papilledema, showed no definitive findings of these diseases.
A systemic laboratory workup, including complete blood count, serum biochemistry, and serologic and immunologic tests for syphilis, tuberculosis, influenza, varicella, toxoplasmosis, toxocariasis, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), anti-aquaporin 4 Ab, angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE), anti-nuclear antibody (ANA)&anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA), rheumatoid factor (RF), and anti-CCP, was performed to rule out underlying conditions that may cause infectious and inflammatory disorders. The test results revealed no evidence of infection or inflammation. However, bone marrow suppression was suspected on the complete blood count test: low red blood cells, hemoglobin, and hematocrit. Therefore, the patient was referred to the Department of Hemato Oncology.
During the evaluation, we started treatment with oral prednisolone 60 mg/day after eliminating the possibility of infection based on the history and laboratory examination results. Blurred vision in both eyes began to improve 3 days after treatment, and the visual acuity of the left eye improved to 20/20. The dose of oral prednisolone was tapered off, and the visual acuity of the right eye improved to 20/40 after 5 days and 20/32 after 2 weeks. Based on the results of a complete blood count and the following findings: increased serum protein and decreased albumin, M-peak findings on serum and urine protein electrophoreses, peripheral blood smear, plasma cell findings on bone marrow biopsy, and increased IgA and free lambda light chain, the patient was diagnosed with multiple myeloma. The bortezomib (Velcade), lenalidomide (Revlimid), and dexamethasone (VRD) regimen was chosen for the treatment of multiple myeloma. Therefore, oral prednisolone was replaced with intravenous dexamethasone. Dexamethasone was administered intravenously for 2 weeks, and the visual acuity of the right eye improved to 20/20 1 month after starting treatment. Subsequently, the patient developed a neutropenic fever. No source of infection was found; however, steroids were discontinued because of the elevation in infectious markers. After 4 weeks of steroid treatment, the visual acuity improved in both eyes, optic disc edema improved, and the optic disc margin became clearer. In addition, the intraretinal edema resolved completely, and the subretinal fluid improved to the extent that only a little remained.