A previously healthy 31 years old man was transferred to our hospital with history of closed fracture of the right patellar after fall injury 13 months ago. He was treated surgically with open reduction tension band wiring at a local hospital. The patient developed wound infection after surgery. The wound was debrided 3 times in the following half a year and he also received long term antibiotic treatment, but no improvement was achieved.
On admission, the physical examination revealed normal body temperature. Mild swelling and normal skin surface temperature of the right knee was observed. A 10 × 5 mm sinus tract was located close to patella, and the range of motion (ROM) of the knee was 0°–40° . Bacterial culture of the exudations at the sinus was MRSA. Laboratory results showed white blood cell count (WBC) was 7.3 × 109/L, C-reactive protein was 10.8 mg/L, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 56 mm/h. The radiograph showed the wires had loosened . Synovial fluid of the knee was obtained by aseptic puncture. The fluid culture was negative and fluid analysis showed the WBC was less than 1000/mL, which suggested no joint infection .
Surgical debridement was performed 4 days after admission to our hospital. Necrotic and inflammatory tissues were found in the deep end of sinus tract and were very close to the wires . The abnormal tissues were completely excised. The wires were removed, and the tracts of the wires were thoroughly debrided with a curette. After washing the wound with a large amount of saline, the debrided cavity and pin tracts were filled with vancomycin-loaded synthetic calcium sulfate beads (Osteoset Resorbable Kit, RBK, Wright Medical, Arlington) . The lateral gastrocnemius myocutaneous flap was dissected and transferred to fully cover the patella. The knee was kept in extension position and a drain tube was placed under the muscle flap. Split-thickness skin grafts were grafted on the muscular flap and then compressed with a gauze pad .
After initial surgery in our hospital, the knee was immobilized with a straight brace for 2 weeks. The patient received intravenous linezolid treatment. One week after initial surgery, the gauze pad was removed and the skin grafts showed well-healed, meanwhile the drain tube was removed. Laboratory inflammation markers were normal at 3 weeks after surgery and the patient was discharged. The patient continued oral linezolid therapy for 4 weeks after discharge. Active and passive motion exercise of the right knee was also instructed. No sign of infection was observed over the following 1 year . Radiograph at follow-up showed no bone destruction of patella . However, ROM of the right knee was limited to 0°–40°.
The patient claimed difficulty with climbing stairs and squatting due to right knee stiffness. No significant improvement was achieved after therapy for about 1 year with guidance from a rehabilitation physician. The patient therefore appealed for further treatment and rehospitalized 1 year after the last discharge from our hospital. Ilizarov external fixation was chosen to manage the knee stiffness. An Ilizarov external ring fixator consisting of four rings and several K-wires was placed on the distal femur and proximal tibia. Hinges were placed between the external fixators. The most proximal and distal rings were connected with two long threaded rods with nuts. The angles of the hinges were adjusted by rotating the nuts on the threaded rods . A scheduled plan was made to adjust the angle of the knee. We flexed the right knee to the fullest and further turned the nuts 5 mm to the proximal end on the first day morning (8 am) to exert persistent bending force on the knee. The locations of the nuts on the threaded rods were marked. The knee was returned to the strait position before sleep (9 pm). The next day morning, the knee was flexed and the nuts were turned to 2.5 mm more proximal than the previous marked location. After adjusting the knee motility for two months, ROM of the right knee reached 0°–120°. Then the fixators were removed. After removal of the external fixation, the patient performed further active and passive knee motion exercises. The last follow-up visit was 2 months after removal of the fixators. Laboratory inflammation markers were normal. The knee presented normal appearance and ROM of the joint was 0°–130°. The patient claimed no pain and no obvious obstacles when climbing stairs or squatting .