A 35 year old male of Kikuyu ethnicity from Kiambu, presents with 6 months history of productive cough and progressive weight loss. NN is a 10 pack-year smoker and has history of heavy alcohol consumption for a long time.
At the time of presentation the patient had noticed pain and increasing swelling involving both knee joints and right ankle joint over 6 days. The left ankle joint and both wrists were also painful. The patient reported no diarrhoea, skin rash, genito-urinary symptoms or eye problems. There was no family history of similar illness.
Examination of the patient revealed the following; Temperature 38 °C, respiratory rate 40/min, pulse rate of 104/min. Patient was normotensive, acyanotic and wasted. Examination of the knee joints demonstrated bilateral knee effusion with limitation of movement of both joints. Auscultation of the chest revealed bilateral crepitations.
Bilateral opacities were seen on a postero-anterior chest radiograph. Full blood count revealed leukocytosis, with an Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate (ESR) of 70 mm/H. HIV test was positive with CD4+ count of 109/ml and HIV viral load of 237,000 copies/ml. The patient had no prior knowledge of his HIV status and was naïve to antiretroviral drug therapy. His sputum smear for acid fast bacilli was positive.
His serum Albumin was 24 g/l and INR 1.57. Other liver function tests were normal. The patient had features of acute kidney injury which abated on rehydration.
His antibody test for salmonella and brucella were both non-reactive. Hepatitis B and C markers were negative. Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) was non-reactive for syphilis, while serum uric acid was normal. Anti-CCP (cyclic citrullinated peptide), antinuclear antibody and rheumatoid factor were all negative. Urine examination was normal.
Synovial fluid was reported as cloudy fluid with 17,000 cells: 74% neutrophils, 10% lymphocytes and 12% monocytes. No birefringent crystals were seen in the synovial fluid which was also sterile on culture and negative for tuberculosis.
The patient was treated with rifampicin 10 mg/kg/day, isoniazid 5 mg/kg/day, ethambutol 15 mg/kg/day and pyrazinamide 20 mg/kg/day and within 2 weeks reported resolution of pain and joint swelling.
After 2 months of therapy, the patient had complete remission of joint symptoms and had gained weight. He was commenced on highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) following the initial intensive phase of tuberculosis chemotherapy.