A 62-year-old male with no eminent clinical history presented at our centre with an acute non-ST segment elevation myocardial infarction. Twelve-lead ECG showed sinus rhythm (SR) with previously known LBBB . Laboratory tests indicated a rise of cardiac troponin I. Urgent coronary angiography revealed a single coronary vessel disease with a subtotal occlusion of the proximal LAD . Successful percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) was performed immediately. No arrhythmias were detected on monitor and his permanent rhythm was identical to the rhythm before PCI. After 5 days of hospitalization, the patient was discharged in good condition. Due to reduced left ventricular function (ejection fraction 40%), medical treatment of heart failure was initiated (bisoprolol 5 mg o.d., spironolactone 25 mg o.d., ramipril 5 mg o.d.).
At admission in our Department of Cardiac Rehabilitation 10 days after PCI, the ECG demonstrated an AIVR with RBBB . Laboratory tests showed no electrolyte abnormalities. The patient was transferred to our intermediate care unit and was scheduled for CRT (cardiac resynchronization therapy) -pacemaker implantation. Eighteen hours after admission, sustained ventricular tachyarrhythmia was documented on ECG monitor. The morphology was compatible with Torsade de Pointes tachycardia degenerating into ventricular fibrillation (VF) . Shortly before the event, ECG monitor readouts showed SR with LBBB switching to AIVR with RBBB morphology . Two external defibrillator shocks had to be delivered and return of spontaneous circulation was achieved after 10 min of cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Another two episodes occurred after transfer to intensive care unit. Repeat coronary angiography revealed no novel coronary lesion. During the whole case history, no prolongation of the QT-interval was observed. A CRT-implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) for secondary prevention was implanted on the same day (device settings: DDD 50/min, VT-zone 188/min, VF-zone 200/min). During the implantation procedure, another three episodes of ventricular tachyarrhythmia occurred. Therefore, we began an antiarrhythmic therapy with amiodarone. After 5 months, pharmacological antiarrhythmic therapy was ceased. At follow-up of 12 months, no further episodes were found upon ICD-interrogation. Biventricular pacing was 98% and ejection fraction had slightly improved (45%).