A 63-year-old woman presented with injury to right ankle after a road traffic accident. Following initial resuscitation and stabilization of the patient, assessment for other injuries was done. Physical examination showed right heel pad avulsion as shown in . The extent of the wound contamination, soft tissue loss, skeletal injury, and sensation and viability of the avulsed flap was performed. The wound was contaminated and there was no skin loss. Radiographs were obtained to identify the skeletal injury which showed fracture of right calcaneal tuberosity as shown in the . Finally, the compound fracture was classified according to the Gustilo-Anderson classification as Grade IIIA. Broad spectrum antibiotics with Gram-positive, Gram-negative, and anaerobic coverage were started intravenously. The patient was counseled about the potential complications of reimplantation of heel pad and the possible necessity for additional surgical procedures.
Under regional anesthesia, the wound was debrided and thoroughly lavaged. Fixation of the calcaneal tuberosity was done temporarily with Kirschner wires, followed by two 4.5 mm CCS. However, final tightening of the screws was not performed. Tendo-achilles was sutured using Ethibond no 5 suture with Krackow’s technique, and the two ends were tied to the head of the screws over washers. Once properly tied, the final tightening of screws was performed. Thus, giving a secure fixation to calcaneal tuberosity and tendo-achilles . The heel pad was later fixed using Schanz pin in the center, and primary suturing of the wound was performed . This provides a stable anchorage for the heel pad over the calcaneus.
The soft tissue was sutured in two layers: Subcutaneous tissue using vicryl and skin using silk. This method makes the avulsed heel pad immobile, thus jamming any movement in sagittal and coronal plane. Over this, an above-knee cast was applied keeping the knee in 30° of flexion and ankle in 30° of equinus. After the cast dried, a window was made in the heel for wound inspection and dressing.
After 2 days, the patient was shifted to oral antibiotics.
Broad spectrum antibiotics covering both Gram-positive and Gram-negative organisms were administered .
Window was created on the 2nd day, through which wound inspection and required dressing was done. Wound and flap healing was assessed weekly . Toe-touch down weight bearing was allowed after 2 weeks. Schanz pin was removed after 6 weeks, and the below-knee cast was applied keeping the foot plantigrade. Full weight bearing was allowed in a gradual manner, over the next 4 weeks . Over a period of 12-week, the patient achieved good functional range of movements, and the patient was followed up for 1 year and her fracture was united (, , ).
We have included the X-ray which is more than 1 year old. The implant was not removed as there were no complaints related to the implant. It is also clinically evident that the fracture is united as the patient is walking full weight bearing without the support and standing on heel and toes independently.