A 50-year-old-Caucasian-female with 20-pack smoking years presented with a history of anorexia, lethargy, unintentional weight loss, and depression. Auscultation revealed absent air entry on the left chest. Laboratory workup demonstrated severe iron-deficiency anemia, low albumin, and normal serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) and beta-hCG. Pre-operative LDH was not included due to the low suspicion of nonseminomatous dysembryoma or lymphoma.
Chest X-ray and computed-tomography revealed a left-thoracic heterogeneously dense 20x25cm mass compressing the heart and lung with a major mediastinal shift . A preoperative MRI was not performed as there was no evidence of invasion into any vital structures. Five IR CT-guided core needle biopsies from different regions of the mass yielded minute fragments of amorphous, acellular material which was insufficient for pathological diagnosis. Core needle biopsy has a diagnostic yield of 77% and can be inadequate for immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry evaluation . The profusely dense material ultimately found during the operation largely contributed to the inability of the core needle biopsy to provide a diagnosis.
A preoperative clinical diagnosis of mediastinal teratoma was entertained. Her BMI on admission was 18.4 and she had a Karnofsky performance scale index between 10 and 20. Because of the severe deconditioned status of the patient and cachexia she was put on enteral feeding and sent to a rehabilitation program for 3 weeks. Thereafter the patient underwent left lateral thoracotomy and complete resection of the mediastinal tumor. Lateral thoracotomy was preferred over median sternotomy in this case because the mass did not cross midline and it extended below the level of the pulmonary hilum. A thoracotomy incision is standard approach to a middle or posterior mediastinal mass [, , ]. Intraoperatively the tumor was firmly adherent to the pulmonary artery and pericardium. It was necessary to resect the anterior aspect of the tumor first to obtain proximal control of the pulmonary artery before completely separating the tumor from the artery.
Macroscopic examination demonstrated yellow pasty-material with teratomatous components including hair and skin . Histologic description was consistent with mature squamous cells and occasional glandular cells.
The patient required prolonged chest tube drainage to allow for shift of the mediastinum and expansion of the chronically atelectatic lung. She continued physical therapy and enteral feeding supplementation due to severe deconditioning. There were no complications and she was discharged on the 17th postoperative day. At the first follow-up appointment 18 days after discharge she was regaining weight and strength without any clinical evidence of recurrence. Her BMI had increased from 18.4 to 21, and her Karnofsky performance scale index was between 80 and 90, quickly approaching 100. She was scheduled again for follow up in 2 months.