A 29-year-old poor adult male from Rajbari district of Bangladesh, had presented to our tertiary care hospital in Faridpur district with severe abdominal pain and progressive abdominal distension associated with scanty micturition during the summer of 2016. The abdominal pain was located on the right hypochondriac region and was dull in nature with no relation with food intake and had no radiation. He had a history of admission to a primary care hospital three months earlier with jaundice and abdominal distension. He had no relevant family history of similar complaints.
On examination, he was anemic, mildly icteric, had ankle oedema, along with ascites. His vital signs were normal. However, he had visible engorged veins over the chest and abdomen with the flow of direction being away from the umbilicus . On abdominal examination, the fluid thrill test was found to be positive with a palpable liver and spleen. During the examination, his testes were found to be atrophied and there was a loss of male secondary sexual characteristics. The routine laboratory investigations revealed a hemoglobin level of 61 g/L with a normal total leukocyte count (9000 cells/mm3) and platelet count (2.6 × 105/mm3). His liver function tests revealed a serum bilirubin level of 32 g/L, total serum protein of 52 g/L, and a serum albumin level of 30 g/L. His viral markers were found negative. The ascitic fluid examination showed 4800 cells/mm3 and biochemical examination showed the protein and sugar levels to be 38 g/L and 0.22 g/L, respectively. An USG of the abdomen revealed that the liver was enlarged but had normal texture . However, the portal vein was normal in diameter (9 mm) without any notable thrombus. Furthermore, a doppler study of hepatic and portal system revealed that the portal vein, hepatic artery, and hepatic veins were intact; showing well-filling of blood and normal flow velocity spectrum, apparently there was no evidence of portal hypertension [Figure and ]. Also, multiple air-fluid levels were noted in the X-ray abdomen, suggestive of obstruction . The radiological diagnosis of BCS could not be established; however, in this case, there was evidence of the presence of a collateral circulation despite a normal diameter and blood flow through the major hepatic veins.
The patient was diagnosed as BCS based on the classical triad of abdominal pain, liver enlargement, and ascites. A symptomatic and supportive treatment plan was established, and the patient was counseled about possible surgical treatment options in BCS such as liver transplantation or portosystemic shunts. Stenting could not be a treatment option as the site of obstruction could not be identified without further costly investigations and the patient was not able to afford liver transplantation. However, his ascites was reduced after conservative treatment with propranolol, lactulose, and paracentesis for the ascetic fluid. The patient got discharged after a 15-day hospitalization and advised for a monthly follow-up at the outpatient department.
The patient was reasonably doing well without any significant complaints until one-month after being discharged. He then presented back to our hospital subsequently with similar complaints and ascites. An USG of the abdomen confirmed his large ascites and 2.5 L of ascitic fluid was drawn out by paracentesis. He was then discharged from the hospital with the same medication and has remained reasonably well for 7 months from his last admission as seen during his monthly visits at the outpatient department.
He was followed up for a social visit 22 months after this initial admission and shared his subjective experience of being in good health. We had the privilege to request the patient to share his opinion regarding his condition. The patient kindly stated that “he hates the fact that his circumstance has no affordable permanent cure at the moment, but his general health and well-being are alright because he believes his family is supportive enough to ensure he takes his medications regularly”.