A 59-year-old male presented to the emergency unit of dr. Wahidin Sudirohusodo General Hospital with complaints of recurrent near-syncope, which occurred a couple of hours ago. He described the episode as light-headedness followed by a brief blackout without loss of consciousness. He also had complaints of weakness and fatigue. He had no previous history of similar episodes. He denied any respiratory problems, fever, or close contact with COVID-19 confirmed patients. To his knowledge, he has no underlying cardiovascular conditions and was otherwise healthy. During the examination, he was afebrile, with a blood pressure of 144/88 mmHg, a heart rate of 44 beats per minute, and a respiratory rate of 20 breaths per minute with oxygen saturation of 94% on room air. Physical examination was nothing out of the ordinary, with no signs of volume overload or dehydration. Electrocardiogram (ECG) on admission showed sinus bradycardia with 44 beats per minute. High sensitivity Troponin I assay showed 3.8 ng/L. A 2-h repeated assay was performed with a result of 4.9 ng/L.
Laboratory findings were significant for serum sodium of 117 mmol/L (reference range 136–145 mmol/L), serum potassium of 3.4 mmol/L (reference range 3.5–5.0 mmol/L) and increased neutrophil/lymphocyte ratio 8,36 (78.6/9.4). Blood urea nitrogen was 11.7 mg/dL (reference range: 7–20 mg/dL) and random blood glucose was 122 mg/dL, resulting in calculated plasma osmolality of 245 mOsm/kg (reference range: 275–299 mOsm/kg). Further workup revealed urine osmolality of 142 mOsm/kg (reference range: 500–850 mOsm/kg) and urinary sodium 34 mmol/L with low plasma osmolality. Thyroid-stimulating hormone and Free T4 were normal (1.77 mIU/mL and 1.41 ng/dL consecutively). The patient was planned to be admitted to the Cardiology Care Unit. However, during the routine COVID-19 screening examination, chest CT scan revealed multiple ground-glass opacities typical for COVID-19 pneumonia. Following the chest CT result, a naso- and oropharyngeal swab for SARS-CoV-2 PCR was obtained from the patient, which came back positive with an IL-6 result of 13.2 pg/ml. Further workup fulfilled the criteria for SIADH, and other potential causes of hyponatremia were excluded. No other potential etiology of SIADH was found, and the patient was assessed to have a COVID-19-associated SIADH.
The patient was treated with a slow infusion of hypertonic saline and oral potassium supplementation. After the serum sodium concentration normalized, his symptoms and heart rate improved , and further ECG monitoring showed no bradycardic events. The patient was given azithromycin and oseltamivir from the pulmonology department. Despite his asymptomatic state, the nasopharyngeal swab test remains positive until the 30th day of hospitalization. This case is the first case report concerning symptomatic sinus bradycardia related to COVID-19 associated SIADH to the author’s concern.