A 70 year old man was admitted with more than one year history of abdominal distension and a weight gain of 10 kilograms. He was evaluated in another center and was given the diagnosis of ascites associated with cirrhosis.
His past medical history was significant due to acute myocardial infarction in 1974, mild asthma and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. Since his last evaluation, he has been receiving diltiazem 180 mg/day, aspirin 100 mg/day, digoxin 0,750 mg/week and spironalactone 50 mg/day. He is asymptomatic and walks 2000–3000 meters a day without angor or dyspnea.
The physical examination shows moderate abdominal distension, with no hepatosplenomegaly or edema, and there is mild jugular vein distension (1/3). The hepatojugular reflux was negative. His blood pressure is 130/70 mmHg, pulse 70/ min and regular. The cardiac auscultation is normal and his lungs are clear. His current weight is 78.8 kg. One year before this admission he weighted 70 kg and before starting diuretics he was weighting 81 kg.
The blood laboratory was normal, except for a slightly increase in gamma-glutamyltransferase and 5'nucleotidase . A paracentesis was performed which showed a milky fluid with a high albumin gradient showing portal hypertension , all cultures and cytological studies were negative. Other studies showed normal iron values; antiHIV, HBsAg, antiHBs, antiHBc IgM and antiHCV negative, antiHBc IgG positive; ANA, AMA, SMA y ANCA negative.
A helical CT scan of the abdomen showed mild hepatomegaly, mild enlargement of caudate lobe and ascites. An upper endoscopy ruled out esophageal varices and portal hypertensive gastropathy. A Doppler ultrasound showed a patent portal vein, with a normal diameter (6.6 mm) without alterations in the flow. A cardiac ultrasound showed moderate to severe systolic left ventricle dysfunction with global hypokinesia and the inferolateral wall was akinesic. The left ventricle diameters were normal and the left atria was enlarged (52 mm). The estimated left ventricular ejection fraction was 35%. There were no relevant valve signs, nor mitral or tricuspid regurgitation, nor pericardial disease.
A liver biopsy showed engrossment of centrilobular veins walls and fibrosis, with centrilobular hemorrhage and marked sinusoidal dilatation in acinar zone 3, suggesting increased intrahepatic venous pressure. An angiogram showed dilated but patent suprahepatic and portal veins and inferior vena cava, with slow flow. The measure of free suprahepatic, wedge suprahepatic, pulmonary capillary wedge, pulmonary artery, right ventricle and right atrial pressures confirmed the diagnosis of portal hypertension related to heart failure . He began treatment with furosemide 40 mg/day and spironalactone 100 mg/day; he continued treatment with aspirin, digoxin and diltiazem. The patient lost 8 kg and the abdominal distension was resolved approximately 2 month after the beginning of the treatment. Given the good response to treatment we decided to withhold other possible treatments (i.e. angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors).