A 64-year-old Japanese man noticed a mass in the right breast and sought medical attention. The patient’s medical records showed that he was currently undergoing treatment for alcoholic hepatitis. Physical findings confirmed gynecomastia in both breasts. An elastic and soft neoplastic 3-cm lesion was palpated in the right papilla . There were no skin lesions, and swollen lymph nodes were not palpated. Blood tests showed that tumor marker levels were normal (carcinoembryonic antigen [CEA] level of 1.6 ng/ml [normal, < 5.0 ng/ml], cancer antigen 15-3 [CA15-3] level of 7.5 IU/ml [normal, < 25.0 IU/ml], and National Cancer Center-Stomach-439 (NCC-ST-439) level of 1.0 U/ml [normal, < 4.5 U/ml]). On mammary ultrasonography, a cystic lesion of 3.9 × 2.6 cm was confirmed immediately below the right papilla (mixed pattern). As a 1-cm solid tumor with a gradual rise from the cyst wall was confirmed within the cyst, vacuum-assisted biopsy (VAB) was performed on that site . Pathological examination of the biopsy revealed heterotypic cells with an enlarged oval nucleus forming dense papillary structures mainly of vascular connective tissue components . There was a nucleolus in the nucleus, and some mitotic images were noted. No invasion of tumor cells into the interstitium was noted. Upon immunohistochemical staining, estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PgR) were diffusely positive, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) was negative, and the Ki 67 index was 62.5%. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) confirmed thickening of the wall that protruded outside the cyst . A systemic examination demonstrated that there were no metastases to the lungs, liver, or lymph nodes. Furthermore, there were no bone metastases as determined via bone scintigraphy. The preoperative diagnosis was right breast cancer (male IPC) TisN0M0 stage 0 luminal B-like. Total mastectomy and sentinel lymph node biopsy were performed. Intraoperative pathological diagnosis confirmed a lack of metastasis to the sentinel lymph node; hence, axillary lymph node dissection was omitted. In the excised specimen, a 4.0-cm unilocular cyst was found, along with a 1-cm solid tumor with a gradual rise from the cyst wall . Pathological diagnosis of the resected specimen shared similar characteristics with the solid tumor in the cyst: notably, an oval nucleus with histologically clear nucleolus and fine granular chromatin, cylindrically shaped heterotypic cells, and the presence of basophilic cells in the papillary growth with a thin stem of fibrovasculature as the axis. Some invasion of tumor cells into the interstitium was confirmed. In the papillary structure, p63-positive myoepithelial cells were absent and it was not biphasic (nuclear grade grade 2, nuclear atypia score 3, mitotic counts score 1) (surgical margin free) . ER and PgR staining were diffusely positive, HER2 staining was negative, and the Ki 67 index was 6.6%. In immunostaining, cytokeratin (CK) 20 was negative, and androgen receptor (AR) was positive. As such, the final diagnosis was right breast cancer (male IPC) T2N0M0 stage IIA luminal B-like. The expression of hormone receptor (ER and PgR) was high, and endocrine therapy was initiated postoperatively (20 mg/day tamoxifen). At the present time (3 months postoperation), there has not been any evidence of metastasis.