A 54-year-old male with no significant medical history or family history of retinal dystrophies developed rapid bilateral vision loss, accompanied by photopsias and myodesopsias, respectively four and three weeks after refractive cataract surgeries, which were performed nine days apart in the right (Nov. 1st 2022) and left eye (Nov. 10th 2022). The patient reported good visual acuity preoperatively and the post-operative best-corrected visual acuity was 1.0 in both eyes. During the surgeries, intracameral (IC) lidocaine 0.5% and cefuroxime 1 mg/0.1ml (Aprokam®) were administered. Both eyes were implanted with a trifocal intraocular lens (FineVision PodF of 23 diopters). Four days after the onset of symptoms, the patient was examined in our center and presented with a visual acuity of 0.32 in the right eye, hand movements in the left eye, and a tubular visual field bilaterally. The intraocular pressures were 11 mmHg in the right eye and 12 mmHg in the left eye. The anterior segment examination showed an inflammation grading of 1 + of anterior chamber cells, 1 + flare and 0.5 + of anterior vitreous cells in both eyes. The fundoscopy revealed symmetrical, discrete, and diffuse retinal whitening, predominantly located posterior to the equator. This whitening exhibited a perivascular pattern, which was highlighted on the autofluorescence frames. .
The optical coherence tomography (OCT) showed a perifoveal outer retinal disruption, manifesting as an angular sign of Henle fiber layer hyperreflectivity (ASHH), and outer retinal atrophy further in the periphery . Both eyes displayed symmetrical outer retinal involvement . The fluorescein/indocyanine green (ICG) angiography showed a mild perfusion delay and no vasculitis. On the first electroretinogram (ERG), conducted 5 days after the onset of symptoms, symmetrical results were observed in both eyes. The rod-specific response was undetectable, the a-wave and b-wave responses were both delayed and of reduced amplitude under scotopic conditions to a standard single flash, 30-Hz flicker and to a single-flash in photopic conditions.
The patient was immediately treated with 4 intravenous infusions of methylprednisolone, twice 250 mg 12 h apart initially, then twice 500 mg/day over 2 consecutive days, after the tests for the main infectious diseases responsible for posterior uveitis yielded negative results (human immunodeficiency virus, syphilis, borreliosis, tuberculosis). Oral prednisone (60 mg/day) was then prescribed, with a gradual tapering over 4 months. Despite the therapy, serial OCTs initially showed rapid disappearance of the foveal ellipsoid zone (EZ), followed by outer retinal atrophy , resulting in an absence of light perception in a few days. Following 6 weeks of treatment, the patient experienced a partial recovery of central retinal function, with a visual acuity limited to counting fingers, enabling shape and color perception bilaterally. The OCT scans revealed a partial recuperation of the foveal EZ in both eyes . A second ERG was performed 5 months after symptom onset, which showed no detectable responses bilaterally, under both scotopic and photopic conditions.
A neoplasia was ruled out by extensive systemic medical examination (thoracoabdominal computerized tomography (CT) and positron emission tomography (PET) scans) and the serology for anti-recoverin was negative.