A 47-year-old male with no past medical history and a past surgical history of
bilateral inguinal hernia repairs presented to the ED with acute right lower
quadrant pain of three days’ duration. Pain was constant, progressive, and
associated with anorexia. There was no associated nausea, vomiting, fever, chills,
dysuria, or constipation. He had never experienced any similar episodes of pain in
the past. Upon arrival to the ED, his temperature was 37° Celsius, heart
rate 85 beats per minute, blood pressure 114/77 millimeters of mercury, and his
respiratory rate was 18 breaths per minute. On exam, his abdomen was soft and
non-distended with severe, focal right-sided tenderness around McBurney’s
point with associated guarding. Rovsing’s and psoas signs were negative.
Coughing elicited pain in the patient, but there was no bulge suggesting recurrence
of his hernia. His laboratory values and urine analysis were relatively unremarkable
.
A computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen with intravenous contrast showed
“no evidence of acute appendicitis.” The report also stated:
“no evidence of recurrence of right inguinal hernia, and numerous
fluid-filled small bowel loops in the right abdomen that in the appropriate setting
could reflect enteritis” ( and ).
Upon reassessment, after one dose of four milligrams of morphine, the patient still
had the same exam: focal point tenderness to an area near McBurney’s point.
A decision was made to consult surgery. The surgical team recommended serial
abdominal exams by the emergency physician as well as administration of ketorolac as
an attempt to rule out a musculoskeletal etiology of the pain. However, after serial
exams six hours later, there was no change in the findings, and peritonitis remained
a concern. Surgery was reconsulted and reassessed the patient, deciding to take him
for exploratory laparoscopy and appendectomy, with appendicitis as the presumptive
diagnosis. In the operating room, findings were consistent with cecal
diverticulitis, and the surgeon removed the affected part of the cecum. The surgeon
also opted to remove the appendix. Pathology reports revealed a perforated cecal
diverticulum that was adherent to the abdominal wall, and a normal appendix. The
patient was discharged three days postoperatively on oral antibiotics to complete a
total of four days of antibiotics. He had no complications during his stay.