A 42-year-old male with diagnosed Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome since childhood was referred to us due to symptomatic severe aortic stenosis, along with at least moderate mitral valve regurgitation. The patient was presented, in sinus rhythm with normal cognitive function, short trunk (H: 135 cm, W: 40 kg), stiff neck, limited joints mobility, hypertrophic tongue, forehead bossing, limited mouth opening, reduced visual acquity, and umbilical hernia . The echocardiogram showed severe aortic valve stenosis (mean gradient 69 mmHg, peak velocity 4,16 m/s), at least moderate mitral regurgitation (regurgitant orifice area 0.37 cm2, regurgitant fraction 50%), normal tricuspid and pulmonary valve function, left ventricular hypertrophy (mass index 120 g/m2), left ventricle ejection fraction 55%, indexed left atrial volume 35 ml/m2, and mean pulmonary artery systolic pressure at rest 28 mmHg. The angiogram revealed normal coronary arteries.
The oropharyngeal features such as neck stiffness and small mouth opening with hypertrophic tongue, made the airway management a very difficult and life-threatening procedure. Specifically, the routine endotracheal intubation was impossible, despite the multiple attempts even with video assisted laryngoscopy. Meanwhile, the ventilation was limited by the restricted compliance of the thoracic cage due to the thoracic joints degeneration and stiffness, and was possible only with the aid of laryngeal mask. Emergency cricothyroidotomy was held as a bailout option due to the difficulty of the neck extension and the possible interference with the median sternotomy. Moreover, it is important to avoid tracheal and cartilaginous tissues manipulation in these patients since they might result in tracheomalacia. Finally, the intubation was achieved with fiberoptic bronchoscope. The insertion of a transesophageal ultrasound probe was considered dangerous and therefore was avoided.
The operation was performed with midline sternotomy, aorto-bicaval cannulation, moderate hypothermia and Bretschneider cardioplegia. The interatrial approach with careful dissection of the interatrial groove, mobilization of both vena cava from the pericardial tissue and wide opening of the left mediastinal pleura to facilitate heart rotation, were proved to be adequate additional maneuvers for the exposure of the mitral valve. No extension of the atriotomy through the right atrium was necessary.
The intraoperative findings included fibrotic and stenotic aortic valve with a small aortic root and macroscopic degeneration of mitral leaflets. An aortic and mitral valve replacement with Sorin Bicarbon Slimline 17 and Sorin Bicarbon Fitline 23 (Sorin Group Italia S.r.l., Saluggia VC Italy) respectively was performed. The decision to replace the mitral valve was imposed by the macroscopical appearance of the leaflets, the degree of moderate regurgitation, the uncertain natural history of this specific valve disease with the possibility of another dangerous anesthesia induction in the future. The small aortic ring and aortic root were addressed with a modified Nick’s procedure using a polyester vascular patch (LeMaitre Vascular, Burlingtone, MA USA).
The patient experienced an uneventful in hospital course, and he was discharged the 8th postoperative day. No patient-prosthesis mismatch signs were presented. The histological examination of the mitral valve revealed leaflets myxoid degeneration and clear cells accumulation . Eighteen months postoperatively, the patient remains asymptomatic in sinus rhythm . The recent echocardiogram showed normal left ventricular function, normal function of the prosthetic valves without leak. The aortic prosthesis mean and peak gradients were 11, 8 and 22, 8 mmHg respectively, and the aortic peak velocity 2, 39 m/sec. The mitral prosthesis peak gradient was 6, 63 m/sec.