An 11-year-old female serval (Leptailurus serval) from Wellington Zoo was presented for a right adrenal mass, which had been progressively enlarging over the previous several months. The mass was initially found incidentally on abdominal ultrasound approximately 2 years previously while undergoing evaluation following a foreign body small intestinal obstruction (wood chip mulch). At initial diagnosis, the right adrenal gland was measured as 1.26 cm in comparison to the left adrenal gland, which measured 0.5 cm .
The zookeeper did not report any clinical signs other than lethargy and progressive weight gain over the last 2 years. Recovery following wood chip foreign body removal via small intestinal enterotomy at exploratory laparotomy surgery 2 years previously was reported by the zookeeper as uneventful, and no further gastrointestinal signs were noted.
Successive abdominal ultrasounds indicated that the adrenal mass was expanding without evidence of invasion into the surrounding caudal vena cava or renal vasculature. The mass was encroaching on the right phrenicoabdominal vein but invasion into the vein could not be determined using ultrasound, and computed tomographic evaluation was recommended .
Physical examination on the presentation for computed tomographic evaluation was limited due to the felid's fractious demeanor. While under general anesthesia, vital parameters, such as pre-operative blood pressure (150/100, MAP 115), heart rate (80 bpm), respiratory rate (20 bpm), and thoracic auscultation, were within normal limits for felid species under general anesthesia, however, her body condition score was 9/9. A blood sample was collected and found incompatible on major and minor cross-match with two donor domestic cats.
A triple phase-contrast abdominal computed tomography (CT) was performed to fully assess the adrenal mass and thoracic CT for metastasis evaluation. The cranial pole of the right adrenal was markedly enlarged at 1.8 cm diameter × 3.4 cm craniocaudal length with a hypoattenuating nodule in the caudal pole measuring 1.8 cm in diameter. The nodule had marked rim enhancement and mild homogenous central enhancement in the arterial and venous phases. The right phrenicoabdominal vein was in close apposition to the caudal aspect of the adrenal nodule and the right adrenal gland was in close apposition to the caudal vena cava without visible flattening or filling defects . The left adrenal gland was noted to be within normal limits at 0.6 cm dorsoventral diameter. There were multiple hypoattenuating splenic nodules, consistent with myelolipoma characteristics in the spleen of domestic cats.
The CT findings were consistent with a right adrenal mass without invasion into the caudal vena cava or renal vasculature. Differential diagnoses included possible neoplastic processes, such as adrenocortical adenoma and carcinoma or pheochromocytoma, although nodular hyperplasia could not be ruled out. Surgical exploration and right adrenal resection were recommended for excisional biopsy to determine the diagnosis.
Upon exploratory laparotomy via ventral midline celiotomy under general anesthetic, the previous enterotomy site was visualized in the proximal to mid jejunum with omental adhesions. The right kidney and adrenal gland were palpable, however, they could not be visualized due to abundant retroperitoneal fat. Malleable retractors were utilized to improve visualization and the overlying fat was carefully dissected following incision into the peritoneum overlying the right kidney until the adrenal gland and associated mass were visible . The caudal pole of the right adrenal gland was enlarged, firm, spherical in shape, and had a smooth capsule with no signs of invasion into the surrounding structures. On manipulation of the mass, the serval's blood pressure increased to 170 mmHg systolic (mean arterial 130 mmHg). The right phrenicoabdominal vein was identified, ligated, and transected both cranial and caudal to the adrenal mass. Once fully excised en bloc using sharp and blunt dissection, the adrenal gland and associated mass were submitted in formalin for histopathological examination. Once the mass had been removed, the serval's hypertension was resolved and remained stable for the remainder of the general anesthetic. A coagulation panel was performed immediately following surgery, and the platelet count was decreased; however, there was platelet clumping noted on the blood smear (automated count likely to be spuriously decreased due to clumping, the manual count was subjectively normal). Recovery from anesthesia was uneventful. The sample was submitted for special immunohistochemical staining with Chromogranin A, as the intraoperative hypertension raised the possibility of an unusual pheochromocytoma.
Histopathology showed an expansile, encapsulated cyst lined by a single layer of plump to attenuated to cuboidal to columnar epithelial cells . The cyst content comprised amorphous eosinophilic (proteinaceous) debris with cholesterol clefts, occasional macrophages, and multinucleated giant cells. Toward one edge of the cyst, there was hemorrhage and aggregates of mineralized debris. The adrenal cortex and medulla were compressed to a rim around the periphery of the cyst. These findings were consistent with an epithelial adrenal cyst. There was no evidence of neoplastic transformation. Due to intra-operative hypertension raising the possibility of an unusual pheochromocytoma, the sample was submitted for special immunohistochemical staining with Chromogranin A. Immunohistochemistry staining for Chromogranin A was performed, using an internal positive and a negative control consisting of areas of normal adrenal medullary and cortical parenchyma, respectively. The epithelial lining cells of the cyst were negative for Chromogranin A, which did not support a cyst of adrenal medullary epithelial origin/cystic pheochromocytoma. There was generalized indistinct staining of the proteinaceous cyst content, considered to be a non-specific reaction .
Since the surgery, the serval has been doing well, showing no clinical signs with a healthy appetite and normal activity.