A 60-year-old male with a chronic pretibial wound with underlying osteomyelitis of the right leg presented himself at the emergency department and was admitted to the surgical ward of the Haaglanden Medical Centre in October 2018. His medical history included the following:
1) In February 2006, the patient's right leg was operatively lengthened using a monotube (due to a length difference between the left and right leg that caused significant complaints while walking). Monotube material was removed in March of the same year and the fracture was fixated using screws. Screws and other osteosynthesis material were removed in 2008 and 2010 after good consolidation of the fracture; 2) In 2012, the patient was treated with antibiotics (flucloxacillin) for a cellulitis infection of the right leg; and 3) He sustained a right crural fracture, which was treated with external fixation and later, after approximately 7 days, an intramedullary nail. This was complicated with osteomyelitis and a break of the intramedullary nail. The osteomyelitis was treated with antibiotics (ceftazidime/clindamycin) and a new intramedullary nail was inserted.
In 2018, the patient presented with a pretibial skin defect of 2x2 cm. Bone is visible caudally in the wound. No erythema of the skin or pus was seen. The patient underwent surgery to remove the protruding bone and to clean the wound. Deep cultures of the bone were taken during surgery. The underlying soft tissue was well perfused and postoperatively he was treated with intravenous antibiotics (ceftazidime and clindamycin). In November 2018, the patient returned with pus outflow out of the wound and severe erythema of the wound edges. X-ray images showed and non-union . A leucocyte scan (MRI) was performed revealing chronic osteomyelitis around the original fracture with intra-medullary expansion; no pus collections were seen.
After several months of antibiotic treatment and vacuum assisted closure (VAC), only a mediocre healing trend was observed. Therefore, in March 2019, the decision was made to remove all of the affected bone, scar tissue, and overlying skin, and to place a gentamycin cement spacer. Pre-operatively the patient stopped smoking and alcohol to minimise the risk of further infection. To cover the fracture and wound, the plastic surgeon was consulted to place an ALT free-flap of the left leg, connected to the dorsal pedal artery. Finally, the surgeons placed an external fixation to stabilize the fracture. The process is seen in Figure , Figure , Figure , and Figure .
Postoperatively, the patient was treated with antibiotics and was kept on bed rest with his leg held at hip height for six days. After this, he started ‘dangling’ with his right leg for 10 minutes twice a day, increasing with 10 minutes every day. Figure shows the postoperative result at two weeks.
In April 2019, the gentamycin cement spacer was removed and the fibula was disconnected proximally at 8cm and distally at 6cm. The distal and proximal ends of the tibia were cleaned and were checked for vascularisation. The fibula was then sawed in half (2x5.5cm) and was placed as a double barrel in the tibia defect. The fibula graft was well vascularized. A locking compression plate (LCP) was placed under x-ray guidance to fixate the tibia. The skin of the lateral lower leg was fixated with a split skin graft (SSG) of the medial upper left leg. This surgery was done by a plastic surgeon together with a trauma surgeon. Intraoperative x-ray images are shown in Figure . Cultures of the infected tibia (taken during surgery) showed Streptococcus constellatus and bacteroides and the pathology report showed less vital bone with fibrosis and marrow inflammation; no malignancies were found.
Postoperatively, the patient received bed rest for two weeks. An upper leg cast was given for these two weeks, to prevent flexion of the knee and ankle, and thereafter a lower leg cast was used. During this time, the patient received antibiotics (piperacillin/tazobactam, total of six weeks). Three weeks after the operation the patient was discharged and then started ‘dangling’ with the same schedule as before. The patient recovered well and started physiotherapy. In August 2019, the patient was readmitted with a recurrent infection of the right lower leg and spontaneous wounds at the medial and distal site of the previous operations. Antibiotics were again administered. Perioperatively an abscess was incised and drained.
In November 2019, an LCP break and fracture of the proximal tibia was found on x-ray after the patient heard a disturbing sound while walking .
The wound at the medial side of the ALT flap was circumcised and removed. Incision was made over the old scar at the lateral end (since the ALT vascularisation was at the medial side). Scar tissue, along with the LCP and screws, was removed. At the proximal end of the fibula double barrel, a non-union was seen, distally consolidation was seen. An LCP was placed more medial to secure the tibia and a second LCP was placed for lateral fixation .
Because of the necessary skin and tissue excision, it was not possible to close the skin primarily and, therefore, a VAC system was again placed. The VAC system was changed in the operation theatre five times to prevent plate infection and since it was too painful in the patient ward.The cultures showed Staphylococcus haemolyticus (commensal flora) and the culture of the LCP showed Enterococcus faecium and was treated accordingly with levofloxacin and vancomycin for two weeks. Afterwards, the patient received VAC changes at the outpatient clinic two times a week. As of February 2020, the wound is fully recovered with a full consolidation of the LCP . The patient has completely stopped smoking and is back to work again.