A 72-year-old male patient with history of stroke, smoking, emphysema, atrial fibrillation, and hyperlipidemia, presented with severe claudication of the left lower extremity (Rutherford 3). Initial arterial duplex US demonstrated diffuse SFA occlusion. The patient underwent a left lower extremity angiogram with recanalization of the long segment left SFA CTO. During the procedure, multiple Everflex stents (Medtronic, Minneapolis MN, USA) were placed, spanning the entire SFA . Patient was placed on clopidogrel 75 mg daily regimen for 6 months, in addition to his long-term rivaroxiban 20 mg daily regimen. At one year follow-up, the patient continued to show clinical improvement albeit with mild claudication at this point, however repeat ultrasound demonstrated interval development of severe ISR in the proximal left SFA. Repeat angiogram confirmed the finding, which was then treated with angioplasty. During the angiogram, a small distal SFA pseudoaneurysm was identified intraprocedurally. This was successfully excluded by placement of a Viabahn covered stent (W. L. Gore®, Flagstaff, AZ, USA) .
At 1-month follow-up, patient demonstrated no recurrence of claudication symptoms; however, there was a new SFA pseudoaneurysm on duplex arterial US spanning from proximal to distal SFA, and demonstrating active flow into the pseudoaneurysm sac from the proximal SFA . As such, a third angiogram was performed with use of intraprocedural intravascular ultrasound (IVUS), which demonstrated at least two foci of Type II stent fracture in the proximal SFA, resulting in stent deformation and widening at the fracture site, with active flow into the pseudoaneurysm . Intraprocedurally, the stent fracture was difficult to identify on angiogram alone, but was much better appreciated on IVUS. The previously repaired site of the pseudoaneurysm remained intact without recurrence. Multiple, overlapping Viabahn covered stents (W. L. Gore®, Flagstaff, AZ, USA) were deployed, from the SFA ostium to the distal SFA (overlapping with the previously placed covered stent), to exclude the flow into the new pseudoaneurysm as well as to prevent future fracture resulting in further pseudoaneurysm formation. Completion angiogram and IVUS demonstrated excellent stent apposition and no further extravasation into the pseudoaneurysm. Fracture of the previously placed bare-metal stents is thought to be the primary cause . Patient was started on long-term aspirin 81 mg regimen.
At the 9-month follow-up, left SFA pseudoaneurysms remained thrombosed without flow or enlargement, and clinically without signs of recurrence of symptoms of claudication.