A 57-year-old man with a history of an unknown previous urologic surgery as a child presented to the ED because of difficulty voiding for approximately 10 days. He reported dribbling when trying to urinate, which later progressed to urinary incontinence. Seven days prior to presentation, he also developed left lower extremity swelling. On ED arrival, he had a blood pressure of 187/111 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg) and a heart rate of 104 beats per minute.
His physical exam was notable for a minimally tender, distended abdomen. The entire left lower extremity was moderately swollen compared to the right, although well-perfused. Routine labs were sent, and the emergency physician performed a point-of-care abdominal ultrasound (POCUS). Normal sonographic abdominal anatomy in the right and left upper quadrants was challenging to identify with several large areas of hypoechoic fluid noted. Owing to the historical concern for urinary retention, bladder catheterization was initiated in the ED. The catheter insertion was atraumatic with an immediate return of one liter of urine. The nurse clamped the catheter to prevent further rapid bladder decompression.
Laboratory studies were notable for an initial creatinine of 12.4 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) (reference range: 0.7–1.3 mg/dL), blood urea nitrogen of 77 mg/dL (6–24 mg/dL), potassium of 5.9 milliequivalents per liter (mEq/L) (3.5–5.0 mEq/L), and bicarbonate of 14 mEq/L (23–29 mEq/L). The patient’s initial hemoglobin (Hgb) was 10.1 grams per deciliter (g/dL) (14–18 g/dL). The urinalysis showed 10–20 white blood cells and 50–100 red blood cells (RBC) per high power field.
A computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis was ordered owing to the abnormal initial POCUS ( and ). The CT images were acquired after approximately 1,200 milliliters (mL) of urine output from the bladder. The radiologist’s interpretation was: “Severe bilateral obstructive uropathy. Diffuse bladder wall thickening may relate to chronic cystitis, but underlying malignancy is not excluded. Bladder diverticula are noted.”
A urologist was consulted in the ED and requested the bladder catheter remain unclamped. After the clamp was removed, the patient rapidly drained over seven liters of urine. The urine output became grossly bloody during the latter portion of the bladder decompression. During decompression, the patient developed diaphoresis and fatigue. At that time, his blood pressure was found to be 70/52 mm Hg. An intravenous (IV) fluid bolus was initiated. The patient ultimately received a total of three liters of normal saline while in the ED.
Owing to the degree of hematuria, serial Hgbs were sent during his ED and hospital stays. Eight and one-half hours after the initial presentation, the patient’s Hgb dropped to 5.7 mg/dL, a drop in 4.4 mg/dL from the initial level. Additional volume resuscitation was initiated with packed RBCs. A total of four units of packed RBCs were transfused. The patient was admitted in the intensive care unit and treated further with continuous bladder irrigation (CBI).
Owing to continued hemodynamic instability and hemorrhage, the patient required operative intervention. He underwent cystoscopy, bladder biopsy, clot evacuation, and fulguration. Postoperatively the patient had continued bladder hemorrhage and was treated with tranexamic acid administered through the urinary catheter along with steroid infused-CBI.
The patient’s course was complicated by the recognition of bilateral deep vein thrombosis (DVT) while in the intensive care unit. He was started on IV heparin. He subsequently redeveloped gross hematuria and required further blood transfusion. Additionally, the patient underwent bilateral percutaneous nephrostomy (PCN) placement to divert urine away from the bladder. The patient was eventually discharged on day five with an inferior vena cava filter and bilateral PCN. Upon discharge, the patient’s creatinine was 1.8 mg/dL. The cause of the patient’s initial urinary retention was never definitively determined.