An 84-year-old Japanese woman was referred to our hospital with appetite loss and vomiting. She saw her family doctor three weeks previously, but was only diagnosed with appetite loss. A physical examination showed that her vitals were stable, but that she was dehydrated. Abdominal distention was observed, and palpation revealed a hard mass in the medial side of the right thigh that was tender. Her white blood cell count was 13,060/ml, C-reactive protein level was 11.5 mg/dl, and temperature was 38 °C.
Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed a proximal small bowel obstruction secondary to the right obturator hernia as well as an abscess spreading to the right thigh . We determined that the abscess had formed because of a perforation in the small intestine by an incarcerated obturator hernia; therefore, emergency surgery was performed. During laparotomy of the lower median, the small intestine was revealed to be herniated into the right obturator canal. The proximal intestine was severely dilated and the distal intestine had collapsed. The incarcerated intestine was reduced, and the abscess had formed due to a perforation in the small intestine by the incarcerated obturator hernia. We performed partial resection of the small intestine and simple closure of the obturator foramen. A large amount of pus was drained at incision of the right femoral below the inguinal ligament and on the inside of the femoral artery, and sufficient irrigation was performed. We repaired this site by filling the drained femoral abscess with the pectineus muscle, which had been incised from part of the attachment to the pubis bone, and fixed it to the adductor longus muscle in order to reduce the residual abscess and risk of recurrence after surgery . Two 15 French continuous suction drains (J-VAC®) were placed in the thigh , and the skin was closed. A residual abscess was not detectable following surgery, and the drains were removed on postoperative day 12.
Although the patient had previously been reliant, she had become bedridden prior to emergency surgery until approximately two weeks after surgery. She subsequently underwent rehabilitation and was gradually ambulatory one month after surgery. She was discharged on postoperative day 63.