A previously healthy 40-year-old man presented with right lateral malleolus pain and swelling after an ankle sprain 2 months ago. He visited a primary clinic, and the radiographs showed an avulsion fracture at the right lateral malleolus and the affected limb was immobilized with a short leg cast. Because the symptoms had progressively worsened, he was referred to our hospital for further treatment. At the first presentation, swelling and tenderness were observed, the skin temperature arisen was recognized in the right lateral malleolus and the right ankle range of motion was limited. The radiographs indicated massive bone destruction in the right distal fibula and partial lateral distal tibial cortex with an unclear margin . MRI showed a lesion with low signal on T1-weighted image, high signal on T2-weighted image, and peripheral enhancement with gadolinium. These radiological findings corresponded to the malignant bone tumor with an aggressive lytic lesion and associated fluid accumulation . The patient had no special family history that could guide the diagnosis and no other lesions in the remaining bone. The plain chest radiograph was normal. Calcium, phosphorus and alkaline phosphatase, parathyroid hormone (PTH) level, liver, and kidney function were all within normal limits.
A biopsy was performed in the lateral distal fibula lesion. Histological examination revealed that the lesion presented with multiple thin-walled capillary-like vascular channels without cellular atypia, focal aggregations of osteoclastic multinucleated cells associated with giant cells, and intermixed with fibrous connective tissue, mild lymphocytes infiltration. Meanwhile, Osteoblast-osteoclast activity was observed . According to the diagnostic criteria proposed by Heffez et al., the patient fulfillment of seven out of the eight criteria . Then, a diagnosis of GSD was made based on combination with histological, radiological, and clinical features. Subsequently, the patient was treated with intravenous drip bisphosphonate (4 mg/month), calcium(500 mg) and vitamin D (400 UI) once a day. The significant remission of symptoms was achieved after one-month treatment and radiographs showed that bone destruction was controlled . After 7 months of medical treatment, regression of lytic lesions and reossificiation were observed in radiographs . The radiographs demonstrated shrinkage of the lesion and the border of lesion becomes well-defined with sclerotic rim. Nevertheless, a limited range of motion of right malleolus still remained and the patient complained of intense pain when he walked with full weight-bearing. In order to restore the stability of malleolus, the treatment was proceeded with en-bloc resection lesion followed by reconstructive surgery. An ankle arthrodesis surgery was performed with contralateral autologous fibular bone grafting, internal fixation with bridge plate and screws . At the last follow-up 8 years after surgery, the patient complained of no pain in the right ankle when he went up or down stairs or walked long distances. Radiographs show that rigid internal fixation with primary union and no local recurrence e.