A 50-year-old previously healthy Caucasian male who was a long-term cannabis vape user with a strong family history of CAA was brought to the emergency department with status epilepticus. Initial blood tests showed metabolic acidosis with a pH of 7.27, bicarbonate of 20 mEq/L, and troponin’s of 1886 ng/L. All other blood tests were normal. Electrocardiogram showed an inferior STEMI . As the Glasgow coma scale (GCS) was 7 out of 15, the patient was emergently intubated and ventilated. Urgent non-contrast computed tomography (CT) of head suggested haemorrhage in the left lateral ventricle. Based on neurosurgical opinion, the patient was admitted to intensive care unit (ICU) and was initiated on 4 hourly nimodipine 60 mg. Invasive CA was deferred since the risk of further bleeding outweighed the benefits of revascularization at that time. On the first day of admission, the patient developed episodes of ventricular tachycardia (VT) with haemodynamic compromise, which necessitated synchronized DC cardioversion and IV amiodarone 300 mg over 30 min and subsequently 900 mg over 24 h. Transthoracic echocardiogram revealed left ventricular (LV) systolic dysfunction with an ejection fraction (EF) of 30% . On Day 2, he developed aspiration pneumonia and acute kidney injury (AKI) requiring 10 days of intravenous meropenem and continuous veno-venous haemofiltration. Subsequently, he underwent a contrast CT head, which revealed an area of high attenuation suggestive of a haemorrhage adjacent to the left anterior communicating artery (ACA) with a 4 mm aneurysm . Thereafter, a magnetic resonance imaging brain with angiography suggested a 4.5-mm aneurysmal dilatation, at the origin of left A2 segment of ACA with a small intra-parenchymal subacute haemorrhage in the medial part of the left frontal lobe with surrounding gliosis . He was treated with IV Levetiracetam 500 mg BD and IV Phenytoin 100 mg TDS for seizures in the ICU (later converted to oral) and following renal stabilization, he was initiated and gradually up-titrated on Ramipril 5 mg o.d. (later changed to Entresto 97/103 mg b.i.d.), Bisoprolol 10 mg o.d., and Eplerenone 25 mg o.d. for heart failure.
On Day 20 of admission, patient recovered from AKI and CT angiogram of brain was performed which confirmed an aneurysm at the A2 segment of the left anterior communicating artery with an established haematoma . The patient made a complete neurological recovery with no residual deficit and hence detailed history was taken from patient retrospectively which revealed he had vaped Cannabis 1 hour before his initial presentation. The multidisciplinary team involving neurosurgeons and neuroradiologists agreed that the final neurological diagnosis was a rupture of a CAA at A2 segment of left ACA causing haemorrhage, but recommended to complete cardiac investigations and stabilization before neurosurgical intervention. Hence, on Day 26, as he remained stable and independent of haemofiltration, he was transferred to the coronary care unit for further evaluation. Elective CA was performed, which demonstrated non-obstructive coronary arteries . Subsequently, CMRI showed normal LV size with moderately impaired systolic function (EF 38%) with akinesia of mid-distal inferolateral and the whole inferior wall. On the late gadolinium enhancement images , there was patchy enhancement with transmural involvement at focal areas of the mid and distal inferior wall and myocardial oedema was seen at these areas on short-tau inversion recovery (STIR) images consistent with MI at left circumflex artery territory . His subsequent ECG’s showed established infarction in inferior territory . Also, he underwent an implantable cardiac defibrillator (ICD) implantation for secondary prevention. He was transferred afterwards to a tertiary neurosurgical centre for further evaluation and intervention, where he underwent further neuroimaging which suggested existence of additional aneurysms for which neurosurgery was offered to the patient. However, following the discussion of risks vs. benefits, the patient preferred elective procedure as outpatient. On cardiology follow-up 8 months later, the repeat transthoracic 2D echocardiogram showed normalization of left ventricular ejection fraction . He remains asymptomatic from a cardiac perspective.