A 58-year-old Caucasian woman with hip osteoarthritis was examined by an anesthesiologist for a surgical procedure of total hip arthroplasty. She had a history of SCA, which started when she was 55-years old with motor dysfunction. Her clinical condition had slowly worsened with appearance of dysarthria, horizontal saccadic eye movements, and lower extremities hypertonia. An MRI of her brain showed olivopontocerebellar atrophy; a mild motor and sensory ataxic polyneuropathy was highlighted by electromyography. Recent neuropsychological examinations identified a dis-executive deficit. Her family history is negative for SCA and she denied any history of cardiovascular, respiratory, or gastrointestinal diseases. Prior to the diagnosis of SCA, she was in good health and did not regularly take drugs. She denied smoking tobacco or drinking alcohol. At the time of the examination, she was taking benzodiazepines (triazolam 0.25 mg once daily) for anxious depressive syndrome, baclofen 25 mg three times a day for spasticity, and anti-cyclooxygenase type 2 (COX-2) for pain treatment (etoricoxib 60 mg once daily). Preoperative blood tests, electrocardiogram, and thoracic X-ray were negative. On physical examination, it was possible to appreciate that she was tall, 168 cm, and weighed 63 kg. A cardiopulmonary examination was unremarkable. Her vital signs were normal with blood pressure of 135/90 mmHg and heart rate of 90 beats per minute. On neuropsychological examination, she presented a mild reduction in performance on the Rey–Osterrieth Complex Figure Test, a limited ability to inhibit cognitive interference (Stroop Test), inability during the Multiple Features Targets Cancellation task, and a Spatial Span Score lower than normal; these were proofs of her dis-executive deficit. After discussing the case with a neurologist, general anesthesia was planned. In fact, our patient’s anxiety and spasticity would have made regional anesthesia difficult to practice. Preoperatively, no medications were administered. General anesthesia was induced with propofol 2 mg/kg intravenously and fentanyl 2 mcg/kg intravenously. Tracheal intubation was facilitated with rocuronium 0.6 mg/kg intravenously. Anesthesia maintenance was performed with sevoflurane (in an oxygen/air mixture) and fentanyl. The minimum alveolar concentration of sevoflurane was set to achieve a Bi-spectral Index (BIS) value between 40 and 60. Mechanical ventilation was set with a tidal volume of 7 ml/kg, a positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 5 cmH2O, and an inspiration/expiration rate of 1:2. These parameters remained stable during the surgical procedure. The respiration rate was adjusted to obtain an end-tidal carbon dioxide (etCO2) between 38 and 45 mmHg. The surgery was uneventful with no significant blood loss and no transfusion was needed. The procedure lasted 2 hours. Upon awakening, she appeared calm and parameters were stable. In the post anesthesia care unit (PACU), she was warmed up and oxygen supplementation was administered. Thirty minutes after awakening, she developed an acute hyperactive delirium. She experienced episodes of confusion, logorrhea, and disorientation. She also exhibited reduced awareness of the environment and hallucinations with aggressive behavior. During this episode, her vital signs remained stable and her oxygen saturation was normal. An arterial blood test revealed no hypercapnia or hypoxia or electrolyte disorders. Haloperidol 5 mg was intravenously administered slowly over 5 minutes, but her behavior did not change. To avoid uncontrolled pain, a single shot fascia iliaca block was performed with 25 ml of ropivacaine 0.375% but she continued to have intermittent episodes of delirium. After 10 minutes, chlorpromazine 25 mg was infused intravenously. This drug seemed to have the same efficacy as haloperidol with a subsequent mild sedation. She was transferred to our intensive care unit (ICU) where chlorpromazine 25 mg was given again during the night for another crisis. She was discharged from ICU the next day under normal neurological conditions.
After 1 month, she was readmitted for the development of an acute periprosthetic hip infection sustained by Staphylococcus epidermidis and Staphylococcus haemolyticus without signs of systemic sepsis. On examination, her temperature was 36.7°C, blood pressure was 128/95 mmHg, and heart rate was 75 beats per minute. Only the wound swab was positive for infection; hemocultures and urine cultures were negative. Preoperative blood tests showed: hemoglobin 10.4 g/dL; platelets 233 × 109/L; neutrophils 4.26 × 10 9/L; erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 47 mm/hour, and C-reactive protein (CRP) 27.2 mg/L. Renal and hepatic function indices were within normal limits. Debridement, antibiotics, and implant retention (DAIR) was performed under general anesthesia with the same modalities . During surgery and after taking new periprosthetic tissue for microbiological examination, teicoplanin was administered intravenously at a loading dose of 400 mg. For the second time, our patient developed POD treated with chlorpromazine 25 mg intravenously with immediate sedation. Within 24 hours, the delirium resolved with no consequences. During the following days, 200 mg of teicoplanin was administered daily and 1 gr of cefazolin every 12 hours intravenously until discharge.
One month after discharge, she returned for follow-up. She was taking her habitual medications and, at the time of the examination, she exhibited no evidence of new disorders or joint infection. She looked well and denied any symptoms of confusion, disorientation, or hallucinations. The hip infection healed without any complication. She was re-evaluated at 3 and 6 months after surgery. Her ESR, CRP, and other biochemical values were within normal limits and her neurological status was stable.