A 38-years-old man with clinical sign of pulmonary tuberculosis and respiratory distress was admitted to Razi of Ahvaz, Iran in September 2012. He had symptoms such as mental retardation, non-productive cough, fever, night sweating, anorexia, pleuritic chest pain and weight loss, which lasted for a month. The patients’ respiratory distress worsened during the last five days. On his physical examination, he was cachectic and there was a weak sound from the left lung. His blood test indicated the following results: No leuckocytosis, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 120 mm/h, lactate dehydrogenase 691mg/dL and total protein 4.8 g/dL.
All aerobic blood cultures were negative after 72 hours. He had left lung pleural effusion on chest X-Ray (left hemithorax more than 50%), and diagnostic pleural tap indicated as follows: white blood cell count 595/dL (PMN: 10%, Lymph: 90%), glucose ˂ 10 mg/dL, protein 6.1 gr/dL, LDH 4804 mg/dL and Adenosine De-aminase (ADA) 107 IU, negative smear for WBC, bacteria and culture, and positive Broncho Alveolar Lavage (BAL) for acid fast bacilli. The patient with the diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis and tuberculous pleurisy was put under treatment with isoniazid, rifampin, ethambutol, pyrazinamide, pyridoxine; and chest tube was inserted. Twelve days later, purulent discharge was observed in his chest tube; therefore, re-tapping was done. This time, his test results were as follows:
Appearance was turbid and WBC was 76000/dL (PMN: 99%, Lymph: 1%) many WBC and many Gram negative bacilli were observed on smear and P. luteola isolated and diagnosed after 48 hours. P. luteola was sensitive to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX), intermediate to gentamycin and resistant to cefepime, ciprofloxacin, norfloxacin, ampicillin, and nalidixicacid. Accordingly, the patient with the diagnosis of empyema was treated with TPM-SMX (5 mg/kg from TMP), as a result of which, his chest tube discharge decreased to 50 mL/24 hours. Then he was referred for pleural decortication.