Mr. Z is a right-handed, 28-year-old young male. His symptoms were first manifested at the age of 17, when he complained of headache that felt like lava spreading out within his head. He reported this to his parents. In addition, he also began to experience paranoia, manifest in the proposition that one of his teachers was monitoring him. This manifestation was assumed to be related to the combined pressures of school life and homework. Specifically, the patient regarded the telephone as a monitoring device controlled by a particular teacher. In addition, his constant suspicion that he was under criminal investigation placed him in a perpetual state of fear. Overall, his sense of persecution caused him to feel stressed and unhappy at school. These feelings were expressed as hostility toward his teacher and a refusal to attend school. His parents felt that his behavior was abnormal and took him to a psychiatric clinic where he received a diagnosis of schizophrenia (based on ICD-10 criteria) and was subsequently treated with mirtazapine (up to 90 mg/day) and quetiapine (up to 300 mg/day).
However, after 1 year of treatment with medication, neither the paranoia nor the headaches had improved. Moreover, the patient had begun to believe that he was also being monitored by his neighbors and strangers. In addition, he now presented with an elated mood, increased energy and activity, flight of fancy, and elevated distractibility almost every day for a period of 1 month, which resulted in failed relationships with his schoolmates. Two months later, he experienced an episode wherein he demonstrated a period of uninterrupted anxiety and irritability, accompanied by feelings of worthlessness, loss of pleasure, and a diminished ability to think. He also complained repeatedly about the swollen pains in his head. The diagnosis was revised as bipolar disorder (based on ICD-10 criteria) by another psychiatrist, after which a combination therapy of sodium valproate (up to 1000 mg/day) and olanzapine (up to 10 mg/day) was commenced. The mirtazapine therapy was discontinued, while the dosage of quetiapine was reduced to 100 mg/day. His psychiatric symptoms disappeared and his emotional stability and headache severity gradually improved after 6 months with the new therapeutic regimen. However, the patient continued to experience difficulties with his thoughts and memories. Moreover, he developed an unusual strong interest in pornography and easily became extremely excited when talking with his female classmates. Believing himself to be cured, the patient discontinued his medication when he was 19, without consulting his psychiatrist. Due to his poor performance in the National Higher Education Entrance Examination, he was obliged to attend a junior college instead of a university. Subsequently, he struggled to complete his studies at junior college and became an office worker. He continued to suffer from repeated, albeit less severe mood swings and paranoia following a renewed onset of minor headache. Moreover, he did not have any period of emotional stability for more than 3 months. Consequently, he found it challenging to complete tasks and maintain relatively harmonious relationships with others.
Eight years after the initial onset of his delusions and 7 years after the first episode of detectable mood disorder, he attended an emergency department at age 25, having experienced a sudden onset of severe headache and nausea.
The physical examination performed upon admission found the patient to possess a painful demeanor. He was clearly conscious, with stable vital signs, and regular and coordinated limb movement. Both pupils were equal and reactive. His deep tendon reflexes were 2+ and equal on both sides without pathological reflexes. Cerebrospinal fluid examination revealed a red blood cell count of 3200 × 106 cells/L and a white blood cell count of 240 × 106 cells/L. Pandy's test indicated a positive result, while liver function, renal function, and serum electrolyte test were all normal. Cerebrospinal fluid culture was sterile after 5 days of incubation. However, computed tomography angiography of the head revealed a 2.1 mm × 4.8 mm aneurysm in the anterior communicating artery with a subarachnoid hemorrhage .
The clinical diagnosis of subarachnoid hemorrhage as a consequence of an anterior communicating aneurysm was made based on the patient's clinical presentation, laboratory tests, and the imaging examination. Following consultation with several neurosurgeons who were on duty that day, the patient underwent emergency digital subtraction angiography and Guglielmi detachable coil embolization, which were successful.
After the operation, the patient's symptoms, previously ascribed to schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, did not reemerge during the course of a 3-year follow-up without the use of mood stabilizers and antipsychotics. His mood stability, energy levels, cognitive status, and other symptoms returned to normal, and he no longer complained about his headache. He exhibited good interpersonal skills and a capability for employment in an office job.