A 69-year-old male with diabetes mellitus and hypertension was brought to the ED during the height of the COVID-19 outbreak with fever, dyspnea, and AMS. The patient’s agitation and confusion stymied interview attempts, but a health records review showed he had been evaluated in the ED three days earlier for fever and cough. He was thought to have a probable COVID-19 infection at that time, but his condition did not warrant admission and the ED was not offering COVID-19 testing for outpatients.
Initial vital signs were notable for tachycardia to 120 beats per minute, blood pressure of 140/90 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg), tachypnea to 22 breaths per minute, oxygen saturation of 96% on room air, and an oral temperature of 38.2º Celsius. Staff noted his breaths were remarkably deep with coarse basilar lung sounds. The patient was in moderate respiratory distress with diaphoresis, cold and mottled extremities and 5-millimeter pupils. No focal neurological deficits or signs of head trauma were noted, but the patient was acutely agitated and restless, shifting repeatedly in the stretcher from side to side.
The providers contacted his wife by telephone and learned that his medications included acetaminophen and insulin. She related that after returning home from the ED three days earlier, he began self-treating his fever but appeared increasingly confused. His wife denied that the patient had any psychiatric or substance abuse history.
A differential diagnosis at the time included infectious etiologies (e.g., sepsis syndrome, encephalitis); drug toxicity or withdrawal; neurological events (e.g., stroke); and metabolic disorders (e.g., hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state, hypoglycemia). His initial workup revealed a bedside fingerstick glucose of 234 milligrams (mg) per deciliter (dL) (reference range [ref]: 70–99 mg/dL), benign electrocardiogram and head computed tomography findings, and bilateral opacities on chest radiograph consistent with viral pneumonia. Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction test was positive. Laboratory tests were as follows: arterial blood gas- pH 7.50 (ref: 7.35–7.45); partial pressure of carbon dioxide 18 mm Hg (ref: 35–45 mm Hg); partial pressure of oxygen 98 mm Hg (ref: 80–100 mm Hg); bicarbonate 14 millimoles (mmol) per liter (L) (ref: 22–29 mmol/L); serum anion gap 27 (ref: 8–17); aspartate aminotransferase 69 units (U) per L (ref: 5–40 U/L); and alanine aminotransferase 51 U/L (ref: 7–56 U/L). The blood gas and metabolic panel revealed a mixed anion gap metabolic acidosis with respiratory alkalosis.
With this new information, clinical staff pivoted to focus on toxic and metabolic etiologies. A serum toxicology screen showed a salicylate level of 52.2 mg/dL (therapeutic range: 0–30mg/dL); acetaminophen level of 70.8 microgram (mcg) per mL (therapeutic range: 10–30 mcg/mL); and undetectable ethanol level. Poison control was consulted, and the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit for urinary alkalization with a sodium bicarbonate infusion for salicylate toxicity and intravenous N-acetylcysteine for acetaminophen toxicity. However, he became oliguric with persistently elevated salicylate levels and refractory confusion requiring hemodialysis. The patient’s mental status improved over three days after hemodialysis.
Upon regaining mental clarity, the patient volunteered that he had deliberately taken large quantities of aspirin and acetaminophen in an attempt to take his own life. He expressed feeling helpless after believing that he had an untreatable COVID-19 infection. His worsening dyspnea further exacerbated the mental anguish, leading him to become increasingly certain that he was dying. The patient also became more confused in the days leading up to his admission, and stated he felt he had no choice but to take large amounts of pain medication.
Eventually he endorsed both lapses and confabulations in his memory during the peak of his symptoms, and thought that his confusion and impaired judgment precipitated the medication overdose. He denied any current suicidal ideation. Psychiatry consultants agreed that the overdose primarily occurred in the context of delirium and felt that his risk of future self-harm was low since he had no history of suicidality or underlying psychiatric disorder. The patient was ultimately released 10 days after admission with community support referrals but no new medications.