The patient was a 57-year-old Japanese man with rectal adenocarcinoma. The tumor was located in the middle rectum and had invaded the serosa with regional metastases. His past medical history was hypertension, hepatitis C virus infection, subarachnoid hemorrhage, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. His social history was significant, including a 20 pack-year smoking history. A low anterior resection was performed in 2010; pathology revealed a stage IIIB moderately differentiated, KRAS wild-type adenocarcinoma, with one out of 15 lymph nodes testing positive. After surgery, he received 12 cycles of adjuvant FOLFOX chemotherapy. One year later, a subsequent positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) scan showed evidence of recurrence, with liver, lung and pelvic lymph node metastases. Additionally, his carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) values had increased to 23 ng/ml. He subsequently received 15 cycles of FOLFIRI + cetuximab therapy followed by 12 cycles of FOLFOX + bevacizumab; however, a PET/CT scan in June 2014 revealed progressive disease.
TAS-102 was subsequently considered as a third-line chemotherapy option, and he began 110 mg daily TAS-102 treatment in June 2014. He had no history of food or medication allergy. He was safely treated with TAS-102 for the first planned cycle; however, approximately 4 days after receiving the second cycle of TAS-102, he complained of high fever and subsequent dyspnea with severe hypoxemia and went to the emergency room. On examination, his respiratory rate was 33 breaths per minute and fine crackles were heard by chest asuculatation. Laboratory values upon admission were: white blood cell (WBC) count 4100/μL (neutrophils 52.0 %, eosinophils 1.0 %), C-reactive protein (CRP) 6.13 mg/dL (normally under 0.10 mg/mL), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 482 IU/mL (normally 114–220 IU/mL), alkaline phosphatase 415 IU/mL (normally 124–367 IU/mL), and KL-6 562 U/mL (normally 105–401 U/mL). Blood gas under oxygen supplementation (10 L/min) revealed a pH of 7.51, pO2 of 50.3 mmHg, pCO2 of 34.3 mmHg, and HCO3- 27.9 mmol/L. All infectious workup tests were performed, and the results were all negative including common bacteria, fungi, Pneumocystis, Legionella and Cytomegalovirus. A chest radiograph revealed a ground-glass opacity and lower consolidation . Furthermore, a chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed thickening of the bronchovascular bundles and interlobular septum, diffuse areas of defined ground-glass opacities with fine reticulation and pleural effusions in both lung fields . Of note, Fig. shows a nodular lesion in the left middle lung field. The appearance of the abnormalities in the CT scan was described as lesions in the form of ground-glass opacities with visible polygonal structures, of the so-called crazy paving pattern. It also revealed a metastatic nodular lesion in the left middle lung field.
The rapid onset and nature of these changes were consistent with drug-induced fibrotic lung disease secondary to TAS-102 chemotherapy. In addition, a peripheral blood drug-induced lymphocyte stimulation test (DLST) with TAS-102 showed that the value for TAS-102 was higher than that of control [973 vs. 476 counts per minute (cpm)]. Thus, he commenced empirical broad-spectrum antibiotics and high-dose intravenous corticosteroid therapy (1000 mg/day for 3 days). Because of his severe dyspnea, bronchoscopy and bronchoalveolar lavage were not performed. Three days later, there was a marked improvement in terms of symptoms and oxygen requirements. Intravenous antibiotics were stopped and oral prednisolone commenced. A CT scan performed approximately 12 days after the prednisolone treatments began showed improvements of the previously observed pulmonary lesions . Blood gas analysis revealed complete recovery of pulmonary function. Our patient was discharged home with oral prednisolone (20 mg/day). Unfortunately, he died from mCRC disease progression approximately 1 year after the last administration of TAS-102.