A 35-year-old woman was admitted in October 2021 with a history of low back pain for the past year, which worsened over the past 2 weeks, and the patient complained of radiating pain in the left lower limb. The patient was treated at another hospital 2 weeks ago, where MRI, CT, and x-ray showed T11–L1 bone destruction. She was diagnosed with thoracic spine tuberculosis and the details of the diagnosis were not mentioned. Then she was treated with isoniazid, rifampin, and ethambutol. The laboratory examination revealed white blood cell count (WBC) 2.10× 109 /L, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 38 mm/h, C-reactive protein (CRP) 10.7 mg/L, interleukin-6 (IL-6) 0.35 pg/ml, and D-dimer 1.88 mg/L FEU. The patient tested positive for tuberculosis infection, as assessed by a T cell spot test. Chest CT showed scattered grain-like nodules in both lungs, suggesting pulmonary tuberculosis. CT of thoracic and lumbar spine revealed bone destruction of T11–L1, which was obvious in T12, mild reduction in the height of the vertebral body and narrowing of T11-12 intervertebral space, with a cold paravertebral abscess on both sides . These results were consistent with spinal tuberculosis. Consequently, the initial diagnosis was spinal tuberculosis with a cold abscess (T11–L1). Further, an ultrasound revealed an abnormal echo in the left paracolonic groove, which was associated with a cold abscess. Consequently, the patient was subjected to ultrasound-guided percutaneous catheter drainage on 15th October 2021 and 600 ml of pus was drained.
After 16 days of drainage, the patient complained of severe chest and back pain. An electrocardiogram (ECG) was performed and it showed no any abnormal finding. The laboratory examination revealed WBC 3.40 × 109 /L, ESR 47 mm/h, CRP 17.4 mg/L, IL-6 37.5 pg/ml, PCT 0.07 ng/ml, and D-dimer 1.89 mg/L FEU. Re-examination of the thoracic and lumbar spine using enhanced MRI revealed bone destruction in T11–L1 and a massive mixed density shadow was observed in the front, wherein blood flow showed low signal on T1WI and T2WI, primarily owing to flow void effect. Obvious enhancement was observed after the lesion was enhanced , which was indicative of a thoracic aortic pseudoaneurysm. Consequently, it was recommended that endovascular aneurysm repair must be performed immediately, however, only bone graft fusion and internal fixation were performed, owing to the patient's personal reasons, and vertebral biopsy revealed a negative result in the acid-fast staining and the culture was positive for M. tuberculosis.
Further, the patient developed pain and numbness in the left thigh after 10 days of the procedure. The laboratory examination revealed WBC 4.80 × 109 /L, ESR 26 mm/h, CRP 14.4 mg/L, IL-6 9.49 pg/ml, and D-dimer 10.42 mg/L FEU.A CT scan revealed enlargement of pseudoaneurysm . Following this, the patient underwent endovascular aneurysm repair. Digital subtraction angiography was performed with the patient under general anesthesia, which revealed an approximate 10 mm breach on the lower portion of the descending aorta, and the orifice of the pseudoaneurysm to be 20 mm away from the lower part of the celiac trunk. The stent graft (Medtronic Inc., 25 mm in diameter and 70 mm in length) was positioned well and correctly and repeated angiography confirmed a complete closure of the mass, a smooth blood flow in the aorta, and a firmly fixed stent on the aortic wall without distortion and displacement; no peripheral leakage of the contrast agent was observed. The surgery was successful and the patient continued to receive isoniazid (0.3 g/day), rifampin (0.45 g/day), and ethambutol (0.75 g/day) during the follow-up. The patient's symptoms gradually disappeared, and she was discharged. After 3 months' follow-up, repeated CT showed a firmly fixed stent on the aortic wall without distortion and displacement and a smooth blood flow in the aorta, and the pseudoaneurysm was basically absorbed without recurrence. Because the follow-up was outpatient, no laboratory examinations were done .