The patient was a 32-year-old Caucasian male who was diagnosed in 2004 with mycosis fungoides after developing a pruritic rash. There was no family history of cancer. He was initially treated with topical nitrogen mustard and later received UVB narrow band therapy. In October 2012, the patient presented with a cough, dyspnea, fever, chills, left pleuritic chest pain and significant weight loss. These symptoms were associated with a flare of his skin lesions. A CT scan of the chest demonstrated extensive left cervical, supraclavicular and mediastinal adenopathy, as well as left upper lobe airspace disease. Review of pathology from a left cervical lymph node biopsy from December 2012 revealed complete effacement of the normal architecture by a diffuse infiltration of large and giant pleomorphic lymphocytes characterized by conspicuous nucleoli and large amounts of cytoplasm . Immunohistochemical stains showed weak CD45 and strong CD43 expression , with strong CD30 expression in the membrane and Golgi patterns . The malignant cells expressed cytoplasmic ALK but lacked expression of CD 3, 4, 5 and 8. A T cell lineage was confirmed in the tumor cells of the initial biopsy sample by clonal T-cell receptor gamma gene rearrangement. Identical infiltrates were identified in material from recurrent biopsies of skin and subcutaneous tissue, and from lung and endobronchial biopsies at the time of progression.
After an initial response to four cycles of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine and prednisone (CHOP) chemotherapy, the disease progressed rapidly while the patient was on therapy. He was started on gemcitabine, dexamethasone and cisplatin (GDP) chemotherapy in preparation for an autologous stem cell transplant but progressed after 3 cycles. The patient then received one cycle of the CD30 antibody–drug conjugate brentuximab, with a response but tolerated the treatment poorly. He was subsequently started on the ALK small-molecule kinase inhibitor crizotinib and tolerated the therapy well with an improved performance status. A fluoro-deoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) scan performed after 3 months of crizotinib showed an improvement in the previously noted airspace disease in the left lung but an enlarging FDG-avid 5.2 cm mass in the apex of the left lung. There was no evidence of disease outside the chest. A CT scan-guided biopsy of this mass was positive for ALK by immunohistochemistry and RT-qPCR using an ALK RGQ RT-PCR Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). The remaining RNA from the lymph node biopsy was reverse transcribed to cDNA and used in a 5′ RACE PCR followed by Sanger sequencing to identify the ALK fusion partner. Analysis of sequence data revealed a TRAF1-ALK fusion in which 3′ end of exon 6 of TRAF1 was fused to the 5′ end of exon 20 of ALK . The mRNA fusion junction in TRAF1 and ALK in the case was identical to that present in the TRAF1-ALK-positive ALCL case reported by Feldman et al. .
The patient underwent an unrelated-donor stem cell transplant in December 2013 but disease recurred in the left lung within 3 months post-transplant, and failed to respond to the reintroduction of crizotinib and brentuximab. Endobronchial biopsies from lesions in the left and right lungs revealed ALK-positive ALCL. The patient died of progressive lymphoma 6 months post-transplant.
Molecular testing of the patient’s biopsy samples was performed with the consent of the patient using a study assay approved by the BC Cancer Agency Research Ethics Board (H13-01763) and conducted in accordance with the ethical principles of the Declaration of Helsinki.