Two months prior to admission to our hospital, a 42-year-old Laotian woman was hospitalized for an expedited workup of a constellation of symptoms, including progressive generalized musculoskeletal pain, persistent dry cough, weakness, generalized lymphadenopathy, and unintentional 20-pound weight loss. During that admission, she was diagnosed with disseminated Mycobacterium hassicum infection and started on a 6-month course of clarithromycin, imipenem/cilastatin, moxifloxacin, and ceftaroline. Because this opportunistic infection is typically seen in immunocompromised individuals, a workup to determine the underlying cause of her immunodeficient status was initiated and revealed adult-onset immunodeficiency with anti-interferon gamma antibodies.
Two months after initiation of her antibiotic regimen, the patient represented for evaluation of fever, headache, generalized myalgia, dark urine, and reduced appetite in the setting of family members at home with similar symptoms. Her vital signs were notable for fever to 102.9 ℉ and tachycardia. Initial laboratories were notable for a respiratory viral panel positive for human rhinovirus and a hepatic panel showing elevated aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 1281 U/L (ref < 45 U/L), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 511 U/L (ref < 50 U/L), and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 265 U/L (ref 40–150 U/L) . The patient had no history of liver disease and liver function tests were normal as recently as 2 weeks prior to this admission. Her total bilirubin, direct bilirubin, and ammonia were within normal limits, and international normalized ratio (INR) was elevated at 1.60 (ref 0.85–1.15). Viral hepatitis panel (including hepatitis A, B, C and HIV), abdominal ultrasound with Doppler, and autoimmune hepatitis serologies (including antismooth muscle, antinuclear, and antimitochondrial antibodies) were unrevealing.
The patient’s liver enzymes continued to rise over the next several days to AST 4188 U/L, ALT 684 U/L, and ALP 669 U/L with no corresponding decline in synthetic liver function. After consultation with infectious disease specialists, the patient’s antibiotic regimen was held due to concern for possible acute hepatitis secondary to drug-induced liver injury. During this time, she remained intermittently febrile and developed a generalized tonic–clonic seizure. Subsequent nuchal rigidity prompted a lumbar puncture and empiric treatment for meningitis. A comprehensive rheumatologic and infectious disease workup had been unrevealing to this point. With new infections and malignancy essentially ruled out, work up for a dysregulated immune response was pursued, revealing a ferritin level of 62,225 ng/mL (ref 6–175 ng/mL), triglycerides 343 mg/dL (ref < 150 mg/dL), white blood cell count 12,600/μL (ref 4000–11,000/μL), hemoglobin 8.4 g/dL (ref 11.7–15.7 g/dL), and platelet count 27,000/μL (ref 150,000–450,000/μL). Notably, a soluble interleukin (IL) 2 receptor alpha level resulted 6477 pg/mL (ref < 2700 pg/mL).
A liver biopsy was obtained to better characterize the systemic process affecting the patient. The biopsy revealed prominent predominantly sinusoidal but also lobar and portal clusters of reactive Kupffer cells with consequent small foci of hepatocellular injury and necrosis . Bile duct architecture was preserved and immunostains were negative for adenovirus, cytomegalovirus, acid fast bacilli, and Epstein–Barr virus. With the patient’s history of acquired immunodeficiency and clinical presentation, the liver biopsy findings supported a diagnosis of acute hepatitis secondary to dysregulated immune response to rhinovirus infection leading to MAS. Treatment with intravenous immune globulin (IVIG), anakinra, and rituximab was initiated by consultants from hematology and rheumatology with subsequent improvement in clinical status, liver function tests, platelet count, and ferritin. Liver function tests improved within 2 weeks and normalized within 3 months. At most recent follow-up, the patient reported feeling well with resolution of presenting symptoms and normalization in inflammatory markers.