A 48-year-old lady had gradually progressive pain and swelling in the right foot for 4 months. It was not associated with signs of infection such as fever, local inflammation, or any signs of chronic arthritis. She had significant comorbidities, including dilated cardiomyopathy with low ejection fraction (15–20%), diabetes mellitus, and chronic hepatitis-C infection. She was evaluated elsewhere with a radiograph and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the foot. Imaging revealed a soft-tissue lesion eroding and involving navicular, calcaneum, and talus with a cystic/necrotic component. A computed tomography (CT)-guided biopsy from the soft-tissue component revealed a benign giant cell-rich lesion. She was counseled about the nature of the disease, that is, a GCT of bone and was planned for surgical curettage.
On presentation to our institute, there was diffuse swelling of the dorsum of mid-foot with mild pitting edema of forefoot without any associated pain . All movements of the toes and ankle were a normal without any neurovascular deficits. She was evaluated further with blood investigations which revealed a normal hemogram and raised uric acid of 15.2 (normal range 3.5–7.2 mg/dL) and creatinine levels of 1.8 (normal range 0.7–1.3 mg/dL).
A plain radiograph and CT scan were done. Plain radiograph of the foot revealed generalized osteoporosis, erosions, osteolytic defects, and calcifications. The so-called “overhanging margins sign” and preservation of joint spaces were evident on CT scan. Imaging features were not unequivocal for GCT. The MRI obtained elsewhere previously was reviewed in the multidisciplinary meeting of our institute.
The biopsy slides were also reviewed. The earlier diagnosis of GCT was considered unlikely based on the appearance under the microscope which showed features such as organized granulomatous reaction, central acellular amorphous eosinophilic zone surrounded by corona zone composed of foreign body giant cell reaction, lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate, and histiocytes. Distinct foreign body giant cells were noted; however, no tumor giant cells were seen. There were no nuclear atypia and no mitosis. No native bone, cartilage, synovium, or calcification were seen in the biopsy.
Gout was suggested as the most probable diagnosis after re-discussion in the tumor board meeting by corroborating the clinical, radiological, and pathological findings. The patient was then referred to a rheumatologist where she was started on the medical line of management to which she responded well.