An 87-year-old healthy male patient presented to the emergency department with head trauma after a fall. The patient’s Glasgow coma scale (GCS) score was 14 (E4V4M6), indicating a mild disturbance of consciousness. The patient had no neurological deficits. A head computed tomography (CT) scan showed a subcutaneous hematoma in the right parietal region and ASDH extending from a subarachnoid cyst in the left middle cranial fossa to the left tentorium and falx [ and ]. The CT scan showed no significant subarachnoid hemorrhage or cerebral contusion. The patient was diagnosed with ASDH and cerebral concussion and was treated conservatively. A repeat CT scan on the following day revealed no remarkable change, while a CT scan performed six days after admission showed a reduction in the ASDH. The patient presented no neurological abnormalities and was discharged on day 6.
Two days after discharge, the patient presented to the emergency department with a headache and disorientation. The assessment indicated mild disturbance of consciousness, a GCS score of 14 (E4V4M6), and no focal signs. Head CT imaging revealed ASDH extending from the left tentorium to the left convexity, with effacement of the sulci and a midline shift [ and ]. Three-dimensional CT (3D-CT) showed a 7.0-mm mass lesion in the ASDH of the tentorium, which was contiguous with the left posterior inferior temporal artery (PITA) branching from the P3 segment of the PCA [ and ]. Three-dimensional digital subtraction angiography and vertebral artery angiography demonstrated a pseudoaneurysm in the PITA from the P3 segment with irregular contours, delayed filling, and no obvious neck [ and ]. Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with ASDH regrowth due to a ruptured TICA. PAO with endovascular treatment was planned to avoid re-rupture of the pseudoaneurysm.
Endovascular treatment was performed under general anesthesia. We approached through the left posterior communicating artery as the left P1 segment was hypoplastic. A 6 Fr FUBUKI catheter (Asahi Intec, Aichi, Japan) was guided into the origin of the left internal carotid artery using a 4-Fr JB2 catheter and a 0.035-inch guiding wire. An intermediate catheter (Guidepost; Tokai Medical Products, Aichi, Japan) was, then, advanced into the left internal carotid artery. A microcatheter (DeFrictor BULL; Medicos Hirata, Tokyo, Japan) was inserted proximal to the aneurysm in the left PITA using a microwire (TENROU 1014; Kaneka Medix, Osaka, Japan; [ and ]). The artery was embolized with 0.13 mL of 33% NBCA. A left vertebral artery angiography revealed the disappearance of the pseudoaneurysm .
Head magnetic resonance imaging on the following day showed a partial acute infarction at the base of the left temporal lobe. However, the patient experienced no symptoms such as visual apraxia or loss [ and ]. Follow-up magnetic resonance angiography and 3D-CT angiography demonstrated complete occlusion of the pseudoaneurysm with no recanalization [ and ]. On the 6th postoperative day, a CT scan showed a chronic subdural hematoma, which was evacuated by a burr-hole surgery. Despite persistent delirium, the patient was discharged home on day 25 of hospitalization with a Glasgow outcome scale score of 4.