A 78-year-old woman presented to our institution for further management of newly diagnosed metastatic liver disease.
The patient initially presented with symptoms of decreased visual acuity of the right eye 1 year prior. Comprehensive physical examination was unrevealing. The patient was referred to ophthalmology and was diagnosed with choroidal melanoma. The tumor initially measured 19.5 x 13.6 mm and involved 50% of the optic nerve head as well as the macula. The patient was treated with radiotherapy along with transpupillary thermotherapy.
As part of routine surveillance for the diagnosis of uveal melanoma, the patient was followed with serial CT scans of the abdomen and pelvis every 3 months. Nine months after the initial diagnosis repeat CT scan revealed multiple liver masses suggestive of metastatic disease involving the lateral segment of the left hepatic lobe. A dominant mass was identified measuring 6.9 x 5.8 cm and the patient was referred for core needle biopsy. Pathology revealed abundant involvement by adenocarcinoma, which stained positive for pankeratin (AE1/AE3), CK7, CK20 . Additionally, several nests of atypical cells with cytoplasmic pigmentation consistent with malignant melanoma were identified. Immunohistochemical stains showed the malignant pigmented neoplasm to be negative for AE1/AE3 and positive for S100, SOX10, HMB45 .
Given the unexpected findings of metastatic adenocarcinoma co-existing with metastatic melanoma, a diagnostic workup was done to identify the site of origin for the adenocarcinoma component. Whole-body PET/CT, and upper and lower endoscopy failed to identify the primary anatomic site. The patient was therefore diagnosed with metastatic collision tumor composed of adenocarcinoma of unknown primary along with malignant melanoma and empiric chemotherapy was initiated. Unfortunately, the disease proved refractory to several lines of conventional cytotoxic chemotherapy. She received two cycles of oral capecitabine (Xeloda, Genentech, South San Francisco, CA; 1000 mg/m2 orally day 1–14 every 21 days). This was discontinued secondary to grade 2–3 gastrointestinal toxicity (nausea, vomiting). The patient subsequently received 8 cycles of gemcitabine (Gemzar, Eli Lilly, Indianapolis, IN; 900 mg/m2 IV day 1, 8 every 21 days;) combined with protein-bound nab-paclitaxel (Abraxane, Celgene, Summit, NJ; 100 mg/m2 IV day 1, 8, 15 every 28 days). Restaging imaging revealed progressive disease in the liver as well as the interval development of metastatic lung nodules.
The patient’s tissue was submitted as a formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded block to a CLIA-certified, CAP-accredited laboratory (Foundation Medicine, Cambridge, MA) for CGP. DNA was extracted from the tumor specimen. Hybrid-capture-based CGP using next-generation sequencing was performed of the entire coding sequence. This included 236 genes and 47 introns of 19 genes involved in fusions at a depth of X500. Alterations were identified as point mutations, deletions, amplifications, duplications, insertions, rearrangements, and splice variants. These were characterized as known or likely pathogenic changes as reported by the FoundationOne assay.
DNA extracted from the biopsy of the collision tumor submitted for NGS contained both melanoma and adenocarcinoma. Several genomic alterations were identified as follows TSC1 loss (homozygous deletion) of exons 20-23, CDKN2A/B loss, BAP1 (E20fs*52), PBRM1 (R1095fs*39). CGP is a validated approach in detecting base substitutions, short insertions, deletions, copy number alterations and selected fusion products. The technique has been directly compared to established assays including PCR. Test sensitivity approximately 95–99% across various alteration types with high specificity (positive predictive value >99%). Because CGP is a validated technique to identify genetic abnormalities, no additional testing on the tumor sample was clinically indicated .
Tuberous sclerosis gene 1 (TSC1) is a tumor suppressor gene found on the long arm of chromosome 9. TSC1 encodes the protein gene product hamartin composed of one transmembrane domain and two coiled-coil domains. The first coiled-coil domain modulates interaction between hamartin and tuberin. A second coiled-coil domain is encoded by exons 17 to 23 which stabilizes the tuberin-hamartin complex . The hamartin-tuberin complex enables the GTPase-activating function of tuberin and is a major regulator of small G-protein Rheb which interacts with mTORC1 [, ]. Loss of hamartin, therefore results in increased downstream mTOR activity potentially predicting increased sensitivity to mTOR inhibitors.
Based on the results of CGP the patient began treatment with temsirolimus (Torisel, Pfizer, New York, NY) 15 mg intravenously weekly. The patient was followed with clinical examinations monthly and restaging imaging every 2 months while on therapy. After 4 months of treatment, a restaging CT scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis demonstrated a significant partial response to therapy by RECIST 1.1 criteria . Restaging imaging 2 months later demonstrated stable disease. The patient experienced no dose-limiting toxicities while on therapy. Unfortunately, the patient later developed severe sepsis related to Clostridium Difficile colitis and died from infectious complications 6 months after starting temsirolimus. Informed consent was obtained for the publication of this manuscript and available to the journal editors for review. This manuscript adhered to CARE guidelines for case reports.