We present the case of a 51-year-old female who complained of multiple joint pain, fatigue, and muscle weakness, persisting for 2 years. The patient had no known co-morbidities and initially experienced bilateral hip pain, gradually extending to both knees and ankles. In addition, she reported tingling and paresthesia in both lower limbs, making it difficult to bear weight. The patient was referred to the endocrinology department for evaluation because of concerns over bone fragility. There were no reports of falls, kidney stones, hereditary osteoporosis, or metabolic bone disease throughout her medical history.
In addition, she denied ever having smoked, drunk alcohol, used steroids, or used recreational drugs. Laboratory investigations revealed hypophosphatemia, reduced 1,25(OH)2D3, high serum ALP and significantly high FGF-23 levels . Based on her medical and family history, there were no indications of a genetic cause of hypophosphatemia, and she had not been exposed to medications or toxins known to cause acquired hypophosphatemia. An X-ray of the pelvis with both hips revealed an osteolytic lesion in the proximal femur which gradually increased in size over the course of 1 year along with osteopenia and insufficiency fracture in the right femoral neck (-). A neck ultrasound was performed, revealing the presence of a parathyroid adenoma. Subsequently, the patient underwent surgery for the excision of the parathyroid adenoma. Following the procedure, she experienced significant improvement in pain and could mobilize with support for 9 months. However, the symptoms recurred after this initial improvement. 3D CT scan showed well-defined soft-tissue density lesion measuring 1.6 × 1.4 × 2.3 cm in the proximal shaft of right femur in the meta-diaphyseal junction with cortical breach . The patient’s magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed generalized osteopenia with bilateral avascular necrosis of femoral heads and insufficiency fracture of right femoral neck and a well-defined exophytic lesion measuring 3 × 2 × 3 cm, arising from the anterior part of the proximal shaft of the right femur . The lesion involved both the cortex and medulla of the bone. The patient also had muscle atrophy in the gluteal and thigh muscles. In addition, the patient’s neck ultrasound revealed two oval-shaped nodules (measuring 2.2 × 16 × 25 mm) on the right thyroid lobe. These nodules had an uneven texture and indicated an active parathyroid adenoma and the possibility of recurrence.
Further evaluation with a Ga68 DotA scan showed a 1.5 × 1 cm nodule in the soft tissue near the patient’s right femur. This nodule had a high concentration of 68Ga DOTATATE and a standard uptake value (max) of 4.89. The medical team suspected that the patient may have TIO due to the presence of this nodule. An additional clinicopathological correlation was required for confirmation. A whole-body FDG PET scan showed metabolic activity in the soft-tissue near the patient’s right femur. The nodule expressed SSTR, further supporting the suspicion that it was the primary lesion causing TIO. However, further clinicopathological correlation was still needed for confirmation. The patient received phosphate, calcium, and Vitamin D supplements as part of their treatment while undergoing evaluation. Based on consultation with the endocrinologist, it was decided to perform an excisional biopsy and curettage of the lesion. This procedure was done under spinal anesthesia and with the help of C-arm fluoroscopy. The orthopedic team removed a 2.5 × 3.5 cm mass from the proximal femur and chemically cauterized the area with bone cement . They also conducted prophylactic fixation using DHS plating. The histopathological examination of the removed tumor confirmed that it was a phosphaturic mesenchymal tumor, consistent with the suspected diagnosis ( and ).
Serum phosphorus levels normalized on the 7th post-operative day with a marked decreased in serum FGF 23 levels at 3-month post-operative and resulted in dramatic and remarkable clinical improvement . TIO diagnosis is often delayed, causing patients to suffer from symptoms for years before receiving proper treatment. The rarity of the disease and the vague symptoms are reasons for this delay. Critical indicators of TIO are low phosphorus levels, high serum ALP, reduced 1,25(OH)2D3, and most notably, elevated FGF-23 levels in the blood. The patient underwent regular follow-up appointments at 3–4-month intervals, during which serum phosphorus, parathyroid hormone (PTH), and calcium levels were monitored. The patient’s phosphorus levels remained within the normal range with oral phosphorus supplementation. After 1 year of follow-up, the patient could bear total weight on the affected limb, resumed normal day-to-day activities, and showed no signs of recurrence .