A 30-year-old Chinese woman with yellowish-white macular lesion in right eye during a routine examination presented to our hospital. She had no other symptoms, and had no pain or vision loss in her right eye. The patient has no traumatic history. Her past medical history and ophthalmic history were negative. The initial best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 6/6 for both eyes. The cornea was clear, and the anterior segment was normal. Pupils were equal, round and reactive to light with no afferent pupillary defect. There was no cataract in both eyes. The initial intraocular pressure (IOP) was 14 mmHg in the right eye and 13 mmHg in the left eye. Funduscopic examination of the left eye was unremarkable. A spindle-shaped yellowish-white and hypo-pigmented lesion of about 0.5 disc diameter vertically and by 1 disc diameter horizontally was located in the temporal macular area with a tip pointing towards the central fovea of the macula . The IR photograph showed that the contour of the lesion was visible, and transverse elliptical and was consistent with the colorful fundus photographs . Microperimetry visual field was basically normal . The SD-OCT showed a normal inner retina, mild thinner outer retina and RPE in the temporal macular area, with correspondingly increased choroidal reflectivity . Other OCT findings included outer retinal loss/attenuation with significant atrophy of an intact ellipsoid zone. OCTA of choroid capillary layer revealed increased density of the choroidal vasculature corresponding to the area of the lesion, while the superficial and deep layers appeared normal . With FAF, the lesion showed normal signals mostly with slight hyperautofluorescence at the nasal lesion margin . FFA of the lesion showed variegated fluorescence and no leakage and change in the morphology during the whole imaging process . Based on these findings, the patient was clearly confirmed to have torpedo maculopathy.
The treatment for this patient was closely observed. The patient was followed-up every 3 to 6 months. Her BCVA remained still 6/6 in both eyes, and the fundus lesion still remained intact during follow-up at 15 months.