A 78-year-old right hand-dominant woman suffered a fall on her right side in a bicycle accident, and presented at our institution on the same day with severe arm pain. Her medical history included internal fixation for a glenoid fracture 7 years ago, and also hemiarthroplasty (bipolar humeral head type) for a proximal humeral fracture 5 years back. She had also undergone coracoid tip transfer to the glenoid rim for atraumatic postoperative dislocation. All the previous operations had been performed at other hospital. Upon initial presentation, the patient had severe pain in the right arm without vascular or neurological abnormalities, and the right arm was swollen, with deformity. She was not aware of any pain around the shoulder. She stated that although her range of motion in the arm had been limited before the accident, she had been able to live without assistance. Standard radiographs of the humerus revealed a periprosthetic fracture, which was centered at the tip of the prosthesis stem with minimal proximal extension, chronic anterior dislocation, proximal medial side osteolysis, and a thin cortex with osteopenia ( and ) We considered that surgery might have a considerable risk of complication because of the patient’s advanced age, poor bone condition, and history of multiple operations on the shoulder. Therefore, we decided to follow her up conservatively using functional bracing with routine periodic X-ray examinations. Her arm was immobilized using a plaster U-slab in a sling, to rest the arm and allow the swelling to subside for 2 weeks after the injury. After the swelling had improved, we modeled a functional brace. At 2 weeks after injury, the functional brace was applied without a sling, and physiotherapy was started, with very good patient compliance. The arm pain gradually resolved on a daily basis, but after 3 weeks, radiography showed that the fracture gap had widened. Therefore, we treated this fracture using a sling to prevent any traction force on the fracture site until sufficient callus formation had been achieved. The presence of a callus was confirmed on radiographs after 5 weeks, and use of the sling was continued until 7 weeks after injury. The patient was able to live an almost normal daily life with a functional brace by 10 weeks. Complete radiographic union was confirmed at 17 weeks, and the bracing was then removed. At the final follow-up at 33 months after injury, three- dimensional computed tomography showed anterior angulation of 27 degrees and valgus deformity of 3 degrees , and radiographs showed no change in alignment at the end of bracing . The range of motion of the right shoulder was forward flexion to 90°, external rotation at the trunk to 30°, abduction to 90°, and internal rotation to level L2. The patient was relieved of the arm pain, and her level of daily living activity was the same as that before injury.