A 76-year-old man with no history of smoking presented with an abnormal shadow on chest X-ray. He had a medical history of hypertension, dyslipidemia, reflux esophagitis, and benign prostatic hyperplasia. He had mild dyspnea on exertion. Physical examination did not reveal any abnormal findings and the results of the laboratory tests were within normal limits. The patient had an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status (ECOG PS) score of 1. Chest X-ray revealed a tumor in the left hilar region and left pleural effusion. This was confirmed by enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan, which showed a 40 mm tumor in the left lower lobe with left pleural effusion. Enhanced CT scan of the abdomen revealed liver and adrenal metastases. Tissue specimens obtained by bronchoscopy revealed a well-differentiated adenocarcinoma . Genomic analysis was performed to identify whether there were any driver mutations present. This revealed that there were no sensitizing mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene, nor were there translocations in the anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene. Immunohistochemical analysis of programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression using the murine 22C-3 antibody, expressed as the tumor proportion score (TPS), revealed a TPS of 23% . Furthermore, there were no increases in the serum levels of various tumor markers.
First-line chemotherapy with carboplatin (area under the curve, 6), paclitaxel (200 mg/m2), and bevacizumab (15 mg/kg) was initiated for pulmonary adenocarcinoma cT3N1M1c (Stage IVB). However, skin eruption developed during the week following administration and spread to his whole body. The size of the liver metastasis in the S4 region also increased from 1.0 to 1.3 cm and new liver metastases were detected . The ECOG PS score of the patient was 1. Since the patient’s skin eruption was classified as a Grade 3 adverse event (Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events, version 4.0) and the disease was progressive, treatment was switched to an ICI. Pembrolizumab (200 mg/body) was administered as a second-line treatment. Following administration, the patient began to experience a gradual loss of appetite and abdominal distension, followed by a worsening of his general condition. On Day 13 after pembrolizumab administration, an enhanced CT scan showed progression of the liver metastases . There was also a large amount of ascites and widespread peritoneal dissemination . These were novel findings that had not been observed prior to pembrolizumab treatment. The patient died suddenly due to rapid progression of respiratory failure on Day 14 after pembrolizumab administration.
An autopsy revealed extensive Stage IV lung adenocarcinoma originating from the left lower lobe with metastases in the lungs, left pleura, liver, adrenal glands, kidneys, pancreas, stomach, small intestine, colon, bone marrow, and lymph nodes of the bilateral hilar and para-aortic lesions. Dissemination to the peritoneum , omentum, and diaphragm was also documented by autopsy. Microscopic examination of the peritoneal tissue confirmed the presence of a well-differentiated invasive adenocarcinoma . Immunohistochemical analysis of the peritoneal tissue revealed that the PD-L1 TPS of the tumor cells was 12% , which is similar to the score for the tumor tissue obtained by bronchoscopy. Overexpression of the MDM2 gene was not detected by immunohistochemistry. In addition to these findings, an extensive hemorrhagic infarction due to tumor embolism was observed in the right lung . This was recorded as the cause of death based on the autopsy.