A 54-year-old Caucasian male was first seen in consultation in 2017 with telangiectasias, hypoxemia, and renal failure. The biology showed a secondary polycythemia with a monoclonal peak composed of IgG kappa (2 g/L). The gas sample examination showed a PaO2 of 50 mm Hg without oxygen supply. The presence of IgG kappa monoclonal gammopathy was confirmed by the bone marrow aspiration analysis, showing 5% of plasma cells. Perinephric fluid collections were seen on MRI with no renal insufficiency at this time. Giving these signs, we concluded to TEMPI syndrome. Perinephric fluid collections were corrected by surgical drainage. He received first three cycles of a bortezomib-based regimen with no significant clinical or hematological improvement. The treatment was stopped. His condition declined with worsening hypoxemia, increase of polycythemia, and monoclonal protein. A moderate renal insufficiency progressively appeared with Bence-Jones proteinuria. Unfortunately, the patient refused any renal biopsy. At this time, the bone marrow showed 7% of anarchic plasma cells. In this context, we proposed an association of daratumumab, lenalidomide, and dexamethasone as a second-line therapy. The dose of daratumumab was 16 mg/kg intravenously plus 40 mg of dexamethasone weekly for 8 weeks and then every 15 days for 4 months and finally once a month. The doses of lenalidomide were reduced because of renal failure (5 mg for 21 days). The response was assessed after each cycle of treatment. After two cycles of treatment, we observed a dramatic fall in the monoclonal protein level and free light chain ratio (, ). Clinical improvement was marked by a significant decrease in oxygen requirement and disappearance of telangiectasias. Serum protein electrophoresis and immunofixation were negative after nine cycles of treatment, so we conclude to complete remission according IMWG criteria 2016 . Kappa light chains dramatically felt too, and the free light chain ratio normalized in the same time (kappa/lambda ratio: 2:1, i.e., <4:1). Renal improvement was slower but significantly improved after six cycles of treatment , supporting the hypothesis of an associated MGRS. Unfortunately, our patient refused renal biopsy to confirm this hypothesis, but the normalization of renal function increases the clinical suspicion.