A 67-year-old female, a known case of CLL and hypertension, presented to our medical facility with abnormal behaviours, forgetfulness, screaming at others, and loss of appetite for 2 months. She used to forget the last meals taken, the names of the family members, and even forget her room. The abnormal behaviours included screaming at others and shouting for no cause. She had no fever, headache, vomiting, abnormal body movements, diplopia, and focal neurological deficits. She was given chemotherapy with a standard dose of six cycles of Chlorambucil (0.5 mg/kg) 2 years back for CLL while she was abroad and was on haematological remission since then. On examination, she appeared cachectic and pallor was present. On neurological evaluation, immediate memory and serial subtraction test were impaired. Her mini-mental status examination score was 20 out of 30. Other general and systemic findings were within normal limits. The routine investigations showed haemoglobin 9.4 g/dl (13–17 g/dl), total count 14870/mm3 (4000–1100/mm3) with 77% lymphocytes (20–40%) and 16% neutrophils (40–60%). Total protein and albumin were 4.9 g/dl (5.5–9 g/dl) and 3.7 g/dl (3.5–5.5 g/dl), respectively. Serology was negative for HIV 1, 2, HBsAg, and Anti HCV. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain was ordered as shown in Figure .
It showed bilateral asymmetrical signal changes involving the periventricular and subcortical white matter of bilateral frontal lobes with involvement of the genu and anterior body of the corpus callosum, left parieto-temporal lobes, right parietal lobe, and right cerebellar hemisphere with mild age-related atrophy. Based on the above history, clinical findings, and laboratory investigations, she was admitted to our hospital for further evaluation and management. She was managed as a case of toxic leukoencephalopathy with CLL and hypertension. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) tapping was done and sent for relevant investigations. CSF analysis showed a total Count- less than 5 cells with all lymphocytes, glucose 52 mg/dl (40–80 mg/dl), protein 10 mg/dl (20–40 mg/dl), adenine deaminase level 2.83 U/L (<10 U/L). CSF neurotropic viral panel came out positive. CSF for JC was sent before discharge to be followed up during the OPD visits.
During discharge, she still had problems with memory, and was advised to increase family participation. As there is no definite cure for PML, the patient was discharged on multivitamin supplementation and anticholinergic (Donepezil 5 mg once daily). On the follow-up visit, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for the JC virus in CSF showed 400 000 copies /ml, and a diagnosis of PML with JC virus was made. Although there are no any established criteria for the diagnosis of PML, we came to the diagnosis based on the neurological deficits in an immunocompromised state with the help of MRI findings and PCR of the CSF from the patient. During the follow-up out-patient department visit after 1 month, there was no further deterioration in the general and neurological condition of the patient.