A 27-year-old, 52-kg, 156-cm woman (G4, P1), with a previous uneventful term vaginal delivery, had epistaxis a few times a month before pregnancy. At 30 weeks of gestation, she was admitted to a local hospital’s emergency department due to excruciating back pain and dyspnea. Computed tomography revealed a ruptured pulmonary AVM (36 × 21 mm) in the left lower lobe. She was transferred to our tertiary perinatal center after embolization and was first diagnosed with HHT because of recurrent epistaxis, pulmonary AVM, and positive family history. Several discussions were held by a multidisciplinary team comprising obstetric anesthesiologists, obstetricians, pediatricians, respiratory physicians, and interventional radiologists to seek the most appropriate management. Our obstetricians preferred to avoid vaginal delivery owing to the risk of rerupture of pulmonary AVM and rupture of undiagnosed pelvic or other areas’ AVMs during vaginal delivery. Our interventional radiologists also agreed that the possibility of pulmonary AVM rerupture during vaginal delivery was not 0%, even after embolization. Therefore, elective cesarean delivery by neuraxial anesthesia at 37 weeks of gestation was planned. Preoperative examinations revealed no abnormal physical or laboratory findings. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at 32 weeks of gestation revealed spinal AVM ranging from the thoracic to the lumbar levels , but AVM was not present in the brain. To avoid puncturing the spinal AVM with neuraxial techniques, the anesthetic plan was changed from neuraxial anesthesia to general anesthesia. A hybrid operating where arterial embolization could be performed in case of pulmonary AVM rerupture was opted for performing the surgery.
After arriving in the operating room, general anesthesia was induced using 300 μg fentanyl, 100 mg propofol, and 60 mg rocuronium in the 30° left lateral tilt position with standard monitoring and direct left radial arterial pressure. The trachea was easily intubated by applying cricoid pressure. Mechanical ventilation settings were peak inspiratory pressure of 15 cmH2O, positive end-expiratory pressure of 5 cmH2O, frequency of 15 breaths per minute, and inspired oxygen fraction of 40%. The target range for end-tidal CO2 was set at 30–35 mmHg. Anesthesia was maintained with oxygen, air, target-controlled infusion of 2.6 μg/ml propofol, and 0.2 μg/kg/min remifentanil. She remained hemodynamically stable throughout the surgery, with SpO2 over 99%. Five minutes after the induction, a 2496-g newborn was delivered with Apgar scores of 7 and 9 at 1 min and 5 min, respectively. The umbilical arterial blood gas had pH 7.28 and base excess − 4.0 mEq/l. After the surgery, intravenous 1000 mg acetaminophen and 100 mg sugammadex were administered, and her trachea was extubated soon after confirming spontaneous breathing to avoid coughing and hypertension. The total surgical and anesthesia durations were 32 min and 54 min, respectively, with blood loss of 904 ml, including the amniotic fluid. She had an uneventful postpartum period and was discharged with her baby on the fifth postoperative day.