A 54-year-old female patient presented to the emergency department with complaints of abdominal pain and dyspnea.
The patient presented with recurrent episodes of epigastric pain and dyspnea, which began 2 mo prior and worsened 48 h before hospital admission.
The patient had a long history of untreated and advanced hypertension, as well as a history of inferior and anterior ST-segment elevation MI without revascularization, which had occurred 4 years prior.
The patient had no relevant family history.
The patient presented with hemodynamic stability, a heart rate of 96 beats/min, respiratory rate of 16 breaths/min, blood pressure of 130/80 mmHg, and oxygen saturation in room air of 98%. Symptoms of acute heart failure were excluded by clinical cardiological examination. A painful and hard epigastric mass was detected upon abdominal examination.
Blood analysis revealed mild leukocytosis (12 × 109/L), with neutrophil predominance (80%) and normal hematocrit and platelet levels. Prothrombin and partial thromboplastin times were normal, and troponin T was slightly increased at 1.2 ng/mL. Blood creatinine was increased at 435 mmol/L. The 12-lead electrocardiogram showed persistent ST elevation and Q wave in the inferior and apical territory. Chest X-ray revealed increased cardiothoracic ratio with rounded opacity along the left cardiac silhouette.
Echocardiography is the first test performed after admission because of its availability. In the four-chamber view, initial imaging evaluation with transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed the narrow neck of a large PAN in the LV apical wall (arrow) , in the apical two-chamber view and modified short axis view . TTE revealed a second PAN of the distal apical inferior wall, separated from the first PAN by a common organizing fibrous tissue, as detected in the subcostal view and apex view , without pericardial effusion. Color Doppler imaging in the four-chamber view demonstrated flow in and out of the pericardial cavity at the site of the tear, as well as abnormal flow into the PAN without any shunt through the organizing thrombus. The LV communicated with the PAN via a narrow neck formed by the ruptured apical and inferior myocardium. The dimensions of the cavity (68/15 mm; Figure ) and imaging findings were indicative of a PAN; however, it is of great clinical importance to differentiate PANs, which have a high likelihood of spontaneous rupture, from a true aneurysm, which seldom ruptures.
The patient was further evaluated with transesophageal echocardiogram, despite the difficulty in assessing the apical wall by this approach; however, the left ventricle communicated with the PANs via a narrow neck formed by the ruptured apical and inferior myocardium . To better characterize this finding, a cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) scan was performed since the severe chronic renal failure precluded evaluation by thoracic computed tomography angiography and to take advantage of the good non-invasive tissue characterization offered by CMR; the cine sequence images confirmed severe LV dysfunction and showed an apical PAN without an intracavitary thrombus in the two-chamber view . Curiously, a larger and a small outpouching, separated by fibrous tissue, was revealed in the inferior apical wall ; the outpouchings were seen to be associated with disrupted myocardial wall, and they were surrounded only by pericardium.