A 56-year-old man presented to our hospital with right pleural effusion.
The patient had a long history of outpatient treatment for hypertension. Although he was asymptomatic, a routine chest computed tomography (CT) scan revealed the presence of pleural effusion in the right lung.
He had no prior history of hospitalization, operations, or injuries.
He had no significant childhood illnesses. His deceased parents had no history of malignancy. He had two healthy siblings. He had a 30-year smoking history of 1 pack/d between the ages of 20 and 56 years (30 pack/year). He was occupationally exposed to asbestos from the age of 24 to 30 years.
Upon physical examination, his respiratory sounds were slightly attenuated in the right back. His cervical, supraclavicular, and axillary lymph nodes were not palpable.
Preoperative complete blood count and biochemical examination of blood showed almost normal findings. The levels of serum tumor markers such as squamous cell carcinoma related antigen, cytokeratin fraction, and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 were within normal limits, while elevation of carcinoembryonic antigen level to 10.5 ng/mL (< 5.0 ng/mL) was observed.
A chest radiograph and chest CT revealed right pleural effusion, but no tumorous shadow was pointed out in the chest. Cytological examination of the right pleural effusion, sampled via thoracentesis, revealed malignant mesothelioma cells. He had been diagnosed with c-T1aN0M0 c-stage IA malignant pleural mesothelioma..
He underwent right EPP and lymph node dissection with curative intent. Pathological examination of the resected tissue yielded a diagnosis of diffuse MPM, epithelioid type, p-T2N2M0, and p-Stage III. He did not receive postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy. Thirteen months after operation, multiple pulmonary metastases were detected on F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography (FDG-PET/CT) . The patient refused CDDP/PEM treatment because of the anticipated side effects of CDDP; he received 8 mo courses of single-agent PEM therapy (500 mg/m2) and achieved stable disease.
Twenty-one months post-surgery, the patient was re-hospitalized because of abdominal pain and tightness, dyspnea, and anorexia due to massive ascites. Accordingly, we diagnosed recurrent mesothelioma presenting with massive malignant ascites.