VH is a 50-year-old male who presented to an outside facility with complaints of diplopia and headache initially diagnosed as PTC. He was evaluated by ophthalmology and neurology before being transferred to us for further tertiary management of sagittal sinus thrombosis. The patient described mild to moderate headaches of 3 weeks duration with blurry vision and 1 week of double vision that seemed to be exaggerated with rightward gaze. The patient had no pertinent past medical history. His physical exam was remarkable only for bilateral papilledema and subtle right-sided abducens nerve palsy. He was otherwise alert and oriented, with full muscle strength and without myelopathy or other cranial nerve findings. Of note, he had a palpable, compressible soft tissue mass over the vertex of his skull.
Imaging demonstrated a midline parietal extradural mass with erosion through the skull and into the subgaleal soft tissues. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)/MRV demonstrated depression of the SSS with local stenosis in that region. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis yielded a 4-cm solid mass on the upper pole of the right kidney. The patient was initially started on a heparin drip by the primary team which was discontinued after definitive imaging was obtained and prior to a diagnostic lumbar puncture (LP). After an opening pressure of 51 cm H2O by manometer in the lateral recumbent position confirmed intracranial hypertension (IH), he was placed on steroids and acetazolamide prior to discussion and recommendation of surgical resection.
A biparietal craniectomy was performed with gross total resection of the mass as demonstrated in preoperative and postoperative MRI scans . Recovery was uneventful with improvements in the patient's headache and gradual improvement in the patient's diplopia. A repeat LP performed 2 days after surgical resection showed an opening pressure of 4 cm H2O and he was discharged on postoperative day number 3. Follow-up MRV demonstrated improved dural venous outflow . Ophthalmology follow-up 2 weeks later documented improvement in his papilledema and a repeat LP at that time gave an opening pressure of 21 cm H2O. He received a cytoreductive right laparoscopic radical nephrectomy 6 weeks after his craniectomy. Twelve weeks after his cranial surgery, he presented with right leg pain related to a metastatic lesion to his femur necessitating prophylactic intramedullary nailing (IMN). Seven days later, X-ray demonstrated a minimally displaced pathologic fracture within the lytic lesion. Unfortunately, prior to receiving adjuvant radiation and chemotherapy, he was found deceased at home 1 week later from an unknown cause, approximately 4 months after presentation.