A 30-year-old male had a history of tensional headache and weakness of the upper limbs for one year prior to the diagnosis of a Chiari malformation type I. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed mild basilar impression, cerebellar tonsils at C2 level, a small syrinx at C3-C4, and no hydrocephalus [Figure and ].
Accordingly, a standard posterior fossa decompression was performed. It consisted of a suboccipital craniectomy, C1-C2 laminectomy, dura opening, and a lyophilized bovine pericardium duraplasty. The immediate postoperative course was uneventful with a routine computed tomography (CT) scan performed 48 h after surgery demonstrating the absence of complications . But, on the fifth day postoperative, the patient suddenly developed severe headache and right hemiparesis. Emergent CT scan revealed a posterior fossa epidural hematoma compressing cerebellum, upper spinal cord, and the fourth ventricle . Emergent evacuation of the hematoma with complete clinical recovery was achieved.
One year later, the patient experienced progressive headache and global hyperreflexia with decreased pinprick and light touch sensations on the upper limbs. The MRI revealed adequate bone decompression without ventricular enlargement. However, the absence of CSF signal dorsal to the cerebellar hemispheres, vermis, tonsils, and spinal cord at C1 level was noted. A remarkable enlargement of the previous syrinx cavity was also demonstrated at C3-C4 level .
Surgical treatment was decided. Severe arachnoid scars that tethered the cerebellar hemispheres and upper spinal cord to the dura and dural graft were sharply dissected. De-tethering of the spinal cord and aperture of the obex were achieved and the normal CSF flow was re-established. A new duraplasty using lyophilized bovine pericardium dural graft was performed and it was tacked up to the adjacent pericranium in order to keep the graft away from the cerebellar hemispheres and upper spinal cord.
The patient's neurological status recovered only few days after surgery. The postoperative MRI showed decreasing of the sirynx and patency of the subarachnoidal space . He did not present any complication during the long-term follow-up.