Herein, we report a case of a 47-year-old heterosexual Caucasian man, who was diagnosed with UC in 2010. At the onset, the disease was localized to the entire colon and the patient was initially treated with oral prednisone and then with mesalazine for about 3 years. In 2013, following a severe relapse with partial response to steroids he started infliximab (IFX) at standard dosage (5 mg/Kg) and achieved a clinical and endoscopic remission. IFX was maintained every 8 weeks until July 2017 when it was withdrawn for a progressive loss of response. At September 2017, the patient experienced a disease flare characterized by 5–6 bowel movements/day of liquid and bloody stools and abdominal pain. Partial Mayo index score was 7 (7–9 indicates severe disease). Laboratory exams revealed anemia (hemoglobin 10.3 g/L) and elevated C-reactive protein (18 mg/L, normal value < 5). So, after the exclusion of intestinal infections, the α4-β7 integrin inhibitor vedolizumab (VDZ) was started at the standard dosage of 300 mg (intravenous infusion). VDZ was administered at time 0, 2 and 6 weeks following the standard induction protocol. The patient reported an early clinical benefit and thus received other three administrations every 8 weeks. Nevertheless, he showed a progressive loss of clinical response and consequently VDZ was discontinued. The patient underwent to a colonoscopy in April 2018, which showed a severe pancolitis with deep ulceration, spontaneous bleeding and nodular mucosa particularly in the transverse and in the right colon (Mayo endoscopic score 3) . Rectal biopsies were taken. Histopathological evaluation of intranuclear cytomegalovirus inclusions resulted negative. Finally, a laparoscopic colectomy with temporary ileostomy was performed. Surprisingly, histological examination of the surgical specimen at level of rectal mucosa and submucosa showed a spindle cells submucosal nodular proliferation suggestive of KS and subsequent immunohistochemical staining detected spindle cells stained with HHV-8 confirming the diagnosis of colonic KS. HIV serology resulted negative and skin examination and upper digestive tract endoscopy were normal. Four months after the colectomy, the patient underwent to ileal pouch-anal anastomosis surgery. At present, the patient shows an overall good health state without any sign of KS recurrence.