A 44-year-old Caucasian (Belgian) man was admitted to the emergency room, after returning from a trip to France. Complaints of right loin pain had started two weeks earlier and were unsuccessfully treated with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents. His past medical history included arterial hypertension for which the patient refused medical treatment. He had already started a diet program in order to lower his blood pressure by losing weight. His blood pressure on admission was 191/106 mmHg, pulse was regular and temperature was 37.5°C. His kidney function was slightly impaired with an estimated glomerular filtration rate (GFR) of 71 mL/min/1.73 m2 (abbreviated modification of diet in renal disease (MDRD) formula), a moderate leukocytosis (10,700/mm3) and slight elevation of C-reactive protein (CRP) (1.9 mg/dL), besides elevated plasma concentrations of lactate dehydrogenase (639 U/L). A computerized tomography (CT) scan demonstrated three wedge shaped areas of low attenuation in the right kidney, and a 'string of beads' sign of the right renal artery with suspicion of peri-arterial inflammatory changes . A sequential angiography with digital subtraction was performed, which confirmed the diagnosis of FMD of the right renal artery . In addition, an intra-luminal thrombus in the upper right renal artery was observed. Intravenous therapy with heparin was started and his blood pressure was easily controlled pharmacologically. Additional thrombophilia screening (anti-cardiolipin antibodies, lupus anticoagulant, anti-thrombin III, factor V Leiden and levels of proteins C and S) turned out to be negative. Echocardiography showed left ventricular hypertrophy with normal left ventricular function. Our patient was discharged a few days later with oral anticoagulation and the combination of two classes of anti-hypertensive drugs. During follow-up, his blood pressure remained perfectly under control. We advised the patient to undergo a new angiography in order to evaluate if the thrombus had resolved and to treat aneurysms and hemodynamically significant stenotic regions.