A previously healthy 63-year-old man was admitted with a two week history of wounds over his sternum. Twenty days before hospital admission, he had developed fever and sore throat. Oral amoxicillin was given. Six days later he noted an erythematous skin lesion over his sternum. One week later his sore throat resolved but the skin lesion worsened. He presented to a dermatologist and was diagnosed with erysipelas and received oral amoxicillin again. Over the next two days, the skin lesion evolved to form vesicles that were drained in the emergency department of another hospital. The lesion progressed to ulceration over the next five days.
The patient had no history of immunosuppressive disease or treatment.
On admission he was afebrile (temperature of 37,2°C), and hemodynamically stable. Physical examination revealed two sloughy necrotic ulcerations of the skin over the sternum with hyperemic margins. These lesions measured about 6 × 4 cm. and 2 × 1 cm. . The white blood cell count was 12.700/mm3, the hemoglobin level was 10.8 g/dL, and the platelet count was 561.000/mm3. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 78 mm/hour, the serum C-reactive protein level was 5,6 mg/L (range 0 – 5 mg/L). Liver function tests, blood urea nitrogen and serum creatinine levels and chest radiographs were normal.
Blood cultures were taken. A skin biopsy with culture was performed. While the results of cultures were pending, antibiotic therapy with imipenem (500 mg. IV every 6 hours) was initiated. Pathological examination of the biopsy material revealed ulcerated inflammatory cell infiltration, vascular proliferation and wide necrosis characteristic of ecthyma gangrenosum . Blood cultures remained sterile, but a culture of the biopsy material grew Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Antibiotic treatment was continued for 14 days, after which the patient was admitted to the Department of Plastic Surgery for skin grafting. Two months later, the skin lesion had healed. One year later, he remains healthy.