The patient, a 67-year-old man with no smoking history, was referred to the hospital for hoarseness that lasted for 20 days. Laryngoscopy revealed complete paralysis of the left vocal cord. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest showed a lobulated mass of 3.2×2.4 cm under the pleura in the left upper lung, with mediastinal and left hilar lymphadenopathy . A CT-guided percutaneous lung biopsy of the lung lesion was performed, and a diagnosis of invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma (IMA) of lung was made by pathologists ( and ), a lot of mucus fills the alveolar space. In addition, brain magnetic resonance imaging and whole-body bone imaging and PET-CT scan revealed no distant metastasis. And laryngoscopy revealed that the left vocal cord was completely paralyzed, considering that the lesion invaded the recurrent laryngeal nerve. A stage IIIB (T4N2M0) IMA of lung was confirmed by histology and imaging.
Then, the biopsied tissue was examined for EGFR, ALK and ROS1 gene panels by real-time fluorescence polymerase chain reaction (real-time PCR), and finally the EML4-ALK rearrangement was detected. Subsequently, the patient began to receive treatment with alectinib (150 mg twice daily), a selective second-generation ALK inhibitor. After the first cycle of treatment, the patient’s hoarseness symptoms improved significantly. CT of the chest showed that the size of the left upper lobe lobulated mass was 1.7×1.4cm, which was significantly smaller than before . After the second cycle of treatment, the chest CT showed that the tumor lesions were further reduced . After three cycles (84 days) of neoadjuvant treatment, no solid lesions were found on chest CT, the tumor achieved complete remission (CR) , and no adverse drug reactions were seen. Subsequently, the patient was transferred to cardiothoracic surgery for thoracoscopic left lobectomy and systemic lymphadenectomy. Postoperative pathology revealed a small amount of scattered high-grade atypical glands in the interstitium, and fibrous tissue proliferation, foam cell aggregation, lymphocyte infiltration, multinucleated giant cell reaction, necrotic hemicalcium can be seen in the remaining lung tissue ( and ). Then, Integrated the TNM stage was downstaged as T1aN0M0 IA. And the immunohistochemistry revealed that Ki61, cytokeratin 7 (CK7) and thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) were positive .