A 55-year-old Caucasian woman with a 5-month history of abdominal pain and vomiting was diagnosed as having a probable high-grade ovarian malignancy with a large volume of peritoneal disease. She had a prior ultrasound of her pelvis which demonstrated a 17 cm large irregular solid vascularized mass in her right ovary. Her comorbidities included obesity (body mass index of 33), asthma, and she had previously undergone a laparoscopic cholecystectomy. There was no significant family history. She did not smoke tobacco and she drank alcohol occasionally. She was scheduled for debulking surgery; however, she presented to our emergency department with worsening abdominal pain, vomiting, and diarrhea. A physical examination showed dry mucous membranes, capillary refill < 3 seconds, and jugular venous pressure of 4 cm. Her chest was clear on auscultation with dual heart sounds. Her abdomen was distended with generalized tenderness but no guarding or signs of peritonism. Bowel sounds were present. A computed tomography (CT) scan of her abdomen and pelvis was performed which demonstrated the large right ovarian tumor, peritoneal tumor deposits, and ascites. There was extrinsic compression of her sigmoid colon due to the tumor without radiological signs of large bowel obstruction. There were no other abnormalities of her bowel. She received intravenously administered fluids for rehydration, anti-emetics for nausea, and intravenously administered morphine for abdominal pain. She remained overnight in our emergency department for treatment. She was reassessed the following morning after resolution of her symptoms and was found to be hemodynamically stable and subsequently discharged home.
She re-presented 1 week later with similar symptoms and was admitted to hospital for further management. Following multidisciplinary discussion, she was recommended for neoadjuvant chemotherapy prior to surgical debulking. An urgent core biopsy of the mass confirmed the likely diagnosis of ovarian malignancy. This biopsy indicated a high-grade serous adenocarcinoma. The histology and CT findings were consistent with an International Federation of Gynaecology and Obstetrics stage III ovarian cancer. She was appropriately counselled as to the benefits and risks of chemotherapy prior to commencing treatment.
She was commenced on a first cycle of the commonly used platinum-based two-drug chemotherapy regime of paclitaxel and carboplatin . The dose prescribed was a three weekly cycle of paclitaxel 100 mg/m2 and carboplatin 385 mg/body to achieve area under the curve (AUC) of 5 using the Calvert formula. The results of her pre-chemotherapy blood tests were within acceptable ranges. Specifically, her white cell count (WCC) was 10.1 × 109/L (normal 4–11 × 109/L) and neutrophils were 8.5 × 109/L (normal 1.5–8 × 109/L). She reported feeling better 1 day after chemotherapy. However, 3 days following the commencement of chemotherapy, persistent diarrhea developed. Stool cultures were negative for stool pathogens including Clostridium difficile. On the sixth day post-chemotherapy, she became febrile and acutely unwell with severe abdominal pain. Blood tests at the time revealed a WCC of 0.6 × 109/L and neutropenia of 0.1 × 109/L. A repeat CT of her abdomen and pelvis showed a thickened descending colon and rectal pneumatosis with perforation into the mesorectum . Blood cultures were positive for Escherichia coli and meropenem was commenced. She was transferred to our intensive care unit for hemodynamic support due to septic shock. A surgical assessment was conducted but immediate surgical intervention was deemed inappropriate due to high predicted mortality. She was administered granulocyte colony-stimulating factor but her white blood cell counts did not improve and her respiratory function deteriorated. She died 9 days after the administration of the first dose of chemotherapy. An autopsy was not performed due to the wishes of our patient’s family.