A 52-year-old man with a history of hypertension, coronary artery disease and end-stage renal disease under continuous ambulatory PD treatment for 3 years presented to the PD clinic with cloudy dialysate effluent and diffuse abdominal pain lasting 2 h. Two weeks before this presentation, he was diagnosed with community-acquired pneumonia, which was treated with 400-mg oral moxifloxacin daily for 10 days. However, persistent intractable cough did not seem to improve. Two days before this presentation, he visited the emergent department due to epigastric pain and an intractable cough. He had no nausea, vomiting or fever. Physical examination showed epigastric tenderness without guarding and rebound pain. Laboratory studies indicated a white blood cell (WBC) count 12,000 cells/mm3 with 87% neutrophils and 8% lymphocytes, hemoglobin 8.0 g/dL, alanine transaminase 35 U/L, amylase 19 U/L, total bilirubin 0.56 mg/dL, creatinine 16.7 mg/dL, sodium concentration 133 mEq/L and potassium concentration 4.2 mEq/L. Chest radiography indicated no signs of pneumonia. PD dialysate effluent analysis revealed WBC 2/μL without polymorphonuclear leukocyte (PMN). Abdominal ultrasonography only showed a distended gallbladder with sludge. Severe strains of abdominal muscles from persistent and intense cough were impressed. He was discharged with antitussives and analgesics.
At the PD clinic, his vital signs were body temperature 36 °C, heart rate 104 per minute, respiratory rate 19 per minute and blood pressure 121/91 mmHg. Physical examination confirmed diffuse abdominal tenderness with peritoneal irritation and clean exit site of PD catheter. PD dialysate effluent analysis revealed WBC 1783/μL including 50% PMN. He was diagnosed with PD peritonitis and admitted to ward. Cefuroxime and amikacin were administered intraperitoneally empirically. He had diffuse abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting. Daily analysis of PD dialysate effluent showed WBC counts of 1565/μL(PMN 71%) on day 2 and 3755/μL (PMN: 66%) on day 3 and 4805/μL (PMN:86%) on day 4. PD effluent culture was positive for Klebsiella pneumoniae on day 3. Cefuroxime and amikacin were replaced by Cefepime intraperitoneally. Owing to persistent symptoms, we repeated dialysate culture on Day 3 and it grew yeast-like organism on day 6. Amphotericin was administered immediately and surgery to remove the PD catheter was scheduled. On the same day, dark yellow dialysate was obtained . The color became green after a 24-h fast . An enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of abdomen only revealed a distended gallbladder with modest wall thickening and distended bowel .
Exploratory laparotomy was performed on day 8. Despite a thorough examination of the intestine and stomach, no perforation was identified. The gallbladder was neither reddish nor edematous. A 0.3-cm rupture was found on the fundus of gallbladder. Primary closure of gallbladder was done with external drainage. The PD catheter was removed uneventfully. After antibiotic treatment and intensive care, he recovered without sequelae. He was discharged after 37 days hospitalization and received maintenance hemodialysis three times a week.