A 73-year-old, 152.8-cm, 56.5-kg Asian man with a history of aortic valve insufficiency, hypertension, and postoperative deep vein thrombosis was scheduled for RALP to treat prostate cancer. His prostate-specific antigen concentration was 4.1 ng/mL. His prostate cancer had been diagnosed by biopsy 6 months earlier and his Gleason score was 4 + 3 = 7. He was undergoing complete androgen blockade therapy. Preoperative laboratory results showed a hemoglobin concentration of 13.5 g/dL, hematocrit of 38.8 %, and no abnormalities in his hemostatic function.
On the day of surgery, anesthesia was induced intravenously with 100 mg of propofol, 50 mg of rocuronium, and a constant-rate infusion of remifentanil at 0.3 μg/kg/min with inhaled desflurane at 5 %. We maintained anesthesia with inhaled desflurane at 5 % and intravenously administered remifentanil at 0.2 μg/kg/min in a fraction of inspired oxygen of 0.45. During surgery, our patient was positioned with a head-down tilt of 28°.
After almost 3 hours of surgery, at the surgical stage of urethrovesical anastomosis, our patient’s systolic blood pressure was <70 mmHg. At that moment, we administered 20 mg ephedrine, 300 μg phenylephrine, and 0.03 μg/kg/min norepinephrine to maintain adequate blood pressure. Arterial blood gas measurements showed a hemoglobin concentration of 10.2 g/dL and hematocrit of 30 %. We did not detect any problems with his respiratory parameters. Dissection of his pelvic lymph node was performed. The surgeons confirmed hemostasis.
The surgery was completed after ~4 hours, abdominal insufflation to create the pneumoperitoneum was ceased, and the operating table was returned to the horizontal position. Our patient’s blood pressure immediately dropped, with his systolic blood pressure decreasing to 40 mmHg. Repeat blood tests showed a hemoglobin concentration of 7.2 g/dL and hematocrit of 21 %. After administration of vasopressors, we placed a central venous catheter, with the patient in the head-down tilt position. We administered 120 μg of norepinephrine. After administration, our patient’s hemoglobin level fell to 5.9 g/dL, his hematocrit fell to 16.9 %, and his platelet count was 56 × 103/dL. Because these findings indicated a possible hemorrhage, the surgeons immediately initiated open surgery. A large volume of blood and blood clots were present in his abdominal cavity and so we began rapid transfusion. His systolic blood pressure remained at 40 mmHg for 10 min; we performed chest compressions to maintain his blood pressure. The surgeons reduced the bleeding and maintained his blood pressure by manually pinching his common iliac artery and external iliac artery on his right side. They discovered a longitudinal slice in a branch of his right external iliac artery along the internal oblique muscle; ligation of this vessel achieved hemostasis. The branch was located around an instrument port that was located medially between a camera port and laterally to an assistant port.
Surgery concluded after confirmation of hemostasis and blood pressure stability. The operation lasted 7 hours 50 minutes; anesthesia, 10 hours 14 minutes; and pneumoperitoneum, 3 hours 51 minutes. Our patient lost 5650 mL of blood and 350 mL of urine during surgery. Blood loss was estimated by measuring the blood in the suction bottle and gauze used to absorb the blood and blood clots. He received 5320 mL of red blood cells, 2400 mL of fresh frozen plasma, and 2500 mL of a 5 % albumin solution intraoperatively. His blood pressure, heart rate, and percutaneous oxygen saturation were recorded in the anesthetic chart .
After surgery, our patient was admitted to the intensive care unit. The following day he was extubated and returned to the general care ward. He recovered from surgery with a suspected ileus and was discharged on day 29.