A 64-year-old man presented with medial osteoarthritis of both knees. He underwent Oxford UKA on each knee on the same day. The surgery on both sides was performed by the same experienced senior surgeon. Post-operative radiographs of his left knee showed that the femoral and tibial implants were placed properly, and there were no loose cement fragments. Post-operative course was good, and the patient was discharged at 3 weeks walking alone. He was able to work without pain for 1 year after surgery. At that time, pain developed on the anterior knee surface of the left knee, and at two and a half years after surgery; the pain became localized around the medial margin of the patella of the left knee. In addition, the pain intensified at the same site with twisting movements. The symptoms led to suspicion of soft-tissue-mediated pain, and a local anesthesia injection temporarily achieved complete pain relief. However, the patient’s symptoms subsequently persisted, and an additional surgery was scheduled. Pre-operative range of motion of the left knee was 0-140°, and there was no marked swelling of that joint. There was pain and tenderness at the medial margin of the patella, pain when standing from a bending position, and pain during twisting movement. The radiolucent line was verified beneath the tibial components in both knees 1 year after surgery on plain radiographs, and we diagnosed it as physiological radiolucency because it was no more than 2 mm thick and was surrounded by sclerotic margin. No enlargement of the radiolucent line was evident before additional surgery . The arthroscopic operation was performed two and a half years after primary UKA. The surgical findings showed that scar tissue extending from the intercondylar area to the posterior part of the infrapatella fat pad covered the anterior surface of the femoral implant to the anterior groove of the implant, and we were able to confirm that the scar tissue was in contact with the femoral implant . While surgically removing the scar tissue, a 3 mm diameter cement fragment was identified in the scar tissue and this was removed along with all of the scar tissue ( and ). After arthroscopic surgery, the symptom disappeared immediately, and at present, 2 years after the additional surgery, there has been no recurrence of symptoms and the pain has disappeared.
The patient was informed that his data would be submitted for publication, and he gave his consent for the same.