In March 2022, the 78-year-old man was seen with a complaint of a “brown spot on his right eye that was enlarging in size.” Examination revealed a darkly pigmented, anterior chamber tumor present in the superior nasal quadrant of the iris with neovascularization in the right eye ( left). Slit lamp biomicroscopy and gonioscopy revealed that the tumor had infiltrated the anterior chamber angle. Ultrasound biomicroscopy demonstrated the connection with the ciliary body. MRI demonstrated the iris area of the right eye tumor mass by size approx. 6 × 3 mm, dorsally pressing on the lens and laterally on the ciliary muscles (, right), without clinical signs of extrabulbar growth. Visual acuity of the right eye was 9,25-2,50 50° 20/50 ETDRS, left eye −5,75-0,75 14° 20/20 ETDRS, IOP right eye 11 Torr, left eye 13 Torr. The patient was in good general health status, and there was no metastasis found on PET CT overall. We decided with the oncologist and radiation oncologist and the patient’s agreement to perform stereotactic radiosurgery on a linear accelerator followed by en bloc tumor removal with iridocyclectomy.
Radiosurgical procedure means surgical preparation and fixation of all the rectus muscles before radiosurgical procedure itself. On the day of irradiation, a stereotactic frame was fitted onto the patient. The patient with a fitted stereotactic frame underwent CT and MRI examination, by means of which the tumor is precisely measured. The size of the calculated volume of the tumor was 0.2 cm3. There then follows the planning of the distribution of the dose of radiation in such a manner that the tumor is blasted with a dose of 20.0 Gy, and the surrounding structures receive as little as possible. This consists of the application of photon beams from an external source into the tumor to receive the highest dose of radiation in the volume of the tumor and the lowest dose in the surrounding tissues. After the fusion of an individual irradiation plan, the patient was irradiated with a single dose of 20.0 Gy on the 6-MV photon-linear accelerator (, ).
After stereotactic irradiation, circular laser coagulation of the peripheral retina was performed to prevent subsequent potential retinal complications, resulting from potential retinal irradiation complications and degeneration. Four weeks after, we continued to perform en bloc tumor removal with iridocyclectomy, iridoplasty, partial sclerectomy, and cryotherapy of the peripheral retina under general anesthesia. Microscopic examination revealed pieces of tissue including the sclera, ciliary body, and iris. Histopathological examination found the iris tissue with malignant melanoma G2, spindle cell type B. Immunophenotype described was S100+, melanA+, HMB45+ 50%, Bcl2+, p53-, cyklinD1 450%, AIF+1, CD117+ 50% Ki67+-<5%. One year after surgery, his vision remained largely stable. Visual acuity of the right eye is −8 D 20/63 ETDRS with cataract progression, IOP 7 mm Hg . Both gonioscopy and high-frequency ultrasound showed no evidence of tumor recurrence. The patient was followed at an outside clinic, where reports indicate no metastasis in the lung and liver, so his overall physical and psychological condition remained largely stable.