A 51-year-old female, who had been complaining of intermittent diarrhea for the previous 2 years, was admitted to our hospital with recurrent watery diarrhea along with abdominal pain for 3 days. The patient had received intermittent treatment of anti-inflammatory drugs and symptomatic treatment for 2 years due to recurrent diarrhea. However, the treatment was not effective and she had lost 5 kg body weight. To determine the specific cause of weight loss and recurrence of diarrhea, the doctor examined the patient thoroughly. No abnormality was evident in gastroscopy and proctoscopy. Enhancement of total abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan suggested a suspected space occupation in the left ventricle. Echocardiography indicated a 45 mm × 28 mm mass in the left ventricle, and a malignant tumor was suspected . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed to confirm the diagnosis; the image showed an oval mass measuring 28 cm × 26 cm × 41 cm in the inferior wall of the left ventricle with unclear boundary and limited movement, and equal T1 and long T2 signals , and a myxoma was suspected. All the indexes of myocardial enzymes were normal. The urine metabolites were normal with exception of slightly elevated calcium levels (2.68 mmol/L, normal reference range: 2.20–2.65 mmol/L) and slightly elevated phosphorus levels (1.95 mmol/L, 0.81–1.45 mmol/L). The patient was transferred from the Department of Gastroenterology to that of Cardiac Surgery for surgical tumor resection.
The mass was relatively isolated. Hence a median sternotomy was performed, cardiopulmonary bypass was initiated, and the heart was arrested with antegrade cardioplegia. The mass, located in the left ventricle measuring 35 mm × 25 mm, adhered to the myocardium of the diaphragmatic surface. Sharp dissection was performed circumferentially around the capsule of the mass, ensuring macroscopically free tumor margins. The heart restarted automatically when the ascending aorta was opened, although the heart rate was slow (60 times/min); it was then sewn to the pacemaker wire on the heart surface, after which it worked well. After chest closure, the patient was transferred to the cardiovascular intensive care unit for routine care. Her course was uneventful with the exception of reduction in hemoglobin and platelet levels, and slight increase in lactate dehydrogenase level.
Macroscopically, the lesion consisted of a 3 cm × 2 cm × 1.5 cm grayish yellow mass with a complete capsule and medium texture.
Histological analysis showed that the complete capsule of the tumor was visible at low magnification . Round tumor cells of well-differentiated neuroendocrine morphology were arranged in typical pseudo-glandular, trabecular, ribbon-like, and sieve-like patterns . The cells were well-differentiated , no tumor necrosis was detected, and the mitotic count was 2/10HPF.
The tumor cells were positive for cytokeratin (CK), CD56, chromogranin (CGA), neuron-specific enolase (NSE) , and synaptophysin (Syn), and were negative for vimentin and S100. The proliferative index of Ki67 was 2%. Diagnosis of neuroendocrine tumor (G1) was based on the results of immunohistochemistry and morphological analysis. Metastatic tumors were considered first because of the special anatomical location of the tumor. Further investigations with multiple imaging modalities, focusing on the appendix, gastrointestinal tract, pancreas, and lungs, did not reveal any primary tumor. Immunohistochemistry plays an important role in differential diagnosis in the absence of other tumor lesions. Hence, immunohistochemistry was performed with thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1) to rule out the possibility of tumor origin in the lung, with paired box gene 8 (PAX8) to rule out origin in the pancreas, with caudal type homeobox 2 (CDX2) to rule out origin in the gastrointestinal tract, and with CD20 to rule out Merkel cell carcinoma. However, the results for these makers were all negative.
The final pathological diagnosis was primary well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumor (WDNET) of the left ventricle (G1).
The course of the patient was uneventful, and the symptoms of abdominal pain and diarrhea disappeared after the operation. She was discharged 10 days after the operation and returned to the hospital for reexamination at 3, 6, and 9 months post-operation. The patient was asymptomatic, with no abnormality in cardiac function and no recurrence of tumor and diarrhea.