A 23-year-old right-handed man was found unconscious in his house about 12 hours after he was last seen in his usual state of health. On site, he was cyanotic and had a pulse oxymetry saturation of 81%. The blood pressure on the scene was 146/78 mmHg, with a heart rate of 101 and respiratory rate of 5/min. He was unresponsive to painful stimuli and had a Glasgow Coma scale of 4. He was intubated on the field and transferred to the emergency department.
On neurological examination, he was unconscious; he had intact pupilary reflexes with positive corneal and gag reflexes. His face was symmetric. He had no spontaneous limb movements, and assumed a decerebrate posture upon noxious stimulation. Reflexes were brisk and symmetric and the plantar reflexes were extensor. Urine drug screen was positive for cocaine, opiates and cannabin metabolites. MRI of brain, obtained 2 days after the episode, showed abnormal signal in Diffusion Weighted Imaging (DWI) sequences in the cerebellum , motor cortex and in the globus pallidus bilaterally . The globus pallidus lesions were also evident in the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) sequences and T2 weighted sequences but not in the corresponding areas of T1 weighted images .
In the first 48 hours, he rapidly improved and was extubated. One week after the injury, he was awake, alert and able to follow 2-step commands. His anterograde memory was intact and he recalled 2 out of 3 names in the 3 object recall test. He was able to perform simple calculations. His speech was slow and dysarthric. He could move his arms but his hand movements were clumsy, and he had difficulty in volitionally moving his legs. There was a significant increase in muscular tone, more prominent in his legs. Reflexes were brisk in the arms and were symmetric; his plantar reflexes remained extensor.
A second MR imaging of the brain was performed two weeks after injury. The cerebellar lesions that were observed in the first DWI sequences were attenuated and confluent . There were new hyperintensities in the cerebral peduncles , and in the frontal cortex . Smaller lesions in the motor cortex were again noted . Previous abnormalities that were observed in the globus pallidus were now less apparent in the DW images , but appeared clearly in the T1 weighted sequences . These lesions remained visible in the T2 and ADC sequences .
His neurological examination improved during the following two weeks of hospitalization. His motor exam showed persistent loss of control and stiffness in the lower extremities. Upon discharge (24 days after admission), he was able to stand up but unable to ambulate normally, secondary to impaired balance, and stiffness and impaired control of his legs. Three months after discharge, he was seen for a follow up examination. His mental state and speech were within normal limits. His motor exam showed improved strength in his lower extremities but with impaired motor control and significant stiffness. He was ambulating with the aid of a walker.