A 38-year-old Chinese woman had a history of psoriasis for more than one year, accompanied by pain in the sacroiliac joints. In July 2020, she was treated with adalimumab, known under the trade name Anjianning, which is one of TNF-α inhibitors. However, there was no apparent improvement in the rash and joint symptoms after 6 weeks. The patient’s biologic drugs were changed to secukinumab, one of IL-17A inhibitors, from the end of August. The rash essentially resolved after the fifth injection, but the sacroiliac joint symptoms still persisted.
One month later, the patient developed a painful mung bean-sized red papule with purulent discharge on the mons pubis without any obvious trigger. Subsequently, similar eruptions appeared in succession on the left thigh, right buttock, right breast, and eyebrows , with ulcer surfaces containing red granulation tissue and yellow necrotic debris with raised oedematous borders.
All bacterial, mycobacterial and fungal cultures were negative and colonoscopy showed no obvious abnormalities. Pathology showed that acanthosis, sponge oedema and neutrophil infiltration into the epidermis. A large number of neutrophils formed a necrotic abscess in the dermal layer, surrounded by granulomatous inflammatory areas, and inflammatory cells such as lymphocytes, plasma cells, and eosinophils could infiltrated. It also shows necrosis of the vessel wall and overflow of large red blood cells . PG should be considered combined with the patient’s clinical manifestations and examination after mycobacterial and fungal infections have been ruled out.
On the 15th day of admission, we had chosen another adalimumab, known by the trade name Humira, to treat the patient because that adalimumab had successfully treated PG., The patient was discharged at the end of December with gradual improvement in the skin lesions and joint symptoms.
The patient’s PG improved but pruritus and dark red macules appeared three months later . We diagnose patients with eczema according to the lesions together with increasing of eosinophils and immunoglobulin E (lgE). Then, we changed the frequency of adalimumab in accordance with several cases of TNF-α inhibitors causing PG, including adalimumab, infliximab and etanercept. However, eczema was not well controlled and adalimumab was stopped on May 4. We selected baricitinib, one of janus kinase (JAK) inhibitors, to treat PG, eczema and psoriasis arthritis (PsA) based on European guideline on atopic eczema and Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved patient medication guide., PG, PsA and eczema improved, eosinophils and lgE decreased after one week of oral baricitinib treatment .