A 47 year old woman with no medical history presented to our hospital for teeth mobility problems.
While collecting detailed medical history, the patient complained of long-term problems with tooth loss and difficulties chewing. The patient had undergone no previous oral therapy, and sought treatment due to recent worsening of her chewing difficulties. The patient had mild halitosis and occasional bleeding during tooth brushing.
The patient had no significant medical history.
The patient had no significant personal or family history.
In the clinical examination, we identified poor oral hygiene with a large amount of dental calculus and obvious plaque retention. The gingiva tissues appeared tender and edematous . No. 21 tooth was distinctly labially inclined, while Nos. 31 and 41 were extremely loose. Overall, 83% of her teeth (25 teeth) showed mobility ≥ I°, and more than 50% presented a probing depth (PD) of > 4 mm with positive bleeding on probing (BOP). According to the “Classification of Periodontal and Peri-Implant Diseases and Conditions” in 2017 and the Angle classification, the patient was diagnosed with: (1) Periodontitis stage IV/ grade C; (2) angle class III skeletal malocclusion, with maxillary and mandibular prognathism; and (3) moderate crowded malocclusion. A therapeutic plan was subsequently proposed by a team of periodontists, orthodontists, and a prosthodontist. In view of her periodontal condition and dental calculus, supragingival ultrasonic scaling was carried out ahead of detailed examination in order to provide a baseline level 1 wk later.
Preoperative panoramic radiographs revealed that the full mouth alveolar bone was absorbed to varying degrees into the middle 1/2 and apical 1/3 of the root, with Nos. 22 and 31 teeth absorbed into the apical region.
The patient approved the treatment plan and provided signed informed consent for inclusion in this case report. The report was reviewed and approved by the Ethics Committee of Nanjing Stomatological Hospital, Medical School of Nanjing University (Nanjing, China).
Oral hygiene (plaque assessment): Oral hygiene and the amount of plaque near the gingival margin were examined by visual inspection and probing.
Florida probe: The Florida probe, a computerized system that transfers periodontal pressure-sensitive probing and charting systems into a graphical representation, was used throughout periodontal treatment. The system stores digital records of each periodontal treatment session, allowing the effectiveness of a course of treatment to be monitored.
Periodontal pocket depth: A periodontal probe was inserted into the periodontal pocket parallel to the long axis of the tooth. The periodontal pocket was then probed to determine the depth of central, mesial, and distal sites on the labial/buccal and lingual/palatal sides of the tooth, respectively.
Tooth mobility assessment: Forceps were placed around the incisal margins of the anterior teeth and then closed around the posterior teeth. The teeth were then moved in a buccal-lingual or mesial-distal direction with the forceps tip against the occlusal fossa and graded as follows: Ⅰ°, mobility within 1 mm or only in a buccal-lingual direction; Ⅱ°, mobility within a range of 1-2 mm or in buccal-lingual and mesial-distal directions; Ⅲ°, mobility greater than 2 mm in buccal-lingual, mesial-distal, and vertical directions.
Bleeding on probing: A probe was inserted into the base of the periodontal pocket or the sulcus then removed, and the gingival margin was observed for bleeding.
X-ray evaluation: Periodontal hard tissues, notably the alveolar bone, was visualized using panoramic and apical radiographs.