An eight-year four-months-old female child reported to the outpatient unit of the Pedodontics department of a tertiary dental care teaching and research hospital, with the chief complaint of pain in the upper front tooth region. The patient gave a history of trauma (self-fall) six months back. The child’s medical history was non-contributing; a class II fracture was noted at about 11 . Radiographs were taken using bisecting angle technique and size 0 intraoral periapical radiograph (22 mm × 35 mm) for radiographic diagnosis. The periapical radiograph revealed a fracture involving the pulp with blunderbuss canals . On further examination, no response was elicited after electric pulp testing, conclusive of the tooth being nonvital; also, dental caries was noted concerning 84 and 75. The decision to do revascularization using PRF was taken after correlating clinical and radiological findings with careful examination and as the patient was young. The inclusion criteria for the case were considered to be a young permanent tooth with an open apex and thin dentinal walls. Vital young permanent teeth and those teeth that cannot be restored were excluded from the study. Consensus-based Clinical Case Reporting Guidelines (CARE) were used as standard guidance to report the case flow and process of treatment .
The patient’s and parent’s informed consent was obtained as it involved drawing the patient’s blood. Further, all the details, such as investigations, clinical procedures, complications, and alternative options were explained to the parents, as per the patient information sheet. Ethical approval was obtained from Institutional Review Board in Chennai, India, without any delay as the procedure did not involve the experimental of any armamentarium and the safety of the technique had been established.
In the first appointment, the tooth was identified and anesthetized by buccal and palatal infiltrations by administering 0.5 ml 2% Lidocaine with 1:80,000 adrenaline. Further, isolation was carried out with a single-use Rubber dam (green) with a #26A clamp. Access opening was done to gain straight-line access to the pulp chamber using #4 round diamond bur, and no bleeding was noted; minimal instrumentation was done to remove dead tissues and dentine ledges. The pulp chamber was irrigated with 0.09% normal saline (20 ml). Working length was taken using an 80 K file. The canals were dried using sterile paper points and Triple antibiotic paste was placed. A sterile cotton pellet was placed and sealed temporarily using Zinc Oxide Eugenol cement. The triple antibiotic paste is considered the reference standard for regenerative endodontics and was placed to disinfect the canal as per standard regenerative protocol . and the child was recalled after two weeks.
In the second appointment, blood was drawn before the procedure, and PRF was prepared as per standard preparation protocol ; squeezed in gauze to remove excess fluid, and cut into small linear strips for easy placement . The triple antibiotic paste was removed from the canal with thorough irrigation with normal saline. Bleeding was induced, and PRF was placed in the canal. The canal orifice was sealed with mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA); a wet cotton pellet was placed over it and sealed with zinc oxide eugenol temporary cement. Further, a postoperative radiograph was done; after 24 h, the patient was recalled, the pellet was removed, and type II glass ionomer cement was placed. The composite filling was done to reform aesthetics, and post-operative instructions were given. The child was recalled in the sixth, ninth, and twelfth months and was evaluated clinically and radiographically.
A periapical radiograph was taken in the follow-up. Root length formation, increase in dentin thickness, and root end closure was assessed in the radiographs at 06 and 09 months . At the 12-month follow-up, the patient was asymptomatic, and increased root lengthening, closure of apex, and increased dentinal thickness were noted. The apical closure was confirmed with Cone Beam Computed Tomography (CBCT) . Pulp canal obliteration was pointed out at the cervical third of the root canal at the end of the 12-month follow-up period. Further, the clinical and radiographic appearance correlated with the desired treatment protocol .