The patient was a 16-year-old Thai female who had suffered from refractory epilepsy since the age of 10. She had a focal onset with impaired awareness and motor predominance at least five times per month. Magnetic resonance imaging studies revealed a non-enhancing diffuse enlargement of the right amygdala, hippocampus, and parahippocampal gyrus, and electroencephalography showed occasional spikes in the corresponding areas. She weighed 32 kg (BMI = 19). She had been on multiple antiepileptic drugs, which include valproate 2000 mg/day, levetiracetam 1500 mg/day, and lamotrigine 50 mg/day. At the age of 16, she experienced multiple attacks of convulsive SE, so she was transferred to our hospital for more specialized treatment. A mood disorder was detected on that visit, but no relevant mood conditions before or during treatment at our department were reported by either the patient or her family. Moreover, neither suicidal thoughts nor previous suicide attempts were reported. The patient was initially treated by increasing the lamotrigine dose to 100 mg/day, but her seizures persisted. Two milligrams per day of PER before sleep was added as adjunctive therapy; the dose was up-titrated to 4 mg/day after 2 weeks. Subsequently, she was seizure-free for 6 months. The seizures were controlled with combination therapy consisting of 4 mg/day of PER, the withdrawal of valproate and levetiracetam, and the tapering of lamotrigine to 25 mg/day. We then decided to switch to PER monotherapy by tapering off lamotrigine. The patient had been seizure-free for 8 months when she was found drowsy in her bedroom by her friends, with an empty bottle of PER; there were approximately 40 tablets missing (80 mg). On physical examination, her mental status was described as a state of confusion, and she exhibited signs of withdrawal in response to painful stimuli. Her Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score was 8. The other physical findings were as follows: normal vital signs; skin that felt warm to the touch; and pupils that were equal, round, and reactive to light. In addition, her reflexes were normal, there were no focal neurological signs or symptoms, and her mucous membranes were moist. Moreover, no tremors were noted, and her gag reflex was intact. No specific treatment was administered in the emergency room; specifically, no gastric lavage was performed because the time of ingestion was more than 3 hours prior to presentation. It is known that oral PER is rapidly and almost completely absorbed (time to maximum concentration [Tmax], 0.5–2.5 hours), is not subject to any significant first-pass metabolism, and has a bioavailability of almost 100%. Her initial laboratory results were normal, and comprised the findings of a complete blood count, electrolyte test, liver function test, and renal function test. A urine drug and toxic substance screen was negative for benzodiazepines, amphetamine, and ethanol. Additional testing including head computed tomography (CT), chest X-ray, and electrocardiography showed no acute abnormalities. An electroencephalogram performed on the day after admission demonstrated a diffuse slowing and disorganization of the background, consistent with generalized dysfunction. Unfortunately, we were unable to determine serum concentrations due to the unavailability of the technology to measure the blood levels of PER in Thailand.
During the patient’s hospital stay, her symptom of drowsiness changed to a qualitative impairment of consciousness involving disorientation and misjudgment of situations, which resolved in 2 days (full GCS score). Her vital signs and other laboratory results remained stable during the first 2 days of admission, and there was no evidence of perampanel-induced systemic AEs such as hepatic or renal toxicity, hypotension, or respiratory suppression. Throughout hospitalization, her vital signs remained within normal parameters. She was discharged on admission day 3 with a normal level of consciousness as well as other neurological and general medical parameters. Once medically cleared, she voluntarily agreed to transfer to the psychiatry ward. During her time there, she was diagnosed with severe depression induced by familial problems. During consultation with the attending staff there, she said, “It was just a blind rage; I did not mean to do that. I am so sorry.” The psychiatric condition leading to her suicide attempt was the diagnosed major depressive syndrome. She was put on an antidepressant, and her depressive symptoms partially resolved. She was deemed psychiatrically stable and was discharged with a prescription of sertraline 50 mg daily and outpatient psychiatric follow-up care. At the initial follow-up 2 weeks after discharge, she reported mood changes with depressive symptoms, which had begun after the tapering off of lamotrigine, and at the same time she was experiencing some family problems; she did not notify her doctor about this. Two months after discharge, she was taking lamotrigine 100 mg/day and sertraline 50 mg/day.