We present the case of an 83-years-old Caucasian male patient, known with high blood pressure, mitral valve regurgitation, coronary artery disease, diabetes mellitus type 2, that underwent a right cemented total hip replacement surgery for osteoarthritis in 2014 in the Academic Emergency Hospital Sibiu, Romania. Detailed clinical patient information is given in Table . Three weeks after the surgery, the patient is diagnosed with an early PJI with no isolated microorganism from periprosthetic tissues or fluids harvested during the surgery. A debridement and change of mobile parts with the retention of fixed prosthetic components is performed. Soft tissues surrounding the implant and periprosthetic interface membrane were taken for histopathological testing. The patient was discharged from the hospital and treated as an outpatient with cefuroxime 2 × 500 mg/day for 2 weeks.
At the beginning of 2016, the patient is readmitted into the Orthopedic Department for sever, right abdominal and groin pain, and elevated serum erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein. An anteriorposterior (AP) radiograph of the pelvis and a horizontal beam lateral hip radiograph of the right hip are performed, reveling signs of loosening at the level of both the acetabular and femoral components. A joint aspiration is performed with a negative microbiological examination. A two-stage exchange with long interval management is adopted, and a preformed spacer loaded with gentamicin was implanted. Intraoperative tissue samples are harvested and Pseudomonas aeruginosa is isolated. Oral ciprofloxacin 2 × 750 mg/day is administered for 6 weeks and intravenous (i.v.) gentamicin 1 × 240 mg/day for 2 weeks after the discharge from the hospital, according to the results of the susceptibility tests that were performed.
The patient was readmitted in one of the Internal Medicine Department, after 3 months, for right groin pain and altered proinflammatory markers, for which nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, muscle relaxants, and anti-clotting drugs are administered with favorable outcome.
In July 2016, based on the proinflammatory markers evolution, a shift a three-stage exchange strategy is decided. A joint aspiration is performed with a negative microbiological examination. A debridement, and changing of the preformed spacer loaded with gentamicin with another was carried out. Intraoperatively soft tissues were taken for histopathological testing. Oral ciprofloxacin 2 × 500 mg/day is administered for 3 weeks, according to the results of the susceptibility tests that were performed.
With the beginning of September 2016, a new strategy for the diagnostics and management of prosthetic joint infection is implemented in the Academic Emergency Hospital Sibiu. Strategy that includes the sonication of the retrieved implant (prosthesis or polymethylmethacrylate spacer). In the operating theater, Ringer’s or saline sterile solution in added in the sterile containers. The implants are processed within 30 min by sonication (1 min) using an ultrasound bath (BactoSonic®14.2, Bandelin GmbH, Berlin, Germany) at a frequency of 42 kHz and a power density of 0.22 W/cm2. The resulting sonication fluid is vortexed, and 50 ml of sonication fluid is centrifuged at 2500 rpm for 5 min. The resulted precipitate is inoculated onto Columbia agar with sheep blood (incubated aerobically, anaerobically and in high concentration of CO2), Sabouraud plate, MacConkey agar plate, glucose broth, lactose broth and thioglycollate broth. Cultures are incubated at 37 °C for 14 days and inspected daily for bacterial growth. Isolated bacteria are identified using the VITEK 2 Compact analyzer (bioMérieux, Marcy-l’Étoile, France). The MICs (minimum inhibitory concentrations) are assessed according to the European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing breakpoints. In addition, as a rapid method of bacteria detection, molecular identification of bacteria by 16S rRNA bbFISH (beacon-based fluorescent in situ hybridization) technology using a bbFISH kit (hemoFISH® Masterpanel, miacom diagnostics GmbH Düsseldorf, Germany), was also implemented. The FISH assay are performed according to the manufacturer using a sample of resulted precipitate from 50 ml of sonication fluid that is centrifuged at 2500 rpm for 5 min. The kit contains beacons for the detection of Staphylococcus spp., Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus spp., Streptococcus pneumoniae, Streptococcus agalactiae, Enterococcus faecium, Enterococcus faecalis, Enterobacteriaceae, Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Proteus mirabilis, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Acinetobacter spp., and Stenotrophomonas maltophilia.
In September 2016, a joint aspiration is performed with a negative microbiological examination. A debridement, and changing of the preformed spacer loaded with gentamicin with another was carried out. Soft tissues surrounding the implant and periprosthetic interface membrane were taken intraoperatively for histopathological testing. Bacteriological examination of the tissues sampled intraoperatively was positive for Pseudomonas aeruginosa, strain that was identified using the VITEK 2 Compact analyzer (bioMérieux, Marcy-l’Étoile, France) and was sensitive to amikacin, cefepime, ceftazidime, ciprofloxacin, pefloxacin, Piperacillin, ticarcillin, meropenem, imipenem, colistin, gentamicin resistant to trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. From the sonication fluid, no bacteria were isolated on culture or identified using the bbFISH assay. During the hospitalization period, the patient received i.v. ceftazidim 3 × 2 g/day and p.o. ciprofloxacin 2 × 750 mg/day, antibiotic therapy that was continued at home after discharge with p.o. ciprofloxacin 2 × 750 mg/day for 6 weeks.
After 5 months, in February 2017, based on the serum proinflammatory markers levels and after a joint aspiration was performed with a negative microbiological examination, a debridement, and reimplantation of a revision prosthesis is performed. Soft tissues surrounding the implant and periprosthetic interface membrane were taken intraoperatively for histopathological testing. Bacteriological examination of the tissues sampled intraoperatively was positive for Pseudomonas aeruginosa, strain with the same susceptibility as the one isolated earlier. The retrieved spacer is sonicated. From the sonication fluid, after 4 days form the inoculation of the sonication fluid on the growth medium, Ralstonia pickettii was isolated. The isolated strain of R. pickettii was sensitive to ticarcillin, piperacillin, cefepime, imipenem, meropenem, ciprofloxacin, pefloxacin, minocycline, cotrimoxazole, resistant to aztreonam, amikacin, gentamicin, colistin, and intermediate sensitive to ceftazidime. No bacteria were identified using the bbFISH assay. The antibiotic therapy with p.o. cotrimoxazole 3 x 2tb (80 mg trimethoprim bp and 400 mg sulfamethoxazole bp)/day is initiated during the hospitalization period, and will be administered for a total duration of 12 weeks, the patient is discharged after 10 days from the admission into the hospital and is scheduled for routine follow-ups. On discharge, the wound is healed, with no open areas, and with sutures that are intact (and will be removed at 21 days after the surgery). The wound edges are well-approximated. The skin surrounding the wound is viable and clean. The wound looks good with no drainage. The dressing was clean and dry. The patient evolution, undertreatment, is favorable. At the last follow-up visit at (14 weeks after the surgery) the wound is healed, with no open areas, and with a clean skin surrounding the wound. The patient is using a cane for long walks, and with no clinical complaints. The laboratory investigations (white blood cells count, fibrinogen, C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, creatinine/estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), liver enzymes (aspartate aminotransferase - AST/SGOT and alanine aminotransferase - ALT/SGPT)) were performed on regular base and were within references levels.