A 52-year-old Kurdish female patient who had been referred about 20 years ago with lesions on her toes, which gradually involved the fingers and then the knee joints on both sides and also the hip joints on both sides. The patient had no family history of this disease and had an IQ appropriate for his age. A surgical intervention had been performed on the second toe of the right foot, which consequently caused necrosis and amputation of the distal phalanx of the second toe, and the wrist joints on both sides are also involved.
The first visit of this patient was 20 years ago, at the age of 32, and was due to the involvement of interphalangeal joints of the 3rd and 4th fingers of the right foot. Gradually, the interphalangeal joints of the left foot became involved, and about three years after the first presentation, the interphalangeal joints of the right hand and then the right wrist joint became involved. Shortly after the right hand, signs of disease and involvement of the interphalangeal joints and the wrist joint of the left hand were also observed. After about 10 years, at the age of 42, due to calcium deposition, the right knee and right hip joints were involved, and during the next three years, at by age 45, the patient's joint and tissue around the left knee and left hip joints were also affected. .
The patient is currently experiencing severe pain and limitation in the joints of their fingers, toes, wrists, knees, and hips bilaterally. The patient’s serum levels of phosphorus, calcium, creatinine, uric acid, and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) were within the normal range in the biochemical tests performed. Laboratory findings of the patient’s urine analysis were negative for protein, glucose, ketone, bilirubin and urobilinogen excretion. The radiographic features of the study patient are pictured in Fig. . Since there is no effective treatment for FOP and surgery could not be an option for removing the excess bones, we only used symptomatic medication to help relieve symptoms of FOP, such as pain and inflammation.
It should be noted that the primary draft report was evaluated and approved by the ethics committee of Kurdistan University of Medical Sciences (Ethic code: IR.MUK.REC.1402.054). Furthermore, written informed consent was obtained from the patient before the data collection and intending to the report of her disease information as a case report.