Increased tumor marker CA125 level.
A 71-year-old female underwent a regular health examination at Da-Lin Tzu Chi Hospital, which revealed an elevation in the tumor marker CA125 (1041.9 U/mL) at 4 months before admission. No other discomfort was reported. Pelvic ultrasound did not reveal any abnormalities, and a subsequent CT scan (2 months before admission) revealed two enlarged retroperitoneal lymph nodes. A PET scan was performed and reported increased F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in lesions located in the bilateral abdominal para-aortic region, which was probably the primary malignant or metastatic nodule.
Consequently, the patient visited our general surgery department for further evaluation. Laparoscopic lymph node biopsy (two lymph nodes in the suprapancreatic region and one lymph node in the right pleural area) was performed 1 month before admission, which revealed metastatic adenocarcinoma, with CK7(+), CDX2(-), GATA(-), TTF-1(-), PAX8(+), WT1(+), PR(-), and p53 mutational loss of expression . Next-generation sequencing did not detect any clinically significant variants or biomarkers. The metastatic lesions were suspected to have originated from a gynecological organ, and the patient was referred to our outpatient department for further evaluation.
Gastric ulcers were diagnosed using panendoscopy performed 4 months before admission. The patient was under medical treatment and was regularly followed up. Sicca syndrome and interstitial cystitis were regularly followed up at the Da-Lin Tzu Chi Hospital. She also underwent tympanic membrane perforation/tympanoplasty 10 years previously, and had undergone cholecystectomy 3 years prior to presentation for cholelithiasis.
The patient experienced menarche at the age of 13 years and menopause at the age of 54 years, without receiving menopausal hormonal therapy. She delivered one child and had a spontaneous abortion. The patient had no history of oral contraceptive use. No previous hysterectomy, salpingectomy, or tubectomy was performed. Her mother had diabetes mellitus and there was no gynecological family history.
Pelvic examination revealed no abnormalities. Physical examinations of the abdomen, chest, heart, and musculoskeletal system did not reveal any significant findings. The neurological examination results were normal. Pelvic examination revealed atrophy of the vagina and cervix. No palpable masses are observed.
Four and one month before admission, her CA125 levels were 1041.9 and 1742.0 U/mL, respectively, showing a remarkable elevation of the tumor marker. After retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy, the value decreased to 17.8 U/mL. On the other hand, her creatinine ranged from 0.53 to 0.6 mg/dL, and her estimated glomerular filtration rate was 111.13–120.86 mL/min.
Two months prior to admission, pelvic ultrasonography did not reveal any abnormalities. CT performed on the same day revealed two lymph nodes of up to 26 mm in the para-aortic retroperitoneum, some lung nodules, a liver mass, and a calcified uterine myoma. Subsequently, a PET scan was arranged, and two enlarged lymph nodes in the bilateral abdominal para-aortic region were reported with intense uptake (maximum standardized uptake value: 9.3 and 10.0, right and left, respectively). One month before admission, the ultrasound showed an anteverted uterus sized 3.7 cm × 2.1 cm, with calcified myoma sited at the right lateral wall; the bilateral adnexa was invisible without discovering ascites.