A 78-year-old white caucasian lady presented to her local hospital with rapid loss of vision in her right eye over 12 hours. She had been suffering from non-specific joint pains for several months for which she had been receiving acupuncture. Ten days prior to her admission a rheumatologist had diagnosed polymyalgia rheumatica based on her symptomatology and scalp tenderness, but she had not been started on steroid treatment. She had had an anterior resection for adenocarcinoma of the bowel in 2001 and a computed tomography scan six months previously showed no evidence of tumour recurrence. There was a past medical history of melanoma (resected from her right foot) in 1983, and a transient ischaemic attack but had no history of diabetes, ocular trauma or sinusitis. There had been no recent hospital admissions or medical procedures.
Initial examination revealed a reduction in her visual acuity on the right to hand movements only, there was also tenderness over the right temporal artery. The left eye vision was normal. The right fundus seen with a direct ophthalmoscope showed an elevated, yellow, sub retinal macular lesion with associated retinal haemorrhages and cotton wool spots. There was no evidence of uveitis. The physical examination was otherwise normal. At this time her erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 58 mm/hr, her C reactive protein 1 mg/L, total white cell count of 11.9 × 109/L. Giant cell arteritis was suspected to be the cause of her pain and she was commenced on 80 mg of prednisolone daily. After five days the pain worsened and became more localised to the right eye and she developed panuveitis with 1 mm hypopyon in the anterior chamber. She was transferred to our institute for further management. An ultrasound B scan of the eye showed retinal elevation at the macula, choroidal thickening and subretinal fluid suggesting the diagnosis of endogenous endophthalmitis. A vitreous biopsy was performed which showed the macular lesion to orginate from a subretinal mass accompanied by an area of macular retinitis with intense inflammatory exudate in the posterior vitreous. Intravitreal ceftazidime and vancomycin were administered. The Gram stain of the vitreous biopsy showed moderate numbers of neutrophils, branching septate hyphae and no bacteria . Bacterial cultures were negative but culture on Sabouraud's agar revealed a mould identified as Aspergillus fumigatus on the basis of typical colonial and microscopic morphology. The organism was susceptible to voriconazole (MIC 0.25 μg/ml) using the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute MS27-A2 method. She was commenced on oral voriconazole 400 mg twice a day for 24 hours as a loading dose. The following day she complained of visual hallucinations at night, a well-known side effect of the drug and the agent was discontinued for a day. She subsequently tolerated maintenance treatment at a dose of 200 mg 12 hourly to complete a two-week course. Systemic steroids were tapered and discontinued over two weeks. Six days after commencing voriconazole she underwent a second vitreous biopsy with intravitreal injection of 5 mcg of amphotericin B. Gram stain and culture of this sample were negative. Voriconazole levels were measured in serum and vitreous aspirate, both eight hours after her last 200 mg dose, by means of a bioassay. Both the assay of the serum and the vitreous revealed a concentration of 0.69 μg/ml.
An extensive search for a source of her infection (blood cultures, echocardiogram, computed tomography of chest, abdomen and pelvis and magnetic resonance imaging of the brain) was negative. The uveitis improved substantially during the first week of treatment, but there was no improvement in her visual acuity due to the macular involvement. On review two months later the uveitis had settled, but there was persistent pain and low intraocular pressure (4 mmHg) in the right eye indicating the onset of phthisis bulbi. She was blind in the right eye. Therefore enucleation of the right eye was suggested and the patient consented to the procedure. Histological examination of the enucleated eye showed non-specific chronic fibrosing vitritis with no fungal elements seen using special stains.