A 44-year-old Chinese man was admitted to the hospital on September 1, 2020, due to a painless mass on the left side of the neck that had been present for 1 year.
One year previously, the patient incidentally noticed a painless mass on the left side of his neck approximately 2.0 cm × 2.0 cm in size. The patient had neck swelling occasionally, and the severity of these symptoms gradually increased over the course of the disease. The patient reported no tenderness, redness, swelling, or heat pain at the mass; no earache, swelling, or pain around the ear; and no cheek pain, numbness or difficulty when opening the mouth.
The patient had a history of hypertension for 1 month and was regularly taking nifedipine sustained release tablets and Irbesartan tablets as antihypertensive treatment.
The patient had no personal or family history of benign or malignant tumors.
Physical examination on admission revealed a temperature of 36.5°C, resting respiratory rate of 20 breaths/min, heart rate of 80 bpm, and blood pressure of 117/70 mmHg. On physical examination, a mass similar in size and shape to a quail egg was found in the left parotid gland, measuring about 2.0 cm × 2.0 cm in size. The mass felt tough, without tenderness and was easily movable with no local redness, swelling, heat or pain. No abnormalities were observed in the contralateral parotid gland.
The laboratory test results showed a white blood cell count of 6.16 × 109/L, with 74% neutrophils, 135 g/L hemoglobin, and a platelet count of 277 × 109/L. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 2 mm/h, and all results for routine urine, stool, liver and kidney function tests as well as electrolyte and blood biochemical index levels were within normal ranges. The results of HIV tests, including antibody and nucleic acid tests as well as CD4+ T cell examination, were negative. Furthermore, all results of testing for carcinoembryonic antigen, neuron-specific enolase, cytokeratin 19 fragment, squamous cell carcinoma antigen, blood coagulation, and immune indexes were negative.
On August 31, 2020, ultrasound of the neck recognized a 2.2 cm × 2.2 cm hypoechoic mass in the left parotid gland, with a clear boundary, coarse calcification foci, and no blood flow signal . On September 2, 2020, neck computed tomography (CT) showed a round cystic lesion in the left parotid gland, with a maximum cross-sectional area of approximately 2.3 cm × 2.2 cm, uneven density, small patches with slightly high-density shadows, and clear boundaries . On contrast-enhanced CT, the cyst wall was slightly enhanced in the arterial phase, but no obvious enhancement was observed in the cyst . The enhancement degree in the venous phase was similar to that in the arterial phase . No abnormality was found in the right parotid gland.