The patient is a 19-year-old Saudi female referred to the gynecology clinic at age 16 as a case of primary amenorrhea. Aside from some intellectual difficulties noticed when she enrolled in the school, she had a relatively uneventful childhood. She is a known case of myopia of more than −3, diagnosed at the age of eleven without evidence of retinopathy. She was born by spontaneous vaginal delivery at term without any perinatal or postnatal complications. The patient’s parents are first-degree relatives and have five daughters, all of whom are healthy and medically free, except for our patient. Her mother and sister had menarche at ages 12 and 13, respectively. The patient did not complain of hearing loss, dysarthria, dysphagia, or lower limb dystonia at any point in her life. She met all her developmental milestones as expected.
During the general examination, the patient was alert and oriented, and vital signs were stable. She was obese, with a height of 154 cm and a weight of 83.7 kg (BMI 35 kg/m2). On focus examination, the patient was found to have sparse, thin hair, thin eyebrows, and proptosis. In addition, she exhibited underdeveloped secondary sexual characteristics, Tanner stage B1 P1. Furthermore, a soft systolic murmur was found in the left upper sternal border. Dysmorphic facial features, including a triangular face, prominent nasal bridge, and hypertelorism, were present. The examination of the rest of the other systems was unremarkable. The clinical features of our case are presented in along with clinically diagnosed cases reported in the literature.
On presentation, the laboratory findings of routine investigations (i.e., complete blood count (CBC) with differential) were normal, with slightly elevated glycated hemoglobin levels (HbA1c) (6.8% (reference range 4.4–6.4%)). The thyroid profile of the patient revealed normal thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) (3.266 uIU/mL (reference range 0.38–5.33 uIU/mL)) and normal free thyroxine (FT4) level (13.50 pmol/L (reference range 7.50–21.10 pmol/L)). The patient’s hormonal profile demonstrated a high follicle-stimulating hormone (48.5 mIU/L, normal range 3.85–8.78 mIU/L) and high luteinizing hormone (17.96 mIU/L, normal range 2.12–10.89 mIU/L). These laboratory results indicate a combination of hypergonadotropic hypogonadism and impaired HbA1c.
The patients underwent further diagnostic genetic testing. Based on the results of karyotyping, 46, XX was determined. The results of the chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) were negative. An NGS analysis revealed a homozygous pathogenic variant in the DCAF17 gene. A genetic diagnosis of autosomal recessive WSS has been confirmed. summarizes the important laboratory findings between the ages of 15 and 19.
At presentation, the patient’s pelvic ultrasound demonstrated the uterus to be very small, measuring about 3.0 × 1.7 × 0.5 cm homogenous echo pattern and smooth outline, with no focal lesion. The endometrium was identified, and small ovaries with no definite follicles were seen. The right ovary measured 1.1 cm × 1.2 cm × 0.5 cm (volume 0.40 mL). The left ovary measured 1.3 cm × 1.1 cm × 0.7 cm (volume 0.53 mL), as demonstrated in .
The management plan for primary amenorrhea and the absence of secondary sexual characteristics (hypergonadotropic hypogonadism) included three phases: phase (1): induction of pubertal breast development; phase (2): establishment of normal regular menses and acquisition of normal bone mineralization; and phase (3): long-term maintenance of a normal estrogen state.
During the first phase of treatment, estrogen monotherapy (Premarin® (conjugated estrogen) 0.3 mg PO OD) was prescribed, starting at a low dose of 0.3 mg daily, with regular follow-ups by pelvic ultrasounds to determine the uterine size and physical examinations to determine the Tanner stages of breast development. The dose of estrogen monotherapy was gradually increased over time based on the uterine size and breast development. Six months following the completion of phase 1 therapy, the dose of estrogen monotherapy was increased to enhance breast development and induce menses. After 18 months of estrogen monotherapy, oral progestin therapy (dydrogesterone 10 mg) was added during phase 2 to maintain endometrial health. Dydrogesterone was given daily for the first five days of the month. Thereafter, the patient experienced menstruation. The pelvis ultrasound of the patient at the age of 19 demonstrated an anteverted uterus of normal size, measuring about 6.2 cm × 2.3 cm × 3.1 cm, homogenous echo pattern, and smooth outline. The endometrial thickness was about 0.6 cm. The right ovary measured about 1.8 cm × 1.0 cm × 1.4 cm (volume 1.3 mL). The left ovary measured 2.4 cm × 2.2 cm ×1.5 cm (volume 4.0 mL), as shown in . Both ovaries were relatively small, showing multiple small follicles with no dominant follicle. There was obvious solid or cystic mass lesion.
Within the first six months, the Tanner stage of breast development evolved into the B4. Then, the dydrogesterone course increased to 10 days each month. Long-term maintenance doses of estrogen were provided, plus progestin for 12 to 14 days each month to protect the endometrium from endometrial hyperplasia.