A 55-year-old Han Chinese man with a long-term history (30 years) of heavy smoking was referred to our hospital in March 2015 due to dry cough. His past medical history and family history were unremarkable. On a routine health checkup, an elevated carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) value of 182.6 g/L (normal value, 0–9.8 g/L; Fig. ) was found. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest showed a 48 × 42 mm tumor in the left lower lobe . A positron emission tomography (PET)-CT scan revealed multiple metastases in the left lower lung, bilateral supraclavicular fossa, hilus pulmonis, mediastinal lymph nodes and bone . The patient underwent CT-guided biopsy of the lung lesion. The biopsy tissue was identified as adenocarcinoma by pathological examination . Immunohistochemistry (IHC) examination showed that the tumor cells were positive for thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) and cytokeratin 7 (CK-7) . The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene of the primary lung cancer harbored a mutation of the 19th exon. Clinically, the patient was diagnosed with stage IV lung adenocarcinoma, with the primary lesion in the left lower lobe. After communicating with the patient and his family, gefitinib (250 mg once a day) was initially commenced in April 2015. The primary tumor shrank about one-fifth after 2 months of treatment, and the patient did not experience obvious adverse effects.
Three months later, during follow-up, the patient complained of dysphagia without melena. The patient could only eat fluids. Laboratory examinations indicated a an elevated CEA level of 112.3 g/L. Barium esophagography showed irregular thickening of the wall and narrowing of the lumen of the lower thoracic esophagus . Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) showed a 17.7 mm wall thickening at the distal esophagus 38 cm from the upper incisors, with mucous epithelium being mildly hemorrhagic but without a distinct break . There was also no evidence of active bleeding. The patient underwent biopsy of the esophageal lesion tissue under endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS). Pathological examination of the esophageal lesion tissue showed similar results as those of the primary lung adenocarcinoma . TTF-1 and CK-7 were positive by IHC . Napsin A staining was positive . Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed multiple metastases. The patient then received additional chemotherapy with docetaxel (60 mg day 1, day 8) and cisplatin (20 mg days 1–5), with gefitinib terminated. After one cycle of chemotherapy, the patient complained of chest tightness after activity. A CT scan showed pleural effusion and progression of the primary tumor. Closed thoracic drainage and injections of lentinan and cisplatin (two cycles) into the chest were conducted to alleviate the patient’s symptoms. The chemotherapy was then adjusted to pemetrexed (0.8 g day 1) and cisplatin (20 mg days 1–5). After six cycles of chemotherapy, the patient gradually returned to a normal diet. Follow-up CT scans showed complete response in the esophageal lesion, and the CEA level decreased to 6.7 g/L in September 2015. The primary lung tumor had partially shrunk. The patient then continued to take gefitinib (250 mg once daily), and the primary tumor was stable. In June, 2016, the patient began having headaches. Brain MRI revealed that the metastases had progressed. The CEA level rebounded to 21.3 g/L. The patient then received AZD9291 orally (80 mg once daily) without T790m mutation testing. His headache symptoms were alleviated, and there was no further follow-up of the patient. We learned by telephone follow-up that the patient died in January 2017.