A 29-year-old male with a history of post-surgical repair for ventricular septal defect (VSD) contacted the emergency department of a branch hospital of Changhua Christian Hospital because of dyspnea and altered consciousness for 3 days. Symptoms of poor response to stimulations and lethargy occurred gradually. No medications or street drugs were administered. Upon arrival, the patient’s Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score was reported as E2M4V3; furthermore, hypotension (80/39 mmHg) and hypothermia (34.5 °C) were noted. Laboratory examinations revealed leukocytosis (15,000/μl), severe metabolic acidosis (pH: 7.04, PCO2: 11.2 mmHg, HCO3−: 3.1 mmol/l), hypokalemia (2.0 mmol/l), and hyperglycemia (646 mg/dl). Serum sodium level was 138 mmol/l unadjusted and 148 mmol/l after adjustment according to the formula of an increase of 1.6 mmol/l per 100 mg/dl of serum glucose.
Initially, four ampules of sodium bicarbonate (7%, 20 ml each ampule) and one ampule of potassium chloride (20 meq) were administered. The patient was admitted to the ICU because of unstable hemodynamics. Insulin was continuously infused, and intubation was performed because of persistent hypotension and altered consciousness. Large amounts of isotonic and hypertonic intravenous fluids were administered for resuscitation (2500 ml 0.9% normal saline, 2000 ml 6% hydroxyethyl starch fluid, and 4000 ml Ringer’s solution for 24-h duration). In addition, norepinephrine and epinephrine were continuously infused. Severe hypokalemia was reported, and multiple ventricular premature complexes (VPCs) were witnessed. In total, 440 meq of potassium chloride was administered. Notably, his consciousness status (GCS: E3M6Ve) and hemodynamics improved following the resuscitation. Sequential blood sampling results are presented in Fig. .
However, the patient’s consciousness status declined at the 40th hour of admission (GCS: E2M2Ve). Accordingly, emergent brain computed tomography was performed, and he was transferred to the medical center for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) evaluation.
MRI results revealed multifocal abnormal signal intensity changes in the whole brain stem; these lesions involved the lower midbrain, whole pons, and upper medulla oblongata. The lesions presented as faint signal on the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) map and brightened up on diffusion-weighted images(DWI), fluid-attenuated inversion recovery(FLAIR), and T2WI MRI images. Based on these findings, ODS was established . Later, type 1 diabetes mellitus was diagnosed during the hospitalization period.
The patient exhibited improved consciousness status following 17-day medical care at the ICU; nonetheless, he was ventilator dependent and subsequently was placed in a respiratory care unit for another 25 days. Although the ventilator was gradually weaned, the patient still needed assistance and rehabilitation at the time of discharge from the hospital. The case report was approved by the institutional review board committee of Changhua Christian Hospital (reference no. 181114). Informed consent was obtained from the individual participant for being included in the study. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this case report and any accompanying images.