We describe the case of a 50-year-old man who had been diagnosed with Behçet’s disease (BD) 14 years previously and met the international criteria. He had first presented with recurrent oral aphthae at the age of 15 and presented 5 years later with simultaneous and recurrent genital ulcers with a clear positive pathergy test. The disease progressed with panniculitic lesions on the inferior limbs, bilateral auricular chondritis (MAGIC syndrome) and asymmetrical polyarthritis. Following the diagnosis of BD, he was initially treated for 3 years with corticosteroids and colchicine, but with only partial improvement. More exuberant oral and genital ulcers justified the initiation of thalidomide, initially at 50 mg per day but increasing to 100 mg per day 2 months later. Less than a month after beginning therapy, the patient showed complete remission of the genital ulcers and marked improvement of the oral aphthae, polyarthritis and auricular chondritis.
However, 8 months later, the patient developed paraesthesia of the lower limbs. As these symptoms did not improve when thalidomide was reduced to 50 mg, an electromyogram was performed and revealed sensitive peripheral neuropathy. Thalidomide was suspended, and the patient was medicated with azathioprine together with corticosteroids and colchicine, but showed only a partial response. Later, due to worsening of BD symptoms and the development of abdominal pain and bloody diarrhoea (with colonoscopic evidence of colonic involvement), the patient was treated with adalimumab with an excellent response. However, 4 months later, he presented hilar and mediastinal adenopathy with pulmonary interstitial involvement; biopsy confirmed pulmonary sarcoidosis probably induced by adalimumab. Total reversal of the pulmonary lesions was observed when adalimumab was suspended. However, the BD worsened with erythema nodosum requiring high doses of corticosteroids, with the consequent development of iatrogenic diabetes and lumbar osteoporosis. The oral and genital ulcers persisted, causing a decrease in quality of life.
Lenalidomide was proposed and approved and the patient was started on 5 mg per day. There was immediate improvement, and the corticosteroid dose was reduced with no signs of peripheral neuropathy or haematological toxicity. Twenty months later there had been no new episodes of oral or genital ulcers and there was total remission of the bilateral auricular chondritis. The most recent electromyogram shows absence of motor or sensitive polyneuropathy of the lower limbs.