A 28-years-old woman diagnosed with EGPA was introduced to our hospital due to bilateral posterior thigh pain. She had asthma and atopic dermatitis. Six months ago, she had complained of left fingers numbness, pain from the left axilla to the sternum, and a fever. After 2 weeks, pain appeared in the right lower thigh and expanded to the entire lower extremities. Bilateral leg purpura and edema, a decreased grip strength with both hands, left tinnitus, and ear blockade sensation also appeared. Five months ago, she developed left drop foot, and a blood examination revealed the following values: eosinophile count, 4000/μL; C-reactive protein, 2.69 mg/dL; ANCA antibody, negative; and immunoglobulin E, 2.977 U/mL. She was therefore diagnosed with EGPA and treated with prednisolone.
After treatment, her symptoms other than peripheral neuropathy improved, but both the posterior lower thigh pain and weakness of the lower legs worsened. She received steroid pulse therapy and intravenous immunoglobulin, but her symptoms were not improved. Four months ago, mepolizumab (antiinterleukin-5 agent) was started, but her symptoms were unchanged.
After moving to a new house, she visited the Department of Internal Medicine in our hospital and was introduced to our department for pain treatment. At the first visit, she used crutches and complained of numb pain in both posterior lower thighs, especially the left. She presented with left foot drop on manual muscle testing with right ankle flexion 4 and extension 5 and lefts ankle flexion 0 and extension 4. She also had a decreased tactile sensation (moderate to severe) on the lateral sides of both lower thighs. She had been receiving subcutaneous mepolizumab 300 mg/month and oral prednisolone 10 mg/day, pregabalin 150 mg/day, duloxetine 40 mg/day, suvorexant 15 mg/day, vitamin B1/B6/B12, vonoprazan, alphacalcidol, ferrous citrate, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, and alendronate, as well as inhaled budesonide. We added tramadol 100 mg/day and learned that left sciatic nerve block using local anesthetics with glucocorticoid at the popliteal fossa had provided pain relief for one week at the previous hospital. Pulsed radiofrequency (42 °C for 6 min) of the left sciatic nerve at the popliteal fossa was performed after several attempts at sciatic nerve blockade with local anesthetic. However, this was utterly ineffective. We then decided to attempt SCS and finally obtained good results.
The details of SCS are described here. Two percutaneous eight-contact trial leads, Octorode (Abbott, Plano, TX, USA), were inserted spanning the Th11-Th12 epidural space . An external pulse generator was programmed using passive burst stimulation according to standard programming techniques. Only electrodes numbers 11, 12, 14, and 15, which correspond to the left-side Th12 level, were used for stimulation according to the pain region after determining the appropriate stimulation position using tonic stimulation. BustDR™ (Abbot) fixes stimulation at 5 pulses per burst, with a 500-Hz intraburst frequency, 40-Hz interburst frequency, and 1000-μsec pulse width, continuously delivered. The patient was treated with a stimulus intensity of 0.35 mA and maximum intensity of 0.4 mA, adjusted to the pain intensity.
Her leg pain improved over the 10 days of stimulation, but the pain gradually increased again after the leads were removed. Three months after this successful trial, the patient had two eight-contact leads, Proclaim (Abbott), permanently implanted into the epidural space . The cranial end of the right lead was located over the middle of the Th11 vertebral body and that of the left lead was located at the upper edge of the Th12 vertebral body. Electrodes numbers 6 and 8, which correspond to the left-side L1 level, were used for stimulation according to the pain region. We examined X-ray findings at the day after implantation and found that the cranial end of the right lead had moved to the upper edge of the Th12 vertebral body. Immediately after implantation, the patient was stimulated at an intensity of 0.2 mA (maximum intensity 0.45 mA) and adjusted to the pain intensity. After 10 days, electrodes numbers 14 and 15, which correspond to the right-side L1 level, were added for stimulation.
Her pain remarkably decreased, and the intensity of stimulation was able to be decreased to a stimulus intensity of 0.15 mA (maximum intensity 0.25 mA) by 6 months later. After 1 year, her legs pain had almost completely disappeared, and she showed improved tactile sensation, increased of muscle strength, and the ability to walk without crutches. Neurologists were able to stop administrating medications for her pain (pregabalin, duloxetine, and tramadol) and decrease the prednisolone dose. The most recent stimulus condition has since been continued, and we are planning reconsider it depending on her condition going forward.
The patient provided her permission for the presentation of this report.