The patient is an 83-year-old man with a 50-year medical history of diabetes; he had been undergoing hemodialysis for 8 years due to renal failure caused by diabetic nephropathy. After repeated shunt failure, the superficialized right brachial artery had been used for blood access for the past 2 years. About 4 months prior to admission, an occasional fever with temperature of 38°C would repeatedly occur after hemodialysis. About 1 month prior to admission, the frequency of fever increased, and levofloxacin and cefotiam were administered but yielded no improvement; the day of dialysis would be followed by an overnight fever of about 38°C accompanied by chills and joint pain. From about 2 weeks prior to presentation, general malaise and loss of appetite was observed; hence, the patient was hospitalized 6 days before the current medical consult. Chest and pelvic CT examination was performed; however, the cause of his fever and chills could not be identified. Enterococcus was detected in a blood culture performed before and after hemodialysis on admission, and the patient was transferred to our hospital for examination and treatment of bacteremia.
Upon admission, blood pressure of the patient was 145/68 mmHg, pulse was 64 beats/min, breathing rate was 20 breaths/min, and body temperature was 37°C. During physical examination, a Levine III/VI systolic ejection murmur was heard in the aortic valve area. No Osler’s nodes or Janeway lesions were observed, and blood from the dialysis puncture site was free of abnormalities.
The laboratory findings were as follows: a white blood cell count of 6,900/μL (neutrophils, 78%); hemoglobin, 10.7 g/dL; platelets, 117,000/μL; C-reactive protein, 3.4 mg/dL; total bilirubin, 0.5 mg/dL; aspartate aminotransferase, 23 IU/L; alanine aminotransferase, 7 IU/L; lactic dehydrogenase, 137 IU/L; gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, 16 IU/L; creatinine phosphokinase, 34 IU/L; blood urea nitrogen, 26 mg/dL; creatinine, 6.22 mg/dL; Na, 139 mEq/L; K, 4.0 mEq/L; Cl, 101 mEq/L; blood glucose, 148 mg/dL; and hemoglobin A1c (NGSP), 6.0%.
Chest-abdominal contrast CT and simple head MRI yielded no abnormal findings, suggesting no infection in particular. Transthoracic echocardiography was unable to point out any anomaly over than moderate aortic stenosis. Transesophageal echocardiography showed a 12-mm diameter verruca at the NCC-RCC junction of the aortic valve . Aneurysm and thrombus attachment appeared in three-dimensional-computerized tomography (3D-CT) and vascular echocardiography of the brachial artery that had been used as the puncture site during hemodialysis . The result of urine culture testing was negative. E. durans was detected in 7 sets of blood culture performed by the previous physician and at our hospital. Definitive identification of the isolate as E. durans was done by using the rapid streptococcus test (Rapid ID32 STREP; bioMerieux SA, Marcy l'Etoile, France) and confirmed by biochemical characterization, as recommended by Facklam & Collins (1989) and Knudtson & Hartman (1992) . These findings led to a diagnosis of subacute infective endocarditis and blood access infection/infective aneurysm caused by E. durans. Based on the results of antimicrobial susceptibility with E. durans, 2 g ampicillin I.V. every 24 h + 40 g/dose of gentamicin (0.8 mg/kg/dose) and post-dialysis I.V. (together with adjustment dosing during dialysis usage) were administered upon admission to our hospital. Drug susceptibility testing was carried out with highly concentrated gentamicin drug susceptibility testing using the disk method and the broth microdilution method from MicroScan WalkAway Pros Combo Panel 3.1 J (Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics K. K, Tokyo, Japan).
Given the patient's age and long history of diabetes, the patient's blood vessels had incurred significant arterial sclerosis. With a performance status of 3, surgical intervention was not performed, and therapy with antibiotics was the first choice. Antibiotic administration alleviated the fever, and subsequent blood culture testing showed negative results after 6 weeks of treatment. Transesophageal echocardiography performed during the course of treatment confirmed the disappearance of the verruca of the aortic valve. Vascular echocardiography of the brachial artery performed during the course of treatment revealed narrowing of the aneurysm. It also showed the disappearance of the thrombus, without the occurrence of any embolic symptoms. Antimicrobial therapy mitigated the condition, and the clinical diagnosis was a plaque (verruca) associated with an infection. Thus antibiotic administration mitigated the infective endocarditis and blood access infection/infective aneurysm and the patient was discharged. The patient has not relapsed after more than six months after discharge.