An 8-month-old white boy of Turkish origin initially presented to the Department of Pedodontics, at Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin Hospital, due to an unexplained early loss of his primary lower central incisors. He was the first child of healthy consanguineous parents (second-degree relatives); their younger daughter was healthy. Our patient had multiple injuries on his face and body and in his oral cavity due to self-mutilation . Further medical history revealed that he was born with a bilateral foot deformity , which resulted in the mandatory use of an orthopedic appliance, enabling him to walk normally . At the age of 6 years and 2 months, he had a fracture in the metatarsal bone, leading to bone necrosis. This resulted in the placement of bone plates and the use of a wheelchair for long walking distances. He had several accidents, such as severe burns from boiling water without feeling any pain.
Prior to the first visit to the Department of Pedodontics at the age of 8 months, he had lost both mandibular primary central incisors for unknown reasons only 3 months after they erupted. His mandibular left lateral incisor was loose (mobility, grade 2). In addition, his mandibular left primary second molar (75) showed signs of enamel hypoplasia. He experienced no pain or discomfort during the dental procedures. A year later, he presented at our department due to the further loss of ten of his primary teeth . The early loss of so many teeth raised suspicion of a systemic disorder. He was referred to the Department of Human Genetics at Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin. The following differential diagnoses of auto-aggression syndromes were suspected: congenital insensitivity to pain and anhidrosis (CIPA), Smith–Magenis syndrome, Lesch–Nyhan syndrome, or pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration (PKAN). In addition, the following systemic diseases, which might cause premature loss of teeth, were suspected: Langerhans cell histiocytosis, hypophosphatasia, and Papillon–Lefèvre syndrome. The diagnosis of CIPA syndrome was thought to be closest to his condition. All other suspected auto-aggression syndromes and systemic diseases were excluded based on blood tests, genetic diagnosis, and further clinical examination. However, after deeper investigations, the diagnosis HSAN-VIII was considered the definitive diagnosis of our patient.
Partial dentures for maxilla and mandible were constructed to prevent speech impairment and to enhance his lower facial height . Due to his high caries activity, an intensive prophylaxis program with continuous follow-up was implemented to avoid further dental deterioration and improve his oral health status. Over the years, with the help of an interdisciplinary medical team and his parents, he has shown great cooperation and completely ceased any sort of self-mutilation behavior.