A 65-year old Caucasian female presented in the Outpatients Clinic complaining of gradually reduced vision and metamorphopsia in the right eye (OD). Patient’s medical and ocular history were unremarkable. She had undergone uncomplicated cataract surgery with posterior chamber intraocular lens (IOL) implantation in OD 19 months ago and was on treatment with preservative free LP 0.005% (Monoprost 50 µg/ml, Thea, Clermont-Ferrand, France) every night in both eyes (OU) for the last 7 months due to ocular hypertension. At the time that LP ophthalmic solution was initiated patient’s best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/20 OU and intraocular pressure (IOP) was 24 mm Hg OU while Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT), conducted as baseline examination, was normal .
On admission, ocular examination disclosed BCVA 20/30 in OD and 20/20 in OS. Slit lamp examination of OD revealed IOL in the capsular bag with intact posterior capsule with no evidence of intraocular inflammation or any other pathology such as ruptured posterior capsule. Slit lamp examination of OS was normal. Intraocular pressure was 14 mmHg OU. Fundus examination revealed a slight decrease in the foveal reflectivity OD indicative of CME whereas no pathology was observed in OS. Optical coherence tomography in OD confirmed the diagnosis of CME demonstrating well-defined, intraretinal cystic areas of low reflectivity in the macula, mainly in the outer plexiform and inner nuclear layers of the retina, with serous retinal detachment (SRD) . Fluorescein angiography (FA) in OD revealed a petaloid leakage from the perifoveal retinal capillaries during the late phases without staining of the optic disc, while multiple areas of subtle fluorescein leakage was noted throughout the retina . No leakage or any other pathology was observed in the OS .
Latanoprost was discontinued and was replaced with brinzolamide eye drops 1% b.i.d (Azopt 10 mg/ml, Alcon Laboratories Ltd., Hertfordshire, UK) OU. Nepafenac eye drops (Nevanac, 1 mg/ml, Alcon Laboratories Ltd., Hertfordshire, UK) t.i.d. were administered in OD. One month later, BCVA was restored to 20/20 in OD, metamorphopsia disappeared, and OCT demonstrated subsidence of CME with a single remaining intraretinal cyst. Two months after LP discontinuation, OCT demonstrated complete resolution of CME whereas a subtle epiretinal membrane was noted . At that time BCVA was 20/20 OU and IOP 17 mmHg in OD and 18 mmHg in OS. Nepafenac eye drops were administered for additional 2 months. Patient was examined every month thereafter. Eight months after LP cessation patient had BCVA 20/20 OU and IOP 18 mmHg OU, while she remained on brinzolamide eye drops b.i.d. OU. Optical coherence tomography demonstrated no sign of CME.