A 61-year-old male complained of left visual disturbance and was admitted to our hospital. He underwent carotid endarterectomy for left internal carotid artery (ICA) stenosis in previous hospital 1-year before, but he experienced left visual disturbance after surgery. Postoperative examinations revealed that the operated CCA was completely occluded. Additional surgery was not performed. His visual disturbance gradually progressed, and he was diagnosed as neovascular glaucoma. None of ophthalmological therapy could improve his symptoms. Neurological examination on admission revealed anisocoria. The size of pupils was 3.5 mm and 5.5 mm in the right and left side, respectively. Light reflex was absent in the left side. Left visual disturbance was severe (20/400 vision). Intraocular pressure was elevated up to 38 mmHg in the left side. No parenchymal lesion was observed on brain magnetic resonance (MR) imaging. However, MR angiography demonstrated that the left CCA and left vertebral artery were completely occluded. 123I-IMP single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) showed an impaired reactivity to acetazolamide in the territory of the left ICA . On cerebral angiography, the left CCA was occluded at the origin. Left anterior cerebral artery and MCA were opacified via the anterior communicating artery on right carotid angiogram. Left subclavian angiogram showed the development of collateral circulation to the left ICA through the left ECA. Thus, the deep cervical artery extensively supplied collateral blood flow to the distal part of the left occipital artery. The blood flowed to the proximal part of the left ECA with a retrograde fashion, and then to the left ICA via the left ophthalmic artery . At the same time, the left STA was opacified without a significant delay . Ultrasound examination also revealed the reversed blood flow in the left ophthalmic artery. The peak systolic flow velocity was −40 cm/s, suggesting that ocular ischemia was closely related to severe neovascular glaucoma in this case .
Based on these findings, he underwent left STA-MCA double anastomosis to resolve the reversed blood flow in the left ophthalmic artery and improve his glaucoma-related symptoms. The frontal and parietal branches of the STA were carefully dissected under a surgical microscope. We could confirm that the blood flow from the distal end of the ipsilateral STA had enough high-pressure during surgery. The branches of STA were anastomosed to the frontal and temporal branches of the MCA with an end-to-side fashion, respectively. The patency was confirmed during surgery, using indocyanine green videoangiography. Postoperative course was uneventful. Postoperative SPECT study performed 2 weeks after surgery demonstrated that the reactivity to acetazolamide completely recovered in the territory of the left MCA . Postoperative cerebral angiography demonstrated that STA-MCA anastomosis supplied enough blood flow to the operated hemisphere . Follow-up ultrasound examination also revealed that the reversed blood flow in the left ophthalmic artery improved from −40 cm/s to −20 cm/s at 6 days after surgery . His visual disturbance did not deteriorate for these 21 months after surgery. Abnormal blood vessels around the iris gradually decreased and disappeared. Intraocular pressure decreased from 38 to 16 mmHg.