The patient was a 29-year-old woman who had undergone debridement and drainage for cervical lymph node tuberculosis 9 years prior to the current presentation. She had been examined 7 years prior to the current presentation via abdominal computed tomography (CT) at another hospital due to abdominal pain. That CT examination revealed a mass in the pancreas body and enlarged lymph nodes in the abdominal cavity. Understandably, at that time it was suspected that she had pancreatic cancer with lymphatic metastasis. Apart from the CT report however, the specific clinical examination index of the patient compiled at the other hospital was unavailable. Two years after the symptoms had been relieved via treatment with traditional Chinese medicine, the patient began experiencing repeated vomiting and melena that had persisted for the subsequent 5 five years; up to the time of the current presentation. At our hospital she stated that her psychological status, appetite, and sleep were normal, and she exhibited ochrodermia but no fever, jaundice, petechiae, or ecchymoses. On physical examination her general condition was good, and there was no abdominal tenderness, abdominal muscle tension, rebound pain, abdominal mass, or hepatomegaly. There was also no swelling of the cervical, supraclavicular, axillary, or inguinal lymph nodes.
To clarify the cause of the patient’s condition, biochemical blood analysis and routine blood examinations were performed. Adenosine deaminase and liver function were within normal ranges , but erythrocyte, platelet, and leukocyte counts were reduced . Alpha fetal protein, tumor associated antigen 125, and tumor associated antigen 199 results were normal. Tests for human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, and M. tuberculosis infection were negative, but an interferon gamma release assay was positive.
To further aid in the diagnosis, imaging examinations including abdominal non-contrast and contrast-enhanced CT, CT angiography (CTA), CT venography, and portal-phase three-dimensional vascular reconstruction were performed. Both non-contrast and contrast-enhanced CT indicated non-obvious enhancement in both the arterial and venous phases, and a heterogeneous, non-vascular, low-density mass was depicted in the lower margin of the pancreas body with poorly defined edges and dimensions of approximately 3.1 × 2.0 cm . An intumescent spleen and multiple nodular dense shadows around the pancreas, hepatic hilar region, and mesentery were also visible on CT . CTA, CT venography, and portal-phase three-dimensional vascular reconstruction depicted an enlarged splenic vein, narrowed initial section of the splenic vein, and tortuous gastric veins . Gastroscopy detected varicose veins under the gastric fundus mucosa , but the esophageal mucosa was smooth. Chest CT was conducted to investigate a potential history of tuberculosis, and it depicted a cable-like increased density of flaky shadows in the posterior segment of the upper lobe tip of the left lung. Based on the above results the patient was diagnosed with LSPH. Due to the nature of the mass in the pancreas however, it was unclear whether it was tuberculosis, a tumor, or another lesion. In the present case the mass was located in the lower margin of the pancreas body, and peripancreatic blood vessels were abundant, so it is difficult and dangerous to operate aspiration. According to our Multiple Disciplinary Team, endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy (EUS-FNAB) was not applicative.
Due to repeated hematemesis symptoms, after a blood transfusion and the improvement of anemia the patient underwent a splenectomy and perigastric fundus vascular dissection, and a lesion excision was performed for biopsy. Intraoperatively an enlarged spleen with dimensions of approximately 34 × 25 × 15 cm was observed. After dissociating the peritoneal adipose tissue it was evident that the left gastric vein, right gastric vein, left gastroepiploic vein, and right gastroepiploic vein were extensively tortuous and dilated . As the dissection deepened, swelling of the lymph nodes at the greater curvature, hepatoduodenal ligament, and lower margin of the pancreas were apparent . Intraoperative ultrasound suggested that the mass occupying the lower margin of the pancreas was an abscess. Because it exhibited a caseous necrosis profile the sample was submitted for biopsy, and a necrotizing granulomatous lymphadenitis compatible with tuberculosis was observed . After obtaining these results microbiological analysis was performed, and Ziehl–Neelsen staining was suspiciously positive. Therefore, the diagnosis of LSPH caused by lymph node tuberculosis was confirmed. Based on the newly generated clinical evidence it was concluded that the patient’s diagnosis 7 years prior should have been peripancreatic lymph node tuberculosis rather than pancreatic cancer.