In February 2013, a 51-year-old Caucasian woman presented with a several month history of back pain, hot flushes, sweats and weight loss. A subsequent CT scan demonstrated multiple enlarged cervical nodes, as well as confluent paravertebral soft tissue masses in the region of the thoracic spine and anterior to L5 to the presacral region. A CT-guided core biopsy of the presacral mass was performed and histology confirmed low grade B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma based on immunostaining results.
Further staging included a whole body 18F-FDG PET scan which demonstrated moderate to markedly FDG-avid right upper and bilateral lower thoracic para-spinal, lower lumbar para-spinal and presacral soft tissue masses with extension into several right lower lumbar and sacral neural foramen. Heterogeneous increased FDG uptake was also seen in a right external iliac node and throughout the skeleton, most marked and intense in the trochanteric region of the right femur and right ilium, consistent with marrow infiltration . A bone marrow aspirate and trephine of the right ilium at a site of increased FDG uptake on the PET scan confirmed a marrow packed with lymphoma, with a combination of small and larger cells, the latter of which were CD20 positive. Due to sacral and lumbar neural foramen invasion, CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain scans along with a lumbar puncture were performed to exclude leptomeningeal disease. These were found to be negative.
Despite the presacral mass core biopsy demonstrating low grade B-cell small lymphocytic lymphoma, clinical symptoms, bone marrow biopsy and 18F-FDG PET scan findings were suggestive of concomitant higher grade lymphoma. She was thus considered likely to have follicular B-cell lymphoma with high-grade transformation and treatment comprised of six cycles of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisolone and rituximab (CHOP-R) chemotherapy with pegfilgrastim support every three weeks. This was followed by two cycles of high-dose methotrexate due to the perceived higher risk for central nervous system disease from direct neural foramen invasion.
The first three cycles of CHOP-R chemotherapy were well-tolerated without significant complication apart from persistent low-grade lower back pain. An interim mid-treatment 18F-FDG PET scan to assess treatment response was performed at this point which demonstrated resolution of FDG-avid right upper and bilateral lower thoracic para-spinal, lower lumbar para-spinal and pre-sacral soft tissue masses and right external iliac node . FDG uptake in the trochanteric region of the right femur and right ilium had also decreased, however, new heterogeneous intense FDG uptake was demonstrated throughout most of the axial and proximal appendicular skeleton, sternum and numerous ribs. Some of this corresponded with mixed lytic and sclerotic lesions on the fusion low-dose CT scan performed at the time of the 18F-FDG PET scan which was highly suggestive of widespread high-grade lymphoma progression within the marrow .
A right posterior superior iliac spine bone marrow biopsy was thus performed with a view to intensifying chemotherapy if persistent lymphoma was confirmed within the marrow. This was performed at a site previously positive for marrow involvement on the pretreatment PET scan, and demonstrated a moderately hypocellular marrow with some clusters of B-cells, which may have been regenerative in nature. No convincing evidence of residual lymphoma was seen. Given the suspicious PET scan findings and potential patchy nature of disease, a repeat bone marrow biopsy was performed from the left posterior superior iliac spine, which again demonstrated no evidence of lymphoma and normal moderately hypercellular tri-lineage hemopoiesis.
As residual lymphoma was not confirmed on both bone marrow biopsies, treatment was not changed and she completed a further three cycles of CHOP-R chemotherapy, at which point another 18F-FDG PET scan was performed . This scan again demonstrated a similar heterogeneous pattern of increased FDG uptake throughout the marrow of the skeleton in a similar distribution to the post third cycle interim PET scan however, overall intensity of uptake had decreased significantly and was not typical for disease progression.Due to the apparent improvement in PET scan appearances, a whole body radiolabelled white cell scan was performed to evaluate normal skeletal bone marrow activity. This demonstrated areas of normal marrow activity throughout the skeleton in a similar highly heterogeneous distribution to the interim and post-six cycle PET/CT scans. This suggested that the apparent ‘abnormal’ bone marrow appearance on the interim and, to a lesser extent, post-six cycle chemotherapy PET scans actually represented FDG uptake in scattered residual islands of regenerating and pegfilgrastim-stimulated normal bone marrow, rather than sites of progressive lymphoma .
Our patient has remained in clinical remission for three months since the post-six cycle chemotherapy PET scan, and continues to receive three-monthly rituximab maintenance therapy for the presumed lower grade lymphoma component of her disease.
The baseline, interim and completion PET scans were all performed on the same Phillips GEMINI PET/CT camera (Phillips Healthcare, Massachusetts, United States). The range of 18F-FDG dose and uptake time for the three PET/CT scans were 307 to 319 MBq and 60 to 65 minutes, respectively, suggesting differences between PET scan appearances were true changes and not due to variability in the acquisition technique.