An 86-year-old woman visited our outpatient department with sudden-onset pain in her dominant right shoulder that had developed after daily activity without specific trauma history. Her pain was severely aggravated with shoulder movement. The pain was dull in nature, continued for 3 weeks, and was aggravated 2 days prior to hospital presentation. In her medical history, she had undergone TSA for right shoulder osteoarthritis at our hospital 4 years prior. She had not received acupuncture or intra-articular injections to the shoulder. Upon presentation in our outpatient clinic, there was severe swelling of the shoulder joint, with mild tenderness but no localized increase in temperature. We aspirated 80 mL of dark-colored fluid from the shoulder joint . The patient had a medical history of hypertension and was taking rivaroxaban for atrial fibrillation.
Simple radiologic findings of the shoulder joint showed no bony abnormality. However, plain radiographs showed severe joint swelling and metallosis around the shoulder joint (metallic staining in the shoulder joint). X-rays showed the need for reverse TSA (RTSA), with the upper one-third of the glenoid baseplate worn and a broken screw . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed rim-enhanced and non-enhanced fluid collection around the subdeltoid and subacromial bursa and around the glenohumeral joint , which was diagnosed as an infected fluid sac. Additionally, a low-density lesion was observed in the fluid sac at the glenohumeral joint level. Preoperative laboratory findings of the erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein were 12 mm/h and 0.28 mg/dL, respectively, and the white blood cell count of the joint fluid was 980 cells with a greenish color.
Intraoperative findings were as follows. Following a previous incision, the deltopectoral approach was performed. A needle-tip electrocautery was used to dissect subcutaneous or deep soft scar dissection to prevent hemorrhage. The cephalic vein was not identified during the revision surgery. After dividing the deltoid and pectoralis major muscle, we tried to find the biceps tendon that was attached to the bicipital groove during the previous surgery. After searching the bicipital tendon and glenohumeral joint, scar tissue and adhesion were carefully removed. A torn subscapularis tendon and metallosis debris were observed in the glenohumeral joint and proximal humerus. The glenoid bearing was worn out and had displaced from the baseplate, and wear of the upper portion of the glenoid component was evident in the glenohumeral joint . Complete debridement and thorough irrigation of the metallosis were performed. Even though the upper one-third of the glenoid baseplate was worn out, a glenosphere was inserted without instability . Postoperatively, pendulum exercise was started immediately after recovery, and an ultra-arm sling was used for 4 weeks. The patient's most recent follow-up was at 1 year. She had a pain visual analogue scale (VAS) score of 2, an American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons (ASES) score of 85, a University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) score of 31, a Simple Shoulder Test (SST) score of 10, and a Korean Shoulder Score (KSS) of 88. The range of motion was forward flexion 150°, abduction 140°, and external rotation 35°. The internal rotation level was L1 behind the back. The patient was eventually satisfied with the results.