A 34-year-old man had reduced vision in his left eye for about 15 years, and night blindness for about two years. He had a complete ophthalmic examination including measurements of the best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) and intraocular pressure, slit-lamp examinations, indirect ophthalmoscopy, Goldmann perimetry (GP), perimetry with Humphrey Field Analyzer (HFA), optical coherence tomography (OCT), MP-3 microperimetry, and full-field ERGs. His visual acuity was 20/15 in the right eye and 20/50 in the left eye. The fundus did not show any obvious abnormalities, but optical coherence tomography showed partial loss of the interdigitation zone . The retinal sensitivity of the macular region was reduced in both eyes . His family ocular histories were unknown because both his parents and grandparents were dead.
The ERGs were recorded and analyzed with MEB-9402 (NIHON KOHDEN, Tokyo, Japan) and LS-100 (Mayo, Nagoya, Japan) as light emitting device. Before ERG recordings, we confirmed that the pupils were maximally dilated to approximately 8.0 mm following topical application of a mixture of 0.5% tropicamide and 0.5% phenylephrine (Sandol P; Nitten Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., Aichi, Japan). ERG recordings performed binocularly with contact lens electrodes.
He was dark-adapted for 20 min, and the dark-adapted 0.01 ERG, dark-adapted 3.0 ERG, and dark-adapted oscillatory potentials were recorded in that order. The eye was then light-adapted for 10 min, and the light-adapted 3.0 ERG, light-adapted 30 Hz flicker (3.0 photopic cd‧s‧m− 2 stimulus luminance) were recorded. Then, ERGs elicited by long-duration stimuli (on and off responses: 63.0 cd/m2 stimulus intensity with 31.6 cd/m2 background intensity, 200 ms duration) were recorded. All of the recordings conformed to the International Society for Clinical Electrophysiology of Vision (ISCEV) standard for full-field clinical electroretinography .
During the recording of the dark-adapted ERG series elicited by single flashes, there were no changes in the patient’s overall condition. However, as soon as the flicker ERG recordings were completed and long-duration flashes began, the patient reported that a paralysis had developed in both upper limbs. Therefore, the examiner immediately stopped the ERG recordings, and soon thereafter, convulsions of the lower limbs developed and he lost consciousness. The convulsions disappeared after an intravenous injection of diazepam. Examinations of the ERG recordings, no apparent decrease in amplitudes or extension of implicit times were observed as compared with the normal waveforms indicated by ISCEV. No abnormality of the a-wave / b-wave ratio at the maximum combined response was observed . Computed tomography of the head was performed on the same day, and no abnormality was found. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head was also performed later, and the findings were normal. There was no abnormality in the electroencephalogram examination performed after the attack. After that incident, he reported that he had had conscious-loss seizures four years earlier.