A 77-year-old man was admitted to our Internal Medicine Department for fever, diarrhea, and a 1-month history of persistent polyarthralgia and prolonged morning stiffness at both ankles and knees. Almost 40 days before, the patient had been hospitalized for an exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), which was treated with a fluoroquinolone. Subsequently, he developed a Clostridium Difficile induced colitis, treated with oral metronidazole. The patient was a former port worker and had been a heavy smoker for 40 years. Past medical history included ischemic heart disease and arterial hypertension, for which he was taking anti-platelet and anti-hypertensive therapy.
On physical examination, he was febrile (37.9 °C) and had a heart rate of 95 beats/min and a blood pressure of 135/70 mmHg. His oxygen saturation was 96% on room air. His body mass index was 27 Kg/m2 and he reported a 5 Kg weight loss over the last 3 months. His ankles appeared clearly swollen, with reduced range of motion. There was a tense effusion in the left knee and a moderate joint tenderness in all limbs. Fingers and toes presented with a low grade digital clubbing, whose first appearance could not be precisely dated. Laboratory exams showed C-reactive protein (CRP) of 116.1 mg/L (normal values < 5 mg/L), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 90 mm/hr. (normal values < 35 mm/hr), white blood cells (WBC) of 11.860/mm3 (normal values between 4.000 and 11.000/mm3) and a rheumatoid factor of 56 U/mL (normal values < 20 U/ml). Blood and urine cultures were negative. The left knee synovial fluid aspiration showed an aseptic synovitis (8.226 WBC/hpf, with 90% neutrophils, while crystal detection, gram stain and cultures were negative). Moreover, Clostridium Difficile toxin in stool samples was still detectable.
Based on this presentation, a reactive arthritis due to a Clostridium Difficile induced colitis was suspected and oral vancomycin, oral prednisone, and painkillers were prescribed. Five days later, since fever, diarrhea, and polyarthralgia had apparently resolved, the patient was discharged, and a post-discharge visit was scheduled at the Rheumatology Office 1 month later.
When the patient came to the Rheumatology Office, he reported a relapse of polyarthralgia and joint tenderness while he was gradually reducing oral prednisone. He was slightly febrile (37.5 °C) but had denied relapse of diarrhea. On physical examination, his ankles were still swollen, while the left knee effusion had resolved. The fingers of both hands were also diffusely swollen and digital clubbing had worsened, with an increase of distal phalangeal/interphalangeal depth ratio (greater than 1.05). Lung auscultation revealed fine crackles at the base of the right lung. In laboratory exams, CRP was 101.1 mg/L, ESR was 99 mm/h and WBC was 14.380/mm3. Chest radiograph was unchanged as compared to that performed when the patient had the COPD exacerbation, revealing a possible patchy infiltrate at the base of the right lung, while radiograph of the ankles was inconclusive . At that stage, given the presence of a lung infiltrate and systemic inflammatory features (fever and elevated inflammatory markers), a relapse of right base pneumonia was suspected; thus, an empiric antibiotic therapy with a broad-spectrum penicillin and pain killers were prescribed. In addition, bone scintigraphy and chest computed tomography (CT) were promptly performed. The first revealed increased linear periosteal 99mTc-hydroxymethylene diphosphonate (HMDP) uptake, which is a typical sign of HOA . The second revealed a lung infiltrate with a partly ground-glass aspect .
Owing to the high association between HOA and lung malignancies , the patient underwent a bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) and transbronchial biopsies of the right lung infiltrate. Unfortunately, biopsies could not be performed because of the complexity in localizing the infiltrate under fluoroscopy. On the other hand, we were unable to schedule a CT-guided percutaneous biopsy or a diagnostic surgery because the patient’s general conditions dramatically worsened. He developed high fever (39.4 °C) and severe respiratory failure, which we ascribed to a severe bilateral pneumonia. During the hospitalization in a semi-intensive care unit, bronchoscopy was tried again and, finally, a transbronchial small biopsy could be performed. In the BAL, there were no malignant cells or infectious pathogens; likewise, blood and sputum cultures turned out negative. When the result of the transbronchial biopsy pathology examination became available, showing a lepidic pattern adenocarcinoma, no specific therapy was prescribed due to the extreme gravity of the patient’s general conditions. Despite the use of noninvasive ventilation and extended spectrum antibiotic therapy, the patient died 4 days after the biopsy results and roughly 5 months after the initial clinical presentation. Autopsy confirmed the diagnosis of lepidic predominant adenocarcinoma of the right lung, associated with massive bilateral destructive pneumonia and severe emphysema with centrolobular pattern .