A 38-year-old Japanese woman complained of continuous high fever, chills, and muscular pain on minimal exertion for 5 days. Blood tests revealed a platelet count of 27 000/μL (normal range: 150 000–450 000/μL) and a C-reactive protein level of 159.1 mg/L (0–5 mg/L). She had a history of dental infection treated with antibiotics 3 months prior, but no teeth were extracted. She denied tobacco, alcohol, or intravenous (i.v.) drug abuse. Her vital signs were within the normal range except for the high fever, and she showed no vascular or immunological phenomena. Her heart exam on admission revealed normal S1 and S2, with an apical systolic regurgitant murmur. On admission, ceftriaxone was initiated at a dosage of 2 g/day for 4 days, and two sets of blood cultures showed Staphylococcus aureus growth after 2 days. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head showed multiple low-density areas in the spleen and a hyperintense signal in the parietal lobe on diffusion-weighted imaging. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed an abnormal structure located posterior to the medial side of the left atrium (LA) . Furthermore, we confirmed moderate MR and abnormal structures in the posterior wall of the medial LA with transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE) . The anterior mitral leaflet (AML) was large, with thickening of the A2 extremity and pseudoprolapse. Transoesophageal echocardiography showed that the vegetation was attached to the posterior wall of the LA where the MR jet was directly blowing, sticking out like a broad stem from the mitral annulus on the side of the medial scallop of the posterior leaflet. Thus, we made a definitive diagnosis of IE using the Duke criteria. Since there was a slight possibility that the abnormal structure in the LA was a thrombus, we administered unfractionated heparin as antithrombotic therapy simultaneously with i.v. ampicillin/sulbactam (12 g/day for 5 days). However, her fever persisted and the inflammatory response tended to get worse. Consequently, the patient was prescribed oral rifampicin (600 mg/day) and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (four tablets/day) and i.v. daptomycin (350 mg/day) and clindamycin (1800 mg/day). Transthoracic echocardiography during follow-up after 17 days of treatment showed a tendency for the vegetation to expand and become more mobile as the inflammatory response worsened. Thrombus was ruled out because it did not shrink despite appropriate anticoagulant therapy. The patient had already experienced embolic episodes when the vegetation had expanded to >10 mm. Although she had no symptoms of heart failure and MR was not too severe, we decided to surgically remove the infected tissues and repair the mitral valve on the 26th day of hospitalization. No vegetations were attached to the mitral valve leaflets themselves . Since A3 deviation and a cleft were observed, regurgitation was caused by improper coaptation of the leaflets. After debridement of the vegetation on the posterior wall of the LA, valve repair was performed. An annuloplasty ring (Physio II, 30 mm) was sewn to the mitral valve ring, resulting in a marked reduction in regurgitation. The removed vegetation was not referred to pathology or microbiology examination due to insufficient amount collected. Fever or clinical worsening was not observed after the operation. Follow-up TTE showed a well-functioning mitral valve, mild MR, and good systolic dysfunction. The patient was discharged in an ambulatory condition without the need for any medication on the 41st day of hospitalization. During a 1-year follow-up period after discharge, she did not have any relapses.