A 75-year-old male was referred to our unit with unsteadiness, falls, and slurred speech. His past medical history included a hormone escaped prostate adenocarcinoma with known bony metastases to the ribs and pelvis as well as intrabdominal lymph node involvement. He was originally managed with single androgen suppression therapy (LHRH analog) and external beam radiotherapy for the primary disease but not for the bony metastases. At the time of presentation no calvarian or intracranial disease was present. His Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status was 2.
Computed tomography (CT) head performed at the referring hospital revealed bilateral chronic subdural collections, larger on left side, with 18 mm midline shift to the right. These had the typical radiological appearance of liquefied hematomas .
On admission his Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) was 15/15 with no lateralizing neurology except mild expressive dysphasia. He was not taking any antiplatelet or anticoagulant medication and his hematological profile revealed unimpaired coagulation and normal biochemical profile.
The patient underwent evacuation of his left sided subdural collection (the prominently symptomatic side) via two burr holes under general anesthetic. The operating surgeon described the procedure uneventful, the subdural collection as “typical light brown color,” under high pressure. A Jacques catheter was left in the subdural space for 48 h, which is standard practice in our unit. Postoperatively the patient improved only marginally and the fifth postoperative day, it was clear that he was again expressively dysphasic. Repeat CT of his head revealed re-accumulation of the subdural collection, with moderate mass effect . He returned to theatre where again the left sided subdural collection was re-opened, found to be under high pressure, re-drained and send for cytology. In addition a specimen of dura was biopsied.
Histopathology revealed connective tissue containing occasional small, cohesive epithelial cell lobules. The cells had pale cytoplasm and round or oval nuclei with medium-sized nucleoli. Immunohistochemistry revealed positive staining for AE1/AE3 (cytokeratin cocktail), prostate specific antigen and prostatic specific acid phosphatase, but not for CK7, CK20, and TTF-1. All these findings were consistent with a metastatic prostate adenocarcinoma with similar histopathological features with the original biopsy. Cytology did not reveal any malignant cells.
The patient had a slow and fluctuating neurological recovery. Further CT of his head revealed re-accumulation of the subdural fluid . He was discussed in the regional neuro-oncology multidisciplinary meeting (MDM) and it was decided to be refereed for whole brain radiotherapy (WBR). Four weeks later, and while still inpatient, he received 20 Gy in 4 fractions of 5 Gy, delivered in five consecutive days. Despite WBR, the patients ECOG performance status deteriorated from 2 to 3. He was discussed again in the neuro-oncology MDT meeting and the decision was made for best supportive treatment and palliative care. After a total inpatient stay of 5 weeks, he was discharged to a hospice for palliative care management where he succumbed to his disease one month later.