A 56-year-old woman was referred to the endocrinology and metabolism clinic by her gynecologist for assessment of virilization. She had initially sought medical attention with her family physician for these symptoms and had been referred to a gynecologist for further investigation, who subsequently referred her to endocrinology. She had a past medical history of hypertension and prediabetes, and her medications were perindopril for blood pressure control and over-the-counter minoxidil drops for hair loss. She denied using any other over-the-counter or topical medications. Her symptoms began postmenopause at the age of 52 years. She reported rapidly progressive deepening of her voice; scalp hair loss; enlargement of her clitoris; and excessive dark and long hair growth on her face, back, chest, and extremities. She recalled that her hair growth had preceded her other symptoms by 6 years. She reported regular menstrual cycles until menopause, with no history of infertility. Her family history was negative for history of virilization or ovarian tumors, and she did not have constitutional symptoms of fever, weight loss, or night sweats. She denied use of exogenous testosterone.
Her physical examination was significant for deep voice; severe male-pattern baldness at the vertex and temporal areas ; clitoris measuring >4 mm, consistent with clitoromegaly; and dark long hair growth around her chin, lower back, umbilicus, chest, and upper and lower extremities. Her Ferriman-Gallwey score was 20, representing moderate hirsutism. Her laboratory investigations showed total testosterone of 11.5 (0.3-1.3 nmol/L), with bioavailable testosterone of 7.19 (0.1-0.6 nmol/L). DHEAS was normal at 4.0 (0.8-4.9 μmol/L). Her other investigations, including thyroid-stimulating hormone, prolactin level, insulin-like growth factor 1, and growth hormone were within normal range . Her cortisol suppressed to <50 nmol/L after 1 mg dexamethasone suppression test, and her early morning follicular phase 17-hydroxyprogesterone was 1.4 (0.4-1.5 nmol/L).
A pelvic transvaginal ultrasound showed 2 fundal uterine fibroids and normal appearance of the ovaries, with no abnormal adnexal masses. Magnetic resonance imaging of her abdomen and pelvis showed no adrenal lesions bilaterally, an anteverted uterus with 3 intramural fibroids, and no definite solid or cystic ovarian masses.
In the context of unremarkable biochemical and radiographic data, the patient underwent OVS and AVS. AVS showed right and left adrenal testosterone levels of 10.1 and 6.8 (0.3-1.3 nmol/L), respectively. OVS showed left ovarian testosterone level of 780.0 nmol/L (RR = 0.3-1.8) and right ovarian testosterone level of 18.6 nmol/L (RR = 0.3-1.3) . Left-to-right ovarian testosterone ratio was 41.94.
After discussion with gynecology-oncology at a multidisciplinary cancer conference, both left unilateral and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy were offered to the patient. She opted for bilateral resection; therefore, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and total abdominal hysterectomy were performed. The histopathology showed a 1.0 cm left ovarian tumor composed of a monotonous cellular population that was positive for inhibin A, calretinin, and melan A , most consistent with a Leydig cell tumor. The right ovary pathology was within normal limits. The uterine pathology showed leiomyomata in the myometrium and an inactive endometrium, with no evidence of hyperplasia, atypia, or malignancy.
One month after surgery, her total testosterone and bioavailable testosterone were both <0.4 nmol/L, and her virilization symptoms markedly improved at 6-month follow-up. She reported normalization of her voice to baseline, decrease in dark hair growth on her back, and improvement in her male-pattern baldness. She had moderate persistent hirsutism, requiring frequent facial hair removal and continued to use minoxidil for her baldness but felt that these had overall improved.