We present the case of a 30-year-old West African Yoruba man, an indigent Nigerian clergyman, who presented to our facility with recurrent nasal discharge of a history of about one year, recurrent nasal blockage of a history of about five months, and right facial swelling of a history of about one week. The nasal discharge was bilateral, mucopurulent, brownish, foul smelling, associated with excessive sneezing accompanied with intermittent bilateral nasal obstruction five months prior to presentation. The obstruction started from the right nasal cavity and subsequently involved the left side to become bilateral with an associated inability to perceive smell and no history of epistaxis. The right cheek swelling was noticed a week prior to presentation, progressive and associated with facial pain. A nasal examination revealed a pale polypoidal mass in both nasal cavities, characteristic of nasal polyps that do not bleed on touch, with associated mucopurulent sinonasal discharge. No other mass was seen.
A CT scan of the paranasal sinuses showed an isodense lesion in both nasal cavities, maxillary antral and ethmoid, with erosion of the medial and anterior walls of the right maxillary antrum .
Our patient had a bilateral nasal polypectomy and intra-nasal inferior meatal antrostomy performed and blackish debris was seen in both the nasal and antral cavities. The antrostomy was widened with a Watson-Williams rasp. The operative findings were a pale glistening mass and black-greyish materials in both nasal and antral cavities, and mucopurulent aspirate from the right antrum.
The surgical specimens were sent for fungal studies and histopathology. Fungal studies yielded trichophyton mentagrophytes and the histopathology result showed inflammatory polyps. Our patient was treated with terbinafine 250mg daily for two weeks, within which time the symptoms subsided. Our patient failed to turn up for follow-up. Our patient presented again four months after surgery with a recurrent right cheek swelling; an X-ray of the paranasal sinuses showed opacification of both maxillary sinuses with erosion of the anterior and medial walls as earlier noted.
Our patient had a bilateral antral washout with warm saline under local anesthesia using the previously made antrostomy. Our patient was then given a trial of flumetasone and clioquinol (Locacorten®-Vioform®; double dilution) intra-antral application after informed consent was obtained. A nasal spray with 4% plain xylocaine was applied to the nasal cavity; flumetasone and clioquinol solution was then applied with our patient in a sitting position and neck slightly extended. An antral cannula was introduced into the maxillary antrum through an old inferior meatal antrostomy (surgically created fistula). Aspiration of the antral content was performed with subsequent introduction of the agent (flumetasone and clioquinol) with a volume of about 5mL into the cavity. An initial pre-application photograph was also obtained from our patient after informed consent was granted. This was repeated serially weekly for six weeks and close follow-up and monitoring of our patient were performed. After the first dose, there was remission of the right cheek swelling, but persistent nasal discharge. After the second dose the nasal discharge stopped with continuous regression of the mass.
A third dose was administered, and our patient successfully presented for the fourth, fifth and sixth dose. An antral aspirate yielded 3.6mL of straw-colored fluid that was sent for cytology and fungal studies. The results of these studies were negative for fungal and bacterial growth. There was improvement in our patient’s symptoms such as nasal clearance and facial pain, which reduced significantly. Our patient has been symptom free for the past four months after administration of the medication intra-antrally.