A 67-year-old man presented to our department complained of substernal pain for 1 year. EGD showed the esophageal mucosal congestion, erosion, and roughness, 29~31 cm from the incisors. Pathological analysis indicated squamous-cell middle-severe dysplasia of an esophageal mucosa . We achieved en bloc resection by ESD without adverse events. During the operation, it was shown that the lesion flaky mucosa was rough and the surface structure disorder infiltrated 3/4 circumference of the esophageal lumen, 28~33 cm from the incisors . Narrow-band imaging (NBI) staining for the lesion was brown . Ultrasonic gastroscopy indicated that the mucosal lesion was thickened, and there was a clear boundary between the submucosa and muscularis propria . Therefore, ESD was performed with a HybridKnife, and the primary outcome was en bloc resection of the lesions. There was no bleeding or perforation after wound management with electrocoagulation . So, ESD for the treatment of early esophageal cancer was feasible and safe. The resected lesion size was 5.0 × 8.0 cm . The post-ESD pathological analysis was high-grade esophageal intraepithelial neoplastic; cancer cells infiltrated the lamina propria mucosae of the esophagus . The patient underwent resected lesion with a negative margin. To prevent the formation of the esophageal stricture after ESD, the patient continued to take oral prednisone and intraluminal stent insertion for 30 days. However, the patient developed progressive dysphagia on the seventh day after the removal of the esophageal stent. EGD showed an esophageal stricture. The patient undergone repeated EBD in other hospitals, but it was ineffective. Eventually, the patient was admitted to our department for endoscopic evaluation and therapy, considering the patient had failed multiple EBD. Finally, we chose ERI as the treatment for post-ESD esophageal stricture.
The patient had an unremarkable physical and systemic examination. No abnormal physical finding or laboratory data were observed. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed thickening of the middle part of the esophagus wall. EGD showed a benign cicatricial stricture (diameter 0.6 cm) of the esophagus, 29 cm from the incisors . And the gastroscopy cannot pass through smoothly. The NBI showed the surface structure of the esophageal mucosa was regular. We used the insulated-tip knife to perform ERI, and the incision was made to cut the superficial muscle layer along the line that connects the esophageal lumen on the oral side and the lumen on the anal side in the 3, 6, 9, and 12 o’clock direction. The cutting depth ranges from 4 to 6 mm. When the endoscope can pass through the structure, then the stricture of the esophagus was a widespread cutting . Finally, the symptoms improved (diameter 1.3 cm) . We used electrocoagulation for hemostasis and without bleeding or perforation. Next, we saw another severe cicatricial stricture (diameter 0.2 cm) of the esophagus, 31 cm from the incisors . ERI also was performed. Finally, the symptoms improved (diameter 1.2 cm) . The gastroscope into the stomach without resistance is shown in Fig. . The wound was treated with electrocoagulation without bleeding. The procedure took approximately 30 min. The patient with dysphagia was significantly relieved and without complications such as fever, poststernal pain, bleeding, and perforation. We followed up the patient for 3 months and there was no recurrence of dysphagia. Long-term follow-up is ongoing.