A 28-year-old male presented with a swollen, painful right calf following an injury. On day 12 postinjury, he had a fever with a max temperature of 40.5°C, increased swelling and pain of the right calf, and ulcers on skin and soft tissues. Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy at the local hospital showed the possibility of acute myeloid leukemia and MDS. Then he was transferred to the emergency department of our hospital. In the middle section of the anterior side of the calf, there was a 10.0 × 8.0 cm superficial wound with partial skin and soft tissue defects, swelling of the surrounding soft tissue, high skin temperature, and a large amount of purulent secretions and necrotic tissue on the surface of the wound . WBC: 18.55 × 109/L, N: 14.27 × 109/L, HBG: 132 g/L, PLT: 221 × 109/L. On the day of admission, a right calf debridement and negative pressure suction” was performed. After 2 weeks, the wound was improved, and the negative pressure drainage material was removed. The wound granulation tissue grew well; the extremity blood circulation was good, and the body temperature gradually returned to normal. Two days later, the right foot reappeared swelling. MRI showed diffuse edema of the skin, subcutaneous soft tissue of the right foot, and plantar muscle groups, unregular skin in some areas, infections in the subcutaneous tissue, muscle, and surrounding areas of the first and fifth toes, and the anterior part of the planta, and, a small amount of fluid in the right ankle joint cavity, suggesting compartment syndrome. Therefore, the right foot incision and decompression were performed immediately. After the operation, WBC count was continually increased, with the highest value of 97.64 × 109/L. The body temperature was as high as 41°C, and there was no improvement after antiinfection treatment. The first bone marrow aspiration and biopsy showed obviously active nucleated cell proliferation. Blasts accounted for 16.5%, indicating the possibility of leukemia-like bone marrow and the possibility of hematopoietic system malignancy. The second bone marrow aspiration and biopsy showed extremely active nuclear cell proliferation, with blast cells accounting for 18.5%, suggesting myeloid tumors (possibly acute myeloid leukemia) complicating with infection. Immunophenotyping: R2 group accounted for about 12.2%. Cells in this group expressed CD45, CD13, CD33, HLA-DR; some expressed CD123, CD38, CD64, and MPO; a small part expressed CD117. The Granulocyte population showed a disorder of antigen expression and SS decrease, and R2 population was considered to be a myeloid proto-blast cell population, suggesting a myeloid tumor. The third bone marrow aspiration and biopsy showed obviously active proliferation of nucleated cells with 12.5% of blast cells. Bone marrow biopsy showed silver staining (−), iron staining (++), vigorous bone marrow granulosa hyperplasia, and focally distribution of blasts. Thus, myeloid tumors cannot be excluded. Myeloproliferative neoplasm (MPN) gene screening was negative. Leukemia gene screening: DEK-CAN positive. Bone marrow chromosome: 46, XY [10]. The results for blood culture (multiple times), wound secretions (multiple times), tissue culture, bone marrow culture during hospitalization, G test, and T-SPOT were all negative. Autoimmune-related antibodies were all negative. PG combined with myeloid tumor, pulmonary infection, and skin and soft tissue infection was considered. On the basis of antiinfection, intravenous infusion of methylprednisolone 40 mg, thalidomide 150 mg oral immunotherapy, hydroxyurea cell reduction, and other treatments were performed, and the body temperature was gradually returned to normal. The WBC was gradually returned to normal. The lung infection was controlled, and the skin lesions gradually improved. The patient was discharged after his condition was stable. Two weeks later, he was readmitted due to fever, with WBC: 2.8 × 109/L, N: 0.95 × 109/L, HBG: 82 g/L, PLT: 102 × 109/L. A bone marrow biopsy was suggested, but the family finally gave up treatment.