An 11-year-old female patient was admitted to the hospital on July 29, 2021 with the chief complaint of “intermittent nausea, vomiting and abdominal pain for 6 years, aggravated for 2 months”. The patient was born at full-term, had an uneventful delivery and was previously healthy. Physical examination indicated that the liver area was slightly inflated, and a liver mass could be palpated 3 cm below the rib cage, with a hard texture and positive tenderness to touch. Laboratory tests indicated that the white blood cell count was 12.92 × 10^9/L, ESR was 44 mm/1H, and tumor markers and the stool routine examination were normal. An abdominal angio CT suggested a giant low-density mass in the right lobe of the liver of approximately 13.6 × 11.2 cm in size , with a CT value of approximately 5–30 HU, and multiple cystic changes within it, with honeycomb, lava cavity-like changes and faintly visible fluttering signs with calcification. In the arterial phase, no enhancement was seen within the mass, the edges were unevenly enhanced, and the surrounding liver parenchyma was significantly enhanced . In the venous and equilibrium phases , it was poorly visualized. The imaging diagnosis considers hepatic echinococcosis but cannot exclude the possibility of malignancy. Surgery was planned. Before surgery, the volume of the mass measured by CT 3D reconstruction was approximately 1421 cm2, the total volume of the patient’s liver was approximately 2063 cm2, and the volume of the left liver was approximately 415 cm2. If the right half of the liver was removed, the functional liver volume removed was approximately 37%. In addition, the liver function evaluation results showed that the retention rate of indocyanine green was 2.5% in 15 minutes. These results indicated that the patient had good liver function and was expected to tolerate the surgery. Therefore we operated on 11 August 2021. During the surgery, we observed a large mass in the right lobe of the liver that was confined to the liver and did not break through the peritoneum. Exploration of the other abdominal organs showed no abnormalities, so we removed the intact mass together with the right half of the liver. The postoperative pathology specimen showed a large grayish-white stromal area within the resected liver tissue, measuring approximately 18 cm × 13 cm × 9 cm, with a localized hardness around the stromal area and a central cystic cavity, 7 cm in diameter, containing a jelly like substance. Microscopically, the swelling was consisted of both spindle cells and epithelioid cells . The spindle cells were uniform in size and arranged in fascicular swirls, and the epithelioid cells formed an adenoid structure surrounded by a basement membrane. In addition, dilated vessels resembling hemangioepithelioma were observed in some areas . Immunoprecipitation analysis results were as follows: CK-pan (+) , vimentin (+), myogenin (−), CD99 (+) , CK20 (−), PAX-8 (−), WT-1 (−), GPC-3 (−), SF1 (−), TLE1 (+), CK7 (ASO+), SMA (−), CD117 (+), S-100 (−), CD34 (−), desmin9 (−), and Ki-67 (20%+). The pathological diagnosis was considered to be hepatic biphasic synovial sarcoma. To further confirm the diagnosis, we sent the pathology section to a higher level hospital for DNA sequencing. The result revealed the fusion gene SS18-SSX1 (+) and finally confirmed the diagnosis of hepatic biphasic synovial sarcoma. The patient recovered well after surgery without complications such as bleeding or biliary fistula and successfully discharged on the 7th postoperative day. The family refused to receive other medication or radiotherapy due to family circumstances. The patient was followed up by telephone and was stable with no recurrence at the date of submission.