A 67-year-old man was referred to our centre for exertional dyspnoea developed during the last couple of months (NYHA class IIb). His daily medical therapy included only Cardioaspirin and Valsartan. He underwent urgent Bentall procedure for type A dissection 6 years before and a BioValsalva conduit with a 25 mm sized valve was implanted. At the admission, physical examination did not show any signs of heart failure but a moderate systo-diastolic murmur was clearly detected; transthoracic echocardiography showed a degenerated aortic prosthesis with severe stenosis (transvalvular mean gradient 45 mmHg) and moderate-to-severe regurgitation consequent to a paravalvular leak, as confirmed by transoesophageal echocardiography . To assess the feasibility of percutaneous VIV, we performed an aortic computed tomography (CT) angiography (according to the transaortic aortic valve replacement—TAVI—protocol), which showed a dissection of the three-layered aortic graft arising from the valvular plane . After patient’s evaluation by local Institutional Valvular Team, despite the possible feasibility of transfemoral TAVI, considering the relatively young age of the patient and the concerns of possible evolution of the graft dissection to a life-threatening pseudoaneurysm, it was decided to perform a second Bentall procedure. Pre-interventional coronary angiography showed a chronic occlusion of the right coronary ostium with good retrograde collateral circulation (Rentrop grade 3) and a viable left coronary artery. After median sternotomy, before cardiopulmonary bypass, surgical inspection showed extensive mediastinal adhesions to the polyester conduit, and the redo intervention was aborted. At that point, TAVI became the only available option, and CT angiography was carefully revaluated to establish the transcatheter heart valve (THV) size and assess the procedure risk of the left main obstruction . Given the absence of severe calcifications of the cusps, the target anchoring plane for the THV was the Dacron sewing ring of the conduit, at the native annulus plane and immediately below the porcine cusps’ reflection point. According to product specifications and ViV app, the sewing ring of a 25 mm BioValsalva conduit has an inner diameter (ID) of 25 mm, and the bioprosthetic valve has a true ID of 23 mm and is mounted at the bottom of a conduit with a constant ID of 26 mm. The distance between the sewing ring and the take of the left coronary artery (LCA) was not easily detectable at CT, but it was estimated to be no more than 12 mm. Taking into account the known perivalvular leak and aortic graft wall tear at the site of the valvular insertion, a balloon expandable THV, providing more radial strength than a self-expandable one, was preferred. Finally, considering the Dacron sewing ring size, an Edwards Sapien 3 26 mm was choice, as also suggested by the ViV app; this model has an overall 20 mm height and simulating a standard 70/30 height deployment (70% of the prosthesis struts above and 30% below the annulus), a virtual cylinder leaning on the sewing ring with a 26 mm diameter and a height of 14 mm was projected into the aorta. The deployment simulation predicted that THV frame would have been in front of left coronary ostium with a concerning valve to coronary distance (VTC) of 3 mm . The day after the failed redo surgery, TAVI via transfemoral approach was attempted. The procedure was performed under general anaesthesia following the classical steps. We decided to wire the left anterior descending artery to eventually be ready for the treatment of LCA occlusion. Moreover, because of the relevant paravalvular leak, before advancing the THV through the deteriorated bioprosthesis, transoesophageal echocardiography confirmation of the passage of the wire through the true valve orifice was obtained. During the valve deployment, the Edwards Sapien’ central marker was maintained slightly below the virtual line passing through the cusps’ nadir (where the target Dacron sewing ring of the BioValsalva was expected to be located) so that a mildly deeper implantation than normal was obtained, reducing the risk of the left main occlusion . Final angiography showed no significant aortic regurgitation and patency of the LCA ; no conduction disturbances were observed. The patient was rapidly extubated, and he was discharged three days after the procedure. Post-TAVI echocardiography showed a residual mild aortic stenosis (mean gradient 18 mmHg) and a trivial intra-prosthetic regurgitation. Fifteen days after TAVI, the patient underwent a new aortic CT angiography to assess the evolution of the graft dissection: the contrast enhancement of the false lumen was not detectable anymore and the THV struts were confirmed to be located immediately below the left main stem ostium . Six months after the procedure, the patient is free from dyspnoea, flow velocity across the prosthesis is stable (mean gradient 17 mmHg), and no regurgitation can be depicted at transthoracic echocardiography.