An 80-year-old Caucasian female presented to the clinic with complaints of the left 3rd toe pain and swelling that began after a traumatic impact to the foot while walking. The patient was initially seen in the emergency department and referred for orthopedic evaluation of a questionable non-displaced fracture seen on radiographs. Her medical history included stage T1a endometrial cancer treated with hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and invasive ductal breast cancer (estrogen receptor positive) treated with radiation therapy and long-term use of selective estrogen receptor modulators. Notable family medical history includes colon cancer in her mother and prostate cancer in her father.
Radiographs demonstrated a fracture through the mid-portion of the third proximal phalanx with a lytic lesion, cortical erosion, and soft-tissue shadowing .
After initial evaluation, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was ordered because of the lesion observed on radiographs. MRI with contrast similarly showed an aggressive appearing lytic expansile lesion of the third toe measuring 15×13×14 mm expanding through the cortex medially, approximately 14 mm, beyond the cortex with intense uniform post-contrast enhancement and adjacent soft-tissue enhancement. This prompted a referral to orthopedic oncology, and subsequent radionuclide bone scan imaging which showed enhancement at the lesion in question but no concern for metastasis.
An open biopsy of the left third toe was performed and curettings of the soft-tissue component were collected for frozen sections. Once frozen section analysis confirmed the presence of carcinoma, wide resection was performed with a third toe amputation. There was no evidence of residual tumor following the procedure. Two months following the amputation, a PET scan and chest computer tomography showed no evidence of metastasis. Follow-up at 2 years showed no evidence of tumor recurrence or metastasis .
Microscopic analysis of the biopsy specimen showed the tumor consisted of anastomosing cords of reniform cells characterized by a thin rim of eosinophilic cytoplasm and present within a myxoid stroma. Nuclei were ovoid with prominent nuclear grooves and no atypical mitotic figures. There were no hyaline chondroid or osteoid matrix, vascular channels or differentiation, or cross striations identified. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed tumor cells focally positive for S100 and KIT proteins, whereas negative for HMB-45, MART-1, pankeratin, GATA3, CAM5.2, CK5/6, 34betaE12, CK7, desmin, EMA, WT-1, and SOX-10. Metastatic breast carcinoma was ruled out by negative GATA-3, EMA, and keratin staining, and myxofibrosarcoma was ruled out because of insufficient cell spindling. The diagnosis of EMC was confirmed from the pathognomonic NR4A3 rearrangement at 9q22.33 demonstrated by fluorescent in situ hybridization.