A 63-year-old man came to the hospital because of bilateral swollen lymph nodes.
In April 2020, the patient received a pathological examination performed on a right cervical lymph node biopsy and immunohistochemical examination revealed that the infiltrating cells were positive for cluster of differentiation 20 (CD20), paired box 5 (PAX5), BCL-2, CD21, CD23, and Ki-67 staining of 10%, and were negative for CD10, BCL-6, CyclinD1, sry-related HMG-box 11 (SOX-11), CD3, and CD5 . The involvement of bone marrow was not found. Positron emission tomography (PET)-computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated mildly enlarged bilateral cervical lymph nodes (SUVmax: 5.4), and cirrhosis.The patient was diagnosed with MZL (Ann Arbor stage IIA, IPI 1 score). The patient refused radiation therapy, so we gave him 2 cycles of rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vindesine and prednisone (R-CHOP). The enlarged lymph nodes disappeared after 2 cycles; however, the toxicity of chemotherapy was severe, so we reduced the dose of the drug (R-minCHOP). The patient reached complete response after 2 cycles, then he stopped chemotherapy, and the disease was stable during the follow-up period.
In April 2022, new lesions appeared, with notably enlarged lymph nodes on the right side of the neck. The patient then received a lymph node biopsy again. The lymph node was replaced by diffuse medium-to small tumor cells, with multifocal, and massive necrosis. Immunohistochemical examination showed that the cells were positive for CD20, BCL-2, CD10, and CD5, partially expressing TDT, but negative for BCL-6, CyclinD1, SOX-11, CD3, PAX5, CD21, and Ki-67 staining of approximately 30% . Therefore, the pathologic diagnosis of MZL with the possibility of transformation into HGBL was given. The PET-CT scans demonstrated that partial necrosis and multiple enlarged lymph nodes were observed on the right side of the cervix, with a large diameter of 2.2 cm (SUVmax: 7.6), and an enlarged lymph node in the right anterior aspect of the new ascending aorta, with a diameter of 0.9 cm (SUVmax: 7.2). Moreover, there was a new nodule in the liver measuring 2.9 cm × 2.0 cm (SUVmax 2.4), which was considered a recurrence of liver cancer. After the patient underwent hepatic artery chemoembolization and radiofrequency ablation of hepatocellular carcinoma, he received ultrasound-guided coarse-needle aspiration in the right cervical mass. Immunohistochemical staining showed that the neoplastic cells were positive for CD20, PAX5, CD5, TDT, BCL-2 (approximately 90%), CD10, C-MYC, CD7, CD43, MUM1, CD99 and Ki-67 staining of approximately 80% but negative for BCL-6, myeloperoxidase, CD34, CyclinD1, CD21, and CD3 . The CT scan showed the mass on the right side of the neck, measuring 6.4 cm × 4.0 cm.
The patient had a history of liver cancer and underwent surgical treatment in 2010.
The patient had no remarkable personal or family history.
Physical examination showed bilateral mildly enlarged lymph nodes in the neck.
The involvement of bone marrow was not found. Routine laboratory tests, including peripheral blood cells, lactic dehydrogenase (168 U/L), liver, and renal function, were normal and the virus tests consisted of viral hepatitis B and epstein-barr virus were negative. The reexamination of bone marrow and routine laboratory tests were still normal, including lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) (195 U/L). Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis revealed positivity for the MYC gene but negativity for BCL-2 and BCL-6 . MYC/immunoglobulin heavy chain (IGH) rearrangement was confirmed by FISH examination. Retrospectively, we performed a next generation sequencing analysis of specimens of the mass before and after transformation. The mutational results before transformation showed that TP53, PHF6, TPMT, HIST1H1C, KMT2D, SETD2, TNFAIP3 and TRAF3 were positive, and after conversion, they still showed the same mutations, but the frequency of gene mutations decreased compared to before .
In April 2020, a PET-CT scan demonstrated mildly enlarged bilateral cervical lymph nodes (SUVmax: 5.4), and cirrhosis.
In April 2022, a follow-up PET-CT scan showed that partial necrosis and multiple enlarged lymph nodes were observed on the right side of the cervix, with a large diameter of 2.2 cm (SUVmax: 7.6), and an enlarged lymph node in the right anterior aspect of the new ascending aorta, with a diameter of 0.9 cm (SUVmax: 7.2). Moreover, there was a new nodule in the liver measuring 2.9 cm × 2.0 cm (SUVmax: 2.4), which was considered a recurrence of liver cancer. And 2 months later, the CT scan showed the mass on the right side of the neck, measuring 6.4 cm × 4.0 cm.