This report describes the case of a 54-year-old married woman with four children. Other than a history of diabetes mellitus, the patient had no known allergies, was a non-smoker who does not engage in alcohol consumption, and had no family history of cancer.
The patient was diagnosed with melanoma of the right knee in November 2019, for which she underwent surgery in January 2020. No spitzoid melanoma components were identified upon histological examination. Shortly after, she was commenced on adjuvant nivolumab (240 mg every 2 weeks) in March 2020 and completed 10 cycles by November 2020. Due to progression of disease on the leg, ipilimumab (1 mg/kg every 3 weeks) was added to the treatment regimen. No clinical improvement was observed even after three cycles of therapy. She then suffered from Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19), from which she had a lengthy recovery. In the interim period, patient tissue samples were sent for molecular profiling (results shown in ). Tissue was obtained from the new biopsy that was performed to determine the diagnosis. This is due to the unavailability of the original pathology report from the two previous excisional biopsies that were performed in the patient’s native country. Molecular profiling showed that tumor mutational burden was low and an ANXA2-NTRK3 fusion was detected in this tumor. This specific fusion has not been previously reported; however, it is in-frame and similar to other known oncogenic NTRK fusions.
The patient underwent a clinical review prior to enrollment in the entrectinib special access program. A comprehensive discussion was carried out with the patient and supporting family member, detailing entrectinib’s side effects profile and that response to therapy cannot be guaranteed. Supporting family was also fully aware that limb perfusion therapy should be considered at some point in the management. However, limb perfusion therapy was not immediately accessible to the patient. At the time of entrectinib initiation, the patient has clear cut disease progression on the right leg. Examination revealed multiple nodules fungating from the right knee to the ankle: clear signs of progression on immunotherapy (a, b). In March 2021, she was commenced on entrectinib 200 mg once daily for 2 weeks. Good treatment response was observed with unremarkable laboratory test results. The patient developed Bell’s palsy (right side) that was observed to be resolving gradually and was determined to be unrelated to entrectinib. Due to this, entrectinib was administered at the same dose for another 2 weeks. Entrectinib was well tolerated and Bell’s palsy resolved, which led to the increase of entrectinib dose to 400 mg once daily for 2 weeks. Patient response to treatment and laboratory test results were good with the exception of elevated blood sugar. She was referred to the treating diabetologist to explore options for restoring glycemic control. The only concomitant medications taken by the patient were diabetic medications. After a thorough check with pharmacists, these medications were not found to have any interaction with entrectinib. Entrectinib dose was escalated again, with the patient taking entrectinib 600 mg once daily for 3 weeks. On May 25, 2021, she presented with complaints of shortness of breath. She was found to be clinically unwell and had a bilateral pleural effusion that was then drained. Following this, patient symptoms improved. Pathology report revealed no disease and the patient was restarted on entrectinib 200 mg once daily. Once again, she responded well to entrectinib and had good laboratory test results. The chest remained clear, while the lesions on the leg showed notable improvement. Entrectinib dose was increased to 400 mg on June 2021. However, upon patient follow-up on the August 1, 2021, the patient revealed that daily entrectinib 400 mg was not well tolerated. Instead, the patient was only taking entrectinib 400 mg once daily for 2 days each week, alternating it with entrectinib 200 mg once daily.
Radiologic imaging was conducted on the November 29, 2021. Computed tomography with contrast of the neck, chest, abdomen, and pelvis showed multiple mild to moderate enlarged retroperitoneal and iliac lymph nodes. Observations remained unchanged as compared to the previous study, with no newly developed evidence of disease. There was also no change in existing bilateral multiple tiny pulmonary nodules. Magnetic resonance imaging with contrast of the brain was unremarkable. Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) score was 0 and leg lesions showed further improvement. As of September 2023 (approx. 2.5 years of treatment with entrectinib), the patient was alive and well and continued to be in remission. The CARE Checklist has been completed by the authors for this case report, attached as online supplementary material (for all online suppl. material, see ).