A 47-year-old woman was hospitalized suffering from persistent abdominal pain for nearly a month. The patient had suffered from calculus of intrahepatic duct and gallbladder prior to admission and underwent a CT scan two weeks previously. The patient was suffering from a hiatal hernia in most of the stomach and the beginning of the duodenum and mesangium located above the diaphragm and part of the intestinal wall was slightly thickened.
To evaluate the causes of abdominal pain, the content of esophageal hiatal hernia into the thoracic cavity and ischemic necrosis of abdominal content, a contrast enhanced CT of the abdomen was performed. For this procedure, the patient received a total of 70 mL of iodixanol intravenously (Visipaque 320, GE Healthcare, Cork, Ireland). The result showed that the patient had an esophageal hiatal hernia with gastric turnover, a left inguinal hernia, increased mesangial lymph nodes in ileocecal region and calcification in the left lateral lobe of the liver or intrahepatic bile duct stones. However, after 5 minutes of the procedure, the patient became pale with sweating, muscle tension and trembling followed by complaining of general numbness, she subsequently developed hypotension (BP 90/43 mm Hg), dyspnea and cardiac respiratory arrest. The patient was immediately treated with delivery of oxygen, received adrenaline 1 mg subcutaneously and further treatment with dexamethasone 5 mg, and rapid intravenous drip of compound sodium chloride. After BP value up to 117/68 mmHg, the patient was urgently transferred from the CT scan room to the ward. However, the patient was reanimated again with dilated pupils and cardiac arrest. Finally, she had not yet recovered consciousness and was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU).
The patient remained unconscious and was given endotracheal intubation and ventilator to assist breathing (FiO2, 100%) in the ICU. Electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring result showed that her heart rate (HR) was 63 bpm, the lowest BP value was 58/38 mm Hg and SpO2 was 100%. Both pupils were equal in size and circle, with a diameter of 1.5 mm, and the light reflection was disappeared. The respiratory sound of the lungs was thick, no rales were heard, the heart rate was fast, the heart sounds were unequal, and the rhythm was uneven. The muscle strength test of limbs showed no response, and there was no edema in the lower limbs. Analysis of arterial gas indicated: pH 7.06, PO2 599mmHg, PCO2 28mmHg, Na+ 127 mmol/L, K+ 2.9 mmol/L, Lac 11.6 mmol/L, HCO3- 7.9 mmol/L. With the consent of family members, right femoral vein catheterization was performed under local anesthesia. After active rehydration, pressor, anti-shock and anti-allergy (norepinephrine pump 8 mL/h, 10 mg/50 mL and pituitary vasopressin pump 1 mL/h, 30U/50 mL), BP value of the patient was 118/80 mmHg, HR was 80 bpm, SpO2 was 96%, and the patient still remained coma. Laboratory evaluation showed a white blood cell count of 13,720/μL with 88.3% neutrophils. Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) were 47 U/L (normal ≤ 32 U/L) and 499 U/L (normal 135–214 U/L). The level of serum tryptase was 5.38 ng/mL (<20 ng/mL). Serum potassium concentration of the patient decreased to 3.06 mmol/L. The patient was treated with adding alkali based on blood pH and correcting electrolyte turbulence. Contrast-induced nephropathy (CIN) is a serious complication of angiographic procedures and results from administration of RCM. The laboratory investigation showed significant reduction of radioactive drug uptake in kidneys and iodixanol-related nephropathy.
The patient was hospitalized in ICU for improving. After the patient’s symptoms were relatively stable, she was transferred to the ward and changes to her condition were closely observed. During hospitalization, the patient underwent acute heart failure, arrhythmia, multiple bacterial infections of the lungs, encephalopathy, electrolyte disturbances. Finally, sudden cardiac arrest occurred after cardiopulmonary resuscitation and the patient died three months later.
In general, an allergic reaction to iodixanol is uncommon, but in rare cases it can be life-threatening. We performed a literature review to find whether other patients had experienced the same serious symptom, including anaphylactic reactions. Literature searches written in English were conducted through PubMed and Google scholar between 2002 to 2022. Finally, 6 articles (with a total of 6 cases) reporting iodixanol-associated anaphylaxis were found. Detailed information on the dose of iodixanol, the time period between iodixanol administration and anaphylactic reactions, clinical manifestations and outcomes of these reaction was available in 6 case described in case reports and is summarized in .