An Italian 8-year-old girl from Ivory Coast presented to our hospital’s emergency department with a three-day fever, inappetence, and abdominal pain. Her previous medical history revealed risperidone-treated autism; she had no prior contact with a COVID 19-confirmed case. Her parents had received COVID 19 vaccination, but because her clinical picture was compatible with COVID-19, she was admitted to our department for a nasal swab for SARS-CoV2.
Due to the patient’s autistic condition, our physical examination was made more difficult; as far as we could tell, the child was conscious but in poor clinical conditions. Mild signs of dehydration and bilateral eyelid oedema, pharyngeal hyperaemia, and posterior cervical lymph node hypertrophy were noted. A respiratory examination revealed rhonchi. An abdominal examination showed mild hepatomegaly. The cardiovascular and neurological examination were both normal.
The laboratory workup revealed elevated inflammatory parameters (C-reactive protein, CRP 8.4 mg/dL, procalcitonin 2.2 μg/L, ferritin 1070 μg/L), bilirubin (total bilirubin 2.19 mg/dL, indirect bilirubin 1.2 mg/dL), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 716 U/L and transaminases (alanine transaminase, ALT 89 U/L and aspartate transaminase, AST 100 U/L). Her total blood count showed a low platelet count 4390/uL. A nasopharyngeal swab was positive for SARS-CoV2 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) as antibody IgG against SARS-CoV2.
Broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy was initiated with endovenous ceftriaxone.
During a detailed history in our infectious disease department, the mother reported that she was taking mefloquine hydrochloride for malaria prophylaxis for a recent trip to Africa with her daughter.
Therefore, thick and thin blood smear, rapid antigen test, and PCR for malaria were performed urgently, and the girl was diagnosed with malaria by Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium vivax with a parasitaemia of 5% . After ruling out glucose 6 phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, specific drug treatment with atovaquone-proguanil for a total of 3 days, followed by 14 days of primaquine, was started.
Despite repeated malaria smear after 5 days from initial presentation revealed clearance of parasitaemia and a COVID-19 nasopharyngeal PCR repeated 7 days after admission was confirmed as negative, the patient’s clinical conditions worsened. Fever was persistent as did the abdominal pain and a diffuse erythematous rash appeared. Coinfections with Neisseria meningitidis, Haemophilus influenzae, Streptoccoccus pneumoniae, Streptoccoccus agalactiae, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Listeria monocytogenes, Escherichia coli were ruled out.
Further laboratory investigations were performed to document organ damage in accordance with guideline diagnostic criteria in cases where MIS-C was suspected. Cardiovascular involvement was investigated by analysis of troponin and pro B-type natriuretic peptide (ProBNP) values, respectively 8.3 ng/L and 520 pg/mL. Therefore, electrocardiogram, which was normal, and cardiac ultrasound, which showed mild mitral insufficiency, were performed. A chest X-ray showed accentuation of micronodular reticular pulmonary character pattern; ultrasound of the abdomen revealed hepatomegaly with starry sky appearance, as well as peritoneal fluid .
The World Health Organization (WHO) criteria were used to make the diagnosis of MIS-C . Therapy with a single dose of intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIG) at a dosage of 2 g/Kg and intravenous methylprednisolone at a dosage of 30 mg/Kg/day was started in accordance with guidelines, and performed for three days, followed by methylprednisolone at a dosage of 2 mg/Kg/day.
Acute anaemia was treated with a blood transfusion.
The treatment was well tolerated and quickly effective, resulting in an overall improvement in the patient’s clinical conditions. The child became apyretic after administration of immunoglobulin and the first bolus of methylprednisolone. Blood tests gradually returned to normal .