A 52-year-old-female patient presented with a fever and cough for a week that had worsened over 1 week; however, her symptoms worsened, and she was brought to the emergency department. She had no remarkable medical history, medication use, or allergies. Her height, weight, and body mass index were 152 cm, 71.9 kg, and 31.1 kg/m2, respectively. Her respiratory rate was 24 breaths/min, oxygen saturation was 92% (oxygen mask with reservoir 15 L/min), blood pressure (BP) was 110/70 mmHg, heart rate (HR) was 118 beats/min, and body temperature was 39.5 °C. Her level of consciousness, using the Glasgow Coma Scale, was E3 (best eye response: eye opening to sound), V5 (best verbal response: oriented), M6 (best motor response: obeys commands).
Findings of arterial blood gas analysis (oxygen mask with reservoir: 15 L/min) were as follows: pH, 7.411; PaCO2, 29.3 mmHg; PaO2, 63.0 mmHg; HCO3−, 20.4 mmol/L; base excess, − 5.5 mmol/L; and lactate, 8.1 mmol/L.
The clinical course of the patient is shown in Fig. . Chest radiography findings showed diffuse ground-glass opacities in the bilateral lung fields, and chest computed tomography (CT) showed infiltrating shadows in the lower lung fields. Blood test results are presented in Table . An echocardiogram was performed, and an ejection fraction of 65% and wall motion within normal limits helped rule out heart failure. The patient was diagnosed with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) due to sepsis because of significant inflammatory findings, including a white blood cell count of 1200/µL and a C-reactive protein level of 17.1 mg/dL. The patient was intubated, and ventilatory management was initiated due to poor oxygenation. The Murray score at this time was 4. The patient’s circulatory status was still under the shock state, with a BP of 66/50 mmHg even with catecholamine (noradrenaline 0.013 μg/kg/min) administration. As both respiratory and circulatory status could not be maintained despite ventilatory management, fluid administration, and catecholamine administration, VA-ECMO was started as an adjuvant circulatory therapy. As the patient had anuria, she was considered to have acute kidney injury and was therefore started on continuous hemodiafiltration. Peripheral circulation was poor from the time she was transported from her house to the hospital, and purpura was present in the peripheral extremities . After the insertion of an arterial line into the right femoral artery and initiation of VA-ECMO, the mottled purpura of the right lower limb worsened. Further deterioration was prevented by inserting a sheath into the right femoral artery toward the periphery to maintain blood flow and peripheral circulation in the right lower limb. The acute DIC score was 4 (platelet count, 92,000/µL; PT-INR prothrombin time-international normalized ratio, 1.10; D-dimer, 4.47); hence, the patient was considered to have complicated DIC . Because of her circulatory instability, we decided to administer meropenem (MEPM) and azithromycin as broad-spectrum antimicrobials. On day 4, penicillin G (PCG) was added due to the detection of Pasteurella multocida in blood cultures. On day 6, PCG was changed to ceftazidime because of proven susceptibility. On day 9, VA-ECMO was withdrawn because the patient’s circulatory status was stable (HR 70 beats/min, BP 120/60 mmHg), remaining so despite reduced support by VA-ECMO. On day 11, enteral feeding was initiated. On day 14, the patient was extubated as the respiratory condition had stabilized. On day 15, the patient presented with abdominal pain. However, there were no obvious findings on contrast-enhanced CT. On day 16, septic shock redeveloped; elevated lactate level led to a suspected diagnosis of intestinal ischemia and, thereafter, a confirmed diagnosis of NOMI. Therefore, an experimental laparotomy was performed. The small intestine was perforated due to ischemia. Partial small bowel resection and open abdominal management were performed for small bowel necrosis and perforation, respectively . After the operation, Polymyxin B-immobilized fiber column direct hemoperfusion was performed to improve circulatory dynamics. On day 17, no new abnormal findings were found in the second-look surgery; therefore, the separated small intestine was anastomosed, and the abdomen was closed. Subsequently, MEPM was changed to cefmetazole owing to suspected drug-induced leukocytopenia. However, micafungin was additionally administered due to lack of improvement in the inflammatory findings. On day 24, there was no evidence of circulatory disturbance, but a brown discharge from the wound was observed. Therefore, a third emergency laparotomy was performed, which revealed anastomotic leakage. A small-bowel anastomosis resection was subsequently performed. On day 30, the patient’s respiratory status deteriorated again, and she was considered to be having a flare-up. Intra-abdominal infection was suspected as the cause. On day 35, a fourth laparotomy was performed. Owing to anastomotic re-leakage, partial resection of the small intestine and double-barreled stoma were performed. On day 55, the patient underwent amputations of 2–5 fingers of both hands with ischemic necrosis and segmental skin grafting. On day 68, debridement of the right whole metatarsal bones was performed because of abscess formation in the right plantar region. On day 73, owing to delayed wound healing, we decided to amputate the right lower limb. Upon incision, however, the right lower leg revealed itself to be so extensively necrotic that a right femoral amputation was performed. On day 98, MEPM was initiated because of fever and elevated inflammatory findings, suspected to be due to bacteremia. On day 99, incisional abscess drainage was performed because of the presence of a right rectus femoris abscess. The patient continued to have liver dysfunction and gastrointestinal malabsorption, and although it took time for her to stabilize, she underwent stoma closure on day 382 and was discharged home on day 443.