A 56-year-old Greek Caucasian woman presented to a primary care setting, in rural Crete, Greece complaining of mild lower abdominal pain, cramping and bloating, during the last four months. The pain was located primarily in the left upper quadrant, and often affected the entire abdomen.
Her symptoms gradually worsened over time, with only temporary relief with defecation. She reported that her bowel habits changed approximately one month after the onset of her abdominal symptoms. Alternating constipation and diarrhea was reported, with diarrhea being more predominant. She also reported a sensation of incomplete bowel emptying. A change in the frequency of bowel movements was also reported. She denied any bleeding, fever, or weight loss. She also denied having any aggravating symptoms such as stress and certain foods over the last few months.
Complete physical examination was within normal limits. Vital signs were also within normal limits. Our patient's medical history included hypertension (treated with an angiotensin II receptor antagonist, telmisartan), hypothyroidism (treated with L-thyroxine) and hypercholesterolemia (treated with atorvastatin), as well as some other minor bowel and gastric disorders that were chronic. There were no concerning associated signs or symptoms such as anemia or weight loss that would have led the family physician to initiate further studies. No abdominal or other surgical operations were reported. The family history for colorectal cancer was negative.
The first impression was that the patient had IBS. General dietary advice according to the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) guidelines for primary care management of IBS were given (regular meals, avoiding long gaps between eating, adequate and appropriate fluid intake). The patient received also mebeverine hydrochloride 135 mg three times daily for three weeks.
The diagnostic approach included laboratory tests and an abdominal ultrasound control. Laboratory tests results revealed a normal complete blood count, normal erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein, and normal stool studies. Abdominal ultrasound revealed that her gall bladder, biliary tree, pancreas, spleen, and right kidney were all within normal limits. The lower portion of the left kidney was difficult to visual secondary to the presence of a loop of bowel.
Because her symptoms persisted despite treatment, a colonoscopy was ordered. The colonoscopy revealed the following: rectum with first degree hemorrhoids, sigmoid and descending colon with increased spasticity and normal mucosa, and a normal ileum. In the ascending colon a sharp piece of a birthday cake decoration was found and removed . No necrosis of bowel mucosa or hemorrhage was observed. The increased bowel spasticity that was observed was interpreted by the gastroenterologist who performed the colonoscopy as possibile IBS resulting as a consequence of the foreign body irritation . The dimension of the foreign body is shown in comparison with a key in Figure . One week after the removal of the foreign body all symptoms resolved. Our patient was free of symptoms after eight months of follow up.