A 54-year-old female with gross hematuria and dysuria was referred to our hospital with the suspicion of bladder cancer. Urine analysis confirmed hematuria with pyuria and urine cytology showed class 5. Ultrasonography and cystoscopy revealed the presence of a non-papillary bladder tumor adjacent to the right ureteric orifice (Fig. ). CT scans and MRI showed a 20-mm bladder tumor at the right posterior bladder wall suspected for muscle invasion and grade 1 right hydronephrosis . There was no evidence of distant or lymph node metastases.
TURBT was performed and pathological examination showed evidence of muscle invasion with UC accompanied by small cell carcinoma . Immunohistochemical staining showed that CD56 is partially positive while Chromogranin A and Synaptophysin were negative on the specimen. TURBT, serum NSE level was within the normal level (6.1 ng/ml).
Given her clinical staging (T2N0M0), we planned for three cycles of etoposide-cisplatin NAC-based treatment of SCLC. After NAC, CT scans showed decreasing size of bladder tumor and once again we did not detect any distant and lymph node metastases. Then, LRC with extended pelvic lymph node dissection and ileal conduit diversion was performed. Pathological finding revealed no residual carcinoma in the bladder with no lymph node metastases, pT0N0M0.
In the follow-up imaging 4 months after LRC, there was no evidence of disease recurrence . However, 7.5 months after LRC, serum NSE level increased up to 45.7 ng/ml. CT scans showed a 60-mm mass at the pelvis with possible invasion to the left distal ureter . This local recurrence of SCCB was discussed with the patient, she decided to proceed with pembrolizumab. After receiving two cycles of pembrolizumab therapy, CT scans demonstrated disappearance of recurrent tumor and left hydronephrosis . After completing five cycles of pembrolizumab therapy, local recurrent tumor and left hydronephrosis remained undetectable on CT scans . We evaluated efficacy of pembrolizumab therapy as complete response by the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors 1.1 and serum NSE level decreased to the normal level (10.2 ng/mL). Twelve cycles of pembrolizumab therapy are ongoing and she has no adverse events.