A 70-year-old man presented to the emergency department after experiencing left lower back pain for several days. He had a history of benign prostate hyperplasia, perforated peptic ulcer status post operation 10 years ago. He denied any remarkable family history, medication history, and psychosocial history.
The patient had experienced left flank pain for several days. The pain radiated to the left thigh and he reported being unable to walk for approximately 2 to 3 days. In addition, he experienced intermittent fever and chills. He denied any recent trauma, painful micturition, or hematuria. He initially went to a local hospital for medical treatment, where he received antibiotics. However, his symptoms progressed. He was then referred to our emergency department. His vital signs on admission were as below: Temperature = 37.2 °C, blood pressure = 122/71 mmHg, heart rate = 98 beats per minute, respiratory rate = 19 cycles per minute. He initially exhibited drowsiness. Physical examination revealed tenderness in the left lower abdomen and swelling in the left thigh, with limited range of motion. No external wounds, erythema, localized heat, or blister lesions were noted. Laboratory data indicated leukocytosis (13.1k/uL) with a left shift (neutrophils 89%) and bandemia (8%), severe coagulopathy (international normalized ratio >5), elevated C-reactive protein (325 mg/L), hyperlactatemia (46 mg/dL), and acute kidney injury (with an increase in creatinine from 0.94 mg/dL to 1.34 mg/dL). Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and lower limbs revealed fluid accumulation over the left iliopsoas muscle that extended into the retroperitoneum, left pelvic cavity, and left thigh region, which suggested an iliopsoas abscess and necrotizing fasciitis (a and b). The initial impression was sepsis with disseminated intravascular coagulation. Upon observation of the left iliopsoas abscess and necrotizing fasciitis extending to the left thigh, we performed blood culture and initiated empirical antibiotic therapy with 1 g of ertapenem once a day and 1 g of vancomycin every 12 h.