A 24-year-old Asian man, with remote history of lung lesion removal in his home country as a child (< 10 years of age), was found to have enlarged right thyroid lobe on exam by his primary care physician. He did not know more details about his remote diagnosis and no medical records were available. He had no past history of radiation exposure. No symptoms of thyrotoxicosis, hypothyroidism or compressive thyromegaly were reported. Family history was unremarkable for any thyroid related diseases or malignancies. He was not on any medications. Review of systems was unremarkable. He denied having cough, dyspnea, fatigue. Examination was unremarkable except for a large soft, non-tender, mobile nodule on the right thyroid, but no palpable lesions on the left side. No noted lymphadenopathy. His labs were unremarkable with a TSH level of 2.51 mIU/L and undetectable microsomal antibody level of < 10 IU/mL.
A thyroid ultrasound, showed enlarged right thyroid with multiple solid hypoechoic nodules some with coarse calcifications, largest in right mid-pole measuring 2 × 1.6 × 2.1 cm with peripheral vascularity. The left thyroid lobe and isthmus were both noted for homogenous echotexture and normal vascularity. . Given the size and the sonographic pattern of the nodules, a fine-needle aspiration biopsy was performed. Cytology results were consistent with Bethesda II, benign, with features of lymphocytic thyroiditis. However, lymphocytic thyroiditis - also known as Hashimoto’s disease - usually involves both thyroid lobes, which was not the case in our patient. So a repeat ultrasound was done at 6 months and endocrine referral was placed by his primary care physician.
Repeat ultrasound evaluated by endocrinology showed a stable right sided nodule, measuring 1.6 × 2.0 × 2.2 cm with smooth margins, hypoechoic with increased macro and microcalcifications. Core-needle biopsy was recommended and revealed mesenchymal chondrosarcoma with preliminary grade of 2 out of 3 on the French Federation of Cancer Centers Sarcoma Group (FNCLCC) .
This prompted an immediate referral to Oncology, sarcoma specialist who recommended further imaging - staging was performed over the course of 3 weeks. Computed Tomography (CT) of the neck re-demonstrated large right thyroid mass with calcified matrix. CT of the chest noted innumerable nodules concerning for metastatic disease and loculated right pleural effusion with cellular debris versus pleural deposits. Bone scan with SPECT-CT showed the known heterogeneous soft tissue attenuation right thyroid mass with two areas of dense calcifications . There was a large amount of dense soft tissue attenuation throughout the right pleura without abnormal radiotracer uptake. Post-surgical changes consistent with partial right 7th rib resection were also identified, presumably form the patient’s prior surgical intervention. There was also focally increased radiotracer uptake along the superior aspect of the right scapular spine, with corresponding lytic lesion, concerning for bone metastatic lesion. Ultimately, imaging studies concluded the final findings of mesenchymal chondrosarcoma of unclear primary involving the thyroid, lung, right pleural, and right scapula.
During that period of time, patient reported worsening dry cough, nocturnal shortness of breath, intermittent neck and back discomfort and profound fatigue. His fatigue limited his ability to cook for himself and he had lost almost 10 pounds. Upon follow up with sarcoma oncology, the metastatic mesenchymal chondrosarcoma was deemed non-curable but chemotherapy options were given for tumor control. The main goals and regimens of chemotherapy were discussed with the patient. Patient decided to go back to his home country to receive treatment where his family can closely support him.