A 16-year-old girl was referred to our service from another hospital for further management of recurrent germ cell malignancy. Her initial presentation was abdominal bloating with an adnexal 18-cm mass and tumor marker elevation (Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP): 131.53 (0–20) ng/mL, CA 125: 521 (0–35) U/mL, Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH): 242 (98–192) IU/L). She received optimally debulked fertility-sparing staging surgery (unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, unilateral pelvic and para-aortic lymph node dissection, omentectomy, and cul-de-sac tumor excision) followed by chemotherapy with 4 cycles of BEP (bleomycin, etoposide, and cisplatin) at age 14. Final pathology reported a mixed germ cell tumor composed of mainly immature teratoma (grade 3, FIGO stage IIIC, pT3cN0M0) with components of embryonal carcinoma (23%) and yolk sac tumor (3%).
During follow-up, disease recurrence was suspected due to tumor marker elevation (AFP: 118.82 ng/mL, CA 125: 58.82 U/mL) and pelvic cystic lesions with ascites on abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan. Thus, she was referred to our hospital and received second fertility-sparing debulking surgery. Intra-operative findings were a 6 × 5-cm solid tumor at omentum, another gray tan soft tissue measuring 5 × 3 cm upon bladder, and some small cul-de-sac tumors. No residual disease was noted. All lesions were reported to be metastatic mixed germ cell tumors, which was mainly composed of an immature teratoma with focal areas of yolk sac tumors. The teratoma component is composed of squamous epithelium, intestinal-type epithelium, respiratory epithelium, mesenchymal tissue and neuroglial tissue. The immature element is found focally and is composed of fetal-type epithelium and mesenchymal tissue. This neuroglial tissue is characterized by GFAP (glial fibrillary acidic protein)-positive astrocytic cells and scattered ganglion cells. Adjuvant chemotherapy with 4 cycles of EP (etoposide and cisplatin) was completed uneventfully.
However, 4 years later (at age 20), the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) detected an 8 × 7-cm cystic mass at the right adnexa with suspicious pelvic tumor seedings . AFP was 42.31 ng/mL, and CA 125 was 13.5 U/mL. The patient underwent a third conservative debulking surgery with excision of a right ovarian cystic lesion and pelvic tumors. The surgery was considered optimal, but some residual tumors remained in the cul-de-sac, all of which were less than 10 mm in diameter. The pathology results of the right ovarian tumor suggested a teratoma and associated mucinous cystadenoma, whereas the intrapelvic tissue sections revealed a mixed germ cell tumor composed of teratoma with somatic type malignancy (melanoma and leiomyosarcoma) and foci of yolk sac tumor . No immature component is identified within the teratoma. Pelvic recurrence and multiple metastases were noted 8 months later after a third debulking surgery. Biopsy of sacral bone, lung, and liver were compatible with the presence of sarcomatous cells. The patient received palliative radiotherapy, salvage chemotherapy with high-dose doxorubicin and ifosfamide for leiomyosarcoma, and immunotherapy with pembrolizumab for melanoma. She died of disease 10 months later.