A 71-year-old Asian man with a history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus type 2, and hyperuricemia was admitted to the hospital with fever, fatigue, and weight loss of approximately 10 kg in 2 months. The patient’s family history was unremarkable, and he had a history of smoking for about 40 years and did not have a drinking habit. Computed tomography (CT) showed a left renal mass, multiple lung masses, and mediastinal lymph node enlargement. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a level II tumor thrombus reaching the inferior vena cava. The patient was referred to our department for multidisciplinary treatment . Renal tumor biopsy revealed a diagnosis of Xp.11.2 translocation renal cell carcinoma (cT3bN0M1; International Metastatic Renal Cell Carcinoma Database Consortium; poor risk), and the patient received ipilimumab (1 mg/kg) and nivolumab (240 mg) as initial therapy for metastatic renal cell carcinoma.
Although renal function was normal at the start of the immunotherapy, the serum creatinine level was gradually elevated to 1.98 mg/dL from the seventh day of the first infusion. The patient was not taking nephrotoxic drugs and was otherwise asymptomatic. A non-contrast CT scan confirmed the absence of any obstacle in the urinary tract, while marked regression was observed in all lesions. Urine biochemistry examination showed acute tubular disorder (N-acetyl glucosaminidase, 24.8 U/L; β2-microglobulin, 23,488 µg/L) and a negative immunological examination led to the clinical suspicion of acute interstitial nephritis as an irAE. This renal injury was treated with intravenous prednisolone at a daily dose of 1 mg/kg, followed by oral prednisolone. Serum creatinine level and urinary biochemistry findings were also rapidly normalized with good response to steroid therapy . The dose of corticosteroids was progressively tapered to 5 mg daily as maintenance. After 50 days of the first cycle, CT revealed that the primary tumor and lung metastasis showed partial response, while the mediastinal lymph node and inferior vena cava tumor thrombus demonstrated complete response. However, pulmonary embolism was noted simultaneously, and the patient was admitted and started on anticoagulation therapy with heparin. Because the respiratory and circulatory dynamics were stable and considering the achieved cancer control, a second cycle of ipilimumab/nivolumab combination therapy was started.
Four days after the second infusion, the patient experienced an asymptomatic but sustainable mild rise in serum creatine phosphokinase. From the evening of the seventh day to the morning of the eighth day, ST-segment elevation was observed in the cardiac monitor despite the absence of any complaint. Hence 12-lead electrocardiography (ECG) was performed, and ST-segment elevation was seen in all leads . Laboratory analysis revealed a high level of inflammatory reaction and elevation of myocardial biomarkers (creatine kinase MB-isozyme, 23, 488 U/L; troponin-I, 100,680 pg/mL; NT-proBNP, 15,964 pg/mL), and the patient was immediately referred to cardiovascular internal medicine. Echocardiography showed an akinetic apex, a hypokinetic septum, and an ejection fraction of 50% (baseline 2 months previously was 72%). Emergency cardiac catheterization excluded relevant coronary disease, and left ventriculography showed that the left ventricular apex was nearly akinetic and the remaining left ventricle was hyperkinetic . The differential diagnoses at this point included Takotsubo cardiomyopathy triggered by viral infection and myocarditis due to autoimmunological causes. To monitor for hemodynamic failure, the patient was admitted to the coronary care unit. Twelve hours after admission to the care unit, he complained of chest tightness and shortness of breath. His hemodynamics rapidly worsened due to cardiogenic shock, and echocardiography revealed widespread cardiac akinesis except for the back wall. To maintain and improve cardiorespiratory function, dopamine, dobutamine, and noradrenaline were infused, an intra-aortic balloon pump was inserted, and adaptive servo ventilation therapy was initiated. The clinical oncology unit was consulted, and they noted that the clinical presentation was suggestive of myocarditis as an irAE. Momentarily, right heart catheterization was performed and myocardial biopsy was also performed for histological analysis. Thereafter, a 3-day methylprednisolone mini-pulse (500 mg/day) therapy was administered followed by prednisolone administration at 1 mg/kg. Nevertheless, the patient’s condition worsened, and he was admitted to the intensive care unit for percutaneous cardiopulmonary support. Although he experienced notable arrhythmia such as ventricular fibrillation, his hemodynamics gradually improved with troponin I decrease, and he returned to the general ward after treatment in the high care unit for 18 days . Serological analysis of paired serum samples for cardiotropic viruses was negative. The myocardial biopsy sample taken during the acute phase demonstrated marked lymphocytic infiltration with a predominance of CD4-positive cells . Additionally, on the 32nd day after starting steroid treatment, myocardial repeat biopsy revealed an admixture of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells and many histiocytes/macrophages within the myocardial inflammation suggested chronic smoldering myocarditis . Because of the persisting inflammation, the patient was placed under long-term prednisone therapy (15 mg/day). Cardiac MRI showed that the left ventricular wall was extensively fibrotic, and myocardial scintigraphy revealed that the ejection fraction had dropped to 20% . The tumor reduction tendency of immunotherapy continued in both the remaining primary lesion and multiple lung metastases . Since the patient’s performance status remained limited due to the chronic heart failure and many of these tumor responses were sustained over months, we decided to observe and not to reintroduce immunotherapy. Figure shows a summary of his clinical course.