23 years old lady with 16 years history of Parry Romberg syndrome was referred to our clinic. The family history was positive for autoimmune diseases: her father was affected by rheumatoid arthritis and her first degree aunt by cutaneous psoriasis. No other cases of PRS were reported in the family. She did not report previous trauma, but had a Varicella Zoster virus (VZV) infection when she was 5 years old. When 6 years old, she developed a dermal hyperpigmented lesion in the left side of the neck. One year later she presented signs of left hemifacial atrophy. She progressively developed atrophy of cutaneous and subcutaneous fat tissue with maxillary-mandibular asimmetry and enophthalmos. The nasal septum and the mouth were deviated . The disease progression stopped when she was 15 years old. She then underwent two autologous fat injections which reabsorbed after a few months. She didn’t undergo further surgical interventions. The disease is presently stable . She complained migraine, but no other neurological symptoms. Serological tests were positive for anti-streptolysin O titre (369 U/ml; range 0-250 U/ml), rheumatoid factor (101 U/ml; range 0-40 U/ml), antibodies against nucleic (>1:640; range < 1:160) and against double strain DNA (42 U/ml; range < 30 - >50). The rheumatologic examination was negative. TSH was mildly elevated (4.27 UI/ml; range 0.2-4 UI/ml), but T3 and T4 were still in the normal range (T3:3.29 pg/ml; range 2.35-4.55 pg/ml and T4: 13.12 pg/ml; range 6.95-18.20 pg/ml), suggesting a subclinical hypothyroidism.
The ocular involvement started simultaneous to the development of facial atrophy. She first reported intense photofobia and she presented with multiple episodes of left iridocyclitis in the following years. She was diagnosed with Fuchs heterochromic iridocyclitis.
She presented to our Clinic with left enophthalmos and pseudoptosis. Her best corrected visual acuity was 20/20 in the right eye and 20/60 in the left eye. The anterior segment examination showed bilateral non-pigmented endothelial deposits , but no flare. The left iris was atrophic with partial aniridia, the pupil was non reactive to light . The anterior chamber depth was reduced in periphery. Gonioscopy showed a narrow angle grade 1-2 (Shaffer) and ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) demonstrated a narrow angle at 3,6 and 12 o’clock and a closed angle at 9 o’clock. Unexpectedly during this exam, the ciliary body was atrophic . The right eye UBM reported a dystrophic ciliary body .
The lens showed phacodonesis. The intraocular pressure (IOP) measured with Goldmann applanation tonometry was 12 mmHg in the right eye and 10 mmHg in the left eye. Fundus examination was normal in both eyes.