A 26-year-old Caucasian man was referred to the surgical service with an enlarging splenic mass and left upper quadrant pain. The pain was described as dull with no exacerbating factors. He had no nausea or vomiting and no other systemic complaints. He had a history of laryngeal ACC that was treated with total laryngectomy and adjuvant radiation three years prior to this clinical visit. Within a year of the original diagnosis and treatment of ACC, our patient developed a single right lung metastasis for which he underwent thoracotomy with resection. This was followed by recurrence in the ipsilateral lung, which was again resected. He was started on Tarceva (erlotinib), an EGFR inhibitor used to treat non-small cell lung cancer, but the therapy was discontinued secondary to an intolerable rash.
During follow up a computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest demonstrated bilateral lung nodules, which were consistent with metastatic disease . However, there were no symptoms attributable to these lesions. The CT scan also demonstrated a lesion in the spleen that measured 4cm and was approximately 1mm from the splenic capsule . He was referred to the surgical service when a follow up CT scan of the abdomen three months later demonstrated progression in size of the lesion by 1cm and our patient complained of left upper quadrant abdominal discomfort. There was no evidence of other intra-abdominal disease. Due to the progression in size of the splenic lesion, its proximity to the capsule with potential complications of rupture or local advancement, and in light of our patient's symptoms the decision was made to proceed with laparoscopic splenectomy. He was given appropriate pre-operative immunization. At the time of surgery, there was no evidence of other intra-abdominal disease. The spleen was removed intact through an enlarged port site incision. Pathologic examination showed a 5.2 × 4.3 × 4cm single metastatic nodule within 0.1cm from the capsule. The mass shows mucoid areas in the center and microscopically had features characteristic of adenoid cystic carcinoma with a predominant cribriform growth pattern. He had a routine convalescence, and is currently alive and well.