A 24-year-old male patient was admitted to our hospital on Sep 1st, 2020 due to recurrent limb fatigue for four years and aggravating for one month. Four years ago, the patient presented limb weakness episode once sweating a lot in every summer, hypokalemia was revealed in a local hospital. Following potassium chloride supplement during hospitalization, fatigue was relieved. However, he stopped taking potassium chloride after discharge, and fatigue recurred following sweating in every summer.
One month ago, the patient suffered from limb weakness again after tooth extraction. Serum biochemistry in local hospital showed that potassium was 2.8mmol/L and albumin was 22 g/L; urinalysis demonstrated 3 + proteinuria. Therefore, he was admitted to our hospital. The patient denied taking diuretics, laxatives, diet pills and Chinese herbal medicines; His parents are healthy and non-consanguineous marriage; his two sisters are healthy.
Blood pressure after admission was 108/77mmHg.While this patient had no oedema and other physical examination abnormality. Laboratory tests showed hypokalemia due to renal potassium wasting, hypomagnesemia, hypochloridemia, metabolic alkalosis, hyperreninemia, hypocalciuria , which were suggestive of GS. Thiazide test was performed according to the protocol described in the previous study . The difference value between the chloride excretion fraction before and after the use of hydrochlorothiazide was 0.468%, indicating that he was no response to hydrochlorothiazide, which could be functionally diagnosed of GS. Therefore, Next-Generation sequencing(NGS)-based panel was performed to identify the exact type of SLTs. The method of gene sequencing was performed as previously reported . Two missense heterozygous mutations[c.536T > A(p.V179D) and c.1456G > A(p.D486N)] in SLC12A3 were revealed. His father carries one mutation (c.536T > A) and his mother carries the other mutation (c.1456G > A), which are compatible with compound heterozygosity in this patient . The mutation of SLC12A3 ( p.V179D) was predicted to be benign by PolyPhen-2, polymorphism by Mutation Taster, and damaging by SIFT. This mutation has been reported by Lee, et al. . The mutation of p.D486N was predicted to be probably-damaging by PolyPhen-2, disease-causing by Mutation Taster, and damaging by SIFT. This mutation has been reported by Simon, et al . Both mutations are classified as likely pathogenic according to American College of Medical Genetics(ACMG) guidelines. Eventually, GS was identified.
24 h proteinuria showed nephrotic-range proteinuria, he also has hypoalbuminemia. Results of ANA, ENA, anti-dsDNA, anti-tiroid antibodies, imaging of chest/abdomen were negative. Taken together, nephrotic syndrome (NS) was identified. Therefore, renal biopsy was performed. Light microscopy showed 18 glomeruli, including 3 sclerotic ones, with thickened basement membrane, spike-like structures and subepithelial deposition of erythrophilic proteins.; The immunofluorescence results of renal biopsy showed that IgG (3+), IgG1 (3+), IgG4 (3+), C3 (+) and PLA2R (2+) were granular deposition along capillaries; Electron microscopy showed irregular thickening of glomerular basement membrane with the thickest part of 1500 nm, diffuse foot process effacement, and deposition of electron dense substance in subepithelial and basement membrane. The serum anti-phospholipase A2 receptor (PLA2R) antibody was also positive. Eventually, diagnosis of PLA2R-associated MN was established .
According to the patient’s history, laboratory tests and gene sequencing findings, the final diagnosis was GS concomitant with MN. Following immunosuppressant with methylprednisolone tablets (12 mg once daily) plus tacrolimus (1 mg twice daily), electric supplement with potassium chloride tablets (3.0 g per day), magnesium oxide (300 mg magnesium per day), the level of serum potassium and magnesium increased, NS was partially remitted, anti-PLA2R titre reduced after 6 months .