A male patient aged 66 years with metastatic cutaneous melanoma stage IV of the back presented with visual loss on both eyes, painful eyes and foreign body sensation. No prior medication, illnesses or allergies were known. Chemotherapy was started with Dabrafenib 75 mg four times a day since 5 months and Trametinib 2 mg once a day since 3 months.
At first clinical visit visual acuity was 20/25 on both eyes. Slit lamp examination only revealed a dry eye, but funduscopy showed a bilateral serous neuroretinal detachment of the fovea accompanied with white spots surrounding the fovea. Optical coherence tomography presented a central retinal detachment on both eyes . Fluorescein and indocyanine green angiography showed hypofluorescein spots without optic disc leakage . The therapy with Trametinib and Dabrafenib was stopped immediately after diagnosis. We induced a uveitis work-up, including blood test and computer tomography, which were negative.
Although therapy was stopped, the patient presented again after 2 weeks with a visual loss. Visual acuity was then 20/40 on the right eye and 20/50 on the left eye. Examination also showed uveitis of the anterior segment with anterior chamber cells 1–2+ and partial synechiae of the left pupil, vitritis was not detected. Therefore, local therapy was started with topical corticosteroid treatment six times a day and mydriatic agents once a day. Within a week good response was obtained and uveitis symptoms and neuroretinal detachment reduced. Therefore, Dabrafenib was again started and after another week uveitis anterior became worse again on the left eye and appeared also on the right eye. Dabrafenib was completely stopped and a Triamcinolonacetonid parabulbous injection at the left eye was applied.
After 2 months without any therapy Nivolumab, a monoclonal antibody, was administered . It binds at the receptor PD-1 of active T-cells and leads to an increased activity of T-cells. Visual acuity was 20/30 on both eyes and eye examination showed no uveitis or serous neuroretinal detachment.
After half a year the therapy with Dabrafenib and Trametinib was started again. The patient presented once more with a vision loss of 20/200 and a visual acuity of 20/40 on both eyes. Serous neuroretinal detachment was detected, however without any inflammatory process of the anterior segment.
After 1 year, clinical examination showed neuroretinal detachment only on the right eye and no signs of uveitis.