The patient was a 78-year-old Japanese male who was synchronously diagnosed with esophageal and cecal cancer at our hospital 7 years previously. Esophagectomy, antethoracic gastric tube reconstruction, and right hemi-colon colectomy were performed without recurrence, and medical care was delivered in an outpatient setting every 6 months. The patient was admitted with densely stained and jaundiced urine and presented no remarkable family medical or preference history. Elevated hepatobiliary enzymes and bilirubin in the blood were detected, and levels of the tumor marker carbohydrate antigen 19-9 were high at 108.1 U/ml .
A common bile duct hypoechoic mass of 20 mm and dilation of the peripheral bile duct were confirmed via abdominal ultrasonography; however, neither pancreatic parenchyma thinning nor main pancreatic duct dilation was detected . Dilation of the common bile duct was confirmed via computed tomography (CT) without any visualization of the tumor. On endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography, narrowing of the distal bile duct stenosis was detected. Both exfoliative cytodiagnosis and cytology of the bile juice were class 2 . In vascular construction obtained through three-dimensional computed tomography angiography (3D-CTA) , RGEA was the main nutrient vessel, which was diverged from GDA .
Considering the aforementioned observations, neither distal cholangiocarcinoma nor pancreatic head cancer could be diagnosed preoperatively. Since the tumor was located far from GDA and no significant lymph node metastases could be found, subtotal stomach-preserving PD was performed instead of the resection of GDA with RGEA for the preservation of gastric tube blood flow. The surgery was performed with preparations such that the gastric tubes could be removed and the free jejunum could be rebuilt in case that the artery could not be preserved or the gastric tube blood flow worsens.
An incision was performed from the precordium to the umbilical region such that the gastric tube could be exposed at the precordial area. The peri-gastric tube was detached throughout its entire circumference, and the gastric tube was taped. The intra-abdominal area was examined, and neither liver metastasis nor peritoneal dissemination was observed. The common hepatic artery (CHA) and GDA were confirmed, and RGEA diverged from GDA was identified. Subsequently, their respective tapings were preserved. After confirming the branching of RGEA from GDA by the pancreatic head arcade, posterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery (PSPDA) and anterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery (ASPDA) were clamped to confirm the pulsation of RGEA and then PSPDA and ASPDA were dissected. RGA was identified, taped, and preserved while considering gastric tube blood flow. The inflow area of RGEV through the gastric colic vein trunk within the superior mesenteric vein was also exposed and preserved as the outflow of gastric tube blood flow . The pancreas was dissected directly above the portal vein for tumor removal. During the surgery, there was no cancer at the stump of the pancreas and bile duct in the frozen section. Reconstruction was then performed using the modified Child’s method. The pancreatic duct was anastomosed with the jejunal mucous membrane via modified Blumgart’s method. A 5-Fr stent loss was indwelled in the pancreatic duct, and a closed suction drain was indwelled at the back of the anastomosis of the pancreatic duct and jejunum. Bile duct jejunostomy was performed on the posterior wall nodule and continuous anterior wall. Gastrojejunostomy was performed via the Albert–Lembert anastomosis from the end to side. The surgery was completed without any complications on the shade of the gastric tube. Surgery duration was 492 min, and blood loss was 652 ml.
Histopathological examination of the resected specimen revealed an invasive ductal adenocarcinoma (15 mm × 12 mm) of the pancreas without lymph node metastases; the surgical margins were negative.
No major complications were reported following surgery, and the patient was discharged within 10 days. Subsequently, no recurrence was noted for 5 months, and observation is ongoing in an outpatient setting. Currently, he is receiving S-1 as postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy.