A 54-year-old man with a remote history of stage III Hodgkin's lymphoma treated 24 years earlier by mantle irradiation presented to our institution with a 2-week history of nausea, vomiting, and ataxia. On examination, he exhibited mild dysmetria and difficulty with rapid alternating movements in the left upper extremity, and a mildly wide-based gait. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 3.6 cm × 3.4 cm × 3.2 cm homogenously enhancing extra-axial mass arising from the tentorium cerebelli, eccentric to the left and crossing the midline . Bony involvement was not evident. There was surrounding edema and mild mass-effect on the fourth ventricle, but no evidence of obstructive hydrocephalus. The presumptive preoperative diagnosis was meningioma, given the homogenous enhancement, extra-axial location, and association with the tentorium. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis revealed no evidence of metastatic disease.
The patient underwent suboccipital craniotomy for resection of the mass with placement of a ventricular catheter. The procedure was uncomplicated, and the patient was discharged after a routine postoperative course.Although he continued to experience some mild left upper extremity dysmetria, his nausea, vomiting, and ataxia improved. Postoperative MRI revealed no obvious evidence of residual disease .
Histopathologic analysis of the mass revealed a chondroblastic osteosarcoma with highly malignant features, including bizarre neoplastic cells, abnormal mitotic figures, and a MIB-1 index of 90%. Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded sections of the tumor were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (HandE), trichrome, as well as several immunohistochemical markers. The mitotically active neoplasm was composed of pleomorphic cells with hyperchromatic multinucleated forms and focal osteoid formation . Neoplastic cells were positive for vimentin, but negative for epithelial membrane antigen, thereby excluding the diagnosis of a meningioma. Staining for CD68 was also negative. Regions of cartilage formation were positive for S-100 protein. Infiltration of adjacent brain parenchyma by neoplastic cells was apparent in sections stained for neurofilament protein and synaptophysin. These features were thought to be consistent with a radiation-induced chondroblastic osteosarcoma.
Notably, the patient′s outside hospital records indicated that the 20 Gy radiation dose he received for Hodgkin′s lymphoma 20 years prior had been performed with the neck extended, and the field treated included the location of his posterior fossa tumor.
On the basis of the pathology findings, the patient underwent two rounds of ifosfamide and doxorubicin chemotherapy. Radiation therapy was initially deferred due to both previous irradiation to the area and relative radioresistant nature of these tumors. Each round of chemotherapy was associated with intractable nausea and vomiting requiring hospitalization. The second hospitalization was complicated by a deep vein thrombosis requiring anticoagulation, organizing pneumonia with bronchiolitis obliterans, and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia. The patient recovered from these hospitalizations, and he was at his neurologic baseline. Nine months after his initial presentation, routine MRI revealed local recurrence of the disease . Radiation therapy was scheduled. However, when the patient presented for therapy, he was experiencing significant ataxia, nausea, and vomiting. A noncontrast head CT was performed, which showed the known recurrence as well as obstructive hydrocephalus. The patient and his family declined further resection but wished to proceed with palliative ventriculoperitoneal shunting. This procedure was performed without complications. After shunt placement, the patient underwent intensity-modulated radiation therapy with a total dose of 65 Gy to the tumor bed. The patient′s symptoms improved and follow-up imaging revealed a reduction in tumor size. He remained stable for 3 months after the completion of radiation therapy, but then experienced progressively worsening bilateral lower extremity weakness over the course of 3 days. MRI of the thoracolumbar spine performed as part of a work-up for his weakness revealed multiple intradural, intra-, and extramedullary masses, as well as diffuse epidural enhancement consistent with metastatic disease . Palliative radiation was performed for symptom control. The patient was discharged to hospice where he succumbed to his disease 16 months after initial presentation.