A 12-year-old girl 141 cm tall and weighing 26.4 kg presented with severe MG. The patient was healthy at birth, and in May 2013, she reported a history of persistent low-grade fever, blepharoptosis, weakness of the extremities, and dysarthrosis. In July 2013, seropositivity for anti-acetylcholine receptor (Ach-R) antibody, a positive Teng Shillong test, and surface electromyogram findings led to a diagnosis of whole-body MG. Despite the administration of immunoglobulin, difficulty in swallowing persisted and dyspnea progressed. At the end of July, she was intubated for mechanical ventilatory support and transferred to our institution. The initial ventilator settings were pressure-controlled, with a fractional inspired oxygen concentration of 0.35, respiratory rate of 10 breaths/min, inspiratory pressure (above positive end-expiratory pressure) of 10 cmH2O adjusted not to exceed a tidal volume of 10 ml/kg, and a positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 5 cmH2O. The PaO2/FiO2 ratio was > 300 mmHg, chest X-rays showed no abnormalities and signs of pneumonia. The patient was sedated with midazolam, fentanyl, and dexmedetomidine, but conscious and oriented (Richmond Agitation-Sedation Scale 0).
Respiratory muscle strength was evaluated every morning by MIP and diaphragm activity in relation to tidal volume (V
T/ΔE-di). E-di was measured with a size-appropriate multiple-array esophageal electrode (E-di catheter, 12 Fr, 125 cm) that was inserted using a method like that used to insert an ordinary nasogastric tube and positioned following the manufacturer’s recommendations. ΔE-di was calculated as the maximum minus the minimum E-di during inspiration . Sedative drugs were discontinued at least 30 min before measuring MIP and V
T/ΔE-di, and the patient was fully conscious when the measurements were started. The measurements were stopped if at least one the following occurred. The blood oxygen saturation (SpO2) was < 90%, the respiratory rate was > 30/min, the systolic blood pressure was ≥ 180 mmHg, or cardiac arrhythmias developed. MIP was measured three times. The patient was encouraged to perform a maximal inspiratory effort with airway occlusion toward a closed circuit, and the largest test value was recorded. V
T/ΔE-di was measured with the same respirator settings, i.e., pressure support ventilation (PSV) mode, PEEP of 5 cmH2O, and pressure support of 5 cmH2O. V
T/ΔE-di was not obtained on day 6 for technical reasons. A few minutes after measuring MIP, the ventilator was set to PSV mode. After breathing was stabilized, airway pressure, flow, and E-di were recorded for 2 min. E-di measurements, acquired via the Servo-i ventilator, were transferred to a personal computer using Servo-i tracker software ® (Maquet, Critical Care AB, Sweden) for the entire duration of the study. Sedatives were restarted after completion of the measurements. On day 2 in the intensive care unit (ICU), the first of three large, consecutive daily doses of corticosteroid (methylprednisolone, 30 mg/kg/day) was given, and pyridostigmine bromide (1.1 mg/kg/day) was started on day 5. The patient’s clinical course is summarized in Fig. .
Figure shows the course of MIP. It increased slightly over time, but changed unpredictably day-by-day. MIP increased during high-dose corticosteroid therapy, but then suddenly decreased afterward. V
T/ΔE-di was measured by the same method every day . In contrast to the unpredictable time course of MIP, V
T/ΔE-di decreased consistently after day 4, which was the last day of corticosteroid pulse therapy. On day 7, the patient passed a spontaneous breathing trial (SBT) with PSV, 5 cmH2O PEEP and 5 cmH2O pressure support for 30 min. Taking her clinical symptoms into account, her diaphragmatic strength appeared to have recovered sufficiently, and she was extubated on that day. Hemodynamic instability, signs of respiratory muscle fatigue, dyspnea, airway obstruction, or decrease in arterial oxygen saturation were not observed following extubation. The patient was discharged from the ICU on day 9.