A 16-year-old boy, after suffering from a falling injury to his right distal tibia, applied home remedies and herbs in an attempt to manage symptoms of swelling and redness. Unfortunately, his skin did not respond well and resulted in the formation of large blisters. He was taken to the local hospital and intravenous antibiotics were given. However, medication was ineffective, and skin around the medial side of right tibia ruptured leaving his bone exposed. He was experiencing repeated rupturing of his wound with purulent discharge that had a foul smell. This later developed to continuous purulent discharge. He was then taken to the local hospital and bacterial culture was done. The results showed Staphylococcus aureus and he was eventually transferred to our hospital.
At presentation, his right foot was not weight-bearing. There was scar tissue along the full length of the anteromedial side of the tibia and fixed equinus deformity and stiffness of the right ankle joint . There was a draining sinus anteriorly just 4 cm below the knee joint . On physical examination the right knee flexion was limited to less than 70 degrees, muscles were atrophied, and there was equinus ankle deformity and ankle stiffness. Neurovascular and muscular status of the anterior compartment of the right lower leg was compromised, anterior tibialis was unidentified, dorsal pedis artery was weak compared to the opposite side, right foot lacked sensation on palpation and active dorsiflexion of the foot was completely lost.
Radiology showed a tibial bone defect of about 80% of the distal length. The remaining proximal tibia showed some loss of cortex and lytic lesion . Fibula showed diffused osteomyelitis in the distal part. Furthermore, the X-ray showed talus bone defect and equinus deformity of the calcaneus .
Laboratory results from blood work revealed ESR 26(mm/1 h), c-reactive protein 6.83(mg/L) and a slightly increased liver function AST/ALT 1.9(IU/L), otherwise normal. A biopsy was taken from the drainage sinus and culture showed the presence of Staphylococcus epidermidis and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. It was clear that the patient suffered from a severe diffused chronic osteomyelitis of the right tibia according to Cierny-Mader classification type IV class A . The patient and his parents strongly insisted to focus the treatment on preserving his limb.
After thorough analysis and planning, the patient was scheduled for his first stage of surgery. We started by excision of the infected part of the distal fibula, followed by application of Ilizarov external fixator for tibiocalcaneal fusion and correction of foot deformity. A footplate was placed on the hindfoot to maintain a neutral foot position . A long incision was made from the proximal tibia to distal third, three samples for biopsy from deep tissue both bone and scar tissue was collected, and debridement was done while attempting to preserve viable bone from the remains of the tibia . Followed by repeated irrigation and vancomycin combined calcium sulphate was filled into the cavity then wound was closed . Intravenous antibiotics were administered for 2 weeks.
A percutaneous tibial osteotomy was not done during the first stage because the remaining proximal tibia was short in length and its proximity to the infected area posed a potential risk of transfer of infection. After the infection n was subsided, the patient was scheduled for second-stage surgery, for percutaneous tibial osteotomy. One week after the procedure, distraction was started at a rate of 0.25 mm, three times per day. This rate was manipulated following callus formation and consolidation. Partial weight-bearing with the assistance of crutches and physiotherapy was advocated for his right knee to prevent knee stiffness. At discharge, the patient was advised to continue his daily distraction and was scheduled for a monthly follow up at the clinic.
Following the daily distraction and monthly checkups, 9 months after surgery the tibia had grown to fuse with the calcaneus . The patient was taken for a third surgery for fibular osteotomy to further continue distraction osteogenesis to correct limb discrepancy. During surgery manual compression was done to avoid nonunion in the osteotomy site of the fibula .
The skin and scar tissue stretched smoothly with bone distraction. During the 14 months of distraction, the patient showed no further complications and the tibia was lengthened until discrepancy was corrected. The patient was able to walk without crutches, was fully weight-bearing and was advised to keep wearing the apparatus for 3 months to ensure continuous compression until healing was achieved at the docking site .
Distraction was stopped after reaching the presumed length. Five months later, when sufficient consolidation and healing of the docking site was appreciated on the X-ray and the Ilizarov apparatus was removed. At removal, bone lengthening was recorded at 32 cm. Though the patient lost function in the foot due to the absence of ankle and subtalar joint the patient restored normal gait, he was able to walk without crutches and was able to return to school.
Shortly after, the patient showed slight discomfort with minute discrepancy and varus deformity of the tibia. He was admitted for varus deformity of 15 degrees and discrepancy correction. By using a unilateral external fixator, we corrected the angulation and further distracted the tibia for 1.5 cm, totaling distraction osteogenesis of 33.5 cm . After the restoration of the full length of the lower extremity and plantar grade foot, the patient was able to walk and even jog without crutches. Functional outcome was evaluated during follow up using Lower Extremity Functional Scale (LEFS) and the patient had a score of 67/80 or 83.8% at his final checkup .