A healthy 34-year-old female was admitted to hospital after 12 weeks of gestation. The patient began to have symptoms of nausea and vomiting at 5 weeks of pregnancy. The symptoms worsened over a 3-day period, and she was admitted to hospital for inability to eat. The patient had no previous liver disease or other diseases. The patient denied a history of drinking alcohol, and she had no recent history of medication use that could potentially be toxic to the liver. Her parents were not consanguineous.
When admitted to the hospital, the patient had a routine blood examination which included tests for liver function, kidney function, potassium, sodium, chloride, and glucose, all of which were within the normal range. Prothrombin time (PT) was extended by 3 seconds, and C-reactive protein was slightly elevated. Hepatitis virus markers were negative. The patient had an abdominal ultrasound examination of the fetal sac, fetal bud, and fetal heart, all of which were normal. Initially, the patient was given fluid replacement and vitamin B6 and B1 supplements.
On the second day of admission, the patient had no emesis but did not cooperate with the medical staff’s questions or medical examinations. She had difficulty falling asleep, and was given a 10-mg intramuscular injection of diazepam after notification of the risk. On the morning of the third day of admission, a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) study of the head was performed. The result showed scattered intraluminal infarcts or demyelinating lesions in the brain . She experienced sudden convulsions and showed no response to attempts at interaction by staff during the night of the third day of admission. She was given oxygen by mask, a slow push of diazepam, and quick intravenous drip of magnesium sulfate. She was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) and was given cefuroxime; medications for phlegm reduction, convulsions, and hypertension; and sedative treatment.
When transferred to ICU, blood examination revealed a leukocyte level of 20.8 × 109/L, neutrophils 89.6%, slightly elevated serum chloride, PT of 21.5 seconds, plasma thromboplastin antecedent of 42%, and plasma ammonia of 503 μmol/L; hemoglobin, platelet level, liver function transaminases, bilirubin, kidney function, and potassium and sodium levels were all within normal limits. Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, anticardiolipin antibody, and HLA-B27 were negative on blood tests performed. On the fifth day of admission, A computed tomography (CT) of the brain was performed. The CT report showed diffuse cerebral edema and a small amount of subarachnoid hemorrhage . Multiple areas of inflammation and exudative lesions were noted in both lungs, along with consolidation of the left lower lobe. There was bilateral pleural effusion. The liver and spleen were normal .
After consultation with all the relevant departments, combined with nausea and vomiting symptoms, high plasma ammonia, convulsions and mental symptoms, this was considered as urea cycle disorder. She was given plasma exchange and continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) treatment. She was also administered lactulose combined with vinegar saline enema and other supportive treatments, tracheal intubation to ensure airway patency. Because the patient had hyperchloric acidosis, arginine was not given. Plasma ammonia significantly increased every time it was tested . On the seventh day of admission, antibiotics were adjusted and the patient received continued CRRT and plasma exchange treatment, along with levocarnitine to remove toxins from the body. On the eighth day of admission, the patient was still in a coma and had no spontaneous breathing. Glasgow Coma Scale score was 3 and there was intermittent high fever. After careful consideration, her family members decided to discontinue plasma exchange and CRRT, and requested removal of mechanical ventilation and all medication therapy. The patient was pronounced dead that night.
The result of urinary organic acids came out a few days later, suggested that the levels of many organic acids such as uracil and various orotic acids were high. Analysis of blood amino acids showed higher citrulline 541.57 (normal range, 4-35), ornithine 214.94 (normal range, 10-120), and aspartic acid 108.53 (normal range, 10-100) levels, indicating a UCD.
The patient’s whole blood was collected for high-throughput sequencing; the patient’s family members refused to have their blood tested. The analysis showed that there were two heterozygous variations in the argininosuccinate synthase 1, or ASS1, gene of the patient. The first variation was c.421-2A > G, causing the change of amino acid; this was a splicing variation. According to the Criteria for Classifying Pathogenic Variants from the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) guidelines, this variation was initially determined to be pathogenic (PVS1, a zero-effect mutation that may lead to loss of gene function). The Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD) database already had a related report of citrullinemia for this site (PS1) . The pathogenicity of this site in the ClinVar database was pathogenic (CTLN1).
The second variation was c.1046 T > G (variation of nucleotide 1046 in the coding region from thymine to guanine) causing the change of amino acid p.V349G (valine to glycine at amino acid 349), which is a missense mutation.
The final diagnosis was CTLN1.