A 72-year-old Japanese woman presented to a neighboring hospital with loss of consciousness due to severe hypoglycemia (plasma glucose 10mg/dl). She was transferred to our facility the following day. She had had type 2 diabetes, treated with insulin (basal-supported oral therapy) for three years before admission. Three months before admission, she was diagnosed with autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA) and was started on 70mg oral prednisolone per day, which exacerbated her diabetes, necessitating intensive insulin therapy. By two weeks before admission, oral prednisolone was tapered to 50mg as her hemoglobin concentration had stabilized around 10g/dl. She experienced no episodes of overt hypoglycemia prior to hospitalization.
Our patient was obese with a body mass index of 31.2kg/m2. Her medications included insulin (27 units/day), and oral prednisolone (50mg/day). Her insulin dosage was 7 units of insulin aspart before breakfast, 4 units before other meals, and 12 units of insulin glargine at bedtime. Chest radiography on admission revealed a high-density area with a hollow lesion not detected the previous month , which was confirmed by computed tomography. A lung abscess was diagnosed and intravenous 4.5g piperacillin/tazobactam every 8 hours was started. Her sputum and blood culture test results were negative. Laboratory examinations showed elevated serum C-reactive protein (7.32mg/dl), and normal fasting adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) (19.1pg/ml) and cortisol (10.6μg/ml) levels despite administration of 50mg of prednisolone per day. Her fasting and postprandial plasma C-peptide levels were low (fasting and postprandial plasma glucose and C-peptide levels were 221mg/dl, 0.5ng/ml and 293mg/dl, 0.4ng/ml respectively). Our patient’s kidney function was normal with a serum creatinine level of 0.76mg/dl. The hemoglobin concentration remained stable (10.5g/dl), and hemoglobin (Hb) A1c was stable at 7.6% (59.6mmol/mol). Her serum albumin was low (1.8g/dl). Her anti-insulin antibody test was negative .
Recurrent episodes of hypoglycemia continued after admission, and did not resolve until the 30th day of hospitalization, the point at which the lung lesion was largest . Hypoglycemia was observed 16 times in the same period, with a maximum of three times in the same day . Episodes were observed before and after meals, and were not concentrated in a particular time of the day. After admission, her insulin dosage was reduced to 3 units of insulin aspart before meals, which was skipped when oral intake was insufficient. Her insulin glargine was not reduced, due to high levels of fasting plasma glucose. Oral therapy consisted of voglibose (0.2mg before meals), and buformine hydrochloride (100mg before breakfast). Buformine was discontinued shortly after admission. A dosage of 50mg oral prednisolone was constantly administered from two weeks before admission until episodes of hypoglycemia ceased to appear. Episodes of hypoglycemia were not observed as the lesion decreased in size after this point , and our patient was discharged from our hospital after two months of antibiotic treatment.