A 40-year-old man, non-smoker, presented to our institution due to microscopic hematuria identified on routine urine analyses of four years duration. Renal ultrasonography performed at another institution showed no abnormalities. The patient denied trauma to the testicular / perineal bump or history of infections including sexually transmitted diseases. The patient also denied having had any foley catheters or history of kidney stones. However, he did complain of incomplete bladder emptying, difficulty urinating, slow stream, and frequency. There was family history of renal cell carcinoma (cousin) and thyroid cancer (sister). Medical history was relevant for hypercholesterolemia for which the patient took atorvastatin 10mg once daily. The patient had a surgical hernia repair. He had no known allergies. He was sexually active and monogamous.
Vital signs on admission were as follows: blood pressure 133/85mmHg, pulse 84 beats per minute, respiratory rate 16 per minute, temperature 97.8oF, and SpO2 98%. Body mass index (BMI) was 25.50 kg/m2 (height 1.829 meters and weight 85.3 kg). Physical examination revealed a circumcised penis, high-riding left testicle and a right epididymal cystic-like nodule.
Retrograde urethrogram was performed by introducing contrast through a catheter-tip syringe into the urethra. Fluoroscopic images showed a proximal short and narrow bulbar urethral stricture , which explained patient's complaints of incomplete bladder emptying, difficulty urinating, slow stream, and frequency. Accordingly, cystoscopy with urethral balloon dilation was accomplished.
Two months later, the patient continued to have mild urgency during the day and nocturia with not much improvement in his symptoms. He also complained of right back pain that radiated to the right testicle. Sitting down and laying down made it better, while standing made it worse. The pain was more prominent in the morning. The patient denied trauma to the genital area. He also started feeling a “liquid filled sac” on the right testicle. Testicular sonogram was performed revealing a 1.2 cm hypoechoic, hypervascular mass in the right epididymal head .
Serum LDH isoenzymes were within normal limits (LDH: 146 IU/L (Reference range (RR): 121 - 224 IU/L); LDH-1: 31% (RR: 17-32%); LDH-2: 35% (RR: 25-40%); LDH-3: 18% (17-27%); LDH-4: 7% (5-13%); LDH-5 9% (4-20%)). Alpha-Fetoprotein (AFP) was also normal at 0.9 ng/mL (RR: 0.0-8.0 ng/mL) and serum beta-HCG was negative. Differential diagnosis included focal epididymitis, adenomatoid tumor, lymphoma, or mesenchymal tumor. The supratesticular mass was excised and sent for pathologic evaluation.
Gross pathological examination demonstrated a 1.1 x 0.8 x 0.8 cm irregular, bright yellow, solid mass within the right epididymis .
Microscopic examination revealed a clear cell neoplasm with tubular/glandular morphology . At this point, metastatic clear cell renal cell carcinoma (CCRCC) and clear cell papillary RCC were high in the differential diagnosis. However, the latter is extremely indolent with metastasis almost unheard of, and the patient's course of presentation with symptoms extending over a period of 4 years makes a malignant neoplasm less likely, favoring a benign entity.
On immunohistochemical staining the tumor cells were positive for pankeratin (AE1/AE3), PAX8, cytokeratin 7 (CK7), and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA). A CD10 stain showed equivocal weak focal staining. The stains for prostate specific antigen (PSA), prostate-specific acid phosphatase (PSAP), racemase (AMACR), CD30, and CD117 were negative .
Taking into consideration that the epididymal mass was present on a CT scan from 2019 (performed at another institution), and that no renal masses were present (which make metastatic renal cell carcinoma an unlikely diagnosis), the histologic features and immunohistochemical findings were considered to represent a papillary cystadenoma of the epididymis (PCE).
Germline sequencing using a next-generation sequencing panel of 84 genes on the Invitae Multi-Cancer panel was performed (Supplement Material 1) to rule out Von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHLD). Results yielded heterozygous mutations in three genes - CASR (variant c.2417T>G (p.Phe806Cys)), POT1 (variant c.526G>A (p.Gly176Arg)), and RAD51D (variant c.629C>A (p.Ala210Glu)), all three of which have not been reported in PCE before. CASR acts as a tumor suppressor or an oncogene, depending on the cancer site, and it is associated with an increased risk of colorectal, prostate, breast, and pancreatic cancers.
POT1 gene has been specifically reported in melanoma, chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), angiosarcoma, and glioma. The POT1 variant found in our case (variant c.526G>A (p.Gly176Arg)) has been linked to the hereditary cancer-predisposing syndrome. However, clinically it remains of uncertain significance due to the lack of studies tackling its role in human diseases. Similarly, the clinical significance of CASR (variant c.2417T>G (p.Phe806Cys)) and RAD51D (variant c.629C>A (p.Ala210Glu)) is yet to be determined. There have been reported associations of the pathogenic variants in RAD51D gene with tubo-ovarian carcinoma and breast cancer. At the 6-month follow-up, the patient was doing well and without symptoms.