A 64-year-old Caucasian female presented with dizziness, pre-syncope, and progressive decline in functional capacity, with New York Heart Association (NYHA) class III symptoms. Her past medical history was significant for atrial fibrillation, type II diabetes mellitus, hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, prior tobacco use, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and idiopathic thrombocytopenia. She also had been previously diagnosed with aortic stenosis, which prompted admission for further evaluation of progression. Family history was significant for coronary artery disease in her parents and brother, and colon cancer in the mother. Physical exam was significant for a holosystolic murmur radiating to the axilla, and bilateral lower extremity oedema, otherwise unremarkable. Initial electrocardiogram (ECG) showed normal sinus rhythm without LV hypertrophy or significant ST/T wave abnormalities . Echocardiography showed normal LV systolic function, Grade II LV diastolic dysfunction, and moderate septal LV hypertrophy (1.7 cm at the level of mitral leaflet tips) (, Videos 1 and 2). At rest, there was mitral valve SAM with near septal contact and a peak LVOT gradient of 48 mmHg, with resultant moderate, posteriorly directed mitral regurgitation, which increased to SAM with septal contact after provocation with Valsalva manoeuvre, showing an increase in the peak LVOT gradient to 82 mmHg . She underwent CMR imaging, which showed again septal hypertrophy, mitral valve SAM with moderately severe mitral regurgitation, and flow acceleration in the LVOT, suggestive of a haemodynamically significant obstruction (Video 3 and ). Interestingly, the septal thickness was less prominent by CMR (1.5 cm in the mid-inferoseptum), likely due to the inclusion of right ventricular septal trabeculation on echo and resultant overestimation of septal thickness. Cardiac magnetic resonance also defined abnormal chordal attachments from the posterior medial papillary muscle to the base of the anterior mitral valve leaflet, which were also likely contributing to LVOT obstruction . Mild delayed gadolinium enhancement was noted within the mid-myocardium of the thickened anteroseptum, as well as at the inferior right ventricle insertion point into the inter-ventricular septum . This constellation of imaging findings was most likely consistent with hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy (HOCM). Surgery was indicated because of the haemodynamically significant LVOT obstruction in the setting of her NYHA Class III symptoms despite optimal beta-blocker therapy, in line with current guideline recommendations.
Because of her relatively thin upper septum and the abnormal chordal attachments seen on imaging, and also possible need for mitral valve repair, septal myectomy was favoured instead of alcohol ablation. She underwent septal myectomy with left-sided Cox–MAZE IV procedure, with left atrial appendage ligation, and intraoperative findings were consistent with concentric left ventricular hypertrophy. Despite her multimodality imaging findings being consistent with HOCM, histopathology of the myectomy did not show the classic histopathology of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Instead, it showed non-caseating granulomatous myocarditis . Therefore, she was initiated on prednisone and referred for ICD implantation.
A month later, cardiac and whole-body FDG-PET were performed, with adequate preparation, and showed no FDG avid process except for left lower lobe ground-glass opacification with minimal uptake, not typical for pulmonary sarcoidosis. A year and a half after the myectomy, during admission for decompensated heart failure, work-up with repeat echocardiogram showed mildly decreased LV systolic function and moderate mitral regurgitation, and N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide of 2175 pg/mL. Repeat cardiac FDG-PET was done, at this time showing a diffuse myocardial FDG uptake despite a good diet preparation, suggestive of active inflammation (large, more than five segments of inflamed myocardium), with no perfusion defects. Repeat whole-body PET showed no abnormal FDG avid processes in the remainder of the body, and ophthalmologic evaluation also ruled out eye involvement, suggesting a diagnosis of isolated cardiac sarcoidosis (CS). She was initiated on methotrexate with a plan to progressively taper corticosteroids.