A 40-year-old Caucasian female, with MD1, was referred to our cardiomyopathy clinic following a 5-month history of atypical left-sided chest pain. MD1 was previously diagnosed following neurological examination which revealed myopathic facies, weakness of finger extension, and myotonia of hand closure. Analysis of the patient’s DNA revealed one allele within the normal range and an expansion in the affected range (>50 CTG repeats) at the myotonic dystrophy 1 locus. A family pedigree diagram is depicted in .
Both the patient’s sister and mother aged 34 and 65 years, respectively, had been diagnosed with MD1 and had undergone prophylactic PPM implantation at a different institution. The sister’s 14-year-old son also had genetically confirmed MD1. The patient’s baseline electrocardiograms (ECGs) showed sinus rhythm, variable PR interval prolongation (206–220 ms), and intermittent left anterior fascicular block (LAFB). Routine blood tests, cardiac investigations including a 24-h ECG monitoring, echocardiogram, and a cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan were normal. We discussed the need for PPM implantation based on her prolonged PR interval and fascicular block. Of note, similar conduction abnormalities were present on an ECG performed by her General Practitioner 6 months prior to her current presentation.
To clarify the nature of her chest pain, the site and degree of her conduction abnormalities and guide our decision regarding device implantation, EST was performed as she retained good physical exercise capacity. Treadmill EST was performed according to the BRUCE protocol, achieving a maximum work level of METS: 7.10. The baseline ECG revealed sinus rhythm with a borderline first-degree AV block; PR = 206 ms, heart rate (HR) = 96 b.p.m. without fascicular block. No sustained tachy/bradyarrhythmias or relevant symptoms were observed before the test was stopped at 6 min due to fatigue. At peak exercise (HR = 157 b.p.m.), minimal PR interval shortening (PR = 200 ms) was observed and during the early recovery period (HR = 137 b.p.m.) paradoxical PR prolongation was observed with marked first-degree AV block (PR = 280 ms) that persisted throughout the recovery period . However, at the end of the recovery (5 min), the PR interval was seen to shorten to 216 ms.
Following the findings of EST, an EPS was performed to confirm the need for PPM implantation. The EPS revealed a prolonged HV interval of 84 ms , and the patient subsequently had a prophylactic DDDR PPM implanted. A ventricular tachycardia stimulation protocol was not performed due to the absence of ventricular arrhythmias on Holter monitoring and also because she had a normal cardiac MRI. She remains well at 24 months follow-up.