The patient is a 61-year-old gentleman with an infected right total hip arthroplasty for which he had a partial two-stage exchange performed. His primary total hip arthroplasty was performed in September 2013 for hip osteoarthritis. Pre-operatively, he complained of right hip pain for a few years, which limited him to walking with a stick. The primary right total hip arthroplasty components included a cementless acetabular shell and femoral stem, polyethylene liner, and a ceramic femoral head.
He had a history of rectal cancer, with a rather turbulent course. A laparoscopic low anterior resection was performed in June 2014. He had further radiotherapy and chemotherapy in the United States. A left lateral segmentectomy was performed for pulmonary metastasis in October 2015 and underwent further rounds of chemotherapy.
During chemotherapy, he had recurrent right hip wound swelling and discharging sinus, first noted in June 2015 (21 months after the initial total hip replacement), and he had two drainages performed by a general surgeon, without entry into the hip joint. The last incision and drainage were performed in March 2016. He was given a prolonged 3-month course of antibiotics. The organism isolated was staphylococcus aureus and the right hip swelling eventually improved.
He was seen by orthopedics in July 2016. The C-reactive protein (CRP) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) were elevated to 121 mg/L (normal reference <5 mg/L) and 98 mm/h (normal reference 0–15 mm/h), respectively. A right hip aspiration was performed, which did not yield any growth from culture. Repeat radiographs showed acetabular component loosening with new radiolucencies in all three DeLee and Charnley zones and a change in the position . The femoral component appeared to be well fixed. A positron emission tomography-computed tomography scan showed increased uptake mainly around the acetabulum . A diagnosis of periprosthetic joint infection was made on the basis of a discharging sinus . The patient agreed to a two-stage revision with a partial exchange, with retention of the well-fixed femoral stem.
The first-stage revision was performed on 22 August 2016. Intra-operatively, there was extensive fibrous tissue around the hip. The acetabular component was loose, and the femoral component was well fixed. Debridement of the infected tissues and irrigation were performed. The acetabular component and liner were removed. The femoral stem was retained. The fibrous tissue in the acetabulum was removed with reaming. A polyethylene liner was cemented with vancomycin antibiotic-loaded cement to the acetabulum, at the standard cup orientation of 45° abduction and 15° anteversion. The femoral head was exchanged to a metal femoral head. The reduction was stable and the patient was permitted for full weight-bearing walking post-operatively .
Post-operatively, the wound was well and he had minimal pain. There was a downtrend of the inflammatory markers, CRP and ESR . The intra-operative specimens did not yield any growth from extended cultures.
A second-stage revision was performed on 7 November 2016 (11 weeks from the first stage revision). Intra-operatively, there was no gross infection. The cemented liner and femoral head were removed. The acetabulum was further reamed and fitted with a new acetabular cementless component, polyethylene liner, and a metal femoral head . The post-operative period was uneventful. On his follow-up at 2 weeks post-operatively, he reported no right hip pain, and the wound was well. He also subsequently had left hip mechanical pain for which he had a left primary total hip arthroplasty in February 2016. At his last follow-up at more than 4-year post-operative, he had no hip pain or signs of infection. He had full Oxford (48 out of 48) and Harris hip scores (100 out of100) and had reported no limitation in walking tolerance.