A 71-year-old Japanese woman was referred to our hospital for evaluation of her elevation of serum gamma glutamyl transferase levels to 135 IU/L (reference value 16–73 IU/L), which were incidentally found in a biochemical test in medical health check. She had no symptoms of epigastralgia or jaundice. Her physical examination and past medical history was unremarkable. She did not smoke or drink. The remainder of her serum chemistries, complete blood count, and coagulation profile were all normal. Serum levels of tumor marker such as carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) were within normal limits.
Abdominal ultrasonography (US) and computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a cystic lesion measuring 2.0 cm in maximal diameter at the left lateral segment of the liver with peripheral left lateral anterior subsegmental bile duct (B3) dilation . Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging also confirmed a cystic lesion at the left lateral segment of the liver, but the presence of a mural nodule in the cystic lesion or mucin was not confirmed . MR cholangiography showed a cystic lesion at the left lobe of the liver, but a filling defect in the bile duct and a communication between the cystic lesion and bile duct could not be defined . Duodenoscopy showed a widely patent papillary orifice with extruded mucoid material, and endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) could not detect a tumor component in the bile duct or cystic lesion . Endoscopic retrograde cholangiogram (ERC) demonstrated amorphous filling defects in the common bile duct corresponding to mucin, and percutaneous transhepatic cholangiograms (PTC) revealed communication between the hepatic cyst and the major bile duct . The cytological examinations through both ERC and PTC routes were negative for malignancy.
Left and caudate lobectomy of the liver with extrahepatic bile duct resection and reconstruction was performed because the lesion seemed to be a potential malignancy. Gross examination of the resected specimens revealed no obvious mass protruding into the lumen, and only a markedly dilated bile duct was observed at a glance . Microscopically, the cystically dilated bile duct was lined by tall columnar epithelium with micropapillary features and mucin hypersecretion, but the tall papillary growth with fibrovascular cores or villous structures showing mass component was not present . These neoplastic cells with hyperchromatic nuclei and loss of cell polarity, lacking stromal invasion was observed . Ovarian-like stroma typically seen in hepatobiliary cystadenomas was not observed in the wall. On immunohistochemistry using standard streptavidin-biotin-peroxidase method, meoplastic cells were positive for MUC2 and MUC5AC, but negative for MUC1, CK20. The patient has been well without any evidence of recurrence for 38 months since her operation.