A 30-year-old Sri-Lankan woman presented with left flank pain. The pain was intermittent, sharp, and of moderate severity and radiated to the groin. The patient reported no history of lower urinary tract symptoms or gross hematuria. The pain was associated with weight loss of 8 kg over a period of 3 months. Her medical and surgical history was not significant, and the patient was not on any regular medications.
The patient was afebrile on presentation with no microscopic hematuria. On physical examination, the abdomen was soft with minimal tenderness over the left flank, and a palpable left upper quadrant mass was present. The rest of the clinical examination revealed normal findings.A computed tomography (CT) scan showed a large left upper quadrant mass measuring 17 × 13 × 12 cm in its greatest dimension. The mass crossed the midline and compressed the stomach, spleen, pancreas, and small bowel . The origin of the mass was unclear, and the differential diagnoses included a left adrenal mass, left upper pole renal mass, and retroperitoneal sarcoma. A functional adrenal work-up was performed according to the Canadian Urological Association guidelines and included measurement of serum aldosterone, potassium, renin, and adrenocorticotrophic hormone levels; a dexamethasone suppression test; and measurement of 24-hour urinary metanephrine levels. All results were within the reference ranges.
The metastatic work-up included CT scans of the head and chest and a bone scan. The head CT scan revealed normal findings. The chest CT scan showed a 1.8-cm nodule in the medial left lower lobe, close to the posterior mediastinum, as well as two subcentimetric nodules in the left lung. Neither the bone scan nor magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed evidence of bone metastasis. A decision was made to proceed with en bloc excision of the mass. Cardiothoracic surgeons were consulted regarding the suspicious lung nodules, and they planned to biopsy the lung lesion after excision of the primary tumor.
A Chevron incision was made, and a Gomez poly tract retractor (Pilling®) was used to ensure adequate exposure. The mass was exposed after medial reflection of the descending colon and was found to be displacing the stomach, pancreas, and spleen, but it had a grossly negative margin with no evidence of adjacent organ invasion. The mass was covering the left renal hilum and was densely adhered to the aorta. After adequate exposure of the left kidney, the mass was noted to be densely adhered to the upper pole with no surgically defined plane. It seemed to be arising from the upper pole of the left kidney. In the presence of a vascular surgeon, the mass was dissected and the left renal hilum was carefully isolated. We decided intraoperatively to proceed with left radical nephrectomy. This decision was made to avoid positive surgical margins if partial nephrectomy was performed given the wide base of tumor adherence to the kidney. Upon vascular control of the left renal artery and vein, the mass significantly shrunk in size and became less congested. It was then easily dissected off the aorta. No enlarged lymph nodes were identified. After ensuring adequate hemostasis, Surgicel® Fibrillar™ was applied, and an intra-abdominal drain was inserted.
The postoperative recovery was uneventful. The drain was removed on postoperative day 2, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 6. She was followed up 4 weeks postoperatively with no complications. After returning to her home country, her local cardiothoracic surgeon obtained biopsy specimens from the lung nodules; these were found to be benign granulomas. However, contrast-enhanced CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis performed 3 months postoperatively showed new liver metastasis.
Histological examination showed a 1.63-kg en bloc left radical nephrectomy specimen that measured 20.0- × 16.5- × 11.0-cm . Opening of the specimen revealed a huge mass arising from the left adrenal gland measuring 16 × 14 × 10 cm. The tumor was tan-yellow and well demarcated, and it showed a clear line of cleavage from the left kidney. Histological examination of the tumor showed overt features of malignancy including a high nuclear grade, high mitotic activity (>10/50 high-power fields), and foci of diffuse growth admixed with single infiltrating cells. Venous and capsular invasion was also present. Immunohistochemistry revealed positive staining of tumor cells for synaptophysin and inhibin, supporting a diagnosis of ACC . The margins were uninvolved by the tumor. In accordance with the 2010 Tumor Nodes Metastasis staging system, the tumor stage was pT3NxMx.