A 33-year-old woman (weight, 16.8 kg; height, 131 cm; BMI 9.8 kg/cm2) with Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) experienced hypercapnic respiratory failure . Computed tomography scans showed muscle atrophy, including respiratory muscles, and SMA syndrome. Hospitalized for chronic respiratory failure, she started noninvasive ventilation after losing consciousness from CO2 narcosis. Respiratory muscle weakness, worsened by SRS and malnutrition from SMA syndrome, caused further decline. Despite receiving nasal nutrition and central venous catheter support, she developed aspiration pneumonia, aggravating her hypercapnia. Preoperative evaluation revealed severely restricted pulmonary function with her vital capacity of 0.40 L (17% of the predicted value) and thoracolumbar scoliosis without major thoracic deformity Fig. . Arterial blood gases (ABG) in ambient air indicated significant respiratory acidosis; pH of 7.28, pCO2 of 75.7 mmHg, pO2 of 93.4 mmHg, and HCO3− of 34.8 mEq/L. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) for PEG planning was uneventful. Due to the high CO2 narcosis risk from intraoperative sedation and expected ventilator weaning challenges, PEG was scheduled under epidural anesthesia.
The patient underwent epidural anesthesia. Positioned in left lateral decubitus, the epidural puncture was performed at Th8-9, reaching a depth of 2 cm. An epidural catheter was inserted 3 cm into the epidural space. Initial anesthesia involved injecting 3 mL of 1% mepivacaine, with the anesthetic area confirmed by a cold test at Th8-9 after approximately 3 min. Subsequently, 3 mL of 2% mepivacaine was administered for extended anesthesia, and the anesthetic area was verified by a cold test at Th5-12.
After ensuring sufficient anesthesia, a gastroenterologist performed an EGD with CO2 insufflation. Within minutes of endoscope insertion, the patient lost consciousness and spontaneous breathing. The endoscope was promptly removed, and mask ventilation was initiated. As the patient did not recover, a decision was made to perform tracheal intubation for ventilatory management. Anticipating intubate difficulties, a difficult airway management (DAM) cart was prepared. Adequate oxygenation was maintained with mask ventilation, FiO2 1.0, and a tidal value of around 150 mL. General anesthesia was induced using a continuous infusion of the target-controlled infusion of 1% propofol 4 mcg/mL and 0.3 mcg/kg/min remifentanil, with muscle relaxation achieved by administering 20 mg of rocuronium. Laryngeal visualization was straightforward with the percentage of the glottic opening score was 100% using a McGRATH® blade #3, and successful tracheal intubation was accomplished with a 7.0 mm tracheal tube. End-tidal carbon dioxide levels exceeded 90 mmHg at intubation. Post-intubation, oxygen, and air were administered, and general anesthesia was maintained with reduced doses of propofol and remifentanil. Continuous monitoring was done with an arterial line, blood glucose level remained at 100 mg/dL and there was no hypoglycemia. In consultation with a gastroenterologist, it was decided to proceed with surgery under general anesthesia. Propofol and remifentanil were discontinued as the surgery was completed, and 50 mg of sugammadex was administered. Spontaneous respiration resumed upon awakening. The patient was extubated after confirming stable breathing and observed in the operating room for approximately 30 min, the result of ABG with O2 3 L/min mask administration showed as below; pH of 7.34, pCO2 of 70.3 mmHg, pO2 of 96.3 mmHg, and HCO3− of 37.7 mEq/L. Subsequently, she was transferred to the intensive care unit for respiratory management. She was discharged 2 days later as oxygenation could be maintained with nasal cannula administration of 2 L/min of oxygen.