A 14-year-old white girl with unilateral anterior uveitis and abnormal urinalysis was referred from the ophthalmological care to our nephrology unit in November 2018. She had been seen at our out-patient clinic at the age of 12 years in 2016. Her family history was positive for elevated blood pressure. She was the first child of an uneventful pregnancy, born at 40 weeks gestation with a birth weight of 3990 g and birth length of 53 cm.
Upon visit, she was seen due to elevated blood pressure with occasional tension-type headaches, obesity, impaired glucose tolerance, and hyperlipidemia, which were a result of a sedentary lifestyle and unhealthy eating habits. She reported no first-degree family members with metabolic syndrome or its complications. Ambulatory blood pressure monitor values were within reference ranges (average 24-hour systolic and diastolic blood pressure 117 and 66 mmHg, respectively), so we implemented nonpharmacological lifestyle approaches. During follow-up, she received extensive evaluation, including endocrinological and dietary assessment, and was continued to be seen by our pediatric nephrologist twice per year.
In October 2018, aged 14 years, she presented to the Department of Ophthalmology with 1 week of redness, pain, epiphora, and loss of visual acuity of the right eye. She denied any recent drug exposure, allergy, infection, or symptoms of systemic illness. A diagnosis of acute anterior uveitis was made, followed by topical corticosteroid and cycloplegic treatment, which led to symptom alleviation.
A broad diagnostic work-up was performed. Renal ultrasound was normal. Also, chest radiography was also normal , which in conjunction with a normal serum angiotensin-converting enzyme level and absence of cough excluded sarcoidosis, a known oculorenal offender. However, upon laboratory evaluation, marked elevation in erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR, 98 mm/hour), mild elevation of serum C-reactive protein (CRP, 13 mg/L), mild normocytic anemia (Hb, 113 g/L), elevated serum creatinine (80 µmol/L), mild proteinuria (0.38 g/day), microalbuminuria (urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio, 58 mg/g), elevated values of alpha-1 microglobulin (urine alpha-1-microglobulin-to-creatinine ratio, 3.24 mg/g), and normoglycemic glycosuria (1+) were observed. Immunological screening revealed elevated C3 complement fraction (C3, 2.01 g/L), with negative antinuclear antibodies (ANA), anti-extractable nuclear antigen antibodies (ENA), anti-deoxyribonucleic acid antibodies (anti-DNA) and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) antibodies. These values indicated mild renal involvement and prompted a referral to our nephrology unit.
Upon admission, she had no history of unexplained fevers, weight-loss, or other systemic symptoms. She had a pulse of 100 beats/minute, blood pressure of 126/81 mmHg, and body temperature of 36.5 °C. Her review of systems was negative, with a gradual improvement of symptoms and vision of the right eye. She continued both-sided topical cycloplegic and topical corticosteroid therapy. Borderline blood pressure values with repeated and persistent abnormal values of ESR, serum urea and creatinine, proteinuria, and glucosuria, indicating kidney injury, prompted a kidney biopsy.
Histopathology revealed focal tubulointerstitial nephritis. Interstitial inflammatory cell infiltrate was composed of lymphocytes, macrophages, fewer neutrophils, eosinophils, and plasma cells and rare noncaseating granulomata, with foci of invasion of lymphocytes into the tubules (tubulitis). Tubules in the affected areas showed signs of acute tubular injury—flattened, irregular, and vacuolated tubular epithelium. Glomeruli and vessels were unremarkable . Immunofluorescence was negative. Electron microscopy showed no specific pathological findings. On the day of renal biopsy, 1 month after first symptom presentation, she also developed contralateral, left-sided anterior uveitis. A diagnosis of TINU syndrome was confirmed, based upon histopathological findings.
DNA typing of HLA loci showed the subtype HLA-B *07, *51; DRB1 *11, *13; DQA1 *05:05/05:09; DQB1 *03:01, negative for uveitis-related HLA-B27 genotype. Next-generation sequencing did not demonstrate any disease-related variants.
The patient was started on methylprednisolone 60 mg daily, which improved the laboratory markers of kidney injury and allowed us to continue an alternate-day corticosteroid therapy regimen. She also received pantoprazole 40 mg daily, trimetoprim–sulfametoxazole 480 mg twice daily every other day for Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia prevention, and vitamin D supplementation 2000 units daily, together with topical ocular therapy (scopolamine, nepafenac, dexamethasone). Because of elevated blood-pressure readings, she began therapy with ramipril 2.5 mg and later 5 mg daily and received regular follow-up.
After 3 months, upon evaluation at our out-patient clinic, her ocular symptoms improved, although she started having pain in her lumbar spine. Clinical examination showed a Cushingoid appearance with a 4 kg increase in body weight since discharge. Blood pressure values with antihypertensive therapy were normal. Lumbosacral spine X-ray imaging was normal, without signs of osteopenia . This allowed a slow reduction in corticosteroid therapy upon following weeks and motivated her for implementation of healthy lifestyle measures.
At the most recent ambulatory office visit, two and a half years after onset of TINU, the patient denied any further ocular exacerbations, but she gained weight and had a body mass index of almost 35 kg/m2. Her 24-hour ambulatory blood pressure values were normal, as well as renal ultrasound examination, without presence of renal scarring. She was receiving ramipril 2.5 mg and metformin 500 mg twice daily each, together with education on necessary lifestyle changes.