A 49-year-old man was admitted with epigastric pain. History suggestive of acute pancreatitis was confirmed on routine investigations with a raised amylase of 1040. Investigations to elicit the common aetiology of acute pancreatitis were normal: absence of gallstones (GS) on ultrasound (USS), lack of history of alcohol intake, normal lipids and calcium. He was not on any regular medications. He was readmitted again over the course of the next 3 months with similar presentation and raised amylase but normal USS and again normal liver function tests. His gastroscopy and repeat USS of the abdomen were normal. A subsequent endoscopic ultrasound revealed microlithiasis, a recognised cause for pancreatitis . The gall bladder status was Parkland grading scale Grade 1 . He was subsequently listed for LC. This was performed using a novel three port procedure consisting of only 5 mm ports, and he was discharged as a day case without complications. Informed patient consent was obtained.
The surgical technique is fundamentally similar to a standard LC and is demonstrated in Figs. , , and . Standard disposable 5 mm balloon ports × 3 (applied sciences) were placed in supraumbilical, epigastric and RUQ (in midclavicular line). The standard 4th port in the anterior axillary line was not inserted in this case. We used a high quality 5 mm camera in the umbilical port. The other two ports each 5 mm were inserted under direct vision. Patient was in reverse Trendelenburg position with right side of the patient tilted to the left by approximately 30°. A Maryland forceps and diathermy hook was used via the epigastric port and a Johans forceps via the RUQ port. The gallbladder (GB) was grasped at a convenient point just above the Hartmann’s pouch and retracted upwards and outwards or downwards as required to gain exposure to the Calot’s triangle. A Maryland forceps and hook connected to diathermy was used to grasp and strip or divide the peritoneum and create windows on the lateral side and medial sides of the Calot’s triangle staying close to the GB. Sufficient length of cystic duct and artery were displayed, clipped with a 5 mm laparoscopic clipper-2 proximally and 1 distally and divided. The GB was dissected off the liver bed. Through the 5 mm epigastric port the GB was grasped with a Johans forceps near its cystic duct end and withdrawn into the port. The port was gently withdrawn such that the distal GB and the distended fundus was snugly stuck into the epigastric port and the proximal end protruding from the abdominal wall. A small incision between two clips to this exposed part of the GB allowed suction and aspiration of the GB with a laparoscopic sucker to leave a shrivelled G.B. This was easily coaxed out, withdrawn and sent for histology. The epigastric port was reinserted to carry out a final inspection of the operative field and help with infiltration of Marcaine-20 mls of 0.25% marcaine to the GB fossa and 20 mls of 0.5% to the three ports. Ports were removed under direct vision checking that there was no bleeding or oozing. ‘J’ Needle Vicryl ‘1’ suture was used to close the 5 mm umbilical port and skin was closed with single staple to be removed in 8 days and Mepore dressing applied. This patient was discharged with uneventful postoperative recovery as a day case.