A 30-year-old female presented with chest pain and shortness of breath. The patient denies any complaints of palpitations or fevers. Her medical history was significant for non-ischemic cardiomyopathy, diagnosed 4 years ago, requiring an automatic implantable cardioverter-defibrillator, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, obstructive sleep apnoea, paroxysmal atrial fibrillation on apixaban, and recent COVID-19 infection. Her heart failure had been evaluated by her primary cardiologist and heart failure doctor by doing a cardiac catheterization showing normal coronary arteries, ever since her diagnosis 4 years ago. Previous transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) done 4 months prior to admission showed a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 15–20% with Grade 2 diastolic dysfunction and severe global hypokinesis of the LV, along with elevated right ventricular systolic pressure of 45–50 mmHg. Her medication history included carvedilol 37.5 mg/day twice a day (b.i.d.), sacubitril-valsartan 97–103 mg/day b.i.d., spironolactone 25 mg daily, hydralazine 25 mg three times a day (t.i.d.), isosorbide-dinitrate 10 mg t.i.d., torsemide 20 mg b.i.d., apixaban 5 mg b.i.d., and glipizide 5 mg b.i.d.. She was admitted to an outside hospital a month prior with COVID-19, not requiring mechanical ventilation, where she was treated with remdesivir and dexamethasone, which lead to her recovery, and continued her Eliquis due to normal renal function. She denies any smoking, or illicit drugs and drinks alcohol socially. She also has had multiple past admissions for heart failure.
Vital signs showed tachycardia to 117 b.p.m. and elevated blood pressure at 181/136 mmHg; rest of the vitals including temperature were within normal limits. Physical examination was significant for a regular, tachycardic pulse but diminished breath sounds at the bases but no crackles. Cardiovascular examination was unremarkable, including no peripheral signs of endocarditis, including Roth spots, Osler nodes, Janeway lesions, and splinter haemorrhages. SpO2 was 102 mmHg on arterial blood gas and patient was not requiring supplemental oxygen.
Initial workup was significant for brain natriuretic peptide of 1599 pg/mL (0–99 pg/mL), troponin I high sensitivity of 34 ng/L (<16ng/L), serum creatinine of 1.15 mg/dL (baseline 0.7 mg/dL) (0–1.11 mg/dL), D-dimer of 2442 ng/mL (0–230 ng/mL), ferritin 1852 ng/mL (5–204 ng/mL), fibrinogen 925 mg/dL (194–450 mg/dL), lactate dehydrogenase 1738 U/L (100–220 U/L), WBC 6.1 K/µL (4.0–12.0 K/µL), and thrombocytopenia at 103 000/mcL (150 000–400 000/mcL). Electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia, tall P- and QRS-waves suggestive of left atrial enlargement (with bifid P waves in lead II with >40 ms between the two peaks) and LV hypertrophy (R wave in aVL > 11 mm). Chest X-ray revealed cardiomegaly and central vascular prominence. A repeat COVID test was positive. The previous echo from 4 months prior to the current presentation did not show any LV thrombus . TTE during current admission showed decreased LVEF to 10–15%. and a new mobile mass in the LV outflow tract at the base of the mitral valve which measured 3.3 cm by 1.7 cm suggestive of a thrombus; however, vegetation could not be excluded (, ). LV internal dimension in systole and diastole were 7.1 cm and 7.3 cm, respectively.
The patient was admitted, and a heparin infusion was started for the LV thrombus. Patient continued to be afebrile and blood cultures were drawn for concerns for the possibility of endocarditis. Apixaban was discontinued. Cardiothoracic (CT) surgery was consulted for evaluation for a LV embolectomy; however, medical management was favoured. On Day 2, the patient felt heaviness in her lower extremities and physical examination revealed absent pulses bilaterally. Cardiothoracic angiogram aorta with bilateral run-off revealed a near-occlusive embolus within the distal infrarenal abdominal aorta extending into the common iliac arteries bilaterally. She underwent a bilateral femoral artery cutdown, bilateral iliac artery embolectomy, superficial femoral artery embolectomy, and bilateral lower extremity fasciotomy. A repeat TTE, on Day 3, did not reveal the original LV thrombus. However, there were two new mobile, echogenic structures in the LV apex and at the basal antero-lateral wall suggestive of further LV thrombus.
To identify the aetiology of the thrombi, a hypercoagulable workup including antinuclear antibodies, beta-2-glycoprotein, and anticardiolipin antibody was conducted; however, all were negative. Blood cultures that were previously drawn on admission, continued to be negative for any pathogen making endocarditis and a septic embolus unlikely. COVID-19 was deemed the aetiology for the LV thrombus. Heparin was bridged to warfarin. Repeat echocardiogram before discharge did not show any apical thrombus with a LVEF of 15%. After concerns for surgical wound healing, pain management due to bilateral fasciotomies, successful bridging from heparin to warfarin and titration of her heart failure therapy were addressed, the patient was successfully discharged after 6 weeks. Patient was discharged on carvedilol 25 mg b.i.d., Entresto 49–51 mg b.i.d., spironolactone 25 mg daily, torsemide 20 mg daily, and warfarin 9 mg daily, until the next follow-up with her cardiologist. A follow-up echocardiogram, 2 months later post-discharge, showed an ejection fraction of 25% with no recurrence of the LV thrombi .