A 12-year-old Japanese girl was referred to our department with cervical lymphadenitis and liver dysfunction, which she had experienced for 1 month prior to presentation. Physical examination showed no abnormalities except for slight swelling of the right cervical lymph nodes. Initial laboratory results revealed a normal complete blood cell count, but an elevated aspartate aminotransferase (AST) level (96 IU/L), an elevated alanine aminotransferase (ALT) level (241 IU/L), and anti-CMV immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibodies (3.08) (detected by enzyme immunoassay [EIA]; positive titer, >1.21). Based on these results, we first diagnosed transient liver dysfunction due to CMV infection. In general, most cases of CMV infection are self-limited; therefore, our patient was discharged to her home and no additional medications were provided at that time. Although we advised the patient to receive subsequent consultation a week later to follow-up on her liver dysfunction, she did not do so.
Two months after our examination, the patient returned to our hospital with recurrent fever, butterfly eruption, and palmar erythema. On examination, her vital signs were normal without low-grade fever (37.7 °C). Her neurologic exam also was normal. Nikolsky’s sign was negative, there were no mucosal erosions or blisters, and Raynaud phenomenon was absent. Abdominal examination did not reveal hepatosplenomegaly. We suspected SLE, and admitted the patient to the hospital.
Laboratory tests on admission were significant for presence of leucopenia and thrombocytopenia (white blood cell count, 5000/μL; neutrophil count, 4075/μL; lymphocyte count, 650/μL; hemoglobin level, 12.3 g/dL; platelet count, 12.3 × 104/μL). Her international normalized ratio, partial thromboplastin time, and C-reactive protein level were within normal limits, and her serum creatinine level was 0.77 mg/dL. Liver dysfunction showed slight improvement compared with the assessment performed 2 months prior (AST level, 76 IU/L; ALT level, 77 IU/L). Antinuclear antibody was positive in 1/640 titers, which showed a speckled and homogeneous pattern. Double-stranded DNA (ds-DNA) level was elevated (119 IU/mL), and complement levels were low [C3, 43 mg/dL (reference range, 86–160 mg/dL); C4, 6 mg/dL (reference range, 17–45 mg/dL)]. Anticardiolipin antibody and lupus anticoagulant were negative. Anti-Ro, anti-La, anti-Sm, and anticentromere antibodies were also negative. Anti-CMV IgM antibodies were elevated (4.16), as were anti-CMV IgG antibodies (9.1) (EIA; positive titer, >4.0). CMV pp65 antigenemia level was modestly elevated (1 cell per 5 × 104 cells), and CMV DNA was detected in her urine, but not in her blood, by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Her twenty-four-hour urinary protein level was 2.4 g/d. Renal biopsy was performed, which revealed class III lupus nephritis, as assessed according to the International Society of Nephrology/Renal Pathology Society classification.
The patient was diagnosed with SLE and concomitant primary CMV infection. We began treatment with 1 mg kg−1 day−1 prednisolone for the SLE and 10 mg kg−1 day−1 ganciclovir for the CMV infection, until tests for CMV DNA were confirmed to be negative in her blood and urine, which occurred after 10 days of treatment. Subsequently, the patient was administered 20 mg kg−1 day−1 methylprednisolone 3 days per week, followed by 0.8 mg kg−1 day−1 prednisolone; she repeated this therapy three times. These treatments were effective for symptoms of SLE: fever improved within a week after admission, while skin lesions and liver dysfunction improved within a week after methylprednisolone treatment. Ganciclovir was administered for a total of 14 days. On day 36, the patient also was administered 500 mg/m2 cyclophosphamide according to American College of Rheumatology guidelines. She was discharged after 6 weeks. At discharge, her ds-DNA level had improved to 29 IU/mL, her urinary protein level was 0.5 g/d, her CMV IgG level was elevated (91.9), and her CMV pp65 antigenemia level was normal. After discharge, the patient received the remaining cyclophosphamide therapy five times at our ambulatory clinic. Currently, the patient has a good condition with normal ds-DNA and urinary protein levels. There were no adverse effects of the drugs administered during this course of treatment .