A 24-year-old male attended the emergency department with a 2-day history of persistent palpitations and dyspnoea. He reported such symptoms over the last year, which became more frequent over the last 2 months. He had no previous medical history but alcohol and illegal drug use (including cannabis and cocaine), all of them discontinued due to symptoms’ exacerbation. His family history was unremarkable.
On admission, he was haemodynamically stable and his blood pressure was 128/80 mmHg. He had irregular tachycardia and bilateral crackles consistent with acute heart failure (HF). Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed atrial fibrillation (AF) with rapid ventricular response and non-specific intraventricular conduction disturbance . Chest X-ray confirmed pulmonary congestion . Laboratory findings revealed normal thyroid profile. He was given intravenous furosemide 40 mg and deslanoside 0.4 mg with clinical improvement.
The following day, the transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed severe left ventricular (LV) systolic dysfunction with an ejection fraction of 17%, increased LV filling pressure with an E/e′ ratio 15, mild mitral regurgitation and severe left atrium dilation with an indexed volume of 63.4 mL/m2. Furthermore, dysfunction of the right ventricle (RV) with a tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE) of 10 mm was present. In addition, striking features were noted. Both papillary muscles originated from a flattened LV apex (, see , ) while a spherical left ventricle and an elongated RV wrapping around the deficient LV apex resembled an orange-shaped and banana-shaped ventricle, respectively (, see , ).
Isolated left ventricular apical hypoplasia was suggested as a possible diagnosis and the patient was referred for an advanced cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) scan. Despite low-quality images due to AF and low patient compliance with respiratory instructions, CMR displayed same findings as TTE with the addition of subepicardial fatty replacement at the LV apex (, see , ) confirming ILVAH diagnosis. There was no clear evidence of myocardial fibrosis at late gadolinium enhancement sequence .
Diagnosis of HF with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF) and AF with an intermediate risk of stroke (CHA2DS2-VASc = 1) was made. Toxins (particularly alcohol and cocaine), tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy (TCM) and ILVAH per se were considered as potential explanations of ventricular dysfunction. Psychiatry counselling was encouraged to maintain drug abstinence. Moreover, AF ablation was proposed either because of the possibility of TCM or the coexistence of LV systolic dysfunction (irrespectively of its cause). Unfortunately, procedure-related costs precluded its performance. Then, the patient was started on carvedilol 6.25 mg twice daily (BD) and enalapril 10 mg BD, along with digoxin 0.25 mg once daily (OD) for rate control therapy due to low-normal blood pressure. Given low bleeding risk (HASBLED = 0) and severe left atria dilation, warfarin 5 mg OD was added for anticoagulation. He was discharged without signs of pulmonary congestion.
At 2 weeks of follow-up visit, he was at New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class II and reported frequent palpitations with evidence of AF with rapid ventricular response at new ECG. Heart failure medication was up-titrated and warfarin dose adjusted due to high international normalized ratio (INR).
At present, 18 months later, he remains on NYHA functional class II and persistent AF with controlled ventricular response, with no episode of thrombo-embolism or bleeding. New TTE showed similar findings as those of first study.