A 42-year-old male developed an insidious onset swelling on the ventral aspect of left elbow 6 months back for which he consulted elsewhere. Following radiological and blood investigations, he was diagnosed as pyogenic arthritis for which incision and drainage were performed followed by broad-spectrum antibiotics for 3 weeks. Subsequently, he developed multiple persistent discharging sinuses. He also had pain over the left elbow which was aggravated during movement and activities. Range of movement of his left elbow was restricted. There was no h/o trauma, constitutional symptoms such as fever, night cry, loss of appetite, and body weight. Other joints were not involved. There was no past or contact history of TB. Examination revealed two discharging sinuses; one on the ventral aspect and another on the dorsal aspect of left elbow . Discharge of pus from the sinuses was evident but no h/o history of bony spicules is coming out. Elbow range of motion was 10°—°—° and muscles of arm and forearm were wasted. Epitrochlear and axillary lymph nodes were not palpable. Distal neurovascular status was intact. Plain radiograph of the left elbow joint showed irregularity of proximal radius mainly in the metadiaphyseal region and mild periosteal reaction . Sinogram of the affected side showed a blind-ending linear tract suggestive of sinus formation . Magnetic Resonance Imaging of elbow joint revealed focal widening of medullary cavity of proximal radius affecting metadiaphyseal region and large bony defect (8.2 mm) in the anterolateral cortex of proximal radius communicating with the skin through a well-defined sinus tract which opens on the ventral aspect of elbow . Two sinus tracts, one posteromedially and another laterally directed sinus tracts were noted from the affected radius into the subcutaneous plane. No articular extension and involvement of humerus and ulna were seen. These findings were reported as suggestive of chronic osteomyelitis of upper end of the radius with cloaca formation in the anterolateral cortex with sinus tracts formation. Blood parameters were within normal limit except minimal rise in erythrocyte sedimentation rate (33 mm/1 h) and quantitative C-reactive protein (2.43). Chest X-ray was found to be normal. As the patient was an adult and attained skeletal maturity, he underwent radial head excision following exposure by Kocher’s approach along with excision of sinus tract under GA brachial block. The excised specimen was sent for Gram staining, Ziehl-Nielson (Z-N) staining for Acid Fast Bacilli (AFB), Cartridge Based Nucleic Acid Amplification Test (CB-NAAT) examination, culture for pyogenic and tubercle bacilli and histopathology for etiological diagnosis. Although mycobacterium TB was detected by real time Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) method on gene expert platform, acid-fast bacilli was not detected in Z N staining. The histopathological examination showed tuberculoma with central caseation . Rifampicin resistance was not detected. A baseline Liver Function Test (LFT) was done which showed normal parameters. Multidrug antitubercular therapy was started under category 1 under directly observed treatment short course which includes intensive phase of 2 months of isoniazid, rifampicin, ethambutol, and pyrazinamide; continuation phase of 7 months of isoniazid and rifampicin. Elbow was splinted for 2 weeks until subsidence of pain and spasm and then weaned for active and assisted range of motion exercises within pain limits.
Patient was followed up regularly by clinical examination, blood investigations like Hemoglobin %, blood cell count, LFT etc. and radiographs of left elbow. No drug related ad verse effect was reported by the patient during treatment. At final follow up on completion of antitubercular drugs, the sinuses healed , elbow became painless with full range of motion and normal functional ability.