We present a case of a human immunodeficiency virus-negative 37-year-old man with 4 months of an intermittent, non-productive cough with associated weight loss (body mass index of 19). He had recently spent 6 weeks in the Amazonian jungle and had traveled to Botswana and India within 2 years of presentation. His brother had been previously treated with active TB. His symptoms progressed with the onset of chest discomfort prompting medical evaluation. A chest x-ray showed a right pleural effusion without other pulmonary nodules . The initial pleural fluid studies showed an exudative process by Light’s criteria and a cell count was not obtained. Bacterial, fungal and AFB cultures were collected, with no elements seen on initial Gram’s stain or AFB smear. He was discharged on azithromycin for presumed parapneumonic effusion. He returned to the hospital 6 days later with increased chest pain and fevers. Repeat thoracentesis demonstrated pleural fluid with 1900 white blood cells/μL (25% polymorphonuclear leukocytes, 54% atypical lymphocytes and 21% lymphocytes). Pleural lactate dehydrogenase was 1121 units/L, glucose 86 mg/dL, pH 7.5 and total protein 5.0 g/dL. Repeat pleural fluid bacterial, fungal and AFB cultures (two slants on Lowenstein-Jensen media, one in liquid media with Mycobacterium Growth Indicator) were obtained and again no organisms were seen on Gram’s stain or AFB smear. Nucleic acid amplification testing (NAAT) for M. tuberculosis on the pleural sample was negative (Mayo MTBRP). Sputum AFB cultures revealed no growth. Sputum NAAT (Cepheid GeneXpert MTB/RIF) for TB was negative. A pleural fluid ADA (ARUP 3002978) returned at 6.5 IU/L by quantitative spectrophotometry. Given the very low ADA value, negative NAAT and that cultures of the pleural fluid were preliminarily without growth, alternative diagnoses were considered, and anti-TB therapy was withheld. The otherwise more exhaustive diagnostics included a multiplexed respiratory virus polymerase chain reaction panel, urine antigen studies for Histoplasmosis and Blastomyces species, and autoimmune serologies; all of which were unremarkable. While computed tomography imaging did not show enlarged lymph nodes to suggest lymphoma and pleural cytology did not demonstrate malignant cells, there were a few small calcified supraclavicular lymph nodes and thus given the very low ADA value and lack of alternate diagnosis, a thoracoscopic pleural biopsy was performed. On hospital day 21, his initial pleural fluid cultures grew M. tuberculosis, and later his pleural biopsy also grew M. tuberculosis. While awaiting the diagnostic work-up and without anti-TB therapy, he received numerous administrations of antipyretics and continued to lose weight. Once the diagnosis of TB was ultimately made, he was initiated on typical four-drug treatment for drug-susceptible TB. However, he subsequently developed hepatoxicity and required treatment interruption before continuing a triple-drug, pyrazinamide-sparing regimen necessitating an extended total duration. His total hospital course was 30 days, and now has completed treatment. He is clinically improved to near baseline health with a resolved pleural effusion by repeat imaging.