A 30-year-old male presented to the emergency department with low-grade fever, sore throat and generalised malaise that started 3 days prior to presentation. He went to his primary care physician who diagnosed him as a case of a viral upper respiratory tract infection and treated him with supportive measures (ibuprofen and paracetamol). On the following day, he developed an erythematous pruritic warm raised rash on his left anterolateral chest that extended to the medial aspect of the axilla. He also noticed the same rash on his mid-back. He presented to an emergency department 12 h after that where he was evaluated and treated with the impression of an allergic reaction to ibuprofen. He was given intravenous antihistamine and hydrocortisone in the emergency department and was discharged with topical steroid cream and antihistamine tablets. The ibuprofen was also stopped on that visit. Twelve hours after that presentation, he appeared in another emergency department complaining of worsening itchiness and heat from the rash. He described the rash to be extremely itchy and uncomfortable preventing him from sleeping at night. His past medical history was negative except for gout controlled with allopurinol. He denied any previous hospitalisations, surgeries, other medications, allergies to food, substance or medications. He also denied any recent travel or positive sick contacts. He is a regular smoker with 10-year-pack history and had no alcohol or illicit drug use history.
Upon examination, he was found to be febrile (38.2 °C) and tachycardic with a heart rate of (108 bpm). He also was found to have exudate on his tonsils and bilaterally enlarged cervical lymph nodes. Otherwise, his ear, nose and throat examination was unremarkable. His respiratory and cardiovascular examinations were all normal.
His integumentary examination revealed erythematous, raised rough warm plaques on the anterior left lateral chest wall that extended to the medial aspect of the left axilla and mid-thoracic area on his back left to the mid-line .
Investigations showed positive results for point of care influenza B swab test and unremarkable full blood count, renal profile and C-reactive protein levels. A throat culture was also sent.
He received 1.2 million units of intramuscular (IM) penicillin G benzathine under the clinical impression of scarlet fever, intravenous (IV) diphenhydramine and methylprednisolone as symptomatic treatment and paracetamol for fever. He was then discharged on oral oseltamivir, loratadine, and paracetamol and was advised to continue using the topical steroid cream.
A day later, the patient reported no improvement and decided to seek medical care again. He was seen in the emergency department with worsening pruritus and pain in the lesion and was referred to the dermatology clinic to be seen on the same day. The dermatologist decided to perform a biopsy on the lesion and discharged the patient on clobetasol 0.05% topical cream for 14 days and oxycodone oral tablets with a follow-up in the dermatology clinic in 14 days.
Fourteen days later, the patient followed-up with the dermatologist. He described a change in the rash couple of days after he was seen in the clinic. He described raised vesicles that disappeared a week later leaving white lesions that persisted till the day of the follow-up appointment . His skin biopsy was reported positive for herpes zoster virus. He was then prescribed oral valacyclovir for 7 days with the diagnosis of multidermatomal herpes zoster (T1-T4).