A 60 year old male was referred to the Endocrinology clinic at the University of Minnesota for the evaluation of worsening symptoms that included diaphoresis, anxiety, inability to concentrate and episodic visual changes for the prior 18 months. Patient reported waking from sleep during the night with symptoms. He had discovered that carbohydrate rich snacks every 30 – 60 min prevented his symptoms. As a result of frequent snacking on carbohydrate containing foods, he had gained 30 pounds in the prior 12 months. He did not experience symptoms postprandially. During one of his episodes, he obtained a finger stick glucose value of 36 mg/dL. His past medical history included hypertension, dyslipidemia and obstructive sleep apnea. He did not have history of diabetes mellitus or bariatric surgery. His medications included metoprolol extended release, hydrochlorothiazide, irbesartan, amlodipine, aspirin, terazosin, simvastatin and omeprazole. He occasionally consumed alcohol and had a remote history of smoking. Physical examination was within normal limits except for body mass index (BMI) of 33.2 kg/m2.
Serial finger stick blood glucose monitoring during symptomatic episodes demonstrated recurrent hypoglycemia with blood glucose values of 41, 35 and 41 mg/dL. Diagnoses considered included medication induced hypoglycemia, insulinoma, chronic liver disease, pheochromocytoma and adrenal insufficiency. These diagnoses were excluded based on laboratory evaluation .Subsequently, IGF-2 was measured and found to be 2215 ng/mL (reference range: 414 – 1248 ng/mL). Computed Tomography (CT) without contrast of chest, abdomen and pelvis showed a large right suprarenal mass measuring 14 × 17 × 16 cm, which was lobular in shape with central necrosis and calcifications . Technetium radionuclide bone scan did not show any metastatic disease.The patient underwent right nephrectomy and resection of the mass. Surgical pathology showed a malignant solitary fibrous tumor with spindled to epithelioid cells and focal high-grade nuclear atypia . The tumor cell proliferation marker Ki67 index was elevated. The tumor was positive for CD34, CD99 and Bcl-2 consistent with a diagnosis of malignant solitary fibrous tumor.
The patient’s follow-up IGF-2 levels were within the normal range . He did not experience further episodes of hypoglycemia and was able to lose 10 lbs over the next six months. A three year follow-up CT scan of the abdomen did not demonstrate any evidence of recurrence.