A 19-year-old female presented to the emergency department (ED) with the chief complaint of chest pain, palpitations, and generalized weakness intermittently, which were present for two months but had become more prominent during the prior week and worsening over the immediately preceding day. She had been seen in our ED one week prior for similar symptoms and was diagnosed with anxiety before being discharged. The patient did not report any other previous medical or surgical history, denied any history of familial disease to the best of her knowledge, and reported marijuana use several days earlier.
On presentation, the patient was tachycardic with a rate of 126 beats per minute (bpm), hypertensive at 169/84 millimeters of mercury, and mildly tachypneic with a respiratory rate of 17 breaths per minute. Otherwise, she was afebrile and not hypoxic. Examination revealed a young female who appeared stated age and mildly anxious. Her cardiac exam revealed tachycardia with a regular rhythm and no appreciable murmurs. The patient’s lungs were clear to auscultation bilaterally and she was in no respiratory distress. Her skin was without any notable lesions or rashes, and she had no lower extremity edema or calf tenderness to palpation. Of note, the patient exhibited pronounced heart rate lability and would often be noted to have a resting heart rate between 90–100 bpm on telemetry when alone in the room, which increased to 120–140 bpm whenever staff entered.
Point-of-care echocardiography demonstrated an approximately 3.42 x 2.80 centimeters (cm) ovular echogenic structure in the left ventricular outflow tract in the parasternal long window. The structure was also visualized in the apical four-chamber window (, ). On bedside echocardiography the patient was noted to be tachycardic without global left ventricular hypokinesis, and the right ventricle was not dilated. A chest radiograph was obtained that did not demonstrate any cardiopulmonary abnormality , and 12-lead electrocardiogram demonstrated sinus tachycardia without ST-segment changes.
Laboratory testing demonstrated a mild microcytic anemia with a hemoglobin level of 10.6 grams per deciliter (g/dL) (reference range: 11.5–15.5 g/dL) and mean corpuscular volume of 77 femtoliters (fL) (80–100 fL). Otherwise, the patient’s white blood cell counts were within reference range, but she had a mild thrombocytosis at 400 thousand cells per microliter (th/μL) (120–360 th/μL). Chemistries were primarily remarkable for a mildly low potassium level of 3.0 milliequivalents per liter (mEq/L) (3.5–5.5 mEq/L), carbon dioxide level of 19 millimoles per liter (mmol/L) (24–34 mmol/L), iron level of 22 micrograms per deciliter (mcg/dL) (40–150 mcg/dL), and ferritin of 11.6 nanograms per milliliter (ng/mL) (20–300 ng/mL). Urine toxicology returned positive for marijuana, and thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) levels were within normal reference range. Urinalysis was unremarkable, and urine pregnancy test was negative.
The patient received two liters of normal saline for fluid resuscitation and repeat vitals after administration of fluid demonstrated improvement in tachycardia. As seen in the lab values, the patient was mildly anemic with a microcytic anemia consistent with iron deficiency anemia. Unfortunately, date of last menstrual period was unknown; however, this finding is not unexpected secondary to menses in a reproductive-age woman. There was less suspicion for thyroid dysfunction given normal TSH levels, and the patient’s symptoms were considered unlikely to be secondary to acute marijuana toxicity given the reported timeline of use. Urine fractionated metanephrines and plasma free metanephrine levels were not obtained, however, pheochromocytoma should also have been considered in this young, hypertensive patient.
The case was discussed with cardiology, and heparin infusion was initiated over concerns of adherent thrombi that could embolize. The patient was subsequently admitted to the hospital, and a computed tomography (CT) of the thorax with intravenous contrast was performed; however, the CT was not obtained using a cardiac protocol. No mass was noted on the final report. The patient underwent transesophageal echocardiography that confirmed the presence of a 3.5 x 2.25 cm interventricular septal mass just below the aortic valve. The patient was subsequently transferred to a tertiary medical center for cardiothoracic surgical evaluation.