A two-and-half-year-old Caucasian girl presented with hematemesis. A systemic inquiry revealed no other symptoms. She was noted to be very small, with growth below the 3rd centile. She was pale, very alert, active and playful. Her abdominal examination revealed prominent superficial veins with splenomegaly measuring 6 cm from the costal margin. The rest of her systemic examination was normal.
Her stool was positive for occult blood; however her complete blood count, coagulation profile, extended clotting study, and thrombophilia screen were all within normal limits. She had had a Meckel's abdominal scan which came back normal. Her liver function which was repeatedly checked remained within normal limits.
Our patient was born by emergency lower segment Cesarean section (EmLSCS) due to fetal distress at 33 weeks' gestation. Her parents were non-consanguineous Caucasians. At birth her mother was 34 years of age, a non-smoker and a non-alcoholic; and she was on prophylthyouracil for a hyperactive thyroid. Antenatal history revealed that her pregnancy had been complicated by pregnancy-induced hypertension. Fetal growth had been monitored regularly for suspected growth restriction. Ultrasound scan had confirmed the restricted growth and a Doppler ultrasound scan had been abnormal with absent end diastolic flow. There had been no oligo- or polyhydramnios. Antenatal TORCH (toxoplasma, rubella, cytomegalovirus, Herpes Simplex), HIV, Treponemma and Hepatitis screening were all normal.
Our patient was born in a good condition with Apgars of 9 at one minute and 10 at five minutes. Her weight was 1250 g at birth, which was below the 3rd centile for her age and sex. She was noted to have an imperforate anus, with a rectovaginal fistula. She had heart murmur, and a subsequent echocardiography confirmed perimembranous ventricular septal defect (VSD) and persistent foramen ovale. An X-ray of her spine confirmed the hemivertebrae on her sacrococcygeal spine. She had had surgical correction of her imperforate anus and rectovaginal fistula within the first few days of life.
She had spent four weeks in the neonatal unit before being discharged home. She was doing well at home until she presented to us at two and half years of age with effortless vomiting of blood. Her growth trajectory had always remained below the 3rd centile.
She had had different tests following her admission with hematemesis. An ultrasound of her abdomen confirmed splenomegaly, and a Doppler sonography showed a thready portal vein with correct directional low velocity flow towards the liver.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of her liver, using a gadolinium contrast agent, confirmed splenomegaly with gastric, retroperitoneal and splenic varices. The portal vein was thready with collateral vessels involving both left and right portal veins. There was no evidence of intrahepatic duct dilation in the gadolinium-enhanced MRI scan of the liver.