A 15-year-old boy with severe neurodevelopmental disabilities developed sudden-onset fever, abdominal distention, and dyspnea and was referred to our hospital 3 hours after symptom onset. He was born at 36 weeks of gestational age by normal spontaneous vaginal delivery with an Apgar score of 8/10 and birth weight of 1836 g. He had multiple malformations and had undergone several surgeries including Ramstedt pyloromyotomy, ventricular septal defect repair, orchidopexy, Nissen fundoplication, and scoliosis correction. Conventional G-banding analysis of his peripheral blood showed a normal karyotype.
He was taking several medications including magnesium oxide, daikenchuto (a Japanese herbal medicine), dimethicone, mosapride, and lansoprazole for gastrointestinal symptom control. Nitrazepam, risperidone, and carbamazepine were prescribed for insomnia and epilepsy. He had severe intellectual impairment and limited activities of daily living. He walked with a body support walker and had difficulty with oral feeding and no verbal communication ability.
On admission, he appeared unwell; his body temperature was 38.7°C, pulse rate was 110/min, and respiratory rate was 24/min. Physical examination revealed no abdominal distension or tenderness. Laboratory examination showed a normal white blood cell count with a slightly increased C-reactive protein level and normal serum levels of bilirubin, ammonia, glucose, and lactate. Serum levels of potassium, sodium, and chloride were 5.2 mEq/L, 134 mEq/L, and 102 mEq/L, respectively. Blood urea nitrogen and serum creatinine were 10 mg/dL and 1.41 mg/dL, respectively. Serum levels of aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, and lactate dehydrogenase were elevated at 83 U/L, 41 U/L, and 475 U/L, respectively. The platelet count was normal at 34.3 × 104/μL. The plasma fibrinogen level and antithrombin III level were 237 mg/dL and 69.3%, respectively. Prothrombin time expressed as internal normalized ratio (PT-INR) was 1.24, and activated partial thromboplastin time was 33.2 sec. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) without contrast revealed dilated and thinned intestinal loops from the duodenum to the sigmoid colon, without free air or fluid .
The patient was initially diagnosed as having paralytic ileus secondary to severe constipation. He received nasogastric suction and intravenous fluids, and his dyspnea subsequently resolved. We had discussed further examinations including contrast CT when his condition suddenly worsened to shock presenting with ventricular tachycardia and absent distal pulses, cool extremities, and prolonged capillary refill. After appropriate cardiopulmonary resuscitation, he was transferred to an intensive care unit. The ventricular tachycardia diminished without electrical defibrillation. Isotonic crystalloids, albumin solution, dopamine, and dobutamine were administrated under the diagnosis of hypovolemic shock. Meropenem and intravenous immunoglobulin were also given for a provisional diagnosis of sepsis from bacterial translocation. It is considered that the patient developed disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) because of a decreased platelet count of 19.1 × 104/μL, decreased fibrinogen level of 109 mg/dL, decreased antithrombin III level of 41.8%, and prolonged PT-INR and APTT of 1.64 and 51.0 sec, respectively. The D-dimer level was 88.0 μg/mL, and the thrombin-antithrombin complex level was 42.1 μg/L, which were also consistent of DIC. Recombinant human soluble thrombomodulin and antithrombin III were used for DIC; however, these treatments were ineffective. The serum potassium level was 4.4 mEq/L, and other electrolyte levels were within normal limits. The serum amylase level was 351 U/L. We did not perform blood gas analysis that time because of some technical problems. Fifteen hours after admission, emergent laparotomy was performed because colonic obstruction secondary to fecal impaction was suspected. Surgery revealed a segmentally necrotic intestine from the jejunum to ascending colon with unattenuated pulsation of peripheral intestinal arteries , suggesting a diagnosis of NOMI. The necrotic intestine was resected, and stomas were created. Histopathology of resected intestine showed massive cellular infiltration, which was mainly neutrophilic, and ischemic changes with transmural necrosis . Arterial or venous thrombus was not identified in the resected specimens, which also supported the diagnosis of NOMI. On postoperative day 3, subserosal hemorrhage of the sutured jejunum occurred, which required surgical resection of the affected section. Extubation was difficult because of aspiration pneumonia; therefore, laryngotracheal separation was performed. He developed short bowel syndrome postoperatively and needed long-term supportive care. He was discharged on postoperative day 334.