A 52-year-old woman, gravida 2, para 2, with history of obesity, asthma, and prediabetes presented to the emergency department with complaints of chest pain. Her mother passed away 3 days prior to her presentation. During the funeral, she reported left-sided chest pain which spontaneously resolved but reappeared later in the evening. It was described as substernal chest tightness, 6/10, non-radiating with no aggravating or relieving factors. Her vital signs included blood pressure 151/83, heart rate 73, respiratory rate 18/min, and she had normal physical examination. An electrocardiogram (ECG) on presentation showed ST-segment elevation in inferior leads with reciprocal changes in lateral leads . Troponin T and CPK were elevated and peaked to 3.90 ng/mL (<0.03 ng/mL) and 1938 U/L (24–173 U/L), respectively during hospitalization. Emergency coronary angiography (CA) revealed Type 1 SCAD of the proximal right coronary artery (RCA) and long segment narrowing consistent with Type 2b distal left anterior descending artery (LAD) SCAD . Given the presence of thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI) 3 flow through the RCA, conservative medical management was pursued. Left ventriculogram (LVgram) revealed evidence of TC with apical akinesis, anterolateral hypokinesis, and inferobasal hyperkinesis, and a transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) confirmed the same. Transthoracic echocardiogram showed ejection fraction 50–55% and no mitral regurgitation or left ventricular outflow tract obstruction. Repeat ECG’s the following day showed resolution of ST elevation. She remained chest pain free and was discharged on maximal medical therapy with dual antiplatelet agents, beta-blocker (BB), and high-dose statin.
The patient returned to the hospital 2 days post-discharge with a similar presentation of persistent chest pain with ST elevation in inferior leads and elevated troponin of 0.958. Repeat CA revealed progression of proximal RCA dissection (Type 1 Saw, ), while the distal LAD dissection showed near complete resolution (Type 2b, ). Since TIMI 3 flow was still present in the distal RCA it was decided to continue medical management. Repeat TTE suggested improvement in inferobasal and resolution of apical hypokinesis. Given her ongoing medical stability, she was discharged home. After 1 week, she complained of palpitations and a 24-h Holter monitor was ordered in the outpatient setting, revealing occasional ectopic ventricular beats but there was no ventricular arrhythmia. Since her palpitations worsened, she was readmitted to the hospital. She underwent another CA which showed evidence of a well healing RCA SCAD (Type 1 Saw, ). Patient continues to be asymptomatic during her last 1 month of follow-up.