A 66-year-old man presented to the emergency department with dyspnoea started within the last 2 weeks. He was hemodynamically stable (blood pressure 145/80 mmHg, heart rate 85/min, respiratory rate 19/min) with signs of heart failure. The body mass index (BMI) was 32. The physical examination revealed mild bilateral ankle oedema with bilateral basal crackles and a systolic murmur at the right second intercostal space. He underwent an aortic valve replacement with a mechanical prosthesis (St. Jude Medical 23 mm, St. Jude Medical Inc., Minnesota, MN) 12 years ago, due to rheumatic aortic stenosis. His electrocardiogram and chest X-ray were unremarkable. Laboratory analysis showed normal sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein level. Serum creatinine was 0.85 mg/dL, and troponin test was negative.
On his medical reports, the last follow-up data were obtained 6 months ago before the symptom onset. Previous echocardiography showed peak transvalvular gradient of 24 mmHg with EF of 55%. At that time, he had no complaints and INR was (2.1). His current pharmacological therapy on admission was warfarin 2.5 mg o.d. Despite being on oral anticoagulation therapy his INR was below his target range (1.3).
The emergency transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed a markedly elevated transvalvular peak and mean pressure gradients of 87 and 65 mmHg, respectively, with impaired movement of prosthesis discs . Left ventricular systolic function was impaired with the ejection fraction of 28% and no mass was visualized in conjunction with the prosthesis. Fluoroscopy showed an immobile anterior disc of the aortic prosthesis . Transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) confirmed severely restricted valve motions by a huge and partially mobile mass, compatible with thrombus, at the supravalvular site of 2 cm2 in size with maximal diameter of 17 mm (, ).
Based on the medical history with acute onset of symptoms, inadequate anticoagulation, and restricted leaflet motion we diagnosed a PVT and referred the patient to a cardiac surgeon. A patient was declined for surgery due to low EF, high BMI, risks of resternotomy, and embolization of thrombus. To address the complex medical issue at hand, a collaborative effort involving cardiologists, cardiac surgeons, anaesthesiologists, and neurologists was necessary. A decision to undergo thrombolytic treatment following bilateral carotid embolic device protection implantation was made. We performed a ‘half-dose’ fibrinolytic therapy with 50 mg Alteplase; a tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA), without a bolus and with an infusion period of 2 h. We decided for this treatment because we administered a t-PA in the catheter laboratory after implanting embolic protection devices (ev3 SpiderFX, Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN) into both internal carotid arteries . The right radial artery was punctured to implant an embolic protection device into the right internal carotid artery. The right common femoral artery below 2 cm of the inguinal ligament was punctured for the implantation of protection device into the left internal carotid artery. 6F sheaths were used for both arterial access. During the procedure, sites of the arterial access were continuously monitored for bleeding and haematoma, to prevent their progression by immediate manual compression. Fortunately, no haematoma nor bleeding occurred during the procedure and there was no need for compression. Also we planned to check the prosthetic valve mobility by performing serial fluoroscopy during the treatment period. After 75 min we detected partial movement of stucked leaflet of prosthetic valve. Ninety minutes after the starting of administration of a t-PA the fluoroscopy showed full mobilization of both of the leaflets of prosthetic valve . The protection devices have been removed 15 min after the end of the administration of a t-PA. An embolized thrombus at the apex of the device that was placed in the left carotid artery was detected . The size of thrombus at the apex of embolic protection device was 2.8 mm. We did not confirm a thrombus by the histology because of the clear mechanism. There was no sign of transient ischaemic attack (TIA) nor stroke and the procedure was ended uneventful. However, there was no sign of emboli in other arterial beds we did not perform CT or MRI to prove the absence of embolization. The TOE performed on the next day confirmed successful resolution of the thrombus as well as the motion of the prosthesis discs were normal (, ). Prosthetic valve pressure gradients had returned to appropriate values . An unfractionated heparin was started 2 h (5000 units i.v. injection four times a day) after the end of thrombolysis. A warfarin 5 mg o.d. was started the next day. When we reached INR level ≥2.0 heparin therapy was discontinued.
After discharge, the patient has been regularly seen in our outpatient clinic. He has been doing well and has no cardiac symptoms. The last echocardiography was performed 4 weeks after discharge showing a normal function of the aortic valve prosthesis with improved LV systolic function (EF 50%) and dimensions. The range of an INR keeps 2.2–2.8 with Warfarin 5 mg o.d.