A 50-year-old Japanese woman fell from a height of approximately 10 m and was brought to our hospital by an ambulance. She had no remarkable medical and family history, was a social drinker, and a non-smoker of tobacco. Her marital status was stable with her husband. Her consciousness levels were 14 points (E4, V4, M6) according to the Glasgow Coma Scale at initial arrival. She complained of respiratory discomfort and low back pain, and was in an unrestful state. Her respiratory rate was 24 breaths/minute, blood oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 95% under 10 L/minute oxygenation, subcutaneous emphysema was recognized in the left side of her chest, and her breathing sounded weak. A hemoperitoneum was not detected on focused assessment with ultrasonography for trauma. Her pulse rate was 90 beats per minute (bpm) and her blood pressure was 180/120 mmHg as measured by an automatic blood pressure monitor. However, her capillary refill time was 3 seconds and radial artery pulsation was feeble with cold sweat in her extremities; hence, she was recognized as being in a state of shock. Her face swelled, and bleeding from her nasal and the oral cavities continued. A subcutaneous hematoma was found in her lumbar and her left femoral region. Her left elbow was deformed and swollen. Because she was in a restless state, accurate neurological assessments were difficult, but coarse paralysis of limbs was not observed.
First, a 28-French chest drain was inserted in her left thoracic cavity for the diagnosis of tension pneumothorax. Hemothorax was not recognized. A pelvis X-ray showed unstable pelvic fracture and a contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) pan scan was additionally performed. In the contrast CT, retroperitoneal bleeding with the extravasation of contrast media was recognized . Other injuries and laboratory data on initial arrival are shown in Tables and respectively.
The injury severity score in this case was 66 and the probability of survival was calculated as 59.3%. Multiple rib fractures were seen, even though active bleeding from intercostal artery injury and pulmonary laceration were not noted at the initial visit. She had deteriorated during CT (blood pressure 67/42 mmHg, pulse rate 75 bpm), and blood transfusion was therefore started and intubation was performed. Transcatheter arterial embolization was performed for hemorrhagic shock with the pelvic fracture as the main bleeding source. While starting angiography, she did not respond to the massive blood transfusion and her systolic blood pressure was maintained at around 60 mmHg. Therefore, first, a 7-French aortic occlusion catheter (RESCUE BALLOON®, Tokai Medical Products, Aichi, Japan) was inserted from her left femoral artery. Her hemodynamics had improved and her systolic blood pressure was 90 mmHg due to REBOA (30 mL saline inflation into the balloon) at the first lumbar vertebra level. Next, transcatheter arterial embolization was started using the sheath inserted in her right femoral artery. Her bilateral internal iliac arteries were embolized from the origin portion with a gelatin sponge. Furthermore, we embolized the extravasation of contrast media of her middle sacral artery and lumbar artery with n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate. Her blood pressure had been monitored by continuous invasive arterial measurement from her upper right brachial artery during interventional radiology. The systolic blood pressure under REBOA was intended to be controlled under 100 mmHg (so called permissive hypotension); however, it was actually in the range of 90 to 160 mmHg. After 18 minutes of occlusion, the balloon was deflated and the aortic occlusion catheter was removed. However, she was still hemodynamically unstable. The internal iliac artery angiography was performed again, and the site that had just been embolized, as described above, presented recanalization. Since coagulopathy was recognized as a complication, we interpreted that it would be difficult to restrain the hemorrhage with the gelatin sponge. Therefore, it was re-embolized from the origin portion of her bilateral internal iliac arteries by n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate . After embolization, retroperitoneal gauze packing and pelvic external skeletal fixation were additionally performed. Further, a repeat CT pan scan was performed, and a massive hemothorax had appeared in her left pleural cavity, which had not been captured at the first arrival . As the inserted chest drain at the first arrival was detained between lobes, the amount of bleeding in the pleural cavity had not been reflected precisely. Thoracotomy hemostasis was performed and a hemothorax of approximately 2500 ml was aspirated to search for the source of the bleeding. However, clear active bleeding was not captured and only extremely minute bleeding from the rib fracture site, chest wall, and pulmonary contusion area was detected. Therefore, special hemostasis treatment was not needed. After a massive hematoma was removed, a chest drain was placed again and her chest was closed. Continuous blood transfusion was not needed before or after the operation and her postoperative hemodynamics became stable. The timeline of the initial treatment in our emergency department is shown in Table .
The retroperitoneal packing gauze was removed on day 3. On day 24, the chest drain was removed without increasing the hemothorax. Complications accompanied by internal iliac artery occlusion, such as gluteal muscle necrosis, did not appear. She regained the ability to walk, and was moved to another hospital on day 154 for rehabilitation. She was discharged from the rehabilitation hospital 6 months after the injury, and her activities of daily living were almost independent.