The patient was a 71-year-old man with no systemic or ophthalmologic disorders. He developed ocular pain and decreased visual acuity of the right eye abruptly over 2 weeks before visiting the local clinic. He was referred to a tertiary referral center for uncontrolled IOP. His visual acuity was hand movement in the right eye and 1.0 in the left eye. IOP was 50 mmHg and 12 mmHg in the right and left eyes, respectively. Slit-lamp examination revealed corneal edema, the presence of inflammatory cells and multiple iridescent crystalline in the anterior chamber, and hypermature cataract in the right eye , while the left eye showed a mild nuclear cataract. Gonioscopic examination revealed open angles in both eyes and the presence of iridescent crystalline in the trabecular meshwork of the right eye. He was treated with instillation of topical glaucoma medication (0.15% brimonidine, 1% brinzolamide/0.5% timolol, and 0.03% bimatoprost) and systemic mannitol. IOP remained high despite intensive anti-glaucoma therapy. We made a diagnosis of phacolytic glaucoma and planned to perform extracapsular cataract extraction (ECCE). However, we found zonulysis in nearly two third of the lens. Because of this, we choose to perform ICCE rather than ECCE. After performing anterior chamber paracentesis (0.3 mL) for diagnostic purposes, ICCE was performed using lens capsular forcep and spoon under retrobulbar anesthesia through a 10-mm superior corneoscleral incision.
The acquired lens and capsule were fixed in 2% glutaraldehyde, embedded in paraffin, and then sectioned at a thickness of 5 μm. Aqueous humor and serial sections of the lens capsule were stained with hematoxylin and eosin and examined under an Olympus BX51 light microscope (Olympus Corporation, Tokyo, Japan). Ultrathin sections (50 μm) were stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate, and then examined using a Zeiss Libra 120 electron microscope (Carl Zeiss SMT AG Company, Oberkochen, Germany).
In the aqueous humor, macrophages with multiple pigmented cytoplasmic materials believed to be lens protein were noted . Stained sections of the anterior lens capsule revealed intact structures by light microscopy . However, by scanning electron microscopic examination, the center of the anterior lens capsule showed full-thickness loss of tissue integrity with multiple grooves unlike the intact peripheral portion of the anterior lens capsule .
Three days after ICCE, corneal edema had decreased with a moderate cellular inflammatory reaction in the anterior chamber. The patient was discharged and treated with topical steroid. At postoperative 2 months, corneal edema had disappeared and no cellular inflammatory reaction was noted in the anterior chamber. In the right eye, IOP was 15 mmHg without anti-glaucoma therapy, and best-corrected visual acuity increased to 0.4.