A 32-year-old man presented with complaints of visual hallucinations that he characterized as “golden glitter” and “glowing translucent patches” in his total visual field. He also complained about seeing trails that follow moving objects. Particularly, loud colors, such as neon-colored objects or clothes, would intimidate him due to their intensity and could also trigger more severe episodes of visual distortions over several hours.
He reported that symptoms started gradually in the months after he repeatedly consumed hallucinogenic drugs at the age of 18. Due to the symptoms, he withdrew from social contacts and became increasingly insecure. At the age of 19, he sought professional help. Cranial magnetic resonance imaging (cMRI) remained unremarkable (except for a left cerebellar arachnoid cyst). A clinical EEG was interpreted as normal. To attenuate symptoms of depression with difficulties to sleep, he received citalopram and quetiapine that improved these symptoms, but not the visual hallucinations. About 8 years later, he developed an acute psychiatric crisis with anxiety and irritability as well as increased perceptual disturbances. During this time, he did not feel safe in his apartment anymore and had increasing suicidal ideations resulting in admission to a psychiatric hospital. At admission, he also mentioned distortions of sound for the time of one day that were classified as akoasms. The reported symptoms were interpreted as signs of an acute (schizophreniform) psychotic episode. During inpatient treatment, the daily dose of quetiapine was increased, which led to an improvement of symptoms. The leading tentative diagnoses over the coming years were a suspected schizophrenic psychosis that alternated with episodes of depression.
During this time, he became treated with various neuroleptics, including clozapine, haloperidol, amisulprid, ziprasidone, risperidone, quetiapine, aripiprazole, perazine, and promethazine, but did not experience any lasting improvement of visual hallucinations. Due to side-effects, including akathisia and other extrapyramidal motor symptoms (EPMS), neuroleptics were discontinued. Out of his despair, he contacted numerous physicians and therapists, including the Center for Neuromodulation at the Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy of the Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin where he was diagnosed with HPPD at the age of 32 based on his self-report and course of disease. A 32-channel EEG was performed and showed diffuse slowing of brain oscillations across broad areas of cortex with high power in the delta range over occipital electrodes . Resting state EEG did not show a clear alpha-peak with eyes open and no alpha blockage during eyes closed. Delta activity did not exhibit any notable lateralization. The patient was asked to rate occurrence and intensity of visual hallucinations or distortions using a visual analog scale (VAS, ranging from 1 = minimal to 10 = extreme) three times a day daily .
Based on the large body of literature showing reduced cortical excitability after cathodal transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) (, ), we delivered tDCS at 2 mA to the occipital lobe using large rubber electrodes (5 cm × 7 cm). The electrodes were placed perpendicularly to the midline, such that the cathode was centered to electrode position Oz and the anode was centered to position Fpz according to the international 10–20 system. Two 30-min sessions of tDCS each were performed, separated by an intermission of 30 min. EEG was obtained immediately before the first and after the second session of tDCS.
During the session, the patient reported that his visual hallucinations gradually improved. After the second session, the patient reported an improvement of visual hallucinations or distortions by approximately 60% which sustained for 10 days . A Mann–Whitney U test comparing baseline VAS values provided for the 10 days before intervention with VAS values provided for the 10 days after intervention was highly significant (p < 0.001). Evaluation of the EEG recorded after the second session showed that abnormal delta activity over the occipital region disappeared . Over the coming 4 weeks attenuation of delta activity remained reduced by approximately 40% relative to the pre-tDCS level . During this time, also symptoms of depression improved, and the patient reported alleviation of anxiety and agitation. Although visual distortions did not completely disappear and their intensity remained at a level of 3–4 on a VAS, the patient underlined that he felt great relief because tDCS provided him a mechanistic tool to control his symptoms.