An 82-year-old Caucasian male retired ex-gymnast from home presented with a 2-week history of acute on chronic lower back pain without a clear precipitant. The pain was exacerbated when weight-bearing, causing the man to collapse to the floor in pain. There were no associated fevers, sweats, or neurological symptoms. The patient’s past medical history included spinal osteoarthritis with an L2–S1 decompression laminectomy and fusion with transpedicular screws and spinal rods last revised in 2008, C4–C5 decompressive laminectomy and anterior cervical discectomy and fusion in 1992–1994, and bilateral hip replacement in 2005. The patient’s pain was managed by his general practitioner, he was taking pregabalin 150 mg twice a day, buprenorphine patch 5 mg per hour weekly, and codeine 30 mg for pain flares. There was no history of recent dental procedures, infections, or other surgeries. There was no history of immunodeficiency or corticosteroid use. The patient was a lifelong nonsmoker and drank up to two standard drinks of alcohol occasionally on weekends.
On physical examination in the emergency department, his vital signs were unremarkable, with heart rate 90 beats per minute, blood pressure 135/70 mmHg, respiratory rate of 16 breaths per minute, oxygen saturation of 96% on room air, and temperature of 36.5 °C. On palpation, he was moderately tender generally at the L4 and L5 vertebrae, and unable to complete a straight leg raise owing to pain when raising his leg. There were no remarkable neurological, respiratory, or cardiac findings. On assessment in the emergency department, his full blood count (white cell count 9.0 × 109/L), C-reactive protein (CRP; < 0.7 mg/L), and renal function blood tests were within normal limits and unremarkable. A computed tomography scan (CT) of the thoracolumbar spine demonstrated advanced degenerative changes. He was admitted under the geriatric team for analgesia and allied health assessment with a provisional diagnosis of acute on chronic flare in degenerative osteoarthritis. Two days into his admission, a septic screen was performed when he spiked a temperature of 38 °C and exhibited tachycardia of 112 beats per minute and hypotension of 90 mmHg systolic. His blood tests revealed a CRP of 279 mg/L with a white cell count of 9.2 × 109/L, and the patient was commenced on empirical intravenous ceftriaxone 2 g 24-hourly. An urgent lumbosacral MRI performed on the same day revealed no features of discitis or epidural abscesses. An abdominal portovenous CT scan was performed to investigate for a possible gastrointestinal source, as well as pelvic and femoral X-rays of the hip prosthesis looking for evidence of osteomyelitis, but all were unremarkable. All four blood cultures taken during the septic screen revealed Veillonella species, which was later confirmed to be Veillonella parvula.
An infectious disease consultation was requested following the initial MRI, and the antibiotic regimen was changed to intravenous piperacillin/tazobactam 4.5 g 8-hourly. In addition to the lower back pain, the patient was also developing new right knee pain. On examination, there was general joint tenderness and reduced range of movement due to pain; although it was unclear if this pain was due to the patient’s known osteoarthritis or underlying infective cause. To investigate for disseminated infection, a whole-body bone scan single-photon emission computerized tomography was performed 4 days later and demonstrated evidence of T12–L1 discitis and features of osteomyelitis in the right tibial plateau. Repeat lumbosacral and right knee MRI 5 days following first MRI demonstrated a T10–L1 effacing epidural phlegmon, T10–T12 discitis, bilateral psoas abscesses (the largest extending from L1–L4), and right tibial plateau osteomyelitis . Transthoracic echo identified small vegetations on the mitral and tricuspid valves. Further investigation with transesophageal echo was not performed as the patient was deemed unsuitable for cardiothoracic intervention owing to his age. His right psoas abscess was drained percutaneously, and microscopy, culture, and sensitivity of the abscess aspirate did not demonstrate significant bacterial growth. Sensitivities to the blood cultured Veillonella parvula confirmed sensitivity to amoxicillin/clavulanic acid, ceftriaxone, clindamycin, and metronidazole but resistance to penicillin. The patient was recommenced on intravenous ceftriaxone daily, leading to improvement in his back and knee symptoms. He was discharged on oral amoxicillin and clavulanic acid 875 mg/125 mg 12-hourly for 6 months. The primary source of this patient’s infection remains unclear. On follow-up, the patient made a full recovery after 6 months, and returned to his baseline level of function and mobility without evidence of infection reoccurrence.