A 63-year-old male was admitted to our hospital with a two-month history of skin hyperpigmentation and one month of diarrhea.
The patient complained of skin hyperpigmentation for two months and loose stool two to four times per day for one month. There was no associated blood in the stool, abdominal distension, nausea, vomiting, appetite loss, or weight loss. The abnormal skin pigmentation was unevenly distributed throughout the body, with the face and both sides of the hands mainly affected.
Segmental resection of the small intestine was performed twenty-three years prior because of severe abdominal trauma. He was diagnosed with syphilis two years previously and treated with benzathine penicillin. Other medical records revealed bradycardia and varicose veins in the lower limbs.
The patient has an 80-pack-year history and a 40-year history of drinking approximately 100 g of wine per day. There was no family history of gastrointestinal polyposis.
On physical examination, he had alopecia, nail dystrophy , and hyperpigmentation of the skin, especially on his face and bilateral upper extremities .
Laboratory tests revealed normal routine blood results . The fecal occult blood test was positive (+), and C-reactive protein was elevated. Serum albumin and serum total protein were decreased. The levels of serum potassium and calcium were also reduced. Bacterial culture of the stool found no salmonella, shigella, or fungus. Cortisol secretion rhythm, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, immunoglobulin, liver function tests, and other blood chemistry panels were normal. Electromyography suggested peripheral nerve damage (sensory fibers) in the upper and lower extremities.
A computer tomography scan of the abdomen showed a partially thickened gastric wall, enterostasis, and slightly enlarged inguinal lymph nodes.
The results of gastroscopy showed multiple polyp hyperplasia of the gastric body, gastric angle, gastric antrum, and descending part of the duodenum . Granular apophyses below the dentate line were observed by the endoscopist, although they are not as evident in Figure . The results of the colonoscopy showed that mucosa erosion and multiple apophyses with the appearance of polypuses were observed in the ileocecal valve, and numerous polyps were found in the whole colon, among which the largest polyp (4.0 cm) was found 20 cm from the anus .
Histological examination of biopsy specimens obtained from the duodenal bulb was consistent with hyperplastic polyps, and biopsy specimens from the gastric antrum mucosa displayed moderate chronic mucosal inflammation, expansion of the glands, and mild intestinal metaplasia of the glandular epithelium . Biopsy specimens obtained from the colon suggested tubular adenomas and low-grade intraepithelial neoplasia .