A 50-year-old female patient was referred to the foot and ankle clinic with the existing diagnosis of HCS. She complained of bilateral foot pain and deformities of the toes. Physical examination revealed left-sided dislocation of the second metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joint, subluxation of the third MTP joint, and Morton’s neuroma between the third and fourth toes . Examination of the right foot similarly demonstrated second MTP joint dislocation and third MTP joint subluxation, along with second-third and third-fourth intermetatarsal Morton’s neuromas . Treatment options were discussed with the patient, including surgical intervention for her foot problems. She was counseled about the high risk of post-operative recurrence of deformities, nonunion, wound complications, and worsening of pain (in setting of pre-existing neuropathy) because of the underlying syndrome. The patient was operated on first on the left foot for Morton’s neuroma excision and Weil osteotomy with proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint resection of the second and third metatarsals with K-wire fixation across the second and third MTP joints . Her post-operative course was complicated by recurrent subluxation of the second MTP joint . A revision surgical option was discussed but refused by the patient, as she was satisfied with the surgery in terms of good pain relief and functional improvement.
Following 7-week post-operative recovery period from the left foot surgery, the patient underwent Morton’s neuroma excision and Weil osteotomy with second and third PIP resection and IK-wire fixation in the right foot . Extensor tendon lengthening was also performedin the same foot. Post-operative course was complicated by atrophic nonunion of the osteotomies , as well as worsening of her neuropathic pain.
Additional orthopedic manifestations in this patient affected the spine in the form of Grade IV L5/S1 isthmic spondylolisthesis with stenosis and radiculopathy, in the setting of severe osteoporosis . After a failed 6-month trial of osteoporosis treatment, she was operated on by our spine colleagues who performed posterior laminectomy at L4-L5 and L5-S1 and posterior instrumentation and fusion, L4 to the sacrum with iliac crest bone graft . She later developed a pathologic (osteoporotic) fracture S1-S2 for which posterior instrumentation was revised with the extension of fusion to the pelvis .
As a point of interest, the following additional manifestations of the HCS were also observed in the patient: Coarse dysmorphic facial features (depression in the coronal region, epicanthic folds, flat nasal bridge, bushy eyebrows, down-slanted palpebrae, malar hypoplasia, relative prognathism, low-set and posteriorly rotated ears, and loss of teeth), coarse thick hair, acroosteolysis of all distal and some middle phalanges of the hand , wormian skull bones , history of surgical correction of patent ductus arteriosus, osteoporosis, scoliosis , platybasia, basilar invagination of skull , hearing difficulty, neuropathy, umbilical hernia, and esophageal stricture with cervical web (treated with endoscopic dilatation).