A 11-year-old boy with complaints of intermittent redness and blurred vision in the right eye for 2 years was referred to us in September 2009. The redness and blurred vision typically occurred in the morning once every 2–3 days and gradually subsided an hour later. His vision markedly worsened, such that he could not even identify an acquaintance from 5 m away if his left eye was covered. His condition did not improve despite multiple consultations with different ophthalmologists and several treatments with topical antibiotics (levofloxacin, tobramycin), steroid eye drops (prednisolone), and artificial tears. Punctate corneal keratopathy existed in the right eye at each visit according to previous medical records. His history included allergic rhinitis that presented as stuffy nose and frequent sneezing, for which no appropriate treatment was sought. Upon inquiring about the patient’s sleeping habit, his parents informed us that he usually slept in a prone position tilted to the right side and snored at night.
An ocular examination revealed that the uncorrected visual acuity was (20/60), and his best-corrected visual acuity was (20/20) in both eyes in the afternoon. The patient had grade-2 floppy eyelids in both eyes . Under slit-lamp examination, the eyelid was in the right position, the bulbar conjunctiva was mild hyperemic at both side; and papillary hyperplasia was noticed in both the upper tarsal conjunctiva, with the right eye more severe than the left. Scattered, fine, punctate corneal epithelial damage was confirmed by fluorescein staining on the right eye . Corneal sensation was 25 mm in the right eye and 50 mm in the left eye as measured using a Cochet-Bonnet esthesiometer. No other abnormity was detected in either eye.
Considering that the floppy eyelid might be related to OSAS [, ], the patient was subsequently referred to the Respiratory Department and moderate OSAS was confirmed by overnight polysomnography. Computed tomography showed severe tonsil hypertrophy and nasopharyngeal adenoid hypertrophy. The child was then referred to an ear-nose-throat (ENT) specialist, and a combined operation (tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy) was performed 2 days later.
The redness and blurry vision in the right eye disappeared after surgery without other additional topical eye drops. Eye redness happened 4 times without vision involvement during the 7-year follow-up duration. Corneal sensation gradually returned to normal: 45 mm 1 year later, 45 mm 3 years later, 60 mm 7 years later. The patient seldom slept in the prone position and corneal lesion disappeared thereafter. The corneal sensation returned to normal (60 mm) in both eyes at the last follow-up. However, the degree of floppy eyelid remained the same . After 7 years the child’s corneal diopter is still in the normal range and there is no tendency of keratoconus.