A 24 year old nulliparous Hispanic woman with no past medical history presented at 40 weeks of gestation in active labor. Her antenatal course had been uncomplicated and her labor was uneventful.
12 hours after delivery, she complained of chills, diaphoresis, and right sided back pain. She had a fever of 40°C, a heart rate of 110 beats per minute, a blood pressure of 136/85mmHg, and a respiratory rate of 20 breaths per minute. On examination, she had marked right costovertebral tenderness. Laboratory tests showed a white blood cell count of 18,000 white blood cells/μL and urinalysis of 3+ blood, 3+ leukocyte esterase, and 49 white blood cells per high powered field. Our patient was started on intravenous antibiotics for presumed pyelonephritis.
36 hours after delivery, she complained of extreme difficulty breathing, non productive cough, and generalized malaise. Her fever had risen to 40.5°C. Her heart rate was 136 beats per minute, blood pressure of 136/82mmHg, respiratory rate of 32 breaths per minute and arterial oxygen saturation 76% on room air. A chest film showed poor aeration in both lung bases and large bilateral pleural effusions. Blood cultures and urine cultures both grew E. coli.
40 hours after delivery, she was intubated. A 12 lead electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia with no ischemic changes. Troponins levels were not elevated and a transthoracic echocardiogram showed a depressed ventricular ejection fraction of 35%. Both the right and left ventricle appeared hypokinetic with normal end diastolic diameters. Valvular function was normal. Chest computed tomography (CT) with intravenous contrast showed significant bilateral airway disease and no evidence of a pulmonary embolus.
On postpartum day five, our patient was extubated. On the eighth postpartum day, a cardiologist evaluated her for continued complaints of shortness of breath, orthopnea, and poor exercise tolerance. Metoprolol and furosemide were started for systolic heart failure; however, she continued to have persistent dyspnea and poor exercise tolerance despite pharmacologic treatment. Ten days postpartum she had a second transthoracic echocardiogram which showed a persistent decreased ejection fraction of 35%. 11 days postpartum, she was discharged home on oral antibiotics, furosemide, and metoprolol.
On postpartum day 21, our patient presented to the Emergency Department with complaints of heavy vaginal bleeding for which she received treatment with intravenous crystalloid solution. During this visit, she reported adherence with her medications, but continued dyspnea and poor exercise tolerance. She could walk only one block without developing shortness of breath and was having considerable difficulty ascending three flights of stairs. Her vital signs at that time were temperature of 36°C, respiratory rate of 16 breaths per minute, heart rate of 57 beats per minute, and blood pressure of 120/72mmHg. She had a normal blood hematocrit and did not require blood transfusion. She was advised to continue her diuretic and beta blocker and discharged from the emergency department with a plan to follow up as an outpatient. Unfortunately, she did not return to our medical center after this visit and we were unable to contact her despite numerous attempts.