A 7-year-old female was diagnosed as pneumonia in a local hospital for having wet cough for twenty days without improvement in her condition. Her chest X-ray revealed dextrocardia and she was then transferred to our hospital. The patient had a history of a runny nose for 6 years and intermittent attacks of wet cough for 2 years. The cough usually got worse after a common cold or flu, accompanied by yellow phlegm, and was relieved after symptomatic treatment. The patient was born at term without a respiratory distress and kept healthy before the age of one. She was the only child of the family and refused the familial history of the condition. The physical examination showed tenderness in the sinus area, pharyngeal congestion and coarse crackles in both lungs. Her apical beat was located at the fifth intercostal space at the right midclavicular line with normal heart rhythm and a heart rate of 102 beats per minute. No pathological murmurs and extra heart sounds were detected. Her abdominal examination was normal. She was admitted with a diagnosis of pneumonia. At the follow-up, the patient did not have a fever but still had chronic cough with phlegm, which could be temporarily relieved by the acetylcysteine solution for inhalation treatment, and a mild runny nose. The patient currently has normal growth and development.
Additional examinations were performed as follows.Nasal NO concentration The nasal NO concentration was 6 parts per billion (ppb), suggesting a possibility of KS, PCD, cystic fibrosis, severe rhinosinusitis, and severe nasal polyp. TEM TEM images were taken using the FEI Tecnai G2 Spirit BioTwin transmission electron microscope (Model No. 943205018411, FEI Company, Czech Republic) together with the Gatan CCD camera. Biopsies from bronchial mucosa demonstrated abnormal ciliary ultrastructures. Cilia showed wrinkled surfaces and lost integrity. Abnormal arrangement and number of microtubules were detected. Some of the microtubules had partial loss of outer dynein arms, reduction of outer dynein arms and immature cilia with internal disorganization. In addition, many cilia were fused into gigantic cilia with unclear axonemal structures . Imaging tests Chest X-ray and chest computed tomography (CT) revealed bilateral pneumonia with potential bronchiectasis and mucus plugs in the middle lobe and the lingula of the lung . Situs inversus was also revealed by the chest X-ray and chest CT and further confirmed by echocardiogram. Sinus CT revealed mucosal thickening in maxillary sinuses and ethmoid sinuses, and soft tissue high-density shadows in several sinus cavities, suggesting rhinosinusitis . Bronchoscopy Results of the bronchoscopy indicated endobronchial inflammation and bronchiectasis in the right middle lobe and the lingula of the left lung . The tracheal mucosa was smooth. A sharply demarcated carina was observed with inversely positioned bronchial structures. The bronchial mucosa of the upper lobe of the left lung was smooth, but all segments of the left lung had thinned mucosa and sharpened tracheal ring. All segments of the right lung had smooth bronchial mucosa but exhibited thinned mucosa and white nodular protuberances, which was caused by mucus thinning accompanied by bulging of cartilage rings. A large amount of white sputum was present in all levels of the tracheobronchial tree, which was cleared by bronchoscopic sputum suction. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) was performed for the B4 and B5 segments of the left lung and B4, B5 and B8 segments of the right lung. The BAL fluid was turbid and positive for Haemophilus influenzae (Hin). Hearing tests The pure-tone audiometry results demonstrated conductive hearing loss. The air-bone gaps were 20 dB for both the left and right ears. Tympanometry resulted in a type B tympanogram, and the acoustic reflex was absent. Pulmonary function tests Pulmonary function tests indicated mild restrictive and obstructive ventilatory defects. And the forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) was improved by 24% after bronchodilator. Laboratory tests Complete blood count (CBC) and the value of procalcitonin (PCT) and C-reactive protein (CRP) were normal. The patient was positive for IgM antibodies to Mycoplasma pneumoniae while negative for all other pathogens tested. Analysis of lymphocyte subsets (TBNK panel) showed reduced level of Helper T cells [CD4 + 22.4% (29.0–45.0%)] and B cells [CD19 + 13.1% (18.0–28.0%)]. Other laboratory tests were normal. Genetic tests Whole-exome sequencing of the patient identified two novel compound heterozygous mutations, NM_001369:c.12813G > A (p. Trp4271Term) and NM_001369:c.9365delT (p. Leu3122Term), in the DNAH5 gene . These nonsense single nucleotide variant and frameshift deletion both result in premature stop codons. These two mutations and their inheritance were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. Therapy Azithromycin was given through intravenous injection to treat M.Pneumonia, and Cefaclor Oral Suspension was given to treat Haemophilus influenzae (Hin). Acetylcysteine solution for inhalation and bromhexine hydrochloride through intravenous injection were given for relieving cough and getting rid of phlegm. Budesonide inhalation solution was given for anti-inflammatory treatment. Postural drainage and percussion, controlled coughing and active cycle of breathing techniques were performed to clear mucus from the lung. Exercise therapy was used for pulmonary rehabilitation.