A 32-year-old Asian woman (height 169cm, body weight 108kg, body mass index 37.8) without any pathological history, such as high corticosteroid intake, presented with gradually progressive weakness and sensory change in her lower extremities over seven months. At the time of presentation, her body mass index had been stable for more than five years. A neurological examination revealed weakness in her lower extremities (manual muscle testing (MMT), grade 3). Her pinprick sensation was moderately decreased (6 out of 10) below the dermatome level of T4 and her vibration sense was decreased in both feet. She had a positive Romberg’s sign. Her deep tendon reflexes were hyperactive on both legs and negative on ankle clonus, straight leg raising, and femoral nerve stretching tests. Bladder-bowel disturbance was evident as pollakiuria. Her pre-operative Japanese Orthopaedic Association (JOA) score for thoracic myelopathy (maximum possible score, 11), derived from the JOA scoring system for cervical myelopathy by eliminating motor and sensory scores for the upper extremity, was 4 (0-1-1-2).Laboratory investigations and plain radiography revealed no abnormalities. A spinal computed tomography (CT) scan revealed that the mass lesion severely compressed her spinal cord in the posterior epidural space at the T1 to T6 level, and the mass extended into the bilateral T2 to T5 neural foramen. There was no obvious bone erosion surrounding the tumor or widened or scalloped neural foramen. Magnetic resonance imaging of the epidural thoracic mass showed hyper-signal intensity on T1- and T2-weighted images and homogenous enhancement with gadolinium (Figure ). Her spinal cord was compressed and anteriorly displaced.Our patient underwent an operation. A total laminectomy of T1 to T6 using a high-speed drill was performed. Epidural fat was encountered at both the upper and lower end of the lesion. The reddish-gray, highly vascularized mass was below the epidural fat. The well-circumscribed tumor was excised from the dorsal dura mater without difficulty and removed piecemeal while alternately repeating hemostasis by electrocoagulation. After a bilateral T2 to T3, T3 to T4, T4 to T5 facetectomy, we radically excised the extradural mass involving the intraforaminal enlargement. Because of concern regarding the stability of her thoracic spine, we performed spinal fixation using pedicle screws (Figure ). The removed bone was saved during the surgery and used as a graft to achieve bony fusion. We achieved gross total removal with no additional deficits. Our patient showed an improvement in strength (MMT grade 5) and sensation in the days following the operation. Post-operative imaging showed no residual tumor.On microscopic examination, the resected tumor appeared as an elongated, encapsulated dark red mass. Histological examination revealed a mixture of mature adipose and abundant vascular tissues that ranged from capillary to venular in size, and a few were irregular in shape with thickened walls (Figure ). Immunohistochemistry staining was positive for cluster of differentiation 34 and smooth muscle actin that were consistent with an angiolipoma. No mitosis was detected according to an examination using Ki-67, a cell cycle marker.
A follow-up neurological examination showed only hyper-reflexia of her lower extremities with no other abnormal findings. Imaging studies six months after the surgery did not show any recurring posterior epidural mass lesions. Her JOA score recovered to 11 out of 11.