The patient was a 64-year-old male who presented to our hospital with the major complaint of abdominal distension for 4 days and right lower quadrant abdominal pain for 3 days. There were no noticeable incentives at the onset of the symptoms. The abdominal pain was dull, intermittent at the beginning, mainly located on the right lower abdomen and started to get worse after admission, accompanied by poor appetite, fatigue, and fever. There was no significant past medical condition, no family history of gastrointestinal cancer, and no prior abdominal surgery.
On physical examination, the first sign showed the patient in distress. And his vital signs were as follows: temperature 38.3, blood pressure 100/63 mmHg, heat rate 65 bpm, and respiratory rate 17 breaths per minute. The bowel sounds were present and diminished. Abdominal palpation revealed tenderness and guarding around the right lower quadrant with rebound tenderness.
The laboratory tests demonstrated an increase of leukocytosis with white blood cell count being 12.68×109/l and neutrophil elevating to 82%, indicating inflammation and abdominal infection. And the red blood cell count and hemoglobin (HGB) were within normal limits. Kidney and liver functions were normal. Electrolytes were imbalanced with lower potassium and sodium. Electrocardiogram (EKG) and chest X-ray found nothing significant.
After the patient was admitted into our department, we started intravenous fluid resuscitation and antibiotics, and ordered nothing by oral. An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan was prescribed, and it illustrated a thickened, inflamed appendix and peri-appendiceal fat stranding . And there was no abnormal imaging signs on the colon and liver. The patient was simply considered having an acute appendicitis at initial evaluation. A laparoscopy was indicated, and a three-port laparoscopy was then performed in a common fashion. With the camera port inserting around the umbilical and the other two working ports on the left lower quadrant and the suprapubic area, the laparoscopic exploration of the abdominal cavity showed some pus and free fluid around the appendix demonstrating an acute appendicitis with a perforated and gangrenous appendix . The size and surface of the liver were normal, and no peritoneum nodule and abnormal mesenteric lymph node were found during the laparoscopic inspection. Then an appendectomy was performed. We carefully suctioned the purulence, and lysed the adhesion of the mesoappendix by harmonic scalpel. The friable appendix was deliberately grasped and elevated by an atraumatic forceps while the mesoappendix with appendiceal artery was divided by harmonic scalpel. The appendix was ligated with 1-0 silk suture at the base and then divided. The specimen was retrieved and then sent for pathological examination. A plastic retrieval bag was used and inserted through the camera port, and the separated appendiceal specimen was carefully grasped and put inside it before pulling the draw-string of the bag through the camera port. At the end, the pelvis was irritated and suctioned before the completion of the surgery.
The patient was continually ordered nil by mouth and administered intravenous fluid resuscitation, nutrition support, and antibiotic on the first day post-surgery. After he started on semi-fluid diet and moved to normal eating, there was no complaint of discomfort. On the fourth day post-surgery, the pathological examination results were received. Unfortunately, appendiceal neoplasm was found.
H&E staining and immunohistochemistry (IHC) detected mainly signet-ring cell adenocarcinoma with small amount of neuroendocrine neoplasm present in the pathological specimen . Specifically, cytokeratin (CK) and CDX-2 were positively expressed on the specimen with high index of Ki-67, and CgA and SYN were slightly stained. The current studies show that the prognosis is poor with this typical pathological classification. Thus, we strongly recommended a further management regimen including a colonoscopy, right hemicolectomy, and chemotherapy, but our patient refused it all and required to be discharged after returning to normal diet. He was carefully put on follow-up lists for high recurrence. We streamlined the specific algorithm of managing ASCA not detected at operation based on our case .