In December 2020, a 47-year-old man with a history of smoking came to our hospital with a paroxysmal dry cough that had lasted about a year and left subcostal pain for two months, which aggravated after deep inhalation. A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a mass in the left lower lobe measuring 8.1 × 6.1 cm, multiple enlarged lymph nodes in left hilum and mediastinum, obstructive pneumonia in the left lung, and left pleural effusion. Radionuclide bone scan and magnetic resonance imaging revealed no evidence of bone or brain metastasis. His medical history was not remarkable. The pathology of this patient’s lung cancer was verified through a CT-guided percutaneous fine-needle lung biopsy. According to the American Joint Committee on Cancer Staging Manual, 8th edition, he was finally diagnosed with stage IV lung adenocarcinoma (cT4N2M1). The biopsy specimen was subjected to next-generation sequencing (NGS), which revealed a hitherto unknown SDK1 Exon36-ALK Exon20 fusion variant (abundance: 9.2%) . Further immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis indicated the positive expression of ALK protein (clone D5F3, Ventana) .
It is well known that ALK inhibitors, such as Crizotinib and alectinib, are pricey. If the patient had maintained his treatment, he would have been in serious financial trouble. SAF-189s is a new selective ALK inhibitor, and the patient satisfied all of the criteria for clinical trial inclusion. He provided informed permission. On January 13, 2021, the patient was then enrolled onto a phase I/II clinical trial evaluating SAF-189s in NSCLC(Clinical Trials.gov number, NCT00585195) after a thorough enrollment assessment and began with oral administration of SAF-189s at a dose of 160 mg per day. After 10 days of medication, his symptoms considerably improved. On February, 2021, done 2 months after treatment initiation, a chest CT scan revealed a partial response (42 percent reduction in the sum of the target lesion’s longest diameters per RECIST 1.1) , and further radiological assessments confirmed his continuing tumor response to this ALK inhibitor. At the time of the latest follow-up, he tolerated well with only grade 1 rash and had a 12-month progression-free survival . Now he continues to be in partial response and keeps on SAF-189s treatment.