A 70-year-old woman with a 45-year smoking history, who had undergone colectomy for CRC (pT3N0M0, p-stage II, well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma [tub1, pT3/SS, ly0, v0, pH0]). 2 years prior, presented with a CT nodule shadow in her right lower pulmonary lobe that had grown from 0.2 cm at her right hemicolectomy to 0.3 cm at 12 months, and to 0.5 cm at 14 months postoperatively . The serum levels of tumor markers were within their normal ranges; CEA, 2.9 ng/mL; CA19-9, 6.8 U/mL; CA125, 4.0 U/mL. Because this growing cavitary lesion with a slightly irregular wall thickness suggested CRC metastasis, a thoracoscopic resection was performed.
As the lesion was barely palpable, preoperative marking was required. Although the dye material was radiolucent, the tip of the catheter used for dye marking was radiopaque. After confirming the positional relationship between the tumor and the tip of the catheter by using cone-beam CT in the hybrid operating room, dye marking with indigo-carmine dye (0.3 mL) by bronchoscopy was performed at a point around 5 mm cranial to the tumor. Preoperative marking took 6 min with two CT inspections . Intraoperatively, the tumor had no gross pleural changes, but because it was slightly palpable at 5 mm caudal from the dyed site, we performed a wedge resection . Intraoperative frozen sections revealed fibrotic tissues with no apparent malignant cells, which did not match the CRC tissue. Permanent sections showed proliferating papillary cells with cilia adjacent to the bronchi and mucous glands around the cystic wall; the alveolar structure was intact and was composed of normal epithelial cells, with no atypical cells . Immunohistochemically, the lesion was positive for cytokeratin-7 (CK7), focal positive for thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), and negative for cytokeratin-20 (CK20) and caudal type homeobox-2 (CDX2), which ruled out CRC metastasis . We therefore diagnosed the tumor as CMPT. The patient has remained recurrence-free for 7 months.