A 50 year old sub fertile female presented with history of sudden onset of generalized colicky pain of 1 day duration. It was associated with repeated bouts of non-bilious vomiting and not passing flatus. She didn't have abdominal distension or fever. In the past she was investigated for subfertility and underwent laparoscopic fimbrial cystectomy of the left fallopian tube. She also had undergone open appendicectomy in the past. No other significant past medical history.
On examination she was haemodynamically stable, abdomen was soft with no palpable masses and bowel sounds were sluggish. Digital rectal examination was unremarkable. Her urine HCG (human chorionic gonadotropin) dipstick test was negative. She was investigated in view of intestinal obstruction. Supine x ray of abdomen showed dilated small bowel loops, erect chest x ray was normal and ultrasound sonography shows free fluid in the abdomen with features of small bowel obstruction. After 48 h of conservative management, no improvement in bowel sounds and bowel opening. Contrast Enhanced Computed Tomography (CECT) showed features of small bowel obstruction with the transition point in the mid ileum and cause for obstruction not identified. As the imaging done failed to show the cause of obstruction, it was decided to proceed with explorative laparotomy (, ).
Lower midline incision was made and peritoneum was entered. Moderate amount of blood-stained free fluid was found in the cavity. There were no evidences of adhesions that may have caused this obstruction. Impending gangrenous bowel loops were identified and the gangrenous part was encircled by the left fallopian tube. Free end of the fallopian tube strongly adhered to the ovary and broad ligament. In order to release the small bowel without spillage left side salphingectomy has to be done. So, on table consultation was taken from the gynecologist for the salphingectomy. Viability of the bowel loops was tested. Nearly 2 ft of unviable small bowel loop identified and was resected with its mesentery close to the loops. Side to side anastomosis was done using linear staplers. Mesentery defect was closed with absorbable suture material. Her post-operative period was unremarkable, oral intake started on the day 3 with clear fluids and gradually to her normal diet. She was post operatively followed up with duration of 2 weeks, 2 month and 6 month time period to assess her nutritional status, bowel habit and to exclude other features of short bowel syndrome.