A 1-year-old girl presented to the emergency department with cough and variable wheezing, which started as an upper respiratory tract infection and persisted for two weeks after the other symptoms of the infection had resolved. She was otherwise healthy. No specific details of the personal or family history were clarified. The patient did not have tachypnea or tachycardia; pulse oximetry was normal on room air, but she had mild to moderate wheezing, expressed mainly during physical activity and not observed during sleep. Lung auscultation revealed bilateral crackles and variable, high-pitched, whistling sounds during exhalation. No other pathological findings were noted on clinical examination. Inhaled salbutamol was ineffective. Chest radiographs showed a decreased volume of the left lung, shifting of the mediastinum to the left, and enlargement of the right lung hilum .
The patient was admitted to the pediatric department for further diagnostic approach. Wheezing persisted for two days and subsided without any specific treatment. A transthoracic echocardiogram revealed absence of the left pulmonary artery, and right arch of aorta and anomaly of subclavian arteries was suspected . No other congenital heart defects or signs of pulmonary hypertension were noted. The diagnosis was confirmed by computed tomography (CT) scans of the chest that demonstrated elongation of the aorta and an aberrant right subclavian artery with Kommerell's diverticulum (KD) , as well as absence of the left pulmonary artery , with a hypoplastic upper lobe of the left lung. Atypical vascular branches dividing from the aorta and forming the vasculature of the left lung were also visible (, ). The mediastinum was slightly shifted to the left. We suspect that atypical vascular branches are aortopulmonary collaterals. Flow supply through ductus arteriosus to the atypical hilar segment of left pulmonary artery could be suspected as well but only angiography could specify the exact anatomy of those branches. We clarified that there is no compression to the airways of vasculature structures during bronchoscopy.
The patient is being followed up for the development of pulmonary hypertension and compression of vascular structures to the airways as well as any indications for surgical intervention because of the KD. Angiography is planned in the future to determine the exact position of the left lung arteries. During follow-up period, the patient had mild COVID-19 infection and was successfully treated at home. No specific changes were observed in the x-ray images.