A 47-year-old man with a confirmed 10-year diagnosis of BD was admitted to our hospital due to hoarse voice, recurrent hemoptysis, and dyspnea on exercise for about 2 weeks. The patient was diagnosed to have a thoracic aortic saccular aneurysm ruptured into the left lung on CTA 4 years previously and was treated by TEVAR. He recovered uneventfully and hemoptysis disappeared since then.
Approximately 12 months after initial TEVAR, follow-up CTA indicated that the stent was well positioned and poorly attached to the concave aspect of the aortic arch at the proximal part , suggesting the risk of the future aneurysm.
During this physical examination, his blood pressure was 122/69 mmHg, and his heart rate was 76 beats per minute. Decreased breath sounds were heard in the left lower-middle lung zone. The hemoglobin level was 109 g/L (reference range 130–175 g/L), C-reactive protein was 39.2 mg/L (reference range 0–3 mg/L), and erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 31 mm/1 h (reference range 0–15 mm/1 h). Chest CTA scan showed partial left lung atelectasis and serious stenosis of the left main bronchus invaded by aortic-arch pseudoaneurysm with a significant increase in size compared with the previous follow-up CT image.
After multidisciplinary consultation, the patient was subjected to emergent TEVAR based on unexpected massive hemoptysis from new pseudoaneurysm at the proximal part of previous endovascular stent and patient’s poor condition. Under general anesthesia, the patient's right femoral artery was dissected and controlled. An angiographic catheter was introduced into the proximal end of the ascending aorta via right femoral artery puncture. Subsequent angiogram showed that pseudoaneurysm was just opposite to the orifice level of the left subclavian artery and left common carotid artery . The inner diameter of the normal arota was 33 mm at the proximal portion of this pseudoaneurysm, so an endovascular stent graft (160 mm × 36 mm; XianJian, China) was deployed covering the poor attachment of the previous stent. Simultaneously, the orifice of the left common carotid artery and left subclavian artery were also occluded. Then, a self-expanding stent (60 mm × 10 mm; Gore Viabahn, America) with the chimney technique was retrogradely placed at the ostium of the left common carotid artery to preserve its perfusion through the transcarotid approach. The left subclavian artery was sacrificed because bilateral vertebral arteries equally supplied the brain in this patient. Repeat angiography showed complete occlusion of the pseudoaneurysm and the operational procedure was terminated.
On the tenth day of postoperative management, carotid color doppler showed left subclavian steal syndrome from retrograde blood flow of the left vertebral artery indicative of good collateral circulation. No change in the patient's neurologic status was present during the perioperative period and he was discharged 14 days later in a stable condition. The patient had been taking steroid hormone and immunosuppressive agents regularly since the second discharge. Chest CTA follow-up showed a satisfactory outcome at the interval of 84 months , and no any complication related to TEVAR was detected again.