A 38-year-old female patient was admitted to our hospital after complaining of “vague pain in the right lower quadrant with an aggravated menstrual period for 8 mo”.
The patient experienced right lower quadrant pain with menstrual aggravation on April 29, 2021, with no apparent cause. Gynaecological ultrasonography revealed a double adnexal tubular mass, with an irregular cyst of approximately 5 cm in diameter near the left ovary and a solid cystic mass of approximately 5 cm in diameter below the right ovary, both of which were adherent. In the case of pelvic inflammatory disease, the symptoms were relieved after two weeks of anti-infective treatment with moxifloxacin hydrochloride tablets. During a re-examination of the ultrasound on July 26, 2021, the double adnexal cyst was found to be an endometriotic cyst, and the patient was referred to our hospital. Gynaecological ultrasound revealed a heterogeneous hypoechoic mass in the pelvis measuring approximately 7.5 cm × 7.7 cm × 5.0 cm in size, with anechoic areas of varying sizes, the nature of which will be investigated. Contrast-enhanced pelvic MRI indicated bilateral adnexal chocolate cysts and abnormal lamellar signals in the uterine and rectal depressions. The patient was diagnosed with endometriosis, which appeared to be associated with bilateral chocolate cysts and an unclear demarcation between the posterior uterine wall and the anterior rectum wall. The outpatient clinic advised the patient to undergo three cycles of GnRH-a treatment before undergoing surgery. On August 16, 2021, and September 6, 2021, the patient received two cycles of 3.75 mg of Differin. Due to personal reasons, the third cycle of treatment could not be completed. During this time (on December 13, 2021), the patient underwent a repeat gynaecological ultrasound , and the results revealed that the lesion had grown in size.
The patient was admitted to the hospital for surgery on January 2, 2022. Preoperative gynaecological ultrasound revealed heterogeneous hypoechoic masses behind the isthmus of the uterus, approximately 9.1 cm × 7.9 cm × 3.8 cm in size, and echogenic areas of varying sizes inside the uterus, which were honeycomb-shaped . Enhanced pelvic MRI showed that the endometriosis lesions were larger than those observed on August 11, 2021, with diffuse grid-like changes in the interior, unclear boundaries with the uterus, bilateral appendages, and anterior wall of the rectum, including new lesions on the left anterior wall of the uterus.
The patient underwent combined hysteroscopy and laparoscopy on May 29, 2019, for “secondary infertility”, during which the bilateral ovarian cysts and uterine fibroids were removed. The left ovarian cyst revealed an endometriotic cyst after surgery. Four months after the operation, the patient became pregnant on her own. Due to a “scarred uterus”, a caesarean section of the lower uterine segment was performed on July 12, 2020, during which the endometrioma cyst of the left ovary was removed. The intraoperative revised classification of the American Fertility Society staging was stage III (40 points), and no medication was used for long-term postoperative management.
The patient had no pertinent personal or family history of PEM.
No abnormalities were found during physical examination of the external genitalia, vagina, or cervix. Poor uterine mobility. Bilateral adnexal thickening without tenderness. Anal examination indicated that the anterior wall of the rectum was fixed to the left sacral ligament.
Antigen 125, antigen 199, carcinoembryonic antigen and alpha-fetoprotein were normal.
Initially, gynaecological ultrasound revealed a heterogeneous hypoechoic mass in the pelvis measuring approximately 7.5 cm × 7.7 cm × 5.0 cm in size, with anechoic areas of varying sizes, the nature of which will be investigated . Contrast-enhanced pelvic MRI indicated bilateral adnexal chocolate cysts and abnormal lamellar signals in the uterine and rectal depressions. After discontinuation of the GnRH-a, gynaecological ultrasound revealed heterogeneous hypoechoic masses behind the isthmus of the uterus, approximately 9.1 cm × 7.9 cm × 3.8 cm in size, and echogenic areas of varying sizes inside the uterus, which were honeycomb-shaped. Enhanced pelvic MRI showed that the endometriosis lesions were larger than those observed on August 11, 2021, with diffuse grid-like changes in the interior, unclear boundaries with the uterus, bilateral appendages, and anterior wall of the rectum, including new lesions on the left anterior wall of the uterus.