An 83-year-old Sinhalese woman presented to our hospital for evaluation of a progressively enlarging, multinodular goiter. She was clinically euthyroid and reported no recent change in weight, cold or heat intolerance, alteration of bowel habits, fatigue, or mood changes. She was receiving treatment for hypertension with hydrochlorothiazide.
Her physical examination demonstrated that she was mildly dehydrated and her body mass index was 24 kg/m2. It also revealed a multinodular goiter with evidence of retrosternal extension and no cervical lymphadenopathy. Her pulse was regular at 84 beats/min, and her blood pressure was 150/90 mmHg. We observed her to have macroglossia, coarse thickened skin, and large, spade-like hands and feet. These findings raised the suspicion of acromegaly. However, she had not noticed a recent change in appearance. She did not describe having had recent headaches, vomiting, visual difficulties, or galactorrhea to suggest a pituitary neoplasm. She was blind in her right eye due to chronic glaucoma, but she had no obvious visual field defect upon examination.
Radiological and histological evaluations of her thyroid revealed a benign, multinodular goiter with early retrosternal extension. Her serum third-generation thyroid-stimulating hormone level was 0.017 μIU/ml (reference range 0.4–4.0 μIU/ml), her serum free thyroxine level was 1.73 ng/dl (reference range 0.89–1.76 ng/dl), and her free triiodothyronine level was 3.12 pg/ml (reference range 1.50–4.10 pg/ml). She was commenced on a daily carbimazole dose of 15 mg, as treatment for thyrotoxicosis. Basic investigations revealed that her hemoglobin level was 12.4 g/dl, her serum creatinine level was 108 μmol/L, and her electrolytes and liver function were normal. Her fasting blood glucose was 43 mmol/L, and she had no evidence osmotic symptoms. She had had a normal fasting blood glucose level when last screened 2 years before. Her urine test was negative for ketone bodies. At the outset, she required 80–90 U/day of insulin for glycemic control. Later, she was stabilized on 40 U/day of insulin together with 2 g/day of metformin.
On the basis of her physical features, together with newly detected diabetes, a diagnosis of acromegaly was suspected. However, screening for serum IGF-1 using a commercially available enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay revealed that her level was low at 124.7 ng/ml (normal range for adults 150–350 ng/ml as specified on product leaflet, assay sensitivity 1.29 ng/ml, intra-assay coefficient of variation 6.62 %, inter-assay coefficient of variation 7.79 %, sample preparation by incubation in 1 M hydrochloric acid).
Her random GH levels were elevated at 149 mU/L (normal range<10 mU/L), and her OGTT demonstrated a paradoxical rise of GH . Though the OGTT is known to yield false-positive results in patients with diabetes, the very high baseline levels of GH in our patient were suggestive of acromegaly. In this setting, the low serum IGF-1 level could be attributed to poorly controlled diabetes.
IGF-1 measurements were repeated after glycemic control was achieved with insulin and metformin. Her IGF-1 level had risen above the normal range , confirming acromegaly beyond doubt.
Magnetic resonance imaging of the patient’s pituitary revealed an 8-mm pituitary microadenoma. Visual perimetry was confounded by a cataract in one eye and chronic glaucoma in the other. Her pituitary hormone axes, other than the thyroid axis, were normal.
The patient was diagnosed with acromegaly secondary to a GH-secreting pituitary microadenoma associated with a toxic multinodular goiter. She was commenced on treatment with cabergoline 500 μg/wk, as she was unwilling to undergo pituitary surgery and radiotherapy and because somatostatin analogues and pegvisomant were not routinely available at our hospital.