The 4-year-old girl underwent subaortic VSD repair surgery in our hospital on October 24, 2011 when she was 2 years old. Ten days after surgery, transthoracic echocardiography showed that the VSD was properly repaired but there was a fistula of right sinus of Valsalva (RSOV) to the right ventricle (RV). With the fistula’s diameter of 1.5 mm, color Doppler showed a continuous shunt from RSOV to RV without aortic regurgitation (AR), and physical examination showed a new grade 3/6 continuous murmur at the left sternal border. Since no rupture of sinus of Valsalva was found in the preoperative echocardiography ordetected during surgery, it was believed that this fistula was a postsurgical complication. Because the patient was asymptomatic and the fistula was small, her parents decided to observe her for progression over a period of time. During 21 months of observation, transthoracic echocardiography (once every 3 months) showed that the fistula’s diameter increased from 1.5 mm to 2.5 mm with a high-velocity (4.5 m/s) continuous Doppler flow (, , ). Meanwhile, the diastolic diameter of LV also increased from 32 mm to 39 mm. The patient was still asymptomatic and the continuous murmur at the left sternal border became grade 4/6.
Although the initial treatment recommendation was surgery, the patient’s parents were more inclined to avoid reopening the heart and using cardiopulmonary bypass and eliminating radiation exposure during percutaneous closure. With experience in closed VSDs using minimally invasive transthoracic device closure guided by TEE, we explored the feasibility of adopting this technique to close the fistula. After the potential risks were explained in detail, the parents gave their informed consent for occlusion of the fistula of RSOV under TEE guidance.
Under general anesthesia, TEE confirmed the diagnosis of fistula of the RSOV to RV with a fistula diameter of 2.5 mm. Antibiotic prophylaxis (Cefotiam, 40 mg/kg body weight) and full heparinization (1 mg/kg body weight) were administered. The free wall of RV was exposed via a 3-cm incision in the inferior sternum and was palpated to locate the area of puncture before a purse-string suture was placed at this location. Under the real-time guidance andmonitoring of TEE (Vivid 7 Dimension, GE, Horten, Norway), a trocar was introduced into RV within the purse-string, and then a guide-wire was passed through the trocar and managed into RSOV through the fistula, at which point the trocar was removed . A 7-Fr delivery sheath was fed over the wire and inserted into RSOV through the fistula. With this done, the guide-wire was pulled out, and the previously prepared loading sheath, which contained a 4 mm ordinary symmetric VSD occluder (Shanghai Shape Memory Alloy Corporation, Shanghai, China), was connected to the delivery sheath. The occluder device was then advanced into RSOV through the sheath and thus deployed.
After deployment, TEE showed that the occluder had a stable position with abolition of the shunt, and no AR occurred . No other periprocedural complications were noted. The patient was asked to take 70 mg of aspirin orally daily for 6 months.
Three months after intervention, the patient was in good condition with no cardiac murmurs on examination.
Transthoracic echocardiography revealed satisfactory position of the occluder with no residual shunt, aortic regurgitation , device embolization or infective endocarditis. The diastolic diameter of LV had decreased from 39 mm to 36 mm. Electrocardiography and chest X-ray also showed normal .