A 64-year-old man was admitted to another hospital because of appetite loss and vomiting. He was diagnosed as having superior mesenteric artery (SMA) syndrome after appropriate investigations. He had been living in social housing because of complications of a cerebral infarction he had had at the age of 57 years. A nasogastric tube was inserted into the third portion of the duodenum beyond the constriction. He was discharged 2 months after admission, his condition having improved. He was subsequently referred to our hospital for gastrostomy because the nasogastric tube had been in place for 3 months. Computed tomography (CT) revealed compression of the third portion of the duodenum between the SMA and aorta . The aorto-mesenteric angle was narrow at 18° and the aorto-mesenteric distance short at 8 mm . His stomach and duodenum were distended, consistent with persistent SMA syndrome. Surgical intervention for SMA syndrome was needed because his condition had not improved. An additional indication for gastrostomy was to provide a route for enteral nutrition because he had dysphagia. After obtaining informed consent, a surgery was planned. His body height was 165.0 cm, his weight 42.0 kg, and his body mass index (BMI) 15.43. His abdomen was soft and not tender. Laboratory tests showed white blood cell count 6.8 × 109/L, red blood cell count 4.84 × 1012/L, hemoglobin concentration 14.3 g/dL, total protein concentration 5.6 g/dL, albumin concentration 2.9 g/dL, and cholinesterase concentration 177 U/L. Laparoscopic gastrojejunostomy was performed under general anesthesia. First, a trans-umbilical incision was made and a 12-mm port inserted. After inducing a pneumoperitoneum, 5-mm ports were inserted in the right and left right upper quadrants and 12-mm ports in the right and left lateral abdomen. The omentum was dissected to open the omental bursa. The greater curvature of the stomach was transected with a linear stapler to increase flow to the jejunal bypass . Small incisions were made in the proximal jejunum (30 cm from the Treitz ligament) and posterior wall of the upper body of the stomach (oral side of the stapled line). A 60-mm Endo GIA Tri-Staple™ purple cartridge (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) was then inserted into the small incisions in the jejunum and stomach to create a gastrojejunostomy . The common point of entry was closed by a hand-sewn continuous running suture using a 3–0 V-Loc™ (Medtronic), after which a Braun anastomosis was created to prevent afferent loop syndrome . Next, a laparoscopic-assisted percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy was performed, the gastrostomy being on the oral side of the gastrojejunostomy . The operation time was 156 min and there was little blood loss. Contrast radiography on postoperative day 3 revealed no evidence of leakage or stenosis . Enteral nutrition via the gastrostomy was started and attempts at dysphagia rehabilitation continued. However, his ability to swallow did not improve and he was able to eat only small amounts of food, necessitating enteral nutrition via the gastrostomy. He was discharged from our hospital on the 27th postoperative day. Laboratory tests before discharge showed total protein concentration 5.8 g/dL, albumin concentration 3.0 g/dL and his nutritional condition was slightly improved. We perform the exchange of the gastrostomy every 6 months and there is no evidence of gastric dilatation on the radiographic image. There have since been no problems with the gastrostomy or evidence of recurrence of SMA syndrome.