A 44-year-old woman was referred by her gastrointestinal surgeon to the emergency room (ER) because of multiple episodes of chest pain. She was, like her mother, known with ADPKD as well as polycystic liver disease, without (intracranial) aneurysms. Two months earlier, a liver transplantation had been performed because of dyspnoea caused by the liver cysts. She was under treatment with antirejection medication (tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil, and steroids that were tapered recently). She did not smoke and there were no other cardiovascular risk factors but stress. The chest pain started during sleep, radiated to the left arm and subsided spontaneously after 5 min. The electrocardiogram (ECG) in the ER showed a normal sinus rhythm without ST segment or T-wave abnormalities. Patient was afebrile, with a blood pressure of 137/74 mmHg and a regular pulse of 77 b.p.m. On auscultation heart sounds were normal and lungs were clear. There was no peripheral oedema and peripheral pulsations were normal. Chest X-ray was normal. Blood samples showed a chronic but stable kidney disease (eGFR 36 mL/min/1.73 m2), absence of inflammation or anaemia. High-sensitive troponin T-level was significantly elevated (53 pg/mL) but showed no significant evolution after 3 h. A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) demonstrated a non-dilated ventricle (end-diastolic diameter 41 mm) with mild septal hypertrophy (14 mm), normal regional contractility, a preserved left ventricular (LV) systolic function and absence of significant valvulopathy. A coronary angiography was performed and showed diffuse narrowing of the distal left anterior descending artery (LAD) with ‘stick insect’ aspect, compatible with a SCAD Type 2 with preserved distal flow . The patient was admitted to the intensive cardiac care unit for further observation and treatment. Dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) with clopidogrel and aspirin was started, as well as pravastatin and a low dose of bisoprolol. During the following days, the troponin level steadily rose with stable kidney function. Three days later, chest pain redeveloped for which IV nitrates were associated but these were quickly interrupted because of headache. The ECG was progressively abnormal with diffuse biphasic T waves in the anterior leads (V2–5). A repeat TTE now showed apicoseptal hypokinesia. A new coronary angiography showed a more proximal and prominent dissection of the mid and distal LAD (75–95% stenosis), with preserved distal flow . Transdermal nitrates were associated after which the pain subsided. Clopidogrel was interrupted because of the progression under DAPT and a small dose of angiotensin-converting-enzyme (ACE)-inhibition was initiated because of the depressed LV function. Prolonged monitoring revealed a single episode of non-sustained ventricular tachycardia. The patient remained asymptomatic and the rest of the stay was uneventful. She was discharged after 10 days and was still doing well at follow-up after 1 month with cardiac enzymes that returned to baseline levels. Cardiac rehabilitation, including psychological support, was initiated.