A 57-year-old Caucasian female nurse presented for elective total knee arthroplasty (TKA) due to osteoarthritis in our high-volume university hospital. Previous conservative treatment with physiotherapy and antiinflammatory medication had failed. She had a medical history of obesity [body mass index (BMI) of 33.4], type II diabetes, hypertension, and had previously undergone percutaneous coronary intervention because of coronary heart disease. Prior to the surgery, the range of motion (ROM) of her right knee was measured at 0-10-90° of extension/flexion and showed a varus leg axis. The patient reported load-related pain.
The elective surgery was performed under spinal anesthesia . During the navigation-based procedure, jigs were placed according to the standard operating procedure distal femoral medioventral and tibial proximal ventral. For local analgesia and hemostasis, 200 mg of ropivacaine 0.2% with 1 mg of adrenaline was applied dorsal of the medial and lateral condyle, in the area of the notch, collateral ligaments, synovialis, ventral capsule, and Hoffa’s fat pad. An additional 100 mg of 0.2% ropivacaine was applied subcutaneously. Furthermore, 3 g of tranexamic acid was applied intraarticularly. Tourniquet control was not used, nor was a drain inserted. The surgery was free of complications. On the same day, the patient underwent mobilization and began physiotherapy in accordance with our in-house FAST-Track protocol.
The day after the surgery, the patient reported severe pain in her right leg, which necessitated an adjustment and an increase in her pain medication. After individual adjustment of her oral pain medication, the standard physiotherapy protocol was continued. On the second day after surgery, the patient experienced massive pain in her right middle thigh that was unresponsive to additional opioid use. The pain worsened with flexion of her leg. She showed a circumferential increase and pain on palpation. Because of the atypical location and the difficult physical examination due to obesity, an ultrasound was performed to rule out thrombosis. However, the examination was complicated by the patient’s obesity and thus ambiguous. After interdisciplinary consultation with our internal and radiological specialists, we initiated a computed tomography (CT) scan of the right thigh. A CT scan provides insight into the affected site, revealing complications such as thrombosis, hematoma, or fractures. Due to the rapid availability, we performed a CT scan and discussed the results immediately afterwards. The CT scan revealed signal alteration and massive swelling of the musculus vastus intermedius without signs of hematoma or acute bleeding . Based on the physical examination and radiological evidence of an increase in volume in the right thigh, acute compartment syndrome was suspected, and immediate surgical intervention was indicated. Compartment pressure measurement was not performed as it would have delayed surgery. Immediately, a dermatofasciotomy of the right ventral thigh was performed.
We opened the fascia using a lateral access, followed by extensive debridement of all layers and enclosure via vacuum-assisted closure device (VAC). Significant swelling of the musculus vastus intermedius was observed during the procedure. There were no signs of hematoma or active bleeding, and no connection was found from the affected areas to the initial surgical site. Histological inspection revealed necrotic areas in the resected tissue.
After the surgery, the patient was immediately free of pain. We performed an exchange of the VAC-dressing 6 days after the initial surgery and successfully closed the wound on day 9. The further course was without complications, and our patient did not experience any functional deficiencies due to muscle debridement. She was discharged from our hospital to follow-up treatment with a ROM of extension/flexion of 0-0-60°. A total of 6 weeks after surgery, she could flex her knee to 100° and reported no pain or other issues .