A 28-year-old Japanese woman was admitted to the emergency department of a local hospital after experiencing acute abdominal pain. Computed tomography (CT) imaging revealed massive ascites and the presence of a cystic tumor measuring 60 mm in diameter in the pancreatic tail . Conservative therapy with antibiotics and abdominal drainage were performed to treat peritonitis that occurred secondary to the ruptured pancreatic cystic tumor, after which the patient’s symptoms improved. Levels of amylase and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) in ascites were 3220 IU/L and 226.2 ng/mL, respectively, and cytological findings were negative for malignant findings. The patient was referred to our department for further examination and treatment. She had no previous medical history including pregnancy and no cigarette smoking or drinking. Her family history showed no remarkable findings.
On admission, her abdomen was flat and soft, and there was no abdominal pain. Laboratory tests showed no anemia, and liver and kidney functions were normal. Serum tumor markers CEA and CA19-9 were 0.8 ng/mL and 3620.9 U/mL, respectively. Enhanced CT imaging showed a tumor measuring 60 mm in diameter with an internal septal formation in the pancreatic tail . There was no evidence of nodular lesion in the tumor or ascites. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a cystic tumor with an internal septal formation present in the pancreatic tail. T1- and T2-weighted imaging showed hypo- and hyperintense signals, respectively, with an unenhanced nodular lesion measuring 10 mm in diameter . Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) also revealed a multilocular cystic tumor with nodular lesion . We diagnosed MCN after rupture. The tumor was close to the splenic vessels; therefore, we decided to perform a laparoscopic spleen-preserving distal pancreatectomy (SPDP) with splenic vascular resection (Warshaw’s technique).
After induction of general anesthesia, the patient was positioned in the supine position. Complete exploration of the abdominal cavity revealed no ascites or peritoneal dissemination. The soft tumor was identified in the pancreatic tail . To avoid rupturing the tumor, we performed fine needle aspiration (FNA) of the cystic fluid by using a balloon catheter. We aspirated 250 mL of yellow fluid and sutured the punctured tumor. Levels of AMY, CEA, and CA19-9 in the cystic fluid were 23,639 IU/L, 203.4 ng/mL, and 1,867,200 ng/mL, respectively. We cut the splenic artery and vein while preserving the left gastroepiploic and short gastric vessels. Then, we cut the pancreatic body with a linear stapler and removed the tumor while preserving the spleen. Finally, we confirmed blood flow to the spleen. The operative time was 339 min, and the blood loss was 80 mL. The specimen was a multilocular cystic tumor measuring 80 mm in diameter that contained mucus. Histopathological findings revealed columnar epithelium with mild dysplasia and ovarian-type stroma, which tested positive for estrogen receptor and progesterone receptor by immunohistochemistry. The histopathological diagnosis was MCA.
The patient remained in hospital for 10 days after surgery with no postoperative complications. The patient remains alive without any evidence of recurrence at 8 years postoperatively.