A 15-year-old male cross-country runner presented to accident and emergency immediately after sustaining a bilateral hip injury whilst sprint training at his local club. The patient had warmed up with race walking and was beginning a speed session. During the first sprint, at around the 50 m mark and going “flat out,” the patient felt a sequential “pop” sensation in his hips. This caused immediate pain and the patient to fall to the floor. There was no antecedent injury or pain. The patient was unable to comment on the phase of sprinting at which the injury occurred, but was concentrating on “striding out.” Although a warm up occurred, the patient felt that he could have involved more hip activation exercises. The patient was training 3 times a week at a club level, with no risk of overtraining. The patient had no relevant injury history. Medical history included asthma, eczema, and nut allergy. There was no family history of apophyseal injury.
On examination, the patient was of a tall build and entered with wheelchair assistance. He had difficulty weight-bearing due to pain and weakness in his hips and stood with a flexed posture from the waist. He had groin tenderness in both hips and was unable to perform straight leg raise bilaterally. Thomas test revealed bilateral fixed flexion deformities. The patient had normal passive hip flexion to 80’, but passive extension was painful and limited to 25’. There was no neurovascular deficit.
Plain radiograph of the pelvis confirmed bilateral AIIS spine avulsion injuries. The right AIIS avulsion was displaced at 4.2 mm and the left undisplaced.
The patient was admitted overnight for optimization of analgesia and physiotherapy assessment and was the acuteness of the injury which was assessed through MRI . The MRI was reported as evidence of bilateral AIIS injury, more significant on the right side, where the apophysis is minimally displaced. On the MRI, more significant amount of fluid was seen surrounding the rectus femoris musculature on the right side, and both tendons remained attached to the apophyses bilaterally. The patient was discharged with protected weight-bearing, where the patient was given two crutches to use when mobilizing and advised to continue this without sporting activity for 6 weeks. At 2 weeks, the patient was reviewed in fracture clinic with satisfactory radiographs showing no further displacement. He was advised with a further 4 weeks of protected weight-bearing and then to begin a graded return to sporting activity with static bike exercise and swimming. The patient was advised to undertake progressively intense light jogging activities in the pool before progressing to full swimming strokes. The patient had two physiotherapy sessions at 4 and 8 weeks, to initiate and progress a basic hip-strengthening program.
The patient was initially lost to follow-up due to the COVID-19 crisis; however, follow-up at 6 months through telephone consultation showed complete resolution of the injury. The patient was able to return to running at 3 months following the injury and his club coach was involved in creating a graded return to play program. This involved slow progression of intensity and distance of training runs. The patient is now 6 months post-injury and has returned to full participation with no symptoms, including sprint training.