A 68-year-old Caucasian female was seen in our clinic in March 2022 with sudden onset of right groin pain. Initially, in March of 2005, at an outside institution, she had her index right THA with a 48-mm acetabular cup, a 28-mm inner diameter ceramic linter, size 7 femoral stem, and a 28-mm ceramic head with a 0-mm neck length (Osteonics Alumina C-taper, Stryker Howmedica Osteonics, Rutherford, N.J., USA). The patient initially did well. She next presented to our clinic in 2013 with left hip pain and degenerative changes. We subsequently performed left THA. During follow-up in 2014, she began to complain about painless clicking of her right hip. We counseled the patient to follow up if the symptoms worsen, otherwise follow-up in 1 year. Films showed an acetabular cup that was in 18.8° of anteversion and 66° of abduction. The patient again followed up in 2020 with worsening of the painless clicking and subluxation sensation, and she was indicated for acetabular revision. However, the patient did not proceed with revision arthroplasty stating that her issue seemed to have been resolved. Then, in March of 2022, she was seen in our clinic with right groin pain and a crunching sensation. Films revealed that the ceramic femoral head had fractured, and she was again indicated for revision of her right THA. No other radiographic changes were noted .
The patient’s THA was revised through a Hardinge direct lateral approach. Metallosis of the tissues was noted, the ceramic femoral head was in four major fragments . The patient was seen in May 2023, 1 year following revision surgery. The patient had no pain, limp, or disability and a perfect score on the Hip Disability and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score for Joint Replacement Questionnaire.
The ceramic liner showed metal staining from stem abrasion and the trunnion had a small notch along the proximal rim that did not affect the body of the trunnion itself. The fragments were removed. The ceramic liner was removed, and the acetabular cup was removed. The stem was well fixed and in good position and was left in place. A dual-mobility head was placed together with a ceramic head and a titanium sleeve on the original trunnion (Stryker Biolox Dual Mobility Vit E 42 mm/28 mm/E; Stryker, Howmedica, Osteonics Inc., Rutherford, N.J., USA). The patient tolerated the procedure well. The patient had an uncomplicated recovery and returned to normal function without pain. The patient was seen 2 weeks, 6 weeks, and 1 year following revision. They reported no post-operative complications and were pleased with the outcome of their surgery.
The patient was informed that data concerning the case would be submitted for publication. The patient agreed to this, and the case report was granted full IRB approval.