A 55-year-old Argentinian male was referred to a Canadian urologist’s practice in February 2021 with a three-month history of left lower abdominal pain, urinary frequency, nocturia, and urgency. The patient denied bothersome obstructive lower urinary tract symptoms, gross hematuria, dysuria, urinary incontinence, and B-symptoms including weight loss and change in appetite. His past medical history was significant for obesity and a laparoscopic cholecystectomy in 2017. He had no known drug allergies or medications. Physical examination demonstrated a patient with truncal obesity, weight of 125 kg, height of 178 cm, no abdominal masses, unremarkable umbilicus, unremarkable male genitalia, and a benign prostate. Screening hematologic, extended electrolytes, creatinine, blood urea nitrogen, glomerular filtration rate, and prostate-specific antigen levels were unremarkable. Urinalysis, urine culture, and urine cytology were negative. Abdominal ultrasound demonstrated an unremarkable post-void residual and prostate size but an abnormal 4.2 × 6.1 × 5.3 cm mass near the superior aspect of the bladder, prompting further investigation. Cystoscopy was unremarkable and did not reveal a bulge at the dome. Computed tomography (CT) abdomen/pelvis revealed a 10.3 cm solid and cystic mass abutting the superior bladder and extending up to the level of the umbilicus. There was associated mild soft tissue thickening, stranding, and nodularity on the anterior aspect of retro-umbilical omentum . The radiologist’s impression was a potential underlying malignancy, likely a urachal carcinoma, with suspected focal omental carcinomatosis.
In March 2021, the patient underwent an open surgical excision of a urachal mass, partial cystectomy, and bilateral extended pelvic lymph node dissection. Gross pathology revealed a 14.5 × 13 × 9.5 cm mass abutting the superior aspect of the bladder . Microscopically, this mass was composed of mixed inflammatory cells with foamy macrophages . There was a negative Von Kossa stain for malakoplakia, a negative Ziehl–Neelsen-GMS stain for microorganisms, a positive CD68 immunostain for macrophages, and a negative pankeratin stain to confirm no dysplastic or malignant cells. Additionally, all nodes sampled revealed small, scattered foci of granulomatous inflammation (3/3 left external iliac, 8/8 left internal iliac, 6/6 right external iliac, and 9/9 right internal iliac) with no evidence of dysplasia or metaplasia. These findings were consistent with a xanthogranulomatous mass with nodal extension.
Post-operatively, the patient had an uncomplicated hospital course. His two-week post-operative CT cystogram did not reveal a bladder leak; thus, his foley was discontinued and the patient passed his trial of void. At his two-month follow-up visit, he had returned to his baseline health with resolution of his urinary symptoms. Follow-up imaging revealed the absence of the urachal mass and no further worrisome findings.