A 37-year-old Panamanian female patient without a pre-existing medical history, was diagnosed with a stage IIIB mammary ductal carcinoma (cT4N0M0), positive estrogen receptors (ER-positive), negative progesterone receptors (PR-negative) in her right breast in 2013, for which she received four cycles of doxorubicin (cumulative dose 240 mg/m2) and cyclophosphamide from January to March 2013, followed by paclitaxel from April to June. An electrocardiogram and chest radiography done prior to chemotherapy revealed no cardiac alterations. In July 2013 the patient underwent mastectomy, with subsequent radiation therapy (45 Gy in 25 fractions).
Two years later, she was admitted to the hospital emergency department with 10 days history of orthopnea, swelling of her arms and legs, bendopnea, and fatigue. An echocardiogram was ordered, showing a reduced left ventricular systolic function (LVEF 25%). The diagnosis of anthracyclines induced cardiomyopathy was established. She was treated with a beta-blocker, diuretics and antihypertensives. After two weeks, she showed a significant improvement of her symptoms, with a LVEF of 45%. A year later, her 38-year-old brother was admitted to the hospital with a clinical presentation characterized by swelling of his legs, fatigue and minimum effort dyspnea, a left ventricular internal diameter in diastole (LVIDd) of 7.52 cm, with a LVEF of 20%. This clinical event prompted us to consider whether our patient had a genetic predisposition for DCM, and thus we performed a complete pedigree analysis of the proband that showed the presence of several DCM cases in the family.
In order to establish the genetic mutation responsible for the familial DCM, genomic DNA was extracted from whole-blood samples of the proband, and her brother, using a Masterpure DNA purification kit following the manufacturer’s protocol, and untargeted whole exome sequencing (WES) assessment was performed. Briefly, DNA samples were amplified prior to exome library preparation by means of GenomiPhi V3 DNA Amplification Kit. Exome libraries of the selected individuals were prepared from amplified DNA using an Illumina Nextera Rapid Capture Exome kit (version 1.1, 37 Mb). Genomic DNA was then tagmented, and amplified using polymerase chain reaction amplification (PCR); regions of interest (exons) were captured by hybridization to specific probes followed by a cycle of PCR amplification. The sequencing step was performed on an Illumina HiSeq 2500 platform, targeting for 100 bp pair-end reads, and a mean sequencing coverage average above 80x. The clinically relevant variant was subsequently confirmed by means of Sanger sequencing. The genetic investigations revealed the presence of a LMNA-p.Arg190Trp (NM_170707.3:c.568C > T) missense variant.