A 39-year-old woman presented to the ophthalmology department of our hospital with discomfort in her eyes. Fundoscopic examination showed bilateral papilledema. Extensive neuro-ophthalmologic examination revealed mild visual field abnormalities. She was referred to the neurosurgery department for suspected abnormally high intracranial pressure (ICP). Neurological examination found normal consciousness with no abnormalities. Her cranial nerves were intact. She had no diplopia, weakness, ataxia, or sensory disturbance. Coagulation profile and biological tests were within normal limits. She was overweight (body mass index of 27.2 kg/m2). Her medical and family history was unremarkable, and no evidence of infection was found including sinusitis, otitis media, and mastoid cellulitis. She was not taking any medication, including oral contraceptives or hormonal agents. She had previously experienced four normal vaginal deliveries (gravidity and parity G4P4) without complications. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination revealed high opening pressure (500 mmH2O [> 35 cm]) on lumbar puncture and normal CSF composition.
Noncontrast computed tomography (CT) revealed no intracranial space-occupying lesions or hydrocephalus except an asymptomatic arachnoid cyst of the left middle fossa . The clinical manifestations and radiological findings indicated venous thrombosis. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging revealed a small (2.5 cm) lesion located in the right sigmoid sinuses appearing as isointense on T1-weighted images, and isointense on T2-weighted images, with homogeneous enhancement following intravenous administration of gadolinium .
CT venography demonstrated subtotal occlusion of the right sigmoid sinus, caused by a well-defined, homogeneous, hypodense mass. Conventional angiography demonstrated the dominant right transverse sinus with hypoplastic left transverse sinus and subtotal occlusion of the dominant right sigmoid sinus in the venous phase, and a mass lesion causing severe luminal narrowing . We considered that this mass lesion interrupted the venous drainage, leading to venous hypertension. The precise location of the mass lesion was difficult to distinguish as the inner sinus wall and invading the sinus, or the extra sinus wall and compressing the sinus.
We investigated methods for improving blood flow by intravascular surgery such as stent placement and percutaneous transluminal angioplasty using a balloon. However, preoperative angiography showed antegrade right transverse flow and poor collateral flow indicating this flow is dependent even in subtotal occlusion. Therefore, sacrifice of the transverse or sigmoid sinus seemed to introduce critical risk. Surgical treatment or intravascular surgery may be high risk without knowing specific location of the mass lesion, inside or outside the sinus, and without knowing the pathological type. Therefore, our patient was treated with lumbar puncture followed by acetazolamide. Oral warfarin was initiated because it was unable to exclude the possibility of venous thrombosis. Frequent ophthalmologic assessments including quantitative visual fields were planned. We expected development of collateral flow and improvement of ICP, but unfortunately imaging showed no change. Slight deterioration of the bilateral papilledema was noted 6 months later. Lumbar puncture confirmed persistent elevation of CSF pressure with opening pressure of 420 mmH2O. We judged that improvement due to medical treatment could not be expected, so we planned surgical treatment.
Right presigmoid craniectomy was performed for tumor resection under motor evoked potential and somatosensory evoked response monitoring. The transverse and sigmoid sinuses were exposed by drilling of the petrosal bones. The transverse and sigmoid sinuses were elastic and hard, suggesting very high pressure in the sinuses . Intraoperative indocyanine green fluorescence angiography revealed the mass lesion as a blood flow defect in the sigmoid sinus . The tumor was directly observed after retraction of the dura and sinus. The tumor extruded out spontaneously without dura or sinus wall incision, because of the high pressure in the sinus. The extra sinus part of the tumor was removed first, and then the tumor was followed into the sinus. The tumor was located lateral sigmoid sinus, had invaded the sigmoid sinus, and attached to the sinus wall projected inside the sigmoid sinus. No attachment with the skull was found . Observation of the inside of the dura found no tumor on the inner layer of the dura or arachnoid membrane. Bleeding under high pressure occurred during resection of the intra-sinus tumor, which suggested the tumor was located in the sigmoid sinus and attached to the inside the sinus wall. Small residual tumor remained involving the transverse sinus, but the patency was checked immediately by Doppler probe or indocyanine green fluorescence.
Histological examination of the surgical specimen revealed spindle-shaped tumor cells, with narrow rod-shaped nuclei arranged in intersecting fascicles, without mitotic activity, nuclear atypia, or necrosis. The pathological diagnosis was fibrous meningioma World Health Organization grade I.
The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful. Postoperative MR imaging showed that the tumor was totally resected . Postoperative CT venography and cerebral angiography showed patency of both the right transverse and straight sinuses . Fundoscopic examination showed improvement of bilateral papilledema. Visual field testing and CSF examination found no abnormalities. The patient was initially negative about the surgery, but finally, she was glad to receive the surgery.