A 63-year-old man was diagnosed with hypopharyngeal cancer (Stage IVb) affecting the lymph nodes in July 2012. Complete remission was achieved through a combination of chemotherapy and radiotherapy. However, the hypopharyngeal cancer recurred in August, 2017 and he underwent resection of the larynx, pharynx, esophagus, thyroid and cervical lymph nodes in September 2017. Lymph node metastasis appeared in December 2017, and nivolumab was administered. Prior to presentation to us, he had received two cycles of nivolumab treatment at a dose of 160 mg (3 mg/kg body weight) on February 16 and March 2, 2018. A third treatment was discontinued owing to his deteriorating health.
He was referred to our clinic with a complaint of blurry vision starting 6 days prior to presentation on April 21, 2018. He did not have tinnitus, meningismus or vitiligo. His past ocular history was unremarkable. At presentation, his best-corrected visual acuity was 10/200 in the right eye and 20/50 in the left eye. Slit lamp examination revealed bilateral anterior uveitis. There were granulomatous mutton-fat keratic precipitates and anterior chamber cells. Both irises exhibited posterior synechiae. Fundus examination showed papilledema and serous retinal detachment in both eyes . Vitreous haze was not observed in either eye. Optical coherence tomography showed subretinal fluid, a wavy retinal pigment epithelium line and optic disc swelling . Fluorescein angiography demonstrated leakages of fundi and optic disc . Indocyanine green angiography demonstrated leakage , the incompetency of the choroidal circulation and hypofluorescent dark dots in the intermediate phase . His genotyping showed HLA-DRB1*04:05. However, examination of CSF did not show pleocytosis. He was diagnosed with probable VKH, based on the revised diagnostic criteria for VKH . We suspected nivolumab as the cause of the uveitis.
In consideration of the patient’s systemic condition, bilateral sub-tenon injection of triamcinolone acetonide (STTA) was initiated as the primary therapy on April 27. Because this did not achieve remission, we started steroid pulse therapy on May 2. We intravenously administered 1000 mg/day of methylprednisolone sodium succinate for 3 days, which led to a rapid improvement in the patient’s vision and resolution of the anterior uveitis and serous retinal detachment . After this therapy finished, we treated him with 50 mg/day of prednisolone for 1 week, and then reduced it by 5 mg every week. The patient’s uveitis remained in complete remission at his last visit on June 28. The uveal inflammation had subsided, and depigmentation and a sunset glow appearance were observed in both fundi. The patient died from cancer on August 4.