A 19-year-old pregnant woman has been referred to our department during her 3rd pregnancy for GD and new-onset TAO. Hyperthyroidism was diagnosed by her primary care physician at week 20 of pregnancy. Her laboratory results were: TSH 0.01 mU/L, FT4: 78,4 pmol/L (reference range: 12–22 pmol/L), FT3: 37.4 pmol/L (reference range: 3.1–6.8 pmol/L). For unknown reasons, she showed up three months later, at week 33 of pregnancy, with untreated hyperthyroidism. She did not report any other disease. She has had no history of thyroid disease and no pre-pregnancy TSH values were available. The two previous pregnancies conceived naturally and were completed by cesarean section due to cephalopelvic disproportion. She smoked 20 cigarettes daily during pregnancy and failed to quit smoking in spite of repeated counseling.
On presentation at week 33 her main complaints were proptosis and limited movement of the right eye with accompanying pain. She recalled that her first symptom, the proptosis appeared around week 14 of gestation. On admission TSH and thyroid hormone levels were in the hyperthyroid range . Her TRAb level was 2.4 U/L (reference range:< 1 U/L), while the anti-thyroglobulin antibody level was 1324.0 IU/ml (reference range: < 60 IU/ml.). In spite of current recommendations an initial dose of metimazol 50 mg/day has been chosen; severe type T3 hyperthyriodism was considered to carry high risk of preterm delivery, while there was no fetal risk of thiamazole in the 3rd trimester. After 3 days, the dose of thiamazole was reduced to 30 mg per day. Examination showed marked exophthalmos on the right side with restricted and painful eye movement, decreased best corrected visual acuity (20/32) and eyelid edema. Proptosis was 28 and 21 mm at the right and left sides, respectively by Hertel exophthalmometry at 90 mm (regional normal < 20 mm). The disease was graded as severe on the EUGOGO scale . Clinical Activity Score (CAS) was 6/7 and 0/7 on the right and left sides, respectively.
The fetus showed no signs of intrauterine growth restriction, no tachycardia or goiter and the growth rate was satisfactory on follow up according to the ultrasonography. From week 34, the therapeutic dose of thiamazole was reduced to two times 15 mg daily . Eye examination on week 38 showed improvement in visual acuity, CAS and proptosis. , although retrobulbar pain, pain on eye movement, eyelid edema and conjunctival redness remained. Because the patient did not develop sight-threatening TAO, the thyroid-eye clinic team decided not to initiate high-dose corticosteroid therapy.
A healthy female baby was delivered through cesarean section on week 39. Both TAO and cephalopelvic disproportion were contraindications of vaginal delivery. The newborn did not show clinical signs of thyroid dysfunction, and day 3 TSH was in the reference newborn range. The mother’s thyroid hormone levels started to rise after delivery; thiamazole dose was modified accordingly, supplemented with bisoprolol. Her eye complaints substantially improved the next day after the cesarean section, CAS declined, and visual acuity returned to normal . Proptosis, eyelid and conjunctival redness and swelling of the eyelid and caruncula were still present on day 3 postpartum . MRI examination was to be performed, however, the patient declined it. For the relapsing Graves’ disease and orbital involvement, total thyroidectomy was scheduled; later she declined and she and her baby were lost for follow up.