The patient was a 28-year-old Japanese woman, weighing 52 kg, with a right benign breast tumor. She had no history of neurological or psychiatric disease. The preoperative assessment was unremarkable. There seemed to be no history of neglect in her childhood or familial problems. She graduated from high school and was working for a company without any problems. The scheduled operation of her benign breast tumor was postponed for almost 2 months because of the COVID-19 pandemic. Therefore, she seemed to be very nervous and anxious about her disease. She underwent an excision of the breast tumor under general anesthesia. General anesthesia was induced with 150 mg of propofol, 100 mcg of fentanyl, and 50 mg of rocuronium. A #3 laryngeal mask airway (LMA) was inserted in the first attempt. Sevoflurane and remifentanil were used to maintain general anesthesia. Hemodynamic stability was maintained with only one dose of 4 mg of ephedrine. No local anesthetic agent was used during the procedure. Other intravenous medications administered intraoperatively were 100 mg of cefazolin and 6 mg of dexamethasone. For analgesia, 1000 mg of acetaminophen was administered. After the 1-h procedure, 200 mg of sugammadex was administered as a reversal agent after the recovery of spontaneous breathing. She demonstrated almost 450 mL of tidal volume, 10 times the respiratory rate per minute, and 0.2% of the end-tidal concentration of sevoflurane before the removal of the LMA.
In the operating room, 5 min after removal of the LMA, she was able to open her eyes voluntarily and open her mouth and put her tongue out when we indicated. She was alert and oriented, with normal vital signs. However, complete paralysis of bilateral lower extremities and incomplete paralysis of bilateral upper extremities were noted. Additionally, 200 mg sugammadex was administered. The train-of-four (TOF) ratio was 1.0 in the posterior tibial nerve and 0.92 in the ulnar nerve 10 min after the additional administration of sugammadex. She began to move her upper extremity but not the lower extremity. Laboratory tests, including the blood chemistry test, full blood count, electrolytes, and blood gas, were unremarkable.
Urgent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and spine was performed to exclude intracranial and spinal complications. It showed no structural abnormalities that would require emergent treatment. The neurology team was immediately consulted for further evaluation. A neurologist conducted neurological examinations 2 h after the removal of the LMA. The patient could maintain bilateral knee positions with passive flexion of her knee by the neurologist, while she could not flex her knee actively. Loss of sensation was not observed in any lesions. There was no hyperreflexia or hypotonia. These immediate results of her physical examination were inconsistent with the MRI findings. Ultimately, she was suspected to have a conversion disorder after other neurologic diseases were excluded. After a 12-h observation, she fully recovered and she could walk without any assistance and was discharged. At the 10-day follow-up, she demonstrated no neurological deficits.