A 41-year-old man was admitted to the Department of Neurology of our hospital after experiencing headache and vomiting for 1 d on September 9, 2020.
Six days before admission, the patient presented with diarrhea (2–3 times per day) and abdominal pain with a slight fever. Self-medication with trimebutine maleate and compound Lactobacillus acidophilus showed no improvement. Three days before admission, the patient visited our hospital on emergency and was treated with antibiotics (levofloxacin) for suspected colitis. The patient achieved remission from diarrhea, but still demonstrated abdominal distension. The patient did not experience chest tightness or heart palpitations. Six days after admission, he complained of a worsening headache and developed left hemiplegia. His consciousness rapidly deteriorated with signs of brain herniation. Thirteen days after admission (2 d after surgery), he had no symptoms, but he did demonstrate acne on his skin.
The patient had a history of tonsillectomy, appendectomy, and kidney stones.
The patient denied a past history of drug or alcohol abuse, smoking, promiscuous sexual behavior, raw food consumption, and travel. There was no family history of neurological or blood system diseases.
After admission, the patient’s body temperature was 36.7 ℃, respiratory rate was 16 bpm, heart rate was 42 bpm, and blood pressure was 135/72 mmHg. There was no detectable rash, bradycardia, arrhythmia, or murmur, and both lungs sounded clear with no rales. Abdominal distension without tenderness was noted, and the patient’s neurological examination was normal.
On September 6, 2020, white blood cell count was elevated (12.6 × 109/L) with an absolute eosinophil count (AEC) of 0.97 × 109/L, hemoglobin concentration of 155 g/L, platelet (PLT) count of 238 × 1012/L, and C-reactive protein concentration of 110 mg/L. On September 9, 2020, PLT count decreased to 60 × 1012/L, AEC increased to 2.41 × 109/L, D-dimer increased to 50.22 mg/L, prothrombin time (PT) was 12.8 s, and activated partial PT was 36.2 s. Total immunoglobulin E was 389.4 IU/mL, erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 21 mm/h, and glycan antigen was 125 U/mL, but a serological allergen screen was negative. Tests for parasites in the stool were negative. Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic, antinuclear, and cardiolipin antibodies were negative. Procalcitonin, troponin, cardiac enzymes, liver and kidney function, folic acid, vitamin B12, and thyroid function were all normal.
Serology for human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis viruses, and Treponemapallidum was normal. Bone marrow biopsy showed normal cellularity with increased eosinophils (35%). FIPL1 and platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR) A/B gene fusion and chromosomal analysis were normal. However, AEC progressively increased up to 7.65 × 109/L, PLT count progressively decreased to a minimum of 14 × 109/L, and D-dimer continuously increased to 69.76 mg/L .
On September 6, 2020, abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed swelling with peripheral exudation changes in the wall of the transverse and sigmoid colon. On September 9, 2020, brain CT revealed thrombosis of the left jugular vein to the left transverse sinus vein . Chest CT demonstrated inflammation in both lungs.
Electrocardiography showed significant sinus bradycardia with irregularity, sinus arrest, and frequent borderline escape, with normal myocardial enzymes and troponin. Echocardiography showed no abnormal findings. On September 15, 2020, brain CT revealed right temporal lobe and left centrum semiovale ICH . Chest CT showed bilateral pleural effusion. Duplex ultrasonography showed bilateral intermuscular venous thrombosis of the calf.
On September 30, 2020, enhanced cranial magnetic resonance venogram showed stenosis of the left internal jugular vein, transverse sinus, sigmoid sinus, confluent sinus, straight sinus, and inferior sagittal sinus .