A 25-year-old White woman attended orthopedic consultation with pain and locking of the lateral side of the left foot 2 years before, with no history of trauma and no previous diagnosis. On examination, she felt pain upon palpation of the fifth metatarsal diaphysis and presented snapping during flexion–extension of the left ankle.
Ankle radiographs were considered normal, and dynamic ultrasonography demonstrated anterior subluxation of the peroneus brevis tendon with dorsiflexion, suggesting superior peroneal retinaculum injury .
After 2 months of conservative treatment, the condition did not improve. Therefore, surgical intervention was suggested. Having explained the procedure and its possible complications, the patient decided to proceed with the operative treatment.
In this case, isolated anatomical reattachment of the retinaculum was performed, as described by Ferran et al. . The patient was placed on the operating table in horizontal dorsal decubitus position, under spinal anesthesia, and a pneumatic tourniquet on the upper thigh, with a cushion under the buttock of the operative side. An approximately 6-cm longitudinal incision was made along the route of the peroneal tendons, and the peroneus brevis sheath was opened longitudinally around 3 mm posterior to the posterior border of the fibula .
Subsequently, the bony surface of the lateral malleolus was scraped until a bleeding surface was visible, and two anchors were inserted along the posterior border of the lower fibula . The posterior margin of the peroneal sheath was moved anteriorly, and the superior peroneal retinaculum was reconstructed by overlapping (“vest over pants” fashion), with the ankle in eversion and slight dorsiflexion. The strength of the repair was verified by moving the joint through its entire range of motion .
The surgical wound was closed, a crepe bandage was applied, and plaster immobilization was placed with the ankle in slight eversion and a neutral position of flexion and extension. The patient was discharged on the day after the surgery. After 10 days, the stitches were removed, and the ankle was immobilized with a synthetic cast for 4 weeks. Following its removal, partial weight-bearing was allowed, and physiotherapy was initiated. Cycling and swimming were introduced 2 weeks after the cast removal, and gradual stretching and strengthening exercises started after 8 weeks. Return to sports activities was authorized on the fifth postoperative month.
There were no postoperative complications. Six months after surgery, magnetic resonance imaging was performed, where the reconstructed retinaculum was evident on T1 and T2 images . After the first postoperative year, the patient presented total ankle mobility, no subluxation recurrence, and no symptoms.