V.S., female, 30 years old, came to our outpatient ward complaining of oro-pharyngeal pain for 10 months that worsen when she ate. She did not report weight loss, anorexia, cough, fever, sudoresis, chills, halitosis, rhinorrhea, secretion or sputum, pharyngeal pruritus, dyspnea or hemoptysis. She had not had pulmonary diseases or surgeries in the past. She reported having had contact with a patient with pulmonary tuberculosis two years ago. She did not smoke nor drank alcoholic beverages.
Physical exam: 16-week pregnant patient had soft palpable and painless nodes in her left sternocleidomastoid region, without signs of infection or fistula. In the oropharyngoscopy we noticed a granulomatous, hyperemic, friable lesion, involving the soft palate, uvula, tonsils and the posterior pharyngeal wall, especially on the right side, without secretions or ulcerations . The rest of her oral cavity did not show alterations.
Indirect laryngoscopy showed a granulomatous infiltrate in the epiglottis, arytenoids domes, especially to the right and on the right side ventricular fold.
We removed tissue fragments from her soft palate for pathology exam, direct view and culture for fungi, alcohol-acid resistant bacilli and common germs.
Histopathology exam revealed a chronic granulomatous inflammatory process, with alcohol-acid resistant bacilli under Ziehl-Neelsen stain, matching tuberculosis signs. Culture was positive for the Koch's bacillus after 30 days of inoculation.
Pneumology did not reveal clinical or radiological alterations .
We started with anti-tuberculosis treatment with a triple scheme based on rifampin, isoniazid and pyrazinamide. Her oropharyngeal pain resolved in the first month of treatment. However, after six months, she still had sporadic pharyngeal discomfort and showed soft palate and right arytenoid with hyperemia. We then decided to maintain her treatment for three more months. After nine months of treatment, the patient was asymptomatic and did not show alterations in her clinical exam . She has been followed for one year now, without signs of disease recurrence.