A 25-year-old man was referred with complaints about blurred vision and discomfort of the right eye 3 days after performing CXL in another ophthalmic center. He was a known case of KCN. Serial preoperative Scheimpflug tomography images indicated the progressive KCN. Also, the thinnest point of the right cornea was 461 μm, which allowed planning for the CXL procedure . According to the patient’s medical records and through a phone call to his surgeon, preservative free 0.1% riboflavin solution with 20% dextran (Sina Darou, Iran) was administered every 3 min for 30 min after central 8-mm epithelial debridement. However, a crater or container was not used to keep the riboflavin in touch with the cornea. Then, this central part of the cornea was irradiated with UV-A light (IROC, Zürich, Switzerland) with the wavelength of 370 nm and radiation of 3.0 mW / cm2 after proper calibration. Riboflavin solutions were applied to the cornea every 5 min during the final 30 min of the procedure. Finally, a therapeutic contact lens was applied.
The patient developed corneal edema within the first day of procedure which did not resolve until the 3rd day of follow-up visit. Hence, the patient was referred to our center. He was suffering from pain and photophobia. Congestion, central corneal edema, and stromal haziness were noted on the slit-lamp examination . The therapeutic contact lens was in place. The crystalline lens was clear and the fundus examination was normal. The best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) and manifest refraction of the right and the left eyes were counting fingers at 1 m (− 3.00–3.75 × 160 °) and 20/20 (− 2.00–0.25 × 47°), respectively. Furthermore, the intraocular pressure (IOP) of the right and the left eyes were 12 mmHg and 14 mmHg, respectively.
Different imaging modalities were applied. ASOCT (Optovue RTVue device, CA, USA) demonstrated increased central and paracentral corneal thickness (673 μm in the central part) with full-thickness stromal haziness. Moreover, no obvious Descemet rupture was detected. Demarcation line of CXL was visible as a faint hyper-reflective line between corneal stroma and endothelium in the paracentral area and beneath the endothelial layer in the center of the cornea showing a very deep CXL line .
Although applying specular microscopy was not possible due to severe corneal edema, confocal scanning estimated the number of endothelial cells up to 1867 cells/m2 . It should be mentioned specular microscopy (SP 3000P; Topcon, Japan) done 1 month later when the cornea turned clear and revealed the cell density of 1909 cells /m2 .
The confocal microscopy examination was performed for evaluating the effect of CXL on the different layers including anterior, middle, and posterior stroma, as well as endothelial layer. Anterior stroma showed hyper-reflective lines without recognizable cells and nerve fibers. In the middle stroma, rare active and edematous keratocytes were found. The boundary of the cross-sectional area was determined by a hyper-reflective reticular pattern with elongated keratocytes and needle-like structures that involved the posterior stroma, indicating the increased depth of the affected region of the CXL .
To manage the patient, the bandage contact lens was removed followed by debridement of loosened epithelium for better re-epithelialization and substituted with new contact lens (FREQUENCY®55 soft contact lens with base curvature of 8.7 mm, diameter of 14.4 mm, and power of − 0.25 diopter). Non-preservative steroid 1% (NPS1%) eye drop was prescribed for every 2 h and homatropine 2% eye drop was used twice a day. On the 4th day of follow-up visit (7 days after CXL) re-epithelialization of the cornea was obviously accompanied by reduced edema and haziness . The corneal edema slowly reduced and completely resolved with no need for surgical procedures during 2 months. The stromal haze was partially resolved within 3 months with a residual whorl-shaped corneal scar . Steroids eye drops were tapered and discontinued in 3 months. Topographic evaluation was stable without any signs of progression. Finally, the patient obtained the BCVA of 20/30 in his right eye. It could be mentioned the preoperative refraction and BCVA were − 3.50 -4.00 × 160° and 20/25, respectively.