Our patient was a 50-year-old Caucasian man with a medical history significant for hypertension, obesity, and nephrolithiasis, and no history of tuberous sclerosis, who presented to our facility with a five-day history of fever, chills, night sweats and lethargy. He had intentionally lost just over 9kg (20 pounds) while taking a product called ‘Healthy Trim’ during the previous month, but had stopped taking it approximately one week prior to presentation. Initial laboratory test results included only a mild normochromic normocytic anemia and an increased erythrosedimentation rate of 86mm/hour. A chest X-ray showed clear lungs with no evidence of consolidation, pleural effusion or pneumothorax; his heart was of normal size.
His symptoms continued and approximately two weeks later a chest, abdomen and pelvis computed tomography (CT) scan was performed. This imaging study showed a solid heterogeneous mass (73×66×65mm) involving the parenchyma of the upper pole of the left kidney . It extended exophytically from the superior and posterior-medial aspects of the kidney. No renal vein invasion or regional lymph node enlargement was detected. The right kidney showed a 35mm simple, homogeneous cystic formation with no evidence of solid component; no other solid renal masses were identified.
Our patient underwent a hand-assisted laparoscopic left nephrectomy with adrenalectomy without complications. Hand-assisted laparoscopic nephrectomies are performed per our institution’s protocol in all cases of renal tumors to avoid morcellation and to maintain the integrity of the specimen. After surgery, a gross surgical pathology examination revealed a 19×8×6.5cm left kidney with a 3.5×1×1cm adrenal gland. The external surface of the specimen was inked black and the specimen was then bi-valved, revealing a 7.5×5.1×4.0cm pinkish/tan, extremely friable and necrotic mass located in the superior pole of the kidney. The mass appeared well circumscribed with pushing borders that displaced, but appeared to not invade, into the superior peri-renal adipose tissue. The inferior portion of the mass involved the renal pelvis. The mass extended to 0.1cm from the superior margin and 4.5cm from the renal vein margin; no tumor thrombus in the renal vein was present. The uninvolved renal tissue showed a well-defined corticomedullary junction with an average cortical thickness of 1.2cm. There was a single calcified, 1.0×0.5×0.5cm renal calculus in the inferior pole. The adrenal gland was grossly unremarkable with no lesions identified. Representative sections were submitted for histological preparations.
Histologically, sections of the mass showed round pleomorphic and occasionally multinucleated tumor cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm, macronucleoli, and rare mitotic figures; moderate interspersed smooth muscle fibers were observed, but adipocytes were not identified . There was prominent vasculature, focal necrosis and hemorrhage; a microfocus of tumor invasion into the peri-renal adipose tissue was present with no invasion beyond Gerota’s fascia. No regional lymph nodes were identified. The Pathologic Staging pTNM of the tumor was pT3a, Nx, Mx (Stage III).
Immunoperoxidase stainings showed tumor cells with uniform cytoplasmic reactivity for vimentin, calponin , and CD68 . The tumor cells had patchy reactivity for CD10 and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA). Smooth muscle actin (SMA) stained only the intervening smooth muscle slips and small round capillaries . Immunostaining for HMB-45 and Melan-A were performed on two separate areas of the tumor and using two different chromogens, diaminobenzidine (DBA) and alkaline phosphatase (AP), and all showed negative staining of the tumor cells. Negative stainings were also observed for renal cell carcinoma (RCC) antigen, cytokeratin AE1/AE3, cytokeratin 7, high molecular weight cytokeratin (MA903), CAM5.2, CD1, CD31, CD117, S100, microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MiTF), tyrosinase (DBA and AP), and desmin (only blood vessels were positive). Staining for Ki-67 (MIB-1) was performed to evaluate the proliferative activity of the tumor, which showed positive nuclear staining in an average of approximately 30 percent of the tumor cells. The positive and negative controls reacted appropriately for each staining.
Tissue retrieved from a paraffin block was subjected to electron microscopic examination in an attempt to demonstrate the premelanosome-like granules that are usually present in epithelioid angiomyolipoma cells. While the paraffin sample used for this study provided suboptimal tissue fixation, we were able to identify tumor cells with finely granular organelles with a substructural periodicity resembling that of premelanosomes .
In the 26 months of clinical follow-up data available at the time of submission of this report, four chest/abdomen/pelvis CT scans were performed, none of which demonstrated evidence of local recurrence or metastatic disease. Our patient did not receive chemotherapy or radiation therapy.