A 23-year-old male presented to our clinic with left side dominant pain in both shoulders.
Gradual aggravation of the patient’s symptoms occurred over the last year, even after physical therapy and intra-articular injection. The patient reported that raising his arm was difficult. The pain was more severe on the left side and became aggravated when lifting heavy objects.
The patient first visited our hospital four years ago, complaining of left side dominant pain in both shoulders. He was then diagnosed with impingement syndrome in both shoulders and visited another local hospital to undergo physical therapy and receive conservative management. After four years of conservative management, the patient returned to our clinic with aggravated pain in both shoulders.
The patient was a college student with no history of heavy loading activity or overuse, and there was no history of trauma or sport injury as well. There was no other past illness or family history.
On physical examination, the patient’s pain was localized to the bicipital groove area and lesser tuberosity in both shoulders. O’Brien test, Speed’s test, and Yegarson test showed a positive result in both shoulders. The patient’s range of motion (ROM) was in nearly normal range in both shoulders. The results of manual muscle testing showed no muscle weakness.
The results of preoperative laboratory tests were normal.
A simple radiograph showed no signs of bony anomaly. Shoulder ultrasonography showed a shallow bicipital groove with an intact subscapularis tendon in both shoulders . Computed tomography scan showed a dysplastic bicipital groove along with flattening of the medial wall of the groove . Preoperative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed that the LHBT was medially dislocated in both shoulders. LHBT distance was 17.9 mm on left shoulder and 20.9 mm on right shoulder. The subscapularis tendon and the supraspinatus tendon were intact on both sides . The morphology of the bicipital groove was examined using the technique introduced by Yoo et al. The opening angle of the bicipital groove was 124.6 degrees on the right side and 137.0 degrees on the left side. The medial wall angle was 25.7 degrees on the right side and 21.4 degrees on the left side. The depth of each bicipital groove was 2.41 mm in the right shoulder, and 1.34 mm in the left shoulder. The bicipital groove in both shoulders was considered shallow, as proposed in previous studies[,]. Considering the values measured in MRI, the groove was more shallow on the left side, where the pain was more severe.