A 68-year-old Caucasian woman presented to our emergency department at the end of February 2020 with cough and dizziness for the past 20 days and persistent fever unresponsive to antipyretic drugs for the past 6 days, associated with worsening shortness of breath. Her past medical history included a prior inferolateral ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) in 2014. Due to the persistence of severe left ventricular (LV) dysfunction [LV ejection fraction (EF) 34%], she was implanted with a single-chamber implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) for primary prevention of sudden cardiac death 3 months later. Follow-up was uneventful and she never experienced ICD interventions. Her medical therapy on admission was metoprolol 100 mg b.i.d., ramipril 5 mg/day, spironolactone 25 mg/day, rosuvastatin 10 mg/day, cardioaspirin 100 mg/day, and rabeprazole 20 mg/day. Her cardiovascular examination was unremarkable, while lung auscultation revealed left basal crackles. A 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus rhythm with signs of inferior MI . Laboratory tests were within the normal range, except for C-reactive protein (CRP) (27.6 mg/L, reference range <1.0 mg/L). Arterial blood gas analysis revealed oxygen partial pressure of 67 mmHg and oxygen saturation of 94%. Two real-time reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction (RT–PCR) assays on nasopharyngeal swabs resulted negative for SARS-CoV-2. A chest radiograph demonstrated a consolidation in the left inferior lobe, suggestive for pneumonia . Non-invasive ventilation and antibiotic therapy were started.
During her hospital stay, the patient had multiple episodes of sustained VT treated with ICD shocks . Device interrogation detected frequent VA episodes over the past 20 days, self-terminating or successfully interrupted with antitachycardia pacing (ATP). ES (12 VT episodes within 24 h) persisted despite intravenous infusion of beta-blockers (metoprolol), amiodarone, and deep sedation. A transthoracic echocardiogram showed mid-range LV dysfunction (LVEF 37%) and excluded the presence of LV thrombi. According to European guidelines, catheter ablation was performed under deep sedation the day after, with the patient afebrile and mainly in sinus rhythm, with persistence of sporadic non-sustained VT episodes . Three different ultrasound-guided venous accesses were obtained: two in the right femoral vein and one in the left femoral vein. A 10-pole catheter (DecaNav, Biosense Webster, Inc., Diamond Bar, CA, USA) was placed in the coronary sinus, and an ultrasound imaging catheter (intracardiac echocardiography, ICE, Acu-Nav, Acuson, Mountain View, CA, USA) was advanced in the mid-right atrium, to guide transseptal puncture. The electroanatomic CARTO3 mapping system (Biosense Webster, Inc., CA, USA) was used to map the left ventricle in sinus rhythm with a Pentaray catheter (Biosense Webster). The bipolar voltage map showed a large ischaemic scar in the inferolateral LV wall. A substrate-based ablation targeting local abnormal ventricular activity (LAVA) was performed with a 3.5 mm tip magnetic irrigated radiofrequency catheter (Navistar® RMT Thermocool, Biosense Webster) and with a remote magnetic navigation system (Niobe™, Stereotaxis, Inc., St. Louis, MO, USA) . At the end of the ablation procedure, non-inducibility of clinical VT by programmed ventricular stimulation was confirmed.
During the subsequent hospital stay, continuous ECG monitoring did not show further VT events. Repeated blood test showed progressive CRP reduction, while the high-sensitivity troponin T level remained negative (5 ng/L, normal values <15.0 ng/L). Despite clinical improvement, a third nasopharyngeal swab resulted positive for SARS-CoV-2 and the patient was finally diagnosed with COVID-19 pneumonia. Another chest radiograph showed a near-complete resolution of pneumonia findings and she was discharged home to self-isolate with the addition of amiodarone 200 mg/day and apixaban 5 mg b.i.d. During the first 2 months after discharge, the patient remained asymptomatic, without further ICD interventions.