Our patient was a 35-year-old male with a history of Widal syndrome who presented frontal headache, resistant to the usual analgesics associated with a left proptosis that progressed for 4 months. The ophthalmological examination found a left upper-medial eyelid swelling, which was renitent, non-beating, without inflammatory signs. A left non-axile, irreducible, painless, and impulsatile exophthalmos without a loss of visual acuity or ocular motricity was noticed in our patient (A–B). Furthermore, the otorhinolaryngological examination found a stage 2 nasosinus polyposis (B) and the neurological examination was unremarkable. On imaging, craniofacial computed tomography (CT) showed a total sinus filling of the face and two hypodense formations centered on the frontal sinuses, with thin walls which were not enhanced after injection of contrast. These formations were blowing and eroding the sinus bone walls, extending into the intra-cranial area with a compression of the two frontal lobes and intra-orbital left associated with grade 2 proptosis and measuring 40 × 25 mm and 30 × 23 on the left and the right side respectively (A and B). Cranio-facial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an expansive process of the frontal sinuses, laminating the sinus bone walls which was hypointense in T1 and heterogeneous in T2 hypersignal and enhancing at the periphery after injection of contrast product (41 × 33 mm on the left and 29 × 33 mm on the right). This lesion lowered the roof of the left orbit and the ipsilateral superior right muscle with bone lysis, with a marked grade 2 exophthalmos and bulging into the right orbital and cranial cavities by compressing the anterior pole of the frontal lobe (C and D). Several diagnoses were proposed including epidermoid cysts, cholesteatomas, meningiomas, chordomas, encephaloceles and mucoceles, neurofibromas, and other tumors. MRI-based imaging was decisive in considering mucocele as the diagnosis that can explain the patient clinical presentation.
Our patient benefited from a surgical removal using a bilateral approach and he initially underwent an endoscopic permeabilization surgery of the frontonasal drainage tract through a Draf IIa procedure in addition to a radical total ethmoidectomy (A). In view of the laterality and the extension of the mucocele, the excision of the mucocelic membrane based on Jacques's eyebrow approach enlarged to the outer part of the eyebrow (B). Surgery was performed by a senior professor of oto-rhino-laryngology assisted by resident trainees in the same specialty. The histological examination confirmed our diagnosis. With a follow-up of 3 months, the evolution was favorable with good healing of the operative wound, regression of headaches and resolution of the exophthalmos.