A 36-year-old Ethiopian single nulligravida lady was presented to Dilchora Referral Hospital with difficulty of urination since childhood. She had to stay in the toilet for hours for urination. The urine passed dribbling in a very slow stream. She had repeated episodes of pain during urination which was associated with suprapubic lower abdominal pain for which she was given tablets at a nearby health center. She also had the sensation of incomplete bladder emptying following urination. Because of this, she limited fluid intake, especially when she had long-distance travel. She had also difficulty with menstruation since her menarche (i.e., at age 13 years). She had severe cramping lower abdominal pain during her menses, and her menses stayed for seven to eight days. She had a history of genital cutting 30 years ago at five years of age. She never had sexual intercourse. She was proposed many times to different men but refused to marry because of fear that she could not have sexual intercourse with her husband and could not give birth after marriage. She is living with her younger brother, who is married and has four children. Her mother died when she was nine years old, and her father died ten years ago. She had never told her problem to anyone, and she never sought treatment, but recently went to the hospital after she heard of a young lady who had the same problem in her neighborhood who had been treated surgically and got married.
On physical examination, she was depressed, and her vital signs were in normal range. A pertinent finding was detected on genitourinary system: on external genitalia examination, there was no clitoris, no labia minora, and labia majora were fused to with a healed old mild scars between them. There was a 0.5 cm by 0.5 cm opening below the fused labia majora near the anus through which urine was dribbling .
With the impression of type three FGM (Infibulation), the patient was investigated with complete blood count (all in the normal range), urine analysis (non-revealing), and blood group and Rh (A positive). An abdominopelvic ultrasound examination was also performed. It revealed a normal uterus that was anteverted and measured 67 × 20 × 35 mm. Both ovaries had normal size and appearance. There was a trace of normal fluid in the Douglas pouch. Both kidneys were in their normal anatomic location and had normal size and corticomedullary differentiation.
Then, verbal informed consent was taken, and under local anesthesia, de-infibulation was done and an intact hymen and external urethral opening were seen . She was also provided with psychological counseling interventions by a psychiatrist. She was discharged a day after the procedure with diclofenac tablets with an appointment to come after seven days.
Her first follow-up was on her seventh day after the procedure, during this time, she had no difficulty with urination, and on genital examination, the wound had healed. Her second follow-up visit was a month after the procedure, during this time, she was on her seventh day after mense which flowed for four days and was associated with mild abdominal discomfort. Her third follow-up visit was six months after the procedure, during this time, she was married with good wedding adjustment and started intercourse with her husband, and she complained of moderate pain during intercourse, especially with the initial insertion of the penis. She was also pregnant, and her obstetrics ultrasound revealed the first trimester, a single intrauterine pregnancy with a gestational age of six weeks and six days. After the third visit, she missed her follow-up, and nothing was known about her pregnancy and its outcome.