A 79-year-old man had anemia, and an esophageal tumor was detected via upper gastrointestinal endoscopy at a local hospital. He was referred to our department for surgical treatment of the esophageal tumor. Physical examinations, including heart and breathing sounds, were normal. The laboratory tests showed renal dysfunction (creatinine clearance: 37 mL/min/1.73 m2; normal range, 82–183 mL/min/1.73 m2). His carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level was normal, but his squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)-related antigen level was slightly elevated (1.8 ng/mL; normal range, < 1.5 ng/mL). Esophagoscopy revealed a 0-IIc type tumor with unstained iodine, occupying half the circumference of the esophageal wall in the middle thoracic esophagus area . Esophagogram showed irregular mucosa on the right side of the esophageal wall at the level of tracheal bifurcation . Histopathological examination of the biopsy samples showed SCC. Based on these findings, we concluded that the primary tumor was cT1b. DAA was detected incidentally on contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT), and the descending aorta was located on the right side of the thoracic vertebrae . The trachea and thoracic esophagus were encircled by the right and left aortic arch . The right aortic arch (RAA) was larger than the left aortic arch (LAA); however, both aortic arches were patent. Based on these findings, the diagnosis was thoracic esophageal cancer (clinical stage I) with DAA (type IA; Edward’s classification). Neoadjuvant chemotherapy was not performed owing to renal dysfunction; thus, we decided to perform surgical treatment.
The operation consisted of three steps. The first step was the dissection of upper mediastinal lymph nodes and confirmation of the location of the bilateral recurrent laryngeal nerves using cervical mediastinoscopy with the patient in the supine position. We identified the vagus nerve leading to each recurrent laryngeal nerve at the upper mediastinum . We put the IONM (NIM-Response 3.0 SystemTM, Medtronic, Jacksonville, FL) monitor on both vagus nerves during the cervical approach with mediastinoscopy. During thoracoscopic surgery, we continuously ran the IONM to examine the response of the nerves. We stimulated both recurrent laryngeal nerves. We could confirm the response of the right side, but that of the left side could not be confirmed. The second step consisted of a detachment of the esophagus using a video-assisted right thoracic approach with the patient in the prone position. The aorta was meandering to the extreme right in the middle and lower mediastinum, and the RAA was located on the upper mediastinum . The degree of adhesion around the aortic arch was not so strong, and we easily remove it from the surrounding tissue. Subsequently, we could confirm that the right and left recurrent laryngeal nerves were recurring at the RAA and LAA, respectively. After careful dissection around both recurrent laryngeal nerves, the transection of the thoracic esophagus was performed. The last step was the laparoscopic creation of a gastric conduit, which was pulled up through a retrosternal route. Finally, cervical esophagogastric anastomosis was performed.
Macroscopic findings showed SCC within the submucosal invasion (350 μm) and no metastatic lymph nodes at any site. This case was classified as Mt, pT1b, N0, M0, pStage I. The patient developed aspiration pneumonia (Grade II by Clavien-Dindo classification), but hoarseness did not appear. The patient was transferred to another hospital for rehabilitation on postoperative day 36, and no recurrence was seen for 18 months after surgery.