A 17-year-old male patient presented with progressive spinal deformity. He had difficulty in lying down on the back due to the hump. The deformity was noted since childhood and was progressing gradually. The rest of the history was unremarkable. On physical examination, the patient had severe kyphosis with apex at thoracolumbar junction. His anthropometric measurements were noted, which include, body weight-50 kg, standing height-160 cm, sitting height-80 cm, and arm span-166 cm. Body mass index (BMI) was 19.56, which was 33 percentile of age- and sex-matched controls. The patient had no limb length discrepancy and neurologically intact.
Kyphotic angle as measured by Cobb’s method was 80° ( and ). Magnetic resonance imaging was done and it is within normal limits. Pre-operative work up is within normal limits.
He was taken up for deformity correction surgery. He underwent kyphosis correction with vertebral column resection at T12, along with posterior instrumentation and posterior spinal fusion under neuromonitoring. Intraoperative blood loss was around 1000 ml. Intraoperative and post-operative course was uneventful. Excellent correction of kyphosis was obtained ( and ). Immediate post-operative period was uneventful. 2 weeks following surgery patient presented to us with severe nausea, persistent vomiting, and abdominal pain. He was dehydrated with severe electrolyte disorders including hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis. His body weight had dropped further to 47 kg. On clinical examination, his abdomen was considerably distended but was soft and non-tender. Bowel sounds were normally heard. Radiological investigations were done as advised by general surgeon. Barium studies, ultrasound abdomen and, were suggestive of superior mesenteric artery syndrome. Contrast computed tomography was done, which was showing narrowed aortomesenteric angle (15°) and narrowed aortomesenteric distance (3.9 mm), which clinched the diagnosis of superior mesenteric artery syndrome ( and ). Nasogastric tube applied and decompression done patient was initially managed conservatively with correction of dyselectrolytemia and was given total parenteral nutrition. As there was no improvement with the conservative care surgical intervention was done.
As the superior mesenteric artery was found compressing the third part of duodenum, a gastrojejunostomy was done by passing the block. Duodenal secretion can still drain into the jejunum. With 2–3 days, the patient’s symptoms completely subsided and patient discharged in stable condition. At follow-up, the patient is doing well and was gaining weight. 1 year after surgery patient’s body weight and BMI was improved significantly (BMI 19.3).