Our patient was a 56-year-old Caucasian married man with height 172 cm, weight 75 kg, and body mass index 25.4 kg/m2. He was admitted to our emergency department for severe dyspnea and desaturation.
The patient had a history of heavy smoking (30 pack-years) and no alcohol intake. In the last year, he had had two hospitalizations for acute exacerbation of COPD and was classified as Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease class C. He was admitted to the ICU and eventually was tracheostomized. After his ICU stay, he was decannulated and actually showed a former closed tracheal stoma. Moreover, he had type 2 diabetes mellitus and hypertension, and he presented with a former closed tracheal stoma after his last ICU admission for COPD exacerbation. His medication history included ramipril, pantoprazole, and inhalation indacatarol/glycopyrronium.
At arrival, the patient showed hypercapnic respiratory acidosis (pH 7.24, partial pressure of oxygen 45 mmHg, PaCO2 70 mmHg, HCO3− 32 mEq/L). Standard medical therapy and noninvasive ventilation (NIV) were immediately started. The result of his neurological examination was normal with a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 15. His heart rate was 106 beats/min, peripheral oxygen saturation was 86%, noninvasive blood pressure was 135/85 mmHg, and body temperature was 37.8 °C. A chest computed tomographic scan showed a centrilobular emphysema and a bilateral fibrothorax .
A few hours after admission, the patient was intubated for worsening mental status and worsening respiratory acidosis (pH 7.18, PaCO2 85 mmHg). Mechanical ventilation in pressure support mode was started in the ICU associated with salmeterol and fluticasone 50 μg/100 μg inhalational therapy every 8 h. Sedation was obtained by titrating propofol infusion to obtain a Richmond Agitation-Sedation Scale score of − 1. On the basis of white blood cell count of 22 × 109/L, high procalcitonin serum level 12 ng/ml, and strong suspicion of a pulmonary infection, bronchoalveolar lavage was collected, and intravenous broad-spectrum empiric antibiotic therapy with piperacillin-tazobactam 4.5 g every 8 h and vancomycin 500 mg every 6 h was started. After 72 h, qualitative bronchial cultures showed a negative Gram stain and heavy growth of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. At this point, intravenous cefepime 2 g every 8 h was started.
On day 4 after admission, owing to the severity of lung infection, hypercapnic respiratory acidosis worsened to pH 6.98 and PaCO2 157 mmHg despite profound sedation and the maximization of minute alveolar ventilation. A low platelet count of 50,000 cells/μl was recorded. ECCO2r was started through a 16-French dialysis bilumen catheter inserted into the right femoral vein using continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) (Diapact® system; B. Braun Medical, Milan, Italy) with a Diacap Acute® filter (B. Braun Medical). The extracorporeal circuit was regionally anticoagulated with heparin administered prefilter and protamine sulfate administered postfilter .
Table shows blood gas analyses before, during, and after ECCO2r treatment. The patient’s PaCO2 dropped to 54 mmHg and pH increased to 7.21 after 6 h of treatment. The Diacap Acute® filter was replaced every 24 h during ECCO2r. On day 6 after admission, because PaCO2 consistently less than 60 mmHg, ECCO2r weaning was attempted, and the patient was switched again into pressure support mode. ECCO2r was started again 2 h later because of a rise in PaCO2. On day 7 after admission, the patient was successfully weaned from ECCO2r. Under pressure support ventilation, he was able to maintain an acceptable PaCO2 level (59 mmHg). On day 9 after admission, the patient became febrile with associated hypotension and increased serum lactate level. Multiple organ failure developed during the following 48 h. On day 11 after admission, blood cultures evidenced multidrug-resistant P. aeruginosa.
The extracorporeal circuit was primed two times, first with 1 L of NaCl 0.9% + 10,000 IU of unfractionated heparin and then with 1 L of NaCl 0.9%. A 500-IU/ml heparin solution was prepared and infused prefilter at 0.15 IU/ml/h of blood flow . A protamine concentration of 5 mg/ml was infused to match the heparin infusion rate . ECCO2r was started at a blood flow of 300 ml/min and increased slowly to 450 ml/min to maximize CO2 removal.