A 26-year-old male came to the casualty with a history of a road traffic accident of two four-wheelers, with the patient sitting on back seat. He was conscious, oriented, and had no history and symptoms suggestive of a head injury. The patient complained of severe mid back pain with inability to move his right lower limb. On examination, there was tenderness over upper and mid-thoracic spine, and he had Grade 0 power in all this right lower limb joints. Power in all left lower limb joints was Grade 5. His bladder and bowel sensations were intact, and anal tone was normal. The patient had loss of sensations of the right side of the trunk below nipple with lost sensation in the right lower limb till S2 dermatome. Reflexes were absent on affected right side with hyperreflexia on the left side. The patient also had bilateral up-going plantar reflexes (Babinski’s sign) indicating an upper motor neuron-type lesion. On first glance, X-ray of thoracic spine revealed nothing except the fracture of spinous processes of D4 and D5 vertebrae. On careful examination, a thin transverse fracture line was noticed in D5 vertebral body .
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed posterior ligamentous disruption extending in line with the transverse fracture line in D5 vertebral body, cord contusion with minimal edema at D5-6 level . Computed tomography showed fractures of transverse processes of D4 and D5, with no retropulsion of fragment at D5 level .
The diagnosis of D5 Chance fracture was confirmed. Fracture was classified to be AO type B2-N3 (distraction injury with osseoligamentous disruption and incomplete cord injury). On calculation, thoracolumbar injury classification and severity (TLICS) score was found to be 10 (distraction injury-4, posterior ligamentous complex [PLC] injured-3 incomplete spinal cord injury-3). Keeping the unstable nature of fracture, neurodeficit, and TLICS score >4 in mind, decision was taken to carry out operative procedure. Midline incision was taken, and dissection was done. Thorough decompression was done in D5 level. Undercutting of D4 and D6 was done. Pedicle screw fixation was done from D4 to D7 level .
Screws were passed in fractured D5 for better stability. Closure was done over drain. Post-operative physiotherapy was started from 2nd post-operative day. On 16th post-operative day, the patient regained Grade 1 power in hip flexors.
By the end of 7 months, the patient regained Grade 4 power in all movements of the right hip and knee joints, with Grade 5 power in the right ankle and great toe.