A 23-year-old male patient presented to us with complaints of atraumatic right elbow pain and restriction of movement for the past 6 and 3 months, respectively. The movement restriction, especially the flexion, was noticed gradually increasing over the past month. For pain, he used to take medicine on need basis from a local practitioner leading to transient relief. Pain, however, had no diurnal variation or association with activities. He was advised MRI of the elbow on account of recurrent pain, the reason for his visit to us. On examination, there was mild swelling around the elbow and anterior elbow tenderness. The active movement of extension was intact but active flexion was restricted and only ninety degree of passive elbow flexion was possible. There was no localized elevation of temperature and distal neurovascular status was intact. There was neither any other joint involvement nor any systemic comorbidity associated. The radiographs of the elbow in initial period did not show any significant abnormality except a small fleck of radio-opacity noted anterior to the distal humerus .
MRI was done to better delineate the etiology and showed effusion in the elbow joint with edema in the bones around the distal humerus. The MRI images were suggestive of elbow arthropathy and considering monoarticular involvement and synovial hypertrophy, a provisional diagnosis of elbow tuberculosis was made. On closer inspection of images, however, a round defect was noted adjacent to the coronoid fossa on its medial aspect, as a clearly evident anomaly on both sagittal and axial images ( and ). A CT scan better delineated the lesion as a small bony lesion with an overlying thin cortical rim, abutting the coronoid fossa, and protruding anteriorly into the elbow joint ( and ). Joint effusion and edema corresponding to the area in distal humerus were also noted.
The lesion with a rim was considered as an osteoid osteoma and the confirmatory exploration and sample collection for biopsy was planned. The elbow was explored by an anterior approach with a 5-cm longitudinal incision centered over the coronoid fossa under tourniquet. The area near coronoid fossa revealed a protruding bony mass with thin rim of bone in the medial aspect of the fossa . The lesion was carefully excised en bloc from the underlying bone and was easily detached owing to its superficial location on the bone . The debridement of the adjacent bony and articular area and synovectomy was done and the joint was given a thorough lavage. The wound was then closed in layers followed by a protection elbow plaster slab. The post-operative period was uneventful and there was marked reduction in pain and gradual decrease in the swelling in coming days. The histopathology confirms the presence of an osteoid osteoma ( and ). The slab was removed after 2 weeks and the elbow range of motion exercises started. The patient had good wound healing and full range of motion in flexion and extension with good radiological improvement in the follow-up at 4 months. No recurrence of the lesion or any complication associated were seen in the follow-up of further 9 months.