An 18-year-old boy presented to our outpatient department with a history of fall while trying to jump across a wall 6 months ago. After the injury, the patient was not able to stand and walk. The patient was initially attended by a local practitioner. The initial radiographs were inconclusive for any fracture. The patient was managed by wooden splint and bed rest for 6 weeks were advised. However, after 3 weeks, the patient removed the splint by itself and started walking with a wooden stick.
At the time of presentation to us, the patient was able to walk normally. The patient mainly complained of loss of active extension of the knee in the sitting position and a palpable gap over the upper part of the patella . The patient was able to actively flex his knee, but an active extension was minimally possible. The patient was able to extend his limb by internal rotation most probably using tensor fascia lata.
Concerning the extent of the injury, the patient underwent radiographic evaluation which showed a small bony avulsion at the upper pole of the patella. Anteroposterior and lateral radiograph were taken, which showed the fracture line along with displaced fragments, which appeared to be a sleeve-like fracture of the upper pole of the patella.
After the complete evaluation, the patient was operated under spinal-epidural anesthesia. The fracture was approached through a suprapatellar incision. We found that the articular cartilage of the patella and portion of patellar retinaculum was avulsed, along with small bony fragments. The fragment was anatomically reduced and fixed with 4 non-resorbable osseous sutures (Ethibond No. 5). Subsequently, to provide more stability, a cerclage wiring was also done .
Post-operatively, the knee was kept in extension with a long-knee brace from groin to ankle for 3 weeks duration. On the 11th-day post-surgery, sutures were removed and a long knee brace was continued. After 3 weeks, the knee brace was removed, and active continuous passive motion assisted exercises were started. As the pain subsided isometric quadriceps, exercise was started. After 10 weeks post-surgery, the patient was free from any pain, had a full range of motion, and was able to walk without support.