The proband, a 12 and a half years old female, is the only daughter of healthy and non-consanguineous Caucasian parents (the mother is 36 years old, the father 40 at conception). She was delivered by cesarean section for maternal reasons at 39 weeks of a spontaneous and unremarkable pregnancy. Amniocentesis was performed due to advanced maternal age resulting in a normal female karyotype (46,XX). The birth weight was 3000 g (25th percentile), length 50 cm (50th percentile), head circumference 35 cm (50th percentile), Apgar score was 8 and 10 at 1 and 5 min respectively. After birth she was referred as normal: she was breastfed for a few weeks, then artificially, weaned at 6 months. She walked independently at one year, spoke the first words at 18 months. At the admission to the kindergarten, at the age of 3, she was referred to the Child Neuropsychiatry Unit on account of language impairment. Intensive speech therapy was supplied for 2 years, then continued with less frequent sessions during the primary school with slowly but steadily positive results. During the second year of the primary school, at the age of 7, learning disability and behavioral disorders became evident. Cognitive assessment performed by Leiter R scale (specific for nonverbal intelligence) and by WPPSI-III, gave an IQ of 91 and 77, respectively (with VIQ = 68, PIQ =89 at the latter scale). A diagnosis of a neurodevelopmental disorder compatible with Gilles de la Tourette syndrome was made at age of 11 for the presence of motor and vocal tics, hyperactivity, motor and behavioral mannerisms, together with mild intellectual disability. During instrumental work up audiological examination, EEG and brain MRI were performed with normal results. At the last follow-up, when she was 12 years old, physical examination showed a height of 153 cm (35th percentile), weight of 61 kg (91th percentile). She had her first menstruation at the age of 11 years without dysmenorrhea or other related problems. Motor embarrassment and bilateral flat foot, corrected with orthotics, were persistent. The last cognitive assessment performed in 2015 by Leiter R gave an IQ score of 69, with WISC IV scale the results indicated total IQ of 57 (VCI = 60, PRI = 67, WMI = 61, PSI = 85) while the GAI was 59. The proband now attends the second class of the secondary school with a learning support teacher. Pharmacological treatment with Aripiprazole 8 mg/day is ongoing.