A 46-year-old man presented to our hospital with a complaint of medial scapular pain. He had been diagnosed with a right clavicle mid-shaft fracture and multiple rib fractures in a motorcycle accident 9 months earlier. He had been immobilized in a sling for 1 month and then underwent conservative treatment; however, X-ray radiographs indicated that bone union had not been achieved. He had a history of juvenile parkinsonism and had been taking ropinirole for 3 years. Physical examination revealed no pain at the nonunion site during shoulder motion; however, tenderness was noted on the medial side of the right scapula, and the pain worsened during anterior and lateral elevations of the shoulder joint. No gross atrophy of the shoulder girdle muscles was observed. The range of motion of the shoulder joint (right/left) was 110/140° for anterior elevation, and 0/15° for external rotation on the sides. The Constant score was 37, and the visual analog scale (VAS) was 4.0 cm. Compared to the unaffected side, the superior angle of the scapula was medial and inferior, and there was marked protrusion of the inferior scapular angle . There were no findings suggestive of vascular injury and electromyography demonstrated no evidence of nerve injury. Radiographs showed a right clavicle mid-shaft fracture with displacement . Computed tomography (CT) showed no bone remodeling reaction at the fracture site . 3D CT measurements demonstrated that the fracture was an oblique fracture of 40.2° . The length of the distal and proximal fragments on the affected side was 90.2 mm and 61.8 mm, respectively, while the length of the clavicle on the unaffected side was 165.5 mm, indicating that the clavicle remained 13.5 mm shorter than that on the unaffected side following reduction . Based on these findings, he was diagnosed with oblique nonunion of the right clavicle with shortening. Since the patient had prolonged medial scapular pain that had interfered with daily life and work for a long period, we scheduled surgery.
Under general anesthesia, surgery was performed in the beach chair position. A skin incision was made along the Langer’s line over the clavicle. A large amount of fibrous tissue was observed around the fracture site. We debrided the fibrous tissue and drilled the fracture ends to open up the intramedullary canal. There was a significant gap between both ends of the fracture ; therefore, we performed iliac bone grafting. According to preoperative measurements, we planned to harvest a column iliac block with a base of 13.5 mm and an angle of 45°. We exposed the iliac crest, created a bony foramen in the iliac crest with a 2.0 mm Kirchner wire. We harvested two parallelogram prism bone fragments from the iliac crest with a chisel . The two iliac bone grafts were inserted into the clavicular gap side by side. After temporary fixation with 2.0 mm Kirschner wires through the proximal bone fragment, central bone graft, and distal bone fragment , we inserted two lag screws perpendicular to the fracture site . We applied Variax plate (Stryker, Kalamazoo, MI, USA) on the superior surface of the clavicle, and fixed the proximal and distal bone fragments . Postoperatively, the affected arm was kept in a sling for 3 weeks. From 1 week postoperatively, active range of shoulder motion training and rotator cuff strength exercises within ˂90° of elevation of the shoulder joint were commenced during rehabilitation. A full range of shoulder motion training was allowed 5 weeks postoperatively. Finally, scapular training was initiated 9 weeks postoperatively.
CT at 9 months postoperatively confirmed bone union . The clavicle lengths of the affected and unaffected sides were 163.8 and 164.9 mm, respectively, indicating recovery of clavicle length. The right medial scapular pain and scapula winging subsided , and the range of shoulder motion (right/left) was 130/140° for anterior elevation, and 10/15° for external rotation at 1 year postoperatively. The Constant score was 76, and the VAS was 0 cm at 1 year postoperatively.