A 46-year-old Caucasian woman was referred to our clinic with a 12-month history of hoarseness and progressive difficulty in breathing. Weeks prior to surgery she developed minor dysphagia which, in combination with the earlier symptoms, convinced her to seek medical advice and treatment. Past medical history included smoking (20 cigarettes per day), with no other significant co-morbidity.
On examination, she had an easily recognized right neck mass, which in palpation felt soft, mobile and non-pulsatile. There were no lymph nodes or other masses nearby. She also had a noticeable breathy dysphonia. On flexible nasendoscopy, there was a large well-defined supraglottic lesion partially obstructing her vocal cords, which were anatomically and functionally intact. An urgent neck computed tomography (CT) scan was ordered, which revealed an extensive cystic supraglottic mass with no further anomalies of the larynx . She was urgently scheduled for surgical management. Her pre-operative tests were of no significance. On airway assessment, Mallampati score was found to be (II), her jaw movement was not limited and thyromental distance was more than three finger breadths. Nevertheless, a fiberoptic intubation kit was arranged as back-up for the induction and the whole procedure.
On the day of the operation, our patient had no premedication. The plan was to induce our patient and test the ability to bag-mask ventilate before administration of a muscle relaxant. The option of awake intubation and gaseous induction was offered, however our patient refused it. An emergency tracheotomy kit was readily available as a last option. Following pre-oxygenation, midazolam 2 mg, fentanyl 100 μg and propofol 200 mg were administered and manual ventilation ability was assessed. It proved to be feasible and subsequently suxamethonium 100 mg was given. Conventional laryngoscopy was attempted at that stage that showed a Cormack and Lehane view Grade IV. Due to the readily available equipment we proceeded down the fiberoptic intubation route. The oral route was chosen to avoid extra tissue trauma that could affect visibility. The initial view was that of a mass obstructing all the structures in the supraglottic area. There was a need for manipulation with the tip of the scope to bypass it as non-traumatically as possible in order to get a view of the vocal cords. Insertion of the tube (flexible size 7.0id) was uneventful. As a result, her airway was secured and we proceeded to the operation. Maintenance of anesthesia was achieved with an oxygen and nitrous oxide mix (65% to 35% respectively) and sevoflurane 1.9%.
The mass was excised with an external approach . This method was preferable to a laser endoscopic vestibulectomy, as it appears to be more efficient in the management of huge cysts . No intra-operative difficulties were faced. At the end of the procedure and just before extubation, conventional laryngoscopy was performed both to confirm airway patency and facilitate suctioning under direct view. The Cormack and Lehane grade this time was Grade I, which was very reassuring for the extubation and recovery period. Both were uneventful.
Inspection of the lesion revealed a brownish soft mucosal lined sac sized 5.5 × 2.9 × 4 cm which contained mucus. A histopathology report confirmed the diagnosis of a cyst lined with pseudostratified columnar respiratory epithelium and focal presence of intracellular and extracellular mucus production (saccular laryngeal cyst). No evidence of cancer cells in the specimen was found. At follow-up eight months later there was no recurrence.