A 40-year-old white male with the main complaint of persistent and painless decrease in the
sensitivity of his vision in his left eye (OS) was evaluated. VA was 20/20 in both eyes.
Anterior segment examination and intraocular pressure were not remarkable. There was no pain
on ocular movements and there was no relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD).
On left eye fundus examination, and color and red free retinographies, severe inflammation
of the optic nerve head was observed accompanied by retinal venous vasodilatation and
tortuosity, cotton-wool spots and moderate superficial hemorrhages in all four quadrants.
Fluorescein angiography (FA) performed in the acute phase of the clinical presentation
showed a discrete venous staining and leakage, in addition to leakage and late staining from
the optic disc. There was no evidence of areas of ischemia or peripheral vasculitis.
In the visual field, a diffuse sensitivity decrease was observed, associated with a slight
central scotoma and a moderate increase in the blind spot. Initial optical coherence
tomography (OCT) showed papillary edema without evidence of involvement of the macular area
. The patient was
diagnosed with papillophlebitis.
The patient indicated that 6 weeks before the onset of visual symptoms, he had presented
high fever, persistent cough, and myalgia for approximately 2 weeks, at the beginning of the
coronavirus pandemic in Madrid (Spain). The patient was followed up on an outpatient basis
and without the need for systemic treatment. At that time, the patient did not undergo a
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) diagnostic test for SARS-CoV-2. Blood pressure was normal,
and patient did not report other relevant medical conditions or previous eye history.
Treatment was started with acetylsalicylic acid orally in the dose of 100 mg once a day and
bromfenac 0.9 mg/mL eye drops one drop twice daily, awaiting the results of the studies and
tests requested.
No pathological findings were observed in requested blood analysis comprising complete
blood count, glycemia, lipidic profile, homocysteinemia, anti-cardiolipin IgM and IgG
antibodies, and screening for genetic thrombophilia (Factor V Leiden and prothrombin
mutations, antithrombin III and proteins C and S deficiencies). Also prothrombin time (PT)
and activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) were normal. Chest X-ray and brain magnetic
resonance were unremarkable. The patient was positive for serum IgM and IgG SARS-CoV-2
qualitative enzyme-linked immunoassay (ELISA; positive value >1.0) and showed persistent
alteration of parameters of the coagulation system: D-dimers (672 μg/L, normal value:
<460 μg/L), fibrinogen (451 mg/dL, normal value: 200–400 mg/dL). The C-reactive protein
(CRP) value at diagnosis was 0.898 mg/dL, normal value: <0.500.
One week after diagnosis, patient visual acuity decreased to 20/200, due to macular edema.
Sustained-release dexamethasone implant (Ozurdex, Allergan, Dublin, Ireland) was
intravitreal injected, showing a marked decrease in macular and papillary edema and a
progressive and gradual recovery of vision as of 20/40 2 weeks later . Written informed consent was obtained for
the publication of this case report.