A 59-year-old male patient was referred to our institution because of diarrhea and lower abdominal pain. He lost 6 kg of weight in 6 months. He did not have any personal or family history of polyps, colon cancer, and IBD. Physical examination revealed lower abdominal pain without tenderness and mass in the lower abdominal area. Blood examination revealed anemia (hemoglobin level 9.3 g/dl), hypoproteinemia (protein level 4.0 g/dl), and hypoalbuminemia (albumin level 1.2 g/dl). The carcinoembryonic antigen level was slightly increased (6.4 ng/ml).
Colonoscopy revealed a large tumor with numerous white-pale reddish polyps of worm-like shape in the sigmoid colon . Biopsies of the tumor were performed, and histology of the examined sections indicated well-differentiated to moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma. The colonoscope could not be inserted beyond this point; the colon distal to the tumor and rectum was normal. Computed tomography (CT) imaging showed an 80-mm heterogeneous tumor of sigmoid colon, which raised suspicion of invasion to the abdominal wall in the anterior side. Patient’s CT scan also showed a few amounts of abdominal dropsy, and no swelling of lymph nodes and no distant organ metastasis were shown. FDG-PET/CT denied the existence of other tumors in proximal portion of the colon beyond the tumor.
Based on these findings, the patient underwent laparoscopic sigmoidectomy with level D3 lymph node dissection. The patient was placed in Trendelenburg position. Camera, three 5-mm and one 12-mm ports were placed in the umbilicus, bilateral upper, and lower abdomen. Intraoperative findings showed that the tumor did not spread to the serosa of the sigmoid colon, but the sigmoid colon strongly adhered to the abdominal wall. Therefore, a part of the abdominal wall was also resected . The blood loss was 30 ml, and the total operative time was 226 min. His postoperative recovery was uneventful, and he was discharged 7 days after surgery. His condition remained stable and no recurrence was noted within 18 months.
The resected specimen was a 300-mm colonic segment that included a sigmoid colon and upper rectum. Macroscopically, a tumor measuring 110 × 95 mm was noted. The tumor had a coral-reef-like surface and was almost constituted with numerous soft, worm-like polyps. A solid 30-mm mass, which was surrounded by these polyps, was found on the anterior wall of the sigmoid colon. The anterior wall of the sigmoid colon was thickened with several diverticulitis, and an adhesion occurred at the resected part of the abdominal wall .
Histopathological findings revealed that the worm-like polyp was an inflammatory polyp; dilated blood vessels, fibrovascular cores, and infiltrated neutrophils and lymphoid cells were found in the submucosal tissue of the polyp axis. These findings led to the diagnosis of filiform polyposis. Furthermore, well- to moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma developed on the inflammatory polyps with erosive mucosa. These adenocarcinomas mostly existed in the intramucosal area and were scattered uniformly on the surface of filiform polyposis. The solid mass on the anterior wall also showed a well- to moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma, which invaded the subserosa with vascular invasion. No lymph node metastasis was noted, and no adenomatous component was found in the tumor. Immunohistochemistry using anti-Ki-67 and anti-p53 verified that the erosive mucosa of filiform polyposis showed neither proliferation abnormality nor p53 abnormal expression. On the contrary, the adenocarcinoma on filiform polyposis and the mass on the anterior wall showed an abnormal p53 nuclear expression . Finally, histopathological examination of the resected specimen led to the diagnosis of filiform polyposis and sigmoid colon adenocarcinoma pT3N0M0 StageIIA .