A 51-year-old female with no remarkable medical history was referred by a private dental clinic for painful swelling, warmness, and difficulty with breathing. One hour before the referral, the patient underwent treatment for peri-implantitis on the buccal side of an implant at the right maxillary lateral incisor at a local dental clinic. To treat the peri-implantitis non-surgically, the subgingival peri-implant pocket was slightly retracted and an air-powder abrasive device was used on the exposed implant surface to clean any possible contamination. During the treatment, however, the patient began to feel facial swelling accompanied by pain, which also spread to the neck and did not disappear. The patient was immediately transferred to the authors’ institution. There were no remarkable findings near the buccal gingiva around the implant . However, the patient exhibited crepitus on palpation of the right face, and both eyes were swollen and shut. Visual acuity and ocular movement were intact. The patient felt discomfort during breathing but exhibited relatively stable vital signs: body temperature 36.2 °C, oxygen (O2) saturation 95–96% in room air; blood pressure 150/90 mmHg; and heart rate, 88 beats/min. Chest radiography revealed pneumomediastinum, and enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed bilateral interstitial air emphysema in the temporal, infratemporal, buccal and canine, submandibular, submental, retromandibular, retropharyngeal, visceral, and carotid spaces . Severe subcutaneous emphysema in both sides of the neck extended to the mediastinum. However, abnormal fluid collection and mass lesions, or distinctive lymph node enlargement, were not observed at the lung and mediastinal region . The patient also underwent consultation with the department of thoracic surgery and was subsequently admitted to the hospital to monitor lung condition and to prevent infection. The patient was advised not to increase intraoral air pressure. Prophylactic antibiotic medication (cephalosporin and piperacillin/tazobactam [intravenous]) was administered for 7 days with 100% O2 supply, in addition to analgesic medication for pain control. Approximately 3 days after admission, O2 saturation was between 98 and 100% without O2 supply. Ten days after admission, all facial and neck swelling virtually disappeared without any complications. Regular laboratory tests were conducted, and swings of infection were not observed; CT findings returned to normal. The patient was discharged 13 days after initial development of emphysema.