A 46-year-old woman was admitted to the Department of Orthopedic Surgery with the complaint of a right hallux pain for the last 18 months. She had been to a doctor several times, but she had not benefited from the prescribed non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID). The pain was occurring after long periods of standing and fatigue. There was no history of trauma. Anteroposterior and lateral oblique radiographs of the right foot revealed a cancellous, oval-shaped opacity of 7 × 3 mm in the distal phalanx of the hallux that was interpreted as a bone island or a sclerotic focus of a healed benign bone lesion. A joint space narrowing accompanied by periarticular sclerosis and osteophyte formation in the interphalangeal joint of the hallux was evident in radiographs . The patient was prescribed an NSAID that she had not tried before, advised to avoid strenuous exercise, and invited for a three months’ control.
Two months later, the patient was admitted with a progressed and worsened right hallux pain that was unresponsive to the NSAID medication. This time, the finger was swollen with obvious erythema and tender to palpation . The patient was otherwise well, with an unremarkable complete blood analysis. The radiographic examination findings were identical to those of the prior one . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the right foot was performed with the use of a phased array coil. Coronal T1- and fat-suppressed T2-weighted images revealed a signal-free focal cancellous lesion consistent with a sclerotic focus. The lesion was surrounded by an edema that was confined to the distal phalanx and characterized by a high signal on fat-suppressed T2-weighted images (a,b). Axial T1- and fat- suppressed T2-weighted images depicted a relatively high signal in the center of the lesion (c,d). Coronal and sagittal fat-suppressed T2-weighted images demonstrated a slight effusion at the insertion area of the extensor hallucis longus tendon . Then, a computed tomography (CT) of the right foot was obtained. A radiolucent central nidus surrounded by the characteristic sclerotic rim consistent with OO was obviously visible in the CT images . Based on the rather specific sectional imaging findings, the lesion was diagnosed as osteoid osteoma.
Following the diagnosis, salicylate treatment was started immediately and a significant decrease was recorded in the patient's complaints. A percutaneous radiofrequency ablation under CT guidance was planned for the treatment of the lesion; however, because the patient feared the planned intervention and was significantly less complaining under salicylate, she requested that the intervention be postponed.