The index case, a 48-year-old Caucasian female, was referred to our service with a history of muscle weakness since childhood. Her delivery and peri-natal period were uneventful. She was a hypotonic baby, had delayed milestones and presented congenital dislocation of the hip as a child. Her present clinical evaluation consisted of mild facial and proximal muscle weakness, lumbar lordosis and scoliosis. She had no cardiac abnormalities and no respiratory complaints. An electromyography exam done in her childhood showed a myopathic pattern. Serum creatine kinase activity (CK) was normal.A muscle biopsy of biceps brachii was performed under local anesthesia. Histological analysis of hematoxilin/eosin (H&E) staining revealed variation in fiber size, split fibers, some fibers with membrane debris in its interior and presence of multiple nuclei within the majority of fibers. Myofibrillar ATPase reaction showed a predominance of type I fibers, and NADH-adenine dinucleotide-tetrazolium reductase reaction revealed areas devoid of oxidative activity (cores) in almost all fibers . Normal localization and distribution was found for all studied muscle proteins: dystrophin, the 4 sarcoglycan, dysferlin, calpain 3, telethonin, and α2-laminin, excluding several forms of limb-girdle muscular dystrophies.
For molecular analysis, Sanger sequencing for the C-terminal region (exons 94 to 106) of the RYR1 gene was first done in genomic DNA, extracted from peripheral blood lymphocytes , using PCR amplification with described primers . Sequencing was done using sequencing kit (Applied Biosystems®) on an ABI 3730 automated DNA sequencer (Life Technologies).
Subsequently, next generation sequencing of the whole RYR1 gene was done using Illumina’s Nextera kits for library preparation and custom capture of 88 genes involved in neuromuscular disorders. Sequencing was performed at the Illumina MiSeq sequencer, and variants were filtered and compared to the control populations of 1000 Genomes, NIH, and 6500 Exome Sequencing Project from Washington University.
Molecular analysis of the RYR1 gene showed two different mutations in the patient (II-2): a missense mutation c.14256 A > C in exon 98, leading to a silencing alteration p.4752 T > T, and a pathogenic missense mutation c.14693 T > C in exon 102, which results in the p.4898 I > T substitution in the protein. The c.14256 A > C mutation was also identified in her daughter (III-1). To exclude a possible unknown deleterious potential, we studied the mother (I-2) and sister (II-1) of the index case, and the same alteration was found in both: in a homozygous state in the mother, and heterozygous state in the sister . None of the relatives presented the pathogenic mutation in exon 102. Additional next generation sequencing study of the whole RYR1 gene in the patients revealed, in addition to the c.14693 T > C and c.14256 A > C mutations, the presence of 5 common silent polymorphisms in homozygosis and 8 polymorphisms in heterozygosis .