A 19-year-old man who underwent delayed treatment for a missed Monteggia fracture dislocation after 9 years was referred to our clinic with complaints of an obvious left cubitus valgus deformity and snapping during wrist pronation–supination. In addition to movement limitations and cosmetic problems, the patient also had elbow arthralgia while lifting weights. The physical examination showed that the bony prominence of the radial head could be felt at the anteriolateral region of the elbow joint. No neurological complications, including tardy ulnar nerve palsy and posterior interosseous nerve palsy were observed. Bado type I lesions were identified on the radiographs in the anterioposterior and lateral views of the affected forearm .
The current case report conforms to the 1995 Declaration of Helsinki and subsequent amendments and was approved by the local ethics committee. Written informed consent was obtained before surgery and for publication of this report. The patient was placed in the supine position under general anesthesia, and a tourniquet was inflated on the left upper arm. We used the Henry approach, as described in previous studies. Once the muscles adjacent to the radiocapitellar joint had been cleared, the pseudocapsule surrounding the capsule was opened from the distal to the proximal region to expose the radial head. Then, we evaluated the state of the cartilage of the radial head. The radial head was surrounded with dense fibrous scar tissue, which was excised. Thereafter, we observed that the intact annular ligament was displaced into the radiocapitellar joint . Reduction of the radial head was then attempted, but it failed. We then performed an oblique osteotomy at the proximal one-third of the ulna through the same incision. Angulation and elongation were temporarily maintained by an external fixator, and the interposed ligament was stretched from the joint space and was reduced around the radial head, as described in our previous study. Next, the osteotomy was fixed with a prebent plate in exchange of a temporary external fixator . The stability of the radial head was assessed in flexion–extension under direct visualization, and the residual annular ligament was sutured in situ. Additionally, it was also important to assess the stability of the radiocapitellar joint with the forearm in full pronation and flexion angles exceeding 90 degrees. Finally, the incision was closed one layer at a time.
After the operation, an elbow cast was applied at 90° of elbow flexion and full supination of the forearm. Postoperative radiographs were taken weekly to assess the level of radiocapitellar congruency. The elbow cast was removed at the end of week 6, and active elbow range of motion exercises were started immediately.
At 4 years after surgery, unfortunately, nonunion was observed, and a revision surgery was performed using a local autogenous bone graft that was harvested from the iliac crest . The internal plate was then removed successfully after the osteotomy healed.
The patient had been followed-up for 7 years. At this time, a full range of extension–flexion and pronation–supination motions were available . The Kim elbow score, at the final follow-up was graded as excellent. Moreover, a good radiographic result was obtained, in accordance with Nakamura et al.