A 96-year-old woman with mild hypertension had been living alone, but then developed general malaise and loss of consciousness in February 2023. Her nephew, who visited her house once a week, found her and brought her to the emergency department. She had been vaccinated three times for SARS-CoV-2 with BNT162b2 (Pfizer/BioNTech), and the third vaccination was about six months earlier. Green salad, cheese and other refrigerated products were her favorite foods. However, she became positive for SARS-CoV-2 on polymerase chain reaction (PCR, Cobas SARS-CoV-2, Roche, Basel, Switzerland) test, and her temperature was high (38.9°C) at that time (day 0). We were unable to confirm the specific variants of the detected virus from her nasal swab; however, omicron was the dominant variant and accounted for all cases in Japan at the time. Therefore, her variant was suggested to be the omicron variant.
Laboratory data on admission to our hospital were as follows: WBC count, 18.65 × 103/μL, with 91.5% neutrophils, 5.5% lymphocytes, 2.8% monocytes, 0.0% eosinophils, and 0.2% basophils; hemoglobin, 16.5 g/dL; platelet count, 25.3 × 103/μL; serum creatinine, 0.71 mg/dL; blood urea nitrogen, 26.6 g/L; aspartate aminotransferase (AST), 31 U/L; alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 14 U/L; and CRP, 4.226 mg/dL. Arterial oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 97% (normal) and no shadows were found on chest computed tomography (CT). SARS-CoV-2 Ag by nasal swab was positive, but at a low titer, 1.77 IU (Cobas SARS-CoV-2 Ag, Roche).
According to the treatment protocol for admitted COVID-19 patients in our hospital, remdesivir (Gilead, Foster City, CA, USA) drip infusion for 5 days was started as the antiviral therapy. On day 2, her high fever continued, and SARs-CoV-2 Ag was still positive, but not increased (1.24 IU). Meningitis was then suspected because she also had a stiff neck and because of her laboratory data at admission, such as increased WBC and CRP counts. Thus, CSF examination was performed. The CSF was yellow and cloudy, suggesting bacterial meningitis . On the same day, the characteristic short Gram-positive rods that occur singly or in short chains were found in the blood culture bottle and L. monocytogenes was identified . Although L. monocytogenes was not isolated from the CSF, its RNA was detected in the CSF by a multiplex PCR system (FilmArray, Biomerieux, Lyon, France).
Because ABPC is considered as the standard antibiotic for listeriosis and is effective for isolated L. monocytogenes , ABPC 1.0 g 6×/day intravenously was started after consultation with the antimicrobial stewardship team. Even though her renal function was normal and she might have tolerated a higher dosage, her body weight was only 29 kg. One week later, her fever and loss of consciousness were prolonged. The second CSF analysis on day 9 also did not show improvement. Therefore, ST 80/400 mg 3×/day intravenously was added after consultation with the antimicrobial stewardship team. The synergic effects of the combination of ABPC and ST were not confirmed by the checkerboard method in vitro;, however, we expected the additional effects of ABPC followed by ST rather than either ABPC or ST alone. Her consciousness and fever improved more than one week later (day 16); CSF also improved, but a drug rash appeared that day. Both ABPC and ST were suspended for a week, and MEPM 1.5 g 3×/day was administered intravenously from day 23 after consultation with the antimicrobial stewardship team. One week later (day 30), the planned 21-day antibiotic therapy was completed, and the patient was finally moved to a chronic care hospital for rehabilitation.