A 29-year-old man with intermittent hemoptysis (10 ml/episode) after physical activity sought treatment 1 year ago at our hospital. He became tired easily after regular physical activity. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) and three-dimensional computed tomography (3DCT) reconstruction showed a robust artery arising from the descending aorta, which was adjacent to the inferior pulmonary vein and approximately 2 cm in diameter. Branches of the artery intertwined with the inferior pulmonary vein in the basal segments. The superior segmental artery was present, whereas the basilar arterial trunk was absent. The structure of the bronchus in the left lower lobe was normal, and no lung tissue sequestration was noted . After consulting with the radiologist, it was determined that the superior segment was supplied by the pulmonary artery and that the basal segments were supplied by an abnormal systemic artery. The overall development of the patient was normal, and no obvious murmur was detected via auscultation of the heart and lungs. Ultrasonography revealed no abnormalities in the structure or function of the heart, and pulmonary function was normal.
After multidisciplinary treatment (MDT) by thoracic surgery, vascular surgery and interventional radiology, we decided to perform interventional therapy via coil embolization to preserve as much lung tissue as possible and protect pulmonary function and obtained the patient's consent. The procedure was uneventful . However, after 24 h, the patient developed severe chest pain accompanied by labored breathing (a clinical manifestation of pulmonary infarction), and levels of serum fibrinogen and D-dimer were elevated. Forty-eight hours after the intervention, chest CT showed signs of infarction of the left lower lobe . Serious symptoms of pulmonary infarction were observed at 72–96 h after the intervention and were accompanied by fever. Morphine was given for analgesia and sedation. His symptoms gradually resolved at 1 week after the intervention, and the patient was discharged at 2 weeks after the intervention.
At the 3-month follow-up, his hemoptysis had subsided completely, and his fatigue after physical activity had improved significantly. After 1 year of embolization, CTA and 3D reconstruction of the pulmonary arteries revealed that the anomalous systemic artery was completely blocked by the coils; the distal arterial branch was atrophic, and the accompanying inferior pulmonary venous branch showed no blood return. The inferior left pulmonary artery and the superior segmental vein remained unchanged . No coils were found to be coughed up during follow-up.