On the day of onset, the 69-year-old woman was eating lunch with her friends in the afternoon. However, in the evening, she complained of sudden-onset epigastric pain, and consulted our emergency room. She had two TTS previous episodes with the first episode occurring just after undergoing laparoscopic adrenalectomy for Cushing’s syndrome, and the second episode being provoked by the reminiscence of her daughter’s death.
Laboratory examinations revealed negative troponin T, and slightly increased brain natriuretic peptide (45.6 pg/mL; cut-off value 18.4 pg/mL). The electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus rhythm with no remarkable ST-T wave changes . On the other hand, the echocardiogram [ultrasound cardiography (UCG)] demonstrated an abnormal anterior-apical wall motion, but neither notable valvular dysfunction nor shunt flow was observed. Her InterTAK Diagnostic Score was calculated to be 54 points (female sex, no ST-segment depression, psychiatric disorders, and QTc prolongation). Following the diagnostic algorithm of TTS, we conducted left ventriculography, which showed the typical findings of apical ballooning, and hyperkinetic wall motion at the basal level of the left ventricle. The ejection fraction was 40.3% ( and ). Coronary angiography ruled out obstructive coronary disease ( and ). Cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging showed the typical regional wall motion abnormality and a high-intensity signal in the short tau inversion recovery image . Furthermore, there was no late gadolinium enhancement. The patient did not show any signs or symptoms that were suspicious for viral infections. The serum C-reactive protein level was within normal limits, and no pericardial effusion was detected in any imaging modality. Based on these findings, we ruled out the possibility of myocarditis and diagnosed with recurrent TTS.
On the following day, T-wave inversion in the broad range of limb and chest leads emerged on the ECG . On Day 5 of hospitalization, she underwent follow-up UCG, which revealed mural thrombus formation in the left ventricular apex ( and ). Anticoagulant therapy with oral warfarin following intravenous heparin effectively dissolved the thrombus, which was confirmed by UCG on Day 14 of hospitalization.
The blood chemical concentrations of each catecholamine were within normal limits . On the other hand, 123I-metaiodobenzylguanidine (123I-MIBG) scintigraphy showed reduced H/M ratios of 1.59 in the early phase and 1.24 in the delayed phase, respectively. The washout rate was increased to 49.08%, suggesting decreased sympathetic function .
She was haemodynamically stable, and no arrhythmic events were observed during hospitalization. She was safely discharged on Day 16 of hospitalization. However, two additional recurrent TTS episodes provoked by emotional stress occurred afterwards . Since the final hospitalization, she has been prescribed perindopril 4 mg/day and β1-receptor-selective β-blocker bisoprolol 5 mg/day (changed from non-selective β-blocker carvedilol after the 5th recurrent episode) and has been able to avoid the 6th recurrence of TTS for more than 12 months at present.