A 37-year-old female presented at the emergency sector with a chief complaint of paracentral visual scotoma in her left eye for 3 weeks. She referred that the scotoma occurred suddenly and that this symptom was steady and painless. A couple days prior to the onset of the visual complaint, she had a mild headache and unverified fever.
Upon ophthalmological examination, she presented with best corrected visual acuity of 20/20 in both eyes and intraocular pressure of 14 mmHg (OD) and 15 mmHg (OS). Anterior biomicroscopy revealed a clear cornea, clear conjunctiva, deep anterior chamber, no anterior chamber reaction and no vitreous cells in both eyes. The retinal fundoscopic exam indicated one small (0.1 optic disc diameter) white round lesion in the superior nasal vessels area of the right eye and two small parafoveal round nasal yellowish lesions and one small white lesion at the inferior temporal vessels area of the left eye . No restriction of ocular motility was observed. Pupillary light reflex examination showed normal direct and consensual pupillary reflexes and no relative afferent pupillary defect in both eyes.
As retinal ancillary exams, color fundus retinography, SS-OCT (Swept source optical coherence tomography), FAF (fundus autofluorescence), FA (fluorescein angiography), angio-OCT and microperimetry were performed. General ancillary exams included general tests such as systemic serum laboratory workup, thorax radiography and infectious serologies.
SS-OCT showed preserved retinal layers in macular topography and well-limited intraretinal lesions extending from superficial to deep retinal layers . Epidemiology included contact with newborn cats, leading us to hypothesize Bartonella henselae infection. FAF showed hyperautofluorescence in areas corresponding to the retinal lesion margins without any other significant findings . FA showed a late fluorescence enhancement at areas corresponding to the retinal lesions that increased during the course of the exam but with limited margins, consistent with the staining pattern . Similar findings in OCT and FA were previously reported in medical literature as being caused by Bartonella infection [, ]. Objective evaluation by microperimetry of the macular scotoma cited as the chief complaint of the patient showed a decrease in light perception at areas corresponding to the retinal lesions .
The first diagnostic hypothesis considered was chorioretinopathy of both non-infectious causes, such as punctate inner choroidopathy (PIC), multiple evanescent white dot syndrome (MEWDS), and sarcoidosis, and infectious causes, such as tuberculosis, syphilis, toxoplasmosis or bartonellosis.
Her laboratory workup included non-reactive serologies for syphilis, HIV and toxoplasmosis, tuberculin skin-test of zero, non-reactive anti-nuclear factor, reactive c-protein of 7 (reference value of 1) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 44 (reference value of 20). Her complete blood count exam reported normal red blood cell and platelet values and mild leukocytosis due to mild neutrophilia (15,500 leukocytes with 55.5% neutrophils, 37.0% lymphocytes, 4.9% monocytes, 1.7% eosinophils, 0.9% basophils) but without a left shift. Thorax radiography did not show significant findings. Bartonella henselae serology was positive, with an IgG of 1/128, and treatment with 100 mg doxycycline every 12 h for 2 weeks was administered.
One month after treatment, she reported an improvement of visual scotoma symptoms. At her retinal fundus examination, it was possible to locate only one of the previous lesions (paracentral of her left eye), and the presentation of this lesion was more subtle than at the first evaluation. SS-OCT also showed decreases in lesion size and intraretinal extension. Microperimetry showed an improvement in light perception in the affected area .
Eighteen months after the initial presentation, the patient underwent another evaluation. She had no visual complaints and her ophthalmologic exam was normal. There were no more signs of retinal lesions at the fundoscopy. Microperimetry showed a greater improvement in light perception at the previous affected area and SS-OCT showed only a mild disorganization in intermediate retinal layers at the site of the previous lesion surrounded by a halo .