An 80-year-old Japanese woman (height 155.2 cm, weight 58.5 kg, body mass index 24.3 kg/m2) was admitted to our hospital because of macroscopic hematuria for 1 month. Cystoscopy revealed a nodular tumor filling the left wall of the bladder; CT and MRI showed cT2bN1M0 bladder cancer and left hydronephrosis. She underwent transurethral resection of the bladder cancer and was diagnosed with high-grade pT2 < urothelial carcinoma. She underwent left percutaneous nephrostomy catheter placement and received three courses of neoadjuvant chemotherapy with gemcitabine and cisplatin. Thereafter, she underwent RARC with an extracorporeal ileal conduit. She previously underwent open surgeries for an ectopic pregnancy and traumatic splenic injury; her body had surgical scars extending from under the xiphoid process to the upper rim of the pubic bone. Because intestinal or abdominal adhesions were assumed to be present, the camera port was first placed in the lower left abdomen and laparoscopic lysis of abdominals was performed. Then, we closed the first camera port and relocated the port for the da-Vinci camera above the navel. Other ports were placed as described in Figure . The total operative and console time were 836 min and 557 min, respectively. Estimate blood loss was 313 mL. Insufflation pressure was 10 mmHg. We closed the fascia of the AirSeal® (SurgiQuest, Inc, Milford, CT, USA) access port and camera port. The early postoperative period was uneventful. Nine days after surgery, she complained of severe abdominal pain and nausea. Clinical examination revealed a distended abdomen. Abdominal CT revealed herniation of the small intestinal from the 8-mm trocar site . An emergency explorative laparotomy revealed that the small intestine was partially prolapsed from the 8-mm trocar and strangulated, causing engorgement of the small intestine and discoloration of bowel loops . The strangulation was released, but there was no improvement in blood flow in some sections of the small bowel, so intestinal resection and reconstruction was performed. She was discharged 35 days after surgery, and her clinical course was uneventful through follow-up.