A 34-year-old man complained of back pain for 2 weeks and then received lower back acupuncture and paravertebral injections to relieve the pain in a healthcare clinic. The pain was not ameliorated, and a mass was discovered in the left psoas. Then, the patient gradually developed a high fever, sensory deficits, progressive muscle weakness, bladder and bowel dysfunction, chest tightness, and dyspnea. The patient was transferred to our hospital. This patient had no history of HIV, syphilis or gastrointestinal surgery. The examination findings on admission were as follows: body temperature, 41 °C; blood pressure, 95/51 mmHg (on norepinephrine); pulse rate, 110 bpm; and respiratory rate, 15 bpm (on mechanical ventilation). A mass could be palpated in the lower back with local tenderness and increased local skin temperature. He was lethargic with normal cranial nerve functions. He could nod his head, and no signs of meningeal irritation or elevated intracranial tension were present. He developed tetraplegia and had Grade 0/5 limb myodynamia with generalized areflexia and hypotonia. The superficial abdominal and tendon reflexes were not elicitable. Babinski sign was negative. He could not breathe spontaneously and required mechanical ventilation. Bladder and bowel dysfunction were present. Sensory deficits were present below the level of the suprasternal fossa. Blood investigations revealed leukocytosis and elevated C-reactive protein. Serological tests for HIV and RPR were negative. The tests of B lymphocytes, T lymphocytes, CD4+, CD8+ and NK cells counts were normal. Autoantibodies including serum ANA, Ro/SSA,La/SSB antibodies, antibodies to extractable nuclear antigen, rheumatoid factor, antiphospholipid antibodies, and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies were negative. The hemoglobin (Hb) level was normal and there was no evidence indicating deficiency of folic acid or VitB12. A lumbar CT evaluation revealed a hematoma in the left psoas. The MRI of spine revealed altered signal intensity involving C2-3 with cord expansion on T2-weighted suggested the diagnosis of myelitis . The cranial MRI findings were normal. No evidence of thoracic and lumbar myelitis was found. The primary diagnoses were psoas muscle abscess and acute myelitis. A lumbar puncture was performed. The opening pressure was 180 mm H2O. The CSF was cloudy with a white blood cell count 5000 /μL, glucose 0.6 mmol/L and protein 5.0 g/L. The emergent operation was performed to drain the abscess . During the operation, over 300 ml of pus in the psoas muscle was drained. Further, the abscess invaded intervertebral space. The pus, blood, and CSF cultures all revealed Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). The histopathological examination of lumbar vertebrae suggested nonspecific inflammation without evidence of tuberculosis infection. Therefore, systemic antibiotics were administered with vancomycin for 10 days and followed by oral formulations of linezolid for 6 weeks [, ].
With the administration of effective antibiotics, the patient gradually improved and showed stable vital signs 6 months later, he could move his fingers and hands, and the myodynamia of the upper limbs had increased to Grade 3/5. He had skin sensation above the T4 level and could wean from mechanical ventilator during the daytime. A follow-up MRI revealed that the lesion of the spinal cord was ameliorated .